THOMAS JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY 
Kimmel Cancer Center 
Detect
ion of high grade prostate cancer with subharmonic ultrasound imaging, A pilot 
study . 
Principal 
Investigator s: Ethan J Halpern, MD         Flemming Forsberg, PhD  
Department of Radi ology         Department of Radiology  
Thomas Jefferson University      Thomas Jefferson University  
132 South 10th Street          132 South 10th Street  
Philadelphia, PA  19107 -5244   Philadelphia, PA  19107- 5244  
215-955-5345         215-955-4870  
Co-Investigator(s):  Edouard Trabulsi  
Department of Urology 
Leonard Gomel
la 
Department of Urology  
Costas
 Lallas  
Department of Urology  
Funding Sponsor:  NIH R21 CA20221 4 
Regulatory Sponsor:  Flemming Forsberg PhD  
IND Number:  112,241  
Study Product:  Definity  
Protocol Number:  15F.607  
Version:  Date: 
1.0 11/2015 
1.1 11/2016 
1.2 12/01/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This doc
ument is confidential and the property of THOMAS  JEFFERSON 
UNIVERSITY.  No part of it may be transmitted, reproduced, published, or used by 
other persons without prior written authorization from the study sponsor.  
  
  
 
 2 Study Summary  
Title Detection of high grade prostate cancer with subharmonic 
ultrasoun d imaging, A pilot study  
Short Title  Using  Contrast -enhanced Ultrasound  (CE-TRUS) to Identify  
Aggressive forms of Prostate Cancer  
Protocol Number   
Phase  Phase II clinical study – classified as Phase II because the 
goal is to demonstrate that imaging of the prostate with 
CEUS is improved with the use of subharmonic imaging  
Methodology /Study 
Design  Pilot cohort study of patients scheduled for prostate biopsy  
Study Duration  two years 
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  1. To implement SHI technology on a transrectal probe 
suitable for prostate imaging and biopsy  
2. To demonstrate visualization of prostatic vascularity using 
subharmonic contrast -enhanced imaging.  
3. To provide a preliminary estimate of the diagnostic 
accuracy of contrast -enhanced subharmonic  imaging  for 
detection of clinically significant PCa.  
Number of 
Subjects  55 subjects (5 controls and 50 patients)   
Diagnosis and Main Inclusion Criteria  1. Patients  who are scheduled for prostate  biopsy  
2. and who are able to undergo CEUS  
Study Therapy , 
Dose, Route, Regimen  The study will involve infusion of the ultrasound 
microbubble contrast agent Definity immediately prior to a 
prostate biopsy procedure.  
Duration of 
administration  and 
follow -up The contrast administration will require 10 -15 minutes,  
during which time a transrectal ultrasound study of the 
prostate will be performed, and a targeted biopsy procedure 
of the prostate will be performed.  
Reference therapy  Conventional 12- core systematic prostate biopsy  
Statistical Methodology  Computation of sensitivity and specificity for detection of 
clinically significant prostate cancer with conventional 12 core prostate biopsy  as the reference standard.  No further 
statistical testing will be performed as this is a prelimi nary 
study, designed to demons trate the feasibility of 
subharmonic imaging of the prostate and to obtain an 
estimate of the diagnostic accuracy of CEUS with 
subharmonic imaging of the prostate.  
  
  
 
 3 Schema Subharmonic imaging software will be expanded to work 
with an endorectal probe on an FDA approved ultrasound 
imaging system  
↓ 
Patient with elevated PSA or an abnormal rectal exam, or a 
patient requiring a prostate biopsy on active surveillance  
↓ Scheduled for prostate biopsy  
↓ Has CEUS with subharmonic imaging 
↓ 
Prostate biopsy with up to 6 targeted cores based upon 
subharmonic  imaging as well as prostate biopsy with 12 
standard systematic cores.  
  
 
  
  
 
 4 1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
This document is a protocol for a human research study. This study is to 
be conducted according to US and international standards of Good Clinical 
Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 and International Conference on Harmonization 
guidelines), applicable government regulations and Institutional research policies and procedures.  
 
1.1 Specific Aims  and Hypothesis  
 
1. To implement SHI technology on a transrectal probe suitable for prostate 
imaging and biopsy  
2. To demonstrate visualization of prostatic vascularity during subharmonic contrast enhanced imaging of the prostate.  
3. To provide a preliminary estimate of the diagnostic accuracy of contrast -
enhanced subharmonic imaging for detection of prostate cancer .  
 
1.2 Background and Rationale  
 
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer among American 
males, with an estimated 3,922,600 living PCa patients.
1 Biochemical screening 
with serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) results in the detection of many small cancers such that “the risk of being diagnosed with PCa is increasingly greater than the risk of dying of it”.
2 Thus, although PCa will account for 27% 
(233,000/855,220) of all new cancer diagnoses among American males in 2014, PCa is estimated to be directly responsible for only 9.5% (29,480/310,010) of 
cancer related deaths among American males.
3 PCa has been likened to the two 
faces of Janus: “one benevolent face of small, indolent tumors, abundant among middle -aged and elderly men” and a second “grim face of a great killer, being the 
second most common cancer -related cause of death within the EU and in the 
US”.
4 This dichotomy in the progression and prognosis of PCa creates a dilemma 
for both physician and patient in deciding between definitive therapy of a potentially lethal disease and expectant management of a potentially indolent disease. Simply stated, the PCa treatment dilemma is related to our inability to distinguish indolent from aggressive PCa at the time of diagnosis.  
 Two recent clinical trials have sparked an intense controversy related to 
the benefit of screening and treatment of PCa. The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial failed to show a mortality benefit from screening and treatm ent of PCa.
5 The European Randomized Study of 
Screening for PCa (ERSPC) suggests that with the current standard of care, 1410 men must be screened and 48 additional cases of PCa treated to prevent 
  
  
 
 5 one death.6 Both studies suggest that overdiagnosis and overtreatment of 
insignificant cancer is a major drawback of PCa screening, and point to the need 
for better diagnostic tools to identify clinically significant PCa.7  Based upon the 
data from these trials, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has  
issued a grade “D” recommendation against PSA -based screening.8 
 Various treatment options are available to the patient with a new diagnosis 
of PCa. Aggressive therapy with surgery or radiation constitutes the traditional therapy for localized PCa, with the goal of treating the entire prostate to eradicate the cancer. However, both radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy can be associated with substantial morbidity, including sexual impotence, urinary incontinence and injury to adjacent organs.
9,10 Expe ctant management without 
curative therapy has demonstrated favorable 15- 20 year follow -up results for 
localized, low -grade PCa.11,12 Prospective cohort studies suggest that aggressive 
treatment for PCa may be deferred until there is evidence of cancer progre ssion.
13 For men with “favorable risk” PCa, defined as low volume disease 
(< 0.5 ml) with a Gleason score below 7, active surveillance (AS) results in similar survival as definitive therapy,
14 and conservative management is 
associated with a 50% lower incidence of incontinence and impotence as compared to radical prostatectomy.
15 A major barrier to the widespread adoption 
of AS is the lack of an accurate non- invasive diagnostic test to prospectively 
identify those patients with aggressive “clinically significant” cancer whose disease will progress without definitive therapy. Patients on AS therefore require a periodic invasive biopsy for tissue diagnosis. A technique that could improve the accuracy of diagnostic ultrasound for the diagnosis of clinically signif icant 
PCa would facilitate wider use of AS.  
  
Contrast -Enhanced Imaging of Prostate Cancer  
 
As prostate imaging is necessary for biopsy guidance in the diagnosis of 
PCa, much research has focused on optimization of imaging techniques for PCa detection. Our  group has focused primarily on prostate imaging with microbubble 
ultrasound contrast agents, as ultrasound is the least expensive and most commonly used modality for guidance of prostate biopsy. When exposed to an ultrasound pulse at some fundamental freq uency (f
0), microbubbles act as 
nonlinear oscillators, generating significant energy components which span the range of frequency emissions from subharmonics through ultraharmonics.
16 
While conventional ultrasound processes received echoes at the fundamental frequency (f
0), contrast -enhanced ultrasound imaging is based upon received 
echo signals in the harmonic (2f 0, 3f 0,,etc) or subharmonic (1/2 f 0, 1/3 f 0,,etc) 
range. Since microbubble contrast agents remain intravascular, contrast -
enhanced transrectal ultrasound (CE -TRUS) with harmonic imaging (HI) or 
subharmonic imaging (SHI) selectively images vascularity within the prostate.  
  
  
 
 6 Pathologic studies demonstrate a clear association of microvessel density 
with the presence of PCa,17 with metastatic disease,18 with disease stage19 and 
with disease- specific survival.20,21 Although microvessels are below the 
resolution of conventional ultrasound Doppler imaging, CE -TRUS provides a 
practical solution to imaging the microvasculature. Clinical studies using HI have 
demonst rated that enhancement of the prostate with CE -TRUS is related to 
increased microvessel density,22,23 that CE -TRUS can improve detection of 
PCa,24,25 and that CE -TRUS can increase cancer detection with fewer biopsy 
cores.26,27  We review preliminary results with CE-TRUS HI and SHI below, but 
note that there are no published studies using SHI of the prostate.  
 
1.3 Study Therapy  
            Since the subjects in this study are scheduled to have prostate biopsy as 
part of their standard of care, the only study related test that will be performed is a contrast -enhanced ultrasound with subharmonic imaging . The proposed 
ultrasound contrast agent for the current study, Definity ™, (Perflutren Lipid 
Microsphere, Lantheus Medical Imaging, Inc; N. Billerica, MA), is a microbubble contrast agent that demonstrates enhancement of the prostate on both grayscale and Doppler imaging. Definity is a sterile, non- pyrogenic suspension of liposome-
encapsulated perfluoropropane microbubbles. This contrast agent is composed of a blend of  three phospholipids contained in a matrix of sodium chloride, propylene 
glycol and glycerin in water. The contrast agent is supplied in a vial that contains the phospholipids and perfluouropropane gas. The microbubble agent is prepared by shaking the standard size vial with the aid of a shaking device (Vialmix; ESPE, Seefeld, Germany). Based upon our previous experience with Definity, two vials of Definity will be mixed and diluted in 50 m l of normal saline, yielding a 
concentration of 49.4 μl /ml. For the purpose of contrast -enhanced imaging, 
Definity will be infused over approximately 10- 12 minutes, during which time 
pulse inversion harmonic and flash replenishment imaging will be performed. Definity remains stable within the circulation for 3 to 6 minutes  after infusion;  all 
contrast -enhanced procedures will be completed during the infusion time.   
 
1.3 Clinical Data  – Breast and Liver  
 
Feasibility studies of this new SHI mode have been conducted in vitro  and 
in vivo  by our group
28,29 as well as others30;31,32,33,34,35;36;37;38. Researchers at 
Jefferson produced the first ever in vivo  grayscale SHI images (of canine 
kidneys) using a modified US scanner. We also produced the first ever in vivo  
human grayscale SHI images, demonstrating (in 14 women with 16 breast 
lesions) that SHI can detect the slow, small volume blood flow associated with breast tumor angiogenesis in humans.
39  
  
  
 
 7 Fig. 1 presents an 
example of a fibroadenoma 
imaged after administration of Optison with power Doppler imaging (PDI) and in SHI mode (transmitting at 
4.4 MHz and receiving at 2.2 MHz; optimized for SHI) using a modified Logiq 9 scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI).  Notice, the almost complete lack of signal from non- vascular 
tissue, and that the internal morphology of the tumor vascularity was vis ualized 
better with SHI than with contrast enhanced PDI.   
 Fig. 2 shows a 
breast lesion with benign ductal microcalcifications and fibrocystic changes. Branching vessels within and around the lesion are depicted in finer detail with SHI (Fig 3b) and without the color 
blooming of contrast enhanced PDI (Fig 3a). Finally, SHI depicts neovessels (~20- 40µm diameter
40) not observed with 
conventional imaging.  
 
More recently we have focused on translating grayscale SHI into human 
clinical trials in the breast and liver41,42 and on improv ed processing of SHI 
images.43 We have introduced the concept 
of CMI -SHI, where the inflow of contrast 
bubbles in tumor neovessels is reconstructed by temporal maximum intensity projection of pixels traced from successive image frames .
44;45 A dynamic 
cumulative maximum intensity display for subharmonic imaging (CMI -SHI) was 
developed using a new automated kernel tracking algorithm by identifying motion 
induced displacements . As demonstrated 
by the receiver operating characteristic 
analys is in Fig 3, the area under the curve 
for diagnosis of breast cancer was greatest 
for dynamic CMI -SHI (0.90) and was (a)             (b) 
Figure 2.  Benign ductal microcalcifications and 
fibrocystic changes (arrows) depicted with contrast 
PDI (a) and with SHI (b).  
Figure 3.  ROC curves for four of the 
imaging modalities; (GS: grayscale).  
Figure 1.  Fibroadenoma (arrows) imaged in PDI mode 
(a) and in SHI mode (b) aft er injection of contrast.  
(a)            (b) 
  
  
 
 8 significantly better than for mammography (p = 0.031). With regard to tissue 
perfusion, we have developed a novel method for deriving quantitative estimates 
of tissue perfusion, based on in vivo grayscale SHI46 as an alternative to the well -
known destruction/reperfusion technique.47 A modified Logiq 9 scanner operating 
in SHI mode was used to measure renal perfusion. Fractional blood volumes 
were estimated from subharmonic signal intensities from blood in tissue.48,49 
Perfusion was estimated from the initial slope of the SHI time intensity curve and correlated with the reference standard neutron activation assay technique (r = 0.62; p < 0.001).
50 Finally, we created parametric images of SHI contrast kinetics, 
demonstrating increased perfusion in breast cancer relative to benign lesions (0.103 ± 0.030 vs. 0.054 ± 0.017; p  = 0.0014).
51 
 
1.5 Clinical Data - Prostate  
 
Two basic ultrasound technologies have been used to image microbubble 
contrast agents in the prostate: Doppler and grayscale HI. These technologies are summarized in a textbook by one of the PIs.
52 Color and power Doppler 
imaging techniques, available on most modern ultrasound systems, util ize 
relatively high energy levels that destroy a large proportion of the microbubbles as they are imaged. Pulse inversion and grayscale HI are technological advances that together permit high resolution, low energy grayscale imaging of contrast agents.
53,54,55,56 Various pulsing sequences can further improve 
grayscale HI of the prostatic microcirculation.57,58 Flash replenishment imaging 
was first described as a grayscale harmonic technique that can demonstrate tissue perfusion and may be used for blood flow esti mation.
59,60,61 Contrast -
Enhanced Flash Replenishment may be combined with Maximum Intensity 
Projection (CE -FR-MIP) of each pixel in the image over 2- 4 seconds of low 
power image frames to demonstrate microvascular patterns associated with neovascularity
62 and PCa.63  Whereas assessment for neovascularity with 
contrast -enhanced Doppler imaging is based upon the magnitude of contrast 
enhancement, CE -FR-MIP provides additional information based upon changes 
to the normal intraprostatic microvascular architecture ( Fig. 4). 
 
Numerous trials of CE -TRUS using HI to detect PCa have been conducted 
at the Jefferson Prostate Diagnostic Center.64,65 An early study (n=100 subjects) 
demonstrated improved sensitivity for PCa detection from 38% at baseline to 
Figure 4. Gleason 7 PCa in 
the right mid- gland is invisible 
on grayscale (left image), but 
tumor vascularity is clearly 
defined with CE -FR-MIP 
imaging (right image; arrows).  
 
  
  
 
 9 65% after infusion of the microbubble agent Definity (Lantheus Medical Imaging, 
N Billerica, MA); p ≤ 0.004.66 Furthermore, lesions detected by contrast -
enhancement were generally larger and with a higher Gleason score – that is, 
they were the more clinically significant cancers. The last 40 subjects in this study were evaluated with targeted biopsy. A suspicious site identified by CE -
TRUS was 3.5 times more likely to have a positive biopsy than an adjacent site without contrast enhancement ( p < 0.025).
67 
 A Department of Defense funded clinical trial of 301 men de monstrated 
that targeted cores based upon CE -TRUS were twice as likely to return a positive 
biopsy as systematic cores.
68  Using CE -FR-MIP, our group demonstrated 
positive biopsies in 29/225 targeted cores as compared with 50/600 systematic cores, yielding an odds ratio of 2.0 for cancer detection with CE -TRUS (p = 
0.034).
69 A recently completed National Cancer Institute (NCI) funded clinical trial 
(n = 272) confirmed increased PCa detection with CE -TRUS, and specifically 
with CE -FR-MIP (OR=2.1, p < 0.001). M ore significantly, CE -TRUS preferentially 
detected lesions with greater tumor volume and Gleason score ≥ 7 (p < 0.001). ROC analysis for detection of high volume / high grade PCa with CE -TRUS 
yielded an area under the curve of 0.90 (p = 0.001).
70 Comparison of CE -TRUS 
HI with whole mount prostatectomy specimens in our DOD and NCI study 
subjects demonstrated microbubble enhancement in 93% of malignant foci. In summary, PCa’ s visualized with CE -TRUS tend to be larger and of higher grade.  
 
In summary, clinical studies demonstrate selective detection of higher grade 
PCa with HI, based upon the increased neovascularity of these tumors. Nonetheless, although CE -TRUS with HI selectively detects clinically significant 
PCa, overall by -patient detection of high grade PCa with targeted biopsy based 
upon HI alone remains inferior to a 12 core systematic biopsy.  This limitation is 
related, in part, to difficulty discerning enhancing foci of PCa adjacent to the hypervascular transition zone (see abstract in appendix). A major limitation of HI 
is related to reduced blood- to-tissue contrast resulting from second har monic 
generation and accumulation in tissue.
71 Hence, subharmonic imaging (SHI), 
transmitting at the fundamental frequency (f 0) and receiving at the subharmonic 
(f0/2), becomes an attractive alternative contrast -specific imaging mode, because 
of the weaker subharmonic generation in tissue and the significant subharmonic scattering produced by some new contrast agents.
72 As demonstrated in the 
previous section, preliminary data with SHI suggest that this technique provides a superior signal to background ratio for evaluation of blood flow, that SHI can 
improve depiction of neovessels, and that SHI may be useful for quantitative assessment of tissue perfusion in cancer. 
In order to optimize the detection of 
clinically significant PCa, we propose the use of SHI w ith CE -TRUS for targeted 
biopsy of the prostate . 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 10 1.6 Dose Rationale and Risk/Benefits  
 Based upon our previous experience with Definity  and according to the 
package insert, two vials of Definity will be mixed and diluted in 50 ml of normal 
saline, yield ing a concentration of 49.4 μl/ml. For the purpose of contrast -
enhanced imaging, Definity will be infused over approximately 10- 12 minutes, 
during which time pulse inversion HI and SHI will be performed. Definity remains 
stable within the circulation for 3  to 6 minutes after infusion; all contrast -
enhanced procedures will be completed during the infusion time. The risk of this procedure is basically the risk of an adverse reaction to Definity. The largest safety studies published to date on the use of ultrasound contrast agents in humans (involving up to 4,300,966 subjects) concluded that these agents have a good safety profile in both cardiac and non- cardiac applications.
73,74,75,76  In our 
experience, adverse reactions to Definity include only minor sensations  of 
discomfort which resolve as soon as the infusion is stopped.  
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
1. To implement SHI technology on a transrectal probe suitable for prostate imaging and biopsy  
2. To demonstrate visualization of prostatic vascularity during subharmonic contrast enhanced imaging of the prostate.  
3. To provide a preliminary estimate of the diagnostic accuracy of contrast -
enhanced subharmonic imaging for detection of prostate cancer .  
 
3.0 STUDY DESIGN 
3.1 General Design  
 
This study is a pilot phase II clinical tr ial of 55 patients  (5 controls and 50 
patients)  over the course of 2 years . Experimental software used for 
subharmonic imaging of other body parts will be adopted to work with the 
transrectal prostate probe of an FDA approved ultrasound system, specificall y 
the IC5-9D transducer on the Logiq E9 system (GE Healthcare; Milwaukee, WI) . 
In vitro testing will be performed on 5 patients to ensure that the power output of 
the transducer with the new subharmonic software is within the FDA approved  
limits  for the system power output.  After in vitro optimization of the subharmonic 
mode for imaging, we will conduct a pilot clinical trial of 50 patients  over 2 years .  
All participants will be evaluated with contrast -enhanced transrectal ultrasound 
(CE-TRUS) prior to pro state biopsy. Subharmonic imaging of the CE -TRUS study 
will be used to direct targeted biopsy of the prostate with up to 6 biopsy cores. This will be followed by a conventional  systematic biopsy of the prostate with12 
cores. 
  
  
 
 11 3.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
a. Demonstration of prostate vascularity with subharmonic contras t-enhanced  
imaging . Specifically, demonstration of increased prostate vascularity in patients 
with high risk, aggressive prostate cancer.  
 
b. Preliminary m easures of efficacy (sensitivity and specificity) will be obtained 
for subharmonic CE -TRUS in the  detection of high risk, aggressive prostate 
cancer  after biopsy procedure on 50 patients . 
3.3 Secondary Study Endpoints  
n/a 
3.4 Primary Safety Endpoints  
 No safety issues are expected from the use of subharmonic imaging, as the 
power output of the ultrasound system will be similar to its operation in conventional mode. No safety issues are expected from the administration of Definity for CEUS, as this agent has been used safely in numerous clinical  trials 
and is FDA approved for intravenous administration during cardiac imaging.  
4.0 SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL  
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Subject must be scheduled for a clinically indicated needle biopsy of the prostate based upon an elevated PSA, abnormal digital rectal examination, or based upon active surveillance of prostate cancer.  
2. Subject must be able and willing to give written informed consent for a 
contrast enhanced ultrasound study of the prostate. 
3. Subject must be a male at least 18 years of age when informed consent is obtained.  
4. Subject must have a life expectancy that exceeds the duration of the clinical trial. 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Participant in a clinical trial involving an investigational drug within the past 30 days.  
2. Patients with known or suspected hypersensitivity to perflutren  
3. Previous treatment for PCa.  
4. Clinically unstable, severely ill, or moribund.  
 
  
  
 
 12 4.3 Gender/Minority/Pediatric Inclusion for Research  
 This study is only applicable to adult males, as PCa is only present in the 
adult male population. The study will include men of all races; there will be no 
exclusion based upon race or ethnicity.  
 
4.4 Subject Recruitment and Screening  
 
Fifty adult male patients will be recruited to this study by our urology co-
investigators from the population scheduled to undergo prostate biopsy  at 
Thomas Jefferson University Hospital.  Subjects will be screened for eligibility by 
the attending urologist. The urologist will explain the procedure and may obtain 
written informed consent from each study  participant at that time or in radiology 
on the day of study and prior to any study procedures being performed.  
  
4.5 Early Withdrawal of Subjects  
4.5.1 When and How to Withdraw Subjects  
Any subject may withdraw from the study up until the time the CEUS s tudy is 
performed.  However, once that study is performed, the data will be included in 
our analysis.  
5.0 STUDY DRUG /THERAPY   
5.1 Description 
This is not a therapeutic trial.  The only drug that will be administered is Definity, which is a microbubble ultrasound contrast agent. The risk of the procedure is the risk of an adverse reaction to Definity, which is considered minimal. Although the study participants may not benefit from the findings, future patients may benefit from development of a non- invasive imaging technique that can detect 
and characterize aggressive PCa.  If successful, this technique may reduce the number of biopsy procedures performed for prostate cancer, and it will likely be used to guide a limited number of targeted biopsy cores into those areas that demonstrate imaging characteristics of aggressive prostate cancer.  
5.2 Treatment Regimen  
Based upon our previous experience with Definity  and according to the 
manufacturer’s instruction in the package insert , two vials of Definity will be 
mixed and diluted in 50 ml of normal saline, yielding a concentration of 49.4 
μl/ml. For the purpose of contrast -enhanced imaging, Definity will be infused over 
  
  
 
 13 approximately 10- 12 minutes, during which time pulse inversion HI and SHI will 
be performed.  
5.3 Risks 
 
The risk of this procedure is basically the risk of an adverse reaction to Definity , 
and the risks of conventional prostate biopsy. The largest safety studies 
published to date on the use of ultrasound contrast agents in humans (involving up to 4,300,966 subjects) concluded that these agents have a good safety profile in both cardiac and non- cardiac applications.
77,78,79,80  In our experience, adverse 
reactions to Definity include only minor sensations of discomfort which resolve as 
soon as the infusion  is stopped.  
 
5.4 Method for Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
 
n/a, as all subjects will be studied with HI and SHI . 
6.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 6.1 Study Visit Schedule  
 
The CEUS study procedure will be performed during a single episode of 
care at which time the patient will undergo a clinically indicated biopsy of the 
prostate.  No additional visits will be required to participate in the study.  
   All ultrasound imaging will be performed with a commercially available 
Logiq E9 ultrasound system that provides conventional color and power Doppler imaging, and which will be modified to provide contrast -enhanced HI and SHI. 
Because of the very low SHI signal obtained from tissue, SHI is performed with a dual imaging technique that displays a conventional grayscale image alongside the SHI image. The conventional grayscale image is necessary to define the tissue anatomy and determine location within the prostate while the SHI is used to demonstrate vascularity and neovessels.  
 
The proposed microbubble contrast agent for the current study, Definity , 
(Perflutren Lipid Microsphere, Lantheus), is a microbubble contrast agent that demonstrates enhancement of the prostate on both grayscale and Doppler imaging. Definity remains stable within the circulation for 3 to 6 minutes after infusion and all contrast -enhanced procedures will need to be completed during 
the infusion time. This time constraint has not been a problem in prior studies. Based on our previous experience with Definity  (and in accordance with the 
manufactur er’s instructions), two vials will be mixed and diluted in 50 ml of 
  
  
 
 14 normal saline, yielding a concentration of 49.4 μl/ml. A 20 gauge intravenous 
catheter will be inserted into an arm vein for administration of contrast material. Definity will be delivered  as an infusion at an initial rate of 4 ml/min. The infusion 
rate will be titrated to achieve adequate enhancement of the prostatic microvasculature. Post contrast imaging will begin as soon as contrast is visible. The infusion of Definity will continue for approximately 10- 12 minutes during 
which time the contrast -enhanced diagnostic ultrasound, the assignment of rating 
scores, and the SHI guided biopsy procedure will be performed.  
 
Study participants will be prepared for biopsy according to standard 
clinical operating procedure for subjects undergoing TRUS -guided biopsy at the 
Jefferson Prostate Diagnostic Center. Study subjects will be imaged in the lithotomy position with grayscale ultrasound performed to measure gland size.
81 
Next, the prostate will be evaluated with both baseline and contrast -enhanced 
imaging modes. The dynamic range and imaging frequencies for grayscale, and color Doppler imaging will be standardized for all subjects (scanning frequency of 7.0 MHz with dynamic range of 65 dB). The Doppler window for color imaging will include the entire gland. The baseline examination (~5 minutes) will consist of conventional grayscale imaging and color Doppler imaging. Contrast -enhanced 
imaging (~5 -7 minutes) will consist of color Doppler imaging, HI and SHI. In order 
to allow comparison of the various imaging modes, a standard imaging sweep through the prostate will be performed in the axial plane from the base of the gland to the apex for each of the 2 baseline imaging modes and 3 contrast -
enhanced imaging modes.  
 Study participants will be monitored for AEs during and 30 minutes after contrast administration.  
 
6.2 Study Interpretation  
 
The peripheral zone of each prostate will be rated for suspicion of PCa at 
12 sites, including medial and lateral component of each sextant. A 5- point rating 
score will be assessed in real -time by the examining physician for each 
ultrasound technique. These scores have been previously described and 
validated,
82 with proven utility for predicting the risk of malignancy in prior 
studies.Error! Bookmark not defined. ,Error! Bookmark not defined. A maximum of 6 sites will be 
identified as the most suspicious areas on SHI; targeted biopsy  specimens will 
be obtained from these sites under ultrasound guidance during contrast -
enhanced imaging. If fewer sites are identified, fewer targeted biopsy cores may be obtained.  
 The interpretation of CEUS studies will follow a 12 part extended sextant 
grid as demonstrated in the illustration below:  
 
  
  
 
 15 
 
 
  
7.0 STATISTICAL PLAN  
7.1 Sample Size Determination  
 The study is a pilot study, for the purpose of generating preliminary data for 
a future grant submission. The study is not powered to demonstrate any specific 
accuracy of CEUS, but rather to accumulate several demonstration cases of SHI 
in high grade prostate cancer .  
 
Based upon our past experience we expect approximately 30% of our 
patients to be positive for prostate cancer and half of these (15%) to have a 
diagnosis of high grade disease. Thus, in a population of 50 patients , the mean 
expected number of patients with high grade disease would be 7.5. Using an 
exact binomial probability distribution, the probability of finding at least 5 patients in this sample with high grade disease is 88%.  The probability of finding 3 or 
fewer patients with high grade disease is 4.6%. The probability of not finding a single patient with high grade disease is 0.03%.  Thus, the sample size of n=50 
provides a greater than 95% probability of demonstrating the performance of SHI in at least 3 patients with high grade prostate cancer . 
  
  
 
 16 7.2 Statistical Methods  
Rough estimates of the sensitivity and specificity of SHI for high grade disease 
may be obtained if there are sufficient patients with high grade disease. No 
additional  statistical analysis will be performed 
7.3 Subject Population(s) for Analysis  
All study participants will be included in the analysis.  
8.0 SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS  
8.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that 
develops or worsens in severity during the course of the study.  Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be adverse events if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by the investigator to be of clinical significance  
 
Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non- serious.   
 
A serious adverse event  is any AE that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospital stay  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly of  major clinical significance. They may 
jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to prevent one of the other serious outcomes noted above.  For example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did not result in in- patient hospitalization, or intensive 
treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency department would typically be considered serious.  
 
  
  
 
 17 All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious should be 
regarded as non-serious adverse events.  
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
The study period during which adverse events will be reported will extend 
from the time of administration of the Definity contrast agent, up to 24 hours 
after the administration.  
Preexisting Condition A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting condition should be recorded as an adverse event if the 
frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition worsens during the study period.  
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically significant findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
Post-study Adverse Event  
All unresolved adverse events should be followed by the investigator until the events are resolved, the subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event 
is otherwise explained.  The investigator will instruct each subject to report 
any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to participation in this study.   
Hospitalization, Prolonged Hospitalization or Surgery  
Any adverse event that results in hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization should be documented and reported as a serious adverse event unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition responsible for surgery should be documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the criteria for and adverse event.   
 Neither the condition, hospitalization, prolonged hospitalization, nor surgery are reported as an adverse event in the following circumstances:  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for diagnostic or elective 
surgical procedures for a preexisting condition.  Surgery should not 
be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the purpose of the 
surgery was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful.  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization required to allow efficacy measurement for the study.  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for therapy of the target disease of the study, unless it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospital admissions as judged by the clinical investigator.  
  
  
 
 18 8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
 
The following subsections detail what information must be docu mented for each 
adverse event occurring during the time period specified in Section 8.3. 
8.2.1 Relationship to Study Intervention  
The relationship to study intervention or study participation must be assessed and documented for all adverse events. Evaluation of relatedness must consider etiologies such as natural history of the underlying disease, concurrent illness, concomitant therapy, study -related procedures, accidents, and other external 
factors.  
 The following guidelines are used to assess relationship of an event to study intervention:  
1. Related (Possible, Probable, Definite)  
a. The event is known to occur with the study intervention.  
b. There is a temporal relationship between the intervention and event 
onset.  
c. The event abates when the intervention is discontinued.  
d. The event reappears upon a re- challenge with the intervention.  
2. Not Related (Unlikely, Not Related)  
a. There is no temporal relationship between the intervention and 
event onset.  
b. An alternate etiology has been established.  
 8.2.2 Expectedness  
The PI i s responsible for determining whether an AE is expected or unexpected. 
An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the intervention. Risk information to assess expectedness can be obtained from preclinical studies, the investigator’s brochure, published medical literature, the protocol, or the informed consent document.  
 8.2.3 Severity of Event  
Adverse events will be graded for severity according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0.  
 8.2.4 Intervention 
Any intervention implemented to treat the adverse event must be documented for all adverse events.  
8.3 Safety Assessment and Follow Up  
The PI will follow advers e events with start dates occurring any time after 
informed consent is obtained until 7 (for non- serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) 
after the last day of study participation. At each study visit, the investigator (or 
  
  
 
 19 designee) will inquire about the occurr ence of AE/SAEs since the last visit. 
Events will be followed for outcome information until resolution or stabilization.  
8.4 Reporting to IRB  
8.4.1 Unanticipated Problems  
All incidents or events that meet criteria for unanticipated problems (UAPs) as 
defined in Section 8.1.1 Unanticipated Problems  require the creation and 
completion of an unanticipated problem report form  (OHR -20).  
UAPs that pose risk  to participants or others, and that are not AEs, wi ll be 
submitted to the IRB on an OHR -20 form via the eazUP system within 10 working 
days of the investigator becoming aware of the event.  
UAPs that do not  pose risk to participants or others will be submitted to the IRB 
at the next continuing review.  
8.4.1.1 Adverse Events  
Grade 1 AEs will be reported to the IRB at continuing review.  
Grade 2 AEs will be reported to the IRB at the time of continuing review.  
8.4.1.2 Serious Adverse Events  
SAEs will be reported to the IRB on OHR -10 forms via the electronic reporting 
system (eSAEy) according to the required time frames described below.  
Grade 3- 4 AEs that are unexpected and deemed to be at least possibly related to 
the study will be reported to the IRB within 2 working days of knowledge of the 
event.  
Grade 3-4 AEs that are deemed unrelated to the study will be reported to the IRB 
within 5 working days.  
Grade 5 AEs will be reported to the IRB within one working day of knowledge of the event.  
All SAEs will be submitted to the IRB at continuing review, includi ng those that 
were reported previously.  
 
8.5 Reporting to SKCC DSMC  
All AEs and SAEs, safety and toxicity data, and any corrective actions will be 
submitted to the DSMC per the frequency described in the SKCC DSMP. The 
  
  
 
 20 report to the SKCC DSMC will also inc lude any unanticipated problems that in 
the opinion of the PI should be reported to the DSMC.  
 
For expedited reporting requirements, see table below:                                            DSMC AE/SAE Reporting Requirements  

  
  
 
 21  
 
 
 
8.6 Report to FDA  
In accordance with 21 CFR 212.32, sponsor -investigators of studies conducted  
under an IND must comply with following safety reporting requirements:  
 
Expedited IND Safety Reports:  
 7 Calendar -Day Telephone or Fax Report:
   
 The Sponsor -Investigator is required to notify the FDA of any fatal or  life-
threatening adverse event that is unexpected and assessed by the investigator to 
be possibly related to the use of Definity .  An unexpected adverse event is one 
that is not already described in the Investigator Brochure.    
 Such reports are to be telephoned or faxed to the FDA within 7 calendar days of 
first learning of the event.   Each telephone call or fax transmission (see fax  
number below) should be directed to the FDA new drug review division in the 
Center for Dr ug Evaluation and Research or in the product review division for the 
Center for Biologics  Evaluation and Research, whichever is responsible for the 
review of the IND.  
 15 Calendar -Day Written Report:
   
 The Sponsor -Investigator is also required to notify the FDA and all  participating 
investigators, in a written IND Safety Report, of any serious,  unexpected AE that 
is considered possibly related to the use of Definity . An unexpected adverse 
event is one that is not already described in the Investigator Brochure.  
 Written IND Safety Reports should include an Analysis of Similar Events in accordance with regulation 21 CFR § 312.32.   All safety reports previously  filed 
with the IND concerning similar events should be analyzed.   The new  report 
should contain comments on the significance of the new event in light  of the 
previous, similar reports.    
 Written IND safety reports with Analysis of Similar Events are to be submitted to 
the FDA and all participating investigators within 15 calendar days of first 
learning of the event.   The FDA prefers these  reports on a MedWatch 3500A 
Form but alternative formats are acceptable (e.g. summary letter).  
 FDA fax number for IND Safety Reports:  
 1 (800) FDA - 0178  
 All written IND Safety Reports submitted to the FDA by the Sponsor -Investigator 
must also be faxed to:  
 Thomas Jefferson University IRB  
 
  
  
 
 22  
IND Annual Reports  
 In accordance with the regulation 21 CFR § 312.32, the Sponsor -Investigator  
shall within 60 days of the anniversary date that the IND went into effect  submit a 
brief report of the progress of the investigation.   Please refer to Code of Federal 
Regulations, 21 CFR § 312.32 for a list of the elements  required for the annual 
report.   All IND annual reports submitted to the FDA  by the Sponsor -Investigator 
should be copied to the National Institutes of Heatlh as the sponsor of this study.  
 
8.5.2 Data and Safety Monitoring Committee  
Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) is the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for the KCC. The DSMC is a multidisciplinary committee charged with overseeing the monitoring of safety of participants in clinical trials, and the conduct, progress, validity, and integrity of the data for all clinical trials at the Thomas Jefferson University KCC. The committee meets quarterly to review the progress and safety of all active research protocols that are not monitored by another safety and data monitoring committee or board.  
• The DSMC meets quarterly. Additional DSMC meetings are scheduled 
based on the nature and number of trials being monitored over a 
specified time period. The DSMC meets (by conference call) within 24 hours following the notification of an unexpected adverse event felt to be related to the study drug.  
• Prior to each DSMC meeting, each board member, is provided a printout of all reported AEs and SAEs occurring during the reporting 
period for this clinical trial. The principal investigator provides a detailed and comprehensive narrative assessment of current adverse events to date, indicating their possible significance and whether these toxicities have affected the conduct of the trial. DSMC members are provided with the principal investigator’s assessment, a written report summarizing adverse events, safety data, and activity data observed during the specified time period described in each protocol, as well as recommendations from the Medical Monitor. A review of outcome results (response, toxicity and adverse events) and factors external to the study (such as scientific or therapeutic developments) is discussed, and the Com mittee votes on the status of each study.  
• A summary of the board’s action is sent to each investigator, the 
CCRRC and TJU IRB s. The DSMC actions may include 
recommendations/requirements that will lead to improved patient safety and/or efficacy, significant benefits or risks that have developed, or other changes determined to be necessary. The DSMC may also take note of slow accrual or lack of scientific progress, and refer such issues to the CCRRC. The DSMC provides the investigator with the rationale for any decision made.  
 
 
  
  
 
 23 9.0 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
9.1 Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according 
to the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed subject authorization 
informing the subject of the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclo se that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period.  
9.2 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in source documents   Examples of these original documents, and data records include: hospital records, clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, 
subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico- technical departments involved in the clinical trial.  
9.3 Case Report Forms  
 The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for the study. CRFs for the CEUS studies will be completed for each study subject, and 
are included in section 14 of this protocol.  All data requested on the CRF must be 
recorded.  All missing data must be explained.  If a space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was not done or the question was not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  All entries 
should be printed legibly in black ink.  If any entry error has been made, to correct such an error, draw a single straight line through the incorrect entry and enter the correct data abov e it.  All such changes must be initialed and dated.  
  
  
 
 24 DO NOT ERASE OR WHITE OUT ERRORS.  For clarification of illegible or 
uncertain entries, print the clarification above the item, then initial and date it.  
 
9.4 Records Retention  
 
It is the investigator’s  responsibility to retain study essential documents for at 
least 2 years after the last approval of a marketing application in their country and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in their country or at least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  These documents should be retained for a longer period if required by an agreement with the sponsor.  In such an instance, it is the responsibility of the sponsor to inform the investigator/institution as to when these documents no longer need to be retained.  
 
10.0 STUDY MONITORING, AUDITING, AND INSPECTING  
Clinical site monitoring and auditing is conducted to ensure that the rights of 
human participants are prot ected, that the study is implemented in accordance 
with the protocol and/or other operating procedures, and that the quality and integrity of study data and data collection methods are maintained. Monitoring and auditing for this study will be performed in accordance with the SKCC’s Data 
and Safety Monitoring Plan ( DSMP) developed by the SKCC Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC) . The DSMP specifies  the frequency of monitoring, 
monitoring procedures, the level of clinical site monitoring activities (e.g. , the 
percentage of participant  data to be reviewed), and the distribution of monitoring 
reports. Some monitoring activities may be performed remotely, while others will take place at the study site (s). Appropriate staff will conduct monitoring activiti es 
and provide reports of the findings and associated action items in accordance with the  details described in the SKCC DSMP.  
 
 
 
 
11.0 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
This study is to be conducted according to US and international standards of 
Good Clinical Practic e (FDA Title 21 part 312 and International Conference on 
Harmonization guidelines), applicable government regulations and Institutional research policies and procedures.  
 This protocol and any amendments will be submitted to a properly constituted independ ent Institutional Review Board (IRB), in agreement with local legal 
  
  
 
 25 prescriptions, for formal approval of the study conduct.  The decision of the IRB 
concerning the conduct of the study will be made in writing to the investigator before commencement of thi s study.   
 All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form that is compliant with local and federal regulations, describing this study and providing sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study.  See Attachment for a copy of the Subject Informed Consent Form.  This consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by the IRB for the study.  The formal consent of a subject, using the IRB -approved 
consent form, mus t be obtained before that subject is submitted to any study 
procedure.  This consent form must be signed by the subject or legally acceptable surrogate, and the investigator -designated research professional 
obtaining the consent.   
 
12.0 STUDY FINANCES  
12.1 Funding Source  
Funding for this study will be provided by an R21 grant from the NIH  (R21 
CA202214) . 
12.2 Conflict of Interest 
Any investigator who has a conflict of interest with this study (patent ownership, 
royalties, or financial gain greater than the minimum allowable by their institution, etc.) must have the conflict reviewed by a properly constituted Conflict of Interest Committee with a Committee -sanctioned conflict management plan that has 
been reviewed and approved by the study sponsor prior to participation in this study.  All Jefferson University Investigators will follow the TJU Conflicts of Interest Policy for Employees (107.03).  
12.3 Subject Stipends or Payments  
n/a 
13.0 PUBLICATION PLAN  
The investigators involved in this study will be soley r esponsible for analysis of 
the data, and publication of any results.  It is expected that the data from this study will be published in a peer reviewed urology journal.  
 
  
  
 
 26  
14.0 REFERENCES  
 
                                            
1 Siegel R, DeSanti s C, Virgo K , Stein K , Mariotto A , Smith T , Cooper D , Gansler T , 
Lerro C , Fedewa S , Lin C , Leach C , Cannady RS , Cho H , Scoppa S , Hachey M , Kirch R, 
Jemal A , Ward E .  Cancer treatment and survivorship statistics, 2012.  CA Cancer J Clin 
2012; 62:220- 241. [PMID: 22700443]  
 
2 Penson DF, Rossignol M, Sartor AO, Scardino PT, Abenhaim LL.  PCa: epidemiology 
and health- related quality of life.   Urology. 2008 ; 72(6 Suppl):S3- 11. [PMID: 19095126]  
 
3 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer Statistics, 2014. CA A Cancer Journal for 
Clinicians.  2014; 64:9-29. [PMID: 23335087] 
 4 Bratt O. Watching the face of Janus --active surveillance as a strategy to reduce 
overtreatment for localised PCa.   Eur Urol. 2006; 50(3):410 -2. [PMID: 16650924]  
 
5 Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL, 3rd, 3rd, Buys SS, Chia D, Church TR, Fouad 
MN, Gelmann EP, Kvale PA, Reding DJ, Weissfeld JL, Yokochi LA, O'Brien B, Clapp JD, 
Rathmell JM, Riley TL, Hayes RB, Kramer BS, Izmirlian G, Miller AB, Pinsky PF, Prorok 
PC, Gohagan JK, Berg CD; PLCO Project Team. Mortality results from a randomized 
prostate- cancer screening trial [published erratum in N Engl J Med. 2009;360:1797] N 
Engl J Med. 2009;360:1310– 1319. PMID: [19297565]  
 
6 Schröder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, Tammela TL, Ciatto S, Nelen V, Kwiatkowski M, 
Lujan M, Lilja H, Zappa M, Denis LJ, Recker F, Berenguer A, Määttänen L, Bangma CH, 
Aus G, Villers A, Rebillard X, van der Kwast T, Blijenberg BG, Moss SM, de Koning HJ, 
Auvinen A; ERSPC Investigators. Screening and prostate- cancer mortality in a 
randomized European study.   N Engl J Med . 2009; 360(13):1320- 8. [PMID: 19207566]  
 
7 Gomella LG, Liu XS, Trabulsi EJ, Kelly WK, Myers R, Showalter T, Dicker A, Wender 
R. Screening for PCa: the current evidence and guidelines controversy.Can J Urol. 2011 
Oct;18(5):5875 -83.  PMID: [22018148]  
 
8 Moyer VA, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force*.  Screening for PCa: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.  Ann Intern Med. 
2012;157:120 -134. 
 
9 Penson DF, McLerran D, Feng Z, Li L, Albertsen PC, Gilliland FD, Hamilton A, 
Hoffman RM, Stephenson RA, Potosky AL, Stanford JL.  5-year urinary and sexual 
outcomes after radical prostatectomy: results from the PCa outcomes study.   J Urol. 
2005 May;173(5):1701- 5. [PMID: 15821561]  
 10 Zelefsky, MJ; Fuks, Z; Happersett, L; Lee, HJ; Ling, CC; Burman, CM; Hunt, M; 
Wolfe, T; Venkatraman, ES; Jackson, A; Skwarchuk, M; Leibel, SA. Clinical experience 
  
  
 
 27                                                                                                                                   
with intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) in PCa. Radiother Oncol. 
2000;55:241– 249. [PMID: 10869739]  
 11 Albertsen PC, Hanley JA, Fine J.  20- year outcomes following conservative 
management of clinically localized PCa.  JAMA. 2005 293(17):2095 -101. [PMID: 
15870412]  
 
12 Johansson JE, Holmberg L, Johansson S, Bergström R, Adami HO.  Fifteen- year 
survival in PCa. A prospective, population- based study in Sweden.   JAMA. 1997 
277(6):467- 71. [PMID: 902 0270]   
 
13 Patel MI, DeConcini DT, Lopez -Corona E, Ohori M, Wheeler T, Scardino PT.  An 
analysis of men with clinically localized PCa who deferred definitive therapy.   J Urol. 
2004;  171(4):1520- 4. [PMID: 15017211]  
 14 Dall'Era MA, Cooperberg MR, Chan JM, Davies BJ, Albertsen PC, Klotz LH, Warlick 
CA, Holmberg L, Bailey DE Jr, Wallace ME, Kant off PW, Carroll PR. Active surveillance 
for early -stage PCa: review of the current literature.   Cancer. 2008; 112(8):1650- 9. 
[PMID: 18306379]  
 15 Steineck G, Helgesen F, Adolfsson J, Dickman PW, Johansson JE, Norlén BJ, 
Holmberg L; Scandinavian Prostatic Cancer Group Study Number 4. Quality of life after 
radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting.   N Engl J Med. 2002; 347(11):790- 6. [PMID: 
12226149]  
 
16 Goldberg BB, Raichlen JS, Forsberg F.  Ultrasound Contrast Agents: Basic Principles 
and ClinicalApplications, 2nd Ed, Martin Dunitz Ltd., London, 2001. 
 17 Bigler SA, Deering RE, Brawer MK. Comparison of microscopic vasculatiry in benign 
and malignant prostate tissue. Human Pathology 24:220- 226, 1993. [PMID: 8432518] 
 
18 Weidner N, Carroll PR, Flax J, Blumenfeld W, Foldman J. Tumor angiogenesis 
correlates with metastasis in invasive prostate carcinoma. American Journal of 
Pathology 143:401 -409, 1993. [PMID: 7688183] 
 19 Bostwick DG,  Wheeler TM, Blute M, Barrett DM, MacLennan GT, Sebo TJ, Scardino 
PT, Humphrey PA, Hudson MA, Fradet Y, Miller GJ, Crawford ED, Blumenstein BA, Mahran HE, Miles BJ. Optimized microvessel density analysis improves prediction of cancer stage from prostate needle biopsies. Urology 48:47 -57, 1996. [PMID: 8693651]  
 20 Lissbrant IF, Stattin P, Damber JE, Bergh A. Vascular density is a predictor of 
cancer -specific survival in prostatic carcinoma. Prostate 33:38 -45, 1997. [PMID: 
9294625]  
 
21 Borre M, Offersen BV, Ner strom B, Overgaard J. Microvessel density predicts 
survival in PCa patients subjected to watchful waiting. British Journal of Cancer 78:940-944, 1998. [PMID: 9764587]  
 
  
  
 
 28                                                                                                                                   
22 Sedelaar JP. van Leenders GJ. Hulsbergen -van de Kaa CA. van der Poel HG. van 
der Laak JA. Debruyne FM. Wijkstra H. de la Rosette JJ. Microvessel density: 
correlation between contrast ultrasonography and histology of PCa. European Urology. 
40(3):285- 93, 2001. [PMID: 11684844]  
 23 Strohmeyer D. Frauscher F. Klauser A. Recheis W. Eibl G. Hornin ger W. Steiner H. 
Volgger H. Bartsch G. Contrast -enhanced transrectal color Doppler ultrasonography 
(TRCDUS) for assessment of angiogenesis in PCa. Anticancer Research. 21(4B):2907 -
13, 200. [PMID: 11712785]  
 24 Bogers HA. Sedelaar JP. Beerlage HP. de la Rosette JJ. Debruyne FM. Wijkstra H. 
Aarnink RG. Contrast -enhanced three- dimensional power Doppler angiography of the 
human prostate: correlation with biopsy outcome. Urology. 54(1):97- 104, 1999. [PMID: 
10414734]  
 25 Roy C, Buy X, Lang H, Saussine, Jacqmin D. Contrast enhanced color Doppler 
endorectal sonography of the prostate: efficiency for detecting peripheral zone tumors 
and role for biopsy procedure. The Journal of Urology 170:69 -72, 2003. [PMID: 
12796647]  
 
26 Frauscher F, Klauser A, Halpern EJ, Horninger W, Bartsch G. Detection of PCa with 
a Microbubble Ultrasound Contrast Agent. The Lancet 357:1849- 1850, 2001.  
 27 Frauscher F, Klauser A, Volgger H, Halpern EJ, Pallwein L, Steiner H, Schuster A, 
Horninger W, Rogatsch H, Bartsch G.  Comparison of Contrast -enhanced Color Doppler 
Targeted Biopsy to Conventional Systematic Biopsy: Impact on PCa Detection. The Journal of Urology 167:1648- 1652, 2002. [PMID: 11912381] 
 
28 Bhagavatheeshwaran G, Shi WT, Forsberg F, Shankar PM.  Subharmonic generation 
from contrast age nts in simulated neovessels.  Ultrasound Med Biol, 2004; 30:199– 203 
 
29 Eisenbrey JR, Sridharan A, Machado P, Zhao H, Halldorsdottir VG, Dave JK, Liu JB, 
Park S, Dianis S, Wallace K, Thomenius KE, Forsberg F.  Three -dimensional 
subharmonic ultrasound imagin g in vitro and in vivo.  Acad Radiol, 2012; 19: 732 -739.  
[PMID:  22464198].  
 
30 Chomas J, Dayton P, May D, Ferrara K.  Nondestructive subharmonic imaging.  IEEE 
Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelec. Freq. Contr., 2002; 49:883- 892. 
 
31 Faez T, Renaud G, Defontaine M, Calle S, de Jong N.  Dynamic manipulation of the 
subharmonic scattering of phospholipid- coated microbubbles.  Phys Med Biol 2011b; 
56:6459- 73. 
 
32 Faez T, Emmer M, Docter M, Sijl J, Versluis M, de Jong N.  Characterizing the 
subharmonic response of phosphol ipid-coated microbubbles for carotid imaging.  
Ultrasound Med Biol. 2011a; 37:958- 970.  [PMID:  21531498].  
 
  
  
 
 29                                                                                                                                   
33 Goertz DE, Cherin E, Needles A, Burns PN, Foster FS.  High frequency nonlinear B -
scan imaging of microbubble contrast agents.  IEEE Trans Ultrason  Ferroelectr Freq 
Control. 52:65 -79, 2005.  
 
34 Goertz DE, Frijlink ME, de jong N, van der Steen AF.  Nonlinear intravascular 
ultrasound contrast imaging .  Ultrasound Med Biol, 32:491 -502, 2006.  
 
35 Goertz DE, Frijlink ME, Tempel D, Bhagwandas V, Gisolf A, Krams R, de Jong N, van 
der Steen AF.  Subharmonic contrast intravascular ultrasound for vasa vasorum 
imaging.  Ultrasound Med Biol, 33:1859 -1872, 2007.  
 
36 Helfield BL, Cherin E, Foster FS, Goertz DE.  Investigating the subharmonic response 
of individual phospholipid encapsulated microbubbles at high frequencies: a comparative 
study of five agents.  Ultrasound Med Biol. 2012; 38:846- 863.  [PMID:  22402024] . 
 
37 Needles A, Goertz DE, Karshafian R, Cherin E, Brown AS, Burns PN, Foster FS.  
High-frequency subharmonic pulsed- wave Doppler and color flow imaging of 
microbubble contrast agents.  Ultrasound Med Biol, 34:1139 -1151, 2008.  
 
38 Shankar PM, Krishna PD, Newhouse VL.  Advantage of subharmonic over second 
harmonic backscatter for contrast -to-tissue echo enhancement.  Ultrasound Med. Biol, 
1998; 24:395- 399. 
 
39 Forsberg F, Piccoli CW, Merton DA, Palazzo JJ, Hall AL.  Breast lesions: imaging with 
contrast -enhanc ed subharmonic US - initial experience.  Radiology 2007, 244:718- 726. 
 
40 Forsberg F, Kuruvilla B, Pascua M, Chaudhari MH, Merton DA, Palazzo JP, Goldberg 
BB.  Comparing contrast -enhanced color flow imaging and pathological measures of 
breast lesion vascularity.  Ultrasound Med Biol, 2008; 34: 1365- 1372 .  
 
41 Forsberg F, Liu JB, Chiou HJ, Rawool NM, Parker L, Goldberg BB.  Comparison of 
fundamental and wideband harmonic contrast imaging of liver tumors. Ultrasonics 2000a, 38:110- 113. 
 
42 Eisenbrey JR, Dave JK, Halldorsdottir VG, Merton DA, Miller C, Gonzalez JM, 
Machado P, Park S, Dianis S, Chalek CL, Kim CE, Baliff JP, Thomenius KE, Brown DB, 
Navarro VJ, Forsberg F.  Noninvasive subharmonic aided pressure estimation of portal 
vein pressures in patients with chronic liver disease.  Radiology, 2013; 266. In press.  
43 Eisenbrey JR, Joshi N, Dave JK, Forsberg F.  Assessing algorithms for defining 
vascular architecture in subharmonic images of breast lesions.  Phys Med Biol, 2011c; 
56:1 – 12. 
 
44 Dave JK, Forsberg F.  Novel automated motion compensation technique for producing 
cumulative maximum intensity subharmonic images.  Ultrasound Med Biol, 2009; 
35:155- 1563.  
 
  
  
 
 30                                                                                                                                   
45 Dave JK, Forsberg F, Fernandes S, Piccoli CW, Fox TB, Merton DA, Leodore LM, Hall 
AL.  Static and dynamic cumulative maximum intensity display mode for subharmonic 
breast imaging - a comparative study with mammography and conventional ultrasound 
techniques.  J Ultrasound Med, 2010; 29:1177- 1185.  
 
46 Forsberg F, Liu JB, Shi WT, Ro R, Lipcan KJ, Deng X, Hall AL.  In vivo perfusion 
estimation using subharmonic contrast microbubble signals.  J Ultrasound Med 2006,  
25:15- 21. 
 
47 Wei K, Jayaweera AR, Firoozan S, Linka A, Skyba DM, Kaul S.  Quantification of 
myocardial blood flow with ultrasound -induced destruction of microbubbles administered 
as a constant venous infusion.  Circulation 1998; 97:473- 483. 
 
48 Rubin JM, Adler RS, Fowlkes JB, Spratt S, Pallister JE, Chen JF, Carson PL.  
Fractional moving blood volume: estimation with power Doppler US.  Radiology 1995; 
197:183- 190. 
 
49 Rubin JM, Bude RO, Fowlkes JB, Spratt RS, Carson PL, Adler RS.  Normalizing 
fractional moving blood volume estimates with power Doppler US: defining a stable 
intravascular point with the cumulative power distribution function.  Radiology 1997; 
205:757- 765. 
 
50 Sridharan A, Eisenbrey JR, Liu JB, et al.  Perfusion estimation using contrast 
enhanced three- dimensional subharmonic ultrasound imaging: an in vivo study.  Invest 
Radiol, 2013; 48  : 654-660. 
 
51 Eisenbrey JR, Dave JK, Merton DA, Palazzo JP, Hall AL, Forsberg F.  Parametric 
imaging using subharmonic signals from ultrasound contrast agents in patients with 
breast lesions.  J Ultrasound Med 2011b; 30:85– 92. 
 
52 Halpern EJ, Cochlin LI, Goldberg BB. Imaging of the Prostate.  London: Martin Dunitz 
Ltd. 2002. [isbn: 1841841986]  
53 de Jong N, Cornet R, Lancee CT.  Higher harmonics of vibrating gas -filled 
microspheres.  Part one: simulations.  Ultrasonics 32:447 -453. 1994. [doi: 10.1016/0041 -
624X(94)90064- 7] 
 
54 de Jong N, Cornet R, Lancee CT. Higher harmonics of vibrating gas -filled 
microspheres. Part two: measurements.  Ultrasonics 32:455 -459, 1994. [ doi: 
10.1016/0041 -624X(94)90065- 5] 
 
55 Schrope BA, Newhouse VL, Uhlendorf V.  Simulated capillary blood flow 
measurement using a nonlinear ultrasonic contrast agent.  Ultrasonic Imaging 14:134 -
158, 1992. [PMID: 1604755]  
 
56 Schrope BA, Newhouse VL. Second harmonic ultrasound blood perfusion 
measurement. Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology 19:567- 579, 1993. [PMID: 8310553] 
 
  
  
 
 31                                                                                                                                   
57 Aigner F, Pallwein L, Mitterberger M, Pinggera GM, Mikuz G, Horninger W, Frauscher 
F.  Contrast -enhanced ultrasonography using cadence- contrast pulse sequencing 
technology for targeted biopsy of the prostate.   BJU Int. 2009; 103(4):458 -63. [PMID: 
19021610]  
 
58 Yang JC, Tang J, Li J, Luo Y, Li Y, Shi H.  Contrast- enhanced gray -scale transrectal 
ultrasound- guided prostate biopsy in men with elevated serum prostate- specific antigen 
levels.   Acad Radiol. 2008; 15(10):1291- 7. [PMID: 18790401]  
 
59 Wei K, Jayaweera AR, Firoozan S, Linka A, Skyba DM, Kaul S.  Quantification of 
myocardial blood flow with ultrasound -induced destruction of microbubbles administered 
as a constant venous infusion.   Circulation. 1998 Feb 10;97(5):473- 83. [PMID: 9490243]  
 
60 Kamiyama N, Moriyasu F, Mine Y, Goto Y.  Analysis of flash echo from contrast 
agent for designing optimal ultrasound diagnostic systems.   Ultrasound Med Biol. 1999 
Mar;25(3):411 -20. [PMID: 10374984]  
 
61 Shi WT, Forsberg F, Liu JB, Rawool NM, Goldberg BB.  Blood flow estimation with 
harmonic Flash Echo Imaging.   Ultrason Imaging. 2001 Jul;23(3):161 -70. [PMID: 
11958587]  
 
62 Sugimoto K, Moriyasu F, Kamiyama N, Metoki R, Yamada M, Imai Y, Iijima H.  
Analysis of morphological vascular changes of hepatocellular carcinoma by microflow imaging using contrast -enhanced sonography.   Hepatol Res. 2008; 38(8):790- 9. [PMID: 
18507694]  
 63 Linden RA, Trabulsi EJ, Forsberg F, Gittens PR, Gomella LG, Halpern EJ.  Contrast 
enhanced ultrasound flash replenishment method for directed prostate biopsies.   J Urol. 
2007; 178(6):2354- 8. [PMID: 17936814]
 
 
64 Halpern E.J., Verkh L., Forsberg F., Gomella L.G., Mattrey R.F., Goldberg BB. Initial 
experience with contrast -enhanced sonography of the prostate. American Journal of 
Roentgenology 174:1757- 1580, 2000. [PMID: 10845484] 
 
65 Halpern EJ, McCue PA, Aksnes AK, Hagen EK, Frauscher F, Gomella LG:  Contrast 
enhanced sonography of the prostate with Sonazoid: Comparison with whole mount 
prostatectomy specimens in twelve patients.  Radiology 2002; 222:361- 366. [PMID: 
11818600]  
 
66 Halpern EJ, Rosenberg M, Gomella LG. PCa: contrast -enhanced US for detection. 
Radiology 219:219- 225, 2001. [PMID: 11274560]  
 
67 Halpern EJ, Frauscher F, Rosenberg M, Gomella LG.  Directed Biopsy During 
Contrast Enhanced Sonography of the Prostate.  American Journal of Roentgenology 
178:915- 919, 2002. [PMID: 11906872]  
 
  
  
 
 32                                                                                                                                   
68 Halpern EJ, Ramey JR, Strup SE, Frauscher F, McCue P, Gomella LG. Detection of 
Prostate Cance with Contrast Enhanced Sonography Using Intermittent Harmonic 
Imaging. Cancer 2005; 104(11):2372- 2383. [PMID: 16240450]  
 69 Linden RA, Trabulsi EJ, Forsberg F, Gomella LG, Halpern EJ. Contrast enhanced 
ultrasound flash replenishment method for directed prostate biopsies. J Urol 
178(6):2354- 8, 2007.  
 70 Halpern EJ, Gomella LG, Forsberg F, McCue PA, Trabulsi EJ. Contrast -Enhanced 
Transrectal Ultrasound for the Detection of PCa: A Randomized, Double- Blinded Trial of 
Dutasteride Pretreatment.  J Urol 2012;  188(5):1739- 45. [PMID: 22998915]  
 
71 Hamilton MF, Blackstock DT.  Nonlinear acoustics, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 
1998.  
 
72 Forsberg F, Shi WT, Goldberg BB.  Subharmonic imaging of contrast agents.  
Ultrasonics 2000b, 38:93 -98. 
 73 Dolan MS, Gala SS, Dodla S, Abdelmoneim SS , Xie F , Cloutier D , Bierig M , Mulvagh 
SL, Porter TR , Labovitz AJ .  Safety and efficacy of commercially available ultrasound 
contrast agents for rest and stress echocardiography a multicenter experience.  J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53:32 -38. [PMID: 19118722]  
 74 Main ML, Ryan AC, Davis TE, Albano MP, Kusnetzky LL, Hibberd M.  Acute mortality 
in hospitalized patients undergoing echocardiography with and without an ultrasound contrast agent (multicenter registry results in 4,300,966 consecutive patients).  Am J Cardiol. 102:1742 -1746, 2008. [PMID: 19064035]  
 75 Main ML, Goldman JH, Grayburn PA.  Ultrasound contrast agents: balancing safety 
versus efficacy.  Expert Opin Drug Saf 2009; 8:49- 56. [PMID: 19236217]  
 
76 Wei K, Mulvagh SL, Carson L, Davidoff R , Gabriel R , Grimm RA , Wilson S , Fane L, 
Herzog CA , Zoghbi WA , Taylor R , Farrar M , Chaudhry FA , Porter TR , Irani W , Lang RM .  
The safety of Definity and Optison for ultrasound image enhancement: a retrospective 
analysis of 78,383 administered contrast doses.  J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2008; 21:1202-
1206. [PMID: 18848430]  
 
77 Dolan MS, Gala SS, Dodla S, Abdelmoneim SS , Xie F , Cloutie r D, Bierig M , Mulvagh 
SL, Porter TR , Labovitz AJ .  Safety and efficacy of commercially available ultrasound 
contrast agents for rest and stress echocardiography a multicenter experience.  J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53:32 -38. [PMID: 19118722]  
 78 Main ML, Ryan AC, Davis TE, Albano MP, Kusnetzky LL, Hibberd M.  Acute mortality 
in hospitalized patients undergoing echocardiography with and without an ultrasound 
contrast agent (multicenter registry results in 4,300,966 consecutive patients).  Am J 
Cardiol. 102:1742 -1746, 2008. [PMID: 19064035]  
 
  
  
 
 33                                                                                                                                   
79 Main ML, Goldman JH, Grayburn PA.  Ultrasound contrast agents: balancing safety 
versus efficacy.  Expert Opin Drug Saf 2009; 8:49- 56. [PMID: 19236217]  
 
80 Wei K, Mulvagh SL, Carson L, Davidoff R , Gabriel R , Grimm RA , Wilson S , Fane L, 
Herzog CA , Zoghbi WA , Taylor R , Farrar M , Chaudhry FA , Porter TR , Irani W , Lang RM .  
The safety of Definity and Optison for ultrasound image enhancement: a retrospective analysis of 78,383 adm inistered contrast doses.  J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2008; 21:1202-
1206. [PMID: 18848430]  
 
81 Halpern EJ, Frauscher F, Forsberg F, Strup SE, Nazarian LN, O’Kane P, Gomella LG. 
High Frequency Doppler Imaging of the Prostate: Effect of Patient Position. Radiology  
222:634- 639, 2002. [PMID: 11867778]  
 
82 Mitterberger M, Aigner F, Pinggera GM, Steiner E, Rehder P, Ulmer H, Halpern EJ, 
Horninger W, Frauscher F.  Contrast -enhanced colour Doppler -targeted prostate biopsy: 
correlation of a subjective blood- flow rating scale with the histopathological outcome of 
the biopsy.   BJU Int . 2010 Mar 25. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20346032] 
 