 
 
 2019  
Hybri d Effectiveness -Implem entation Study to Improve Clopidogrel Adherence  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND S TATISTICAL AN ALYSIS PLAN       
 
Document Date: February 26, 2019  
Uploaded: 05/06/2019  
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 1 
  
 
Protocol  
 
Project Title:  Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation Study to Improve Clopidogrel Adherence  
   
Principal Investigator:  P. Michael Ho , MD, PhD  
         
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims  
 
Clopidogrel  is a critical therapy following percutaneous coron ary intervention (PCI) with stent placement 
and reduces  the risk of stent thrombosis, myocardial infarction (MI) and mortality  (1-7). Despite the 
importance of clopidogrel following stent implantation, multiple VA and non -VA studies have 
demonstrated adher ence gaps to clopidogrel, both delays in initial  filling of the medication at hospital 
discharge (~16%) and early discontinuation during longitudinal use (up to 30%). These studies 
demonstrate clear evidence and guideline consensus supporting clopidogrel a dherence, adverse 
consequences of non -adherence, and the care gap that will be the focus of this project.  
 
Non-adherence to clopidogrel is common in the VA. From the VA’s Cardiovascular Assessment 
Reporting and Tracking in the Cardiac Catheterization Labo ratory (CART -CL), we found that 22.4% of 
patients delayed filling clopidogrel following PCI in FY09 with delay defined as filling a clopidogrel 
prescription > 1 day after discharge. Further, approximately 1/3 of patients discontinued clopidogrel 
early (< 9  months) prior to the recommended one year treatment duration. Even among patients without 
an initial delay in clopidogrel filling, almost 40% of patients discontinued clopidogrel by 9 months of 
hospital discharge. At the hospital level, there is also sign ificant variation in clopidogrel non -adherence. 
On average at each PCI facility, 18.9% of patients  delay filling clopidogrel, and 30 -40% discontinue 
clopidogrel early by 9 months. These findings highlight significant opportunities to improve clopidogrel 
adherence following stent implantation in the VA.  
 
Therefore, o ur main objective is to conduct a type 1 hybrid effectiveness/implementation study to test 
the effectiveness of a successfully -piloted, evidence -based, multi -faceted intervention to improve 
patie nt adherence to clopidogre l following PCI . The proposed study will test the hypothesis that a 
successfully -piloted, evidence -based, multi -faceted intervention targeting veterans following PCI 
procedure improves adherence to clopidogrel, reduces bleeding, m yocardial infarction, stroke, and 
mortality among these patients, and is cost -effective. The proposed intervention will be based on the 
Chronic Care Model  and will build  on our pilot work as well as will leverage the V A’s CART -CL, a 
uniform cath lab proced ure reporting tool at all VA cath labs. The study will be evaluated using the RE -
AIM framework consisting of the following components, reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation 
and maintenance . The intervention will adapt  elements of prior successful intervention, including patient 
education, collaboration between cath lab  clinicians  and impatient/ outpatient pharmacy  teams, and tele -
monitoring via interactive voice response (IVR) technology. This type I hybrid 
effectiveness/implementation study will  be tested at 16 sites randomized to intervention with an average 
of 90 patients per site per 6 month period versus usual care.  
 
 
Specific Aims:  
 
1. To evaluate current practices at VA PCI  facilit ies (n= 16) to enhance adherence to clopidogrel, 
both at hospital d ischarge and during longitudinal follow -up. 
2. To implement the multi -faceted intervention at 16 total sites through 4 roll -out phases ( 4 sites 
during each roll -out) in a randomized stepped wedge trial design.  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 2 
 3. To assess barriers and facilitators to interventi on implementation during each roll -out phase 
through semi -structured interviews and incorporate lessons learned from each roll -out phase 
into subsequent roll -out phases.  
4. To determine the effectiveness of a successfully -piloted, evidence -based, multi –facet ed 
intervention versus usual care for improving clopidogrel filling at hospital discharge and 
adherence to clopidogrel (primary outcome s). 
5. To determine the effectiveness of a successfully -piloted, evidence -based, multi –faceted 
intervention versus usual car e for reducing the combined cardiovascular endpoints of 
bleeding, myocardial infarction, stroke, and mortality (secondary outcomes).  
6. To assess the incremental cost -effectiveness of the successfully -piloted, evidence -based, 
multi –faceted intervention  compar ed with usual care.  
 
 
 
II. Background and Significance : 
 
PCI is a common invasive cardiovascular procedure performed in the VA with over 13,000  procedures 
in FY10. Clopidogrel is a critical adjuvant therapy following PCI with stent placement and is generally 
recommended for up to 1  year following the procedure ( 1). This is a class I recommendation in the 
American College of Cardiology (ACC) /American Heart Association ( AHA) guidelines, which is the 
highest level of rec ommendation in the guidelines ( 1). Despite t he evidence supporting clopidogrel use, 
studies both outside and within the VA suggest that poor adherence to clopidogrel is common. 
However, prior interventions targeting non -adherence have not specifically focused on clopidogrel 
adherence among PCI patie nts. 
  
Non-adherence to clopidogrel  among PCI patients  is common in the VA. From CART, we found that 
22.4% of patients delayed filling clopidogrel following PCI in FY09 with delay defined as filling a 
clopidogrel prescription > 1 day after  discharge. Furth er, approximately 1/3 of patients discontinued 
clopidogrel early (< 9 months) prior to the  recommended one year treatment duration. Even among 
patients without an initial delay in clopidogrel filling,  almost 40% of patients discontinued clopidogrel by 
9 mo nths of hospital discharge. At the hospital level, there  is also significant variation in clopidogrel 
non-adherence. On average at each PCI facility, 18.9% of patients  delay filling clopidogrel, and 30 -40% 
discontinue clopidogrel early by 9 months. These f indings highlight  significant opportunities to improve 
clopidogrel adherence following stent implantation in the VA.   
 
There are many potential reasons for early clopidogrel discontinuation that involve patient and 
healthcare  system factors ( 8-10). Patient s reported the following reasons for discontinuing clopidogrel 
within 1 month  after drug-eluting stent ( DES) implantation: 1) misunderstanding the intended treatment 
duration; 2) conflicting recommendations  about intended duration; 3) cost of the medicatio n; and 4) 
patients’ own decision to stop ( 10). In contrast,  patients who continued to take clopidogrel reported the 
following as helpful: 1) communication such as letters  from their physician; and 2) receiving specific 
instructions on clopidogrel use ( 10). These findings suggest that  there are specific interventions that 
can be implemented to improve clopidogrel adherence.   
 
Multi -modal interventions that incorporate frequent follow -up, especially with  pharmacists and use IVR  
technology have impr oved medica tion adherence ( 11-20). IVR technology is a computer -based  
telephone system which initiates calls, receives calls, provides information, and collects data from 
users.  IVR is currently a mainstay in the VA where patients frequently interact with these autom ated 
systems to get  clinic appointments and/or refill prescriptions. IVR as part of multi -modal interventions 
have been well received  by patients, increased adherence to medications (e.g., statins), and improved 
clinical outcomes (e.g., blood  pressure, dia betes  symptoms, health status) ( 16-20). In addition, we have 
successfully used IVR as part of a  multi -modal, multi -site intervention including pharmacists to improve 
blood pressure levels among hypertensive  patients ( 21-22). Accordingly, we have designed o ur 
intervention to improve clopidogrel adherence that builds on  our prior work and other successful 
adherence interventions from the literature.   
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 3 
  
Further, we have successfully piloted the intervention to improve clopidogrel adherence following PCI. 
We developed a software application integrated within CART -CL that assessed whether patients fill 
their clopidogrel prescription at hospital discharge. If clopidogrel was not filled, patients were contacted 
to identify  barriers to medication filling. During foll ow-up, automated telephone calls were sent to 
patients to educate  them about the importance of medication adherence and to remind them to refill 
clopidogrel prior to the refill  due date. The software application successfully identified all 15 patients 
enrolled in the pilot who underwent  PCI and whether they filled clopidogrel at hospital discharge at 2 
VAMCs. In qualitative interviews about the  automated calls, all patients indicated that the refill reminder 
messages were helpful. A majority of participants  indicated that they felt the education/support from the 
messages or participation in the study was helpful or  would be helpful to others. A few patients shared 
that the messages also supported refilling other medications  and reminding them to ask  clarifyi ng 
questions about other  medications. Following the  successful pilot, our next step is to test the 
effectiveness of the  intervention and study the  implementation process across a  range of VA facilities.   
 
Building on our prior work and  evidence from the li terature, we  have developed our intervention  
informed by the Chronic Care  Model  (CCM)  which is a framework that  uses clinical information systems  
to facilitate evidence -based  quality improvement ( 23). We will leverage CART -CL, IVR technology, 
patient self -management, and team -based care to foster efficient,  productive interactions between 
activated patients and proactive clinical teams to improve clopidogrel  adherence. Further the 
components of the intervention directly address many of the reasons that pati ents have  highlighted as 
leading to early clopidogrel discontinuation. Figure 1 shows how each of the 4 components of  the 
proposed intervention addresses the CCM . 
 
 
 
 
 
This study will refine the current state of knowledge on imp roving medication adherence in multiple 
ways. First, it combines multiple interventions that have been separately shown to be effective in 
improving medication adherence and addresses causes of clopidogrel non -adherence identified by 
patients. Second, the intervention focuses on a novel setting (i.e., patients discharged following PCI 
and transitioning to outpatient care) in contrast to prior adherence interventions that have focused only 
on patients with stable chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension). Prior work by our group and others 
suggest that the immediate post -ACS period, and more generally transitions from the inpatient to the 

VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 4 
 outpatient setting, are particularly ‘vulnerable perio ds’ for medication adherence ( 24). Yet prior 
interventions have not spec ifically targeted this setting. Third, the targeted medication in this study has 
demonstrated short -term benefits and where non -adherence can have immediate adverse outcomes 
(e.g., stent thrombosis). Prior studies have focused on medications (e.g., hyperte nsion medications) 
where non -adherence leads to problems longer term rather than the short term. Fourth, the study 
utilizes existing resources (i.e., cardiac data systems integrated with the VA electronic health record, 
VA pharmacists and patient -aligned c are teams) to implement the intervention, improving the feasibility 
of broader implementation. Prior adherence interventions have generally required significant additional 
resources and the majority of quality improvement interventions are not continued fo llowing the end of 
the rese arch project ( 25). This proposal will extend the current state of knowledge on medication 
adherence by demonstrating that a successful intervention will need multiple evidence -based 
components, and designed with plans for impleme ntation in mind. Finally, this study is being conducted 
as a type I hybrid implementation study and therefore includes extensive study of the implementation 
process, which will yield both contributions to implementation science and facilitate wider dissemi nation 
if the intervention is found to be effective.  
 
It should also be emphasized that the specific aims, design, and intervention proposed are directly and 
fully supported by key VA operations and research entities, including Patient Care Services (Dr. 
Rumsfeld, National Program Director for Cardiology), the QUERI program (Dr. Bryson, Director of IHD 
QUERI), Pharmacy Benefits Management Services (Dr. Valetino, Chief Consultant), the Office of 
Analytics and Business Intelligence (OABI) (Dr. Steve Fihn, Dir ector), and Patient Aligned Care Team 
(PACT ) (Dr. Schectman, Acting Chief Consultant for Primary Care). As noted in the endorsement letter 
from IHD -QUERI leadership, this study is also a major component of  the IHDQUERI Strategic Plan (  
26). Further, the go als and methods of this study are also highly aligned with the concepts for improved 
health care delivery promoted by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute (NHLBI), and the VA. Moreover, the proposed study reflects the Q UERI aims including: a) 
explicit ties between research, QUERI and ‘operational’ components of the VA (i.e., PCS, OABI and 
Pharmacy); and b) studies of interventions that might be candidates for national VA implementation. 
The proposed study also addresses QUERI steps 4 and 5 of implementing interventions to promote 
best practices and to document its impact on outcomes.  
 
Furthermore, the study will make two important contributions to implementation science. First, we will 
integrate a structured survey, the o rganizational readiness to change assessment (ORCA), for use in 
the formative and summative evaluations (described further in the evaluation plan). The ORCA has 
previously been psychometrically validated and found to predict imp lementation effectiveness (  27-28). 
However, it has not been previously tested as a tool to support implementation. Findings from this study 
will help us understand if and how the ORCA can be used to support other implementation projects, 
and will contribute to users’ materials for t he survey. Second, we are using an innovative study design, 
a randomized stepped wedge design, and building -in iterative formative evaluation to guide 
implementation of the intervention at sites in subsequent cohorts. As far as we know, this kind of 
iterat ive rollout design with planned formative evaluation has not been used in an 
effectiveness/implementation hybrid study. If it works as planned, and provides useful formative 
evaluation findings from early cohorts, it may represent an important adaptation o f the hybrid design.  
 
In terms of VA patient care, if the intervention is successful, it will increase adherence to clopidogrel by 
helping patients take their anti -platelet medication routinely as prescribed, the quality of cardiovascular 
care for veteran s since adherence to clopidogrel has been associated with reductions in cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality following PCI, and the efficiency of care by using telephone calls and tele -
monitoring for communication with patients rather than clinic visits.  This study will leverage the 
automated pharmacy system and tele -monitoring technology for which the VA is a nationally recognized 
leader. Further, the study will address an important gap in knowledge (i.e., how to improve adherence 
to clopidogrel medicati ons following PCI) and the findings can inform future interventions to improve 
adherence to other chronic cardiovascular medications. Finally, since the study is designed to be 
implemented using existing personnel/staff and current  national platforms (i.e. , CART -CL and PACT 
teamlets), it will be generalizable to other VA Medical Centers and  veterans.  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 5 
  
 
 
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
We performed a pilot study called “Pilot Intervention to Improve Clopidogrel Adherence after Dru g-
Eluting Stent Imp lantation”. This was a pilot feasibility study to improve adherence to clopidogrel after a 
patient underwent a cardiac procedure that places one or more (DES) in their coronary arteries. We 
followed  eighteen  patient s at the Denver VA Medical Center  for 4 m onths. Most participants (83%) 
believed the refill messages were or would be helpful in refilling prescriptions. Two patients with co -
morbidities indicated the difficulty of handling multiple tasks and that the reminders would be very helpful. A 
few shared  that the messages also supported refilling other medications and reminding patients to ask 
clarifying questions about other medications.  Most study participants (77%) said the educational calls 
were or would be helpful.  
 
Therefore, we have successfully t ested an intervention that focuses on adherence to clopidogrel 
following PCI and are now ready to conduct the proposed effectiveness/implementation study to test 
the effectiveness of a successfully -piloted, evidence -based, multi -faceted intervention to imp rove 
patient adherence to clopidogrel following PCI.  
 
 
 
 
IV. Research Methods  
 
Overview:  This four -year multi -site site -level randomized stepped wedge trial will test the effectiveness 
of the intervention to improve adherence and outcomes, and will formatively  evaluate and refine the 
implementation process. This is a randomized stepped -wedge study, modified to allow stratification by 
clopidogrel adherence. We will randomize 16 VA PCI sites to the multi -faceted intervention through 4 
roll-out phases. We will imp lement the intervention at 4 sites during each roll -out and incorporate a 6 -
month delay between the start of each roll -out. The rest of the PCI sites that are not randomized will 
serve as usual care control group. At each site, we will enroll patients over  a 6-month period and follow 
them for 12 months following PCI. The multi -faceted intervention will adapt elements of prior successful 
intervention and will include the following core components: development of a software application 
integrated within CART -CL that assessed whether patients fill their clopidogrel prescription at hospital 
discharge, collaboration between cath lab clinicians and impatient/outpatient pharmacy teams, patient 
education, and tele -monitoring via IVR technology.  
 
 
 
A. Outcome  Measure (s):   
 
Initial outcomes will assess understanding current practices as VA PCI facilities to enhance adherence 
to clopidogrel. We will then assess barriers and facilitators to intervention implementation during each 
roll-out phase through semi -structured inte rviews and incorporate lessons learned from each roll -out 
phase into subsequent roll -out phases.  
 
The primary outcomes of the study include the proportion of patients whose clopidogrel prescription is 
filled at hospital discharge following the PCI stent p lacement as well as the proportion of patients who 
are adherent based on the pharmacy refill data in the year after hospital discharge.  Secondary 
outcomes include hospitalizations for bleeding, myocardial infarction, stroke, and mortality. Additionally, 
data about the costs of the intervention will be collected to assess the cost -effectiveness of the 
intervention.  
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 6 
  
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled :   
 
Setting, sites, and patients:   
The project will be conducted at 66 VA PCI sites that were chosen based on PCI volume.  The sites are 
geographically distributed throughout the country.  We have divided these PCI sites into quintiles  based 
on the ranks of each site for Clopidogrel delay , so that the highest quintile  (5th quintile ) represents sites 
with th e highest percent of patients with Clopidogrel delays. The lowest quintile will include sites that do 
not have delays in Clopidogrel refill, and therefore, will not be randomized . The upper four quintiles will 
include 13 sites each, and the lowest quintile  will include 14 sites. We will randomize 16 sites to the 
multi -faceted intervention through 4 roll -out phases and compare to 36 control sites.  
 
Each  roll out will include 4 sites, one  from each of the 4 upper  quintiles  (those with the highest percent 
of delay in filling their Clopidogrel prescriptions ). Using a 1:1 randomization we will randomize one site 
in the 5th  quintile  to the intervention , and the remaining sites in the quintile  will serve as usual care 
controls. We will then randomize the 2nd quintile in the same manner and so on until top 4  quintiles  are 
randomized.  We will contact the Cath Lab Director at each randomized site to participate in the study. 
If declined, another site from the same quintile will be randomized to receive the intervent ion. We will 
incorporate a 6 -month delay between the start of each roll -out. At each site, we will enroll patients over 
a 6-month period and follow them for 12 months following PCI.  If needed  and if the participating sites 
agree , the enrollment period coul d be extended for one additional month at sites not meeting enrollment 
goals. We will document the reasons for site decline to help further understand the implementation 
context ual factors  at the sites.  
 
The intervention will be described in detail in Aim  2.   
 
We will collect the outcomes of interest, adherence to clopidogrel, morbidity (MI, stroke, bleeding) and 
mortality centrally through data obtained from national VA data sources (i.e., Austin IT Center, CART -
CL, and CDW) for both arms of the study.   
 
At the PCI sites, we will include all patients undergoing PCI with either a bare -metal (BMS) or drug -
eluting stent (DES) and are prescribed clopidogrel regardless of the intended treatment duration. We 
will include other potential anti -platelet medicatio ns (thienopyridines) used following PCI to 
accommodate changes in practice (e.g., prasugrel or ticagrelor or ticlopidine). Based on FY10, there 
were >10,000 patients undergoing PCI with either a BMS or DES at these facilities.  
 
We will include all patient s undergoing PCI and receiving clopidogrel at the randomized sites, 
regardless of gender, ethnicity or race. Based on data from the national CART Program, we anticipate 
~23% minorities (African American 16.8%, Hispanic 4.4%, Asian/American Indian 1.4%) and  3.1% 
women will be included in the study.  
 
 
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods :   
 
We are proposing a type I hybrid effectiveness -implementation study of a multi -faceted intervention to 
improve clopidogrel adherence at VA PCI centers.  
 
An overview of th e number of patients and providers involved with interviews  and the recruitment 
process is defined  below:  
 
Aim 1 – Identified sites will be stratified into quintiles  and randomized to either the intervention or the 
control arm.  We will choose approximatel y any 3 sites randomized to the intervention to be purposively 
sampled.  We will interview up to 12  provider s at each site.  The interviews will be used to modify the 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 7 
 email survey that will be sent to all 16 sites targeting key personnel described in detai l later in the 
protocol.  After the survey results have been evaluated we will follow up with approximately 2 -3 
additional qualitative interviews based on results from the survey. A single provider may be interviewed 
more than once if they happened to have  identified specific local barriers or facilitators in their survey 
responses. Therefore, we plan on collecting up to 96 telephone interviews from the 16 intervention 
sites.  In addition, we will conduct site visits at approximately 2 -3 of the 16 intervent ion sites. During 
these visits, we will interview up to 10 providers at each site.  
 
Aim 2 – The implementation of the intervention will involve recruiting up to 2,500 patients at 16 sites.  
 
Aim 3 – During the roll -out portion of the intervention we will interview approximately 3 -4 
clinicians/personnel who are involved with the delivery of the intervention at approximately 2 -3 sites in 
each phase of the roll -out. Follow up interviews will occur at approximately 6 and 12 months.  These will 
include up to 2 interviews with the same personnel we originally spoke with.   In addition, we plan to 
interview approximately 80 patients. Therefore, we plan approximately 176 interviews for this aim.  
 
An overview of the number of patients and providers involved with int erviews and recruitment is defined 
below:  
 
 
Aim Interview Participant  Purpose of Interviews  Number of  
Interviews  Timing of the 
Interviews  
Aim 1  Providers  Modify email survey  Up to 36  Prior to 
intervention  
Aim 1  Providers  Follow -up email survey  Up to 60  Prior to 
intervention  
Aim 1  Providers  Site visits  Up to 30  Prior to 
intervention  
Aim3  Providers  Intervention 
implementation  Up to 48  During 
implementation  
Aim 3  Providers  Intervention follow -up Up to 48  6-12 months 
post 
implementation  
Aim 3  Patients  Intervention follow -up Up to 80  1-2 months 
post 
enrollment  
 Total Patient 
Interviews   Up to 80   
 Total Provider 
Interviews   Up to 222   
 
 
All providers, staff, and patients who are asked to participate in the study and interviews will be offered 
the oppor tunity to opt out of being recorded but still participate in the interview.  
 
Telephone interviews will originate from Denver, and both telephone and site visit in person interviews 
will use  VA-approved audio -conferencing  software  to record the interviews . Electronic data files will be 
encrypted/password -protected on computer servers maintained in a secure environment per VA 
security regulations. To protect confidentiality, all study records will be stored on an access -controlled 
secure data server, and acce ss to the study records will be limited to project staff.  
 
Data from interviews will be recorded directly to the secure server, with field notes recorded in text files 
saved directly to the secure data folder. Likewise, audio recordings of the interviews will be made using 
the VA -approved audio -conferencing software  in order to facilitate secure audio recording. Such 
software  uses a toll -free conference dial -in line with the capability of generating a digital audio recording 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 8 
 
of the call. Audio recordings a re made directly to the meeting organizer’s computer and can be directed 
to any network drive. In this case  the secure data drive  is in Denver.  Telephone lines dialed into the 
conference line are displayed on the audio -conferencing software  window , and so participation in the 
call can be monitored (i.e., a third party calling into the interview, intentionally or inadvertently, will be 
visible to the study team). Interview participants will be sent the conference call number and code at the 
time the intervie w is scheduled.  
 
We will sequentially rollout the intervention through 4 phases to 16 sites to test the effectiveness of the 
intervention to improve adherence and outcomes. The conceptual overview of the study is outlined in 
Figure 2. We will randomize si tes to the intervention stratified by quintiles  of site performance based on 
percent of patients with delay in filling clopidogrel at hospital discharge and average number of gap 
days during follow -up. Prior to each roll -out, we will evaluate current pract ices at sites randomized to 
the intervention (n= 20) to enhance adherence to clopidogrel (aim 1). This information will be used to 
inform implementation and modification of the intervention if needed at sites (aim 2). Next, during each 
roll-out phase, we wi ll conduct qualitative interviews with a sample of sites from each cohort to 
understand barriers and facilitators of implementation. Because of the sequential roll -out study design, 
we will be able to incorporate these findings into subsequent roll -out pha ses in an iterative 
implementation process, building on prior experiences (aim 3). We anticipate that follow -up interviews 
will be most intensive in early cohorts where the learning curve is steepest, and less intensive in later 
cohorts, by which point the  most common barriers should be understood.  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Study Design Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aim 1: Through email surveys and targeted qualitative interviews, evaluate current practices at 
VA PCI facilities (n= 16) to enhance adherence to clopi dogrel, both at hospital discharge and 
during longitudinal follow -up among intervention sites.  
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 9 
 
Overview of Aim 1 : We will conduct an email survey supplemented with key informant interviews at the 
16 sites randomized to the intervention to understand the f ollowing: 1) potential clinical champion(s) 
interested in leading implementation of the intervention; 2) perceived local barriers and facilitators to 
implementing the intervention; and 3) perceived readiness to change and change culture. These 6 
steps of A im 1 are outlined in Figure 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Overview of Aim 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steps 1 and 2:  
We will c onduct key informant interviews  with a purposeful sample of sites to further understand 
existing processes and barriers to ensuring clopidogrel adh erence for PCI patients.  Using the findings 
from these interviews we will modify the draft email survey (Appendix 1 ). The  sites will be selected 
based on the  outcome (i.e., clopidogrel adherence rates) and structural factors that may influence 
implementat ion of the  intervention (e.g., facility complexity, region, cardiology -related resources 
available). These structural factors  will be obtained from the recently completed Survey of 
Cardiovascular Spe cialty Care Services . This was a comprehensive survey of all VA facilities about the 
availability and type of cardiology services,  processes of cardiac care, and cardiology related structures 
of care.  
 
We anticipate conducting interviews with approximately 10 -12 individuals at ~3 sites. Semi -structured 
intervie w guides (see Appendix 2 for draft guide) will be designed for use during these interviews and a 
two-page  content summary form will be completed following each interview. This summary will include 
the context of the  interview, emerging themes or issues tha t arose in the interview, areas for 
clarification, and other comments  about the interview or interview guide. The goals of these interviews 
are: 1) to inform development of the  structured survey and 2) to provide preliminary information about 
how the inter vention will integrate into  existing care processes. Interviews will last up to one hour . 
During the process of conducting the  qualitative interviews, the study team will review preliminary 
results in order to ensure that subsequent  interviews are iterativ e and focus on emerging themes that 
will effectively inform the intervention.  
 
Step 3: Finalize survey:  In order to analyze the qualitative content and adequately inform the design 
and conduct of the email survey, we will use an iterative, inductive and de ductive toolkit of analytical 
strategies,  drawing particularly on qualitative content analysis and reflexive team analysis. Analysis will 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 10 
 commence as the  interviews commence and will continue alongside and informing data collection. 
Interviews will be digi tally recorded and transcribed, and will be analyzed using qualitative content 
analysis methods. Analysis of  transcripts will begin with repeated readings to achieve immersion 
followed by initial coding using an emergent  rather than a priori approach, in o rder to emphasize 
respondent perspectives and de -emphasize team member  speculations. ATLAS.ti v 6.2 (Scientific 
Software Development, GmbH, Berlin) will be used for data  organization and management during 
analysis. This software will only be used by the qu alitative analyst at the analysis site only. Words, 
sentences, and paragraphs will be treated as coding  units or “meaning units”. After initial coding is 
completed, the resulting shared set of codes will be applied to  the transcripts, code categories will be 
developed, and emergent themes will be identified. Throughout the  analysis, new findings will be 
continually checked and compared with the rest of the data to establish new  codes, themes or patterns. 
The resulting information will be used to inform, mod ify, and finalize the email  survey to be sent to PCI 
sites.  
 
The ORCA questionnaire (Appendix 1) will be included as part of the email survey and is comprised of 
three  scales corresponding to core elements of the Promoting Action on Research Implementation  in 
Health  Services (PARIHS) framework: 1) Strength and extent of evidence for the clinical practice 
changes  represented by the QI program, with four subscales; 2) Quality of the organizational context for 
the QI program,  with six subscales; and 3) Capacit y for internal facilitation of the QI program, with nine 
subscales. Each  subscale is comprised of three to six items assessing common dimensions of the 
given scale. The ORCA scale  has previously been validated and baseline scores have been positively 
corre lated with measures of  implementation effectiveness ( 27-28). 
 
Steps 4 and 5: Conduct survey and interviews at intervention sites:  We will send these surveys to sites  
randomized to the intervention targeting the Cath Lab Director, Cath Lab manager, pharmaci sts (both 
inpatient  and outpatient), Chief of Primary Care and/or PACT leadership (Step 4). We will disse minate 
the survey via Site PIs . We will use a Web -based survey tool  (such as RedCap and/or other VA -
approved survey tools) , housed on the VA Intranet, so that surveys can be completed online behind the 
VA firewall. The goals of this survey are to identify  the following: 1) potential clinical champion(s) 
interested in leading implementation of the intervention at that  site; 2) perceived local barriers and  
facilitators to implementing the intervention; 3) perceived readiness to  change and change culture using 
the Organizational Readiness to Change (ORCA) scale. We will follow prior  methods for conducting 
email surveys by the CART Program that have achieved response rates of >80%. We  will also follow -up 
these surveys with qualitative interviews targeting key informants identified from the email  survey to 
gather more in -depth information about specific local barriers and potential solutions that can be  
impleme nted to address the barrier as well as clarifications to responses on the email survey (Step 5). 
We envision that this may entail 2 -3 interviews per site.  
 
 In addition, we will conduct qualitative interviews  with clinicians and providers  at the sites from  the 
lowest quintile to learn about their practices, current and past experience s of working with patients 
taking the anti -platelet medicine, and their perceptions of how care should be delivered to patients 
taking the anti -platelet drugs .  These interview s will provide additional insights into existing processes. 
We will notify a facility medical director of these sites of our intent to conduct the interviews.  We will 
request a response within seven days if a facility director decides to opt out from the interviews.  
 
We will conduct site visits for ~2 -3 sites (out of 16 possible sites) for the purpose of exploring whether 
site visits reveal different types of information or quality of information than telephone interviews. 
Relative to  telephone -based inte rviews, site visits are expensive and time -intensive, and potentially 
more burdensome for  participants. However, there is some reason to believe that telephone interviews 
may omit critical information.  Specifically, site visits provide information about ph ysical layout, staff 
interactions, and general atmosphere.  They provide greater opportunity for chance observations. There 
is also evidence that non -verbal, interpersona l cues dramatically influence interpretation of the content 
of communication. For all o f these reasons,  telephone interviews (though they represent the current 
methodological standard in implementation science)  could introduce measurement bias. To assess 
potential differences, we will compare subjective ratings by  investigators on the qualit y of interview data 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 11 
 between telephone and site -visit based interviews and will  compare and contrast the themes that 
emerge to determine if the site visits elicit different or additional themes.  
 
Step 6: Work with site clinical champion to modify interventi on as needed:  Working with the site clinical  
champion, who are the site PIs responsible for conducting the study locally, we will then use the survey 
data on barriers and facilitators to clopidogrel adherence, and  organizational readiness, to inform 
implem entation of the intervention. We will generate summary findings to  guide the discussion of 
specific issues related to local implementation and determine whether modifications are  needed (Step 
6). For example, if pharmacist respondents at a given site perce ive that medication adherence is  not a 
priority for their leadership, project staff and the site clinical champion will engage leadership to discuss  
goals of the project as well as the importance of improving adherence to clopidogrel. In addition, we 
provi de examples of potential problems that may be identified during th e survey/interviews and provide 
solutions to  address the barrier.  
 
In addition, we will include a process improvement component by utilizing A3 tool which is used for 
identifying problems in  current processes, identifying suggestions for improvement and communicating 
these to the management/supervisors. We will present this tool to the participating sites to explore local 
issues and solutions to improve adherence to anti -platelet medications that could be sustained once the 
study is finished. We will work together with a local study coordinator to facilitate and guide the 
completion of the A3 tool by local members of the health care team. We will work to communicate the 
local solutions to the site PIs and the local leadership team.  
 
 
 
Aim 2: Implement the multi -faceted intervention at 16 total sites through 4 roll -out phases ( 4 
sites  during each roll -out) in a randomized stepped wedge trial design . 
 
Overview  of Aim 2 : This is a randomized step ped-wedge study, modified to allow stratification by 
clopidogrel  adherence. We will randomize 16 VA PCI sites to the multi -faceted intervention through  4 
roll-out phases. We will implement the intervention at 4 sites during each roll -out and incorporate a 6-
month  delay between the start of each roll -out. The rest of the PCI sites that are not randomized will 
serve as usual  care control group. At each site, we will enroll patients over a 6 -month period and follow 
them for 12 months  following PCI.  If needed a nd if the participating sites agree, the enrollment period 
could be extended for one additional month at sites not meeting enrollment goals.  
 
 
Setting, sites, and patients:  We will exclude sites with low PCI volume, less than 20 PCI procedures 
performed  during the last fiscal year (n=3).  The sites are geographically distributed throughout the 
country.  At the PCI sites, we will include all patients undergoing PCI with either a bare -metal (BMS) or 
drug-eluting stent  (DES) and are prescribed clopidogrel regar dless of the intended treatment duration. 
We will include other  potential anti -platelet medications used following PCI to accommodate changes in 
practice (e.g., prasugrel or  ticagrelor or ticlopidine). Based on FY10, there were >10,000 patients 
undergoing PCI with either a BMS or DES  at these facilities.  In addition, we will only include patients 
discharged to home setting. Patients discharged to nursing/assisted living facilities, other hospitals, or 
any other facility where their medications are managed will be excluded.  
 
Study design:  Given the serious and prevalent  nature of the clinical problem under study and  the 
characteristics of the intervention to be tested,  we believe that a randomized trial at the site level  is the 
most appropriate design. The i ntervention  is focused on changing processes of care (e.g.,  process for 
getting clopidogrel to patients at  hospital discharge) which are clustered by sites  and therefore to avoid 
contamination, we will  focus the randomization at the site level. Target  enrollment is 16 sites for the 
intervention and  the remaining 36 PCI sites will serve as usual  care controls.   
 
Recruitment:  Of the 66 sites eligible for  randomization, we have ranked each site  according to the 
percent of patients with delay in  clopidogrel fil ling at hospital discharge, and the  average number of gap 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 12 
 
days (i.e., days without  clopidogrel based on clopidogrel refill data) during  follow -up for FY10, FY11, 
and FY12  using CART data. Next, we  have divided these PCI sites into quintiles  based  on the ra nks of 
each site for clopidogrel delay and  average gap days so that the highest quintile  (5th quintile ) 
represents sites with the highest percent  of patients with clopidogrel delay and the greatest  average 
number of gap days among its patients. We will seq uentially randomize sites from each quintile  
beginning with the 1st quintile  (Figure 4). During each roll -out, we will randomize 4 sites, one from each 
of the 4 top quintiles,  to the intervention with the remaining sites in the quintiles  serving as usual c are 
controls.   
 
We have chosen to randomize and include sites from the different quintiles  because there may be 
lessons learned  from sites in each quintile  during our interviews prior to and following implementation of 
the intervention that may  inform site s that have similar practices during wider 
implementation/dissemination. Further, these sites will provide  different insights into barriers and 
facilitators not present in other quintiles . If for some reason a site is unable to  participate following 
random ization to the intervention, we will randomize another site to replace the ineligible site.  This will 
result in slight imbalance in the numbers of usual care sites across quartiles which can be 
accommodated  in the planned analyses.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Overview o f Aim 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randomization Process: Unit of Randomization, Sequence Generation, Allocation Concealment,  
Implementation, and Blinding:  The unit of randomization is the site or PCI facility. Sites that are not  
randomized to the inter vention will serve as usual care control groups in this randomized stepped -
wedge study  design. The process of randomization will be centralized and stratified by quintiles  of 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 13 
 
clopidogrel delay at  hospital discharge and average gap days during follow -up. Fo llowing 
randomization, we will approach sites  about their willingness to participate in the intervention as well as 
conduct the baseline assessment. If for some  reason a site is unable to participate in the study, we will 
randomize another site from the sa me quintiles  to replace that site. During each roll -out, we will 
implement the intervention at 4 sites, one from each quintile,  leaving the remaining  sites as usual care  
controls. Through the 4 roll -outs, we will have a total of 16 intervention sites and 36 usual care sites. All 
the randomized  sites will be contacted for their willingness to participate in the study. Sites that agree to 
participate will be assessed at baseline.    We will collect the outcomes of interest, adherence to 
clopidogrel, morbidity  (MI, stroke, bleeding) and mortality centrally through data obtained from national 
VA data sources (i.e., Austin IT Center, CART -CL, and CDW) for both arms of the study.   
 
 
Intervention Components:  The intervention, building upon the successful pilot, wi ll comprise the 
following 4  components (Figure 5):  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Intervention Components  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A) A Site Study Team will be formed at each intervention site.  The Study Team will have up to 10 
members and will include Directors of the CAT H Labs, pharmacists, pharmacy techs, PACT 
nurses, and physicians. All members of the Site Study Team will be members of the research 
team and will be IRB -trained.  As standard of care , after  a patient receives a PCI with a stent, 
clinicians enter a procedur al report in CART -CL. Completion of the procedural note will trigger a 
secure email to a member of the Site Study Team notifying them that a patient received a stent.   
 
We will set up folders on a secure VA server where information about a patient receivin g a stent 
will be entered by the CART -CL program. Each intervention site and its identified study staff will 
have access to the specific folder, not visible to other sites. A general email, notifying a study 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 14 
 
team member that a PCI procedure has been perfo rmed, will be sent to a Site Stu dy Team 
member. The email will contain no PHI. Upon receiving the email, a Site Study Team member will 
access the secure site -specific folder to obtain the details about the patient study participants.    
 
B) Once notified, a mem ber of the Site Study Team , which may include a pharmacist, a nurse, a 
doctor, or whoever the site determines to be the appropriate person to fulfill the requirements of 
the site and the study, will review the chart to see the anticipated discharge date fo r the patient . 
Before approaching, patients will be given adequate time to recover  from the procedure and 
sedation. The Site Study Team member will bring the first prescription of clopidogrel to patients’ 
bedside prior to hospital discharge. A member of th e Site Study Team will discuss the verbal 
conse nt with the patient participant and  provide the information sheet about the study .  If the 
patient chooses not to participate they can refuse at this time or in the future  and will be 
instruct ed where to call if the patient would like to opt -out from participating in the study. A Site 
Study Team member will educate patients on the importance  of and adherence to clopidogrel 
following PCI as well as bring clopidogrel to patients’ bedside prior to hospital dischar ge. We will 
keep a master list of all patient participants and document those who opt -out and reasons, if they 
are known, to help further understand the contextual factors  
 
We will provide well -developed education materials from the ACC/AHA that describes the 
importance of and adherence to clopidogrel following PCI. Further, we will provide patients with a 
clopidogrel treatment wallet card, which outlines the intended duration of clopidogrel treatment 
following PCI. An example is provided below (Figure 6), and is currently used in the United 
Kingdom. This is similar to the cards that patients currently receive following PCI that outlines the 
type and location of their stents and will serve as another reminder about the importance of 
continuing clopidogrel th erapy.  
 
 
Figure 6: Clopidogrel wallet card  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We will use existing staff and no new staff will need to be added so that if the intervention is 
effective, it can be continued without additional resources. At some sites, someone other than a  
pharmacist may be designated to  educate patients and bring clopidogrel to the bedside. We will 
work with each site to identify and train the designated  individuals to perform this step of the 
intervention. This  component is intended to activate patients, which is an  integral part of the 
CCM.  
 
C) IVR reminder calls to patients around time of clopidogrel refill and to facilitate refills: Building on 
our prior developed IVR calls from the pilot study, we will further refine the calls so that patients 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 15 
 will receiv e an IVR reminder call 14 and 7 days prior to the anticipated refill date for clopidogrel. 
During these calls, patients will have several options: 1) to connect to the pharmacy refill line so 
that they can refill clopidogrel at the same time; 2) to request  a call from a pharmacist if they have 
questions regarding their medications; and/or 3) to cancel future IVR reminder calls if they obtain 
clopidogrel outside of the VA, have been instructed to stop the medication by their physician or 
for some other patie nt-specific reason.  
 
During the call, we will provide the patient with their clopidogrel prescription number in case they 
would like to be connected to the pharmacy line to refill clopidogrel at the same time. The call at 7 
days will not occur if a refill  has been made in the interim. In addition, we will also make sure that 
the patient is not deceased or is not filling their clopidogrel prescription at an outside pharmacy by 
looking for clopidogrel in the “Non -VA Medication List” that is part of CPRS. If either is the case, 
we will discontinue the IVR calls. In our qualitative interviews from the pilot, patients were positive 
about these refill reminder calls. The IVR calls will occur for up to 12 months following hospital 
discharge given current recommend ations for clopidogrel treatment duration but will be modified 
based on patient’s clinical needs. This component leverages clinical information systems of the 
CCM and is intended to activate patients.  
 
To accomplish this step, we will obtain data on date of clopidogrel fill and the number of days 
supplied from the Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW). Based on these data, we will be able to 
trigger the IVR calls to deliver the reminder messages to patients 14 and 7 days prior to the 
clopidogrel refill date. If a  patient has refilled their prescription prior to the 7 day reminder call, we 
will turn off the reminder call. We have successfully used pharmacy data (date of clopidogrel fill 
and days supplied) to trigger IVR calls in our pilot. The CDW pharmacy data is refreshed on a 
daily basis and therefore will reflect any interim refills made by patients.  
 
D) PACT member will contact patients who delay refilling clopidogrel: For patients who do not refill 
their clopidogrel prior to the refill due date, we will notify t he patient’s PACT team about the delay 
in clopidogrel filling so that a PACT team member can contact patients to identify potential 
barriers to refilling the medication. A specific goal of the PACT initiative is to have teamlets 
actively follow -up with the ir patients following hospitalization or referrals to coordinate care. By 
working with Primary Care to involve PACT teamlets, we will help make their jobs easier and 
improve the feasibility of the implementation as well as longer term maintenance . During t he initial 
interviews at each site, we will work with the site champions to identify the person(s) that these 
notifications should be delivered to. At some sites, it may make sense to send these reminders to 
the primary care providers, pharmacists or a des ignated individual in cardiology. We will adapt 
the intervention to local practices while maintaining the key component of the intervention, which 
is that a key person/group is informed of the delay in clopidogrel filling and can follow -up with 
patients to  ensure that the medication is refilled and taken. This component uses team -based 
care to interact with activated patients under the CCM.  
 
We have identified key aspects of the intervention that are essential and will not change, but realize that 
for succ essful implementation and long term maintenance, we will need to have flexibility in aspects of 
the intervention. The elements of the intervention that are not modifiable include: 1) Notification that PCI 
procedure has been performed; 2) Patient education and having clopidogrel brought to the bedside 
prior to discharge; 3) IVR reminder calls about clopidogrel refills; and 4) Contacting patients who do not 
refill clopidogrel. However, the manner in which these components are delivered and the specific 
person (s) delivering the component can be modified according to local site preferences and personnel 
availability.  In addition, in certain situations, it may be more feasible to approach potentially eligible 
patients for participation before their procedures (su ch as weekend and/or same day discharges, etc) . 
In this case, a member of the site study team will approach and inform the patients about the study and 
will obtain permission to contact the patient after their procedure if they are eligible to enroll , and the 
permission to record t he interview will be requested at the time of the interview. In addition, when no 
study team members are available to approach eligible patients, a member of a patient’s healthcare 
team will deliver Clopidogrel to the bedside sinc e it is an approved drug and is part of standard of care, 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 16 
 will supply the patients with patient information sheet without discussing it, as well as obtain permission 
to call the patient. A member of the healthcare team will document in the CPRS that they g ave 
information sheet to a patient and permission to call the patient was obtained. A member of the 
research study team will call the patient and complete enrollment over the phone. In our initial 
survey/interviews at sites (aim 1), we will explore these i ssues to better understand potential barriers 
and implement processes that facilitate implementation of the intervention, and long term maintenance.  
 
 
 
Aim 3: During each roll -out of the intervention, assess barriers and facilitator to implementation 
of th e intervention through semi -structured interviews and incorporate the lessons learned from 
each roll -out phase into subsequent roll -out phases.  
 
Overview  of Aim 3 : This aim will involve in -depth, key informant interviews (~3 -4) with representatives 
from a sample of sites (~2 -3) in each cohort of the roll -out phase. We will work with the site champion to 
identify and interview key clinicians/personnel involved in the delivery of the intervention and the 
interviews will be designed to  understand barriers to a nd facilitators of intervention implementation. In 
addition, we will interview patients to  obtain feedback regarding the IVR calls as well as other aspects 
of the intervention. The sequential roll -out design will enable incorporation of knowledge gathered from 
these interviews into subsequent roll -out phases.  If additional qualitative data are needed to achieve 
thematic saturation, the point at which interviews no longer  produce new themes about barriers and 
facilitators, additional interviews will be condu cted. In addition, we will  conduct follow -up interviews at 6 
and 12 months following intervention implementation to assess  maintenance and identify issues that 
arise after initial implementation and any local solutions.  
 
Focus of the qualitative interviews : The goals of these interviews are: 1) to identify issues, facilitators or 
barriers to the implementation of the intervention and 2) identify strategies that may be useful in the 
refinement  of subsequent roll -out phases (see Appendix 3). 
 
For patients, we  will inquire about perceived strengths and weaknesses of the intervention components, 
focusing on: 1) the education process prior to hospital discharge; 2) having clopidogrel brought to the 
bedside; 3) the clopidogrel wallet card; and 4) the content of IV R calls and ease of being connected to 
the pharmacy line  (see Appendix 3) .  
 
These interviews with providers and patients will last up to one hour . Throughout the analysis of the 
qualitative interviews, the team will review the preliminary results in order  to ensure that subsequent 
interviews are iterative and focused on emerging themes that will effectively inform the intervention.  
 
Timing of the interviews:  We will conduct these interviews approximately 1 -2 months after the start of 
the intervention at ea ch site to allow for sufficient time for study personnel to gain experience with 
conducting the study. Following the interviews, we will summarize the findings so that the lessons 
learned from each roll -out can inform the next roll -out phase. Below, we out line some potential barriers 
that may be identified during these interviews and potential solutions to address the barrier. We will 
work with the site clinical champion to identify solutions.  
 
Qualitative interview methods:  All interviews will be recorded using VA-approved audio -conferencing 
software  and will be transcribed verbatim  by study personnel  and, when needed, by a VA approved 
professional transcription service.  De-identified recordings of the interviews will be uploaded to the 
HIPAA -compliant web -based platform, which is tightly controlled and monitored. Moreover, the platform 
automatically tracks user access and makes it available for review, monitoring and reporting.  
Confidentiality and anonymity will be maintained; only study investigators and t he internal VA 
transcriptionist will be aware of participant identities . Professional transcription service will not have 
access to the participant identities.  Each participant in the study will be assigned a unique coded 
identifier, and only this identifi er will be directly associated with any other data. A file containing only 
individual contact information will be maintained separately to allow coordinators to conduct follow -up 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 17 
 
contacts if needed. The contact information file and all de -identified data w ill be stored in password -
protected files on secure servers in the VA. Only investigators will have access to the files.  
 
 
 
D. Description, Risks and Justification of Proc edures and Data Collection Tools:  
 
We will employ well -developed and well -tested data ma nagement procedures to ensure accurate and 
efficient data collection and analysis, as we have done for our prior/current IVR projects and in several 
other IHD -QUERI studies. Some CART data for this study will be pulled from the database established 
under 0 6-1149. Different elements of the proposed study database system are in current use (e.g., 
hypertension IVR [Improving Blood Pressure in Colorado]; and MEDICATION [IIR 08 -302]), and are 
easily adaptable to the current proposal (i.e. this study deals with a  different aspect of cardiovascular 
disease). There are internal error checks (e.g. detection of pre -specified out -of-range data values and 
incorrect skip patterns), data definitions, and missing data checks. As part of the database, pharmacists 
will have the ability to document that education was provided to the patient, that clopidogrel was 
brought to the patient’s bedside prior to hospital discharge, and to confirm phone numbers that the 
patient can be reached at. The system will also allow for tracking of number of patients enrolled per site 
based on the PCI procedures inputted into CART -CL. 
 
We will obtain basic demographic data (including phone number), co -morbidities, PCI procedural details 
as well as the date of initial clopidogrel fill with and the number of days of pills supplied from  CART -CL. 
We have obtained CART -CL data as part of our pilot intervention to improve clopidogrel adherence, 
demonstrating technical feasibility. Next, we will obtain data on subsequent clopidogrel refills from the 
CDW, including the date of refill, the number of pills supplied and the prescription number. The 
pharmacy data in the CDW is refreshed on a daily basis and will be linked to the CART data (Figure 7). 
The data will be compiled and analyzed in Denver and /or Nashv ille and will be in a secured database 
that will be saved on a VA secured server maintained behind the VA firewall. Access to the database 
and study data will be limited to research staff. O nly personnel who are qualified, trained , and  IRB-
approved in appr opriate behavior for the privacy  of each patient will be viewing the data. Then, we will 
be able to use these data to trigger the IVR calls based on when a clopidogrel prescription is due to be 
refilled and to notify the PACT team about patients who have n ot refilled clopidogrel. This is consistent 
with our processes in the pilot intervention to improve clopidogrel adherence as well as in our other 
prior IVR studies.  
 
 
Figure 7: Overview of Data Sources and Use  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 18 
 We will work with site cham pions to identify and interview key clinicians/personnel involved in the 
delivery of the intervention and the interviews will be designed to understand barriers to and facilitators 
of intervention implementation. In addition, we will interview patients to obtain feedback regarding the 
IVR calls as well as other aspects of the intervention.  
 
We will collect data on costs in two main categories: direct medical costs and intervention costs. To 
calculate medical costs for each patient we will collect Decision S upport System (DSS) data for all 
patients for the one year following the receipt of the stent. We will collect DSS data for outpatient care 
in primary care, cardiology, pharmacy, and geriatric clinics; and for emergency department use, 
hospitalization, and  medications. For hospitalizations we will report costs for all cause hospitalizations 
as well as hospitalizations for cardiovascular -related conditions. Similarly for medications, we will 
estimate costs for all medications and for cardiovascular -related m edications.  
 
Risks are minimal.  There are no physical discomforts to the participant and this may possibly support 
the participants' effort for medication compliance. The CART -CL system is part of the standard of care 
in the VA system at this time and has  had no adverse experiences and there are no known risks to 
utilizing the IVR system.  Electronic data files will be encrypted/password -protected on computers 
maintained in a secure environment per VA security regulations. The study may include risks that a re 
unknown at this time.  
 
Monitoring for unanticipated events will be the responsibility of the Site Study Team members and we 
will support each site with monthly  conference calls to review study procedures, implementation 
processes, and any issues that ma y affect the study integrity across and within sites.  Any data breech 
issues should be brought to the attention of the group during the next monthly  call after they become 
aware.  All SAEs and UAPs will be reported to the VA CIRB according to the establis hed guidelines. 
Due to the nature of the study population, certain events are considered expected and will not be 
reported to the CIRB, such as bleeding, myocardial infarction, stroke, stent thrombosis, repeat PCI 
procedure, hospitalizations associated wit h PCI, hospitalizations associated with coronary artery 
disease (including unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, multi -vessel coronary artery disease). 
We will consider death of a participant as an SAE and will report to the VA CIRB within the esta blished 
guidelines. All SAEs /UAPs  will be reported by a local site team member at a site where SAE/UAP took 
place. We will keep all administrative documents in a shared study folder , accessible by all study team 
members. SAEs and UAPs will be documented an d stored in a shared study folder .  
 
 
E. Potential Scientific Problems:   
 
Potential issues include:  
• failure of the CART -CL system to generate the alerts  
• failure of the IVR system to generate the calls to the patients  
• inability of the study personnel to conta ct the patient  
• sites refusal to participate in the study  
• One potential limitation of the proposed sampling design is that the patients and pharmacists 
chosen for analysis in this study cannot be considered representative of all sites across the 
VA. However , the qualitative component of this study seeks a depth of information that can 
be acquired only by collecting rich data from a limited sample of individuals. Further, the 
patients and providers reflect many aspects that are common to all VA sites.  
• Althoug h we hope the randomized step -wedge design of the trial will lead to treatment groups 
that are balanced on observed covariates at baseline, we recognize that some imbalances 
may nevertheless occur and multivariable models maybe necessary to account for the se 
imbalances.  
• There are concerns that clopidogrel may become generic, however, t he timing of when 
clopidogrel will become generic is not currently  known. We acknowledge that it will be more 
difficult to monitor adherence if clopidogrel becomes generic an d patients fill the medication 
at non -VA pharmacies. However, a majority of patients still obtain generic  cardiovascular 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 19 
 medications (e.g., simvastatin or metoprolol) at VA pharmacies and we expect that this will be 
the case for clopidogrel. For patients w ho fill their clopidogrel at non -VA pharmacies, we will 
ask the patients to see if  they would like to receive clopidogrel refill reminder calls and 
program the IVR calls based on information provided  by the patients on date clopidogrel was 
filled and the n umber of days supplied.  
• We have identified key aspects of the intervention that are essential and will not change, but 
realize that for successful implementation and long term maintenance, we will need to have 
flexibility in aspects of the intervention  
 
 
 
 
F. Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Qualitative analyses : The synthesis stage of data analysis involves triangulating the findings from 
interviews, surveys, and demographic and other informati on, making refinements in the explanatory 
model s, exploring comparisons acr oss different methods and samples, revisiting the literature to 
compare findings to other investigations, and answering questions about facilitators and barriers to 
intervention participation.  
 
Consistent with qualitative methodology, analysis is planned as a continuous process beginning with 
initial interviews and continuing throughout and beyond the data generation period ( 30). The words 
participants use, their beliefs and needs, and desired strategies for intervention will be described. Data 
will be cod ed following a process of initial review, with labeling of data by content, process, or 
impressions of the person coding. Following initial coding, the data will be examined for categories, 
domains, or themes. Codes will be analyzed into categories and bro ad classifications of cultural 
meaning called domains. Transcriptions of data will be anal yzed for themes and patterns ( 31). After this 
initial coding is completed, codes will be organized into categories that reflect symbolic domains of 
meaning, relationa l patterns within domains, and f inally overarching themes ( 32-33). Relationships 
within domains are usually structured according to "organizing principles," such as inclusion, symbol, 
sequence, function, part -whole, or others ( 34). Using this analysis, an analytic summary of each 
interview will be written. In the summaries and resulting publications, the research team will use 
research participants' own words and narratives to preserve the tone and emotion of their experiences 
and increase the theoretical d epth of the final description ( 35). Narratives, as a specific kind of speech 
act, will be indexed in the coding process, and a narrative analysis will ensue ( 36-39). These narratives 
will be analyzed for substantive and conceptual meaning.  
 
Using the coded  and analyzed data, working conceptual models or explanatory models (EMs) of 
clinicians’ and patients’ experiences with the inter vention will be developed ( 40-41). Comparisons 
across interviews to explore differences between clinicians and patients will ad d detail and depth to the 
understanding of the effectiveness of the intervention. The qualitative data software package ATLAS.ti 
will be used to analyze the data ( 42).  
 
Quantitative analyses : The primary analysis will use patient level data and generalize d linear mixed 
models. These models can accommodate the different types of outcomes, correlation due to clustering 
of patients within sites, and different numbers of patients a cross sites and time periods ( 43). Models will 
include terms for site (random, t o account for correlation of patients within sites and to identify site -level 
variables), roll -out period (fixed, to avoid confounding of intervention with time trends), stratum (fixed, to 
account for baseline clopidogrel adherence quartile), and intervent ion variable (fixed, INT/UC, the effect 
of interest). The availability of non -intervention usual care control sites provides additional information 
for estimating the intervention effect, and also will allow us to examine possible dependence of the 
interve ntion effect on baseline clopidogrel adherence. These latter analyses for interaction between 
intervention and baseline adherence will be considered exploratory. Primary yes/no outcomes 
(clopidogrel fill, bleeding, stroke, MI, mortality) will be analyzed w ith mixed logistic regression models 
with these methods. The clopidogrel adherence outcome is a numeric percentage and will be analyzed 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 20 
 with similar models for normal outcomes, using transformations as needed to achieve approximate 
normality.  
 
Available d ata for analysis will include clopidogrel fill and adherence data at each site during the 6 
month period preceding the first roll -out, and during each of the four subsequent 6 month roll -out 
periods of the study, and outcomes (mortality, bleeding, stroke, and MI) during the 12 months following 
the index PCI procedure. Data will be examined graphically and descriptively for general patterns, 
outliers, or other problems. Descriptive tables will show general patterns and trends in site and average 
patient char acteristics and outcomes, separately for sites under usual care (UC) and those under 
intervention (INT), and by time periods.  
 
The economic analysis will weigh the benefits of the intervention in terms of patient survival and quality 
of life against the co st implications of providing the interventions. We will do this through a cost 
effectiveness analysis (CEA). The CEA will take the perspective of the VA and the time horizon will be 
the 12 month period following stent placement. For the intervention compar ed to usual care we will 
calculate incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) and related statistics. The ICER is estimated as 
ICER = (C 1 – C0)/(QALY 1 –QALY 0) where C 1 and C 0 are average cost over 1 year for patients in the INT 
and UC  groups, respectively , and QALY 1 and QALY 0 are mean quality adjusted years of survival over 
that year for the respective groups. Below we describe data sources and methods for deriving these 
estimates.  
 
To estimate the cost of the intervention we will use micro -cost techniques . The cost of developing and 
tailoring the email and IVR systems will be derived from logs of the time, salaries and benefits of 
personnel devoted to those tasks. The costs of inpatient pharmacists will be derived from direct 
observations. We will randomly  selected times and study sites to conduct brief interviews with inpatient 
pharmacists to assess typical time related to delivering the intervention. Estimates of PACT team -
member time will be assessed similarly.  
 
To estimate mean QALYs for the interventi on and usual care groups requires data on survival time over 
the 12 months post stent for every patient, and a measure of the quality of life for each patient over 
those 12 months. Data on survival will come from CDW vital statistics file.  
 
Although we ho pe the randomized step -wedge design of the trial will lead to treatment groups that are 
balanced on observed covariates at baseline, we recognize that some imbalances may nevertheless 
occur and multivariable models maybe necessary to account for these imba lances. To assess 
differences in costs we will use analytic models that account for the skewed nature of cost data, and we 
will pay special attention to the possible biases caused by heteroscedastic error terms  across INT and 
UC groups ( 44-45). Because QoL  data are bounded by 0 and 1, we use beta models to estimate 
differences  in QALYs by treatment group ( 46). We will use bootstrapping to estimate the uncertainty of 
the ICER. If the INT group is found to have better outcomes but at higher mean costs than UC , we will 
produce cost effectiveness acceptability curves to depict  the probability that the intervention would be 
cost effective at various levels of willingness to pay for an  additional QALY ( 47). 
 
 
 
G. Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
 
This study will r efine the current state of knowledge on improving medication adherence in multiple 
ways. First, it combines multiple interventions that have been separately shown to be effective in 
improving medication adherence and addresses causes of clopidogrel non -adherence identified by 
patients. Second, the intervention focuses on a novel setting (i.e., patients discharged following  PCI 
and transitioning to outpatient care) in contrast to prior adherence interventions that have focused only 
on patients with stable ch ronic diseases (e.g., hypertension). Third, the targeted medication in this 
study has demonstrated short -term benefits and where non -adherence can have immediate adverse 
outcomes (e.g., stent thrombosis with discontinuation of clopidogrel). Fourth, the stu dy utilizes existing 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 21 
 resources (i.e., cardiac data systems integrated with the VA electronic health record, VA pharmacists 
and patient -aligned care teams) to implement the intervention, improving the feasibility of broader 
implementation. Finally, this stu dy is being conducted as a type I hybrid implementation study and 
therefore includes extensive study of the implementation process, which will yield both contributions to 
implementation science and facilitate wider dissemination if the intervention is foun d to be effective.  
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 22 
  H. References:  
 
1. Wright RS, Anderson JL, Adams CD, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA Focused Update Incorporated Into the 
ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Unstable Angina/Non -ST-
Elevation Myocardial Infarction A Report of  the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines Developed in 
Collaboration With the American Academy of Family Physicians, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and the Society  of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 May 
10;57(19):e215 -367. 
2. Ho PM, Tsai TT, Maddox TM, et al. Delays in Filling Clopidogrel Prescription After Hospital 
Discharge and Adverse Outcomes After Drug -Eluting Stent Implantation: Implications for 
Transi tions of Care. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010 May;3(3):261 -6. Epub 2010 Apr 20.  
3. Spertus JA, Kettelkamp R, Vance C, et al. Prevalence, predictors, and outcomes of premature 
discontinuation of thienopyridine therapy after drug -eluting stent placement: r esults from the 
PREMIER registry. Circulation. 2006;113:2803 -9. 
4. Iakovou I, Schmidt T, Bonizzoni E, et al. Incidence, predictors, and outcome of thrombosis after 
successful implantation of drug -eluting stents. JAMA. 2005;293:2126 -30. 
5. Ko DT, Chiu M, Guo H, e t al. Patterns of use of thienopyridine therapy after percutaneous coronary 
interventions with drug -eluting stents and bare -metal stents. Am Heart J. 2009 Oct;158(4):592 -
598.e1. Epub 2009 Aug 22.  
6. Ho PM, Fihn SD, Wang L, et al. Clopidogrel and long -term out comes after stent implantation for 
acute coronary syndrome. Am Heart J. 2007 Nov;154(5):846 -51. Epub 2007 Oct 24.  
7.  Boggon R, van Staa TP, Timmis A, Hemingway H, Ray KK, Begg A, Emmas C, Fox KA. 
Clopidogrel discontinuation after acute coronary syndromes: fr equency, predictors and associations 
with death and myocardial infarction --a hospital registry -primary care linked cohort (MINAP -
GPRD).Eur Heart J. 2011 Aug 29. [Epub ahead of print]  
8. Pallares MJ, Powers ER, Zwerner PL, Fowler A, Reeves R, Nappi JM. Barrier s to clopidogrel 
adherence following placement of drug -eluting stents. Ann Pharmacother. 2009 Feb;43(2):259 -67. 
Epub 2009 Feb 3.  
9. Garavalia L, Ho PM, Garavalia B, Foody JM, Kruse H, Spertus JA, Decker C. Clinician -patient 
discord:  exploring differences in perspectives for discontinuing clopidogrel. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2011 Mar;10(1):50 -5. Epub 2010 May 21.  
10. Decker C, Garavalia L, Garavalia B, Spertus JA. Clopidogrel -taking behavior by drug -eluting stent 
patients: discontinuers and continuers. Patient Pref erences and Adherence 2008:2; 167 -175. 
11. Ho PM, Bryson CL, Rumsfeld JS. Medication adherence: Its Importance in Cardiovascular 
Outcomes Research. Circulation. 2009 Jun 16;119(23):3028 -35. 
12. Morgado MP, Morgado SR, Mendes LC, et al. Pharmacist interventions to enhance blood pressure 
control and adherence to antihypertensive therapy: Review and meta -analysis. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm. 2011 Feb 1;68(3):241 -53. 
13. Chisholm -Burns MA, Kim Lee J, Spivey CA, et al. US pharmacists' effect as team members on 
patient care: sys tematic review and meta -analyses. Med Care. 2010 Oct;48(10):923 -33. 
14. Misono AS, Cutrona SL, Choudhry NK, Fischer MA, et al. Healthcare information technology 
interventions to improve cardiovascular and diabetes medication adherence. Am J Manag Care. 
2010 De c;16(12 Suppl HIT):SP82 -92. 
15. Cutrona SL, Choudhry NK, Fischer MA, et al. Modes of delivery for interventions to improve 
cardiovascular medication adherence. Am J Manag Care. 2010;16(12):929 -42. 
16. Friedman RH, Kazis LE, Jette A, et al. A telecommunications sys tem for monitoring and counseling 
patients with hypertension. Impact on medication adherence and blood pressure control. Am J 
Hypertens. 1996 Apr;9(4 Pt 1):285 -92. 
17. Piette JD, Richardson C, Himle J, et al. A randomized trial of telephonic counseling plus wa lking for 
depressed diabetes patients. Med Care. 2011 Jul;49(7):641 -8. 
18. Reidel K, Tamblyn R, Patel V, Huang A. Pilot study of an interactive voice response system to 
improve medication refill compliance. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2008 Oct 9;8:46.  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 23 
 19. Stacy JN,  Schwartz SM, Ershoff D, Shreve MS. Incorporating tailored interactive patient solutions 
using interactive voice response technology to improve statin adherence: results of a randomized 
clinical trial in a managed care setting. Popul Health Manag. 2009 Oct ;12(5):241 -54. 
20. Bender BG, Apter A, Bogen DK, et al. Test of an interactive voice response intervention to improve 
adherence to controller medications in adults with asthma. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010 Mar -
Apr;23(2):159 -65. 
21. Magid DJ, Ho PM, Olson KL, et al. A Multimodal Blood Pressure Control Intervention in 3 
Healthcare Systems. Am J Manag Care. 2011;17(4):e96 -e103.  
22. Lambert -Kerzner A, Havranek EP, Plomondon ME, et al. Patients' Perspectives of a Multifaceted 
Intervention With a Focus on Technology: A Qualitati ve Analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2010 Nov 1;3(6):668 -74. 
23. The Chronic Care Model. http://www.improvingchroniccare.org/. Accessed June 26, 2011.  
24. Coleman EA, Smith JD, Raha D, Min SJ. Posthospital medication discrepancies: prevalence and 
contributi ng factors. Arch Intern Med. 2005 Sep 12;165(16):1842 -7  
25.  Seow H, Phillips CO, Rich MW, Spertus JA, Krumholz HM, Lynn J. Isolation of health services 
research from practice and policy: the example of chronic heart failure management. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2006  Mar;54(3):535 -40. 
26.  IHD QUERI Strategic Plan. http://www.queri.research.va.gov/ihd/default.cfm. Accessed September 
6, 2011.  
27. Helfrich CD, Li YF, Sharp ND, Sales AE.Organizational readiness to change assessment (ORCA): 
development of an instrument based on the Promoting Action on Research in Health Services 
(PARIHS) framework. Implement Sci. 2009 Jul 14;4:38.  
28.  Hagedorn HJ, Heideman PW. The relationship between baseline Organizational Readiness to 
Change Assessment subscale scores and implementation of hepat itis prevention services in 
substance use disorders treatment clinics: a case study. Implement Sci. 2010 Jun 14;5:46.   
29.  Clopidogrel reminder card. http://www.ukcpa.org/content2.php?id=5. Accessed September 6, 2011   
30. Fetterman DM. Ethnography: step -by-step. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1998.   
31. Carey MA. The group effect in focus groups: planning, implementing, and interpreting focus group  
research. In: Morse JM, ed. Critical Issues in Qualitative Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage;  1994 : 225 –241.  
32. Lofland J, Lofland LH. Analyzing Social Settings: A Guide to Qualitative Observation and Analysis. 
2nd ed.  Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing; 1984.   
33. Spradley JP. The Ethnographic Interview . New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston; 1979.  
34. Evanes hko V, Kay M. The ethnoscience research technique. West J Nurs Res. 1982; 4(1):49 –64. 
35. Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks,  
CA: Sage; 1994.  
36. Kleinman A. The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing, a nd the Human Condition. New York, NY: Basic  
Books; 1988.  
37. Mishler EG. Research Interviewing: Context and Narrative . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press;  
1986.  
38. Personal Narratives Group, eds. Interpreting Women's Lives: Feminist Theory and Personal Narra tives.  
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press; 1989.  
39. Sandelowski M. Telling stories: narratives approaches in qualitative research. Image. 1991;23(2):161 –
166. 
40. Quinn N, Holland D. Culture and cognition. In: Holland D, Quinn N, eds. Cultural Models in Lan guage &  
Thought. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press; 1987:3 –42. 
41. Kleinman A. Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press;  
1980.  
42. Muhr T. Atlas/Ti for Windows Version 5.0. London: Scolari Publications; 2 004. 
43. Hussey MA, Hughes JP Design and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials. Contemporary 
Clinical Trials 2007; 28: 182 -191. 
44. Manning, W. G. (1998). "The logged dependent variable, heteroscedasticity, and the retransformation 
problem." Journal Health Economics 17(3): 283 -295. 
45. Manning, W. G., A. Basu, et al. (2005). "Generalized modeling approaches to risk adjustment of skewed 
outcomes data." Journal of Health Economics 24(3): 465 -488. 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 24 
 46. Kieschnick, R. and B. D. McCullough (2003). "Regression analy sis of variates observed on (0, 1): 
percentages, proportions and fractions." Statistical Modelling 3(3): 193 -213. 
47. Fenwick, E., J. O'Brien, et al. (2004). "Cost -effectiveness acceptability curves - facts, fallacies and 
frequently asked questions." Health Ec onomics 13(5): 405 -4 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 25 
 Appendix 1: Draft questions for the email survey:  
 
1. Do you take care of patients who receive stent(s) and are taking clopidogrel therapy?  
O Yes O No (Can stop questionnaire)  
2. What is your current position?  
O Resident/Fellow physician O  Other type of physician  
O Inpatient Pharmacist O Nurse  
O Outpatient Pharmacist O Physician Assistant  
O Cardiologist O Nurse Practitioner  
O Hospitalist  
3. Who is primarily responsible for prescribing clopidogrel at your facility at hospital  
discharge? (check  all that apply)  
O Resident/Fellow physician O Other type of physician  
O Inpatient Pharmacist O Nurse  
O Outpatient Pharmacist O Physician Assistant  
O Cardiologist O Nurse Practitioner  
O Hospitalist  
4. How often do you estimate that pharmacists bring the pati ent’s discharge  medications to 
the bedside at your facility?  
O All of the time (100%) O Infrequently (10 -39%)  
O Most of the time (70 -99%) O Almost never (1 -9%) 
O Some of the time (40 -69%) O Never (0%)  
5. If not all of the time, why is this not the usual prac tice in your opinion?  
(Free text comment)  
 
6. Do you think it is feasible to have clopidogrel brought to the patient’s bedside  prior to 
hospital discharge?  
O Yes O No   
If yes, who would be in the best position to do this?  
If no, what are the barriers that ma ke this not feasible?  
 
7. Who is primarily responsible for prescribing clopidogrel at your facility in the  outpatient 
setting? (check all that apply)  
O Resident/Fellow physician O Other type of physician  
O Inpatient Pharmacist O Nurse  
O Outpatient Pharmacist  O Physician Assistant  
O Cardiologist O Nurse Practitioner  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 26 
 O Hospitalist O Primary care physician  
8. Does your site have a program (e.g. pharmacist fol low-up) to facilitate or ensure 
adherence to clopidogrel in the outpatient setting?  
O Yes O No  
If yes, plea se describe the program.  
(Free text comment)  
9. What happens if patients delay or do not refill their clopidogrel as an outpatient?  Please 
describe.  
(Free text comment)  
10. Do you think it would be helpful to notify a provider when a patient has not refilled  their 
clopidogrel?  
O Yes O No  
If yes, who would be the best person to notify?  
(Free text comment)  
11. In your opinion, is it feasible for providers to contact the patient to assess and  ensure 
patients refill their clopidogrel?  
O Yes O No  
If no, what are the pot ential barriers?  
(Free text comment)  
If yes, who would be the best person to do that at your facility?  
 
12. Do you think an automated telephone call reminding patients to refill their  clopidogrel 
would be helpful?  
O Yes O No  
If no, what would be other alterna tives to remind patients to refill their  
clopidogrel?  
(Free text comment)  
13. Would you be willing to lead implementation of a multi -faceted intervention to  improve 
clopidogrel adherence at your site?  
O Yes O No  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 27 
 If no, who would you recommend?  
 
 
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 28 
 Appendix 2: Key informant interviews for baseline assessment of clopidogrel adherence 
programs  
 
1. Introduce self : 
Hello, my name is [name of interviewer]. I am working on the Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation 
Clopidogrel Study. [Name of person who set up interviews] contacted  you [when: e.g., a few weeks ago] 
to set up this interview appointment.  
2. Introduce the project:  
• The Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation Clopidogrel Study is a study to test an  intervention to 
improve clopidogrel adherence among patients who underg o percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI).  
• We are evaluating a multi -faceted intervention comprising of automated alerts  that will remind 
pharmacists to come to the bedside of PCI patients to educate  them and ensure they are 
discharged with clopidogrel, a nd interactive voice  response (IVR) follow -up telephone calls with 
patients to refill clopidogrel. The  goals of the study are to test the effectiveness of the intervention 
in improving  clopidogrel adherence and reducing adverse outcomes, and to understand how to 
best implement the intervention in VA facilities.  
• The intervention consists of 4 components:  
o A reminder from CART -CL will be sent to the inpatient pharmacist prior to  discharge that a 
patient has received a stent;  
o The pharmacist will educate the pat ients on the importance of and   adherence to clopidogrel 
following PCI, as well as bring clopidogrel to the  patient’s bedside prior to hospital discharge;  
o Interactive voice response (IVR) calls will be made to patients prior to the  time of clopidogrel 
refill to remind patients and to facilitate refills during  follow -up; and  
o A Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT) member will contact patients who  delay filling 
clopidogrel.  
3. Explain the purpose of the interview  
I/we are interviewing a number of people at your site who can help us understand the  medication and 
hospital discharge process for PCI patients, and how this project might  best fit in with what is going on 
now. We wanted to talk with you before the Hybrid  Effectiveness -Implementation Clopidogrel Study is 
implemented so we can understand  what is going on now to improve clopidogrel adherence, how you 
currently work with  primary care, and hear your opinions about how the study should work here.  
4. Describe how we will assure confidentiality, obtain consent, and answ er any  questions.  
I want to let you know what will happen to the information you provide. I am recording this conversation 
so that we do not miss anything that you have to say. People working on this study will be the only ones 
who w ill use the interview r ecordings and the recordings will be stored on the secure VA site behind VA 
firewall .  We will take steps to ensure the information you provide remains confidential. Individuals will not 
be named in any notes, report or summary . 
 
1. Role of interviewee  
1.1. I’d like to begin by asking what your role is within this facility.  
1.2. Probes:  
1.2.1.  Do you have responsibilities outside this facility?  
1.2.2.  Is there anything else?  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 29 
 2. Current discharge medication process  
2.1. Can you give me a brief overview of how discharge medication is organized  here?  
2.2. Probes:  
2.2.1.  When do patients receive discharge medications?  
2.3. When and how do you provide education to the patient or their caregivers about  medications?  
2.4. When and how is communication with the patients’ primary care team handled?  
3. Current challenges to dis charge medication process  
3.1. What challenges do you (or your facility) see in ensuring that PCI patients are  discharged on 
clopidogrel?  
3.2. What challenges do you (or your facility) see in ensuring that hospital patients in  general are 
discharged on required medi cations?  
3.3. Probes:  
3.3.1.  What are the main things that contribute to these challenges?  
3.3.2.  Main Facilitators?  
4. Current challenges to clopidogrel adherence in the outpatient setting  
4.1. Do you think patient are taking clopidogrel as prescribed in the outpatient  setting?  
4.2. What challenges do you (or your facility) see in ensuring that patients refill and  continue to take 
clopidogrel as prescribed?  
4.3. Probes:  
4.3.1.  What are the main things that contribute difficulties with adhering to  clopidogrel treatment?  
4.3.2.  What do you think are things t hat can help patients take clopidogrel as  prescribed?  
5. Receptiveness to Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation Clopidogrel Study  Intervention  
5.1. How receptive do you think clinicians [and others] will be to the intervention?  Why?  
5.2. What concerns do you think pharma cists and clinicians might have about this  intervention? How 
do you think we could address these concerns?  
5.3. What other changes would you recommend to make the intervention more  effective? Easier to 
implement?  
5.4. How big of a change do you think the interventio n will be compared to the way  you’re currently 
managing clopidogrel prescriptions for hospital patients?  
6. Clinician views of intervention  
6.1. When you imagine actually implementing an intervention like this, what kinds of  things would 
cause you to be enthusiast ic about it?  
6.2. What kinds of things would cause you to be uncomfortable about an intervention  like this?  
7. The Environment  
7.1. On a scale of 0 to 10, how difficult would it be to implement this program in this  facility? Why?  
7.2. On a scale of 0 to 10, how much do you think the program will help patients?  Why?  
7.3. What kind of feedback would you want about the program when it is  implemented (e.g., # pts 
eligible, clopidogrel adherence rate, stories from  patients)?  
7.4. What can we do to help staff feel prepared and confident abo ut the intervention?  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 30 
 8. Sustainability  
8.1. What else are the most important things that we would need to show for this  facility to 
continue/expand a program like Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation  Clopidogrel Study?  
8.2. What kind of case would need to be made to con vince people to  continue/expand this program 
after the evaluation phase is done?  
8.3. Do you have any recommendations or considerations that we haven’t  discussed?  
8.4. Anything you’d like to suggest as we refine the intervention over the next few  months?  
9. Close  
That covers all the questions that we wanted to ask. Thank you so much for all the  information you 
have provided.  
9.1. Do you have any final questions for us?  
9.2. Is it ok if we contact you for another interview in the future?  
VA Central IRB Study 12 -12: P. Michael Ho  
Version # 12 
2/26/2019  
 
 Page 31 
  
Appendix 3: Interviews to assess barriers  and facilitators to intervention implementation  of 
clopidogrel adherence programs  
 
 
Provider/Intervention Personnel Questions:  
1. What is your current role in the Hybrid effectiveness -implementation clopidogrel study?  
2. Please tell us about your experience wit h the Hybrid effectiveness -implementation clopidogrel 
study to date.  
3. What’s your impression of how it’s going (questions for inpatient pharmacist or other designee for 
education and bring clopidogrel to the bedside)?  
a. Are you being notified that a PCI proce dure has been performed?  
b. If not, why?  
c. How can the notification process be improved?  
d. Do you have time to educate and bring clopidogrel to the patient’s bedside?  
e. If not, what are the barriers?  
f. How can the education process or the process of bring clopidogrel  to the bedside be 
improved?  
g. Other suggestions to improving the discharge process for patients receiving a stent?  
4. What’s your impression of how it’s going (questions for outpatient PACT team member or other 
designee)?  
a. Have you been notified that a patient has not refilled clopidogrel?  
b. If yes, did you contact the patient and what did you do when you contacted the patient?  
c. How do you think the process can be improved?  
5. Scale of 0 to 10, how difficult has it been to implement this program at your facility? Why?  
6. What should be modified or improved?  
 
Patient Questions:  
 
1. Please tell us about your experience with the Hybrid effectiveness -implementation clopidogrel 
study to date.  
2. What’s your impression of the discharge process?  
a. Did you receive any education about clo pidogrel prior to discharge? If so, what did you think 
of the education that you received?  
b. Did you receive the clopidogrel wallet card prior to discharge? If so, what did you think of the 
wallet card that you received and do you carry it with you?  
c. Did some one bring clopidogrel to the bedside prior to discharge? If so, what did  you think of 
that?  
3. Have you received an automated call reminding you to refill your clopidogrel?  
a. If yes, what did you think of the call? Was it helpful in reminding you to refill your  medication?  
b. If not, what would make it more helpful to remind you to refill your medication?  
c. Did you use other options on the IVR call such as being connected to the pharmacy refill line 
or having the pharmacist call you to answer your questions?  
d. If yes, how was the process of interacting with the telephone system?  
e. What other features would you like to see with the telephone system?  
4. Scale of 0 to 10, how much is a program like this helping you? Why?  
 