Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 1 of 11 
 Comparison of Glenoid Implant Positioning in Total Shoulder 
Arthroplasty using SmartBones: A randomized clinical trial  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
02/22/2015  
 
 
 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 2 of 11 
 Comparison of Glenoid Implant Positioning in Total Shoulder Arthroplasty using SmartBones: A randomized 
clinical trial  
 
Principle Investigator  
Joseph P. Iannotti , MD, PhD  
 
Co Investigators  
Eric Ricchetti , MD 
Peter Evans , MD 
Bong Jae Jun, PhD  
Thomas E. Patt erson, PhD  
 
Study coordinator s 
Thomas E. Patterson, PhD  (primary)  
Eric Rodriguez  
Janet DeLozier  
Everest Gorski  
Linda Adolphi  
Maxine Cox  
Deborah Bork  
 
Introduction  
Glenoid component  loosening is the most common complication of total shoulder arthroplasty . Loosening is 
associated with malposition  of the implant as well as glenoid bone quality . Past studies from our research group 
have  addressed these problems by investigating  novel surgical technologies to increase the accuracy of glenoid 
implant placement.  Our efforts to quantify bone quality and correlate bone quality with implant survival 
continue. Over the course of multiple IRB approved clinical trials, use of our pre -operative planning software in 
combination with patient specific  instrumentation (PSI , #10-582), intelligent reusable instrumentation  (IRI, #12 -
997) or real-time instrumentation (RTI, #13 -652) has proven to more accurately place the glenoid guide pin 
than conventiona l standard  of care  techniques.(Figure 1)  
 
Background and Significance  
Develop ments at Cleveland Clinic have  allowed our surgeons to use pre -operative planning software for 
simulation of the surgical plan to select the optimal implant from an inventory of FDA approved and 
commercial ly available implants and the optimal location of that implant within the bone . Two ongoing clinical 
trials, IRB #12 -997 and #13 -652, examine the use of the pre -operative plan in conjunction with either an 
intelligent reusable instrument (IRI) or a real time instrument (RTI) to transfer the surgical plan i nformation 
from the surgical model  (SmartBone)  to the surgical site . The IRI in the 12 -997 study is a tool provided to the 
surgeon with plastic adjustable legs to be adjusted onto a sterile model of the patient’s pre -operative glenoid 
anatomy (SmartBone), which contains a surgical guide pin in the orientation specified  from the pre -operative 
plan. The RTI in the 13 -652 study also utilizes a SmartBone of the patient’s pre -operative glenoid anatomy, and 
PMMA bone cement is used to create a mold of the glenoid  and guide pin for transfer to the surgical site.  
 
In the 97 total patients treated in the PSI, IRI and RTI studies there has not been the need to abort the use of the 
novel instrumentation, nor has there been a complication during or after surgery relate d to the technology. 
Moreover the objective data of post -operative implant position has proven the PSI, IRI and RTI technology to 
be better than control groups.  
 
 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 3 of 11 
 Study Design  
 
Methods  
 
Continuing our work, we propose a randomized clinical trial to evaluat e the accuracy of glenoid implant 
placement comparing four groups of patients . Group 1 consists of 3D imaging and computer -generated surgical 
planning using standard DePuy instrumentation for placement of the glenoid implant. This group is considered 
the standard of care  group (SOC) . Group 2 consists of 3D imaging and computer -generated surgical planning, 
with use of a SmartBone to trial the standard DePuy instrumentation. (Group 2 is Group 1 with addition of the 
use of a SmartBone.) Group 3 consists of 3D imaging and computer -generated surgical planning, with use of 
the IRI technology including a SmartBone, but with metal legs instead of plastic legs , which were used  in the 
IRB#13 -652 study. Group 4 consists of 3D imaging and computer -generated surgical pla nning, with use of the 
RTI technology including a SmartBone.  
 
We will measure implant placement with RSA  (bi-planar x -rays)  and 3D CT imaging. We will measure pre-
operative  bone  quality using quantitative CT to measure trabecular bone volume and correlate  these finding s 
with bone samples removed from the humeral head  and measured by microCT , and mechanical testing of the 
bone samples. These bone samples will be obtained as part of the routine preparation of the humeral head  for 
implant placement. This bone  tissue is normally removed and discarded as part of the standard of care for 
preparation of the bone for placement of the humeral implant . We have performed all of the work required to 
define both the safety of all components of the proposed study in the completed PSI study and the ongoing IRI  
and RTI studies (#s 10 -582, 12 -997 and 13 -652, respectively) . Since application to the IRB for study of the IRI 
technology Custom Orthopaedic Solutions (Cleveland Clinic  NewCo) has received in April 2013 FDA approval 
for this technology.  
 
Glenoid Instrumentation and Pre -operative planning  
All patients will receive a Standard of Care pre -operative CT scan that will be used for the 3D imaging -based 
computer modeling to determine the best location for the glenoid implant . The surgeon will approve the surgical 
plan, and the printed surgical plan will be available in the OR for consultation by the surgeon. The four groups 
differ in the way that this pre -operative plan is used during the surgical procedure to position the gl enoid 
implant.  
 
Group 1 (SOC, control group):  
In this group the surgeon will use standard DePuy instrumentation provided with the implant to implement the 
pre-operative surgical plan.  
 
Group 2 (SOC plus SmartBone):  
In this group the surgeon will use standa rd DePuy instrumentation provided with the implant and the use of a 
patient -specific SmartBone that contains a guide pin inserted into the SmartBone that mimics the pre -operative 
surgical plan to implement the pre -operative surgical plan.  
 
Group 3 (SOC plu s IRI with metal legs and SmartBone):  
This group is a variation on the IRI study protocol (IRB #12 -997). In the IRI study, the IRI tool has plastic legs 
of different lengths to conform to the contours of the patient’s glenoid anatomy, which is reproduced i n the 
SmartBone model. In group 3, the legs of the IRI tool will be fabricated from metal.  
 
 
 
 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 4 of 11 
 Group 4 (SOC plus RTI and SmartBone):  
 
This group is identical to the RTI study protocol (IRB #13 -652). In group 4, PMMA bone cement will be used 
to create a cog nate mold of the patient’s glenoid anatomy, which is reproduced in the SmartBone model, to 
implement the pre -operative surgical plan.  
 
Group 5 (SOC plus IRI using SmartBase instead of SmartBone):  
This group is a variation of Group 3 of this study. We have designed a new component, “SmartBase”, which 
takes the place of the 3D -printed SmartBone. The SmartBase is a metal base with a djustable metal tabs that 
support each of IRI legs.  In the 3D modeling software, an impact detection function is used to place the  IRI tool  
on the computer model of the patient’s glenoid, and the  appropriate  metal leg  is chosen for each slot of the IRI 
so that the IRI is in the correct position to place the guidepin  in the position dictated by the pre -operative plan. 
The computer sof tware also calculates the height from the tip of the IRI to the point of contact on the computer 
model of the patient’s glenoid for each of the legs. These distances are included in the pre -operative plan 
provided to the surgeon. In the operating room, the  metal tabs of the SmartBase are adjusted to the proper 
height for each of the corresponding legs of the IRI. The surgeon then uses the IRI to drill the guidepin in the 
correct position and orientation into the patient’s glenoid.  
 
This method has been show n to be equivalent to the IRI group in pre -clinical testing. The rationale for testing 
this methodology in the current clinical trial is that the SmartBase does not require fabrication of a sterile 
SmartBone, which will provide a much faster delivery of th e patient -specific instrument.  
 
In all enrolled cases the surgeon will have full control to define the optimal position of the guide pin and the 
final implant. The surgeon can default to standard of care technology in any case in which the IRI or RTI 
techn ology cannot be used or results in guide pin position that, in his best medical opinion, is not consistent 
with the pre -operative plan. Therefore, the surgeon is in full control of all intra -operative decision making and 
execution of the procedure.  
 
Measur ement of Implant Position  
Post-operatively we will obtain a CT scan with metal artifact reduction technology within the first few weeks 
after surgery and will generally obtain this scan prior to discharge from the hospital. A second CT scan will be 
obtaine d at two years  after surgery. We have used these methods of 3D CT imaging to determine implant 
position in several prior studies . We have defined the accuracy of these measurements using first generation 
techniques to be within 1 millimeter and 3 degrees.  We anticipate that the accuracy of these second generation 
imaging techniques will be improved from our earlier work.  
 
To extend the studies of implant position of the IRI study (IRB# 12 -997) and the RTI study (IRB# 13 -652), 
RSA imaging will be obtained from up to 20 subjects at these same time points . RSA imaging uses bi -planar 
fluoroscopic imaging within a calibration grid and image software to define implant position. This technology 
has been a standard for precise implant position for the last 20 years  and has been used in thousands of patients. 
RSA imaging uses metallic markers placed in the implant and in the surrounding bones. The beads im planted in 
the bone and implant  do not move, and are then used as markers to define the location of the implant t o the bone 
and the bones to one another. T he accuracy of RSA measurement has been reported to be  +/- 0.006mm in 
translation and 0.5 degrees in rotation . For RSA measurements , a minimum of three  1mm  radiopaque tantalum 
beads into an implant and  at least thr ee beads into  the surrounding bone when using the RSA system.   
 
Placement of three beads into the implant will also improve the ability of the post-operative  3D CT imaging to 
define the location of the implant and will be an improvement over our first gene ration technology . A metal 
wire is placed in the center peg of the implant by the manufacture of the implant to better identify  the implant  
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 5 of 11 
 and its location on post -operative imaging . The three additional beads that we place in the implant will add 
accurac y to the post -operative imaging.  
 
The risk of the bead becoming  loose has been shown to be  very small and there is no adverse effects relate d to 
bead movement or loosening. We have placed these metallic markers in the glenoid implant (three beads) and in 
the bone (4 -5 beads) in 66 patients to date under the ongoing IRI  and RTI  studies . We have not had any 
problems with bead placement or any adverse events during or after surgery.  
 
RSA and 3D CT measurements will be correlated and compared. Our goal is to d efine the accuracy of second 
generation 3D CT scanning when compared to a gold standard of RSA measurements.  
 
Bone Quality Measurements  
To assess bone quality and its effect on glenoid component loosening, we will take humeral head bone samples 
from all patients . These bone samples will be assessed by microCT to measure trabecular bone volume and 
connectivity as well as by mechanical testing . These  data will be correlated with the trabecular bone volume of  
the glenoid defined by the pre -operative CT scans.  In addition all bone quality measurements will be correlated 
with CT scan imaging of the glenoid at the time of surgery and at two year follow up .  
In order to acquire consistent information on bone quality across the patients, a custom -made calibration 
phantom object will be located between the CT bed and the patient. The phantom object consists of three 
cylindrical rods , each  with a known density of hydroxyapatite (0, 500, and 1,000 mgHA/cm3) embedded in a 
soft foam block. The grey -level of pixel from th e rods will be used to calibrate the Hounsfield units and the 
corresponding bone density using custom -written software.  
 
 
Patient Enrollment  
The proposed clinical trial will randomly enroll patients indicated for standard of care anatomic total shoulder 
arthroplasty  into one of the four treatment groups . Our goal is to have 20 subjects in each treatment group. To 
accomplish this goal, we will enroll up to 120 subjects to control for subject withdrawal after enrollment. To 
enroll at least 20 patients into ea ch group, including Group 5 (SmartBase), new randomization envelopes will be 
generated that start at number 34. The distribution of patients into Groups 1 – 4 at the time that Group 5 was 
begun is:  
Group 1: 8  
Group 2: 7  
Group 3: 7  
Group 4: 10  
 
Thus, to rea ch 20 in each group, randomization envelopes will be created by the statistician, Colin O’Rourke 
(QHS) , that have 12, 13, 13, 10  and 20 in Groups 1 -5, respectively. The change in the odds of being assigned to 
a particular group will c hange from 25% previou sly, to 15  to 19% in Groups 1 -4, and to 29% in Group 5. They 
will receive  all pre-operative  testing, intra -operative care , including all implants and post-operative  care that is 
standard of care and spec ific to the surgeon and patient decisions for care . The only change for this clinical trial 
will be  the type of surgical instruments used to place the glenoid guide pin , retention of the humeral head for  
bone quality analysis , placement of the beads and post -operative CT scanning . In all cases the surgeon is  able 
and allowed to use their own surgical judgment to pl ace the guide pin, prepare the bone and place the desired 
implant. In all cases,  the surgeon can use any and all of the standard instruments or guides provided by the 
implant manufacturer as the sur geon would use if the patient were  not enrolled in the study . If the surgeon 
chooses not to use the IRI or RTI technique  then this would be noted as a deviation in plan, the reasons would 
be recorded and the patient would be excluded from the study without  post-operative  imaging and the ir pre-
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 6 of 11 
 operative  and intra -operative data would be analyzed for the purpose of understanding the reasons for failure of 
the RTI technology to provide  assistance for refinement of the technology .   
 
Detailed Study Design:  
The study will randomly enroll 20 patients  into each of the four treatment  group s. We will have three  surgeons 
with experience in shoulder arthroplasty ; two of these have extensive experience with the IRI,  RTI and 
SmartBones technology.  All patients will have  the standard of care indicatio ns for an anatomic total shoulder 
arthroplasty and will give informed consent for both the surgery and participation in this study. Consent and 
enrollment will be obtained by the surgeon during a routine office evaluation. All  patient s will get standard of 
care pre -operative x -rays and CT scan at least one week  prior to surgery. Scan quality must meet study specific 
criteria and we expect that the scans will be performed at Cleveland Clinic . The pre -operative CT sca n will be 
placed within our pre -operative planning software (OrthoVis , Custom Orthopaedic Solutions, Cleveland, OH ). 
The surgeon will use this software to assess the glenoid bone pathology and select the optimal implant and 
placement of that implant.  
Patients will ha ve standard of care indications for primary anatomic arthroplasty and be able to get a pre -
operative shoulder CT scan at the Cleveland Clinic or at an outside facility so long as the study includes the 
entire scapula and has 1mm or thinner sections. These parameter s are required for accurate pre -operative 
planning as w ell as comparison with the post -operative CT scans. Standard of care pre - and post -operative x -
rays (AP and axillary views) will  also be obtained and can be per formed at Cleveland Clinic or ac quired from 
another health care facility. In all patients the standard x -rays and CT images provided by the radiology 
department will be available to the surgeon before and during the surgery.  
Prior to implanting the glenoid component, three 1mm tantalum beads will be inserted into the backside 
peripheral pegs of the glenoid component. We have developed methods to place the beads in a manner that has 
been used by other investigators  and validated in our own experience in 66 cases enrolled in the IRI and RT I 
clinical study . Placement of tantalum beads in the glenoid implant is now standard of care for Cleveland Clinic . 
The desired implant will be placed into a holding device and , using a drill guide, a 0.9 mm hole measuring 4  
mm deep will be placed in each o f the three peripheral peg s of the implant. A 1 mm tantalum bead (RSA 
biomedical, Umsa Sweden) supplied by the company will then be press fit into the component hole. The 
implant will then be placed in the glenoid, aligned with the previously drilled peg h oles. As standard of care, 
these peg holes are cemented, thus locking the beads within the implant.  
Using manufacturer (RSA biomedical, Umsa Sweden) provided beads and injector gun, four to five 1mm 
tantalum beads will be placed in the coracoid, acromion and glenoid. Exact placement of these beads is at the 
discretion of the surgeon. Patient anatomy and operative exposure will guide the surgeon to the best places to  
inject the beads,  however , the surgeon will not be confined to a specific number  of beads i n a specific location.  
The beads just need to be spread out amongst the coracoid, acromion, and glenoid to establish reference points 
for the RSA imaging . Prior studies looking at should er joint kinematics and implant position have used this 
methodology of  bead placement with successful study related outcomes.  We have successfully placed bone 
beads in 66 patients currently treated in the IRI and RTI clinical studies without any difficulty or adverse events 
during or after surgery.  
Post-operatively, all pat ients will receive a CT with MAR  and RSA (if chosen)  within 3 weeks of surgery. This 
will be a CT Scan performed with the patients arm by the side in a supine position using metal artifact reduction 
techniques. In  addition patients will receive  a second CT  scan RSA imaging, provided they originally got RSA,  
performed 2 to 3 years (± 2 months) after surgery. The second CT scan  will be performed with MAR techniques 
and with the patient in the arm by the side  position again using metal artifact reduction techn iques. We have 
shown that in a small number of patients the glenoid component can shift in position within the first 3 -6 months 
after surgery making the first CT Scan more accurate for implant position . The images obtained from the post -
operative CT scans are placed back into the surgical software and the 3D reconstruction of the post -operative 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 7 of 11 
 scapula with the implants is compared to the pre -operative plan. Using measurement tools within the software, 
developed at Cleveland Clinic, we will compare the posi tion of the actual glenoid component placed in the 
patient with the desired position specified by the pre-operative plan. The use and validation of these imaging 
methods to precisely measure implant position has been performed at the Cleveland Clinic in a prior IRB 
approved studies  (IRB s 10-582, 12 -997 and 13 -652).  
 
Pre-operatively, the high resolution quantitative CT will measure volumetric bone mineral density and the 
trabecular network of the glenoid . When available, this will be applied to the pre -operative CT for those patients 
at Main Campus. Patients who have their pre -operative CT completed at non -Main Campus facilities will have 
the standard of care pre -operative CT . This will be done at the same visit for the standard of care pre -operative 
CT. Mic ro CT imaging, which creates a 3D reconstruction of the fine bone structure, in addition to 
microarchitecture analysis and mechanical testing, will allow assessment of the bone tissue taken from the bone 
core sample . Between the preoperative imaging and th e bone tissue analysis, we will have data to properly 
determine the quality of the bone stock surrounding the implant . Further correlating this with RSA and 3D CT 
imaging of implant movement, we can fully develop the cause and effect of bone quality on gle noid component 
loosening.  
 
The participating surgeo ns will be Drs. Joseph Iannotti, Eric Ricchetti  and Peter Evans . Patient s may have 
surgery at either Cleveland Clinic main campus or at Euclid Hospital . If the procedure is performed at Euclid 
Hospital , post-operative CT scan and RSA (if chosen), will need to be performed  at main campus within 3 
weeks . The patient will be made aware of this at the time of enrollment and consent.  
 
IRI technology:  
For the experimental group, the cannulated IRIS instrument des igned for glenoid pin placement is placed over 
the guide wire that is contained within the sterile SmartBone and the legs of the instrument are adjusted to 
record the relationship (location and trajectory) of the guide pin in relation to the patient specif ic glenoid 
anatomy. This is done at the time of surgery to properly mimic the desired pin placement. The location of each 
leg of the IRI is marked on the SmartBone with a surgical pen. The instrument is then removed from the 
SmartBone model. The SmartBone model is visually compared by the surgeon to the exposed bone surface to 
ensure that the two match for shape and size. Any adjustments to the surgical site may be done by the surgeon 
to optimize the match between the model and the exposed glenoid surface. The marks placed by the surgeon on 
the model are then transferred to the patient bone using a surgical marker or bovie. These marks are in a general 
location as determined by the surgeon and assist in the placement of the IRI. The IRI is placed onto the pa tient 
bone surface in the same manner as it was placed on the SmartBone model and a guide pin provided by the 
manufacturer is placed into the desired position. The surgeon then removes the IRI and compares by visual 
inspection the location and trajectory o f the guide pin in relation to the patient’s bone surface and that within the 
SmartBones model. Any adjustments in guide pin position can be performed by the surgeon based upon surgical 
judgment. The surgeon can make any change needed and use any means or instrument that would otherwise be 
used for standard of care surgery to place the guide pin in any position that the surgeon believed to be best for 
the patient. If the pin is changed without the use of the IRI then the patient will be excluded from this s tudy and 
the reasons for failure of the IRI technology to provide accurate pin placement based upon the surgeon’s sole 
determination of accuracy will be recorded and later analyzed as a failure to treat. These patients will not 
receive post -operative CT sc ans as we would not be able to use the data within any one group as defined by this 
study. After placement of the guide pin the remainder of the procedure is completed in the same manner for 
both groups, using the implant manufacturer’s equipment  
 
RTI tech nology:  
Using the Smartbone  surrogate model , the surgeon visually compares the exposed glenoid surface to the 
Smartbone model  to ensure that the two match for size and shape.  Any a djustments to the surgical site may be 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 8 of 11 
 done by the surgeon to optimize the m atch between the model and the exposed glenoid surface.  Prior to 
molding the bone cement, bone wax is wiped onto the model to ensure proper release of the cement mold . The 
surgeon will then mold bone cement around the pin in the Smartbone, capturing the tr ajectory of the pin and the 
unique  contours of the glenoid rim . A small pin sleeve is inserted over the pin to be embedded within the 
cement model .  Once the bone cement has cured, it is removed from the model and placed onto the patient ’s 
glenoid surface . The bone morphology captured in the mold aligns the mold to the patient’s anatomy . When  the 
surgeon feels that the model has good fit  of the glenoid surface, he may continue with pin placement. After 
placement of the guide pin , the RTI mold is removed and  the remainder of th e procedure is completed using the 
implant manufacturer’s equipment  and standard surgical protocols . Any adjustments in guide pin position can 
be performed by the surgeon based upon surgical judgment. The surgeon can make any change nee ded and use 
any means or instrument that would otherwise be used for standard of care surgery to place the guide pin in any 
position that the surgeon believed to be best for the patient.  If the pin is changed without the use of the RTI then 
the patient wil l be excluded from this study and the reasons for failure of the RTI technology to provide 
accurate pin placement based upon the surgeon ’s sole determination of accuracy will be recorded and later 
analyzed as a failure to treat. These  patients will not rec eive post -operative CT Scans as we wo uld not be able to 
use the data.  
SmartBase technology:  
The IRI legs are placed virtually (manually) on a virtual SmartBone using an impact detection function in the 
3D modeling software. From there the height of each IR I leg is measured and correlated to a number on the 
SmartBase. The SmartBase has hashes in 1/2 mm increments. The surgeon is then given a pre -operative plan 
that includes virtual photos of the IRI placement, the IRI leg lengths and numbers of each SmartBas e height as 
calculated. Intra -operatively the IRI is assembled as normal and placed onto the SmartBase after each adjustable 
tab has bee n set to the appropriate height  for each leg. The IRI is then used as normal.   
 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  
To be eli gible for inclusion, a primary anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty must be indicated for the patient.  
Outcome Measures:  
By comparing computer gener ated pre -operative plan to post -operative  component placement, we will be 
looking at three outcomes . First,  we will compare the overall difference in component placement between the 
four treatment groups: SOC  instrumentation , SOC instrumentation with SmartBone, intelligent reusable 
instrument  with metal instead of plastic legs , and real time  instrumentation . Secondly, we will compare the 
placement between the technologies within and between surgeons . All of the surgeons have extensive 
experience with anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty. Two of the surgeons have extensive experience with the 
pre-operative planni ng and the IRI and RTI technology. Thirdly, we will evaluate the difference in implant 
position between technologies based on severity of pathology. The quality  of the bone core samples  will be 
correlated to the possible loosening of the implants.  
 
Sample Size:  
We intend to have approximately 20 subjects in each of the 4 treatment groups. We expect to randomize up to 
120 subjects to achieve  20-25 subjects in each treatment group .  
 
Data Analysis  
Average deviations from plan for the four treatment groups  will be compared using mixed -effects ANOVA 
methods . Random effects will be included to account for correlation between observations introduced as a 
consequence of multiple observations of deviation being taken on a particular surgeon . If significant differenc es 
are found, multiple comparisons based on the ANOVA model will be made to compare each pair of groups, and 
will use Holm’s step -down procedure to control the family -wise error rate of the tests.  
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 9 of 11 
 All analyses will be done using R software (version 3.0.0,  Vienna, Austria) . A significance level of 5% will be 
used for all testing.  
 
Data Sheets  
Clinical data collected pre - and post -operative ly will be passive and a ctive range of motion, manual muscle 
strength testing and shoulder functional scores, and co -morbidities , all of w hich are standard of care. Post -
operative data will be collected at two years (± 2 month s) after surgery . We will collect at the time of surgery 
the implant used, the time for surgical care glenoid exposure to end of pin placement. The im plant used, the 
surgical instruments used and any comments  from the surgeon as to the ease  of use and accuracy of the  
instruments. Verbatim comments will be solicited and recorded by a research assistant attending all surgical 
procedures.  
Pre-operative  imaging data will include: g lenoid version and inclination, estimated pre -morbid inclination, 
version and depth of glenoid bone loss using  the glenoid vault model, p referred implant type inclination and 
version.  
Post-operative  implant placement to desired location will be defined for  the location of the center peg of the 
implant in the superior/inferior ( SI), anterior/posterior ( AP) and medial/lateral ( ML) dimension in millimeters 
and the trajectory of the center peg actual vs plan in version and inclinatio n. The location of the implant in 
relation to the joint line as measured by the glenoid vault model will be measured in millimeters. Back side 
contact of the implant to the bone will be measured as a surface area in direct contact with the bone and any 
lucent lines around th e implant pegs will be measured. Peg perforation and the location of the peg perforation 
will be recorded. The tantalum beads within each implant will be measured for translational or rotational 
movement.  
Changes in implant position from  post-operative  CT scan (CT 1) vs the first post -operative CT s can (CT 2) will 
be correlated with back side seating, implant type, medialization of the joint line and peg perforation and 
severity of the post-operative  pathology.  
 
Study data will be collect ed and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture).  Tracking data 
will be stored in an Excel spreadsheet, which will exist only on password -protected computers or on restricted -
access CCF servers. Only study personnel will have access to the da ta. 
Adverse Events and Data Monitoring Committee (DMC):  
A Data Monitoring Committee will not be used . Patient safety will be protected by following surgical standards 
of care . The IRB will be notified in writing of any adverse clinical event related to the  use of the IRI or the 
standard instrumentation . Adverse events include excessive bleeding, infection, fracture nerve injury or need for 
revision surgery during the term of this study which is expected to be approximately 1 year from the time of 
surgery.  
 
 
 
Consent:  
During a pre -operative office visit the patient’s primary surgeon will conduct the consent interview, obtain the 
signed Informed C onsent, witness , sign  and send the original to the study coordinator. A copy of each Informed 
Consent form will be sent home with the patient for their records. Informed C onsent forms may also be sent to 
patients if they are located out of town . Research personnel wi ll send multiple copies of the I nformed Consent 
along with a self -addressed stamped envelope to the pati ent home for review, signature and return . Prior to the 
patient signing the Informed Consent, research personnel or the surgeon will call the patient to discuss the 
study, answer questions and ensure that the patient fully understands all aspects of the st udy. After being 
contacted, the patient may then sign and send back the informed consent.  
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 10 of 11 
 Funding Sources and Budget  
Funding source: State of Ohio Biomedical Research and Development Grant - Products to Improve Orthopaedic 
Patient Outcomes (PIOPO) - JP Iann otti, MD, PhD,  Principle Investigator.  
 
 
References:  
1. Verbogt O, DeSmedt T, Vanhees M, Clockaerts S, Parizel PM, and Van Glabbeek F . Accuracy of placement of the glenoid 
component in reversed shoulder arthroplasty with and without navigation. J Shoulder Elb ow Surg 2011; 20: 21 -26. 
2. Nguyen D, Ferreira LM, Brownhill JR, King GJW, Drosdowech DS, Faber KJ, and Johnson J. Improved accuracy of computer 
assisted glenoid imnplantation in total shoulder arthroplasty: an in -vitro randomized controlled trial. J Shoulder  Elbow Surg 
2009;18: 907 -14. 
3. Kircher J, Wiedemann M, Magosch P, Lichtenberg S, and Habermeyer P. Improved accuracy of glenoid positioning in total 
shoulder arthroplasty with intraoperative navigation: a prospective randomized clinical study . J Shoulder Elb ow Surg 2009;18: 
515-20. 
4. Scalise JJ, Codsi MJ, Bryan J, Brems JJ, Iannotti JP. The influence of three dimensional computed tomography images of the 
shoulder in preoperative planning for total shoulder arthroplasty . J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008; 90: 2438 -45. 
5. Matsen FA, Clinton J, Lynch J, Bertelsen A, and Richardson M. Glenoid component failure in Total Shoulder Arthroplasty. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am 2008;90:885 -96. 
6. Franta AK, Lenteres TR, Mounce D, Neradilek B, and Matsen FA . The Complex Characteristics of 282 Uns atisfactory Shoulder 
Arthroplasties. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2007;16:555 -562. 
7. Hendel MD, Bryan JA, Barsoum WK, Rodriguez EJ, Brems JJ, Evans PJ, Iannotti JP. Comparison of glenoid component position 
using patient specific instruments vs. standard surgical in struments: A randomized prospective clinical trial. J Bone Joint Surg . In 
Press.  
8. Madanat R, Makinen TJ, Moritz N, Mattila KT, Aro HT. Accuracy and precision of radiostereometirc analysis in the 
measurement of three dimensional micromotion in a fracture mod el of the distal radius. J Orthop Res. 2005;23:481 -8. 
9. Nuttall,  D., J.F. Haines, and Trail, II . A study of the micromovement of pegged and keeled glenoid components compared using 
radiostereometric analysis . J Shoulder Elbow Surg, 2007. 16(3 Suppl): p. S65 -70. 
10. Nuttall, D ., J.F. Haines, and I.A. Trail. The early migration of a partially cemented fluted pegged glenoid component using 
radiostereometric analysis . J Shoulder Elbow Surg, 2012. 21(9): p. 1191 -6. 
11. Nagels J, Valstar ER, Stokdijk, Rozing PM. Patterns o f loosening of the glenoid component. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 2002. 84(1): p. 
83-7. 
12. Rahme, H ., P. Mattsson, and S. Larsson. Stability of cemented all -polyethylene keeled glenoid components. A radiostereometric 
study with a two -year follow -up. J Bone Joint Su rg Br, 2004. 86(6): p. 856 -60. 
13. Nuttall, D., J.F. Haines, and I.A. Trail. The effect of the offset humeral head on the micromovement of pegged glenoid 
components: a comparative study using radiostereometric analysis . J Bone Joint Surg Br, 2009. 91(6): p. 75 7-61. 
14. Bey MJ, Zauel R, Brock SK, Tashman S. Validation of a new model based tracking technqiue for measuring three dimensional, in 
vivo glenohumeral joint kinematics. J Biomech Eng 2006;128:604 -9. 
15. Karantzoulis V, Liapi C, Papaggelopoulos P. Large scale bon e mineral histomorphometry - report of a simplified technique. 
Histopathology 2012;6:1174 -82. 
16. Ding M, Danielsen CC, Hvid I, Overgaard S. Three -Dimensional microarchitecture of adolescent cancellous bone. Bone 
2012;5:953 -60. 
17. Genant HK, Jiang Y. Advanced imag ing assessment of bone quality. Annaly of the New York Academy of Sciences 
2006;1068:410 -28 
 
 
Revised:  22FEB 15                                                  Page 11 of 11 
 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of actual glenoid implant position versus pre -operative plan among 3D computer 
templating only (left), templating with use of IRI device (m iddle) and templating with RTI device (right).  
 
 