PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    1  
Answer all questions accurately and completely in order to provide the PHRC with the relevant 
information to assess the risk-benefit ratio fo r the study.  Do not leave sections blank. 
 
PRINCIPAL/OVERALL INVESTIGATOR 
Paolo Bonato, PhD 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE 
Robotic-assisted therapy to impr ove manual dexterity in children with cerebral palsy: a pilot 
study on clinical outcomes and muscle syne rgies as a possible predictor of response.  
 
FUNDING Thrasher Research Fund  VERSION DATE August 3
rd, 2020 
 SPECIFIC AIMS 
Concisely state the objectives of th e study and the hypothe sis being tested. 
 
Aim 1. Assess the effectiveness of robot-assis ted training on hand f unction and quality of 
life in children with CP. 
 
Aim 2. To study the relationship between musc le synergies and the outcomes of robot-
assisted training. 
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE 
Provide a brief paragraph su mmarizing prior experience important for understanding the 
proposed study and procedures. 
 
Pediatric cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of disorders affecting move ment, development and 
posture leading to functional limi tations. CP is the most common motor disorder in children (over 
2 per 1 000 live births1) and the leading cause of  chronic childhood disabilit y. It is attributed to 
non-progressive alterations occurring in the brain during fetal and newborn development2. Clinical 
features of children with CP usually include weakness, spastic ity, and loss of selective motor 
control3. Often, there are deficits in the integrity of neuroanatomical structures and pathways 
required for precision grasping and fine motor contro l of the fingers4,5. As such, skilled finger 
movements and hand functi on do not develop normally6-8. This leads to severe limitations in 
activities of daily living (ADL)9-11. The severity of impairments observed in children with CP is 
associated with deficits in specific domains of quality of life (QoL) ( i.e. physical well-being, and 
social support and peers)9. Also, overall participation in ADL al so has a significant impact on QoL 
(i.e. physical well-being, moods and emot ions, and social support and peers)9. Therefore, not only 
should therapy focus on improving motor symptoms, it should aim to improve the performance of 
ADL. 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    2  Based on motor learning theories, recen t studies have demonstrated that intensive, 
repetitive, task-oriented therapies  (IRTT) can help a paretic limb “relearn” how to perform 
movements that were lost after brain damage12,13. The same principle can be applied to children 
with CP that do not have to relearn given moveme nts but rather learn how to perform them in a 
functionally adequate manner14-16. The mechanism by which functional recovery and motor 
learning are believed to occur is thr ough the enhancement of  neuronal plasticity17. A motor 
learning study in humans has s hown that 300 to 800 repe titions per session ar e needed for motor 
learning to occur18 yet, only an average of  32 repetitions of upper-limb  movements is achieved 
during conventional therapy19. There is  robust evidence that IRTT can improve motor and 
functional ability of the hand20. While there is limited evidence for the efficacy of most approaches 
to hand rehabilitation in CP21, some studies have demonstrated that children with hemiplegia may 
benefit from intensive unimanual practice14,15. One approach that has demonstrated promising 
outcomes in hand rehabilitation in  children with CP is constr aint-induced movement therapy 
(CIMT)22-27 since it involves restraining the non-pareti c limb while providing intensive targeted 
practice with the paretic limb. Ho wever, the use of CIMT is funda mentally flawed when done in 
children28 and, as such, must be modifi ed; and the approach can lead to temporary deficits in QoL 
during the prolonged treatment period  (use of a cast). Consequentl y, novel approaches  that enable 
IRTT need to be implemented in children with CP . Robotic devices have become a very important 
area of research because of their capacity to achieve IRTT29,30. While the use of robotic-assisted 
therapy (RAT) to improve grasping and fine motor control has yet to be implemented in children with CP, RAT has been demonstrated as an eff ective intervention in child ren with CP for gait 
rehabilitation
31-37 and reaching movements38,39 suggesting that using th e RAT could improve hand 
function in this population. In the proposed st udy, we will assess the effectiveness of the 
Amadeo®.  The device has been shown to improve manua l dexterity in stroke survivors. The 
computer-controlled device maintains patients’ forearm in a secure position using Velcro straps. 
The patients fingertips are then attached to the robotic device using mild adhesive tape (like a band 
aid). Patients then have to cont rol interactive games displayed on the screen using their fingers. 
 In addition to assessing the efficacy of RAT, the proposed study aims to identify predictors 
of responsiveness to the interventi on. This is of significance in orde r to adequately select children 
that will obtain the best outcome following IRTT as  much variability can be observed in response 
to RAT. Baseline functional impairments have been shown to be important de terminants of overall 
gross motor improvements following RAT of gait ( i.e. more initial impairment → less 
improvements) suggesting that children may need to  attain a certain level of motor function before 
being able to achieve optimal outcomes using RAT. While the current st udy also proposes to 
identify predictors of motor outcome following RAT using clinical outc ome measures, we will 
also utilize a physiological measure (muscle synergies) that we have assessed to be a predictor of 
motor outcome following RAT of gait.  
 
The scientific community widely accepts th at the Central Nervous  System (CNS) adopts 
several strategies to reduce the complexity of the control of movement40-44. Many authors have 
shown that one of these strate gies consists in using a limit ed number of primitive signals 
undergoing the activation of muscles which, when  combined, generate a full collection of 
movements41. 
 
Some studies have shown that the sensitive nature of EMG to represent an aberrant motor 
control in CP45. However, the assessment of muscle syne rgies during grasp has yet to be performed 
in this or any other population.  Nonetheless, the similarity of gait synergies in CP, stroke, and 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    3  infant rhythmic-stepping indicates that there are common changes in control after brain injury that 
may reflect control in  early development46.  
 
Whereas clinical measures of impairment in SMC are available47, such measures do not 
provide information that is suita ble to design physical therapy interventions aimed to address 
specific impairments and hence improve clinical outcomes of robot-assisted gait training. 
 
If successful, the proposed approach would be expected to significantly improve clinical 
outcomes of manual dexterity in children with CP. 
 
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS 
Briefly describe study design and an ticipated enrollment, i.e., number of subjects to be enrolled 
by researchers study-wide and by Partners rese archers.  Provide a brief summary of the 
eligibility criteria (for example, age range, gende r, medical condition).  Include any local site 
restrictions, for example, “Enrol lment at Partners will be limited to adults although the sponsor’s 
protocol is open to both children and adults.”
 
A sample of 10 children with CP with no major orthopedic or neurologi cal complications that 
could interfere with the robot-assis ted training will be recruited in the study. This sample size was 
calculated for an F test with an effect size of  0.4, an alpha of 0.05, a beta of 0.80, a correlation 
coefficient between repeated measur es of 0.7, and an attrit ion rate of 20%. A study clinician will 
screen potential subjects. Screen ing will include a standard histor y and physical exam to ensure 
subjects meet all entry requirements after cons ideration of inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
Specifically, Dr. Nimec, the study physician, will as sess all subjects' suita bility for using the 
Amadeo. 
 
Inclusion criteria: ● Diagnosis of CP with  upper-limb impairment 
● 6 to 18 years of age. 
● Manual Ability Classificati on Scale Level II or III. 
● Ability to communicate pain or discomfort.  
 Exclusion Criteria: ● Recent use of upper-limb robotic-assiste d training within the last 3 months. 
● Contraindication to robotic-assisted manua l training such acute and pronounced pain 
symptoms despite conventional pain therapy of the upper-limb, lack  of compliance, high-
grade ataxia, advanced osteoporosis , and fractures of the upper-limb. 
●          Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS) of 4 in the upper-limb. 
  
Briefly describe study procedures.  Include any local site restri ctions, for example, “Subjects 
enrolled at Partners will not participate in the pharmacokinetic portion of the study.”  Describe 
study endpoints.
 
All study procedures will take place in the Moti on Analysis Laboratory at  Spaulding Rehabilitation 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  Spaulding Re habilitation Hospital is an affiliated hospital 
of Harvard Medical School.   
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    4   
Assessments 
 
Once the children are enrolled in the study, they  will undergo a baseline assessment before 
undertaking a 6 weeks/18 sessions RAT program. On ce training is completed, the children will 
undergo a final assessment. Finally, a follow-up a ssessment will be perform ed one mont h after the 
end of the RAT program to evaluate  retention in the quality of life.    
 
The follow up assessment will be performed 4 weeks after the end of the intervention and will 
consist in the cerebra l palsy Quality of Life Questionnaire, whic h it will be provide d to the subjects 
and they will be asked to fill it  out and return to us when comp leted by email or mail (note: the 
questionnaire does not include a ny identifiable information). 
	
Clinical tests 
Clinical tests will be  conducted by a study staff before a nd after the intervention. Clinical 
testing should last about  1 hour and will include: 
 
• Physical examination: we will gather measures  of Range of Motion (ROM) and muscular strength 
for the upper extremities. Passi ve and active movements of the shoulder (flexion, extension, 
abduction and adduction), elbow (flexion and ex tension), radioulnar joint (pronation and 
supination), wrist (flexion, exte nsion, abduction, and adduction), a nd fingers (flexion, extension, 
abduction, and adduction) will be assessed with a goniometer. 
• Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS)48,49: We will assess spasticity  at the shoulder (flexion-
extension); elbow (flexi on-extension); radioulna r (pronation-supination ), and wrist (flexion-
extension).  
• Quality of Upper Extremity Skills Test (QUEST): th is standardized test is a validated and reliable 
tool to evaluate movement patterns and hand func tion in children with cerebral palsy. The QUEST 
evaluates quality of upper extr emity function in four domains: dissociated movement, grasp, 
protective extension, an d weight bearing.  
• Box and block test52: this test assesses unilateral gross manual dexterity. Children are seated at a 
table, facing a rectangular box that is divided into two square compartments. The individual is 
instructed to move as many blocks  as possible, one at a time, fr om one compartment to the other 
for a period of 60 seconds. 
• The cerebral palsy Qual ity of Life Questionnaire53: this standardized te st assesses 7 domains 
related to quality of life (soc ial wellbeing and acceptance, feeli ngs about functioning, participation 
and physical health, emotional we llbeing and self-esteem,  access to service, pain and impact of 
disability, and family health) and was specifically developed for children between 4-12 years of age with cerebral palsy. It is design ed for self- and pa rent proxy report. 
• Statistical analyses: We will perform a descriptive analysis of the different outcome measures 
and compare results between  pre and post intervention.   
 
 
 
  
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    5  Lab-based study 
We propose to analyze the musc le synergies of subjects us ing a method developed by 
members of the Motion Analysis La boratory and their collaborators41,54-60 . Subjects will be asked 
to reach and grasp objects of different sizes a nd shapes. Electromyographic (EMG) activity will 
be collected from 16 musc les of the upper-limb ( i.e. Teres Major, Infraspinatus, Superior trapezius, 
Deltoid anterior/posterior, clavicul ar head of Pectoralis major, Tr iceps brachii lateral head, Biceps 
brachii (long head), Brachioradia lis, Extensor digitorum communis,  Extensor carpi radialis longus, 
Flexor carpi radialis, Flexor carpi ulnaris, Fi rst dorsal interosseous, A bductor pollicis brevis, 
Abductor digiti minimi). This sa me procedure will be replicated  contralaterally. Additionally, 
reflective markers will be placed bilaterally on the subjects’ u pper-limbs (i.e. C7, T10, Manubrium 
sterni, Xiphoid process, Acromion, Lateral epic ondyle, Styloid process of the radius, Styloid 
process of the ulna, distal head of the first/second /third/fourth/fifth metacarpus, distal head of the 
first/second/third/fourth/fifth proximal and distal phalanges,  and distal head of the 
second/third/fourth/fifth middle phalange) in orde r to assess movement kinematics. The entire 
process should last approximately 1.5 hour. 
Extracting Muscle Synergies : Muscle synergies and their activation coefficients will be 
extracted from the EMGs usi ng a nonnegative matrix factoriza tion (NMF) algorithm. The NMF 
models the activity of the muscles as a linear co mbination of several muscle synergies, each 
activated by a time-dependent coefficient. Synerg ies will be extracted separately from the EMGs 
of each limb. A first estimate of  the number of synergies of each limb will be obtained based the 
quality of reconstruction of the original EMG channels.  
Estimating the Number of Muscle Synergies : We will decompose the EMG matrix 
increasing the number of synergies up to the poin t where the reconstructed envelopes, obtained 
multiplying the synergy vectors by the te mporal activations, have an average R2 similarity with 
the EMG envelopes above 0.8 and a minimum R2 similarity on the indi vidual channel above 0.6. 
Quantifying Synergy Similarity : Similarity between the synerg ies of each limb will first be 
assessed using the scalar product.  We will further quantify syne rgy similarity by estimating the 
dimensionality of the subspace shared between the spaces spanned by the synergies of the two 
limbs by computing the principal angles between se ts of synergy vectors and finding the number 
of principal angles whose cosines are greater than a threshold.  
Statistical analyses: Results of the number of synergies,  and similarity be tween limbs will 
be compared descriptively.  
Assessing the relationship between muscle synergies and response to therapy : he 
relationship between changes in the Muscle Syne rgies and clinical scores (QUEST and Box and 
Block Test) will be investigated on a case by case  basis evaluating the differences between the 
visits.  	
We will ask permission to study participants to video record them during the performance 
of the above-described clinical  tests and the lab-based study. 
 
 Training:  
Training will be performed using the Amadeo ®. The computer-controlled device maintains 
patients’ forearm in a secure position using Velcro straps. Th e patients fingertips are then 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    6  attached to the robotic device using mild adhesive  tape (like a band aid). Patients then have to 
control interactive games displayed on the screen using their fingers.  
 
 Each training session will in clude 30 minutes of active moveme nts that can be divided into 
up to 3 bouts of 10 minutes depending on pa tient fatigue. During th e training bouts, 
children will be encouraged to move continuously and as  actively as possible. The 
Amadeo® provides several intera ctive games to faci litate motor lear ning. Between bouts, 
children will be allowed to rest for at least 5 minutes. Adjustments in training intensity will vary according to the children’s ability and en durance. Training will take place up to 4 
times per week for a total of 18 sessions  over up to 7 weeks. Sessions will last 
approximately 60 minutes (including set up, training, and rest between each bout). 
 
For studies involving treatment or  diagnosis, provide information about standard of care at 
Partners (e.g., BWH, MGH) and indicate how the study procedures differ from standard care.  
Provide information on available alternative treatments, procedur es, or methods of diagnosis.
 
Treatments for children with cerebral palsy to improve manual dexterity can include intensive 
unimanual physical therapy or constraint-induce d movement therapy. The approaches focus on 
having patients use their impai red hand more extensively. Ther apeutic options specific to 
providing a decrease in spastici ty can include physical thera py (constraint-induced movement, 
strength therapy, orthoses, serial casts); oral medications (benzodiazepines, baclofen, tizanidine, 
dantrolene); botulinum neurotox in injections, phenol or ethyl alcohol perineural injections, 
intrathecal baclofen, selective dorsal rhizotomy or musculoske letal surgical procedures. The 
Amadeo® robot training is an advanced version of intensive unimanual physic al therapy. It is not 
the current standard of care.  
 
Describe how risks to subjects are minimized, for example, by  using procedures which are 
consistent with sound research design and which do not unnecessarily expose subjects to risk or 
by using procedures already bei ng performed on the subject for di agnostic or treatment purposes.
 
 
Risks to participants will be minimized by following the Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital 
Policy and Procedure: General Safety Precaution s and Procedures for the Conduct of Human.  
 All laboratory equipment meets or exceeds hospital standards for electrical safety. 
 The robotic device that we propose to use in  the study (i.e. the Am adeo® by TyroMotion) 
has been developed for adults a nd pediatric populations above 3 year s of age (see device brochure). 
Training sessions will be always  overseen by a study staff trained in the use of r obotic systems for 
upper-limb training.   
 Subjects with CP are at higher than normal risk for falls and injuries from daily activities.  
Subjects will be under constant obs ervation. Trained staff will be n earby to help in case of loss of 
balance. During training and when standing is  not required, subjects will be seated on a 
comfortable chair. 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    7  The investigators will use hypo-a llergic tapes and bandages that  are unlikely to cause skin 
irritation. 
 To minimize fatigue, subjects will be allowed rest periods and will  be monitored and 
observed by study staff at all ti mes during the experiments. 
  
Describe explicitly the methods for ensuring the safe ty of subjects.  Provide objective criteria for 
removing a subject from the study, fo r example, objective criteria fo r worsening disease/lack of 
improvement and/or unacceptable adverse events.  The inclusion of objective drop criteria is 
especially important in studies designed with placebo control groups.
 
Subjects will be screened prior to and during enrollment for the presence of medical conditions 
that may contraindicate their participation.  
 FORESEEABLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS 
Provide a brief description of a ny foreseeable risks and discomfort s to subjects.  Include those 
related to drugs/devices/procedures being stud ied and/or administered/ performed solely for 
research purposes.  In addition, include psychosoc ial risks, and risks re lated to privacy and 
confidentiality.  When applicab le, describe risks to a develo ping fetus or nursing infant.
 
The robotic device that we propose to use in  the study (i.e. the Am adeo® by TyroMotion) 
has been developed for adults a nd pediatric populations above 3 year s of age (see device brochure). 
Training sessions will be always  overseen by a study staff trained in the use of r obotic systems for 
upper-limb training.  The risks of using the Amadeo ® include muscle sorene ss and fatigue, but no 
harmful adverse events have been  reported with its use. Trained study staff will stretch the hand 
of the participants to minimize soreness. The Amadeo ® is being used in another approved protocol 
that is taking place within the MAL (2015-P002107). 
 Subjects with CP are at higher than normal risk for falls and injuries from daily activities.  
Some of the proposed testing pro cedures will assess the subject’s pe rformance of activities of daily 
living. In general, subjects will be  at no greater risk for falls or injury than when performing tasks 
in the home and community  setting. Subjects will be under constant observa tion. Trained staff will 
be nearby to help in cas e of loss of balance. During training  and when standing is not required, 
subjects will be seated on a comfortable chair. 
 Subjects will be asked prior to  using sensors to collect data if they recall any past 
occurrences of fragile skin, or sensitivity to tape  or latex. The investigators will use hypo-allergic 
tapes and bandages that are unlikely to cause skin irritation. For indi viduals with fragile skin, there 
is a risk of skin irritation from the adhesive tape that secures the reflective markers and EMG 
electrodes to the skin. Th e risk is equivalent to wearing a Ba nd-Aid for a few hours and peeling it 
off.  Alcohol cleansing, shaving, and light sanding needed prior to  positioning sensors might also 
cause mild skin irritation. It is possible that mild  bruising may occur from pressure of the sensors 
against the skin. 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    8  Subjects may become fatigued or uncomfortable during any visit. To minimize fatigue, 
subjects will be allowed rest pe riods and will be monitored and obs erved by study st aff at all times 
during the experiments. 
 
EXPECTED BENEFITS 
Describe both the expected benef its to individual subjects partic ipating in the research and the 
importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be  expected to result fro m the study.  Provide 
a brief, realistic summary of pot ential benefits to s ubjects, for example, “It is hoped that the 
treatment will result in a partial reduction in tumor size in at least 25% of the enrolled subjects.”  
Indicate how the results of the study will benefit future patients with the disease/condition being 
studied and/or society, e.g., through increased knowledge of human phys iology or behavior, 
improved safety, or t echnological advances. 
 
The potential benefits could be improved fi ne and gross manual c ontrol, spasticity, and 
quality of life in children with cerebral pals y. However, our experience with rehabilitation 
interventions has shown that not all subjects re spond in the same way to the intervention thus, 
some subjects may not benefit directly from partic ipating in the study. It is  possible that gaining a 
better understanding of the characteristics of muscle  activation patterns will ev entually lead to the 
development of new rehabilitation protocols or a better selection of patients that will respond to 
the intervention. Hence, the study might  benefit patients in the future.  
 
EQUITABLE SELECTION OF SUBJECTS 
The risks and benefits of the re search must be fairly  distributed among the populations that stand 
to benefit from it.  No group of persons, fo r example, men, women, pr egnant women, children, 
and minorities, should be categorically excluded  from the research without a good scientific or 
ethical reason to do so.  Please provide the basis for concluding that  the study population is 
representative of the populati on that stands to potentiall y benefit from this research.
 
No person meeting the inclusion an d exclusion criteria will be ex cluded from participation in the 
study on the basis of gender, ethnicity or race.  
 
When people who do not speak English are excluded  from participation in the research, provide 
the scientific rationale for doing so.  Individuals who do not speak  English should not be denied 
participation in research simply because it is inconvenient to translate the consent form in 
different languages and to have an interpreter present.
 
Non-English speaking subjects will not be exclud ed from the study. Interpre ter services will be 
obtained as necessary to facili tate the informed consent pr ocess and study participation.  
 
 
For guidance, refer to the following Partners policy: 
          Obtaining and Documenting Informed Consent of Subjects who do not Speak English
          http://healthcare.partn ers.org/phsirb/nonengco.htm  
 
 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    9  RECRUITMENT PROCEDURES 
Explain in detail the specific methodology that will be used to recruit subjects.  Specifically 
address how, when, where and by whom subjects  will be identified and approached about 
participation.  Include any speci fic recruitment methods used to  enhance recruitment of women 
and minorities.
 
All subjects will be recruited by IRB approved st udy staff for this protocol. Assent will be 
obtained from subjects who ar e enrolled by proxy consent. 
Recruitment strategies will include the use of the following sources: 
1. Attending physicians at Spaulding Rehabilitatio n Hospital may refer their CP patients to 
the study. We will provide physicians with  study information sheets and flyers. 
2. Study divulgation through the or thopedic service in the Bo ston Children’s Hospital and 
in Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital. 
3. Flyers posted in the outpatient specialist clinics, in pediatric and orthopedic clinics, therapy 
gyms and in public spaces inside  and outside of the hospital. 
4. Phone calls through volunteer registry. 
5. Via contact with support groups and conferences. 
6. Patients with CP who previously volunteere d to be contacted about opportunities to 
participate in research studies  at Spaulding Rehabilitation. 
7. Contact with patients who receiv ed robotic-assisted gait traini ng as part of the clinical 
program at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospita l via referrals from physical therapists. 
8. Via advertisement on clinicaltrials.partn ers.org and researchmatch.org websites. 
9. Via letter to prospective subjects co-signed by their physician and study PI. 
10. Via contact to the patients listed for direct contact in the Partners Research Patient Data 
Registry (RPDR).  
 
Provide details of remuneration, when applicable .  Even when subjects may derive medical 
benefit from participation, it is often the case th at extra hospital visits, meals at the hospital, 
parking fees or other inconvenien ces will result in additional out -of-pocket expenses related to 
study participation.  Investigat ors may wish to consider pr oviding reimbursement for such 
expenses when funding is available
 
Subjects will be compensated based on the pr ocedures undertaken. The compensation amount 
will be as follows: • $50 for evaluation sessions (up to 3) • $20 for intervention sessions (up to 18) Each subject will receive in total $510 if he/she completes the whole study.  Additionally, the cost of parking will be covered if the subject is driving to Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital.  
For guidance, refer to the fo llowing Partners policies: 
          Recruitment of Research Subjects 
          http://healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/recruit.htm
 
          Guidelines for Ad vertisements for Recruiting Subjects
          http://healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/advert.htm
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    10   
          Remuneration for Research Subjects
          http://healthcare.part ners.org/phsirb/remun.htm
 
 
CONSENT PROCEDURES 
Explain in detail how, when, where, and by whom  consent is obtained, and the timing of consent 
(i.e., how long subjects will be given to consider participation).  For most studies involving more 
than minimal risk and all studi es involving investigational dr ugs/devices, a licensed physician 
investigator must obtain informed  consent.  When subjects ar e to be enrolled from among the 
investigators’ own patients,  describe how the potential for coercion will be avoided.
 
Subjects who are interested and wi lling to participate in the st udy will undergo an initial phone 
screening to determine their eligibility. Subject s who qualify will be sent study information and 
will be scheduled to visit the lab an d undergo a final screening in person. 
 At the time of the scheduled te st, the subject will be met by one  of the study staff in the Motion 
Analysis Lab. Informed consent and assent wi ll be obtained by the i nvestigators who have 
completed the Partners Healthcare System’s hum an subject protection e ducational requirements 
(i.e. HIPAA), and the CITI Prog ram in Protection of Human Subjects, in compliance with all 
Federal regulations regarding such  training. The parents/legal guard ian will be given a copy of the 
IRB-approved consent form during the initial interv iew. Subjects will be given a copy of the IRB-
approved assent form at the same time. Study staff will clearl y explain to the subject and their 
parents/legal guardian the nature of the informed  consent and assent processes, study purpose and 
procedures, time commitments, risk s, potential benefits, treatment alternatives, rights as research 
participants, study staff contact information, c onfidentiality procedures, and arrangements for 
medical care provided in case of injury during th e study. Subjects and their parents/guardians will 
be able to speak with a physician about any questi ons or concerns if they would like to. The subject 
and his/her parents/guardians w ill be given adequate time to  consider their decision and 
encouraged to ask questions, bot h during the initial in terview and throughout the study. A member 
of the study staff will answer any questions re garding the study at the time consent is given.  
Enrollment will begin when the parents/guardians thoroughly understand and signs the informed 
consent form, and the child thor oughly understands and signs the assent form. The subject and 
parents/guardians will be provide d with a signed copy of the comp leted consent and assent form. 
The subject may pause or terminate his/he r enrollment at any time during the study. 
 
NOTE: When subjects are unable to give consen t due to age (minors) or impaired decision-
making capacity, complete the fo rms for Research Involving Children as Subjects of Research 
and/or Research Involving Individuals with Im paired Decision-making Capacity, available on 
the New Submissions page on the PHRC website: 
http://healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/newapp.htm#Newapp
 
For guidance, refer to the following Partners policy: 
          Informed Consent of Research Subjects
          http://healthcare.partn ers.org/phsirb/infcons.htm
 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    11   
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING 
Describe the plan for monitoring the data to en sure the safety of subj ects.  The plan should 
include a brief description of (1) the safety and/ or efficacy data that wi ll be reviewed; (2) the 
planned frequency of review; and (3) who will be responsible for this review and for determining 
whether the research should be altered or stoppe d.  Include a brief de scription of any stopping 
rules for the study, when appropriate.  Dependi ng upon the risk, size and complexity of the 
study, the investigator, an expe rt group, an independent Data  and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) or others might be assi gned primary responsibility for this  monitoring activity.        
 
NOTE: Regardless of data and safety monitoring plan s by the sponsor or others, the principal 
investigator is ultimately res ponsible for protecting the rights, safety, and welfare of subjects 
under his/her care. 
 
Approval of protocol, informed consent procedures , and recruitment will be  obtained from the IRB 
during annual reviews. Monthly da ta and procedural reviews by the PI in consultation with study 
staff will be done to identify and ameliorate any potential safety i ssues. Any safety concerns about 
the equipment or protocol will be brought to the immediate attention of Dr. Bonato.  Study staff 
will conduct bimonthly audits to ensure co mpliance with regulatory standards for study 
documentation.  
Describe the plan to be followe d by the Principal Investigator/st udy staff for review of adverse 
events experienced by subjects unde r his/her care, and when appli cable, for review of sponsor 
safety reports and DSMB reports.  Describe the plan for reporti ng adverse events to the sponsor 
and the Partners’ IRB and, when applicable, fo r submitting sponsor safe ty reports and DSMB 
reports to the Partners’ IRBs.  Wh en the investigator is  also the sponsor of the IND/IDE, include 
the plan for reporting of adverse events to the FDA and, when applicable , to investigators at 
other sites.   
 
NOTE: In addition to the advers e event reporting re quirements of the sp onsor, the principal 
investigator must follow the Partners Human Re search Committee guidelines for Adverse Event 
Reporting
 
Study staff will report any adverse event promptly to  Dr. Bonato. Adverse events reporting will be 
done according to Partners Human Research polic y, and appropriate changes in procedure and 
protocol will be implemented to prevent reoccurr ence. Remedial action to prevent reoccurrence of 
the event will be institu ted prior to resumption of the study treatment.  
 
MONITORING AND Q UALITY ASSURANCE 
Describe the plan to be followe d by the principal investigator/st udy staff to monitor and assure 
the validity and integrity of th e data and adherence to the IRB- approved protocol.  Specify who 
will be responsible for monitoring, and the plan ned frequency of monitoring.  For example, 
specify who will review the accu racy and completeness of case report form entries, source 
documents, and informed consent.   
 
NOTE: Regardless of monitoring plans by the spons or or others, the prin cipal investigator is 
ultimately responsible for ensuri ng that the study is conducted at his/her investig ative site in 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    12  accordance with the IRB-approved protocol, and a pplicable regulations a nd requirements of the 
IRB.
 
The study coordinator will be re sponsible for monitoring the co mpleteness of all data and 
source documents. The Principal Investigator will monitor the informed consent procedures in accordance with the Informed Consent Compliance Checklist of Partners HealthCare Systems 
HRQIP. Prior to subject enrollment, the PI will review and approve of the consent and assent 
procedures that will be used by the invest igator consenting individuals.  The subject’s 
data/protocol adherence will be monitored by th e study coordinator at each step in the study.  
 
For guidance, refer to the fo llowing Partners policies: 
          Data and Safety Monitoring Plans and Quality Assurance
          http://healthcare.partn ers.org/phsirb/datasafe.htm
 
          Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines
          http://healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/adverse_events.htm
 
  PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
Describe methods used to protect the privacy of  subjects and maintain confidentiality of data 
collected.  This typically include s such practices as substituting codes for names and/or medical 
record numbers; removing face sheets or other identifiers from completed 
surveys/questionnaires; proper disposal of prin ted computer data; limi ted access to study data; 
use of password-protected comput er databases; training for res earch staff on the importance of 
confidentiality of data, a nd storing research records in a secure location.   
 
NOTE: Additional measures, such as obtaining a Certificate of Confidentiality, should be 
considered and are strongly encouraged when th e research involves the collection of sensitive 
data, such as sexual, cri minal or illegal behaviors.
Patients will be assigned a study number, which w ill be used for all documentation except for a 
master list matching subjects na mes and study numbers, and forms for which subjects’ names must 
be recorded (e.g. intake interview forms, copies of reimbursement r eceipts etc).  The master list 
and interview forms will be kept in a secure location in locked offices.  No non-study staff will 
have access to any identifiable patient study data  or demographic information.  All subjects' 
parents will be informed of thei r privacy rights and sign a HIP AA-compliant authorization form 
previously approved by the Spaulding IRB. Study staff in the Motion Analysis Laboratory will 
conduct quarterly audits to ensu re compliance with regulatory st andards for study documentation. 
 Videotapes and photos will be stored securely  in the SRH Motion Analysis Laboratory; only 
investigators listed on the study appl ication will have access to th em.  The videotapes will be 
destroyed after 7 years from the date of study closure in comp liance with Partners Record 
Retention Policy. Patients will be given the choice to be seen or remain anonymous as well as the 
choice to have video/photo ma terial used for the purpose of  articles and presentations. 
 
 
Partners Human Subjects Research Application Form   Filename: Protocol Summary 
Version Date:  June 1, 2005    13  SENDING SPECIMENS/DATA TO RESE ARCH COLLABORATORS OUTSIDE 
PARTNERS 
Specimens or data collected by Pa rtners investigators will be sent to re search collaborators 
outside Partners, indicate to whom specimens/dat a will be sent, what in formation will be sent, 
and whether the specimens/data will contain iden tifiers that could be used by the outside 
collaborators to link the specime ns/data to individual subjects.
 
No personally identifiable data will be sent to or viewed by collaborators outside of SRH.  
 
Specifically address whether specimens/data w ill be stored at collaborating sites outside 
Partners for future use not described in the pr otocol.  Include whethe r subjects can withdraw 
their specimens/data, and how they would do s o.  When appropriate, submit documentation of 
IRB approval from the recipient institution.
 
This study does not involve storing data or  specimens with outs ide collaborators. 
 
 
RECEIVING SPECIMENS/DATA FROM RESEARCH COLLABORATORS OUTSIDE 
PARTNERS 
When specimens or data collected by research co llaborators outside Partne rs will be sent to 
Partners investigators, indicate from where the specimens/data will be obtained and whether the 
specimens/data will contain identifiers that coul d be used by Partners in vestigators to link the 
specimens/data to individual subjects.  When  appropriate, submit documentation of IRB 
approval and a copy of the IRB-approved cons ent form from the in stitution where the 
specimens/data were collected.
 
 This study does not involve receiving data or specimens from outside collaborators.  
 