Titl e of R e s e ar c h Pr oj e ct:  
E x a mi ni n g t h e Effi c a c y of a T h er a p e uti c C o m bi n ati o n of Dr o n a bi n ol ( s y nt h eti c 9- 
t etr a h y dr a c a n n a bi n ol) a n d  P al mit o yl et h a n ol a mi d e f or T o ur ett e S y n dr o m e  
 
N C T 0 3 0 6 6 1 9 3  
I R B A p pr o v al D at e: 2 7 S e pt e m b er  2 0 1 7  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 1  of 161
YALE  UNIVERSITY
HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
Application to Involve  Human Subjects in Biomedical  Research 
100 FR1 (2015-2)
SECTION I:  ADMINISTRATIVE  INFORMATION
Title of Research Project:
Examining the  Efficacy  of a Therapeutic Combination of Dronabinol  (synthetic 9-tetrahydracannabinol) and 
Palmitoylethanolamide for Tourette Syndrome
Principal  Investigator:
Michael  H. Bloch, MD, MSYale Academic Appointment:
Associate Professor
Department: Child Study  Center
Campus Address:
230 South Frontage Rd.,  New Haven, CT 06520 NIHB-205
Campus Phone: 203-745-9921 Fax: 203-785-7611 Pager: 203-745-9921 E-mail:
Michael.bloch@yale.edu
Protocol  Correspondent Name  & Address (if  different  than PI):
Angeli  Landeros-Weisenberger, MD, 230 South Frontage Rd, New Haven, CT 06520 SHM-I-371
Campus Phone: 203-737-4809 Fax: 203-737-5104 E-mail: angeli.landeros@yale.edu
Yale Cancer  Center CTO  Protocol  Correspondent Name  & Address (if  applicable ):
Campus Phone: Fax: E-mail:
Business Manager:
Campus Phone : Fax : E-mail
tment:
  
Investigator Interests:
Does the principal  investigator, or do any research personnel  who are  responsible for the design, 
conduct  or reporting of this project  or any of their  family members (spouse  or dependent  child) 
have an incentive or interest, financial  or otherwise, that  may affect  the protection of the human 
subjects involved in this project, the  scientific objectivity of the research or its integrity?  Note:  
The Principal  Investigator (Project  Director), upon consideration of the individual’s role and 
degree of independence in carrying out the work, will  determine who is responsible for the 
design, conduct, or  reporting  of the research.Faculty Advisor:(required if PI is a student, 
resident, fellow or other trainee) NA
Campus Address:
Campus Phone: Fax: Pager: E-mail:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 2  of 161See Disclosures and Management  of Personal  Interests in Human Research  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/policies/index.html#COI
 Yes  No
Do you or does anyone on the research team who is determined by you to be responsible for the 
design, conduct or  reporting  of this research have  any patent (sole right  to make, use or sell an 
invention) or copyright  (exclusive rights to an original  work) interests related to this research 
protocol?
 Yes  No
If yes to either question above, list names of the investigator or responsible  person:
The Yale  University Principal  Investigator, all Yale University co-investigators, and all Yale 
University individuals who are responsible for the design, conduct  or reporting of research must  
have a current  financial  disclosure form on file with the University’s Conflict  of Interest  Office. 
Yale New  Haven Hospital  personnel  who are listed as co-investigators on a protocol  with a Yale 
University Principal  Investigator must  also have a current  financial  disclosure form  on file with 
the University’s Conflict  of Interest  Office. If this has not been done, the  individual(s) should  
follow this link to the  COI Office Website to complete the form:  http://www.yale.edu/coi/
NOTE:  The requirement  for maintaining a current  disclosure form  on file with the University’s 
Conflict  of Interest  Office  extends primarily to Yale  University and Yale-New Haven Hospital  
personnel.  Whether or  not they are required to maintain a disclosure form with the  
University’s Conflict of Interest Office, all investigators and individuals deemed otherwise  
responsible by the PI who are listed on the protocol  are required to disclose to the  PI any 
interests that are specific to this protocol.
SECTION II: G ENERAL  INFORMATION
1.Performing Organizations:  Identify the hospital, in-patient  or outpatient  facility, school or 
other agency  that will serve  as the location of the research. Choose all  that apply:
a.Internal  Location[s] of the Study:
Magnetic  Resonance  Research Center Yale University PET  Center
(MR-TAC) YCCI/Church Street  Research Unit  (CSRU) 
Yale Cancer Center/Clinical  Trials Office  (CTO) YCCI/Hospital  Research Unit  (HRU)
Yale Cancer Center/Smilow YCCI/Keck Laboratories
Yale-New Haven Hospital Yale-New Haven Hospital—Saint  Raphael  Campus 
Cancer Data  Repository/Tumor Registry
Specify Other  Yale  Location:  Yale  Child Study Center
b.External  Location[s]:
APT Foundation, Inc. Haskins Laboratories 
Connecticut  
Mental  Health Center John B. Pierce  Laboratory, Inc.
Clinical  Neuroscience Research Unit  (CNRU) Veterans Affairs Hospital, West Haven 
Other Locations, Specify: International  Research Site
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 3  of 161(Specify location(s)):
c. Additional  Required Documents (check all that apply): N/A
*YCCI-Scientific  and Safety Committee (YCCI-SSC) Approval  Date:
*Pediatric Protocol  Review Committee (PPRC) Approval  Date:
*YCC  Protocol  Review Committee (YRC-PRC) Approval  Date:
*Dept. of Veterans Affairs, West Haven VA HSS Approval  Date:
*Radioactive Drug Research Committee (RDRC) Approval  Date:  
YNHH-Radiation 
Safety  Committee (YNHH-RSC) Approval  Date:  
Yale University RSC (YU-RSC) Approval  Date:  
Magnetic Resonance Research Center PRC (MRRC-PRC)     Approval  Date:
*Nursing Research Committee Approval  Date:
YSM/YNHH Cancer Data  Repository (CaDR) Approval  Date:  
Dept. of Lab Medicine  request  for services or specimens form
Imaging on  YNHH Diagnostic Radiology equipment request  form (YDRCTO request) found 
at http://radiology.yale.edu/research/ClinTrials.aspx)
*Approval  from  these committees is required before final  HIC approval  is granted. See instructions 
for documents required for initial submission and approval  of the  protocol. Allow sufficient  time for 
these requests. Check with the oversight  body for their time requirements.
2.Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all  
follow-up and data  analysis activities.
3 years
3.Research Type/Phase: (Check all that apply)
a.Study Type
Single Center Study  
Multi-Center Study
Does the Yale  PI serve as the PI of the  multi-site study?  Yes No 
Coordinating Center/Data Management
Other:
b.Study Phase N/A
Pilot Phase  I Phase  II Phase  III Phase  IV 
Other (Specify)
4.Area of Research: (Check all  that apply)  Note that  these are overlapping definitions and 
more than one category may apply to your research protocol. Definitions for the following 
can be found in the  instructions section 4c:
Clinical  Research:  Patient-Oriented Clinical  Research:  Outcomes and 
Clinical  Research:  Epidemiologic and Behavioral Health Services 
Translational  Research #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”) Interdisciplinary Research 
Translational  Research #2 (“Bedside-to-Community”) Community-Based Research
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 4  of 1615.Is this study a clinical  trial?  Yes No
NOTE the  current  ICMJE (International  Committee of Medical  Journal  Editors) definition of a 
clinical  trial: “any research study that prospectively assigns human participants or groups of humans 
to one or more health-related interventions to evaluate the effects on health outcomes.” Health-related 
interventions include any intervention used to modify a biomedical  or health-related outcome  (for 
example, drugs, surgical  procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, dietary interventions, and 
process-of-care changes). Health outcomes include any biomedical  or health-related measures 
obtained in patients or participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events”
If yes, where is it registered?
Clinical  Trials.gov registry 
Other (Specify )
Registration of clinical  trials at their initiation is required by  the FDA, NIH  and by the ICMJE.
If this study  is registered on clinicaltrials.gov, there is new  language in the consent  form  and compound 
authorization that should be  used.
For more information on registering clinical  trials, including whether your trial must be  
registered, see the YCCI webpage, http://ycci.yale.edu/researchers/ors/registerstudy.aspx 
or contact  YCCI at 203.785.3482)
6.Does the Clinical  Trials Agreement  (CTA) require  compliance  with ICH GCP (E6)?  
Yes No
7. Will  this study have a billable service?  A billable service is defined as any  service rendered to 
a study subject  that, if he/she was not on a study, would normally generate a bill from either 
Yale-New  Haven Hospital or Yale Medical  Group to the patient  or the patient’s insurer. The 
service may or may not be  performed by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by  
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital  or Yale Medical  Group (examples include 
x-rays, MRIs, CT scans, specimens sent  to central labs, or specimens sent  to pathology). Notes:
1. There is no distinction made whether the service  is paid for by the subject  or their insurance  
(Standard of Care) or by  the study’s funding mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally  
includes new  services or orders placed in EPIC  for research subjects.
Yes No
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical  research 
management  system, for Epic to appropriately route research related charges. Please contact  
oncore.support@yale.edu
8.. Are there  any procedures involved in this protocol  that will be performed at  YNHH or one of 
its affiliated entities?   Yes No X If  Yes, please answer questions a through c and note 
instructions below.  If  No, proceed to Section III.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 5  of 161a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that  you will  
perform?
b.Will  you be using  any new equipment  or equipment that  you have not used in the  past for 
this procedure?
c.Will  a novel  approach using existing equipment  be applied?
If you answered “no” to question 8a, or "yes" to question 8b or c, please  contact  the YNHH 
Department  of Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before  commencing with your 
research protocol.
Please note  that if this protocol  includes Yale-New Haven Hospital  patients, including patients at  
the HRU, the Principal  Investigator and any co-investigators who are physicians or mid-level  
practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, psychologists and speech pathologists) who may have direct 
patient  contact  with patients on YNHH  premises must  have medical  staff appointment  and 
appropriate clinical  privileges at YNHH. If  you are uncertain whether the  study  personnel  meet  
the criteria, please telephone the Physician Services Department  at 203-688-2615. By  signing 
this protocol  as a PI, you attest  that you and any co-investigator who  may have patient  contact  
has a medical staff appointment  and appropriate clinical  privileges at YNHH .
SECTION III:  FUNDING , RESEARCH  TEAM  AND TRAINING
1.Funding Source: Indicate all  of the  funding source(s) for this study. Check all  boxes that  apply. 
Provide information regarding the external  funding source.  This information should include  
identification of the agency/sponsor, the funding mechanism  (grant  or contract), and whether 
the award is pending or has been awarded. Provide  the M/C# and Agency name (if grant- 
funded).  If the  funding source  associated with a protocol is “pending” at  the time of the 
protocol  submission to the HIC  (as is the case for most NIH submissions), the PI should note 
“Pending” in the  appropriate section of the  protocol application, provide the M/C# and 
Agency name (if grant-funded) and further note  that University (departmental) funds support  
the research (until  such time that  an award is made).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 6  of 161PI Title  of  Grant Name  of  Funding Source Funding Funding Mechanism
Michael  H. 
Bloch, MD, MSExamining the  
Efficacy of a 
Therapeutic  
Combination of 
Dronabinol  (synthetic
9-  
tetrahydracannabinol) 
and 
Palmitoylethanolamide  
for Adults with 
Tourette SyndromeTherapix Biosciences 
Ltd.
PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
IRB Review fees are  charged for projects funded by Industry or Other For-Profit  Sponsors. 
Provide the Name and Address of the Sponsor Representative to whom  the invoice should be 
sent.  Note: the  PI’s home department will  be billed if this information is not provided.
Send IRB Review Fee  Invoice  To:
Name:  Dr. Adi  Zuloff-Shani, PhD 
Company:  Therapix Biosciences Ltd.
Address:  5 Azrieli  Center (Square Tower) 27 Fl., Tel-Aviv 6702501, Israel
2.Research Team:  List  all members of the research team. Indicate under  the affiliation column whether 
the investigators or study personnel  are part  of the Yale faculty  or staff, or part of the faculty  or staff 
from  a collaborating institution, or  are not formally affiliated with any institution. ALL  members of 
the research team MUST complete Human Subject Protection Training (HSPT) and Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Training before they may be listed on the  
protocol. See NOTE  below.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 7  of 161
NOTE: The  HIC will  remove from the protocol  any personnel  who have not completed required training.
Name Affiliation: Yale/Other  
Institution 
(Identify)NetID
Principal  Investigator Michael  H. Bloch, MD, MS Yale MHB32
Role: Co-Investigator James F. Leckman, MD Yale JFL2
Role: Co-Investigator Angeli  Landeros-Weisenberger, MD Yale ALW495
Role: Study Personnel Jessica A. Johnson, BS Yale JAJ62
Role: Study Personnel Shilpa Telang, M.D. Yale SB2558
Role: Study Personnel Baris Olten, M.D. Yale BO222
A personnel  protocol  amendment will need to be submitted when training is completed.
SECTION IV:
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR/F ACULTY ADVISOR/  DEPARTMENT  CHAIR AGREEMENT
As the principal  investigator  of this research project, I certify that:
The  information provided in this application is complete  and accurate.
I  assume  full responsibility for the protection of human subjects and  the proper conduct  of the 
research.
Subject  safety will  be of paramount  concern, and every effort  will be made  to protect  subjects’ 
rights and welfare.
The  research will  be performed according to ethical  principles and in compliance  with all  federal, 
state and local  laws, as well as institutional  regulations and  policies regarding the  protection of 
human subjects.
All  members of the  research team will be kept  apprised of research goals.
I  will obtain approval  for this research study and any subsequent  revisions prior to my initiating the 
study or any change  and I will obtain continuing approval  of this study prior to the  expiration date  
of any approval  period.
I  will report  to the HIC  any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated problems involving risk to 
participants.
I  am in compliance  with the  requirements set  by the  University and qualify to serve  as the  
principal  investigator of this project  or have  acquired the appropriate  approval  from  the 
Dean’s Office  or Office  of the  Provost, or the  Human Subject  Protection Administrator at 
Yale-New Haven Hospital, or have  a faculty advisor.
I  will identify a qualified successor should I cease my role  as principal  investigator and facilitate  a 
smooth transfer of investigator responsibilities.
_Michael  H. Bloch, MD, MS 10/06/16  
PI Name  (PRINT) and Signature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 8  of 161As the faculty advisor  of this research project, I certify that:
The  information provided in this application is complete  and accurate.
This project  has scientific  value  and merit  and that the student  or trainee  investigator has the  necessary 
resources to complete  the project  and achieve  the aims.
I  will train the student  investigator in matters of appropriate  research compliance, protection of human 
subjects and proper conduct  of research.
The  research will  be performed according to ethical  principles and in compliance  with all  federal, state  and 
local  laws, as well  as institutional  regulations and policies regarding the  protection of human subjects.
The  student  investigator will obtain approval  for this research study  and any subsequent  revisions prior to 
initiating the study or revision and will obtain continuing approval  prior to the expiration of any approval  
period.
The  student  investigator will  report  to the HIC  any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated 
problems involving risk to participants.
I  am in compliance  with the  requirements set  forth by the University and  qualify to serve  as the faculty 
advisor of this project.
I  assume  all of the  roles and responsibilities of a Principal  Investigator even though the student  may be  
called a PI.
Advisor Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
Department Chair’s Assurance Statement
Do you know of any real  or apparent  institutional  conflict  of interest  (e.g., Yale ownership of a 
sponsoring company, patents, licensure) associated with this research project?
Yes (provide  a description of that  interest  in a separate letter  addressed to  the HIC.) 
No
As Chair, do  you have  any real or apparent  protocol-specific conflict  of interest  between yourself and 
the sponsor of the research project, or its competitor or any interest  in any intervention and/or method  
tested in the project  that might  compromise this research project?
Yes (provide  a description of that  interest  in a separate letter  addressed to the HIC) 
No
I assure the  HIC that the principal  investigator and all  members of the research team  are qualified by 
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation in the conduct  of this research 
trial. I also assure that the  principal  investigator has departmental  support  and sufficient  resources to  
conduct  this trial  appropriately.
Chair Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
Department
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 9  of 161YNHH  Human Subjects Protection Administrator Assurance  Statement
Required when the  study is conducted solely at YNHH by YNHH  health care providers.
As Human Subject  Protection Administrator (HSPA) for YNHH, I certify that:
I have  read a copy  of the protocol  and approve it being conducted at  YNHH.
I agree to notify the IRB  if I am aware of any real  or apparent  institutional  conflict  of interest.
The principal  investigator of this study is qualified to serve as P.I. and has the support  of the hospital 
for this research project.
YNHH HSPA Name  (PRINT) and Signature Date
SECTION V: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement of  Purpose: State the  scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be  tested.
This is  an investigator-initiated proof of concept  study with the purpose to examine the safety, 
tolerability and feasibility of Dronabinol  (synthetic  9-THC) and PEA for the treatment  of adults 
with Tourette syndrome.
2.Background: Describe the  background information that  led to the plan for this project. 
Provide references to support the expectation of obtaining useful  scientific  data.
Tourette  syndrome  (TS) affects slightly less than 1% of  school-age  children and 0.5% adults.(1) The 
tics associated with TS can have significant  effects on the academic  and social  development  of children as 
well as affecting their overall  self-esteem  and mental  health. Although the majority of children experience  
a decrease  in their tics during adolescence, the worst  symptoms are usually experienced by adults with 
intractable  TS.(2, 3)
There  are significant  limitations to  the available  treatments for TS in terms of both efficacy  and 
side-effects. Currently, two antipsychotic  agents are the only FDA-approved medications for TS: 
haloperidol  and pimozide. Atypical  antipsychotic  agents are also widely utilized in the treatment  of TS even 
though only risperidone  has demonstrated efficacy in multiple, placebo-controlled clinical  trials.(4-6) 
Antipsychotic  agents, although the most  effective  agent  in reducing tics, are not utilized as a first-line  
treatment  for tics (especially in children) because  of the  significant  side-effects associated with their use.(4-
6)  New treatments for TS  are urgently needed.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 10  of 161
Figure  2: Diagram  of CB 1  role in Dopaminergic  
Motor  Circuits of Basal Ganglia. GABAergic  
inhibitory pathways are  represented in blue  and 
glutamatergic  excitatory pathways in red. Modulatory  
dopaminergic  connections are  indicated in green.
CB 1, cannabinoid receptor  type  1; TRPV 1, transient  
receptor potential vanilloid type  1; D1, dopaminergic  
receptor type  1; D2, dopaminergic  receptor type 2; 
GPe, external  globus pallidus;  GPi, internal globus  
pallidus;  STN, subthalamic  nucleus;  SNpc, substantia  
nigra pars compacta;  SNpr, substantia nigra pars 
reticulata. [13]Several  lines of evidence  suggest that cannabis (Cannabis sativa) and 9- 
tetrahydracannabinol  (9-THC) may be effective  in the treatment of tic disorders. Anecdotal  case 
reports have long suggested that smoking marijuana  may improve  tic
 symptoms.(7-9) Standardized 
interviews of 64 consecutive  TS patients seeking treatment  in Germany reported  that 82% of TS patients 
experienced a reduction or complete  remission of tic symptoms when smoking cannabis.(10) 9- 
tetrahydracannabinol  (9-THC), the principal  active  constituent  of cannabis has been studied in 
randomized, placebo-controlled trials in TS.(10) A double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial of 5- 
10mg of 9-THC  in 12 adults with TS, demonstrated a significant  reduction in measures of tic severity and 
global  improvement  with 9-THC  compared to placebo. Tourette  syndrome  Symptom  List (TSSL) ratings 
of tic severity were  significantly reduced when subjects were  given 9-THC  (12.5 11.0 point) compared 
to placebo (2.5 7.0 points) (p=0.015).(11) A 6-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 24 adults 
with TS also demonstrated a significant  benefit  of 9-THC  compared to placebo. Figure  1 depicts the 
change  in TSSL  scores during the course  of the 6-week trial. Subjects randomly assigned to 9-THC  
experienced significant  reduction of their tic symptoms compared to placebo after the first 2 weeks of 
treatments        that         continued
throughout  the  6-week trial. These  
improvements vanished when 
subjects discontinued 9- 
THC.(12) The treatment  effect  
size observed for 9-THC  was 
considerably larger than that 
observed in placebo-controlled 
trials of currently available  
treatments for TS.
CB1 receptors may  be involved in the pathophysiology  of 
TS: Biological  evidence  also suggests that the brain cannabinoid 
system  may contribute to the pathophysiology of TS and other 
movement  disorders.(13, 14) CB1 receptors and endocannabinoids 
are highly expressed in the basal  ganglia  and appear to have an 
important  role in modulating dopaminergic  motor circuits.(14) 
Specifically CB1 receptors are expressed presynaptically on 
medium-spiny neurons -- striatal  neurons projecting in both the 
direct  (substantia  nigra  pars reticulata  and the globus pallidus pars 
interna) and indirect  (globus pallidus pars externa) pathways.(15) 
Activation of CB1 receptors in combination with D1 receptors of 
the direct  pathway serves to decrease  adenyl  cyclase  release  within 
projection neurons. By contrast, activation of CB1 receptors in 
combination with D2 receptors serves to stimulate  adenyl  cyclase  
in projection neurons of the indirect  pathway.(14) Figure  2 
illustrates the mechanisms by which endocannabinoids play an 
important  role in motor inhibition. Although CB1 receptors are 
not expressed by most  striatal  GABAergic  interneurons, CB1 
receptors are expressed by parvalbumin positive  interneurons and 
some  cholinergic  interneurons.(15) Parvalbumin positive  and 
cholinergic  striatal  interneurons have been demonstrated to be 
significantly reduced in post mortem  studies of TS patients.(16)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 11  of 161The major limitations of  both cannabis and dronabinol  use, is the adverse  psychoactive  side effects, 
they induce  in higher doses. The psychoactive  effects of 9-THC  are primarily mediated by its activation 
of CB1G-protein coupled receptors, which result  in  a decrease  in the concentration of the second messenger 
molecule  cAMP through inhibition of adenylate  cyclase  (3). Thus, in  order to harness the therapeutic  
potential  of 9-THC  for patients with Tourette's syndrome, there  is a need to reduce  the accompanied 
adverse  effects.
We hope  to use the entourage  effect  to deliver the therapeutic  benefits of Dronabinol  (synthetic
9-THC) in  reducing tics with decreased psychoactive  effects using Palmitoylethanolamide  (PEA). The 
basic  idea of the entourage  effect  is that cannabinoids within the cannabis plant  work together, or possess 
synergy, and affect  the body in a mechanism  similar to the body’s own endocannabinoid system. 
Palmitoylethanolamide  (PEA) is a lipid messenger known to mimic  several  endocannabinoid-driven 
activities although it does not bind the classical  CB receptors. Based on an activity enhancement  of other 
physiological  compounds, by potentiating their affinity for a receptor or by inhibiting their metabolic  
degradation, PEA may indirectly stimulate  the effects of both phyto- or endocannabinoids, either by its role 
as an agonist  of the transient  receptor potential  vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1), peroxisome  proliferator-activated 
receptor-α  (PPAR-α ) and the cannabinoid receptors(6). PEA capacity to exert  'entourage  effects' is derived 
from its ability to affect  multiple  targets within the body, to improve  the absorption of active  ingredients 
and to minimize  adverse  side effects (7).
One of  the most  important  compounds to be affected by PEA is endocannabinoid anandamide  
(AEA). Sub-effective  dose of AEA, when co-injected with PEA, significantly decreases blood pressure. 
PEA also enhances the hypotensive  responses to both AEA and meth AEA (8). AEA induces vasorelaxation 
only in the presence  of PEA, and the PEA potentiating occurs through TRPV1 receptors. The discovery of 
anandamide  came  from research into CB1 and CB2, as it was inevitable  that a naturally occurring 
(endogenous) chemical  would be found to affect  these  receptors. As PEA potentiate  the effect  of AEA, it 
is plausible  to assume  it may exert  the same  effect  on cannabis derived phytocannabinoids such as 9-THC. 
In a murine  model  of behavioral  and pain perception it was shown that addition of PEA to THC reduced 
the deleterious behavioural  side effects of THC and potentiate  the analgesic  effect  of THC sub-effective  
dose (Brener et  al, 26th symposium  of the  ICRS, 2016)
PEA has  been shown to possess anti-craving effects in cannabis dependent  patients, is efficacious in 
the treatment  of withdrawal  symptoms, produces a reduction of cannabis consumption and is effective  in 
the prevention of cannabis induced neurotoxicity and neuro-psychiatric  disorders. Moreover, by combining
9-THC  therapy with  PEA, one can overcome  the over-sensitization/irritation that the 9-THC  alone  causes 
to the respiratory tract, by PEA ability  to stabilize  mucosal  mast cells and prevent  their degranulation. Thus 
combination of 9-THC  with PEA, may be proved to be by far more  safe and effective  than 9-THC  alone .
Dronabinol:
Dronabinol  is  a cannabinoid designated chemically as (6aR-trans)6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3- 
pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol. CAS registry number 1972-08-03.
Dronabinol  is  the INN for a pure isomer of THC, (-)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol  and is the active  
ingredient  in dronabinol  capsules, is synthetic  delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol  (delta-9-THC). Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  is also a naturally occurring component  of Cannabis sativa  L. (Marijuana).
Synthesized dronabinol  is  marketed as Marinol  (a registered trademark of Solvay Pharmaceuticals). 
Dronabinol  is also marketed, sold and distributed by PAR  Pharmaceutical  Companies under the terms of a 
license  and distribution agreement  with SVC pharma  LP, an affiliate  of Rhodes Technologies.
. 9-THC  is  the primary psychoactive  component  of the Cannabis plant, and is the most  notable  
cannabinoid. 9-THC  possesses activities as a psychoactive  agent, analgesic,  muscle  relaxant, 
antispasmodic, bronchodilator, neuroprotective  antioxidant  and antipruritic  agent.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 12  of 1619-THC  has affinity to  both CB1 and CB2 classical  cannabinoid receptors. Classical  cannabinoid receptors 
(CB1 and CB2) are 7 transmembrane  G-protein couple  receptors (known as GPCRs) negatively coupled to 
adenylyl  cyclase  and positively coupled to MAPKs such as extracellular signal  related kinases 1 and 2 
(ERK1/2) through Gi/o proteins (17). CB1 is highly expressed in neurons within the hippocampus, basal  
ganglia, cerebellum, cortex, thalamus and periaqueductal  gray but poorly expressed in the respiratory center 
of the brainstem, hence  the reason for lack of respiratory depression seen with cannabis toxicity. CB2 is 
expressed on immunocytes including microglia  and mast cells. CB2 is poorly expressed in the CNS (100- 
fold lower expression than CB1) but rapidly upregulated in microglia  and neurons with neural  injury and 
inflammation (18).
In the  United States, Marinol  is a Schedule  III drug, available  by prescription, considered to be non-narcotic  
and to have a low  risk of physical  or mental  dependence. Marinol  has been approved in US and in Canada  
in the treatment  of anorexia  in AIDS patients (19-21), as well as for refractory nausea  and vomiting of 
patients undergoing chemotherapy 19,22,24). It  was proved as safe  and effective  for these  uses (19).
Nabiximols (Sativex) is  a combination of Cannabidiol  (CBD) and THC (at a ratio of 1:1). This product  was 
approved in Canada  as a mouth spray to alleviate  neuropathic  pain, spasticity, overactive  bladder, and other 
symptoms of multiple  sclerosis. This product  is also approved in additional  countries in Europe  (including 
UK) as well  as Israel.
9-THC  was investigated in additional  clinical  studies evaluating its use in  a variety of clinical  indications 
other than the approved ones (see Appendix 1) (20-22). These  include  evaluation of 9-THC  efficacy on 
pain reduction in different  patient’s populations (multiple  sclerosis (23), amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis 
(ALS) (24), fibromyalgia  (25), cancer, abdominal  hysterectomy (26), headaches (27), spinal  cord injury, 
and muscle  spasticity), obstructive  sleep apnea  (28), internal  pressure  in end-stage  open-angle  glaucoma  
(29, 30), dementia-related neuropsychiatric  symptoms (NPS), progressive  inflammatory brain disease, 
antiemetic  effect, colonic  motility and sensation.
In MS  patients, the effect  of 9-THC  on various symptoms (such as muscle  spasticity, illness progression, 
and urge incontinent  episodes) was also investigated in different  clinical  trials. In cancer patients, the effects 
of 9-THC  on chemosensory alterations, appetite, quality of life and anorexia  were  also investigated. Side- 
effects associated with 9-THC  include  mood changes, dizziness, drowsiness, confusion, trouble  
concentrating, feeling "high," warmth or tingly feeling, an exaggerated sense  of well-being, anxiety, 
lightheadedness, headache, red eyes, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain,  diarrhea, sleep problems 
(insomnia), clumsiness, lack of coordination, weakness, unsteadiness or insomnia. Serious, uncommon 
side-effects associated with 9-THC  include seizure, paranoia, disorganized/unusual  behavior and 
tachycardia.(31)
PEA:
PEA is  a primary fatty acid amide  found in egg yolk, and as such, it falls under the  definition of “egg 
yolk-derived phospholipids”  (As an ingredient  in term  and preterm  infant  formula), which  are listed as 
GRAS ingredients (GRN No. 411). Furthermore, PEA can be considered as a derivate  of fatty acid ethyl  
ester (from  anchovy or menhaden oil), which are  listed as GRAS ingredient  (GRN No. 494).
PEA content  can also be attributed to FDA List  of Indirect  Additives Used in Food Contact  Substances 
under general  Main Term:  ANIMAL OIL FATTY ACID AMIDES, Doc  No. 7625, CAS RN 977139-08-
4. In addition,  PEA is listed under the Code  of Federal  Regulations Title 21, 21CFR175.105 (Revised as 
of April  1, 2014) SUBCHAPTER B--FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION PART  175 -- INDIRECT  
FOOD ADDITIVES:  ADHESIVES AND COMPONENTS OF COATINGS.
In Europe, PEAPure  is categorized as food supplement  and marketed as such. Other PEA derived 
products (Normast®  and Pelvilen®) are  approved via  a decentralized procedure  in few EU countries 
(Italy, Spain, Slovakia, Germany and the Netherlands) as a food for medical  purposes.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 13  of 161An additional  PEA product  (Palmidrol) has been approved nationally in  Spain and Italy as an anti- 
inflammatory agent  (CAS 0000544-31-0).
Clinical  research on PEA started in  the 1960s and 1970s, especially in the Czech Republic. PEA, at that 
time under the brand name  ‘Impulsin’ was indicated for prevention of flu and respiratory diseases and 
immune  system  enhancement  (32-36). In general, PEA has been  shown to be effective, tolerable  and safe. 
PEA has been submitted for clinical  relevancy as an analgesic, as a treatment  for various chronic  pain states. 
More than 30 various clinical  trials have been conducted, shedding light on clinical  relevance  of PEA as a 
standalone  agent  or as a part of combinational  therapy. It is of high importance  that these  trials demonstrate  
no relevant  side-effects and no drug-drug interactions, when PEA has been administered. Full range  of PEA 
doses had been implemented, most  notably 300 mg or 600 mg for up to two times a day (1200 mg/day) and 
up to two months. PEA has been  found to be effective in many pain states. Clinically addressed pain states 
include  refractory neuropathic  pain, temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJD), Costen syndrome, pains 
due to lumbosciatic  problems, low back pain, diabetes-induced carpal  tunnel  syndrome, entrapment  
neuropathy (with significant  improvement  in neurophysiological  parameters (distal  motor latency)).
When used in  combination with other agents, such as Pregabalin (Lyrica, Pfizer), classical  NSAIDs, 
transpolydatin or oxycodone, PEA has been found to potentiate  the analgesic  effect  of the mentioned drugs. 
Efficacy of PEA as part of multimodal  analgesic  therapy in patients with low back  pain has been 
demonstrated. PEA enhances the analgesic  effects of other compounds. Visual, analog scale  (VAS) is a 
psychometric  response  scale  which can be  used in questionnaires, has been found to lower from  7 to mean
2.5 in  most  cases of PEA use. All neurophysiological  parameters improved on PEA. In patients suffering 
from MS and neuropathic  pain and treated with PEA 300 mg twice  daily, 14 of 20 patients were  full 
responders. Significant  decrease  of spasticity (as measured via modified Ashworth scale) and pain after 
stroke  due to treatment  with PEA was also observed. PEA improves pain and nerve  function in patients 
suffering from  chemotherapy induced neuropathy. Pain significantly decreased and nerve  function, as 
measured by laser evoked LEP, increased significantly. In 20 patients undergoing thalidomide  and 
bortezomib treatment  for multiple myeloma, changes in neurophysiological  measures indicate  that PEA 
exerted a positive  action on myelinated fiber groups. PEA, possibly by moderating mast cell hyperactivity, 
relieved conduction blocks secondary to endoneural  edema. In a severe  condition such as painful  
neuropathy associated with multiple  myeloma  and chemotherapy, a safe substance  such as PEA provides 
significant  restoration of nerve  function. In glaucoma  patients, PEA effects have been investigated on 
intraocular pressure  (IOP) in primary open  angle  glaucoma  (POAG) and ocular hypertension (OH). 
Systemic  administration of PEA reduces IOP in patients with glaucoma  and ocular hypertension. PEA could 
be a valuable  tool for the  treatment  of glaucoma.
Moreover, PEA based  topical  treatment  for conditions such as atopic  eczema, atopic  dermatitis, contact  
allergic  dermatitis, facial  post-herpetic  neuralgia  and pruritus have shown to be an effective  remedy. PEA 
based creams inhibit  ultraviolet  light-induced inflammation and DNA damage  in human skin. PEA as an 
analgesic  can be utilized in dentistry and has been used in study for Impacted Lower Third Molar Surgery. 
Administering PEA improves the postoperative  course—in terms of pain—after lower third molar 
extraction.
Thus, PEA treatments by  means of oral (systemic) or topical  administration prove  to be effective  and safe, 
with no observable  side effects, and no noticed drug-drug interactions. Appendix 2 provides a 
comprehensive  list of previous trials conducted using PEA. In these trials no adverse  events have been 
reported that  exceed the  rate observed with placebo controls.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 14  of 1613.Research Plan: Summarize  the study design and research procedures using non-technical  
language that  can be readily understood by someone outside  the discipline. Be sure to 
distinguish between standard of care vs. research procedures when applicable, and 
include any flowcharts of visits specifying their  individual  times and lengths. Describe  
the setting in which the  research will  take place.
Overview
We propose  a  12-week, investigator-initiated, open-label  trial of a therapeutic  combination of Dronabinol  
and PEA in 18 adults with Tourette  syndrome. Subjects will receive  Dronabinol  and PEA in combination 
for the duration of the trial. Our goal for this pilot study is to (1) provide  initial  safety, feasibility and 
tolerability data on both Dronabinol  and PEA in a TS population and (2) provide  data in order to make  a 
more  informed decision regarding the appropriate  sample  size and design of a larger clinical  trial to prove  
efficacy (i.e. sample  size and trial duration in large  efficacy trial of the Dronabinol /PEA combination in 
TS).
Subjects
Eighteen adults will be recruited through the TS/OCD Clinic  at the  Yale  Child Study  Center. The Yale 
Child Study Center  has a nearly three-decade  history of successfully recruiting for pharmacological  trials 
of TS. We will additionally recruit  through email  blast through local  TS chapters and by contacting local  
providers who treat adults with TS. We will additionally contact  adult  subjects who recently completed 
other treatment  trials for TS at our site and agreed to be contacted for future  trials. Subjects will be 
compensated $500 for their participation.
Interventions
Subjects will be titrated up on Dronabinol  dose  during the first week of the  trial (2.5mg Dronabinol  for 3 
days and then 5mg Dronabinol  for 4 days increasing to 10mg Dronabinol  for the remainder of the trial). 
Dronabinol  will only be increased to 10mg at the week 1 assessment  if the subject  is tolerating the 5mg 
dose of Dronabinol  and the Dronabinol  may be  reduced based on patient  side-effects. Subjects will  be 
assigned to receive  two 400mg tablets of PEA daily for all  12 weeks. See  pages 9-12 of this application 
for a detailed description of previous human use, known risks, and data  addressing dosage(s), interval(s), 
route(s) of administration, and any other factors that  might  influence  risks for both Dronabinol  and PEA.
Assessments
Pre-study  screening procedure: After an  initial  phone  screen to rule out obvious exclusions from  the study 
protocol, potential  subjects will have an initial  evaluation that will be performed by a multidisciplinary 
clinical  team. In addition  to a standard clinical  evaluation consisting of history, and mental  status exam, 
subjects will receive  a clinical  diagnostic  interview using the Structured Clinical  Interview of DSM-IV 
(SCID). Additional  rating scales will assess severity of tic symptoms and common comorbid symptoms 
such as OCD, ADHD, depression and anxiety severity which are  listed below.
Baseline Assessments Medical  Assessments Rating scales
SCID
Psychiatric  History  
General  Medical  History 
Chart  review of Med HxVital  Signs, ECG 
Physical  Exam  
Mental  Status Exam  
Baseline  Labs
Urine Tox and Preg.YGT SS PUTS
Y-BOCS Connors 
HAM-D HAM-A 
CGI AERS
 
TSSL
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 15  of 161Outcome  Measures:
Improvement  in  Tic Severity -- Yale Global  Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) (Total  Tic Score)
Improvement  of Premonitory Urges -- Premonitory Urge  for Tics Scale  (PUTS)
Self-Report  of Tic Severity – Tourette  Syndrome  Symptom  List (TSSL)
OCD Severity -- Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive  Scale (Y-BOCS)
ADHD severity -- Connors Adult  Attention Deficit  Hyperactivity Rating Scale  (Connors)
Depression Severity-- Hamilton Rating Scale  for Depression (HAM-D)
Anxiety Severity -- Hamilton Rating Scale  for Anxiety (HAM-A)
Overall  Improvement  -- Clinical  Global  Improvement  Scale (CGI)
Adverse  Effects -- Adverse  Events Rating Scale  (AERS)
Safety Assessments:
A medical  assessment  including vital signs, ECG, physical  exam, routine  blood tests  indicating physical  
health and urine  drug screen and pregnancy test will be completed prior to study enrollment. These  safety 
assessments will be repeated every 2 weeks throughout  the trial. Additionally, subjects will be assessed for 
any adverse  effects of medication using the  adverse  events rating scale  at every study visit.
Within Trial  Assessment Procedure:
The table  below indicates the clinical  ratings scheduled planned for the trial. Subjects will be evaluated 
every week during
 the course  of the trial. Clinical  ratings of symptom  severity will be performed by a 
research investigator. A study physician will review laboratory values, assess medication side effects and 
assess study medication compliance.
Study Week Ope n Exte  nsion
Measure Scre e ningBase line 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 Every 4 Weeks
Yale Global Tic Severity Scale X X X X X X X X X X
Premonitory Urge Scale X X X X X X X X X X Tic Severity
Tourette Syndrome Severity List X X X X X X X X X X
Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale X X X X X X X X X
Connors ADHD  Rating Scale X X X X X X X X
Hamilton Depression Scale X X X X X X X X
Hamilton Anxiety Scale X X X X X X X XSeverity of 
Common 
Comorbid 
DisordersClinician-Rated Global Improvement X X X X X X X X X
SCID X
Psychiatric Medication History XPsychiatric 
AssesmentMental Status Exam X
Medical History X
Current Medication List X X
Physical Exam X X X X X X
12 Lead  ECG X X X X X X X X XMedical 
Assesment
Vital Signs X X X X X X X X X
Adverse Events Rating Scale X X X X X X X X X
Urine Toxicology X X X X X X X X X
Urine Pregnancy X
Electrolytes X X X X X X X X
LFTs X X X X X X X X
PT/PTT X X X X X X X XSafety
BUN/Cr X X X X X X X X
CompliancePill Counts X X X X X
Assignment  to THC/PEA combination  for 12 weeks . Subjects  will receive  
2.3mgTHC/ 518mg PEA for 3 days  then 5mg THC/ 518mg PEA 3 days  and 
then 10mg THC/518mg PEA for the remainder of the 10 week trial.10mg THC/518mg 
PEA for an 
additional  24
Weeks.
Extension Phase:
Subjects who report  an improvement  in  the initial  12-week trial will be allowed to continue  on the study 
medication (Dronabinol /PEA combination) free of charge  for 6 months as long as they continue  to complete  
clinical  assessments every 4 weeks and test  positive  for cannabis on urine  toxicology screen (indicating
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 16  of 161compliance  with study  medication). They will be compensated $25 for each follow-up assessment  at the 
conclusion of their participation in the trial.
Feasibility
James Leckman and the Yale  Child Study  Center have nearly a three-decade  history of successfully 
recruiting for pharmacological  studies of Tourette  syndrome.(37-39) We have recently completed a 10- 
subject, uncontrolled trial of EPI-743, in the treatment  of adults with Tourette  syndrome. We also had been 
recruiting successfully for a placebo-controlled crossover trial of a Fatty acid amide  hydrolase  (FAAH)- 
inhibitor before  it was placed on hold due to clinical  concerns with these  medications as a class 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). The inclusion/exclusion criteria  are extremely similar between the two trials and thus 
we suspect  a large  proportion of the subjects completing the EPI-743 and FAAH-inhibitor studies to be 
eligible  to enroll  in the current  trial. Based on this large  number of prevalent, research-interested patients 
we expect  to meet  recruitment  goals for the  current  trial.
4.Genetic Testing   N/A
A.Describe
i. the  types of future  research to be conducted using the materials, specifying if  
immortalization of cell  lines, whole exome  or genome sequencing, genome  wide  
association studies, or animal studies are planned
ii. the  plan for the collection of material  or the conditions under which material  will 
be received
iii.the  types of information about  the donor/individual  contributors that  will be 
entered into a database
iv.the  methods to uphold confidentiality
B.What  are the  conditions or procedures for sharing of materials and/or distributing for 
future research projects?
C. Is widespread sharing of materials planned?
D.When  and under what conditions will  materials be stripped of all  identifiers?
E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials at  any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers 
that connect  them  to their materials?
i. How will  requests to withdraw materials be handled (e.g., material  no longer 
identified:  that is, anonymized) or material  destroyed)?
F.Describe the  provisions for protection of participant privacy
G.Describe the  methods for the security of storage  and sharing of materials
5.Subject Population: Provide  a detailed description of the  types of human subjects who will  
be recruited into this study.
The subject  population will include  adults with significant  tic symptoms that have not  previously 
responded to evidence-based treatments for TS. Subjects will include  interested patients from the 
TS/OCD clinic, as well as eligible  subjects who respond to the clinicaltrials.gov website posting. 
Additionally, subjects will be recruited via email  blast through local TS chapters and by contacting 
local  providers who treat adults with TS. Furthermore, contact  will be made with adult  subjects 
who have recently completed other treatment  trials for TS at the clinic  and agreed to be contacted 
for future trials.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 17  of 1616.Subject classification: Check off all  classifications of subjects that  will be specifically 
recruited for enrollment  in the  research project. Will subjects who may require additional  
safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the  study?  If so, identify the population of 
subjects requiring special  safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.
Children Healthy Fetal  material, placenta, or dead fetus 
Non-English Speaking Prisoners Economically disadvantaged persons 
Decisionally Impaired Employees Pregnant  women and/or fetuses
Yale Students Females of childbearing potential
NOTE:  Is this research proposal designed to enroll children who are  wards of the  state as 
potential  subjects? Yes No (If yes, see Instructions section VII #4 for further 
requirements)
7.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What are  the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or 
exclusion?
Inclusion Criteria:
Adult between 18-60 years of age
Meet  DSM-5 criteria  for the  diagnosis of Tourette  syndrome
Significant  current  tic symptoms:  YGTSS total  tic score  greater than or equal  to 22 at baseline
On stable  psychiatric  medication regimen for a minimum  of 4 weeks prior to beginning the trial
Accepted method of birth control
Exclusion Criteria:
Comorbid bipolar disorder, psychotic  disorder, substance  use disorder, developmental  disorder or 
intellectual  disability (IQ<70)
Recent  change  (less than 4 weeks) in other medications that have potential  effects on tic severity 
(such as alpha-2 agonists (guanfacine, clonidine  or prazosin), SSRIs, clomipramine, naltrexone, 
lithium, anxiolytics, topiramate, baclofen etc.). Medication change  is defined to include  dose 
changes or medication discontinuation.
Recent  change  in behavioral  treatment  for Tourette  syndrome  or comorbid conditions (i.e. OCD) 
within the  last 4 weeks or initiation of behavioral  therapy for tics within the last 12 weeks.
Taking any co-medications (over the counter or prescription), food supplements/additives which 
can have  a drug interaction with dronabinol  or PEA.
Positive  pregnancy test  or drug screening test
History of cannabis dependence
Significant  Medical  Comorbidity
History of hypersensitivity to any  cannabinoid or sesame  oil
8.How will  eligibility be determined, and by whom?
Subjects will first undergo a phone  screen to initially determine  eligibility. Information collected 
during the phone screen  will be used only in the event that the subject  continues to participate  in 
the study.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 18  of 161After determining initial  eligibility, research staff will provide  a  brief description of the research 
and the subject  will undergo the screening procedures described previously. Once  all screening 
procedures have commenced, research staff, along with the principal  investigator, will review all 
relevant  information and determine, based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, if  the subject  is 
eligible to complete the remaining study procedures.
9.Risks: Describe the  reasonably  foreseeable  risks, including risks to subject  privacy, 
discomforts, or inconveniences associated with subjects participating in the research.
A medical  assessment  including vital  signs, ECG, physical  exam, routine  blood tests indicating physical  
health and urine  drug screen and pregnancy test  will be completed prior to study enrollment. These  safety 
assessments will  be repeated every 2 weeks throughout  the trial. Additionally, subjects will  be assessed 
for any adverse  effects of medication using the adverse  events rating scale  at every study visit.
The risks associated with the  study include  those related to: 1) screening, 2) phlebotomy, 3)
Dronabinol  and 4) confidentiality.
**Note** In previous trials  involving PEA, no adverse  events have been reported that have  
exceeded the rate observed with placebo controls.  The absence  of serious  side effects or drug- 
drug interactions have been recorded is most likely due to the fact that PEA is an endogenous 
modulator in various foods such as eggs and milk.
1) Screening
All subjects will undergo  a Structured Clinical  Interview for DSM-IV conducted by a 
research assistant, as well
 as a psychiatric  evaluation by the principal  investigator or one of 
the co-investigators. The diagnostic  interviews may cover issues which are stressful  to a 
person, for example, questions regarding the experience  of paranoid thoughts or social  
isolation.
2) Phlebotomy
A medical  assessment  including vital signs, ECG, physical  exam, routine blood tests 
indicating physical  health and urine drug screen and pregnancy test will  be completed prior 
to study  enrollment.  Bruising, infection and thrombosis are all  possible consequences of 
phlebotomy.  The medical assessments will  occur every two weeks during the 12-week 
trial.  A total  of approximately 3 tbsp of blood will be drawn over this time  period, an 
amount  which is well  within the  Red Cross blood standards.
3) Dronabinol  (synthetic 9THC)
In various studies investigating 9THC  in the treatment  of patients with AIDS and/or 
cancer, 9THC  has been co-administered with a variety of mediations (e.g., cytotoxic  
agents, anti-infective agents, sedatives, or opioid analgesics) without  resulting in any 
clinically significant  drug/drug interactions.  However, it is possible 9THC  may interact  
with other mediations through metabolic  and/or pharmacodynamics mechanisms.
Additionally, potential  added central  nervous system depression may occur if 9THC  is 
used in combination with alcohol  or other CNS depressants.  Dronabinol  is abusable and 
controlled [Schedule  III (CIII)] under the Controlled Substance Act. Psychological  and
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 19  of 161physiological  dependence  have been noted in healthy individuals receiving 9THC, 
however addiction is uncommon and has only been seen after prolonged high dose 
administration.  In clinical  trials with 9THC  in patients with AIDS, no abuse, diversion or 
systemic change in personality or social functioning were observed despite  the inclusion of 
a substantial  number of patients with a  past history of drug abuse.  Side-effects associated 
with 9THC  include mood changes, dizziness, drowsiness, confusion, trouble 
concentrating, feeling "high," warmth or tingly  feeling, an exaggerated sense of well-being, 
anxiety, lightheadedness, headache, red eyes, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, 
diarrhea, sleep problems (insomnia), clumsiness, lack of coordination, weakness or, 
unsteadiness.  Serious, uncommon side-effects associated with 9-THC  include seizure, 
paranoia, disorganized/unusual  behavior and tachycardia. Previous studies have shown 
that PEA is effective in the prevention of cannabis (a substance  containing 9THC) 
induced neurotoxicity and neuro-psychiatric disorders. Furthermore, the ability  of PEA to  
stabilize mucosal  mast  cells and prevent  their degranulation allows one  to overcome the  
over-sensitization/irritation that  the 9THC  alone causes to the  respiratory tract. Thus the 
combination of 9THC  with PEA may be prove  to be more safe and effective than 9THC  
alone. Currently, approval has been granted from the FDA for the use of 9THC  in the  
treatment  of anorexia associated with weight  loss in patients with AIDS, as well  as nausea 
and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy in patients who have failed to respond 
adequately to conventional  antiemetic treatments.
4) Confidentiality
Participating in research may involve a loss of privacy and confidentiality.  However, as 
will be explained below, extensive  procedures have been put in place to secure such 
information.
10.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner  in which the  above-mentioned risks will  be 
minimized.
1) Screening
Subjects will be carefully screened in order  to exclude those with any significant  medical  
or psychiatric conditions.  The screening process is rigorous, including a SCID, a 
psychiatric and medical  evaluation by a psychiatrist, laboratory tests, ECG, etc., designed 
to screen out unsuitable subjects.
2) Phlebotomy
Due to  the risks associated with phlebotomy  procedures, subjects who have donated 
blood within eight  weeks of the present  study will be excluded. Subjects will  be 
informed that  they  should not give blood for at  least eight  weeks prior to the beginning of 
the study or after completing the trial. Additionally, blood will  be drawn by trained 
nurses or phlebotomists using standard sterile phlebotomy procedures.
3)9THC
The FDA in  1986 granted approval  for the use of synthetic 9THC  in the treatment  of 
anorexia associated with weight  loss in patients with AIDS, as well  as nausea and 
vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy  in patients who have failed to respond 
adequately to conventional  antiemetic treatments. 9-THC  is also an active  ingredient  in 
nabiximols (Sativex patient  leaflet), a specific  extract  of Cannabis, that  has been 
approved in the  UK for the alleviation of neuropathic pain, spasticity, overactive  bladder,
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 20  of 161and other symptoms in multiple sclerosis patients. Furthermore, 9-THC  has been 
investigated in a  number of clinical  trials evaluating its pain reducing  effects in various 
patient  populations including multiple sclerosis (23), amyotrophic lateral  sclerosis (ALS) 
(24), fibromyalgia (25), cancer, abdominal  hysterectomy (26), headaches (27), spinal  
cord injury, and muscle spasticity, as well as its symptom  reducing effects in obstructive  
sleep apnea  (28), internal  pressure in end-stage open-angle  glaucoma (29, 30), dementia- 
related neuropsychiatric  symptoms (NPS), progressive inflammatory brain  disease, 
antiemetic effect, colonic  motility and sensation.  The risks and benefits of 9THC  and 
the specific study procedures will  be explained to all  participants. After a thorough 
background of 9THC  has been provided, subjects will  undergo careful  physical, 
psychiatric and laboratory examinations to assure  the clinical  appropriateness and safety 
of their participation in the study.  Close clinical  monitoring will  ensure the 
appropriateness and safety of subjects’  continued participation. As stated previously, the 
combination of 9THC  with PEA may prove  to be more safe and effective  than 9THC  
alone.
A subject  may withdraw consent  and stop the clinical  trial at any time.  Subjects may be 
discontinued on the study medication if they develop serious adverse symptoms that  are 
known side  effects of dronabinol including cardiac  issues (tachycardia >100bpm or 
hypotension <100/65), physical  symptoms (urinary retention, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal  pain) or psychiatric symptoms (psychotic  symptoms or anxiety) that does not  
resolve with a  decrease in dosage of the study  medication. The principal  investigator of 
the trial  may  also withdraw a subject  from the trial  at any time if he believes the study 
medication poses a significant  health risk to the  participant.
4) Confidentiality
All subject  information will  be kept  as confidential  as possible. Only members of the  
investigative research team with appropriate  IRB/HIC  and HIPPA training will  have  
access to identifying patient information and study data.  Data  will be maintained and 
secured in locked file cabinets, on a  password protected computer or on an encrypted 
flash drive, all  within a locked room.  A numbering  coder will  be used to assign a  unique 
identifier to each subject.  The code number will  not be based on any information that  
could be used to identify subjects (for example, social security number, initials, birth 
date, etc.)  As part  of the  study procedures, some information about  subject  participation 
in this study  will become part of their Connecticut  Mental  Health Center (CMHC) 
medical  record.  If a  subject does not already  have a medical  record at  CMHC, one will  
be made for their visit.  Furthermore, if a subject  has been a  patient at  YNHH at  any time, 
his or her previous medical  records of other visits or admissions will  become available to 
the researchers and to the  staff of CMHC  when the  information collected for this research 
is added into their medical  record.  Information will  be stored as per HIPPA  guidelines.
Information will not be dispensed to anyone outside of this research project without  prior 
written authorization from the subject.  If it is brought  to the attention of the researchers 
that a child is being abused or neglected, or that  there is a risk of harm  to the subject  or 
others, this information will  be reported to the appropriate authorities. Records will  be 
maintained according to FDA Good Clinical  Practice  guidelines to ensure protection of 
confidentiality and security of the records.  If requested, participants will  be provided
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 21  of 161with a  letter explaining the possibility of a positive drug test  for cannabis, to their 
employer.
11.Data and Safety Monitoring Plan: Include  an appropriate Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based on the investigator’s risk assessment  stated below. (Note:  the HIC  will make  
the final  determination of the risk to subjects.) For more information, see the Instructions, 
page 24.
a.What is the investigator’s assessment  of the  overall risk level  for subjects
participating in  this study?
The investigator has assessed  the overall  risk level  for subjects participating in the 
study to be moderate.
b.If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment  of the overall risk 
level  for the children participating in this study?
N/A
c. Include an appropriate Data  and Safety  Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-templates/biomedical.html  for
i. Minimal  risk
ii. Greater than minimal
Moderate  Risk DSMP
1.Personnel  responsible  for the safety review and its frequency:
The principal  investigator will be  responsible  for monitoring the data, assuring protocol  compliance, and 
conducting the safety reviews at the specified frequency of a minimum  of every 6 months (including when 
reapproval  of the protocol  is sought). During the review process, the principal  investigator will evaluate  
whether the study should continue  unchanged, require  modification/amendment, or close  to enrollment. 
The principal  investigator, the IRB and the Human Investigation Committee  (HIC) all have the authority to 
stop or suspend the  study or require  modifications.
2.The risks associated with the  current study are  deemed moderate  for the  following reasons:
(choose  those  that apply)
1. We  do not view the  risks associated with the  Dronabinol  or PEA as minimal.
2. Given the  now established safety and validity of the  current  use of Dronabinol  and PEA, we  do 
not view the  proposed studies as high risk.
Although the  proposed study has been assessed as one of moderate  risk, the potential  exists for anticipated 
and/or unanticipated adverse  events, serious or otherwise, to occur since  it is not possible  to predict  with 
certainty the absolute  risk in any given individual  or in advance  of first-hand experience  with the proposed 
study methods. Therefore, we provide  a plan for monitoring the data and safety of the proposed study as 
follows:
I. Attribution of Adverse  Events:
Adverse  events will be  monitored for each subject  participating in the study and attributed to the study 
procedures/design by the principal  investigator (Michael  H. Bloch) according to the following 
categories:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 22  of 161a.) Definite:  Adverse  event  is  clearly related to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s). b.) Probable:  
Adverse  event  is likely  related to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s). c.) Possible:  Adverse  event  
may be related to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s). d.) Unlikely:  Adverse  event  is likely not to be 
related to the investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s). e.) Unrelated:  Adverse  event  is clearly not related 
to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).
II. Plan  for Grading Adverse  Events:
The following scale  will be used in grading the severity of adverse  events noted during the  study:
1. Mild adverse  event
2. Moderate  adverse  event
3. Severe
III. Plan  for  Determining Seriousness of Adverse  Events: Serious Adverse  Events:
In addition  to  grading the  adverse  event, the principal  investigator will determine  whether the adverse  
event  meets the criteria  for a Serious Adverse  Event  (SAE). An adverse  event  is considered serious if 
it:
1.is life-threatening OR
2. results in  in-patient  hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization OR
3. results in  persistent  or significant  disability or incapacity OR
4. results in  a congenital  anomaly or birth defect  OR
5. results in  death OR
6. based upon  appropriate  medical  judgment, may jeopardize  the subject’s health and  may require 
medical  or surgical  intervention to prevent  one of the other outcomes listed in this definition, OR
7. adversely affects the risk/benefit  ratio of the  study
An adverse  event  may be graded  as severe  but still not meet  the criteria  for a Serious Adverse  Event. 
Similarly, an adverse  event  may be graded as moderate  but still meet  the criteria  for an SAE. It is 
important  for the PI to consider the grade  of the event  as well as its “seriousness”  when determining 
whether reporting to the  IRB is necessary.
IV. Plan  for  reporting Reportable  Adverse  Events and other  unanticipated problems involving 
risks to subjects or others to the  IRB
The principal  investigator will  report  the following types of events to the IRB:  a) adverse  events that 
are serious or life-threatening AND unanticipated (or anticipated but occurring with a greater frequency 
than expected) AND possibly, probably or definitely related to the drug/device/intervention;  and b) 
other unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others.
These  adverse  events or  unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be reported 
to the  IRB  in accordance  with IRB  Policy 710, using the  appropriate  forms found on the website.
V. Plan  for reporting adverse  events to co-investigators on the study, as  appropriate  the 
protocol’s research monitor(s), e.g., industrial  sponsor, Yale  Cancer  Center  Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee  (DSMC), Protocol  Review Committee  (PRC), DSMBs, study 
sponsors, funding and regulatory agencies, and regulatory and decision-making bodies.
For the  current  study, the following individuals, funding, and/or regulatory agencies will be notified 
(choose  those  that apply):
All  Co-Investigators listed on the protocol
Yale  Cancer Center Data  and Safety Monitoring Committee  (DSMC)
National  Institutes of  Health
Food and Drug Administration (Physician-Sponsored IND #131864 )
The principal  investigator (Michael  H. Bloch) will conduct  a  review of all adverse  events upon completion 
of every study subject. The principal  investigator will evaluate  the frequency and severity of the adverse  
events and determine  if modifications to the  protocol  or consent  form  are required.
d. For multi-site studies for which the  Yale PI serves as the lead investigator:  N/A
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 23  of 161i. How will  adverse  events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or 
others be  reported, reviewed and managed?
ii.What  provisions are in place for management  of interim results?
iii.What  will  the multi-site process be for protocol  modifications?
12. Statistical  Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that  support  the study design.
Go/No-Go Decision for Larger  Multi-Site  Phase  III Trial
The important  go/no-go decision  is whether the trial, which is not a true efficacy trial but rather a Phase  II 
pilot, provides sufficient  encouragement  to move  forward for a Phase  III trial. We propose  a series of 
benchmarks for feasibility, tolerability and preliminary efficacy in an initial  trial for go/no-go decision- 
making. Feasibility:  Average treatment  compliance  with the Dronabinol /PEA combination of at least 80% 
(via pill counts and positive  urine  drug screen) during the trial. Tolerability:  Attrition due to AEs of 4 or 
fewer subjects receiving treatment. Safety:  Four or fewer subjects have a greater than 20% worsening of 
tic symptoms while in the trial. Efficacy: An average  improvement  of YGTSS severity of greater than 10% 
during the course  of the  12-week trial.
Assuming all  go/no-go decision points are met in the trial, we will additionally use the initial  pilot data to 
design the most  appropriate  phase  III trial design. Specifically, we will examine  difference  in tic severity 
as assessed by YGTSS (across all subjects and specifically those  assigned to active  medication) between 
week 0 (baseline) and week 12 (endpoint) to determine  the time at which treatment  benefits likely plateau.
SECTION VI: RESEARCH  INVOLVING  DRUGS, B IOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS, P LACEBOS AND
D
EVICES
If this section (or one  of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, state N/A and delete the rest  of the 
section.
A. DRUGS, BIOLOGICS and RADIOTRACERS
1.Identification of Drug, Biologic or Radiotracer: What is (are) the name(s) of the drug(s) 
biologic(s) or radiotracer(s) being  used?  Identify whether FDA approval  has been granted and for what  
indication(s).
In addition to PEA, other names of the drug include: Palmitoylethanolamide, C18H37NO2, PeaPure, 
Normast, Impulsin, MimyX, N-(2-hydroxyethyl)palmitate and N-palmitoylethanolamine. FDA 
approval  has not been granted for the use of PEA.  However, PEA is a  primary fatty acid amine found 
in egg yolk.  Therefore, it  falls under the definition of egg yolk-derived phospholipids, which are listed 
on the FDA list of “Generally  Recognized as Safe” with a designated number  GRN No. 411. Content  
of PEA can also be  seen under the FDA List  of Indirect  Additives Used in  Food Contact  Substances 
under general  main term:  ANIMAL  OIL  FATTY ACID AMIDES, Doc  No. 7625, CAS RN 977139- 
08-4.
Other names for 9THC include:  9-Tetrahydracannabinol, Dronabinol, Marinol  and C21H30O2.  Currently, 
approval  has been granted from  the FDA for the use of 9THC in the treatment  of anorexia  associated with 
weight  loss in patients with AIDS, as well as nausea  and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy in 
patients who have  failed to respond adequately to conventional  antiemetic  treatments.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 24  of 161All protocols which utilize a drug, biologic or radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by, the FDA, 
or a radiotracer regulated by the RDRC, must provide the following information:
a.What  is the Investigational  New Drug (IND) number assigned by the FDA?  131864
b.Who  holds the  IND?  Michael  H. Bloch MD, MS
c. All  protocols which utilize a radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by the FDA must 
provide the IND number: N/A 
Alternatively, use of the  investigational  radiotracer may be under RDRC/RSC  oversight:  (check 
if appropriate)    N/A 
For all  investigational  radiotracers, attach a  copy of the RDRC/RSC  application (for 
radioisotopes used in the  PET Center, PET Center personnel  may complete this step)
Go to http://rsc.med.yale.edu/login.asp?url=myApps.asp.  When you have logged in,  complete  
the application and attach a copy to this submission.
Alternatively, an exemption from IND filing requirements may be  sought for a  clinical  
investigation of a  drug product that  is lawfully marketed in the United States. If there  is no IND and 
an exemption is being sought, review the following categories and complete  the category  that applies 
(and delete the inapplicable categories):
Exempt Category 1
The clinical  investigation of a  drug product that  is lawfully marketed in the United States can be 
exempt from  IND regulations if  all of the following are yes:
i.The intention of the  investigation is NOT to report to the  FDA as a well-controlled study in support 
of a new indication for  use or to be used to support any  other significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug. Yes No
ii.The drug that  is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the  investigation is NOT to support a significant  change in the advertising for the 
product. Yes No
iii.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration or dosage level  or use in populations  
or other factor that  significantly increases the  risks (or decreases the acceptability  of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product. Yes No
iv.The investigation will be  conducted in compliance  with the requirements for institutional  (HIC) 
review and with the requirements for informed consent  of the FDA regulations (21 CFR  Part 50 
and 21 CFR  Part 56).      Yes       No
v.The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and  
charging for investigational  drugs. Yes No
Exempt Category 2 (all  items i, ii, and iii must  be checked to grant  a category 2 exemption)
i. The clinical  investigation is for an in vitro diagnostic biological  product that  involves one or 
more of the following  (check all  that apply):
Blood grouping serum  
Reagent  
red blood cells 
Anti-human globulin
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 25  of 161ii. The diagnostic test  is intended to be used in a diagnostic procedure that  confirms the 
diagnosis made by another, medically established, diagnostic product or procedure;  and
iii.The diagnostic test  is shipped in compliance with 21 CFR  §312.160.
Exempt Category 3
The drug  is intended solely for tests in vitro or in laboratory research animals if shipped in  
accordance with 21 CFR  312.60
Exempt Category 4
A clinical  investigation involving use of a placebo if the investigation does not otherwise  
require submission of an IND.
2.Background Information: Provide a  description of previous human use, known risks, and data  
addressing dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration, and any other factors that  might  
influence risks. If this is the first  time this drug is  being administered to humans, include relevant  
data on animal  models.
See pages 9-12 under “Background”  for this information.
3.Source: a) Identify the  source  of the drug or biologic to be  used. 
Therapix Biosciences Ltd.
b) Is the  drug provided free of charge to subjects? Yes No 
If yes, by whom?
Therapix Biosciences Ltd.
4.Storage, Preparation and Use: Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability  information, 
and for parenteral  products, method of sterilization and method of testing sterility and 
pyrogenicity.
Dronabinol  will be stored in a well-closed container and in a cool environment  between 8° and 
15°C (46°  and 59°F) such as a refrigerator, as these are the storage  recommendations from  the 
FDA. Additionally, arrangements will  be made with the CMHC  investigational  pharmacy 
regarding proper  storage, preparation and stability  information for both Dronabinol  and PEA.
Check applicable  Investigational  Drug Service utilized:
YNHH  IDS Yale Cancer Center
CMHC Pharmacy West Haven VA
PET  Center None
Other:
Note: If  the YNHH IDS (or comparable service at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be  utilized, explain in 
detail  how the PI will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 26  of 1615.Use of  Placebo: Not applicable  to this research project
If use  of  a placebo is planned, provide a justification which addresses the  following:
a. Describe the  safety  and efficacy of other available  therapies. If there  are no other 
available therapies, state  this.
The following  therapies are currently  available  for the treatment  of TS: 1) Neuroleptic  
medications, 2) atypical  neuroleptics, 3) α2-receptors agonists and 4) habit  reversal  training 
(HRT).
b. State the  maximum total length of time a participant may receive placebo while on the study.
c. Address the greatest  potential harm  that may come to a participant  as a result of receiving 
placebo.
d. Describe the  procedures that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo.
6.Use of  Controlled Substances:
Will this research project  involve the use of controlled substances in human subjects?
Yes No  See HIC  Application Instructions to view  controlled substance listings.
If yes, is the use of the  controlled substance considered:
Therapeutic:  The use of the controlled substance, within the context of the research, has the 
potential  to benefit  the research participant.
Non-Therapeutic:  Note, the use of a controlled substance in a non-therapeutic research study  
involving human subjects may require that the investigator obtain a Laboratory Research License. 
Examples include  controlled substances used for basic  imaging, observation or biochemical  
studies or other non-therapeutic purposes. See  Instructions for further information.
7.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure Not applicable to this project
Are subjects provided the opportunity  to continue  to receive the study drug(s) after the study has 
ended?
Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under which continued access to study drug(s) may apply  
as well  as conditions for termination of such access.
Subjects who report  an improvement  in the  initial  12-week trial will  be allowed to continue on 
the study medication (Dronabinol /PEA combination) free of charge  for 6 months as long  as they  
continue to complete clinical  assessments every  4 weeks and test  positive  for cannabis on urine 
toxicology screen (indicating compliance with study medication).  They will be compensated
$25 for each follow-up assessment  at the conclusion of their participation in the trial.
No If no,  explain why this is acceptable.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 27  of 161B. DEVICES 
N/A
1. Are there  any investigational  devices used or investigational  procedures performed at  Yale- 
New Haven Hospital  (YNHH) (e.g., in the YNHH Operating Room or  YNHH Heart  and 
Vascular Center)?   ☐Yes   ☒No If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements:
a.A  YNHH New Product/Trial  Request  Form  must be  completed via EPIC:  Pull  down the  
Tools tab in the EPIC Banner, Click on Lawson, Click on “Add new” under the New 
Technology Request Summary and fill out the  forms requested including the “Initial  
Request Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary, “ and attach any other pertinent 
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;  and
b. Your request  must be  reviewed and approved in writing by the  appropriate  YNHH 
committee before  patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive the investigational  device  
or investigational  procedure.
2. What  is the name of the device to be studied in this protocol?  
Has this device been FDA approved? Yes No
If yes, state for what  indication.
3.Background Information: Provide a  description of previous human use, known risks, and 
any other  factors that  might  influence risks. If this is the first  time this device is being used in 
humans, include relevant  data on animal  models.
4.Source:
a) Identify the  source  of the device to be  used.
b)Is the  device provided free of charge to subjects? Yes No
5.  What  is the PI’s assessment  of risk level  (significant  or non-significant) associated with the 
use of the device?
Significant Risk (SR) Device Study: A study of a device that presents a potential for serious 
risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a participant and 1) is intended as an implant;  2) is used in  
supporting or sustaining human life;  or otherwise  prevents impairment  of human health;  3) is of 
substantial  importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating or treating disease, or otherwise prevents
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 28  of 161impairment  of human health; or 4) otherwise presents a potential  for serious risk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of a  participant.
Significant  Risk Devices require  an Investigational  Device Exemption (IDE) issued by the FDA. 
What is the IDE number assigned by the FDA?
Did the  FDA approve this  IDE  as Category A (experimental/investigational) or as Category B
(non-experimental/investigational)?  
Who
 holds the  IDE?
Non-Significant Risk (NSR) Device Study: A study of a device that does not meet  the 
definition for a  significant  risk device and does not present  a potential  for serious risk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of participants.  Note that  if the HIC concurs with this determination, an IDE  is 
not required.
6.Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE: There are abbreviated requirements for an IDE  and 
there also are exemptions to the requirement  for an IDE. See the criteria in the HIC  
Application Instructions, Section VI.B.4 at  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/resources/docs/100FR1aHICProtocol_Application_Instructions5-   
25-11.pdf to  determine if these pertain to this study.
Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE  – If criteria set  forth in the HIC  Application Instructions 
are met, copy  and paste the completed relevant  section from  the Instructions into this application.
7. Investigational  device accountability:
a. State how  the PI, or named designee, ensures that  an investigational  device  is used only in 
accordance with the  research protocol approved by the  HIC, and maintains control  of the 
investigational  device  as follows:
Maintains appropriate  records, including receipt  of shipment, inventory  at the 
site, dispensation or use by each participant, and final disposition and/or the return of the 
investigational  device  (or other disposal  if applicable):
Documents pertinent  information assigned to the  investigational  device  (e.g., date, quantity, batch 
or serial  number, expiration date if applicable, and unique code number):
Stores the investigational  device according  to the manufacturer's recommendations with respect  to 
temperature, humidity, lighting, and other environmental  considerations:
Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance  with applicable  
regulatory requirements:
Distributes the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 29  of 161SECTION VII: RECRUITMENT /CONSENT  AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES
1.Targeted Enrollment: Give the  number of subjects:
a. targeted for enrollment  at Yale for this protocol_18_
b.If this  is a multi-site study, give the total  number of subjects targeted across all
sites N/A_
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach copies of any recruitment  materials that  will be used.
Flyers Internet/Web Postings Radio
Posters Mass E-mail  Solicitation Telephone
Letter Departmental/Center Website Television
Medical  Record Review
Departmental/Center NewslettersDepartmental/Center Research Boards
Web-Based Clinical  Trial RegistriesNewspaper
YCCI Recruitment  database Clinicaltrials.gov Registry (do not send materials to HIC)
Other (describe):
3.Recruitment Procedures:
a. Describe how  potential  subjects will  be identified.
Subjects will be recruited through the TS/OCD Clinic  at  the Yale Child Study Center. Additionally, 
subjects will be contacted through email  blast through local  TS chapters and by contacting local  
providers who treat adults with TS. Furthermore, adult  subjects that have recently completed other 
treatment  trials for TS at the clinic and agreed to be contacted for future  trials will be recruited. Study 
information, along with the contact  phone number, will be posted on clinicaltrials.gov. The YCCI 
recruitment  database  and flyers will  also be  used.
b. Describe how  potential  subjects are  contacted.
Research staff will contact  adult  subjects who have recently completed other treatment  trials  for TS 
at the clinic  and agreed to be contacted for future  studies. All other potential  subjects will be asked 
to contact  the research staff through the advertisement  methods listed previously.
c.Who  is recruiting potential subjects?
The clinicians at the Yale TS/OCD (PI and/or co-investigators), as well as the study 
personnel, members of Dr. Bloch’s research team.
4.Screening Procedures
a.Will  email  or telephone correspondence be  used to screen potential subjects for 
eligibility prior to the potential subject  coming to the research office? Yes No
b.If yes, identify  below all health information to be collected as part of screening and 
check off any of the following HIPAA identifiers to be  collected and retained by the 
research team during this screening process.
HEALTH INFORMATION  TO BE COLLECTED:
A brief psychiatric and medical  history will be collected during  telephone  screening including Axis I 
diagnoses, medical  and neurologic diagnoses, as well  as recent  medication and psychotherapy
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 30  of 161changes. All information will  be stored in locked cabinets/password protected computer in an office  
that is locked. Information that  will breach subject confidentiality will  not be  shared. Rather, data will  
only be released upon written consent  of the subject and will  be available  for review by the Yale  
human Investigation Committee. We will  hold paper files for seven years at  which point they will be 
destroyed.
HIPAA identifiers:
Names
All geographic  subdivisions smaller than a  State, including:  street  address, city, county,  precinct, zip codes and their 
equivalent  geocodes, except  for the initial  three digits of a zip code if, according to the current  publicly-available data from  
the Bureau of the Census:  (1) the geographic  unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same  three  initial  digits contains  
more  than 20,000 people, and (2) the initial  three digits of a zip code for all such geographic  units containing 20,000 or fewer  
people is changed to 000.
Telephone  numbers  
Fax numbers
E-mail  addresses
Social  Security numbers  
Medical record  numbers
Health plan  beneficiary numbers  
Account  numbers
All elements of dates  (except  year) for dates  related to an individual, including:  birth date, admission date, discharge  
date, date of death, all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative  of such age, except that such ages  
and elements may be aggregated into a single  category of age 90 or older
Certificate/license  numbers
Vehicle  identifiers and serial  numbers, including license  plate  numbers  
Device  identifiers and serial  numbers
Web Universal  Resource  Locators (URLs)  
Internet  Protocol (IP) address numbers
Biometric  identifiers, including finger and  voice  prints   
Full face photographic  images  and any  comparable images
Any other  unique  identifying numbers, characteristics, or codes
5.Assessment of  Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team  have a direct  existing clinical  
relationship with any  potential subject?
Yes, all subjects
Yes, some of the  subjects  
No
If yes, describe the nature  of this relationship.
Subjects who have  been seen in the clinic  may be  recruited. Some  subjects may be referred for 
psychopharmacology consult. Other subjects may come  specifically because  of interest  in the  study. No subjects 
will be taken off current  medication or withdrawn from  ongoing therapy in order to participate  in the trial,  
unless the  current  medication is ineffective  or causes unacceptable  adverse  effects. Patients who are  not 
interested in the study will be treated in the usual  clinical  manner.
6. Request for  waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When requesting a waiver  of HIPAA Authorization 
for either the entire study, or for recruitment  purposes only. Note:  if you are  collecting PHI as part of 
a phone or email screen, you must request  a HIPAA waiver for recruitment  purposes.)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 31  of 161Choose one:
□For entire  study
☒ For recruitment  purposes only
□For inclusion of non-English speaking  subject if short  form  is being used
i.Describe  why it  would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for 
use/disclosure of this data;
A waiver of HIPAA authorized is being requested for recruitment  purposes only. 
Subjects will  be initially  recruited through word of mouth, TS advocacy organizations, 
physician referrals and internet  ads.  PHI such as name, telephone number and email  
addresses will  be needed to schedule initial  screening interviews.  It  would be  
impractical  to coordinate  initial  subject  enrollment  and recruitment  without  this data.
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be 
impracticable to obtain the subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this  
data;
Signed authorization is impractical, as the initial  screening patients recruited through 
advertisements or referral may occur  via phone or email.
By signing this protocol  application, the investigator assures that the protected 
health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been requested will not 
be reused or disclosed to any person or  entity other than those listed in this 
application, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of this research 
study, or as specifically approved for use in another  study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale 
HIPAA-Covered entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by subject  
name, purpose, date, recipients, and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be  
forwarded to the  Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.
7.Required HIPAA Authorization: If the research involves the creation, use or disclosure of 
protected health information (PHI), separate subject authorization is required under the  
HIPAA Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the  following forms are being  provided:
Compound Consent  and Authorization form  
HIPAA Research Authorization Form
8. Consent Personnel: List  the  names of all  members of the research team who will  be obtaining 
consent/assent.
Michael  H. Bloch, MD, MS, James F. Leckman, MD, Angeli  Landeros-Weisenberger, MD, and 
Jessica A. Johnson, BS.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 32  of 1619. Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent  will 
be obtained, including parental  permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure  
subjects’ independent  decision-making.
Investigators and/or research staff will  obtain consent during the initial  screening visit.  During 
this visit, all  aspects of the  study will be discussed and the  inclusion criteria  will be explained.
10.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the 
personnel  obtaining consent will  assess the potential  subject’s ability and capacity to consent  to the 
research being  proposed.
The consent  documents will  be reviewed verbally with the subject.  If for any reason, it becomes 
clear that  the subject cannot comprehend trial  design or procedures, they will not be enrolled in  
the study.
11. Documentation of Consent/Assent: Specify  the documents that  will be used during the 
consent/assent  process. Copies of all  documents should be  appended to the protocol, in the same  
format  that they will be given to subjects.
Compound Authorization Form
12. Non-English Speaking Subjects: Explain  provisions in place to ensure  comprehension for 
research involving non-English speaking  subjects. If enrollment  of these subjects is anticipated, 
translated copies of all  consent materials must be submitted for approval  prior to use.
This protocol  will not involve non-English speaking  subjects.
12(a) As a  limited alternative to the above requirement, will  you use the short form* for 
consenting process if you unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual interested 
in study  participation and the translation of the long form is not possible  prior to intended 
enrollment?
YES ☐ NO ☐
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short  form  translated into the  same  
language, then the  full consent form  should be translated into that  language  for use  the next time 
a subject  speaking that language is to be enrolled.
Several  translated short  form templates are  found on our website
at: http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-templates/biomedical.html. If the  translation of the short  
form  is not available on our website, then the  translated short  form  needs to be  submitted to the 
IRB office for approval  via amendment  prior to enrolling the subject. Please  review  the 
guidance and presentation on use of the short form  available on the HRPP website.
If using a short form without a translated HIPAA Research Authorization Form, please  
request a HIPAA waiver in the section above.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 33  of 16113. Consent Waiver: In certain circumstances, the  HIC  may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or  
a full  waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will  request  either a waiver of consent, 
or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete the appropriate section below.
Not Requesting a consent waiver  
Requesting a waiver of signed consent 
Requesting a full  waiver of consent
A.Waiver of signed consent: (Verbal  consent  from subjects will  be obtained. If PHI is 
collected, information in this section must match Section VII, Question 6)
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for Recruitment/Screening only
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please  address the following:
a.Would  the signed consent form  be the only record linking the subject  and the research?
Yes No
b. Does a  breach of confidentiality  constitute the  principal  risk to subjects?  
Yes No
OR
c. Does the research activity  pose greater than minimal  risk?
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted. Please note:  
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal  risk research activity
No
AND
d. Does the research include any activities that  would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for the Entire  Study (Note that  an information 
sheet  may be required.)
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please  address the following:
a.Would  the signed consent form  be the only record linking the subject  and the research?
Yes No
b. Does a  breach of confidentiality  constitute the  principal  risk to subjects?  
Yes No
OR
c. Does the research pose  greater than minimal  risk? Yes If you answered yes, stop. A 
waiver cannot  be granted. No
AND
d. Does the research include any activities that  would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
B. Full  waiver of consent: (No consent  from  subjects will  be obtained for the activity.)
Requesting a waiver of consent for  Recruitment/Screening only
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 34  of 161a. Does the research activity  pose greater than minimal  risk to subjects?
Yes If  you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted. Please note:  
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal  risk research activity
No
b.Will  the waiver adversely affect  subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
c.Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without  the waiver?
d. Where appropriate, how will  pertinent  information be  returned to, or shared with 
subjects at  a later date?
Requesting a full  waiver of consent for  the Entire  Study (Note: If PHI is 
collected, information here  must match Section VII, question 6.)
If requesting a full  waiver of consent, please  address the following:
a. Does the research pose  greater than minimal  risk to subjects?  
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.
No
b.Will  the waiver adversely affect  subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
c.Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without  the waiver?
d. Where appropriate, how will  pertinent  information be  returned to, or shared with 
subjects at  a later date?
SECTION VIII: P ROTECTION OF  RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
Confidentiality & Security of Data:
a. What  protected health information (medical  information along with the  HIPAA identifiers) 
about  subjects will  be collected and used for the research?
Research staff will collect  and use for research the  following private identifiable  
information from  subjects after consent  is obtained: name, age, address, telephone number,  
email  address, diagnosis, results from  the clinical  evaluation, clinical  rating scales, 
laboratory tests (blood and urine), electrocardiogram  (ECG) and physical  examination 
results. Scientific  reports will be written in aggregate  terms. Individual  responses  will not 
be described if the data is published.
b. How will  the research data be collected, recorded and stored?
Clinical  data, outcomes of diagnostic  instruments  and research data will be collected by 
the
 principal  investigator, co-investigators and study personnel. Collected information will 
be stored in a locked file cabinet  in a locked office. Data will be entered by study  personnel  
into a database, using a secured server, on a password protected computer in a locked 
office. Data may also be stored on an encrypted flash drive  that will be stored in a locked 
office.
c.How will  the digital  data be stored? CD DVD Flash Drive Portable Hard
Drive Secured Server Laptop Computer Desktop Computer Other
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 35  of 161d.What  methods and procedures will  be used to safeguard the  confidentiality and security of 
the identifiable  study data and the storage media  indicated above  during  and after the subject’s 
participation in the study?
Do all portable devices contain encryption software? Yes No
If no, see http://hipaa.yale.edu/guidance/policy.html
All data will  be  coded and stored in locked cabinets on a password protected computer, as 
well as an encrypted flash drive, in a locked office. Private identifiable information about  
individuals will not be shared. A numbering code will be used to assign a unique  identifier 
to each subject, that of which will be used for data entry stored on all secure  electronic  
devices. Information that will breach subject  confidentiality will only be released upon 
written consent  of the subject  and will be available for review by the Yale Human 
Investigation Committee. A Certificate of Confidentiality has been  obtained.
e.What  will be done  with the data when the research is completed?  Are there  plans to destroy  
the identifiable  data?  If yes, describe  how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If 
no, describe how the  data  and/or identifiers will  be secured.
Paper files will be held for  seven years after the completion of the study. After that  point, 
all paper files will be destroyed. As noted previously, archived computer  files will not 
have any identifying  patient information.
f. Who  will  have access to the protected health information (such as the research sponsor, the 
investigator, the research staff, all  research monitors, FDA, Yale Cancer Center Data  and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC), SSC, etc.)?  (please distinguish between PHI and de-identified 
data)
The principal  investigator, co-investigators and all  study personnel.
g.If appropriate, has a Certificate  of  Confidentiality  been obtained?
h.YES Are  any  of the study procedures likely to yield information subject  to mandatory 
reporting requirements?  (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable  diseases;  parent interview 
-incidents of child abuse, elderly abuse, etc.). Please  verify  to whom  such instances will need to  
be reported.
Yes.  Evidence  of abuse  or situations in which the  subject  is deemed a danger to self or 
others will  be reported.
SECTION IX: P OTENTIAL  BENEFITS
Potential  Benefits: Identify any benefits that  may be reasonably expected to result  from  the 
research, either to the  subject(s) or to society at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a 
benefit  in this context of the risk benefit  assessment.)
Subjects may benefit  from the medical  and psychiatric evaluations that  they will  receive while  
participating in the  study.  Patients will  receive a higher level of evaluation and care than routine  
treatment.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 36  of 161SECTION X: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND E CONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
1. Alternatives: What  other alternatives are  available to the study subjects outside of the research?
Subjects may continue  any current  mediations or therapy, those  of which might  include various 
antipsychotics or alpha-2 antagonists, as well  as habit reversal  therapy.  All  of these interventions 
have demonstrated efficacy for the treatment  of TS. Subjects will  be presented with the risks and 
benefits of each of the  treatments.  Additionally, subjects will  be offered any of the previously 
stated treatments that  they have not received prior to enrolling in the trial.
2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that  will be 
made to subjects, the amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this 
compensation.
Participants may be paid up to  $650 total as compensation for participating in this study. They will 
receive  a stipend payment  of $80 for the in-person screening assessment, $70 for the Baseline, 
Week 4, Week 8, and Week 12 assessments;  and $35 for the Week 1, Week 2, Week 6 and Week 
10 assessments. Additionally, They will receive  a stipend payment  of $25 for each clinical  follow- 
up assessment  that you complete. Follow-up assessments will take place every 4 weeks for 6 
months, after the end of the initial  12-week trial. Participants will receive  such payments only for 
those visits that  are completed.
If the  participant  travels more  than 50 miles each way in order to participate  in the study, they also 
may receive reimbursement  for reasonable  lodging and travel  expenses in addition to the stipend 
outlined above, up to a total of $200.00 per visit. Participants will need to provide receipts of your 
costs to the study coordinator.
According to the rules of the Internal  Revenue  Service  (IRS), payments that are made  to research 
subjects as a result of their participation in a  study  may be considered taxable income.
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the subject’s costs 
associated with participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that 
will be provided at  no cost to subjects.
Subjects will not  be charged for the study medications, clinical  assessments, services or laboratory 
tests directly related to the study. As previously noted, some  subjects may be seen for a clinical  
consultation at the Yale Child Study Center TS/OCD Clinic  piror to study entry. Clinical  
consultation will  be charged as part  of care in the usual  manner.
4. In  Case of Injury: This section is required for any  research involving  more than minimal  risk.
a. Will  medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs?
Yes
b. Where and from  whom  may treatment  be obtained?
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 37  of 161Initial  assessment  and appropriate  referral  will be  carried out by the research  team. The PI 
(Michael  H. Bloch, MD, MS) will  conduct  an assessment  to determine whether the events 
were  considered “related to the study treatment”  or not. The research team will participate  
in assessment  and appropriate  disposition  of the case. Disposition has taken  many forms:  
assumed ongoing clinical  care of the subject, securing of appropriate  referrals and 
discontinued involvement  in the patient’s care, as well as a combined approach in which 
care is provided in collaboration with appropriate  specialists. In all cases, the disposition 
is guided by the family’s preference  and clinical  judgment  regarding the subject’s best 
interest. Every reasonable effort  will be made  to incorporate  the interest  of the subject’s 
primary care provider.
c. Are there  any limits to the treatment  being provided?
The  intervention  will   focus  on  assessment   and  securing  an  appropriate  referral   in 
collaboration with the family and the primary care provider.
d.Who  will  pay for this treatment?
Assessment  and referral  services will  be  provided without  charge.  Ongoing care will be 
paid for by the family  or the family’s insurance  carrier.
e. How will  the medical  treatment  be accessed by subjects?
As previously  noted, the occurrence of an adverse  event  requiring care outside of the 
confines of the study will initially  be assessed by the research time. Referral’s to the 
family’s primary  care provider or other specialists will  be made in accordance with the 
nature of the subject’s problem.
**Note** In order to simply  and clarify  these  points in the consent  form, the following 
statement  was added to the compound authorization form:
“If you are  injured during your participation in this study, treatment  will be provided, but you or your 
insurance  company will be responsible  for the  cost of this treatment. There  are no provisions for financial  
compensation for injuries. You do not give  up any  of your legal  rights by signing this form.”
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 38  of 161REFERENCES
1. Scahill L, Sukhodolsky DG, Williams  SK, Leckman JF. Public  health  significance  of tic 
disorders  in children and  adolescents. Adv  Neurol. 2005;96:240-8.
2. Bloch  MH, Peterson BS, Scahill L, Otka J, Katsovich  L, Zhang H, et al. Adulthood  
outcome  of tic and obsessive-compulsive  symptom severity  in children with  Tourette  
syndrome. Arch Pediatr  Adolesc  Med. 2006;160(1):65-9.
3. Cheung MY, Shahed  J, Jankovic  J. Malignant Tourette  syndrome. Mov Disord. 
2007;22(12):1743-50.
4. Roessner  V, Plessen KJ, Rothenberger  A, Ludolph  AG, Rizzo  R, Skov  L, et al. European 
clinical guidelines  for Tourette  syndrome  and  other  tic disorders. Part II:  pharmacological 
treatment. Eur  Child  Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;20(4):173-96.
5. Scahill L, Erenberg G, Berlin CM, Jr., Budman C, Coffey  BJ, Jankovic  J, et al. 
Contemporary  assessment and pharmacotherapy  of Tourette  syndrome. NeuroRx. 
2006;3(2):192-206.
6. Pringsheim T, Doja A, Gorman D, McKinlay  D, Day  L, Billinghurst L, et al. Canadian 
guidelines  for the evidence-based  treatment of  tic disorders:  pharmacotherapy. Can J  
Psychiatry. 2012;57(3):133-43.
7. Sandyk R, Awerbuch  G. Marijuana and Tourette's  syndrome. J  Clin  
Psychopharmacol. 1988;8(6):444-5.
8. Hemming M, Yellowlees  PM.  Effective  treatment of  Tourette's  syndrome  with  
marijuana. J Psychopharmacol. 1993;7(4):389-91.
9. Muller-Vahl KR, Schneider  U, Kolbe  H, Emrich  HM. Treatment of  Tourette's  
syndrome  with  delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Am J Psychiatry. 1999;156(3):495.
10. Muller-Vahl KR, Kolbe  H, Schneider  U, Emrich  HM. Cannabinoids:  possible  role  in 
patho-physiology  and therapy of Gilles  de la Tourette  syndrome. Acta Psychiatr  Scand. 
1998;98(6):502-6.
11. Muller-Vahl KR, Schneider  U, Koblenz  A, Jobges  M, Kolbe  H, Daldrup T, et al. 
Treatment of  Tourette's  syndrome  with  Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC):  a randomized  
crossover  trial. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2002;35(2):57-61.
12. Muller-Vahl KR, Schneider  U, Prevedel H, Theloe  K, Kolbe  H, Daldrup T, et al. Delta 9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)  is effective  in the treatment of  tics  in Tourette  syndrome:  a 6- 
week randomized  trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64(4):459-65.
13. Morera-Herreras  T, Miguelez  C, Aristieta A, Ruiz-Ortega JA, Ugedo  L. 
Endocannabinoid  modulation of  dopaminergic  motor  circuits. Front Pharmacol. 
2012;3:110.
14. Fernandez-Ruiz  J. The endocannabinoid  system as  a target for  the treatment of  
motor  dysfunction. Br  J Pharmacol. 2009;156(7):1029-40.
15. Hohmann AG, Herkenham M. Localization of  cannabinoid  CB(1)  receptor  mRNA in  
neuronal subpopulations  of rat striatum:  a double-label  in situ hybridization study. 
Synapse. 2000;37(1):71-80.
16. Kataoka Y, Kalanithi  PS, Grantz  H, Schwartz  ML, Saper C, Leckman JF, et al. 
Decreased  number  of parvalbumin and cholinergic  interneurons  in the striatum of  
individuals  with  Tourette  syndrome. J Comp Neurol. 2010;518(3):277-91.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 39  of 16117. Vasileiou I, Fotopoulou G, Matzourani  M, Patsouris  E, Theocharis  S. Evidence  for the 
involvement of  cannabinoid  receptors'  polymorphisms  in the pathophysiology  of human 
diseases. Expert opinion on therapeutic  targets. 2013;17(4):363-77.
18. Rahn EJ, Hohmann AG. Cannabinoids  as pharmacotherapies  for neuropathic  pain:  
from the  bench  to the bedside. Neurotherapeutics  : the journal of  the American Society  for 
Experimental NeuroTherapeutics. 2009;6(4):713-37.
19. Haney M, Hart CL, Vosburg SK, Comer  SD, Reed  SC, Foltin RW. Effects  of THC  and 
lofexidine  in a human laboratory  model of  marijuana withdrawal and relapse.  
Psychopharmac ology.    2008;197( 1):157-68.
20. Iskedjian M, Bereza B, Gordon A, Piwko C, Einarson TR. Meta-analysis  of cannabis  
based treatments  for neuropathic  and multiple  sclerosis-related  pain. Current medical 
research  and opinion. 2007;23(1):17-24.
21. Whiting PF, Wolff  RF, Deshpande  S, Di  Nisio  M, Duffy  S, Hernandez  AV, et al. 
Cannabinoids  for Medical Use:  A Systematic  Review and Meta-analysis. Jama. 
2015;313(24):2456-73.
22. Martin-Sanchez  E, Furukawa TA, Taylor  J, Martin JL. Systematic  review and  meta- 
analysis  of cannabis  treatment for  chronic  pain. Pain medicine. 2009;10(8):1353-68.
23. Svendsen KB, Jensen TS, Bach  FW. Does  the cannabinoid  dronabinol reduce  central 
pain in multiple  sclerosis? Randomised  double  blind  placebo  controlled  crossover  trial. 
Bmj. 2004;329(7460):253.
24. Weber  M, Goldman B, Truniger  S. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)  for cramps  in 
amyotrophic  lateral sclerosis:  a randomised, double-blind  crossover  trial. Journal of 
neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. 2010;81(10):1135-40.
25. Weber  J, Schley  M, Casutt M, Gerber  H, Schuepfer  G, Rukwied  R, et al. 
Tetrahydrocannabinol  (Delta 9-THC)  Treatment in Chronic  Central Neuropathic  Pain and 
Fibromyalgia Patients:  Results  of a Multicenter  Survey. Anesthesiology  research  and  
practice. 2009;2009.
26. Buggy  DJ, Toogood  L, Maric  S, Sharpe  P, Lambert DG, Rowbotham DJ. Lack of 
analgesic  efficacy  of oral delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  in postoperative  pain. Pain. 
2003;106(1-2):169-72.
27. Napchan U, Buse  DC, Loder  EW. The use  of marijuana or  synthetic  cannabinoids  for 
the treatment of  headache. Headache. 2011;51(3):502-5.
28. Prasad  B, Radulovacki  MG, Carley  DW. Proof  of concept trial  of dronabinol in  
obstructive  sleep apnea. Frontiers  in psychiatry. 2013;4:1.
29. Flach  AJ. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)  in the  treatment of  end-stage  open- 
angle  glaucoma. Transactions  of the American Ophthalmological Society. 2002;100:215-22;  
discussion 22-4.
30. Tomida I, Azuara-Blanco  A, House  H, Flint M, Pertwee  RG, Robson PJ.  Effect of  
sublingual application of  cannabinoids  on intraocular  pressure:  a pilot study. Journal of  
glaucoma. 2006;15(5):349-53.
31. Leussink VI, Husseini  L, Warnke  C, Broussalis  E, Hartung HP,  Kieseier  BC. 
Symptomatic  therapy  in multiple  sclerosis:  the role  of cannabinoids  in treating spasticity. 
Therapeutic  advances  in neurological  disorders. 2012;5(5):255-66.
32. Kahlich  R, Klima J, Cihla F, Frankova V, Masek K, Rosicky  M, et al. Studies  on 
prophylactic  efficacy  of N-2-hydroxyethyl palmitamide  (Impulsin)  in acute  respiratory
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 40  of 161infections. Serologically  controlled  field  trials.  Journal of  hygiene, epidemiology, 
microbiology, and  immunology. 1979;23(1):11-24.
33. Masek K, Perlik F,  Klima J, Kahlich  R. Prophylactic  efficacy  of N-2-hydroxyethyl 
palmitamide  (impulsin)  in acute  respiratory  tract infections. European journal of  clinical 
pharmacology. 1974;7(6):415-9.
34. Plesnik V, Havrlantova M, Jancova J, Januska J, Mackova O. [Impulsin in the 
prevention of  acute  respiratory  diseases  in school children]. Ceskoslovenska pediatrie.  
1977;32(6):365-9.
35. Wiedermannova D, Lokaj J,  Wiedermann D. [Prophylactic  administration of  impulsin  
to clinically  healthy  children. The  effect on T  and B lymphocytes  in peripheral blood  
(author's  transl)]. Casopis  lekaru ceskych. 1979;118(40-41):1249-51.
36. Wiedermannova D, Wiedermann D, Lokaj J. [Prophylactic  administration of  impulsin  
to clinically  healthy  children.--effect on the  serum proteins  and metabolic  activity  of 
granulocytes  (author's  transl)]. Casopis  lekaru ceskych. 1978;117(33):1030-4.
37. Leckman JF, Hardin MT, Riddle  MA,  Stevenson J,  Ort SI, Cohen DJ. Clonidine  
treatment of  Gilles  de la Tourette's  syndrome. Arch  Gen Psychiatry. 1991;48(4):324-8.
38. Scahill L, Chappell PB, Kim YS, Schultz  RT, Katsovich  L, Shepherd  E, et al. A placebo- 
controlled  study of guanfacine  in the treatment of children with  tic disorders  and attention 
deficit hyperactivity  disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158(7):1067-74.
39. Scahill L, Leckman JF, Schultz  RT, Katsovich  L, Peterson BS. A placebo-controlled  
trial  of risperidone  in Tourette  syndrome. Neurology. 2003;60(7):1130-5.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 41  of 161APPENDIXES:
Appendix 1:  Previous Trials of Δ9-tetrahydracannabinol
Primary Medical  
ConditionNumber  of
Administered Drug Main Results Reference
Patients
Central  neuropathic pain in  
patients
with multiple  sclerosis24 patients aged 
between 23 and 55
 
yearsOrally
administered dronabinol  
at
 a maximum  dose  of
10 mg daily or 
corresponding placebo f
 
or three  weeks (15-21 
days), separated by a 
three  week washout  
period.Median     spontaneous pain intensity     was     significantly     lower 
during dronabinol treatment  than during placebotreatment  (4.0 (25th to
 
75th centiles 2.3 to 6.0) v 5.0 (4.0 to 6.4), P =  0.02), and median pain relief
score  (numerical  rating scale) was higher (3.0  (0 to  6.7) v>  0 (0 to 2.3), P
= 0.035). The functional  ability of the  multiple  sclerosis patients did not 
change.Svendsen, K. B.,  Jensen, T. S., and 
Bach, F. W. (2004). Does the 
cannabinoid dronabinol  reduce  
central  pain in multiple  sclerosis?  
Randomised double  blind placebo 
controlled crossover trial. BMJ.  
329: 253-260
Central  neuropathic pain in  
patients
with multiple  sclerosis339 patients SativexInterim  analysis at week 10 showed a statistically significant  treatment  
difference  in favor of THC/CBD spray at
 this time point  (p = 0.046). 
During the randomized-withdrawal  phase, the primary endpoint of time to 
treatment  failure  was statistically significant  in favor of THC/CBD spray, 
with 57 % of patients receiving placebo failing treatment  versus 24 % of 
patients from  the THC/CBD spray group (p = 0.04).Langford RM, Mares J, Novotna  
A, et al. 
A
 double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled,
parallel-group study of THC/CBD 
oromucosal spray
in combination with the existing 
treatment
regimen, in the relief of central  
neuropathic pain in 
patients with multiple  sclerosis. J 
Neurol. 2013;260
(4):984-997
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 42  of 161Central  neuropathic pain in  
patients
with multiple  sclerosisCannabis based
medicinal extracts 
(CBME)Young CA, Rog DJ. (2003) 
Randomised     controlled     trial 
of cannabis based medicinal  
extracts (CBME) in central  
neuropathic  pain due
 to multiple  
sclerosis. Paper presented at: IV 
Congress of the European 
Federation of IASP Chapters 
(EFIC);  September 2-6, 2003;  
Prague, Czech Republic.
Multiple     sclerosis-induced 
neuropathic pain15 relapsing- 
remitting MS
 
patients with MS- 
induced NPPNabilone  or placebo was 
titrated over 4
 weeks 
(0.5 mg/week increase) 
followed by 5-week 
maintenance  of 1 mg 
oral nabilone  (placebo) 
twice  daily in patients 
stabilized on GBPSignificant  group × time(2) interaction term was reported for both the VAS 
pain (P < 0.01) and VASimpact  score  (P < 0.01), demonstrating the 
adjusted rate of decrease  for
 both outcomes was statistically greater in 
nabilone vs placebo study group.Turcotte  D, Doupe  M,  Torabi  M, 
Gomori  A, Ethans K, Esfahani  F, 
Galloway K, Namaka  M (2015) 
Nabilone  as an adjunctive  to 
gabapentin for multiple  sclerosis- 
induced neuropathic  pain:  a 
randomized controlled trial. Pain 
Med. 2015 Jan;16(1):149-59
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 43  of 161Central    pain   in   multiple  
sclerosis (MS)66 patients with MS  
and central  pain 
states (59
dysesthetic, seven 
painful spasms)Whole-plant  cannabis- 
based medicine  (CBM), 
containing delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol:ca  
nnabidiol  (THC:CBD) 
delivered via an 
oromucosal  spray, as
 
adjunctive  analgesic  
treatment  (Each spray 
delivered 2.7 mg of THC  
and 2.5 of CBD, and 
patients could gradually 
self-titrate  to  a 
maximum  of 48 sprays 
in 24 hours.)CBM was superior to  placebo in reducing the mean intensity of pain (CBM 
mean change  -2.7, 95% CI:  -3.4 to -2.0, placebo -1.4 95% CI: -2.0 to -0.8, 
comparison between groups, p = 0.005) and sleep disturbance  (CBM mean 
change  -2.5, 95% CI:  -3.4 to -1.7, placebo -0.8, 95% CI:  -1.5 to  -0.1,
comparison between groups, p  = 0.003).Rog, D. J., Nurmikko, T. J., Friede, 
T., and Young, C.
 A. (2005). 
Randomized, controlled trial of 
cannabis-based medicine  in central  
pain in multiple  sclerosis. 
Neurology. 65: 812-819.
Central    pain   in   multiple  
sclerosis (MS)24 MS patients DronabinolDronabinol  reduced the spontaneous pain intensity significantly compared 
with placebo (4.0 (2.3-6.0) vs. 5.0 (4.0-6.4), median (25th-75th 
percentiles), p
 = 0.02).Svendsen KB, Jensen TS, Bach  
FW. (2005) [Effect  of the synthetic  
cannabinoid dronabinol  on central  
pain in patients with multiple  
sclerosis–secondary publication]. 
Ugeskr Laeger. 167(25-31):2772-
2774
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 44  of 161Central  neuropathic  pain 
from  brachial  plexus 
avulsion48 patientsTHC  25 mg/ml  or 
THC:CBD 25
 mg/ml  
given as  patient  
activated oromucosal  
100ul sprays or placeboPain VAS was 6.1 for THC  and THC:CBD compared to  6.7 for placebo, 
11-point  box scale  was 43.6 for THC  and 45.1 for THC:CBD, compared 
to 52.9 for placebo.Berman J, Lee J, Cooper M, et al. 
(2003)
 Efficacy of two cannabis- 
based medicinal  extracts for relief 
of central  neuropathic  pain from  
brachial  plexus avulsion:  results of 
a randomised controlled trial. 
Paper presented at: Pain Society 
Annual  Meeting;  April  1-4, 2003;  
Glasgow, United Kingdom. 
Anaesthesia. 2003;58(9):938
Chronic  pain associated with 
brachial  plexus root  avulsion48 patients with at  
least one avulsed 
root and baseline  
pain score  of four or 
more  on an 11-point  
ordinate scalePlacebo and two whole  
plant extracts of 
Cannabis sativa  L.: GW- 
1000-02 (Sativex), 
containing 
Delta(9)tetrahydrocanna  
binol  (THC):cannabidiol  
(CBD) in an 
approximate   
 1:1   ratio 
and GW-2000-02,
containing primarily 
THCThe primary outcome  measure  (mean pain severity score  during  the last 7 
days of treatment) failed to fall by the two points defined in our hypothesis. 
However, both this measure  and measures of sleep showed statistically 
significant  improvements. The study medications were  generally well 
tolerated with the majority of adverse  events, including intoxication type 
reactions, being  mild to moderate  in severity and  resolving spontaneously.Berman, J. S., Symonds, C.,  and 
Birch, R. (2004). Efficacy of two 
cannabis based medicinal  extracts 
for relief of central neuropathic  
pain from  brachial  plexus 
avulsion:  results of a randomised 
controlled  trial.  Pain.  112:  299-
306.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 45  of 161Neuropathic painMild dose cannabis 
3.53% THC  by
 weight, 
Low dose cannabis 
1.29% THC  by weight, 
Placebo cannabis 
placebo marijuana.The primary outcome  variable, VAS Pain Intensity, was assessed by  
asking participants to indicate  the intensity of their current  pain on a 100- 
mm visual  analog scale  (VAS) between 0 (no pain) and 100 (worst  possible  
pain).An assessment  was performed before  the administration of vaporized 
cannabis or placebo and hourly thereafter for six hours.University of California  Davis. 
Center for Medicinal  Cannabis 
Research, VA Northern California  
Health Care System. Effects of 
vaporized marijuana  on 
neuropathic pain.
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T01037088.  
 Accessed   April    7, 
2014
Neuropathic painHigh dose cannabis 
(7.5% THC  by
 weight), 
Low dose cannabis 
(3.5% THC  by weight), 
and Placebo cannabisScore  on a  series of pain scales (heat  pain threshold, VAS intensity, VAS 
unpleasantness, pain relief, neuropathic pain scale) was assessedCenter  for  Medicinal   Cannabis 
Research.    Effects    of    smoked 
marijuana   on  neuropathic   pain.  
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00254761.   Accessed   April    7, 
2014
Neuropathic pain38    patients    with 
central and 
peripheral  
neuropathic painHigh-dose  (7%), low- 
dose (3.5%), or placebo 
cannabisA mixed linear model  demonstrated an analgesic  response  to  smoking 
cannabis. No effect  on evoked pain was seen. Psychoactive  effects were  
minimal  and well-tolerated, with some  acute  cognitive  effects, particularly 
with memory, at higher doses.Wilsey, B.,  Marcotte, T., 
Tsodikov, A., Millman, J. and 
others. (2008). A randomized, 
placebo-controlled, crossover trial 
of cannabis cigarettes in 
neuropathic  pain. J.Pain. 9: 506-
521
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 46  of 161Pain of neurological origin 70 GW-1000-02 vs placeboChange  From  Baseline  in Mean Pain Box Scale-11 Score  at 3  Weeks was
-1.3 (1.67) for GW-1000-02 and -0.9 (1.62) for placebo, while  Use of 
Analgesic  Escape  Medication was 20.57 (33.08) for GW-1000-02, 
comparing to
 50.12  (44.10) for placeboGWPharmaceuticals Ltd. A  study 
to evaluate
the   effects   of   cannabis   based 
medicine in patients 
with pain of neurological  origin. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T01606176
Accessed April 7,  2014
Chronic pain1 56-year-old man 
who developed 
chronic pain
following the  
excision of a facial  
cancerNabiloneCondition was poorly controlled despite  multiple  analgesic  medications. 
Following the starting of nabilone  (a synthetic  cannabinoid) his pain 
control  was greatly improved and this had a huge  impact  on his quality of 
life.Reynolds TD, Osborn HL (2013) 
The use of cannabinoids in chronic  
pain. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Jul
 26;
Chronic pain30 patients taking 
opioids for chronic  
painDronabinol (Marinol  
capsule s; Solvay 
Pharmaceuticals, 
Brussels,  Belgium)  10 
mg or 20 mgPatients who received dronabinol  experienced decreased pain intensity and 
increased satisfaction compared with placebo. No differences in
 benefit  
were found between the 20 mg and 10 mg doses.Narang, S., Gibson, D., Wasan, A. 
D., Ross, E.
 L. and others. (2008). 
Efficacy of dronabinol  as an 
adjuvant  treatment  for  chronic  
pain patients on opioid therapy. 
J.Pain. 9: 254-264
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 47  of 161Chronic pain 30 patientsNabilone (1/4)-1 
mg/day)Throughout  the cross-over periods the nabilone  treatment  was superior 
(medians [25%-;  75%-percentiles]:  nabilone/placebo):  decrease  of the 
average spinal
 pain intensity within the last  4 weeks (DeltaVAS) 0.9 [0.0;  
2.0]  /  0.5  [0.0;   1.7],  decrease   of  the  current   spinal   pain  intensity
(DeltaVAS) 0.6  [0.0; 2.5] / 0.0 [-1.0, 1.0] (p = .006), decrease  of the 
average  headache intensity within the last 4 weeks (DeltaVAS) 1.0 [-1.0;  
2.4] / 0.2 [-0.9;  1.0], increase  of the  number of days without  headache
within the  last 4  weeks 2.0 [0.0;  6.5] / 0.0 [-5.0;  4.0], increase  of the quality
of life (DeltaQOL-Score) 5.0 [0.8; 10.8] /  2.0 [-2.3; 8.0].Pinsger M, SchimettaW, Volc  D, 
Hiermann E, Riederer F, PolzW. 
(2006)
 [Benefits of an add-on 
treatment  with the synthetic  
cannabinomimetic  nabilone  on 
patients with chronic  pain—a  
randomized controlled trial]. Wien 
KlinWochenschr. 118(11-12):327-
335
Chronic pain 30Dronabinol  (Marinol) as  
Add-On Therapy for 
Patients on OpioidsBrigham  andWomen’s Hospital;  
Solvay Pharmaceuticals. Study to
 
evaluate  the efficacy of dronabinol  
(Marinol) as add on therapy for 
patients on opioids for chronic  
pain. ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00153192. Accessed 
April 7, 2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 48  of 161Chronic back pain(synthetic  
cannabinomimeticum)Pinsger M.  (2012) Benefit  of an 
add-on-treatment  with a synthetic  
cannabinomimeticum  on patients 
with chronic  back pain-a  
randomized controlled trial. Paper 
presented at 8th International  
Conference  on Early Psychosis:  
From  Neurobiology to Public  
Policy;  October 11-13, 2012;  San 
Francisco:  CA. Eur Spine  J. 
21(11):2366
Chronic  Central  Neuropathic  
Pain and Fibromyalgia1247.5 mg delta  9-THC  over 
7
 monthsPsychometric  parameters (PDI, SF-12, QLIP, HADS) and  pain intensity 
improved significantly during delta  9-THC  treatment. Opioid doses were  
reduced and patients perceived THC  therapy as effective  with tolerable  
side effects. About  25% of the patients, however, did not tolerate  the 
treatment.Weber, J., Schley, M.,  Casutt, M., 
Gerber, H. and others. (2009). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol  (Delta  9- 
THC) Treatment  in Chronic  
Central  Neuropathic  Pain and 
Fibromyalgia  Patients:  Results of a 
Multicenter Survey. 
Anesthesiol.Res.Pract.          2009:
827290.-
Chronic neuropathic pain 100Nabilone and 
dihydrocodeineMean pain score  as measured by  VAS 0 - 10 for the last two weeks on 
treatmentCambridge  Laboratories Ltd. A  
randomised, crossover, double  
blind comparison of the analgesic  
effect  and patient  tolerability of 
Nabilone  and dihydrocodeine  in 
chronic  neuropathic  pain. 
metaRegister of Controlled Trials. 
http://isrctn.org/ISRCTN1533075
7. Accessed April 7, 2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 49  of 161Chronic neuropathic pain 21 patientsAjulemic  acid (AJA)  or 
placebo capsulesThe results showed no significant  reduction in mechanical  hypersensitivity 
(p=0.052), although a
 tendency towards pain reduction could be seen. The  
VAS score  showed significant  pain reduction (p=0.021) and NNT  values 
for 30% pain relief were  2.14 for the first treatment group and 5.29 for the 
second treatment  group. No significant  findings were  observed regarding 
psychotropic  or physical measurements.Salim  K, Schneider U, Burstein S, 
Hoy
 L, Karst  M. (2005) Pain 
measurements and side effect  
profile  of the  novel  cannabinoid 
ajulemic acid.
Neuropharmacology   48(8):1164-
71
Chronic neuropathic pain21 patients (8 
women and 13 men) 
aged 29
 to 65 years 
(mean, 51 years)1',1'dimethylheptyl- 
Delta8- 
tetrahydrocannabinol- 
11-oic  
 acid  (CT-3),  a  
potent   analog  of  THC- 
11-oic  acid (Two daily 
doses of CT-3 (four 10- 
mg capsules per day) or 
identical placebo 
capsules)The mean differences over time for the VAS values in the CT-3-placebo 
sequence  measured 3 hours after intake  of study
 drug differed significantly 
from  those  in the placebo-CT-3 sequence  (mean [SD], -11.54 [14.16] vs 
9.86 [21.43];  P =.02).Karst  M, Salim  K, Burstein S, 
Conrad I, Hoy
 L, Schneider U. 
(2003) Analgesic  effect  of the 
synthetic  cannabinoid CT-3 on 
chronic  neuropathic  pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 290(13):  1757-1762
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 50  of 161Chronic neuropathic pain96 patients with 
chronic  neuropathic  
pain, aged 23-84 
yearsMaximum  daily dose of 
240 mg dihydrocodeine  
or 
2 mg nabiloneThe mean score  was 6.0 mm longer for nabilone  than for dihydrocodeine  
(95% confidence  interval  1.4
 to 10.5) in the available  case analysis and 5.6 
mm (10.3 to 0.8) in the per protocol  analysis. Dihydrocodeine  provided 
better pain relief than nabilone and had slightly fewer side  effects.Frank B,  Serpell  MG, Hughes J, 
Matthews JNS, Kapur D. (2008) 
Comparison of analgesic  effects 
and patient  tolerability of nabilone  
and dihydrocodeine  for chronic  
neuropathic  pain:  randomised, 
crossover, double  blind study. 
BMJ. 336 (7637):199-201
Chronic neuropathic painCannabis containing 
9.43% THC versus
cannabis containing 0%  
THCMontreal  General  Hospital. Pilot 
study of smoked cannabis for 
chronic  neuropathic  pain.
 
metaRegister of Controlled Trials 
(mRCT),
http://www.controlledtrials.com/I 
SRCTN68314063 Accessed April  
7,
 2014.
Central  neuropathic pain SativexBerman J, Bosworth T, Guy G, 
Stott C; Sativex Spinal  Cord Injury 
Study Group. Sativex in the 
treatment  of central  neuropathic  
pain due to
 spinal  cord injury:  a 
randomised controlled study. 
Paper presented at: British Pain 
Society Annual   Scientific  
Meeting;  April  2007;  Glasgow:  
United Kingdom.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 51  of 161Central  neuropathic pain 339 Sativex vs placeboChange  From  Baseline  in  Mean Pain Due to MS NRS Score  was -2.02 
(2.15) for Sativex and -1.89 (2.33) for placebo, while  Change  in Pain From  
Baseline  to End of the Treatment Using the NPS (Neuropathic Pain Scale) 
was -14.24 (18.17) for Sativex, comparing to  -11.44 (17.86) for placebo.GWPharmaceuticals Ltd. Sativex 
versus placebo when added to
 
existing treatment  for central  
neuropathic  pain inMS. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00391079 Accessed April  7, 
2014
Neuropathic     pain    despite  
traditional treatment39    patients    with 
central and 
peripheral  
neuropathic painInhaling    medium-dose  
(3.53%), low-
dose(1.29%), or placebo 
cannabisThere  was no  significant  difference  between the 2 active  dose groups' 
results (P > .7). The number needed to treat (NNT) to achieve  30% pain 
reduction was 3.2 for placebo versus low-dose, 2.9 for placebo versus 
medium-dose, and 25 for medium- versus low-dose. As these  NNTs are 
comparable  to those  of traditional  neuropathic  painmedications, cannabis 
has analgesic  efficacy with the low dose  being  as effective  a pain reliever 
as the medium  dose. Psychoactive  effects were  minimal  and well tolerated, 
and neuropsychological  effects were  of limited duration and readily 
reversible  within 1 to 2 hours.Wilsey, B.,  Marcotte, T., Deutsch, 
R., Gouaux, B. and others. (2012). 
Low-Dose  Vaporized Cannabis 
Significantly Improves 
Neuropathic  Pain. J.Pain. 14:  136-
148
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 52  of 161Peripheral  Neuropathic  Pain, 
characterized by
 Allodynia80THC:
placCBD, 1:1 and 
eboGWPharma  Ltd. A  double  blind, 
randomised, placebo controlled 
parallel  group study of cannabis 
based medicine  extract  (CBME), 
in the treatment  of peripheral  
neuropathic  pain characterised by 
allodynia. metaRegister of 
Controlled Trials.
http://www.controlled- 
trials.com/ISRCTN38250575 
Accessed April 7,
 2014
Peripheral  Neuropathic  Pain, 
characterized by
 AllodyniaSativex OngoingGWPharma  Ltd. A  double  blind, 
randomised, placebo controlled, 
parallel  group study of Sativex, in 
the treatment  of subjects with 
peripheral  neuropathic  pain 
associated with allodynia. EU 
Clinical  Trials Register. 
https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.e  
u/ctrsearch/search?query=eudract
_number:2004-002531-32. 
Accessed April
8, 2014.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 53  of 161Neuropathic pain 
characterized by
 allodyniaSativexNurmikko TJ, Serpell   MG, 
Hoggart  B,
 Toomey PJ, Morlion 
BJ. (2005) A multi-centre, double- 
blind, randomized, controlled trial 
of oro-mucosal  cannabis based 
medicine  in the treatment  of 
neuropathic  pain characterized by 
allodynia. Neurology. 64(suppl  
1):A374
Pain and allodynia 125Oro-mucosal sativex, 
(THC: CBD)The mean reduction in pain intensity scores (primary outcome  measure) 
was greater in patients receiving sativex than placebo (mean adjusted 
scores -1.48 points vs. -0.52 points on a
 0-10 Numerical  Rating Scale  
(p=0.004;  95% CI: -1.59, -0.32). Improvements in Neuropathic Pain Scale  
composite  score  (p=0.007), sleep NRS (p=0.001), dynamic  allodynia  
(p=0.042), punctate  allodynia  (p=0.021), Pain Disability Index (p=0.003) 
and Patient's Global  Impression of Change  (p<0.001) were  similarly 
greater on sativex vs. placebo. Sedative  and gastrointestinal  side effects 
were reported more commonly by patients on active medication.Nurmikko, T. J., Serpell, M.  G., 
Hoggart, B., Toomey, P. J. and 
others. (2007). Sativex 
successfully treats  neuropathic  
pain characterised by allodynia:  a 
randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical  trial. 
Pain. 133: 210-220
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 54  of 161Pain   due    to   rheumatoid 
arthritis(RA)58  patients  over  5 
weeksCBM (Sativex)and 
placeboIn comparison with placebo, the CBM produced statistically significant  
improvements in pain on movement,pain at
 rest, quality of sleep, DAS28 
and the SF-MPQ pain at present  component. There  was no effect  on 
morning stiffness but baseline  scores were  low. The large  majority of 
adverse effects were  mild or moderate.Blake, D. R., Robson, P., Ho, M., 
Jubb, R. W. and others. (2006). 
Preliminary assessment  of the 
efficacy, tolerability and safety of
 
a cannabis-based medicine  
(Sativex) in the treatment  of pain 
caused by rheumatoid arthritis. 
Rheumatology. (Oxford). 45: 50-
52.
TMJ pain caused by 
osteoarthritis24300mg at morning +  
600mg at evening for 7 
days;  followed by 
300mg/bid for 7 days 
Vs ibupfofen  (600 
mg/tid
for 14 days)Among the  completers, pain relief was greater with cannabis than placebo 
(median difference  in DDS pain intensity change, 3.3 points, effect  
size=0.60;  p=0.016). The proportions of subjects achieving at least 30% 
pain relief with cannabis versus placebo were  0.46 (95%CI 0.28, 0.65) and 
0.18 (0.03, 0.32).Ellis, R.  J., Toperoff, W., Vaida, 
F., van den Brande, G. and others. 
(2009). Smoked medicinal  
cannabis for
neuropathic  pain in  HIV:  a 
randomized, crossover clinical  
trial. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
34: 672-680
AnalgesiaDelta(9)-THC  5  mg 
orally or placebo and 90 
min later morphine  0.02 
mg/kg intravenously or 
placeboAmong affective  responses, although neither morphine nor Delta(9)-THC  
had a
 significant  effect, there  was a positiveanalgesic  interaction between 
the two (p = 0.012), indicating that the combination had a synergistic  
affective analgesic  effect.Roberts, J. D., Gennings, C.,  and 
Shih, M. (2006). Synergistic  
affective  analgesic  interaction 
between delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and 
morphine. 
 Eur.J.Pharmacol.  530:
54-58.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 55  of 161Noncancer pain30 chronic
noncancer         pain
patients taking 
opioids and not 
using marijuanaPlacebo,  10  or  20  mg 
dronabinolThe 10  and 20 mg dronabinol doses had significantly elevated scores over 
time on 4/5 subscales versus placebo (P<0.05). Average  daily morphine  
use, total pain relief (TOTPAR), age, sex, and baseline  pain level were  not 
significant  covariates. ARCI peak effects at 2 hours were  similar to peak 
effects of smoked marijuana  at 30 minutes (P=0.80, 10 mg=low strength, 
20 mg=high strength).Issa MA, Narang S, Jamison RN, 
Michna  E,
 Edwards RR, Penetar 
DM, Wasan AD (2014) The 
subjective  psychoactive  effects of 
oral dronabinol  studied in a 
randomized, controlled crossover 
clinical  trial for pain. Clin J Pain. 
30(6):472-8
Chronic noncancer pain 20Nabilone  followed  up  
for an average  of 1.5 
yearsFifteen patients reported subjective  overall  improvement  with nabilone, 
and nine
 reported reduced pain intensity. Beneficial  effects on sleep and 
nausea  were  the main reasons for continuing use. Intolerable  side effects 
were  experienced in three  patients (palpitations, urinary retention, dry 
mouth).Berlach, D. M.,  Shir, Y., and 
Ware, M. A. (2006). Experience  
with the synthetic  cannabinoid 
nabilone  in chronic  noncancer 
pain. Pain Med. 7: 25-29
Post-traumatic or 
postsurgical  neuropathic  
pain23, 2  weeksCannabis at four 
potencies  
 (0%,   2.5%,
6% and 9.4%  
tetrahydrocannabinol)A single  inhalation of 25 mg of 9.4% tetrahydrocannabinol  herbal  cannabis 
three  times daily for five days reduced the intensity of pain, improved sleep 
and was 
well tolerated.Ware, M.  A., Wang, T., Shapiro, 
S., Robinson, A. and others. 
(2010). Smoked cannabis for 
chronic        neuropathic         pain:  
a randomized controlled trial. 
CMAJ. 182: E694-E701
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 56  of 161Pain tolerance Marijuana and placeboA statistically significant  increase  in  tolerance  was observed after smoking 
marijuana. Although there  was no statistically significant  interaction 
between the drug effect  and having had previous cannabis experience, 
there  was a definite  trend towards a greater increase  for the experienced 
(16%) compared to the naive group(8%).Milstein, S. L., MacCannell, K., 
Karr, G., and Clark, S. (1975). 
Marijuana-produced changes in
 
pain tolerance. Experienced and 
non-e xperienced subjects. 
Int.Pharmacopsychiatry. 10:  177-
182
Antinociception5 male regular 
marijuana usersMarijuana (3. 55% 
Delta(9)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(Delta(9)-THC)
(active))Marijuana  produced significant  dose-dependent  antinociception (increased 
finger withdrawal  latency) and
 biobehavioral  effects. Naltrexone  did not 
significantly influence  marijuana  dose-effect curves, suggesting no role of 
endogenous opiates in marijuana-induced antinociception under these  
conditions.Greenwald, M.  K. and Stitzer, M.
L. (2000). Antinociceptive, 
subjective  and behavioral  effects 
of smoked marijuana  in humans. 
Drug Alcohol  Depend. 59: 261- 
275
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 57  of 161Pain and hyperalgesia  
induced by
 intradermal  
capsaicin15 healthy
volunteersLow-, medium-, and 
high-dose smoked 
cannabis (respectively 
2%,
 4%, and 8% 9-delta- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  by 
weight)By 45 min aftercannabis exposure, there  was a  significant  decrease  in 
capsaicin-induced pain with the  medium  dose and a significant  increase  in 
capsaicin-induced pain with the high dose. There  was no effect  seen with 
the low dose, nor was there  an effect  on the area of hyperalgesia  at any 
dose. Significant  negative  correlations between pain perception and 
plasma  delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  levels were  found after adjusting for 
the overall  dose effects. There  was no significant  difference  in 
performance on the  neuropsychological tests.Wallace, M.,  Schulteis, G., 
Atkinson, J. H., Wolfson, T. and 
others. (2007). Dose-dependent  
effects of smoked cannabis on 
capsaicin-induced pain and 
hyperalgesia  in healthy volunteers. 
Anesthesiology. 107:  785-796
Capsaicin-induced pain and 
hyperalgesia30    healthy    male  
volunteersSingle  doses of nabilone  
(1,
 2 or 3 mg)Pain and hyperalgesia  were measured at baseline and 2-3.5 h  after dosing. 
Nabilone did not significantly attenuate  either ongoing pain or primary or 
secondary hyperalgesia, whereas dose-dependent  CNS effects were  
observed from  1.5 to 6 h after dosing, being maximal  at 4-6 h.Kalliomaki, J., Philipp, A., 
Baxendale, J., Annas, P. and 
others. (2012). Lack of effect  of 
central  nervous system-active  
doses of nabilone  on capsaicin- 
induced pain and hyperalgesia. 
Clin.Exp.Pharmacol.Physiol.  
 39:
336-342
Anti-hyperalgesic  properties 
upon capsaicin stimulationCannabinoid receptor 
ligand HU210Pre-treatment  with HU210 significantly reduced the  perception of pain 
following the
 administration of capsaicin.Rukwied, R., Watkinson, A., 
McGlone, F., and
 Dvorak, M. 
(2003). Cannabinoid agonists 
attenuate capsaicin-induced 
responses in human skin. Pain. 
102: 283-288
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 58  of 161Pain12 healthy
volunteersTHC  (20  mg), morphine  
(30 mg), THC-morphine  
(20 mg THC+30 mg 
morphine), or placebo 
were  given orally and as 
single dosesTHC  did  not significantly reduce pain. In the cold and heat tests it even 
produced hyperalgesia, which was completely neutralized by THC- 
morphine. A slight  additive  analgesic  effect  could be observed for THC- 
morphine  in the electrical  stimulation test. No analgesic  effect  resulted in 
the pressure  and heat test, neither with THC  nor THC-morphine. 
Psychotropic  and somatic  side-effects (sleepiness, euphoria, anxiety, 
confusion, nausea, dizziness, etc.) were  common, but usually mild.Naef, M., Curatolo, M., Petersen- 
Felix, S., Arendt-Nielsen, L. and 
others. (2003). The analgesic  
effect  of oral delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC), 
morphine, and a
 THC-morphine  
combination in healthy subjects 
under experimental  pain 
conditions. Pain. 105: 79-88
Pain due  to  spinal  cord injury 
(SCI)116GW-1000-02 (THC  (27
mg/ml) and CBD (25 
mg/ml) delivered in 100 
microlitre  actuations by
 
a pump action 
oromucosal  spray) vs 
placeboChange  From  Baseline  in  Mean Central  Neuropathic  Pain at the End of 
Treatment  (up to 51 Days) was -0.74 (1.12) for GW-1000-02 and -0.69 
(1.39) for placebo, while  change  From  Baseline  in the Mean Percentage  of 
Days on Which Escape  Medication Was Used at  the End of Treatment  was
-4.68 (18.25) and -2.91 (20.83) respectively.GWPharmaceuticals Ltd. A  study 
of    cannabis    based    medicine  
extracts  and  placebo  in  patients 
with pain due  to spinal  cord injury. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T01606202.
Accessed April 7,  2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 59  of 161Diabetic painful  
peripheral neuropathy17Inhaled cannabis 
(400mg placebo or 
active cannabis 
administered via the 
Volcano vaporizer)Center for Medicinal  Cannabis 
Research. Efficacy of inhaled 
cannabis in diabetic  painful  
peripheral neuropathy. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. http:
//ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NCT00 
781001. Accessed
April 7,  2014
Diabetic painful  
peripheral neuropathySativex ongoingGWPharma  Ltd. A  double  blind, 
randomised, placebo controlled, 
parallel  group study of Sativex in 
the treatment  of subjects with pain 
due to diabetic  neuropathy. EU 
Clinical  Trials Register. 
https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.e  
u/ctrsearch/search?query=eudract
_number:2004
-002530-20. Accessed  August  4,
2014
Peripheral  neuropathic  pain 
(PNP)380 patients with 
PNP associated with 
diabetes or allodyniaDelta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol(T  
HC)/cannabidiol  (CBD) 
oromucosal sprayThe pain NRS showed a  decrease  in score  over time in patients from  a 
mean of 6.9 points (baseline  in the parent  studies) to a mean of 4.2 points 
(end of open-label follow-up) (38-week).Hoggart  B,  Ratcliffe  S, Ehler E, 
Simpson KH, Hovorka  J, Lejčko J, 
Taylor L, Lauder H, Serpell  M. 
(2015) A multicentre, open-label, 
follow-on study to assess the long- 
term maintenance  of effect, 
tolerance  and safety of THC/CBD 
oromucosal  spray in the 
management  of neuropathic  pain. J 
Neurol. Jan;  262(1):27-40
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 60  of 161Peripheral  neuropathic  pain 
(PNP)303 patients with 
PNP associated with 
allodyniaTHC/CBD    spray    vs 
placeboAt the  30% responder level, there  were  statistically significant  treatment  
differences in favour of THC/CBD spray in the full analysis (intention-to- 
treat) dataset  [p = 0.034;  95% confidence  interval  (CI):  1.05-3.70]. There  
was also a reduction in mean PNP 0-10 NRS scores in both treatment  
groups that was numerically higher in the THC/CBD spray group, but 
which failed to reach statistical significance.Serpell  M,  Ratcliffe  S, Hovorka  J, 
et al. (2014) A double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled, 
parallel  group study of THC/CBD 
spray in peripheral  
neuropathic  pain treatment. Eur J 
Pain. 18(7):999-1012
Painful   diabetic   peripheral  
neuropathy16    patients    with 
painful diabetic  
peripheral  
neuropathyPlacebo   or   low   (1% 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
[THC]),   medium    (4% 
THC),    or   high    (7% 
THC) doses of cannabis 
(Aerosolized    cannabis 
or placebo)Dose-dependent   reduction  in  diabetic   peripheral   neuropathy  pain  in 
patients with treatment-refractory pain.Wallace  MS,  Marcotte  TD, 
Umlauf A, Gouaux B, Atkinson JH 
(2015) Efficacy of Inhaled 
Cannabis on Painful  Diabetic  
Neuropathy. J Pain. 16(7):616-27
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 61  of 161Painful   diabetic   peripheral  
neuropathy30 subjects with 
intractable  PDN 
unresponsive
to currently 
available treatmentsSativex or placeboThere  was a substantial  and significant  improvement  in pain scores in  both 
groups over the course  of the study. There  was, however, no significant  
difference  between the two treatment  arms for the primary outcome  
measures.Selvarajah D, Gandhi  RA,Witte  D, 
Bowler H, Emery C,
 Tesfaye  S. 
(2006) Treatment  of painful  
diabetic  neuropathy with Sativex 
(a cannabis based medicinal  
product)—results of a randomized 
placebo controlled trial. 
Diabetologia.     2006;49     (suppl
1):671-672
Diabetic painful  
peripheral neuropathySativexThe mean daily pain due  to  diabetic  neuropathy on a 0-10 NRS score  
during the last seven days of treatment  was assessedGWPharmaceuticals Ltd. A  study 
of sativex®  for pain relief due to 
diabetic neuropathy. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00710424.   Accessed   April    7, 
2014
Refractory human diabetic  
peripheral  neuropathic  pain 
(DPN)26 Nabilone, 9  weeksImprovement  in the  change  in mean end-point  neuropathic  pain vs placebo 
(mean treatment  reduction of 1.27;  95% confidence  interval  2.29-0.25, 
P=0.02), with an average  nabilone  dose at end point  of 2.9 ± 1.1mg/day, 
and improvements from  baseline  for the anxiety subscale  of the Hospital  
Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Medical  Outcomes Study sleep scale  
problems index, and the European Quality of Life-5-Domains index score  
(each P<0.05).Toth, C.,  Mawani, S., Brady, S., 
Chan, C. and others. (2012). An 
enriched-enrolment, randomized 
withdrawal, flexible-dose, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled, parallel  
assignment  efficacy study of 
nabilone as adjuvant  
in the treatment  of diabetic  
peripheral  neuropathic  pain. Pain. 
153: 2073-2082
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 62  of 161Adjuvant  treatment  in 
painful  diabeticperipheral  
neuropathy (DPN).30 Sativex or placeboSignificant  improvement  in  pain scores in both groups, but  mean change  
between groups was not  significant.Selvarajah, D., Gandhi, R.,  Emery,
C. J., and Tesfaye, S. (2010). 
Randomized placebo-controlled 
double-blind clinical  trial of 
cannabis-based medicinal  product  
(Sativex) in
 painful  diabetic  
neuropathy:  depression is a major 
confounding factor. Diabetes Care. 
33: 128-130
HIV-related painful  
peripheral neuropathySmoked cannabisAbrams DI, Jay CA, Vizoso H, et 
al. Smoked cannabis therapy for 
HIV-related painful  peripheral  
neuropathy:  results of a 
randomized, placebo-controlled 
clinical  trial. Paper presented at:
 
IACM 3rd Conference  on 
Cannabinoids in Medicine;  
September 9-10, 2005;  Leiden, the  
Netherlands.
HIV-related painful  
peripheral neuropathySmoked cannabis:  
Active  cannabis (1-8% 
THC  by
 weight) vs 
Placebo cannabisCenter  for  Medicinal   Cannabis 
Research. Medicinal  cannabis for 
painful HIV neuropathy. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00255580.  
 Accessed   April    7, 
2014.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 63  of 161Neuropathic  pain of HIV- 
associated sensory 
neuropathy50Cannabis (3.56% 
tetrahydrocannabinol) or 
identical placebo 
cigarettesSmoked cannabis reduced daily pain  by 34% (median reduction;  IQR = - 
71, -16) vs 17% (IQR  = -29, 8) with placebo (p = 0.03). Greater than 30% 
reduction in pain was reported by 52% in thecannabis group and by 24% 
in the placebo group (p =  0.04).Abrams, D. I., Jay, C.  A., Shade, S. 
B., Vizoso, H. and others. (2007). 
Cannabis in painful  HIV- 
associated sensory neuropathy:  a 
randomized placebo-controlled 
trial. Neurology. 68: 515-521
HIV derived pain and other 
medical symptomsHIV-positive  
individuals 
attending   
 a    large  
clinic  (523)CannabisPatients reported improved appetite  (97%), muscle  pain (94%), nausea  
(93%), anxiety (93%),
 nerve  pain (90%), depression (86%), and 
paresthesia  (85%). Many cannabis users (47%) reported associated 
memory deterioration.Woolridge, E.,  Barton, S., Samuel, 
J., Osorio, J. and others. (2005). 
Cannabis use in HIV for pain and 
other medical  symptoms. J.Pain 
Symptom.Manage. 29: 358-367.
Pain management  and 
quality of life improvement  
in
 patients with fibromyalgia40Nabilone, from  0.5 mg 
PO at
 bedtime  to 1 mg 
BID over 4 weeksSignificant  decreases in the  VAS (-2.04, P <  .02), FIQ (-12.07, P < .02), 
and anxiety (-1.67, P <  .02) in the  nabilone treated group at 4 weeks.Skrabek, R. Q., Galimova, L., 
Ethans, K., and Perry, D. (2008). 
Nabilone  for the treatment  of pain 
in fibromyalgia.
J.Pain. 9:  164-173
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 64  of 161Pain and other symptoms in 
patients 
with IBD100 patients with 
ulcerative  colitis 
(UC) and 191 
patients with
Crohn's disease  
(CD)    
attending   a  
tertiary-care  
outpatient clinic
completed a 
questionnaireCannabisPatients were  more  likely to  usecannabis for symptom  relief if they had a 
history of abdominal  surgery [29/48 (60%) vs. 24/74 (32%);  P=0.002], 
chronic  analgesic  use [29/41 (71%) vs. 25/81 (31%);  P<0.001], 
complimentary alternative  medicine  use [36/66 (55%) vs. 18/56 (32%);  
P=0.01] and a lower short  inflammatory bowel  disease  questionnaire  score  
(45.1±2.1 vs. 50.3±1.5;  P=0.03).Lal, S., Prasad, N., Ryan, M.,  
Tangri, S. and others. (2011). 
Cannabis use amongst  patients 
with inflammatory bowel  disease. 
Eur.J.Gastroenterol.Hepatol.    23:
891-896
Acute    inflammatory   pain 
and hyperalgesia18   healthy   female  
volunteersCapsule s containing 
Delta- 
tetrahydrocannabinol- 
standardized cannabis 
extract  or active  placebo 
(orally)Cannabis extract did not affect  heat pain thresholds in the sunburn model. 
Electrical  thresholds (250 Hz) were  significantly lower compared with 
baseline  and placebo. In the
 capsaicin model, the area of secondary 
hyperalgesia, flare, and spontaneous pain were  not altered.Kraft, B., Frickey, N. A., 
Kaufmann, R.
 M., Reif, M. and 
others. (2008). Lack of analgesia  
by oral standardized cannabis 
extract  on acute  inflammatory pain 
and hyperalgesia  in volunteers. 
Anesthesiology. 109:  101-110
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 65  of 161Chronic  pain in patients with 
advanced cancer43    patients    with 
cancer-related   pain 
experiencing 
inadequate  analgesia
 
despite
chronic opioid 
dosingPatients self-titrated 
THC/CBD spray (n=39)
 
or THC  spray (n=4)Long-term  use  of THC/CBD spray was generally well tolerated, with no 
evidence  of a loss of effect  for the relief of cancer-related pain with long- 
term use. Furthermore, patients who kept using the study medication did 
not seek to increase  their dose of this or other pain-relieving medication 
over timeJohnson JR, Lossignol  D, Burnell- 
Nugent  M, Fallon MT
 (2013) An 
open-label  extension study to 
investigate  the long-term  safety 
and tolerability of THC/CBD 
oromucosal  spray and oromucosal  
THC  spray in patients with 
terminal  cancer-related pain 
refractory to strong opioid 
analgesics. J Pain Symptom  
Manage. 46(2):207-18
Pain that responds poorly to  
opioid therapy in patients 
with advanced cancer263Nabiximols at  a low 
dose  (1-4   sprays/day),
medium  dose (6-10 
sprays/day), or high dose 
(11-16 sprays/day)Efficacy and  safety of nabiximols at the 2 lower-dose  levelsPortenoy, R.  K., Ganae-Motan, E. 
D., Allende, S., Yanagihara, R. 
and others. (2012). Nabiximols for 
opioid-treated
cancer patients with poorly- 
controlled chronic  pain:  a 
randomized, placebo-controlled, 
graded-dose trial.
J.Pain. 13: 438-449
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 66  of 161Pain in patients with 
advanced cancer177   patients   with 
cancer   pain,   who 
experienced 
inadequate  analgesia
 
despite
chronic opioid 
dosingTHC:CBD extract  (n =  
60), THC  extract  (n = 
58), or placebo (n = 59)Twice  as many patients taking THC:CBD showed a  reduction of more  than 
30% from  baseline  pain NRS score  when compared with placebo (23 
[43%] vs. 12 [21%]). The associated odds ratio was statistically significant, 
whereas the number of THC  group responders was similar to placebo (12 
[23%] vs. 12 [21%]) and did not reach statistical significance.Johnson, J. R., Burnell-Nugent, 
M.,
 Lossignol, D., Ganae-Motan,
E. D. and others. (2010). 
Multicenter, double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group study of the 
efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 
THC:CBD extract  and THC  
extract  in patients with intractable  
cancer-related pain. J.Pain 
Symptom.Manage. 39: 167-179
Cancer related pain 10Placebo and 5, 10, 15, 
and 20
 mg THCPain relief significantly superior to  placebo was demonstrated at high dose 
levels (15 and 20 mg). At these  levels, substantial  sedation and mental  
clouding were  reported.Noyes, R.,  Jr., Brunk, S. F., 
Baram, D. A., and Canter, A. 
(1975). Analgesic  effect  of delta- 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol.
J.Clin.Pharmacol. 15: 139-143
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 67  of 161Chronic  pain in patients with 
advanced cancer43    patients    with 
cancer-related   pain 
experiencing 
inadequate  analgesia
 
despite
chronic opioid 
dosingSativex(®)
Long-term  safety and  
tolerability of 
THC/CBD spray and 
THC  sprayThe efficacy end point  of change  from  baseline  in mean Brief Pain 
Inventory-Short Form  scores for "pain severity" and "worst  pain" domains 
showed a
 decrease  (i.e., improvement) at each visit in the THC/CBD spray 
patients. Similarly, the European Organization for Research and Treatment  
of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-C30 scores showed a decrease  
(i.e., improvement) from  baseline  in the domains of insomnia, pain, and 
fatigue. No new safety concerns associated with the extended use of 
THC/CBD spray arose.Johnson, J. R.,  Lossignol, D., 
Burnell-Nugent,  M.,  and  Fallon,
M. T. (2012). An Open-Label  
Extension Study to
 Investigate  the 
Long-Term  Safety  and 
Tolerability of THC/CBD 
Oromucosal  Spray and 
Oromucosal  THC  Spray  in 
Patients With Terminal  Cancer- 
Related Pain Refractory to Strong 
Opioid Analgesics. J.Pain 
Symptom.Manage.
Chemotherapy induced 
neuropathic pain16    patients    with 
established 
chemotherapy- 
induced neuropathic  
painNabiximolsThere was no  statistically significant  difference  between the treatment  and 
the placebo groups on the NRS-PI. A responder analysis demonstrated that 
there  were  five participants who reported a two-point  or greater reduction 
in pain that trended toward statistical  significance and the number needed 
to treat  was five.Lynch ME,  Cesar-Rittenberg P, 
Hohmann AG. (2014) A double- 
blind, placebo-controlled, 
crossover pilot
trial with extension using an oral 
mucosal  cannabinoid extract  for 
treatment of
chemotherapy-induced 
neuropathic pain. J Pain 
SymptomManage. 47(1):166-173
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 68  of 161Experimental  heat pain7 men (mean age  =
22.5 years, SD = +/-  
1.5) and 10 women 
(mean age = 23.2 
years, SD =  +/- 2.8).Nabilone single doses of
0.5 and 1  mgNabilone  did not reduce  the  global  pain intensity experienced during tonic  
heat pain (all values of p > 0.18), also failed to potentiate  the strength of 
descending inhibitory responses (all values of p > 43). Nevertheless, at the 
highest  dose (1 mg), only for women, nabilone  significantly (p = 0.003) 
dampened the temporal  summation experienced during the last portion of 
the tonic  heat pulse  test (i.e., the period of time during which temporal  
summation is greatest).Redmond, W. J., Goffaux, P., 
Potvin, S., and Marchand, S. 
(2008). Analgesic and 
antihyperalgesic  effects of 
nabilone  on experimental  heat 
pain.    Curr.Med.Res.Opin.    24:
1017-1024.
Electrically induced pain, 
axon reflex flare, and
 
psychometric  variables in 
FM patients9 FM patients2.5-15 mg of delta-9- 
THC, with a
 weekly 
increase  of 2.5 mg, as 
long as no side effects 
were reportedDelta-9-THC  had no  effect  on the axon reflex flare, whereas electrically 
induced pain was significantly attenuated after doses of 10-15 mg delta-9- 
THC  (p < 0.05). Daily-recorded pain of the FM patients was significantly 
reduced (p < 0.01).Schley, M.,  Legler, A., Skopp, G., 
Schmelz, M. and others. (2006). 
Delta-9-THC  based monotherapy 
in fibromyalgia  patients on 
experimentally induced pain, axon 
reflex flare, and pain relief. 
Curr.Med.Res.Opin.    22:    1269-
1276.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 69  of 161Postoperative pain 65Single  oral dose of 
cannabis plant  extract  
(Cannador;  Institute  for 
Clinical  Research, IKF, 
Berlin, Germany) 
(5, 10,
or 15 mg)These  significant  dose-related improvements in rescue  analgesia  
requirements in
 the 10 mg and 15 mg groups provide  a number needed to 
treat that is equivalent  to many routinely used analgesics without  frequent  
adverse effects.Holdcroft, A., Maze, M., Dore, C., 
Tebbs, S. and others. (2006). A
 
multicenter dose-escalation study 
of the analgesic  and adverse  
effects of an oral cannabis extract  
(Cannador) for postoperative  pain 
management.   Anesthesiology. 
104: 1040-1046.
Postoperative pain56 patients with 
moderate  to
 severe  
postoperative  or 
trauma pain1.5, 2.0,  2.5, or 3.0 mg
levonantradol  or placeboSignificant  analgesic  effects of each dose of levonantradol  as  compared to 
placebo (P less than 0.05). However, no significant  dose response  was 
observed. Side effects:  Drowsiness was most  frequent. Dry mouth, 
dizziness, "weird dreams," mild hallucinations, nervousness, apprehension 
and confusion occurred less frequently.Jain, A. K., Ryan, J. R.,  McMahon,
F. G., and Smith, G. (1981). 
Evaluation of intramuscular 
levonantradol  and placebo in acute  
postoperative pain.
 
J.Clin.Pharmacol. 21: 320S-326S
Postoperative pain40 women
undergoing  elective  
abdominal  
hysterectomyIdentical  capsule  of 
eitheroral  delta-9-THC  5
 
mg (n=20) or placebo 
(n=20)There were  no  significant  differences in mean (95% confidence  interval  of 
the difference) SPID at 6 h between the groups [placebo 7.9, delta-9-THC  
4.3(-1.8 to 9.0)cm  h on movement;  placebo 8.8, delta-9-THC  4.9(-0.2 to 
8.1)cm  h at rest] and time to rescue  analgesia  [placebo 217, delta-9-THC  
163(-22 to 130)min].Buggy, D. J., Toogood, L., Maric, 
S., Sharpe, P. and others. (2003). 
Lack of analgesic  efficacy of oral 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  in
 
postoperative  pain. Pain. 106: 169-
172
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 70  of 161Postoperative pain41   patients   (mean 
age  52   +/-  2   yr) 
undergoing 
gynecologic   (46%), 
orthopedic     (44%), 
or other(10%) 
surgery1 mg (n =  11) and 2 mg 
(n = 9) of nabilone, 
ketoprofen 50 mg (n =
11) or placebo (n =  10)Pain scores at rest and on movement  were significantly higher in the  2 mg 
nabilone  group compared to the other groups. There  were  no significant  
differences between groups with respect  to episodes of nausea  and 
vomiting, quality of sleep, sedation, euphoria, pruritus, or the number and 
severity of adverse events. No serious adverse event  was recorded.Beaulieu, P. (2006). Effects of 
nabilone, a
 synthetic  cannabinoid, 
on postoperative pain. 
Can.J.Anaesth. 53: 769-775
Neurogenic symptoms 
unresponsive  to standard 
treatment, and to
 quantify 
adverse effects24 patients with 
multiple  sclerosis 
(18),
 spinal  cord 
injury (4), brachial  
plexus damage  (1), 
and limb amputation 
due to
neurofibromatosis 
(1)Whole-plant  extracts of 
delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC), cannabidiol  
(CBD), 
 1:1  CBD:THC,
or matched placebo (2.5- 
120 mg/24 hours)Pain relief associated with both THC  and CBD was significantly superior 
to
 placebo. Impaired bladder control, muscle  spasms and spasticity were  
improved by CME  in some  patients with these  symptoms. Three  patients 
had transient  hypotension and intoxication with rapid initial  dosing of 
THC-containing CME.Wade, D. T., Robson, P., House, 
H., Makela, P. and others. (2003). 
A
 preliminary controlled study to 
determine  whether whole-plant  
cannabis extracts can improve  
intractable  neurogenic  symptoms. 
Clin.Rehabil. 17:  21-29
Fibromyalgia  (FM) 56Cannabis:  the  route  of 
administration was 
smoking    (54%),    oral
(46%)   and   combined
(43%)After 2  hours of cannabis use, VAS scores showed a statistically significant  
(p<0.001) reduction of pain and stiffness, enhancement  of relaxation, and 
an increase in somnolence and feeling of well being.Fiz, J., Duran, M., Capella, D., 
Carbonell, J. and others. (2011). 
Cannabis use
 in patients with 
fibromyalgia:   effect    on 
symptoms relief and health-related 
quality of life. PLoS.One. 6: 
e18440
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 71  of 161Fibromyalgia  (FM) 40 NabiloneEffect   of  Nabilone   on  Pain  and  Quality  of  Life   in  Patients  With 
FibromyalgiaWinnipeg Regional  Health 
Authority;  Valeant  Canada  
Limited. A
 trial assessing the 
effect  of nabilone  on pain and 
quality of life in patients with 
fibromyalgia. ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00272207. Accessed April  7,
 
2014
Fibromyalgia  (FM)28 FM patients who 
were  cannabis users 
and 28
 non-usersCannabis: smoking 
(54%), 
 oral  (46%)  and
combined (43%)After 2  hours of cannabis use, VAS scores showed a statistically significant  
(p<0.001) reduction of pain and stiffness, enhancement  of relaxation, and 
an increase  in somnolence  and feeling of well being. The mental  health 
component  summary score of the SF-36 was significantly higher (p<0.05) 
in cannabis users than in non-users. No significant differences were found 
in the other SF-36 domains, in the  FIQ and the PSQI.Fiz, J., Duran, M., Capella, D., 
Carbonell, J. and others. (2011). 
Cannabis use
 in patients with 
fibromyalgia:  effect  on symptoms 
relief and health-related quality of 
life. PLoS.One. 6: e18440.-
Headache 128 (survey)Marijuana, hashish,
alcoholic tincture, 
Marinol (5 cases)Napchan, U., Buse, D. C., and 
Loder, E. W. (2011). The use
 of 
marijuana or synthetic  
cannabinoids for the treatment  of 
headache. Headache. 51: 502-505.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 72  of 161Cluster headache  refractory 
to
 multiple  acute  and 
preventive medications1 Marijuana, dronabinolSuccessfully aborted attacks with recreational  marijuana  use;  subsequent  
use
 of dronabinol provided equally effective pain relief.Robbins, M.  S., Tarshish, S., 
Solomon, S., and Grosberg, B. M. 
(2009). Cluster attacks responsive  
to recreational  cannabis and 
dronabinol.  Headache.  49:   914-
916.
Cluster headache (CH) 
attacks139 MarijuanaAmong the  27 patients (19.4% of the total cohort) who had tried cannabis 
to treat CH attacks, 25.9% reported some  efficacy, 51.8% variable  or 
uncertain effects, and 22.3% negative  effects. Cannabis use is very 
frequent  in CH patients, but its efficacy for the treatment  of the attacks is 
limited.Leroux, E.,  Taifas, I., Valade, D., 
Donnet, A. and others. (2012). Use 
of cannabis among 139 cluster 
headache  sufferers. Cephalalgia. 
33: 208-213.
Medication overuse  
headache (MOH)30 MOH  patientsNabilone    0.5   mg/day 
versus ibuprofen 400 mgImprovements from  baseline  were  observed with both treatments. 
However, nabilone  was more  effective  than
 ibuprofen in reducing pain 
intensity and daily analgesic  intake (p < 0.05);  moreover, nabilone  was the 
only drug able to reduce  the level  of medication dependence  (-41 %, p < 
0.01) and to improve  the quality of life (p < 0.05). Side effects were  
uncommon, mild and disappeared when nabilone was discontinued.Pini LA, Guerzoni  S, Cainazzo 
MM, Ferrari  A, Sarchielli  P, 
Tiraferri  I, Ciccarese  M,
 
Zappaterra  M (2012) Nabilone  for 
the treatment  of medication 
overuse  headache:  results of a 
preliminary double-blind, active- 
controlled, randomized trial. J 
Headache Pain. 13(8):677-84
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 73  of 161Spasticity   of   spinal    cord 
injured persons43 questionnaires of 
spinal  cord injured 
personsVariousThe  study  suggests  the  need  to  examine   the  relationship  between 
measurable and reported changes in spasticity.Malec, J., Harvey, R.  F., and 
Cayner, J. J. (1982). Cannabis 
effect  on spasticity in spinal  cord 
injury. Arch.Phys.Med.Rehabil. 
63: 116-118.
Spasticity  and  pain  due   to 
spinal cord injuryComparing 5  mg delta- 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)    p.o.,    50    mg
codeine p.o., and 
placeboDelta-9-THC and codeine  both had an analgesic effect in comparison with 
placebo. Only delta-9-THC  showed a
 significant  beneficial  effect  on 
spasticity.Maurer, M., Henn, V., Dittrich, A., 
and Hofmann, A. (1990). Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol shows 
antispastic  and analgesic  effects 
in 
a  single   case   double-blind  trial. 
Eur.Arch.Psychiatry 
Clin.Neurosci. 240: 1-4.
Spasticity   in   people    with 
spinal cord injury(SCI)12Nabilone  or placebo 
during the first 4-week 
period (0.5mg once a
 
day with option to 
increase  to 0.5mg twice  
a day)There  was a  significant  decrease  on active  treatment  for the Ashworth in 
the most  involved muscle  (mean difference  +/- SD, .909+/-.85;  P=.003), 
as well as the total Ashworth score  (P=.001). There  was no significant  
difference in other measures. Side effects were  mild and tolerable.Pooyania, S., Ethans, K., Szturm, 
T., Casey, A. and others. (2010). A
 
randomized, double-blinded, 
crossover pilot study assessing the 
effect  of nabilone  on spasticity in 
persons with spinal  cord injury. 
Arch.Phys.Med.Rehabil. 91:  703-
707
Spasticity   in   people    with 
spinal cord injury(SCI)12 Nabilone or placeboUniversity  of  Manitoba,  Valeant  
Canada     Limited.    Randomized 
double  blind cross over study for 
nabilone   in  spasticity  in  spinal  
cord injury persons. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00623376.   Accessed   April    7, 
2014.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 74  of 161SCITwenty-five   
patients   with   SCI 
(three-phase   study), 
individua l dose
adjustment, each 
consisting of 6 
weeksOral THC  (starting with 
a
 single  dose of 10 mg), 
rectal  THC-HS, placebo. 
Mean daily doses were  
31 mg with THC  and 43 
mg with THC-HS.Mean SSS for THC  decreased significantly from  16.72 (+/-7.60) at 
baseline  to
 8.92 (+/-7.14) on day 43. Similar improvement  was seen with 
THC-HS.Hagenbach, U., Luz, S., Ghafoor, 
N., Berger, J. M. and others. 
(2007). The treatment of spasticity 
with Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
in
 persons with spinal  cord injury. 
Spinal Cord. 45: 551-562.
Spasticity as  a disabling 
complication of multiple  
sclerosis.572, 19 weeksSativex or placebo 
(Phase  III)Intention-to-treat  (ITT) analysis showed a  highly significant  difference  in 
favour of nabiximols (P=0.0002). Secondary end-points of responder 
analysis, Spasm  Frequency Score, Sleep Disturbance  NRS Patient, Carer 
and Clinician Global  Impression of Change  were  all significant  in favour 
of nabiximolsNovotna, A., Mares, J., Ratcliffe, 
S., Novakova, I. and others. 
(2011). A
 randomized, double- 
blind, placebocontrolled, parallel- 
group, enriched-design study of 
nabiximols* (Sativex((R)) ), as 
add-on therapy, in 
subjects with refractory spasticity 
caused by multiple  sclerosis. 
Eur.J.Neurol. 18: 1122-1131
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 75  of 161Infantile  spasms (IS) and 
Lennox-Gastaut  syndrome  
(LGS)117 parents of 
children with 
epilepsy (including 
53
 with IS or LGS) 
who had
administered CBD  
products to their 
childrenCBD productsPerceived efficacy and tolerability were  similar across etiologic  subgroups. 
Eighty-five  percent  of all parents reported a reduction in seizure  frequency, 
and 14% reported complete  seizure  freedom. Reported side effects were  
far less common during
 CBD exposure, with the exception of increased 
appetite  (30%). A high proportion of respondents reported improvement  in 
sleep (53%), alertness (71%), and mood (63%) during CBD therapy.Hussain SA, Zhou R,  Jacobson C, 
Weng J, Cheng E, Lay J, Hung P, 
Lerner JT, Sankar R (2015) 
Perceived efficacy of cannabidiol- 
enriched cannabis extracts for 
treatment  of pediatric  epilepsy:  A 
potential  role for infantile  spasms 
and Lennox-Gastaut  syndrome. 
Epilepsy Behav. 47:138-41
Spasticity in multiple  
sclerosisDelta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)/cannabidiol  
(CBD) [Sativex®]A significantly greater proportion of THC/CBD than placebo recipients 
achieved a
 ≥ 30% reduction (a clinically relevant  reduction) in spasticity 
severity. The efficacy of THC/CBD has been also shown in at least one 
everyday clinical  practice  study (MOVE  2). THC/CBD was generally well 
tolerated in  clinical trials.Syed YY, McKeage  K, Scott  LJ. 
(2014) Delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol  
(Sativex®):  a review of its
 use in 
patients with moderate  to severe  
spasticity due  to multiple  sclerosis. 
Drugs. 74(5):563-78
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 76  of 161Moderate  to  severe  multiple  
sclerosis spasticity (MSS) 
resistant to other 
medications276 Nabiximols (Sativex®)After 1  month, nabiximols provided relief of resistant  MSS in 74.6% of 
patients according to specialist  assessment;  mean spasticity 0-10 numerical  
rating scale  (NRS) score  decreased from  6.1 ± 1.8 to 5.2 ± 2.0 points;  in 
patients with NRS improvement  ≥20% mean NRS score  decreased by 
40%. After 3 months, 55.3% of patients had continued to use nabiximols 
and the mean NRS score  had decreased by 25% from  baseline. 17% of 
patients reported adverse eventsFlachenecker P, Henze  T, Zettl 
UK. (2014)
 Nabiximols 
(THC/CBD oromucosal  spray, 
Sativex®) in clinical  practice-- 
results of a multicenter, non- 
interventional  study (MOVE  2) in 
patients with multiple  sclerosis 
spasticity. Eur Neurol. 71(5- 
6):271-9
Moderate  to  severe  multiple  
sclerosis spasticity (MSS)52 patients Nabiximols (Sativex®)The mean spasticity numerical  rating scale  (NRS, 0-10) score  decreased 
significantly from  6.0
 ± 1.8 points at MOVE  2 baseline to 4.8 ± 1.9 points 
after 1 month and remained on this level  after 12 months (4.5 ± 2.0 points);  
in patients classified as 'initial responders' (≥20% NRS improvement  after 
1 month) similar results were  found (baseline:  6.3 ±  1.4 points;  after 1
month:  4.0 ± 1.0 points;  after 12  months:  4.3 ± 1.9 points). The majority 
of patients (84%) did not report  adverse events.Flachenecker  P,  Henze   T,  Zettl  
UK. (2014) Long-term  
effectiveness and safety of 
nabiximols 
(tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol  
oromucosal    spray)   in   clinical  
practice. Eur Neurol. 72(1-2):95- 
102
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 77  of 161Moderate  to  severe  multiple  
sclerosis spasticity (MSS)300 patients from  42  
specialized MS
centers across 
GermanyNabiximols (Sativex®)Sativex provided relief of MS-related spasticity in the majority of patients 
who were  previously resistant  to treatment. In addition, clear 
improvements were  noted in MS
 spasticity-associated symptoms (e.g., 
sleep quality, bladder function and mobility), activities of daily living and 
QoL. Sativex was generally well tolerated.Flachenecker P  (2013) A new 
multiple  sclerosis spasticity 
treatment  option:  effect  in 
everyday clinical  practice  and 
cost-effectiveness in Germany. 
Expert  Rev Neurother. 13(3 Suppl  
1):15-9
Spasticity   among   patients 
with multiple sclerosis (MS)50   patients   (42% 
male) with a median 
age 47.8 years (25.6- 
76.8);     38%    were  
diagnosed with 
primary progressive  
MS, 44% with 
secondary 
progressive  MS, and 
18% with relapsing- 
remitting MSInhaled THC/CBDTHC/CBD was effective  in  80% of patients at a median dose of 5 (2-10) 
inhalations/day. The adverse  event  profile  consisted of dizziness (11 
patients),  somnolence   (6),  muscle   weakness  (7),  oral   discomfort   (2),
diarrhoea  (3), dry  mouth (2), blurred vision (2), agitation (1), nausea  (1), 
and paranoid ideation (1).Lorente  Fernández  L, Monte  
Boquet  E, Pérez-Miralles F, Gil 
Gómez  I, Escutia  Roig M, Boscá  
Blasco I, Poveda  Andrés 
JL,Casanova-Estruch B (2014) 
Clinical  experiences with 
cannabinoids in spasticity 
management  in multiple  sclerosis. 
Neurologia. 29(5):257-60
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 78  of 161MS with muscle spasticity630 patients with 
stable  MS
 with 
muscle  spasticity 
from  33 UK centres,
15 week and 12  
months follow upOral Delta(9)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(Delta(9)-THC)
(Dronabinol, 2.5 mg), 
cannabis extract  (2.5 mg 
of D9 -THC  equivalent,
1.25  mg  of  CBD,  and
,5% other cannabinoids 
per 
capsule), or placebo.There  was suggestive  evidence  for treatment  effects of Delta(9)-THC  on 
some  aspects of disability. There  were  no
 majorsafety concerns. Overall, 
patients felt  that these drugs were  helpful in treating their disease.Zajicek, J., Fox, P., Sanders, H., 
Wright, D. and others. (2003). 
Cannabinoids for treatment  of 
spasticity and other 
symptoms related to
 multiple  
sclerosis (CAMS study):  
multicentre  randomised placebo- 
controlled trial.
Lancet.        362:         1517-1526/
Zajicek, J. P., Sanders, H. P., 
Wright, D. E.,
 Vickery, P. J. and 
others. (2005). Cannabinoids in 
multiple sclerosis
(CAMS) study:  safety and  efficacy 
data for 12 months follow up. 
J.Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatry.
76:
1664-1669
Safety    in    spasticity    in 
multiple sclerosis33 patients (60% 
female) aged 33-68 
years and
 a mean 
disease   duration  of
6.6 yearsNabiximols (Sativex®)THC:CBD oromucosal spray did  not adversely influence standard driving 
ability in patients with moderate  to severe  MS spasticity. No additional  
safety concerns were  identified in the registry studies which included 
findings from  patients who have been treated for prolonged periods (in the 
German/UK registry 45% of patients had >2 years exposure).Rekand T. (2014) THC:CBD spray 
and MS spasticity symptoms:  data 
from  latest  studies. Eur
 Neurol. 71 
Suppl 1:4-9
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 79  of 161Course of progressive  
multiple sclerosis498 patientsDronabinol  or placebo 
for 36 months;  
Maximum  dose was 28 
mg per day, titrated 
against  bodyweight  and 
adverse effects.Dronabinol  has  no overall  effect  on the  progression of multiple  sclerosis 
in the progressive phase.Zajicek J, Ball S, Wright  D, 
Vickery J, Nunn A, Miller D, 
Gomez  Cano M, McManus D, 
Mallik S, Hobart  J; CUPID 
investigator group. (2013) Effect  
of dronabinol  on progression in
 
progressive  multiple  sclerosis 
(CUPID):  a randomised, placebo- 
controlled trial. Lancet  Neurol. 
12(9):857-65
Range  of symptoms due  to 
multiple sclerosis 
(MS)160 outpatients with 
MSCannabis-based 
medicinal extract
(CBME) (Sativex)
containing equal  
amounts of delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) 
 and  cannabidiol  
(CBD) at a dose of 2.5- 
120 mg of each daily, in 
divided doses.Reduced from  mean (SE) 74.36 (11.1) to  48.89 (22.0) following CBME
and from  74.31 (12.5) to  54.79 (26.3) following placebo [ns]. Spasticity 
VAS scores were  significantly reduced by CBME  (Sativex) in comparison 
with placebo (P =0.001).Wade, D. T., Makela, P., Robson, 
P., House, H. and others. (2004). 
Do cannabis-based medicinal  
extracts have general  or specific  
effects on symptoms in multiple  
sclerosis?  A
 double-blind, 
randomized, placebocontrolled 
study on 160 patients. Mult.Scler. 
10: 434-441
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 80  of 161Taste and smell  
(chemosensory)perception 
as  well as  appetite, caloric  
intake,  and  quality  of  life  
(QOL)  for  cancer  patients 
with chemosensory 
alterations21 patients 
completed the trialTHC          (2.5         mg,
Marinol(®);  Solvay 
Pharma  Inc.) or placebo 
oral capsules twice daily 
for 
18 daysCompared with placebo, THC-treated patients reported improved (P = 
0.026) and enhanced (P <
 0.001) chemosensory perception and food 'tasted 
better' (P = 0.04). Premeal  appetite  (P = 0.05) and proportion of calories 
consumed as protein increased compared with placebo (P = 0.008). THC- 
treated patients reported increased quality of sleep (P = 0.025) and 
relaxation (P = 0.045).Brisbois, T. D., de  Kock, I. H., 
Watanabe, S. M., Mirhosseini, M. 
and others. (2011). Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol
may palliate  altered chemosensory 
perception in cancer patients:  
results of a randomized, double- 
blind,
placebo-controlled pilot trial. 
Ann.Oncol. 22: 2086-2093
Symptoms associated with 
multiple  sclerosis (MS), 
poorly controlled spasticity57Cannabis-extract  
capsules standardized to
2.5 mg
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)   
 and    0.9    mg 
cannabidiol  (CBD) each. 
Drug   escalation   phase  
from  15 to  maximally 30 
mg THC  by 5 mgNo statistically significant  differences associated with active  treatment  
compared to
 placebo, but trends in favour of active  treatment  were  seen for 
spasm  frequency, mobility and getting to sleep.Vaney, C.,  Heinzel-Gutenbrunner, 
M., Jobin, P., Tschopp, F. and 
others. (2004). Efficacy, safety and 
tolerability of
an orally administered cannabis 
extract  in the treatment  of 
spasticity in patients with multiple  
sclerosis: a
randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, crossover 
study. Mult.Scler. 10: 417-424
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 81  of 161Spasticity in multiple  
sclerosis37 Smoked cannabisReduction in patient scores on the modified Ashworth scale  by  an average  
of 2.74 points more  than placebo (p < 0.0001). In addition, treatment  
reduced pain scores on a visual  analogue  scale  by an average  of 5.28 points 
more than placebo (p = 0.008).Corey-Bloom, J., Wolfson, T., 
Gamst, A., Jin, S. and others. 
(2012). Smoked cannabis for 
spasticity in multiple  
sclerosis:  a
 randomized, placebo- 
controlled trial. CMAJ. 184: 1143-
1150
Spasticity caused by 
multiple  sclerosis189Oromucosal  cannabis- 
based  medicine(CBM), 
6
 weeksThe primary efficacy analysis on the  intention to treat (ITT) population 
showed the active  preparation to be significantly superior (P = 0.048). 40% 
of subjects achieved >30% benefit (P = 0.014).Collin, C., Davies, P., Mutiboko, I. 
K., and Ratcliffe, S. (2007). 
Randomized controlled trial of 
cannabis-based
medicine  in  spasticity caused by 
multiple  sclerosis. Eur.J.Neurol. 
14: 290-296
Spasticity caused by 
multiple sclerosis30 Medicinal  CannabisAssessment   of Reduction in spasticity as indicated by the:  Ashworth 
Spasticity Scale, Timed 25-ft Walk, and Grooved Pegboard Test.Center  for  Medicinal   Cannabis 
Research.  Short-term   effects  of 
medicinal    cannabis   therapy   on 
spasticity  in   multiple   sclerosis. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. 
http://ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NC  
T00248378.   Accessed   April    7, 
2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 82  of 161Spasticity and other 
symptoms in
 multiple  
sclerosis337 subjects with 
MS
 spasticity not 
fully relieved with 
current anti- 
spasticity therapySativex and placeboThe per protocol  (PP) population (79% of subjects) change  in  NRS score  
and responder analyses (> or =30% improvement  from  baseline) were  both 
significantly superior for Sativex, compared with placebo:  -1.3 versus -0.8 
points (change  from  baseline, p=0.035);  and 36% versus 24% (responders, 
p=0.040).Collin C, Ehler E,Waberzinek G, 
et al. (2010) A double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group study of Sativex, in
 
subjects with symptoms of 
spasticity due to multiple  sclerosis. 
Neurol Res. 2010;32(5):451-459
Spasticity and other 
symptoms in
 multiple  
sclerosis137    MS    patients 
with  symptoms  not  
controlled 
satisfactorily   using 
standard drugsOromucosal  cannabis- 
based medicine(CBM), 
average of 
434 daysLong-term  use of an  oromucosal  CBM (Sativex) maintains its effect  in 
those patients who perceive initial benefit.Wade, D. T., Makela, P. M., 
House, H., Bateman, C. and others. 
(2006). Long-term  use
 of a 
cannabis-based
medicine  in  the treatment  of 
spasticity and other symptoms in 
multiple  sclerosis. Mult.Scler. 12: 
639-645
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)279Oral   cannabis   extract  
(CE) or placebo.The rate of relief from  muscle  stiffness after 12  weeks was almost  twice  as 
high with CE  than with placebo (29.4% vs. 15.7%;  OR 2.26; 95% CI 1.24 
to 4.13; p=0.004, one sided).Zajicek, J. P., Hobart, J. C., Slade, 
A., Barnes, D. and others. (2012). 
MUltiple  Sclerosis and Extract  of 
Cannabis:
results of the MUSEC  trial. 
J.Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatry.
83: 1125-1132
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 83  of 161Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)72 subjects (36%) 
reported ever having 
used cannabis for 
any
 purpose;  29 
respondents (14%) 
reported continuing 
use of cannabis for 
symptom  treatment.Medical cannabisThe symptoms reported by  medical  cannabis users to be most  effectively 
relieved were  stress, sleep, mood, stiffness/spasm, and pain.Clark, A. J., Ware, M.  A., Yazer, 
E., Murray, T. J. and others. 
(2004). Patterns of cannabis use 
among patients with multiple  
sclerosis.  Neurology.  62:  2098-
2100.
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)16 patients with MSOral Delta(9)- 
Tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)   
 and    Cannabis 
sativa plant  extractBoth drugs were  safe, but  adverse  events were  more  common with plant- 
extract  treatment. Compared with placebo, neither THC  nor plant-extract  
treatment  reduced spasticity. Both THC  and plant-extract  treatment  
worsened the  participant's global impression.Killestein J, Hoogervorst  ELJ, 
ReifM, et al. (2002) Safety, 
tolerability, and efficacy of orally 
administered cannabinoids in MS. 
Neurology. 2002;
58(9):1404-1407.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 84  of 161Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)Smoked cannabisHobart  JC, Zajicek JP. Cannabis as  
a symptomatic  treatment  for MS: 
Clinically meaningful  MUSEC  to 
the stiffness and walking problems 
of people  with MS. Paper 
presented at: 28th Congress of the 
European Committee  for 
Treatment  and Research in 
Multiple  Sclerosis; October 10-13, 
2012;  Lyon:  France. Mult  Scler. 
2012; 18(4 suppl 1):247
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)Cannabis extractZajicek J, Reif M, Schnelle  M.  
Cannabis extract  in the treatment  
of muscle  stiffness and other 
symptoms in multiple  sclerosis— 
Results of the MUSEC  study. 
Paper presented at: 25th Congress 
of the European Committee  for 
Treatment  and Research in 
Multiple  Sclerosis;  September 9- 
12,  2009;   Dusseldorf:   Germany.
Mult     Scler.      2009;15(9) 
(suppl S):S274
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)Orally administred 
cannabinoidsKillestein J, Hoogervorst  ELJ, 
Kalkers NF, et al. The effects of 
orally administred cannabinoids in
 
multiple  sclerosis patients:  a pilot 
study. Mult  Scler. 2000;6(1 suppl  
1):S28 doi
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 85  of 161Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)Cannabis extractZajicek J, Reif M,  Schnelle  M; UK 
MUSEC  Study Investigators. 
Cannabis extract  in the treatment  
of muscle  stiffness and other 
symptoms in multiple  sclerosis – 
results of the MUSEC  study. Paper 
presented at:  IACM5th 
Conference  on Cannabinoids in 
Medicine;  October 2-3, 2009;  
Cologne, Germany
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)SativexCollin C, Ambler Z, Kent  R,  
McCalla  R. A randomised 
controlled study of Sativex®  in 
patients with symptoms of 
spasticity due to multiple  sclerosis. 
Paper presented at: 22nd Congress 
of the ECTRIMS;  September 27- 
30, 2006; Madrid, Spain.
Symptoms  associated  with 
multiple sclerosis (MS)SativexRobson P,Wade  D, Makela  P, 
House  H, Bateman C. Cannabis- 
based medicinal  extract  (Sativex) 
produced significant  
improvements in a subjective  
measure  of spasticity which were  
maintained on long-term  treatment  
with no
 evidence  of tolerance. 
Paper presented at: IACM 3rd 
Conference  on Cannabinoids in 
Medicine;  September 9-10, 2005;  
Leiden, the Netherlands
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 86  of 161Progression of MS493
subjects with
primary or
secondary 
progressive, but  not 
relapse-remitting, 
MSOrally administered Δ9- 
THCFound no
evidence to  support  an effect  of Δ9-THC  on MS progression, as measured 
by using either the Expanded Disability 
Status Scale  or the Multiple  Sclerosis Impact  Scale  29 (MSIS-29). 
However,      the       authors       concluded       that       there        was 
some  evidence  to suggest  a beneficial  effect  in participants who were  at 
the      lower      end      of      the      disability       scale        at       the 
time of patient enrolment.http://sites.pcmd.ac.uk/cnrg/cupid. 
php
The CUPID (Cannabinoid Use in  
Progressive  Inflammatory Brain 
Disease) study
Urge  incontinence  episodes 
without  affecting voiding in 
patients with multiple  
sclerosis630 (three groups)Oral  administration  of 
cannabis extract, 
Delta(9)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) or matched 
placeboBoth active  treatments showed significant  effects over placebo (cannabis 
extract, p=0.005;  THC, p=0.039). Adjusted episode  rate (i.e. correcting for 
baseline  imbalance) from  baseline  to
 the end of treatment:  cannabis 
extract, 38%;  THC, 33%; and placebo, 18%.Freeman, R.  M., Adekanmi, O., 
Waterfield, M. R., Waterfield, A.
E. and others. (2006). The effect  of 
cannabis on urge incontinence  in
 
patients with multiple  sclerosis:  a 
multicentre, randomised placebo- 
controlled trial (CAMS-LUTS). 
Int.Urogynecol.J.Pelvic.Floor.Dys 
funct. 17: 636-641
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 87  of 161Lower urinary  tract 
symptoms (LUTS) in 
patients with multiple  
sclerosis (MS)21Extracts containing 
delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) 
 and  cannabidiol  
(CBD;   2.5  mg  of  each 
per   spray)   for   eight  
weeks followed by 
THC-only (2.5 mg THC  
per spray) for a  further 
eight  weeksPatient  self-assessment  of pain, spasticity and quality of sleep improved 
significantly (P <0.05, Wilcoxon's signed rank test) with pain 
improvement  continuing up
 to median of 35 weeks.Brady, C.  M., DasGupta, R., 
Dalton, C., Wiseman, O. J. and 
others. (2004). An open-label  pilot 
study of cannabis-based extracts 
for bladder dysfunction in 
advanced multiple  sclerosis. 
Mult.Scler. 10: 425-433
Multiple sclerosis420/673 eligible  
subjects (response  
rate 62%) completed 
questionnairesMedical marijuanaSubjective  improvements in symptom  experience  were  reported by  the 
majority of people with MS who currently use cannabis.Page, S. A., Verhoef, M.  J., 
Stebbins, R. A., Metz, L. M. and 
others. (2003). Cannabis use as 
described by people  with multiple  
sclerosis.   Can.J.Neurol.Sci.   30:
201-205.
Multiple sclerosis6 men and eight  
women with 
multiple sclerosisMedical  marijuana  
(ranged from  very 
infrequent  to
 very 
regular)The perceived benefits of use  were  consistent  with previous reports in  the 
literature:  reduction in pain, spasms, tremors, nausea, numbness, sleep 
problems, bladder and bowel  problems, and fatigue  and improved mood, 
ability to eat and drink, ability to write, and sexual  functioning. Adverse  
effects included problems with cognition, balance, and fatigue  and the 
feeling of being  high.Page, S. A. and Verhoef, M. J. 
(2006). Medicinal  marijuana  use: 
experiences of people  with 
multiple sclerosis. 
Can.Fam.Physician. 52:
 64-65
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 88  of 161Appetite  and quality of life 
(QOL) in
 patients with 
cancer-related anorexia- 
cachexia  syndrome (CACS)289 patients 
screened, 243 were  
randomly assigned 
and 164 (CE, 66
 of 
95 patients;  THC, 65 
of 100 patients;  and 
PL, 33 of 48 
patients) completed 
treatmentCannabis  extract   (CE), 
delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC),    and    placebo 
(PL).Intent-to-treat  analysis showed no  significant  differences between the three  
arms for appetite, QOL, or cannabinoid-related toxicity.Strasser, F., Luftner, D., Possinger, 
K., Ernst, G. and others. (2006). 
Comparison of orally administered 
cannabis
extract and delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  in
 treating 
patients with cancer-related 
anorexia-cachexia
syndrome:  a  multicenter, phase  III, 
randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical  trial 
from the
Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study- 
Group. 
 J.Clin.Oncol.  24:   3394-
3400
Food intake  and body  weight6 adult  male  
research volunteers, 
in
 two groups of 
three  subjects each, 
13 daysTwo cigarettes 
containing active  
marijuana  (2.3% delta  9
 
THC) or placebo per daySmoked active  marijuana  significantly increased total  daily caloric  intake  
by
 40%.Foltin, R. W., Fischman, M.  W., 
and Byrne, M. F. (1988). Effects of 
smoked marijuana  on food intake  
and body
weight  of humans living in  a 
residential  laboratory. Appetite. 
11: 1-14
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 89  of 161Effects across a  range  of 
behaviors: eating 
topography, mood, cognitive  
performance, physiologic  
measures, and sleep.10 HIV(+)
marijuana smokersDronabinol  (5 and 10 
mg) and
 marijuana  
(2.0%  and  3.9%  THC)
dose was administered 4  
times daily for 4 daysAs compared with placebo, marijuana  and dronabinol  dose dependently 
increased daily caloric  intake
 and body weight  in HIV-positive  marijuana  
smokers. Effects of marijuana  and dronabinol  were  comparable, except  
that only marijuana  (3.9% THC) improved ratings of sleep.Haney, M.,  Gunderson, E. W., 
Rabkin, J., Hart, C. L. and others. 
(2007). Dronabinol  and marijuana  
in HIV-positive  marijuana  
smokers. Caloric  intake, mood, 
and sleep.
J.Acquir.Immune.Defic.Syndr. 45:
545-554
Appetite  and quality of life 
(QOL) in
 patients with 
cancer-related anorexia- 
cachexia  syndrome (CACS)164CE (standardized for 2.5 
mg THC  and
 1 mg 
cannabidiol) or  THC  
(2.5 mg) or PL orally, 
twice daily for 6 weeksIntent-to-treat  analysis showed no  significant  differences between the three  
arms for appetite, QOL, or cannabinoid-related toxicity. Increased appetite  
was reported by 73%, 58%, and 69% of patients receiving CE, THC, or 
PL, respectively.Strasser, F., Luftner, D., Possinger, 
K., Ernst, G. and others. (2006). 
Comparison of orally administered 
cannabis
extract and delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  in
 treating 
patients with cancer-related 
anorexia-cachexia
syndrome:  a  multicenter, phase  III, 
randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical  trial 
from the
Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study- 
Group. 
 J.Clin.Oncol.  24:   3394-
3400
Anorexia   due  to  advanced 
cancer19THC  2.5  mg p.o. t.i.d. 
one hour after meals for 
four weeksThirteen patients reported an improved appetiteNelson, K., Walsh, D., Deeter, P., 
and Sheehan, F. (1994). A
 phase  II 
study of delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol for 
appetite  stimulation in cancer- 
associated anorexia. J.Palliat.Care. 
10: 14-18
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 90  of 161Palliating  cancer-associated 
anorexia469Oral megestrol  acetate  
800 mg/d liquid 
suspension plus placebo, 
oral dronabinol  2.5 mg 
twice  a
 day plus placebo, 
or both agentsIn the  doses and schedules we studied, megestrol  acetate  provided superior 
anorexia  palliation among advanced cancer patients compared with 
dronabinol  alone. Combination therapy did not appear to confer additional  
benefit.Jatoi, A., Windschitl, H. E.,  
Loprinzi, C. L., Sloan, J. A. and 
others. (2002). Dronabinol  versus 
megestrol acetate
versus combination therapy for  
cancer-associated anorexia:  a 
North Central  Cancer Treatment  
Group
study. J.Clin.Oncol. 20:  567-573
Anorexia  nervosa  (AN) 11 female patientsΔ9-THC  in  daily doses 
from  7.5 mg (2.5 mg, 
t.i.d.) to a maximum  of 
30 mg (10 mg, t.i.d.), 90 
min
before  meals, for a  
period of two weeks.Δ9-THC   produced  a  weight   gain  equivalent   to  the   active   placebo 
(diazepam)Gross, H., Ebert, M.  H., Faden, V. 
B., Goldberg, S. C. and others. 
(1983). A double-blind trial of 
delta 9-
tetrahydrocannabinol  in primary 
anorexia nervosa.
J.Clin.Psychopharmacol.  3:  165-
171
Severe, longstanding 
anorexia  nervosa  (AN)25 women over 18  
years with AN of at 
least 5 years 
durationDronabinol, 2.5 mg 
twice  daily for 4
 weeks 
and matching  placebo 
for 4 weeks, separated 
by a 4-week wash-out  
period.During dronabinol  treatment, participants gained 0.73 kg  (t = 2.86, df = 22, 
p < 0.01) above placebo without  significant psychotropic adverse events.Andries A, Frystyk J, Flyvbjerg A, 
Støving RK. Dronabinol  in
 severe, 
enduring anorexia  nervosa:  a 
randomized controlled trial. Int J 
Eat Disord. 2014 Jan;47(1):18-23
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 91  of 161Anorexia  and disturbed 
behavior in patients with 
Alzheimer's 
disease15 patients, 6  weeks DronabinolBody weight  of study subjects increased more  during the  dronabinol  
treatment  than during the placebo periods.Dronabinol  treatment  decreased 
severity of disturbed behavior and this effect  persisted during the placebo 
period in patientswho received dronabinol first.Volicer, L., Stelly, M.,  Morris, J., 
McLaughlin, J. and others. (1997). 
Effects of dronabinol  on anorexia  
and disturbed
behavior in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease. 
Int.J.Geriatr.Psychiatry. 
 12:  913-
919
Weight  lossPlacebo, 5  mg 
rimonabant, or 20mg 
rimonabant  once daily in 
addition to a mild 
hypocaloric  diet (600 
kcal/day deficit)Weight  loss at  1 year was significantly greater in patients treated with 
rimonabant 5 mg (mean -3.4 kg [SD 5.7]; p=0.002 vs placebo) and 20 mg 
(-6.6 kg [7.2];  p<0.001 vs placebo) compared with placebo (-1.8 kg [6.4]). 
Significantly morepatients treated with rimonabant  20 mg than placebo 
achieved weight  loss of 5% or greater (p<0.001) and 10% or greater 
(p<0.001).Van Gaal LF, Rissanen AM, 
Scheen AJ, Ziegler O, Rössner S; 
RIO-Europe  Study Group. (2005) 
Effects of the
 cannabinoid-1 
receptor blocker rimonabant  on 
weight reduction and 
cardiovascularrisk factors in 
overweight  patients:  1-year 
experience  from  the RIO-Europe  
study.
Lancet.       2005        Apr       16-
22;365(9468):1389-97
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 92  of 161Caloric  intake, sleep quality 
in
 HIV-positive  marijuana  
smokers7, marijuana  
4.2 ± 2.3 days/week,Two 16-day stays, 
dronabinol  (10 mg QID) 
in
 one stay and placebo 
in the otherDespite  sustained increases in  self-reported food cravings, dronabinol  only 
increased caloric  intake  in the initial  8 days of dosing. Similarly, sleep 
quality was improved only in the first 8 days of dosing. Dronabinol's 
mood-enhancing effects were  sustained across the 16-day inpatient  stay. 
Dronabinol  was well tolerated, causing few negative  subjective  or 
cognitive effects.Bedi, G., Foltin, R. W., 
Gunderson, E.
 W., Rabkin, J. and 
others. (2010). Efficacy and 
tolerability of high-dose  
dronabinol  maintenance  in HIV- 
positive  marijuana  smokers:  a 
controlled laboratory study. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 212:
675-686.
HIV wasting syndrome39 completed the 
planned 12 weeks of 
study visitsDronabinol  2.5 mg 
twice/day (D);  
megestrol  acetate  750 
mg/da y (M750);  
megestrol    acetate    750
mg/day+dronabinol  2.5 
mg twice/day 
(M750+D); or megestrol  
acetate 250
mg/day+dronabinol   2.5
mg twice/day 
(M250+D)The mean weight  change  +/- SE  over 12  weeks was as follows:  D, -2.0 +/-  
1.3 kg;  M750, +6.5 +/- 1.1 kg;  M750+D, +6.0 +/- 1.0 kg;  and M250+D, -
0.3 +/- 1.0 kg  (difference among treatment  arms, p =  0.0001).Timpone, J. G., Wright, D. J., Li, 
N., Egorin, M.
 J. and others. 
(1997). The safety and 
pharmacokinetics of singleagent  
and combination therapy with 
megestrol  acetate  and dronabinol  
for the treatment  of HIV wasting 
syndrome. The DATRI 004 Study 
Group. Division of AIDS 
Treatment  Research Initiative. 
AIDS
Res.Hum.Retroviruses.  13:  305-
315
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 93  of 161AIDS-related anorexia12 HIV-infected 
patients who had 
had at
 least a 2.25- 
kg weight  lossDronabinol  5  mg twice  
daily before  meals or 
placeboDuring dronabinol  treatment, subjects experienced increased percent  body 
fat (one percent, p
 = 0.04);  decreased symptom  distress (p = 0.04);  and 
trends toward weight  gain (0.5 kg, p = 0.13), increased prealbumin (29.0 
mg/L, p = 0.11), and improved appetite score (p = 0.14).Struwe  M,  Kaempfer SH, Geiger 
CJ,    et    al.     (1997)     Effect  
of dronabinol  on nutritional  status 
in HIV infection. Ann 
Pharmacother. 27(7-8):827-831
AIDS-related anorexia 1392.5 mg dronabinol  twice  
daily or
 placeboDronabinol  was associated with increased appetite  above  baseline  (38% vs 
8%
 for placebo, P = 0.015), improvement  in mood (10% vs -2%, P = 0.06), 
and decreased nausea  (20% vs 7%; P = 0.05). Weight  was stable  in 
dronabinolpatients, while  placebo recipients had a mean loss of 0.4 kg (P
= 0.14). Of the dronabinol  patients, 22% gained > or =  2 kg, compared with 
10.5% of placebo recipients (P =  0.11).Beal, J. E.,  Olson, R., Laubenstein, 
L., Morales, J. O. and others. 
(1995). Dronabinol  as a treatment  
for anorexia
associated with weight  loss in  
patients with AIDS. J.Pain 
Symptom.Manage. 10: 89-97
AIDS-related anorexia94 late-stage  
acquired 
immunodeficiency 
syndrome  
(AIDS)patients 
(mean CD4 count  of 
45/mm3), 12
monthsDronabinol orally-2.5 
mg twice  daily (90%)
 or
2.5 mg once  daily (10%)Dronabinol  was associated with a  VASH change  at  least twice  baseline  and 
stable body weight  for at least 7 monthsBeal, J. E.,  Olson, R., Lefkowitz, 
L., Laubenstein, L. and others. 
(1997). Long-term  efficacy and 
safety of dronabinol  
for acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome-associated anorexia. 
J.Pain Symptom.Manage. 14:  7-14
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 94  of 161Acute  effects on caloric  
intake  and mood in HIV(+) 
marijuana smokers30 HIV(+)
marijuana  smokers 
with and without  
clinically significant  
loss 
of muscle massDronabinol   (0,  10,  20,
30 mg p.o.) and 
marijuana  [0.0, 1.8,
 2.8, 
3.9% Delta(9)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)]Marijuana and dronabinol significantly increased caloric intake in the low 
bioelectrical  impedance  analysis (BIA) group but not in the normal  BIA 
group;drug effects 
on cognitive performance were  minorHaney, M.,  Rabkin, J., Gunderson, 
E., and Foltin, R. W. (2005). 
Dronabinol  and marijuana  in 
HIV(+) marijuana  
smokers:  acute effects on caloric  
intake and mood. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 181:
170-178
Improvement  in  quality of 
life, disease  activity and 
weight  gain in Inflammatory 
bowel  disease  (IBD) patients13, 3  months Inhaled cannabisImprovement  in  general  health perception (p = 0.001), social  functioning 
(p = 0.0002), ability to work (p = 0.0005), physical  pain (p = 0.004) and 
depression (p = 0.007). Patients had a weight  gain of 4.3 ± 2 kg during 
treatment  (range  2-8; p = 0.0002) and an average  rise in BMI of 1.4 ± 0.61 
(range  0.8-2.7;  p = 0.002). The average  Harvey-Bradshaw index was 
reduced from  11.36 ± 3.17 to 5.72 ± 2.68 (p = 0.001).Lahat, A., Lang, A., and Ben- 
Horin, S. (2012). Impact  of 
cannabis treatment  on the
 quality 
of     life,     weight       and 
clinical  disease  activity in 
inflammatory bowel  disease  
patients:  a pilot prospective  study. 
Digestion. 85: 1-8
Antiemetic  effect13 healthy volunteer 
with ipecac  induced 
emesis.Smoked marijuana  
cigarettes (8.4 and 16.9 
mg Delta(9)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
[THC])   
 compared    to 
antiemetic drug, 
ondansetron (8 mg)Marijuana   significantly  reduced  ratings  of  "queasiness"  and  slightly 
reduced the incidence of vomiting compared to placebo.Soderpalm, A. H., Schuster, A., 
and de, Wit H. (2001). Antiemetic  
efficacy of smoked marijuana:  
subjective and
behavioral  effects on nausea  
induced by
 syrup of ipecac. 
Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.     69:
343-350
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 95  of 161Antiemetic  effectLevonantradol and 
ProchlorperazineLong A,Mioduszewski  J, Natale  R.  
(1982) A randomized double-blind 
cross-over comparison 
of the antiemetic  activity of 
levonantradol and 
prochlorperazine. Proc Am Soc 
Clin Oncol. 1: C-220.
Antiemetic  effect THC  vs hydroxizineBroder LE, Lean NL, Hilsenbeck 
SG. (1982)
A randomized blinded clinical  trial 
comparing
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) 
 and  hydroxizine   (HZ)  as 
antiemetics    (AE)    for    cancer 
chemotherapy   (CT).   Proc    Am  
Assoc  Cancer Res. ;23:514
Antiemetic  effect36 patients whose  
vomiting was
refractory to  
standard antiemetic  
therapyOral delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC), 15 mg/m2, was 
compared to
prochlorperazine  (PCZ), 
10
 mgTHC  decreased nausea and vomiting in 23 of 36 (64%) patients compared 
to
 1 of 36 receiving PCZ. THC  efficacy was not dependent  on the class of 
antineoplastic-agent  inducing the emetic  symptoms, age of patients or type 
of sensorial change experienced.McCabe  M, Smith FP, Macdonald 
JS,Woolley
PV, Goldberg D, Schein PS.(1988) 
Efficacy of
tetrahydrocannabinol   in  patients 
refractory to
standard antiemetic  therapy. Invest  
New Drugs.
6(3):243-246
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 96  of 161Antiemetic  effect38 patients receiving 
highly   
 emetogenic  
chemotherapy 
regimens (70% 
containing cisplatin)Butyrophenone  
analogue   
 domperidone
(D) versus the synthetic  
cannabinoid  nabilone  
(N)Nausea  and food intake  scores did not differ significantly, although there  
was a trend towards less nausea  and an increased food intake  with N. 
Subjectively adverse  effects were  more  frequent  with N and included 
drowsiness, dizziness, dry
 mouth, and postural hypotension. N is superior 
to D for the  control of cytotoxic-induced emesisPomeroy M,  Fennelly JJ, Towers
M. (1986) Prospective  randomized 
double-blind trial of nabilone  
versus domperidone  in the 
treatment  of cytotoxic-induced 
emesis. Cancer Chemother 
Pharmacol. 17(3):  285-288.
Antiemetic  effect18 eligible  children, 
aged 10
 months to 
17 yearsNabilone versus 
domperidoneWhen taking nabilone  they experienced significantly fewer vomiting 
episodes and less nausea, and two thirds expressed a
 preference  for the 
drug. The most  common side effects of treatment  with nabilone  were  
somnolence  and dizziness, with one patient  being  disturbed by 
hallucinations.Dalzell  AM, Bartlett  H, Lilleyman 
JS. (1986) Nabilone:  an
 alternative  
antiemetic for cancer 
chemotherapy. Arch Dis Child. 
61(5):502-505.
Antiemetic  effect 16 patients1 mg levonantradol, 
versus 10
 mg 
prochlorperazineThere  were  no  statistical  differences in patients' responses to levonantradol  
and prochlorperazine. The frequency of side effects was greater with 
levonantradol than with prochlorperazine.Sheidler VR, Ettinger DS, Diasio 
RB, Enterline
JP, Brown MD. (1984) Double- 
blind multiple-dose  
crossover study  of the
 antiemetic  
effect of
intramuscular levonantradol  
compared to
prochlorperazine. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 24(4):155-159.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 97  of 161Antiemetic  effect DronabinolHarden-Harrison MM, 
MunsellMF,         Fisch         MJ, 
et al. (2012) Dronabinol  for the
 
prevention of nausea  from  
cyclophosphamide and/or
adriamycin. Paper 
presented at: International  
MASCC/ISOO Symposium:  
Supportive  Care in
 Cancer;  June 
28-30,   2012;    New   York,   NY.
Support Care Cancer. 
2012;20:S209-S210.
Antiemetic  effect/CINV 16Whole-plant     cannabis- 
based  medicine   (CBM) 
containing delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
and cannabidiol, taken in 
conjunction with 
standard therapies in the  
control of CINV.A higher proportion of patients in the  CBM group experienced a  complete  
response  during the overall  observation period [5/7 (71.4%) with CMB  vs. 
2/9 (22.2%) with placebo, the difference  being 49.2% (95% CI 1%, 75%)], 
due to the delayed period. The incidence  of AEs was higher in the CBM 
group (86% vs. 67%). No serious AEs were  reported.Duran M,  Pיrez E, Abanades S, et 
al. (2010) Preliminary efficacy and 
safety of an oromucosal  
standardized cannabis extract  in 
chemotherapy induced 
nausea  and vomiting. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 70(5):656-663
Antiemetic  effect/CINV 64 patientsDronabinol, 
ondansetron, or the  
combinationNausea  absence  was significantly greater in  active  treatment  groups 
(dronabinol, 71%;  ondansetron, 64%;  combination therapy, 53%) versus 
placebo (15%;  p < 0.05 vs. placebo for all). Nausea  intensity and 
vomiting/retching were  lowest  in patients treated with dronabinol.Meiri  E, Jhangiani  H, 
Vredenburgh JJ, et al. (2007) 
Efficacy of dronabinol  alone  and
 
in combination
with ondansetron versus 
ondansetron alone for 
delayed chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and
vomiting. Curr Med Res Opin. 
23(3):533-543
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
A P P R O V E D B Y T H E Y A L E U NI V E R SI T Y I R B 9/ 2 7/ 2 0 1 7 V A LI D T H R O U G H 1 0/ 2 5/ 2 0 1 8 Pa ge 9 8  of  1 6 1 A ntie metic  effect/ CI N V Dr o na bi n ol a n d  
pr oc hl or perazi ne  al o ne  
a n d i n  c o m bi nati o n A d diti o n  of  pr oc hl or perazi ne  t o  dr o na bi n ol  a p peare d  t o  decrease  t he  
fre q ue nc y  of  d ys p h oric effects  see n  wit h t he  latter  a ge nt.  T he  c o m bi nati o n  
was  si g nifica ntl y  m ore  effecti ve  t ha n  was  eit her  si n gle  a ge nt  i n  c o ntr olli n g  
c he m ot hera p y-i n d uce d na usea a n d  v o miti n g. La ne  M,  V o gel  C L,  Fer g us o n  J,  et  
al. ( 1 9 9 1)  Dr o na bi n ol  
a n d  pr oc hl or perazi ne  i n  
c o m bi nati o n       f or       treat me nt  
of  ca ncer  c he m ot hera p y-i n d uce d  
na usea a n d 
v o miti n g.  J Pai n  S y m pt o m  
Ma na ge. 6( 6): 3 5 2- 3 5 9 
A ntie metic  effect/ CI N V 2 0 
n o nse mi n o mat o us  
testicular ca ncer  
patie nts Na bil o ne  ( 2  X 2 m g/ da y) 
or  aliza pri de  ( 3  X 1 5 0  
m g/ da y)  pri or  t o  
be gi n ni n g  l o w- d ose  
cis plati n c he m ot hera p y Patie nts  o n  na bil o ne  ha d si g nifica ntl y  fe wer  e pis o des  of  e mesis  t ha n t h ose  
o n  aliza pri de  ( me dia ns,  1. 1  vs  2. 9;  p less  t ha n  0. 0 1).  Na bil o ne  was  s u peri or  
t o  aliza pri de  i n  gi vi n g  c o m plete  relief  fr o m  na usea  ( me dia ns,  6 5 %  vs  3 0 %;  
p less  t ha n  0. 0 1),  a n d  was  m ore  effecti ve  i n  s h orte ni n g  t he  d urati o n  of  
na usea  ( me dia ns,  1. 3  h vs  5. 1  h;  p less  t ha n  0. 0 1);  h o we ver,  it  ca use d  m ore  
a d verse effects. Nie derle  N,  Sc h tte  J,  Sc h mi dt  
C G.  ( 1 9 8 6)  Cr oss o ver  c o m paris o n  
of  t he  a ntie metic  efficac y  of  
na bil o ne  a n d  aliza pri de  i n  patie nts  
wit h n o nse mi n o mat o us  
testic ular  ca ncer  recei vi n g  
cis plati n therapy. Kli n  
W oc he nsc hr. 6 4( 8): 3 6 2- 3 6 5 
A ntie metic  effect/ CI N V 2 4 l u n g ca ncer  
patie nts recei vi n g  
ca ncer  
c he m ot hera p y 2 m g  of  na bil o ne,  or  1 5  
m g of  pr oc hl or perazi ne Na bil o ne  was  si g nifica ntl y  s u peri or  t o  pr oc hl or perazi ne  i n  t he  re d ucti o n  of  
v o miti n g  e pis o des.  Si de  effects,  mai nl y  verti g o,  were  e vi de nt  i n  nearl y  half  
of  t he  patie nts  after  na bil o ne,  a n d  t hree  patie nts  were  wit h dra w n  fr o m  t he  
st u d y  d ue  t o  decrease d  c o or di nati o n  a n d hall uci nati o ns  after  na bil o ne. Niira ne n  A,  Matts o n  K.  ( 1 9 8 5)  A 
cr oss- o ver 
c o m paris o n  of  na bil o ne  a n d  
prochlorperazine f or  
e mesis  i n d uce d  b y  ca ncer  
c he m ot hera p y.  A m   J  Cli n  
O nc ol.  8( 4): 3 3 6- 3 4 0. A P P R O V E D B Y T H E Y A L E U NI V E R SI T Y I R B 9/ 2 7/ 2 0 1 7 V A LI D T H R O U G H 1 0/ 2 5/ 2 0 1 8 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 99  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV57   cancer   patients 
receiving 
chemotherapyLow-dose  levonantradol  
or standard-dose  
metoclopramide  and 
crossed over to
 the other 
antiemetic  drug in the 
next identical  
chemotherapy cyclePatient  preference  for antiemetic  treatment  was levonantradol  in 49% and 
metoclopramide  in 22% of cases. Levonantradol  treatment  was 
accompanied by
 a relatively high incidence  of side-effects (71%) 
compared with metoclopramide (29%)HeimME, QueisserW, Altenburg 
HP. (1984)
Randomized crossover study of 
the
 antiemetic  activity of 
levonantradol  and metoclopramide  
in
cancer patients receiving 
chemotherapy. Cancer 
Chemother Pharmacol. 13(2):123-
125
Antiemetic  effect/CINV 108 patientLevonantradol  (0.5, 0.75 
or 1
 mg) or 
chlorpromazine  (25 mg) 
prior to receiving first 
course  of cytotoxic  
therapyLevonantradol  (0.5 mg) was superior to chlorpromazine  (25 mg) as  an anti- 
emetic. Both were  reasonably well tolerated, although at this dose of 
levonantradol  22% of patients experienced dysphoric  reactions. At higher 
doses of levonantradol  the proportion of patients experiencing these  
reactions rose to 50%, but without  a concomitant  increase  in antiemetic  
activity. Neither drug achieved satisfactory control  of vomiting in patients 
receiving combinations containing cis-platinum.Hutcheon AW, Palmer JB, Soukop 
M, et al. (1983) 
A randomised multicentre  single  
blind comparison
of a  cannabinoid anti-emetic  
(levonantradol) with 
chlorpromazine  in patients 
receiving their first  
cytotoxic  chemotherapy. Eur J 
Cancer Clin Oncol. 
19(8):1087-1090
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 100  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV20    patients    with 
advanced 
gynaecological  
cancer who received 
chemotherapy 
including cis- 
platinumNabilone  3  mg, orally 
three  times a day, 
Chlorpromazine   12.5 
mg given IM, 15 
minutes before  the start 
of cis-platinumNabilone, in comparison with chlorpromazine  did not significantly reduce  
the
 number of vomiting. Ten patients preferred nabilone, 5 preferred 
chlorpromazine  and 3 were  undecided. Predominant  side effects noted by 
patients were  similar for both agents and included somnolence, dry mouth 
and orthostatic hypotension.George  M,  Pejovic  MH, Thuaire  
M, Kramar A, 
Wolff JP. (1983) [Randomized 
comparative  trial of a new anti- 
emetic:  nabilone, in  cancer 
patients treated with cisplatin]. 
Biomed  Pharmacother.  37(1):24-
27
Antiemetic  effect/CINVNabilone vs
placeboJones SE, Durant  JR, Greco FA, 
Robertone A. (1982) 
A multi-institutional  phase  III 
study    of    nabilone      vs 
placebo in chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and
vomiting. Cancer Treat  Rev. 
9(suppl B):45-48
Antiemetic  effect/CINVNabilone vs
placeboWada  JK, Bogdon DL, Gunnell  
JC,       Hum        GJ,        Gota  
CH, Rieth TE. (1982) Double- 
blind, randomized, crossover trial 
of nabilone  vs placebo in
 cancer 
chemotherapy. Cancer Treat  Rev. 
9(suppl B):39-44
Antiemetic  effect/CINVNabilone vs.
prochlorperazineJohansson R,  Kilkku P, Groenroos 
M. (1982)
A double-blind, controlled trial of 
nabilone vs.
prochlorperazine  for refractory 
emesis induced by
 cancer 
chemotherapy. Cancer Treat  Rev. 
9(suppl
B):25-33
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 101  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV55 patients 
harboring a
 variety 
of neoplasms and 
previously found to 
have severe  nausea  
or emesis from  
antitumor drugsDelta 9-
Tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC),
prochlorpe razine, and 
placeboNausea  was absent in 40  of 55 patients receiving THC, in 8 of 55 patients 
receiving prochlorperazine, and in 5 of 55 in the placebo group. THC  
appeared to be more  efficacious in controlling the emesis associated with 
cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, and doxorubicin and less so for 
nitrogen mustard and the nitrosourea.Orr LE, McKernan JF. (1981) 
Antiemetic  effect  of delta  9-
tetrahydrocannabinol in
 
chemotherapy associated nausea  
and emesis as compared to placebo 
and compazine. J Clin Pharmacol. 
21(8-9
suppl):76S-80S
Antiemetic  effect/CINV80 evaluable  
patients receiving 
chemotherapyNabilone versus 
prochlorperazineSixty patients (75 per cent) reported nabilone  to  be more  effective  than 
prochlorperazine  for relief of nausea  and vomiting. Of these  60 patients, 
46 required further chemotherapy and continued taking nabilone  as the 
antiemetic of choice.Einhorn LH, Nagy C,  Furnas B, 
Williams SD. (1981) 
Nabilone:  an effective  antiemetic  
in patients receiving cancer 
chemotherapy. J Clin Pharmacol. 
21(8-9 suppl):64S-69S
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 102  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV55 patients 
previously found to
 
have severe  nausea  
or emesis from  
antitumor drugsTetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC),
prochlorpe razine, and 
placeboNausea  was absent  in  40 of 55 patients receiving THC, eight  of 55 patients 
receiving prochlorperazine, and five of 55 in the placebo group. The 
antiemetic  effect  of THC  appeared to be more  efficacious for 
cyclophosphamide, fluorouracil, and doxorubicin hydrochloride, and less 
so for mechlorethamine  hydrochloride and the nitrosureas.Orr LE, McKernan JF, Bloome  B.  
(1980)Antiemetic
effect    of   tetrahydrocannabinol:  
compared with
placebo  and  prochlorperazine   in 
chemotherapyassociated
nausea   and  emesis.  Arch  Intern 
Med. 140(11):1431-1433.
Antiemetic  effect/CINV37 patients receiving 
cancer 
chemotherapyNabilone given at a  dose  
of 2 mg every 12 hours 
versus         slow-release
capsule s of
prochlorperazine  given 
at
 a dose of 10 mg every 
12 hoursEighteen of the  37 patients achieved a complete  or partial  elimination of 
symptoms:  seven with nabilone  alone, three  with prochlorperazine  alone, 
and eight  with each drug. Nabilone  appeared to be the more  effective  
antiemetic for patients who received chemotherapy agents other than high 
dose DDP;  it was equivalent  to prochlorperazine  for those  who did receive  
high-dose DDP.Steele  N, Gralla  RJ, Braun DWJr, 
Young CW. (1980)
Double-blind comparison of the 
antiemetic effects
of nabilone  and prochlorperazine  
on
chemotherapy-induced emesis. 
Cancer Treat Rep. 
64(2-3):219-224
Antiemetic  effect/CINV25 patients who had 
failed to
 benefit  
from standard 
antiemetic therapyTHC versus
prochlorperazine  
(compazine)THC  is  an effective  antiemetic  in many patients who receive  chemotherapy 
for cancer and for whom  other antiemetics are ineffectiveSallan SE, Cronin C,  Zelen M, 
Zinberg NE. (1980) Antiemetics in 
patients receiving chemotherapy 
for
cancer:  a randomized comparison 
of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
and
prochlorperazine. N  Engl J Med. 
302(3):135-138.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 103  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV116 patients 
(median age 61 
years) receiving 
combined 5-
fluorouracil and 
semustine     (methyl  
CCNU) therapy for 
gastrointestinal  
carcinomaTHC, 15  mg orally three  
times a day, 
prochlorperazine, 10 mg 
orally three  times a day, 
or placeboThe THC  had superior antiemetic activity in  comparison to placebo, but it  
showed no advantage  over prochlorperazine. Central  nervous system side- 
effects, however, were  significantly more  frequent  and more  severe  with 
THCFrytak S, Moertel  CG, O’Fallon 
JR, et al. (1979)
Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol  as  an 
antiemetic for
patients receiving cancer 
chemotherapy:
a comparison with 
prochlorperazine  and a
 placebo. 
Ann Intern Med. 91(6):825-830
Antiemetic  effect/CINV34 patients with lung 
cancer undergoing a
 
3-day schedule  of 
chemotherapy with 
Cyclophosphamide, 
Adriamycin and 
EtoposideNabilone versus 
ProchlorperazineSymptom  scores were  significantly better for patients on nabilone  for 
nausea, retching and vomiting (P less than 0.05). Fewer subjects vomited 
with nabilone  (P =
 0.05) and the number of vomiting episodes was lower 
(P less than 0.05);  no patients on nabilone  required additional  parenteral  
anti-emetic.Ahmedzai  S, Carlyle  DL, Calder 
IT,       
 Moran        F.        (1983)
Anti-emetic  efficacy and toxicity 
of nabilone, a
 synthetic  
cannabinoid, in lung cancer 
chemotherapy. Br J Cancer. 
48(5):657-663
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 104  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINV214 (75% of whom  
had previously 
received Compazine  
with varying results)Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) versus 
prochlorperazine  
(Compazine);
THC  was administered 
by
 body surface  area 
(BSA):   BSA  less  than
1.4 m2 =  7.5 mg; BSA 
1.4-1.8 m2 = 10- mg; 
and BSA greater than 
1.8 m2 =  12.5 mgThere  were  significant  drug effects with THC:  less ability to  concentrate  
(P less than 0.01), less social  interaction (P less than 0.05), and less activity 
(P less than 0.05). There  were  no significant  differences between the two 
drugs in the level of food intake or appetite.Ungerleider JT, Andrysiak T, 
Fairbanks L, Goodnight  J, Sarna  
G, Jamison K. (1982)
 Cannabis 
and cancer chemotherapy:  a 
comparison of oral
delta-9-THC and
prochlorpe razine. Cancer. 
50(4):636-645.
Antiemetic  effect/CINV DronabinolGrunberg SM,  MunsellMF, 
Morrow PKH, et al. (2012) 
Randomized double-blind 
evaluation       of       dronabinol  
for the prevention of 
chemotherapy-induced
nausea. Paper presented at: Annual  
Meeting of the American Society 
of Clinical  Oncology (ASCO); 1-5 
Jun
 2012;  Chicago, IL. J Clin 
Oncol. 2012;30(15)(suppl  
1):9061.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 105  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINVDronabinol versus 
prochlorperazineLane  M,  Vogel  CL, Ferguson J, et 
al. (1989) Dronabinol  
and prochlorperazine  in 
combination are better 
than either single  agent  alone  for 
treatment of
chemotherapy-induced nausea  and 
vomiting. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol. 8:326.
Antiemetic  effect/CINV Nabilone vs placeboLevittM. (1982) Nabilone  vs 
placebo     in     the      treatment  
of chemotherapy-induced nausea  
and vomiting in
 
cancer patients. Cancer Treat  Rev. 
9(suppl B):49-53.
Antiemetic  effect/CINVNabilone vs
prochlorperazineChan HS, MacLeod SM,  Correia  
JA. (1984) Nabilone  vs 
prochlorperazine  for control  of 
cancer chemotherapy-induced 
emesis in children. Proc Am Soc 
Clin Oncol. 3:108.
Antiemetic  effect/CINVDronabinol  (10 - 20 mg) 
versus
Ondansetron (8 -  16 mg) 
or 
dronabinol/ondansetron 
(10 - 20 mg/8 - 16 mg)Solvay Pharmaceuticals. 
Dronabinol versus 
standard ondansetron antiemetic  
therapy in
preventing delayed-onset  
chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting.
ClinicalTrials.gov. http:
//ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NCT00 
642512 Accessed
April 7,  2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 106  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINVDelta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC),
prochlorperazine   (PCP) 
and placeboFrytak S, Moertel CG, Ofallon JR.
Comparison
of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC),
prochlorperazine  (PCP) and 
placebo       as
        anti-emetics 
for cancer-chemotherapy. Proc 
Am Assoc  Cancer Res. 
1979;20:391
Antiemetic  effect/CINVDronabinol or 
ondansetron alone  and 
combinedJhangiani  H, Vredenburgh JJ, 
Barbato L, et al. (2005) 
Dronabinol  or ondansetron alone  
and combined for 
delayed chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and
vomiting (CINV). Blood. 106(11, 
part
 2):477B
Antiemetic  effect/CINVOral THC vs 
prochlorperazineMcCabe  M,  Smith FP, Goldberg 
D, et al. (1981) 
Comparative  trial of oral 9 
tetrahydrocannabinol and 
prochlorperazine  for cancer 
chemotherapy related nausea  and 
vomiting. Proc Am Assoc  Cancer 
Res and Am Soc Clin Oncol. 
22:416
Antiemetic  effect/CINV 113 patientsNabilone vs
prochlorperazineWhen both drugs were  compared, both nausea  (P less than 0.01)  and 
vomiting episodes (P less than 0.001) were  significantly lower in patients 
given nabilone. Moreover, patients clearly favored nabilone for continued 
use (P less than 0.001).Herman TS, Einhorn LH, Jones 
SE, et al. (1979)
Superiority of nabilone  over 
prochlorperazine  as
 an antiemetic  
in patients receiving cancer 
chemotherapy. N Engl J Med. 
300(23):1295-1297
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 107  of 161Antiemetic  effect/CINVPalonosetron plus  
dexamethasone  with or 
without dronabinolMelhem-Bertrandt AI, 
MunsellMF,         Fisch         MJ, 
et al. (2014)
 A randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial of palonosetron plus 
dexamethasone  with or without  
dronabinol for the 
prevention of chemotherapy- 
induced nausea  and vomiting after 
moderately emetogenic  
chemotherapy [Unpublished 
manuscript]. 2014:1-23
Antiemetic  effect/CINV 25THC vs.
prochlorperazine  
(compazine)Sallan, S. E., Cronin, C., Zelen, 
M.,
 and Zinberg, N. E. (1980). 
Antiemetics in patients receiving 
chemotherapy for
cancer:  a randomized comparison 
of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
and prochlorperazine. 
N.Engl.J.Med.
302: 135-138
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 108  of 161Antiemetic   effect/CINV  in  
children30  children  3.5  to
17.8 years of ageNabilone versus 
prochlorperazineThe overall  rate of  improvement  of retching and emesis was 70% during 
the nabilone  and 30% during the  prochlorperazine  treatment  cycles (P =
.003, chi 2  test). On completion of the trial, 66% of the children stated that 
they preferred nabilone, 17% preferred prochlorperazine, and 17% had no 
preference (P = .015, chi 2 test).Chan HS, Correia  JA, MacLeod 
SM.
 (1987) Nabilone  versus 
prochlorperazine  for control  of 
cancer chemotherapy-induced 
emesis in children:  
a double-blind, crossover trial. 
Pediatrics. 79 (6):946-952.
Antiemetic   effect/CINV  in  
childrenTHC vs.
metoclopramide  syrup 
and prochlorperazine  
tabletsTHC  was found to  be a significantly better antinausea  and antivomiting 
agent, but  not all patients obtained relief of nausea  and vomiting with THC.Ekert, H., Waters, K. D., Jurk, I. 
H., Mobilia, J. and others. (1979). 
Amelioration of cancer 
chemotherapy-induced
nausea  and vomiting by  delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol. Med.J.Aust. 
2: 657-659
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 109  of 161Metabolic risk factors,
including adiponectin levels,
in
 high-risk patients who are 
overweight  or obese  and 
have dyslipidemia1036 overweight  or
obese patientsPlacebo or rimonabant  at
a
 dose of 5 mg or 20 mg 
daily for 12 monthsThe most  frequent  adverse  events resulting in discontinuation of the  drug
were  depression, anxiety, and nausea. As compared with placebo, 
rimonabant  at a
 dose of 20 mg was associated with a significant  (P<0.001) 
mean weight  loss (repeated-measures method, -6.7+/-0.5 kg, and last- 
observation-carried-forward analyses, -5.4+/-0.4 kg), reduction in waist  
circumference  (repeated-measures method, -5.8+/-0.5 cm, and last- 
observation-carried-forward analyses, -4.7+/-0.5 cm), increase  in HDL  
cholesterol  (repeated-measures method, +10.0+/-1.6 percent, and last- 
observation-carried-forward analyses, +8.1+/-1.5 percent), and reduction 
in triglycerides (repeated-measures method, -13.0+/-3.5 percent, and last- 
observation-carried-forward analyses, -12.4+/-3.2 percent). Rimonabant  at 
a dose of 20 mg also resulted in an increase  in plasma  adiponectin levels 
(repeated-measures method, 57.7 percent, and last-observation-carried- 
forward analyses, 46.2 percent;  P<0.001), for a change  that was partly 
independent  of weight  loss alone.Despres,  J.  P.,  Golay,  A.,  and
Sjostrom, L. (2005). Effects of 
rimonabant  on metabolic  risk 
factors in overweight  patients with 
dyslipidemia. N.Engl.J.Med. 353:
2121-2134
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 110  of 161Body weight  and 
cardiometabolic  risk factors 
in
 patients who are 
overweight  or obese3045   obese    (body 
mass   index   >   or
=30)  or  overweight  
(body   mass   index
>27  and  treated  or 
untreated 
hypertension or 
dyslipidemia)  adult  
patientsPlacebo, 5  mg/d of 
rimonabant, or 20 mg/d 
of rimonabant  for 1 yearAt year 1,  the completion rate was 309 (51%) patients in the placebo group, 
620 (51%) patients in the 5 mg ofrimonabant  group, and 673 (55%) 
patients in the 20 mg of rimonabant  group. Compared with the placebo 
group, the 20 mg ofrimonabant  group produced greater mean (SEM) 
reductions  in  weight   (-6.3  [0.2]  kg  vs  -1.6  [0.2]  kg;   P<.001),  waist
circumference  (-6.1 [0.2] cm  vs -2.5 [0.3] cm;  P<.001), and level  of
triglycerides (percentage  change, -5.3 [1.2] vs 7.9 [2.0];  P<.001) and a 
greater increase  in level  of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol  (percentage  
change, 12.6 [0.5] vs 5.4 [0.7];  P<.001). Patients who were  switched from  
the
 20 mg of rimonabant  group to the placebo group during year 2 
experienced weight  regainPi-Sunyer, F. X., Aronne, L. J., 
Heshmati, H. M., Devin, J. and 
others. (2006). Effect  of 
rimonabant, a cannabinoid-1 
receptor blocker, on weight  and 
cardiometabolic  risk factors in
 
overweight  or obese  patients:  RIO- 
North America:  a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 295: 761-
775.
Weight  loss1047 overweight  or
obese type 2 
diabetes patientsPlacebo (n=348), 5  
mg/day         rimonabant
(360) or 20 mg/day 
rimonabant  (339) for 1
 
yearWeight  loss was significantly greater after 1  year in both rimonabant  
groups than in the placebo group (placebo:  -1.4 kg [SD 3.6]; 5 mg/day:  - 
2.3 kg [4.2], p=0.01 vs placebo;  20 mg/day:  -5.3 kg [5.2], p<0.0001 vs 
placebo).Scheen, A. J., Finer, N., Hollander, 
P., Jensen, M. D. and others. 
(2006). Efficacy and tolerability of 
rimonabant  in overweight  or obese  
patients with type 2
 diabetes:  a 
randomised controlled study. 
Lancet. 368:  1660-1672
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 111  of 161Weight  lossPlacebo, rimonabant  5  or 
20 mg once daily plus a 
calorie-restricted diet for 
2 yearsRimonabant  20 mg over 2  years promoted clinically relevant  and durable  
weight  loss and improvements incardiometabolic  risk factorsVan Gaal, L. F., Scheen, A. J., 
Rissanen, A. M., Rossner, S. and 
others. (2008). Long-term  effect  of 
CB1 blockade  with rimonabant  on 
cardiometabolic  risk factors:  two 
year results from  the RIO-Europe  
Study. Eur.Heart  J. 29:  1761-1771
Weight  loss5,580 patients
without diabetes 
(3,165 completed
treatment) and 1,047 
patients with
diabetes (692 
completed 
treatment)Rimonabant  (5 or  20 
mg) or placebo for 1
 
yearIn overweight/obese  patients, 20 mg/day rimonabant  produced weight  loss 
and significant  improvements inmultiple  cardiometabolic  risk factors such 
as
 waist  circumference, A1C, HDL  cholesterol, and triglycerides. 
Rimonabant  was generally well tolerated, with more  frequently reported 
adverse  events being gastrointestinal, neurological, and psychiatric  in 
nature.Van Gaal, L., Pi-Sunyer, X., 
Despres, J. P., McCarthy, C.
 and 
others. (2008). Efficacy and safety 
of rimonabant  for improvement  of 
multiple  cardiometabolic  risk 
factors in overweight/obese  
patients:  pooled 1-year data from  
the Rimonabant  in Obesity (RIO) 
program. Diabetes Care. 31 Suppl  
2: S229-S240
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 112  of 161Weight  loss803 abdominally
obese  
 patients  with Placebo  or  rimonabant  
atherogenic 20 mg/d for 1 year 
dyslipidemiaRimonabant  decreased abdominal  subcutaneous adipose  tissue  (AT) cross-
sectional  area by
 5.1% compared to placebo (P<0.005), with a greater 
reduction in visceral  AT. Rimonabant  significantly reduced liver fat 
content. Systolic  (-3.3 mm  Hg) and diastolic (-2.4 mm  Hg) blood pressure  
were  significantly reduced with rimonabant  versus placebo (P<0.0001). 
Gastrointestinal, nervous system, psychiatric, and general  adverse  events 
were more common with rimonabant  20 mg.Despres, J. P., Ross, R., Boka, G.,
Almeras, N. and others. (2009). 
Effect  of rimonabant  on the high- 
triglyceride/  low-HDL-cholesterol  
dyslipidemia, intraabdominal  
adiposity,   
 and    liver    fat:     the
ADAGIO-Lipids trial.
Arterioscler.Thromb.Vasc.Biol.
29:
 416-423
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 113  of 161Overweight/obesity in 
young adults2566  young  adults
(1264    males    and
1302 females) who 
had data  available  
on cannabis use and 
age of initiation to 
use
 of cannabis and 
BMI at the 21-year 
follow-up (MUSP 
children)Cannabis, 21-year 
follow-upMultivariate  analysis showed that those  who had  used cannabis were  less 
likely to be categorised in the BMI ≥ 25 group with the least prevalence  of 
overweight/obesity being observed in every day cannabis users (odds ratio
= .2; 95% confidence interval [CI]:.1-.4).Hayatbakhsh, M.  R., O'Callaghan,
M. J., Mamun, A. A., Williams, G.
M. and others. (2010). Cannabis 
use
 and obesity and young adults. 
Am.J.Drug Alcohol  Abuse. 36: 
350-356.
Overweight/obesityUS  adults  aged  18 
years or older;  -Cannabis The prevalence of obesity is lower in cannabis users than in nonusers.Le Strat, Y. and Le Foll, B.  (2011). 
Obesity and cannabis use: results 
from  2 representative  national  
surveys.   Am.J.Epidemiol.   174:
929-933
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 114  of 16110 896    adults    in
four groups:  non- 
marijuana  users 
(61.0%),
Diabetespastmarijuana   users
(30.7%),  light   (one  
to four times/month) 
(5.0%)   and   heavy 
(more than five 
times/month) 
current marijuana  
users(3.3%)CannabisMarijuana  users had a  lower age-adjusted prevalence  of DM compared to     Rajavashisth, T. B., Shaheen, M.,
non-marijuana  users (OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.55;  p<0.0001). The Norris, K. C., Pan, D. and others. 
prevalence  of elevated C reactive  protein (>0.5 mg/dl) was significantly (2012). Decreased prevalence  of 
higher (p<0.0001) among non-marijuana  users (18.9%) than among past diabetes in marijuana  users:  cross- 
(12.7%) or current  light (15.8%) or heavy (9.2%) users. In a robust  sectional  data from  the National  
multivariate  model  controlling for socio-demographic  factors, laboratory Health and Nutrition Examination 
values and comorbidity, the lower odds of DM among marijuana  users was Survey (NHANES) III. BMJ 
significant  (adjusted OR 0.36, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.55; p<0.0001). Open. 2: e000494-
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 115  of 161GI  transit,  gastric   volume  
and satiation30 healthy
volunteersDronabinol   (DRO)  and 
placebo (PLA)There  was an  overall  retardation of gastric  emptying with DRO (P = 
0.018);  this was more  pronounced in females (P =  0.011), than in males (P
= 0.184). No significant  treatment  differences were  detected for gastric  
volumes, MTV, post-Ensure(R) symptoms, small  bowel  and
 colonic  
transit. Fasting gastric  volume  was greater in males receiving DRO 
compared with PLA (238 +/- 17 vs 185 +/- 16, P = 0.04).Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M.,  
Ferber, I., Burton, D. and others. 
(2006). Effect  of a cannabinoid 
agonist  on gastrointestinal  transit  
and postprandial  satiation in 
healthy human subjects:  a 
randomized, placebo-controlled 
study. Neurogastroenterol.Motil. 
18: 831-838
Colonic motil ity and 
sensation52 volunteersSingle   dose   of  7.5  mg 
DRO or PLA
postoperative with 
concealed allocationDRO, relaxes the  colon and reduces postprandialcolonic  motility and tone. 
Increase  in sensation ratings to distension in the presence  of relaxation of 
the colon suggests central modulation of perception.Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M.,  
Busciglio, I., Burton, D. and 
others. (2007). Effects of a 
cannabinoid receptor agonist  on 
colonic  motor and sensory 
functions in humans:  a 
randomized, placebo-controlled 
study. Am.J.Physiol  
Gastrointest.Liver Physiol. 293: 
G137-G145
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 116  of 161Colonic  motility and 
sensation in
 patients with 
IBS75 individuals with 
IBS (35 with IBS 
with     constipation,
35 with IBS with 
diarrhea, and with 5
 
IBS alternating)1 dose  of placebo or 2.5  
mg or 5.0 mg dronabinolIn all patients, dronabinol  decreased fasting proximal  left colonic  MI 
compared with placebo (overall  P = .05; for 5
 mg dronabinol, P = .046), 
decreased fasting distal  left colonic  MI (overall  P = .08; for 5 mg, P = .13), 
and increased coloniccompliance (P = .058).Wong, B.  S., Camilleri, M., 
Busciglio, I., Carlson, P. and 
others. (2011). Pharmacogenetic  
trial of a cannabinoid agonist  
shows reduced fasting colonic  
motility in patients with 
nonconstipated irritable  bowel  
syndrome. Gastroenterology. 141:
1638-1647
Gut transit  in patients with 
IBS36 IBS-D volunteersTwice  per day  PLA (n =  
13), DRO 2.5 mg (n =
10), or DRO 5  mg (n =
13) for 2  daysOverall, DRO 2.5 or 5  mg twice  per day for 2 days had no effect  on gut 
transit  in IBS-D. There  appears to be a treatment-by-genotype  effect, 
whereby DRO preferentially delays colonic  transit  in those  with the CNR1 
rs806378 CT/TT genotypes.Wong, B.  S., Camilleri, M., 
Eckert, D., Carlson, P. and others. 
(2012). Randomized 
pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacogenetic  trial of 
dronabinol  effects on colon transit  
in irritable  bowel  syndrome- 
diarrhea.
Neurogastroenterol.Motil. 24: 
358-e169
Rectal sensitivity10 IBS patients and
12 healthy
volunteers (HV)Placebo and Δ(9) -THC  
(5 and 10 mg in healthy 
volunteers and
 10 mg in 
IBS patients)The cannabinoid agonist  Δ(9) -THC  did not alter baseline  rectal  perception 
to
 distension compared to placebo in HV or IBS patients. Similarly, after 
sigmoid stimulation there  were  no significant  differences between placebo 
and Δ(9) -THC  in sensory thresholds of discomfort.Klooker, T. K., Leliefeld, K. E.,  
van den Wijngaard, R. M., and 
Boeckxstaens, G. E. (2011). The 
cannabinoid receptor agonist  
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  does 
not affect  visceral  sensitivity to 
rectal  distension in healthy 
volunteers and IBS patients. 
Neurogastroenterol.Motil. 23:  30-
5
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 117  of 161Crohn's disease (CD)30 patients (26 
males) with CDMedical cannabisOf the  30 patients 21 improved significantly after treatment  with cannabis. 
The average  Harvey Bradshaw index improved from  14 +/- 6.7 to 7 +/- 4.7 
(P < 0.001). The  need for other medication was significantly reduced.Naftali, T., Lev, L. B.,  
Yablecovitch, D., Half, E. and 
others. (2011). Treatment  of 
Crohn's disease  with cannabis:  an 
observational study. 
Isr.Med.Assoc.J. 13: 455-458
Crohn's disease (CD)21 patients (mean 
age, 40 ±
 14 y; 13 
men)Twice  daily, cigarettes 
containing 115 mg of 
Δ9-
tetrahydrocannabinol(T  
HC)        or       
 placebo
containing cannabis 
flowers from  which the 
THC  had been extractedComplete  remission (CDAI score, <150)  was achieved by 5 of 11 subjects 
in the cannabis group (45%) and 1 of 10 in the  placebo group (10%;  P =
.43). A clinical  response  (decrease  in  CDAI score  of >100)  was observed 
in 10 of 11 subjects in the  cannabis group (90%;  from  330 ±  105 to 152 ±
109) and 4  of 10 in the placebo group (40%;  from  373 ± 94 to  306 ±  143;  
P = .028).Naftali  T, Bar-Lev Schleider L, 
Dotan I, Lansky EP, Sklerovsky 
Benjaminov F, Konikoff FM 
(2013)
 Cannabis induces a clinical  
response  in patients with Crohn's 
disease:  a prospective  placebo- 
controlled study. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
11(10):1276-1280
Crohn's disease (CD)21 chronic CD  
patientsMedical cannabisDecrease  in  the CD activity index >100 in 10 of 11 subjects on cannabis 
compared to 4 of 10 on placebo. Complete remission was achieved in 5 of 
11 subjects in the cannabis group and 1 of 10 in the placebo group.Naftali  T, Mechulam  R, Lev LB, 
Konikoff FM. (2014) Cannabis for 
inflammatory bowel  disease. Dig 
Dis. 32(4):468-74
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 118  of 161HIV-1 infection (viral load)67 patients with 
HIV-1 infection, 21 
days3.95%-
tetrahydrocannabinol  
marijuana   
 cigarette,   a  
2.5-mg dronabinol  
(delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol) 
capsule,  or  a  placebo 
capsule  three  times daily 
before mealsThe adjusted average  changes in  viral load in marijuana  and dronabinol  
relative  to placebo were  -15% (CI, -50% to 34%) and -8% (CI, -37% to 
37%), respectively. Neither CD4+ nor CD8+ cell counts appeared to be 
adversely affected by the  cannabinoids.Abrams, D. I., Hilton, J. F., Leiser,
R. J., Shade, S. B. and others. 
(2003). Short-term  effects of 
cannabinoids in
patients with HIV-1 infection:  a  
randomized, placebo-controlled 
clinical  trial. Ann.Intern.Med. 139: 
258-266
ALS131 respondents 
(anonymous survey 
of persons with 
ALS)Various (plant  derived)Cannabis may be  moderately effective  at reducing symptoms of appetite  
loss, depression, pain, spasticity, and drooling. Cannabis was reported 
ineffective  in reducing difficulties with speech and swallowing, and sexual  
dysfunction. The longest  relief was reported for depression (approximately 
two to three hours).Amtmann, D., Weydt, P., Johnson,
K. L., Jensen, M.  P. and others. 
(2004). Survey of cannabis use in 
patients with amyotrophic  lateral  
sclerosis. Am.J.Hosp.Palliat.Care. 
21: 95-104
ALSOpen-label  
crossover   
 7-month 
treatment in 20 
patients with ALSEscalating dose study 
(from  2.5–10 mg) of 
MarinolAlthough the  study was not powered sufficiently to detect  a statistical  
significance  in primary efficacy variables (FVC, ALSFRS), symptomatic  
benefits were  seen in insomnia, appetite and spasticity.Gelinas, D. F, Miller, R.  G, and 
Abood, M. (2002). Pilot study of 
safety and tolerability of delta  9- 
THC  (Marinol) treatment  for ALS. 
Amyotroph Lateral  Scler Other 
Motor Neuron Disord. 3: 23-24.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 119  of 161Cramps in amyotrophic  
lateral sclerosis27 ALS patients 
suffering from  
moderate  to
 severe  
(visual        analogue
scale (VAS);
VAS≥ 4) daily 
cramps5 mg THC  twice  daily 
followed by
 placebo or 
vice versa. Treatment  
period lasted for 2 weeks 
and was preceded by a 2- 
week drug-free  
observation period (run- 
in, wash-out  period 
respectively).THC  was well tolerated. There  was no evidence  for a  treatment  effect  on 
cramp intensity, number of cramps, fasciculation intensity or any of the 
other secondary outcome measures.Weber, M., Goldman, B., and 
Trunige r, S. (2010). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC) for 
cramps in amyotrophic  lateral  
sclerosis:  a randomised, double- 
blind crossover trial. 
J.Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatry.
81: 1135-1140.
Dystonia secondary to 
Wilson's disease1 Smoked cannabisA patient  with generalized  dystonia  due  to Wilson's disease  obtained 
marked improvement  in response to smoking cannabis.Uribe  Roca, M. C.,  Micheli, F., 
and Viotti, R. (2005). Cannabis 
sativa  and dystonia  secondary to 
Wilson's disease. Mov Disord. 20: 
113-115.
Musician's dystonia 1 THC General improvementJabusch, H. C., Schneider, U., and 
Altenmuller, E.
 (2004). Delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  improves 
motor control  in a patient  with 
musician's dystonia. Mov Disord. 
19: 990-991.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 120  of 161Dystonic movement  
disorders5Oral doses of CBD  
rising from  100 to 600 
mg/day over a 6 weekDose-related improvement  in  dystonia  was observed in all patients and 
ranged from  20 to 50%. Side-effects of CBD  were  mild and included 
hypotension, dry mouth, psychomotor slowing, lightheadedness, and 
sedation.Consroe, P., Sandyk, R.,  and 
Snider, S. R. (1986). Open label  
evaluation of cannabidiol  in 
dystonic  movement  disorders. 
Int.J.Neurosci. 30: 277-282
Generalised  and  segmental  
primary dystoniaNabilone No significant reduction in  dystonia  following treatment  with nabilone.Fox, S. H., Kellett, M., Moore, A. 
P., Crossman, A. R.
 and others. 
(2002). Randomised, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled trial to 
assess the potential  of cannabinoid 
receptor stimulation in the 
treatment  of dystonia. Mov 
Disord. 17: 145-149
Psychomotor function19 male  chronic, 
daily cannabis 
smokersDaily cannabis smokers 
compared to
 a control  
group of non-intoxicated 
occasional  drug usersChronic  cannabis smokers' performance  on the  CTT (p<0.001) and the 
DAT  (p<0.001) was impaired during baseline  relative  to the comparison 
group. Psychomotor performance  in the chronic  cannabis smokers 
improved over 3 weeks of abstinence, but did not recover to equivalent  
control group performance.Bosker WM, Karschner EL, Lee 
D, Goodwin RS, Hirvonen J, Innis 
RB,
 Theunissen EL, Kuypers KP, 
Huestis MA, Ramaekers JG (2013) 
Psychomotor function in chronic  
daily Cannabis smokers during 
sustained abstinence. PLoS One. 
8(1):e53127
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 121  of 161Huntington's Disease (HD)15   neuroleptic-free  
patients with 
Huntington's 
Disease (HD)Oral CBD  (10 
mg/kg/day for 6 weeks) 
and placebo (sesame  oil 
for 6 weeks)CBD, at an  average  daily dose of about 700 mg/day for 6 weeks, was 
neither symptomatically effective  nor toxic, relative  to placebo, in 
neuroleptic-free patients with HD.Consroe, P., Laguna, J., Allender, 
J., Snider, S. and others. (1991). 
Controlled clinical  trial of 
cannabidiol  in
 Huntington's 
disease.
Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.     40:
701-708.
Huntington's Disease (HD) 44Nabilone   (1  or  2  mg) 
versus placeboNabilone  safe and well tolerated, no  psychotic  episodes. Assessment  of 
either dose  of nabilone  versus placebo showed a  treatment  difference  of
0.86 (95% CI: -1.8 to  3.52) for total motor score;  1.68 (95% CI: 0.44 to 
2.92) for chorea;  3.57 (95% CI: -3.41 to 10.55) for UHDRS cognition;  4.01 
(95% CI: -0.11 to 8.13) for UHDRS behavior, and 6.43 (95% CI: 0.2 to 
12.66) for the NPI.Curtis, A., Mitchell, I., Patel, S., 
Ives, N. and
 others. (2009). A pilot 
study using nabilone  for 
symptomatic  treatment  in 
Huntington's disease. Mov Disord. 
24: 2254-2259.
Huntington's Disease (HD) NabiloneMuller-Vahl, K. R., Schneider, U., 
and Emrich, H. M.
 (1999). 
Nabilone  increases choreatic  
movements in Huntington's 
disease.  Mov  Disord.  14:   1038-
1040.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 122  of 161Huntington's disease (HD) 1Smoked   cannabis   and 
nabiloneThe cannabis appeared to  improve  mood and making patient  calmer and 
more  relaxed. Improvements in behavior and reduction of chorea  
coinciding with the introduction of cannabis and maintained by daily 
taking nabiloneCurtis, A. and Rickards, H. (2006). 
Nabilone  could treat chorea  and 
irritability in
 Huntington's disease. 
J.Neuropsychiatry Clin.Neurosci. 
18: 553-554.
Parkinsonian tremor 5All patients were  given 
on consecutive  days:  1)
 
marijuana  smoked as a 
cigarette, 2) diazepam  5
mg          orally,          3)
levodopa/carbidopa  250 
mg/25 mg orally 
(Sinemet      
 275),      4)
apomorphine  1  5 mg 
subcutaneously.None  of the patients, including the  woman who had previously reported 
benefit, experienced relief or demonstrated improvement  of tremor 
following marijuana, despite  central  effects as evidenced by drowsiness or 
mild euphoriaFrankel, J. P., Hughes, A., Lees, A. 
J., and Stern, G. M. (1990). 
Marijuana  for parkinsonian 
tremor.
J.Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatry. 
53:
 436.-
Levodopa-induced 
dyskinesia  in PD7 Nabilone Nabilone significantly reduces levodopa-induced dyskinesia  in PDSieradzan, K. A., Fox, S. H., Hill,
M., Dick, J. P. and others. (2001). 
Cannabinoids reduce  levodopa- 
induced dyskinesia  in Parkinson's 
disease:  a
 pilot study. Neurology. 
57: 2108-2111
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 123  of 161Levodopa-induced 
dyskinesia  in PD19A 4-week dose 
escalation of orally 
administered cannabisCannabis was well tolerated, and had no pro- or antiparkinsonian action. 
There  was no
 evidence  for a treatment  effect  on levodopa-induced 
dyskinesia  as assessed by the UPDRS, or any of the secondary outcome  
measuresCarroll, C.  B., Bain, P. G., Teare,
L., Liu, X. and others. (2004). 
Cannabis for dyskinesia  in
 
Parkinson disease:  a randomized 
double-blind crossover study. 
Neurology. 63: 1245-1250.
Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome1 MarijuanaMarijuana   appears  to  have  been  an  effective   treatment   modality  for 
symptoms of Tourette's syndrome.Hemming, M. and Yellowlees, P.
M. (1993). Effective  treatment  of 
Tourette's syndrome  with 
marijuana. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology. 7:
 389-391.
Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome12 adult TS patientsSingle   dose   of  delta9- 
THC  at 5.0 to 10.0 mgFound no significant  differences after treatment  with delta9-THC  
compared to
 placebo treatment  in verbal  and visual  memory, reaction time, 
intelligence, sustained attention, divided attention, vigilance, or mood. 
Only when using the Symptom  Checklist  90-R  (SCL-90-R) data provide  
evidence for a deterioration of obsessive-compulsive behavior (OCB) and 
a trend towards an  increase in phobic anxietyMuller-Vahl, K. R.,  Koblenz, A., 
Jobges, M., Kolbe, H. and others. 
(2001). Influence  of treatment  of 
Tourette  syndrome  with delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  (delta9- 
THC) on neuropsychological  
performance.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 34: 19-24.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 124  of 161Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome24 patients with TSup to  10 mg/day of THC  
vs placeboUsing the TSSL  at  10 treatment  days (between days 16 and 41) there  was 
a significant  difference  (p <.05) between both groups. Evidence  that THC  
is effective and safe in the treatment  of ticsMuller-Vahl, K. R., Schneider, U., 
Prevedel, H., Theloe, K. and
 
others. (2003). Delta  9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC) is 
effective  in the treatment  of tics in 
Tourette  syndrome:  a 6-week 
randomized trial.
J.Clin.Psychiatry. 64:  459-465.
Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome12 adult TS patientsSingle -dose trial of 
Delta(9)-THC   (5.0,  7.5
or 10.0 mg)Using the TSSL, there  was a significant  improvement  of tics (p=0.015) and 
obsessive-compulsive  behavior (OCB) (p =
 0.041) after treatment  with 
Delta(9)-THC  compared to placebo. Examiner ratings demonstrated a 
significant  difference  for the subscore  "complex motor tics" (p = 0.015) 
and a trend towards a significant  improvement  for the subscores "motor 
tics" (p = 0.065), "simple  motor tics" (p = 0.093), and "vocal  tics" (p = 
0.093). No serious adverse reactions occurred.Müller-Vahl  KR, Schneider U, 
Koblenz  A, Jöbges M,
 Kolbe  H, 
Daldrup T, Emrich HM. Treatment  
of Tourette's syndrome  with Delta  
9-tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC):  a 
randomized crossover trial. 
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2002 
Mar;35(2):57-61
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 125  of 161Sleep in  fibromyalgia NabiloneWare  M,  FitzcharlesMA,  Joseph 
L, Shir Y. The  
effects of nabilone  on sleep in 
fibromyalgia: results 
of a randomized controlled trial. 
Paper presented
at: Canadian Rheumatology 
Association Meeting;  February 18- 
21, 2009;  Kananaskis, AB: 
Canada.
Abstract  149 J  Rheumatol. 
2009;36(11):2607
Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome24 patients suffering 
from  TS10   mg   Delta(9)-THC  
over a 6-week periodMeasuring immediate  verbal  memory span, we even found  a trend towards 
a significant  improvement  during and after treatment. Results from  this 
study corroborate  previous data suggesting that in patients suffering from  
TS, treatment  with Delta(9)-THC  causes neither acute  nor long-term  
cognitive deficits.Müller-Vahl  KR, Prevedel  H, 
Theloe  K, Kolbe  H, Emrich HM,
 
Schneider U. Treatment  of 
Tourette  syndrome  with delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  (delta  9- 
THC):  no influence  on 
neuropsychological  performance. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003 
Feb;28(2):384-8.
Symptoms    of    Tourette's 
syndrome28Delta-9- 
Tetrahydrocannabinol  
(Delta(9)THC), either 
as 
monotherapy or as 
adjuvant   therapy,  with 
placeboPositive  effect  from  Delta(9)THC, the improvements in tic frequency and  
severity were  small  and were  only detected by some  of the outcome  
measuresCurtis, A., Clarke, C.  E., and 
Rickards, H. E. (2009). 
Cannabinoids for Tourette's 
Syndrome.
Cochrane.Database.Syst.Rev. 
CD006565.-
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 126  of 161Sleep in  fibromyalgia NabiloneFitzcharles MA, Shir Y, Joseph L, 
Ware  MA. (2009)
 The effects of 
nabilone  on insomnia  in 
fibromyalgia:
results of a randomized controlled 
trial. Paper
presented at: American College  of  
Rheumatology/  Association of 
Rheumatology Health 
Professionals Annual  Scientific  
Meeting       (ACR/ARHP       09);
November 6-11,  2009;  Atlanta:  
GA. Arthritis Rheum. 60:1429.
Sleep in  fibromyalgiaNabilone    0.5-1mg   vs 
amitriptyline 10-20mgMcGill  University Health Center. 
Nabilone  versus amitriptyline  in
 
improving quality of sleep in 
patients with fibromyalgia. 
ClinicalTrials.gov. http:
//ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NCT00 
381199 Accessed
April 7,  2014.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 127  of 161Sleep disturbance in 
fibromyalgia  (FM)29Nabilone  (0.5-1.0 mg 
before  bedtime) vs 
amitriptyline  (10-20 mg 
before bedtime)Although sleep was improved by  both amitriptyline  and nabilone, nabilone  
was superior to amitriptyline  (Insomnia  Severity Index difference  = 3.2; 
95% confidence  interval  = 1.2-5.3). Nabilone  was marginally better on the 
restfulness (Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire  difference  = 0.5 [0.0- 
1.0]) but not on wakefulness (difference = 0.3 [-0.2 to 0.8]). No effects on 
pain, mood, or quality of life were  observed. AEs were  mostly mild to 
moderate and were  more frequent  with nabilone.Ware, M.  A., Fitzcharles, M. A., 
Joseph, L., and Shir, Y. (2010). 
The effects of nabilone on sleep in 
fibromyalgia:  results of a 
randomized controlled trial. 
Anesth.Analg. 110: 604-610.
Sleep disturbance17 heavy MJ users 
discontinuing MJ
 
use and 14 drug-free  
controls. Men and 
women were  
studied, 18 to 30 
years.CannabisThe MJ users showed differences in PSG measures (lower total sleep 
times, and less slow wave  sleep than the control  group) on both nights;  
they also showed worse  sleep efficiency, longer sleep onset, and shorter 
REM latency than the
 control  group on Night  2. More  sleep continuity 
parameters were  significantly worse  for the MJ group than the control  
group on Night  2 versus Night  1, indicating that sleep in the MJ group was 
relatively worse on Night 2 compared to Night 1.Bolla, K. I., Lesage, S. R.,  
Gamaldo, C. E., Neubauer, D. N. 
and others. (2008). Sleep 
disturbance  in heavy marijuana  
users. Sleep. 31: 901-908.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 128  of 161Sleep disturbance 18 heavy MJ  users CannabisAcross abstinence, Total  Sleep Time  (TST), Sleep Efficiency (SEff), and 
amount  of REM sleep declined, while  Wake  after Sleep Onset  (WASO) 
and Periodic  Limb Movements (PLM) increased. Furthermore, quantity 
(joints/week) and
 duration (years) of MJ use were  positively associated 
with more PLMs.Bolla, K. I., Lesage, S. R.,  
Gamaldo, C. E., Neubauer, D. N. 
and others. (2010). 
Polysomnogram  changes in 
marijuana  users who report  sleep 
disturbances during prior 
abstinence. Sleep  Med. 11:  882-
889.
Obstructive     Sleep    Apnea  
(OSA)17   adults   with   a 
baseline Apnea
Hypopnea Index 
(AHI) 
≥15/hDronabinol  starting at  
2.5 mg once daily. The 
dose was increased 
weekly, as tolerated, to 
5 mg and finally to 
10 mg once dailyDronabinol  treatment  is safe  and  well-tolerated in  OSA patients at  doses 
of 2.5-10 mg daily and significantly reduces AHI in the short-term.Prasad B,  Radulovacki  MG, 
Carley DW. (2013) Proof of 
concept  trial of dronabinol  in 
obstructive  sleep apnea. Front  
Psychiatry. 22;4:1
Somnolence  in  chronic  daily 
cannabis smokers13 male  chronic  
daily cannabis 
smokersTHC  doses (20 mg) 
around-the-clock for 7
 
days (40-120 mg daily)Higher evening THC  and 11-OH-THC  concentrations were  significantly 
associated with shorter sleep latency, less difficulty falling asleep, and 
more  daytime  sleep the following day. In contrast, the duration of 
calculated and self-reported nighttime  sleep decreased slightly (3.54
 and
5.34 minutes per night, respectively) but  significantly during the study.Gorelick DA1, Goodwin RS, 
Schwilke  E,
 Schroeder JR, 
Schwope  DM, Kelly DL, 
Ortemann-Renon C, Bonnet  D, 
Huestis MA. (2013) Around-the- 
clock oral THC  effects on sleep in 
male  chronic  daily cannabis 
smokers. Am J Addict. 22(5):510- 
4
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 129  of 161Intraocular pressure (IOP)6 patients with 
ocular hypertension 
or early primary 
open angle
glaucomaSublingual  dose of 5  mg 
Delta-9-THC, 20 mg 
CBD,  40  mg  CBD,  or
placeboTwo hours after sublingual  administration of 5  mg Delta-9-THC, the IOP 
was significantly lower than after placebo (23.5 mm Hg vs. 27.3 mm Hg, 
P=0.026). The IOP returned to baseline  level  after the 4-hour IOP 
measurement. CBD administration did not  reduce the  IOP at any time.Tomida, I., Azuara-Blanco, A., 
House, H., Flint, M.
 and others. 
(2006). Effect  of sublingual  
application of cannabinoids on 
intraocular pressure:  a pilot study. 
J.Glaucoma. 15: 349-353.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) 8WIN 55212--2, applied 
topically at
 doses of 25 
or 50 microgDecreases  the  intraocular  pressure   of  human  glaucoma   resistant   to 
conventional  therapies within the  first  30 min (15 +/- 0.5% and 23 +/-
0.9%). A  maximal reduction of 20 +/- 0.7% and 31 +/- 0.6% is reached in 
the first 60 min.Porcella, A., Maxia, C.,  Gessa, G. 
L., and Pani, L. (2001). The 
synthetic cannabinoid WIN55212-
2 decreases the intraocular 
pressure  in human glaucoma  
resistant  to
 conventional  therapies. 
Eur.J.Neurosci. 13: 409-412.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) 1 Marijuana, Marinol Dramatic  effect  (lowering).Zhan, G. L., Camras, C.  B., 
Palmberg, P. F., and Toris, C. B. 
(2005). Effects of marijuana  on 
aqueous humor dynamics in a 
glaucoma  patient. J.Glaucoma. 14: 
175-177
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 130  of 161Arterial and intraocular 
hypertensionSystemic  
normotensive  (N=8) 
and hypertensive  
(N=8) open-angle  
glaucoma     patients 
(N=16)Inhalation of
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) 
(2.8%)The salient  observation after THC  inhalation was that the changes in ocular 
pressure  paralleled the
 changes in blood pressure  in each glaucoma  patient. 
These  findings suggest  that the positive  chronotropic  response  to THC  
tends to maintain cardiac  output  which limits further decreases in blood 
pressure  and the capillary filtration of aqueous humor decreases or the 
reabsorption of aqueous humor increases because  of the systemic  
hypotensive effect  attending THC  inhalation.Crawford, W. J. and Merritt, J. C.  
(1979). Effects of 
tetrahydrocannabinol    on   arterial  
and intraocular hypertension. 
Int.J.Clin.Pharmacol.Biopharm. 
17: 191-196.
Histamine-evoked 
somatosensory and  vascular 
responses12 (Study 1,  
iontophoresis) and 
six participants 
(Study 2,
microdialysis)HU210 (cannabinoid 
receptor agonist) by
 skin 
patch (50 mM) or dermal  
microdialysis (5 mM)In humans  peripheral  administration of a cannabinoid receptor agonist  
attenuates histamine-induced itch. The observation that protein 
extravasation was not decreased demonstrates that the alleviation of itch is 
not due to an anti-histaminergic  property of HU210. The reduced 
neurogenic  flare reaction indicates an attenuated antidromic  nerve  fibre 
activation and neuropeptide release.Dvorak, M., Watkinson, A., 
McGlone, F., and Rukwied, R.
 
(2003). Histamine  induced 
responses are attenuated by a 
cannabinoid receptor agonist  in 
human skin. Inflamm.Res. 52: 
238-245.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 131  of 161Regional  cerebral  blood flow10    healthy    male  
volunteersOral dose  of CBD  (400 
mg) or placeboCBD significantly decreased subjective  anxiety and increased mental  
sedation, while placebo did not induce  significant changes. Assessment  of 
brain regions where  anxiolyticeffects of CBD
 were  predicted a priori  
revealed two voxel  clusters of significantly decreased ECD uptake  in the 
CBD relative  to the placebo condition (p<0.001, uncorrected for multiple  
comparisons).Crippa, J. A., Zuardi, A. W., 
Garrido, G. E.,
 Wichert-Ana, L. 
and others. (2004). Effects of 
cannabidiol  (CBD) on regional  
cerebral blood flow. 
Neuropsychopharmacology.     29:
417-426
End-st age open-angle  
glaucoma9Either orally
administered delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
capsule s or inhaled 
marijuana  in addition to 
their existing therapeutic  
regimenAn initial  decrease  in intraocular pressure  was observed in  all patients, and 
the investigator's therapeutic  goal was met in four of the nine patients. 
However, the decreases in intraocular pressure were not  sustained, and all  
patients elected to discontinuetreatment  within 1 to 9 months for various 
reasons.Flach, A. J. (2002). Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC) in
 the 
treatment  of end-stage  open-angle  
glaucoma.
Trans.Am.Ophthalmol.Soc.    100:
215-222
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 132  of 161Heterogenous glaucomas 18 Marihuana inhalationThe hypotensive  effects appeared in 60  to 90 minutes as the decrease  in 
intraocular pressure(IOP) appeared to follow the decrease  in blood 
pressure. In addition to any local  effect, the mechanism  of lowered to any 
localeffect, the mechanism  of lowered IOP may also involve  the decreased 
pressure  perfusing the ciliary body vasculature  as a result of the peripheral  
vasodilatory properties of marihuana.Merritt, J. C., Crawford, W. J., 
Alexander, P. C., Anduze, A. L. 
and others. (1980). Effect  of 
marihuana  on intraocular and 
blood pressure  in glaucoma. 
Ophthalmology. 87:
 222-228.
Specific  airway conductance  
(Gaw/VL) and the maximal  
expiratory flow6   control    and   six 
asthmaticsubjects10 mg of delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinolIn control  subjects, there  was a slight  but statistically significant  increase  
in
 Gaw/VL  after oral administration of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol;  
however, there  was no significant  increase  in Vmax 50%. One of the 
asthmatic  patients developed severe  bronchoconstriction following 
administration of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol;  among the remaining five 
patients, there  were  variable  changes in Gaw/VL  and Vmax 50% after oral 
administration of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, but mean changes were  not 
significant.Abboud, R. T. and Sanders, H. D. 
(1976). Effect  of oral 
administration of delta- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  on airway 
mechanics in normal   and 
asthmatic  subjects. Chest. 70:  480-
485
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 133  of 161Bronchial     dynamics    and 
respiratory-center sensitivity17 normal
volunteers with 
previous marihuana  
smoking experience3.23 mg per kilogram  of 
marihuana, using a
 bag- 
in-box technicMarihuana  smoke, unlike  cigarette  smoke, causes bronchodilatation rather 
than bronchoconstriction and, unlike  opiates, does not cause  central  
respiratory depression.Vachon, L., FitzGerald, M.  X., 
Solliday, N. H., Gould, I. A. and 
others. (1973). Single-dose  effects 
of marihuana  smoke. Bronchial  
dynamics and respiratory-center 
sensitivity in normal  subjects. 
N.Engl.J.Med. 288: 985-989.
Acute pulmonary 
physiologic  effects32 healthy, 
experienced male  
marijuana smokers1  or  2  per  cent   Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(smoking)  or  ingestion 
of 10, 15 and 20 mg of 
Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinolBoth smoked marijuana  and oral Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol  cause  definite  
dilatation of the airways lasting as
 long as 60 minutes and six hours, 
respectively.Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B.  J., and 
Frank, I. M. (1973). Acute  
pulmonary physiologic  effects of 
smoked marijuana  and oral 9 - 
tetrahydrocannabinol  in healthy 
young men. N.Engl.J.Med. 289: 
336-341
Plethysmographically 
determined airway resistance  
(Raw) 
 and  specific   airway 
conductance (SGaw)10 subjects with 
stable  bronchial  
asthma2    per    cent     natural  
marijuana  (7 mg per kg) 
and 15 mg of oral Delta- 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) vs placeboAfter smoked marijuana, SGaw increased immediately and remained 
significantly elevated (33
 to 48 per cent above  initial  control  values) for at 
least 2 hours, whereas SGaw did not change after placebo. After ingestion 
of 15 mg of THC, SGaw was elevated significantly at 1 and 2 hours, and 
Raw was reduced significantly at 1 to 4 hours, whereas no changes were  
noted after placebo.Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B.  J., and 
Frank, I. M. (1974). Acute  effects 
of smoked marijuana  and oral 
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol  on 
specific  airway conductance  in 
asthmatic subjects. 
Am.Rev.Respir.Dis.    109:     420-
428.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 134  of 161Experimental    induction   of
acute bronchospasm8 subje cts with
clinically stable500    mg    of    smoked
marijuana  (2.0 per cent  
delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol) 
compared with those  of
500    mg    of    smoked 
placebo  marijuana   (0.0
bronchial asthmaper cent delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol),
0.25
 ml of aerosolized 
saline, and 0.25 ml of 
aerosolizedAfter methacholine-inducedbronchospasm, placebo marijuana  and saline  Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B. J., Lee, 
inhalation produced minimal  changes in specific  airway conductance  and Y. E., and Harper, C. E. (1975). 
thoracic  gas volume, whereas 2.0 per cent marijuana  and isoproterenol  Effects  of  smoked  marijuana   in 
each caused a prompt  correction of the bronchospasm  and associated experimentally induced asthma. 
hyperinflation.Am.Rev.Respir.Dis.    112:     377-
386.
isoproterenol (1,250
mug)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 135  of 161BronchodilationDelta 8-
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(delta 8-THC), 
cannabinol  
 (CBN),  and 
cannabidiol    (CBD)   in 
maximal  doses of 75 mg, 
1200 mg, and 1200 mg, 
delta   8-THC   (75  mg), 
delta 9-
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(delta 9-THC), 
combinations  
 of   CBN 
and CBD with delta  9- 
THC  (5 mg)Delta  9-THC  and, to  a lesser extent, delta  8-THC, have acute  
bronchodilator activity but that  CBN, CBD, and their combinations do not 
provide  effective  bronchodilation. The daily use of delta  9-THC  was not 
associated with clinical  tolerance.Gong, H., Jr., Tashkin, D. P., 
Simmons, M.
 S., Calvarese, B. and 
others. (1984). Acute  and subacute  
bronchial  effects of oral 
cannabinoids.
Clin.Pharmacol.Ther. 35: 26-32.
Bronchodilation10 volunteer 
inpatient  asthmatics 
in
 a steady statePlacebo-ethanol only;  
delta1- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)   
 200    mug    in 
ethanol;   or  salbutamol
100 mug (Ventolin 
inhaler)Salbutamol  and THC  significantly improved ventilatory function. 
Maximal  bronchodilatation was achieved more  rapidly with salbutamol, 
but at 1
 hour both drugs were  equally effective. No cardiovascular or mood 
disturbance  was detected, and plasma  total cannabinoids at 15 minutes 
were undectable by radioimmunoassay.Williams, S. J., Hartley, J. P., and 
Graham, J. D. (1976).
Bronchodilator  effect   of  delta1- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  administered
 by aerosolof 
asthmatic   patients.  Thorax.  31:  
720-723.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 136  of 161BronchodilationDelta1-trans- 
tetrahydrocannabinol, 
(delta1-THC)It increased peak expiratory flow  rate (PEFR) and forced expiratory 
volume  in 1 second (FEV1). The  rate of onset, magnitude, and duration of 
the bronchodilator effect  was dose related.Hartley, J. P., Nogrady, S. G., and 
Seaton, A. (1978). Bronchodilator 
effect of delta1- 
tetrahydrocannabinol.
Br.J.Clin.Pharmacol. 5:  523-525.
Bronchodilation16 patients with 
proven reversible  
airways 
obstructionOral delta-1-(trans)- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(delta-1-THC) and 
salbutamolMeasurements of forced vital capacity, forced expired volume  in  one 
second, peak expiratory flow rate, and maximum  expiratory flow rate at 50 
percent  vital capacity after 10 mg oral delta-1-THC  did not differ 
significantly from  the effect  of placebo, whereas increases after salbutamol  
were significant.Davies, B. H., Radcliffe, S., 
Seaton, A., and Graham, J. D. 
(1975). A
 trial of oral delta-1- 
(trans)-tetrahydrocannabinol  in 
reversible  airways obstruction. 
Thorax. 30: 80-85.
Bronchomotor effect6  healthy  and  six 
asthmatic  subjectsOral nabilone (2 mg)Bronchodilation following nabilone  was intermediate  between that of 
terbutalineand placebo in the healthy subjects but was equivalent  to 
placebo in
 the asthmatics.Gong, H., Jr., Tashkin, D. P., and 
Calvarese, B.
 (1983). Comparison 
of bronchial  effects of nabilone  
and terbutaline  in healthy and 
asthmatic subjects. 
J.Clin.Pharmacol. 23: 127-133.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 137  of 161Subacute  effects of heavy  
marihuana  smoking on the 
lung28 healthy young 
male  experienced 
cannabis usersBefore  and  after 47 to 59 
days of daily ad-libitum  
marihuana smoking 
(mean of 5.2 marihuana  
cigarettes  per  day  per 
subject,   2.2   per   cent  
delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol)After 47  to 59 days of heavy smoking, statistically significant  decreases in 
forced expired volume  in one second (3 +/- 1 per cent, S.E.), maximal  mid- 
expiratory flow rate  (11 +/- 2 per cent), plethysmographic  specific  airway 
conductance  (16 +/- 2 per cent) and diffusing capacity (8 +/- 2 per cent) 
were noted as compared with the base-line studies.Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B.  J., Lee,
Y. E.,  and Harper, C. E. (1976). 
Subacute  effects of heavy 
marihuana  smoking on pulmonary 
function in healthy men. 
N.Engl.J.Med. 294: 125-129.
Cognitive  function in 
patients with multiple  
sclerosisTwo groups, each of 
25
 patients with MS 
(cannabis users and 
nonusers)CannabisCannabis users performed significantly more  poorly than  nonusers on 
measures of information processing speed, working memory, executive  
functions, and visuospatial  perception. They were  also twice  as likely as 
nonusers to be classified as globally cognitively impaired. There  were  no 
between-group differences on the HADS measures of depression and 
anxiety or lifetime SCID-I psychiatric diagnoses.Honarmand, K., Tierney, M. C., 
O'Connor, P., and Feinstein, A. 
(2011). Effects of cannabis on 
cognitive  function in patients with 
multiple  sclerosis. Neurology. 76:
 
1153-1160.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 138  of 161Cognitive  function in 
patients with multiple  
sclerosis17 cannabis-naïve  
patientswith MS
 
were  assessed at 
baseline  and at the 
end of the cannabis 
and placebo phases 
of the trialFree-dose  cannabis plant  
extract  (Sativex)Cannabinoid treatment  did not induce  psychopathology and  did not impair 
cognition in cannabis-naïve  patientswith MS. However, the positive  
correlation between blood levels of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  and 
psychopathological scores suggests that at dosages higher than those used 
in therapeutic  settings, interpersonal  sensitivity, aggressiveness, and 
paranoiac  features might arise.Aragona  M, Onesti  E,  Tomassini  
V, Conte  A, Gupta  S, Gilio F, 
Pantano P, Pozzilli  C, Inghilleri  M. 
(2009). Psychopathological  and 
cognitive  effects of therapeutic  
cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis:  
a double-blind, placebo controlled, 
crossover study.
Clin Neuropharmacol. Jan- 
Feb;32(1):41-7
Cognitive  function in 
patients with multiple  
sclerosis20 subjects with MS 
who smoked 
cannabis and 19 
noncannabis users 
with MSCannabisThe cannabis group performed more  poorly on the  more  demanding of the 
Paced Auditory Serial  Addition Test tasks (i.e., 2-second version) (p < 
0.02) and the 10/36 Spatial  Recall  Test (p < 0.03). Cannabis users had more  
diffuse  cerebral  activation across all N-Back trials and made  more  errors 
on the 2-Back task (p < 0.006), during which they displayed increased 
activation relative  to nonusers in parietal  (p < 0.007) and anterior cingulate  
(p < 0.001) regions implicated in working memory.Pavisian B,  MacIntosh BJ, 
Szilagyi G, Staines RW, O'Connor 
P, Feinstein A2. (2014) Effects of 
cannabis on cognition in patients 
with MS: a psychometric  and MRI 
study. Neurology. 2014 May 
27;82(21):1879-87
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 139  of 161Depression4400  adult   internet  
usersMarijuana  daily, once  a  
week or less, or neverDaily users reported less depressed mood and more  positive  affect  than 
non-users. The three  groups did not differ on interpersonal  symptoms. 
Separate  analyses for medical  vs. recreational  users demonstrated that 
medical  usersreported more  depressed mood and more  somatic  complaints 
than recreational  users, suggesting that medical  conditions clearly 
contribute  to
 depression scores and should be considered in studies of 
marijuana and depression.Denson, T. F. and Earleywine, M.  
(2006). Decreased depression in 
marijuana  users. Addict.Behav. 
31: 738-742.
Generalized  social   anxiety 
disorder (SAD)10   treatment-naïve  
patients 
with SADOral    dose     of    CBD 
(400 mg) or placeboRelative  to placebo, CBD  was associated with significantly decreased 
subjective  anxiety (p < 0.001), reduced ECD uptake  in the left 
parahippocampal  gyrus, hippocampus, and inferior temporal  gyrus 
(p < 0.001, uncorrected), and increased ECD uptake  in the right posterior 
cingulate gyrus (p <  0.001, uncorrected).Crippa  JA, Derenusson GN, 
Ferrari  TB, Wichert-Ana  L, Duran 
FL, Martin-Santos R,
 Simões MV, 
Bhattacharyya  S, Fusar-Poli  P, 
Atakan Z,Santos Filho A, Freitas- 
Ferrari  MC, McGuire  PK, Zuardi  
AW, Busatto GF, Hallak JE. 
(2011) Neural  basis of anxiolytic  
effects of cannabidiol  (CBD) in 
generalized social  anxiety 
disorder:    a   preliminary   report. 
J Psychopharmacol. 2011 
Jan;25(1):121-30
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 140  of 161Generalized  social   anxiety 
disorder (SAD)24 never-treated 
patients 
with SADCBD (600 mg;  n=12) or 
placebo (placebo; n=12)Pretreatment  with CBD  significantly reduced anxiety, cognitive  
impairment  and discomfort  in their speech performance, and significantly 
decreased alert in
 their anticipatory speech. The placebo group presented 
higher anxiety, cognitive  impairment, discomfort, and alert levels when 
compared with the control group as assessed with the VAMS.Bergamaschi, M. M.,  Queiroz, R. 
H., Chagas, M. H., de Oliveira, D.
C. and others. (2011). Cannabidiol  
reduces 
 the  anxiety  induced  by 
simulated    public     speaking    in 
treatment-naive     social     phobia  
patients. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 36: 
1219-1226
Driving behavior24 experienced 
driver 
participantsDronabinol   (Marinol®;
10   and   20   mg)   and 
placeboTreatment  effects of dronabinol  on weaving were  comparable  with driving 
on the road but inter-individual  variability seemed higher in
 the simulator 
than on the road which may have potential  effects on the clinical  inferences 
made from  simulator driving.Veldstra  JL, Bosker WM, de  
Waard D, Ramaekers JG, 
Brookhuis KA. (2015) Comparing 
treatment  effects of oral THC  on 
simulated and on-the-road driving 
performance:  testing the  validity 
of driving simulator drug research. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
232(16):2911-9
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 141  of 161THC  induced anxiety0.5 mg/kg delta  9-THC, 
1
 mg/kg CBD, a mixture  
containing 0.5 mg/kg 
delta  9-THC  and 1 
mg/kg CBD and placebo 
and diazepam  (10 mg)CBD blocks the anxiety provoked by  delta  9-THC, however this effect  also 
extended to marihuana-like  effects and to other subjective  alterations 
induced by delta  9-THC. This antagonism  does not  appear to be caused by 
a general  block of delta  9-THC  effects, since  no change  was detected in 
the pulse-rate  measurements. Several  further effects were  observed typical  
of CBD and of an opposite nature to those of delta  9-THC.Zuardi, A. W., Shirakawa, I., 
Finkelfarb, E., and Karniol, I. G. 
(1982). Action of cannabidiol  on 
the
 anxiety and other effects 
produced by delta  9-THC  in 
norma l subjects.
Psychopharmacology  (Berl).  76:
245-250
Anxiety15 healthy men who 
had used cannabis 
15
 times or less in 
their life10 mg of Delta9-THC, 
600 mg of CBD, or a
 
placeboDelta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol  increased anxiety, as  well as levels of 
intoxication, sedation, and psychotic  symptoms, whereas there  was a trend 
for a reduction in anxiety following administration of CBD.Fusar-Poli, P., Crippa, J. A., 
Bhattacharyya, S., Borgwardt, S. J. 
and others. (2009). Distinct effects 
of (26)9-tetrahydrocannabinol  and 
cannabidiol  on neural  activation 
during emotional  processing. 
Arch.Gen.Psychiatry. 66: 95-105.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 142  of 161Paranoia121 individuals with 
paranoid ideationPlacebo, THC, or THC  
preceded by
 a cognitive  
awareness conditionTHC  significantly increased paranoia, negative  affect  (anxiety, worry, 
depression, negative  thoughts about  the self), and a
 range  of anomalous 
experiences, and reduced working memory capacity. The increase  in 
negative  affect  and in anomalous experiences fully accounted for the 
increase in paranoia. Working memory changes did not  lead to paranoia.Freeman D, Dunn G, Murray  RM, 
Evans N, Lister R, Antley A, Slater 
M,
 Godlewska  B, Cornish R, 
Williams J, Di Simplicio 
M,Igoumenou A, Brenneisen R, 
Tunbridge  EM, Harrison PJ, 
Harmer CJ, Cowen P, Morrison 
PD (2015) How cannabis causes 
paranoia:  using the intravenous 
administration of∆9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol(THC) to 
identify key cognitive  mechanisms 
leading to paranoia. Schizophr 
Bull. 41(2):391-9
Psychotic symptoms 
induced by
 Delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol15 healthy men with 
minima l earlier
exposure to  
cannabisDelta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(Delta-9-THC) and 
Cannabidiol (CBD)Delta-9-THC  and CBD  had opposite  effects on activation relative  to 
placebo in the striatum  during verbal  recall, in the hippocampus during the 
response  inhibition task, in the amygdala  when subjects viewed fearful  
faces, in the superior temporal  cortex when subjects listened to speech, and 
in the occipital  cortex during visual  processing. Delta-9-THC  and CBD 
can have opposite  effects on regional  brain function, which may underlie  
their different  symptomatic  and behavioral  effects, and CBD's ability to 
block the  psychotogenic  effects of Delta-9-THC.Bhattacharyya, S., Morrison, P. D., 
Fusar-Poli, P., Martin-Santos, R.
 
and others. (2010). Opposite  
effects of delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol and 
cannabidiol  on human brain 
function and psychopathology. 
Neuropsychopharmacology.     35:
764-774.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 143  of 161Posttraumatic  stress disorder 
(PTSD)47 patients 
diagnosed with 
PTSD  
 and   having 
continuing 
nightmares  in  spite  
of conventional  
antidepressants  and 
hypnoticsNabiloneThe majority of patients (72%) receiving nabilone  experienced either 
cessation of nightmares or a
 significant  reduction in nightmare  intensity. 
Subjective  improvement  in sleep time, the quality of sleep, and the 
reduction of daytime flashbacks and nightsweats were  also noted by some  
patients.Fraser, G. A. (2009). The use  of a 
synthetic  cannabinoid in the 
management  of treatment-resistant  
nightmares in posttraumatic  stress 
disorder (PTSD).
CNS.Neurosci.Ther. 15:  84-88
Posttraumatic  stress disorder 
(PTSD)Canadian male  
military personnel  
with PTSDNabilone capsules 
(NAB) 0.5mg
 to 
maximum  of 3.0mg or 
placebo (PBO)NAB  provided significant  relief for military personnel  with PTSD, The 
mean reduction in nightmares as measured by
 the CAPS Recurring and 
Distressing Dream  scores were  -3.6 ± 2.4 and -1.0 ± 2.1 in the NAB  and 
PBO groups, respectively (p=0.03).Jetly R,  Heber A, Fraser G, 
Boisvert  D (2015) The efficacy of 
nabilone, a synthetic  cannabinoid, 
in the treatment  of PTSD- 
associated nightmares:  A 
preliminary randomized, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled cross- 
over design study. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology.
51:585-8
PTSD104 male  inmates 
with serious mental  
illnessNabilone  4.0 mgResults indicated significant  improvement  in  PTSD-associated insomnia, 
nightmares, PTSD symptoms, and Global  Assessment  of Functioning and 
subjective  improvement  in chronic  pain. There  was no evidence  of abuse  
within this high-risk population or reduction of efficacy when nabilone  
was given in powder form  with water rather than as a capsule.Cameron C,  Watson D, Robinson J 
(2015) Use of a synthetic  
cannabinoid in a correctional  
population for posttraumatic stress 
disorder-related insomnia  and 
nightmares, chronic  pain, harm  
reduction, and other indications:  a 
retrospective  evaluation. J 
ClinPsychopharmacol. 34(5):559-
64
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 144  of 161Nightti me agitation in 
patients with dementia6 consecutive  
patients 
 in  the  late 
stages  of  dementia  
and  suffering  from  
circadian and 
behavioral  
disturbances-five  
patients with 
Alzheimer's  disease  
and one  patient  with 
vascular dementia2.5 mg dronabinol  daily 
for 
2 weeksCompared to  baseline, dronabinol  led to a reduction in nocturnal  motor 
activity (P=0.028). These  findings were  corroborated by improvements in 
Neuropsychiatric  Inventory total score  (P=0.027) as well as in subscores 
for agitation, aberrant  motor, and nighttime  behaviors (P<0.05). No side 
effects were  observed.Walther, S., Mahlberg, R.,  
Eichmann, U., and Kunz, D. 
(2006). Delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol for 
nighttime  agitation in
 severe  
dementia. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 185: 524-528.
Dementia-related agitation 1Nabilone  (initially 0.5  
mg at bedtime, and then 
twice per day)Immediate  reduction in the  severity of agitation and resistiveness and 
eventual  improvement  in various behavioural  symptoms following six 
weeks of continuous treatmentPassmore, M. J. (2008). The 
cannabinoid receptor agonist  
nabilone  for the treatment  of 
dementia-related agitation. 
Int.J.Geriatr.Psychiatry. 
 23:  116-
117.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 145  of 161Agitation and aggressive  
behavior in severely 
demented patients40 inpatients DronabinolThe addition of dronabinol  to  patients' treatment  regimens was associated 
with significant  decreases in all domains of the Pittsburgh Agitation Scale. 
There  were  also significant  improvements in Clinical  Global  Impression 
scores, sleep duration and percentage  of meals consumed during the 
treatment  periods. Twenty-six adverse  events were  recorded during  
dronabinoltreatment, none  of which led to  medication discontinuation.Woodward MR, Harper DG2, 
Ellison JM2. (2014) Dronabinol  
for the
 treatment  of agitation and 
aggressive  behavior in acutely 
hospitalized severely demented 
patients with noncognitive  
behavioral  symptoms. Am J 
Geriatr Psychiatry. 22(4):415-9
Dementia-related 
neuropsychiatric   
 symptoms 
(NPS)24 patients received
THC and 26  
received placeboTHC  1.5 mg or matched 
placebo (1:1) 3
 times 
daily for 3 weeksThis study provides Class I  evidence  that for patients with dementia- 
related NPS, low-dose THC  does not significantly reduce NPS at 21 days, 
though it  is well-tolerated.van den Elsen GA, Ahmed AI, 
Verkes RJ, Kramers C,
 Feuth T, 
Rosenberg PB, van der Marck 
MA, Olde  Rikkert  MG (2015). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol for 
neuropsychiatric  symptoms in 
dementia:  A randomized 
controlled trial. Neurology. 
9;84(23):2338-46
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 146  of 161Emotional processing 48 volunteersTHC (8mg), CBD  
(16mg), THC+CBD
(8mg+16mg) and 
placebo, by
 inhalationIn comparison to  placebo, CBD improved emotional  facial  affect  
recognition at 60% emotional  intensity;  THC  was detrimental  to the 
recognition of ambiguous faces of 40% intensity. The combination of 
THC+CBD produced no impairment. Relative  to placebo, both THC  alone  
and combined THC+CBD equally increased feelings of being 'stoned'. 
CBD did not influence feelings of 'stoned'.Hindocha  C1, Freeman TP2, 
Schafer G2, Gardener C2, Das 
RK2, Morgan CJ3, Curran HV 
(2015)
 Acute  effects of delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol  
and their combination on facial  
emotion recognition: a 
randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study in 
cannabis users. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 
Mar;25(3):325-34
Progressive Inflammatory 
brain Disease  (CUPID)Patients were  
randomised in  a 2 : 1 
ratio to
 Δ(9)-THC  or 
placebo; Adults 
aged   18-65   years 
with    primary    or 
secondary 
progressive MS 
(493 (329 active and
164 placebo))Oral Δ(9)-THC
(maximum  28 mg/day) 
or matching placebo;  
Visits - Three  and
 6 
months, and then 6- 
monthly up to 36 or 42 
months.The CUPID trial failed to  demonstrate  a significant  treatment  effect  in 
primary or secondary outcomes. There were  no major safety concerns, but 
unwanted side effects seemed to affect  compliance. The intervention had 
significant  additional  costs with no improvement  in health outcomes;  
therefore, it was dominated by usual care and not cost-effective.Ball S, Vickery J, Hobart  J, Wright  
D, Green C,
 Shearer J, Nunn A, 
Cano MG, MacManus D, Miller 
D, Mallik S, Zajicek J (2015) The 
Cannabinoid Use in Progressive  
Inflammatory brain Disease  
(CUPID) trial: a randomised 
double-blind placebo-controlled 
parallel-group multicentre  trial and 
economic  evaluation of 
cannabinoids to slow progression 
in multiple  sclerosis. Health 
Technol Assess. 2015
Feb;19(12):vii-viii,  xxv-xxxi,  1-
187.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 147  of 161Antitumoral action9 patients with 
recurrent  
glioblastoma  
multiformeTHC  intratumoralyCannabinoid delivery was safe and could be  achieved without  overt  
psychoactive effects. Median survival  of the cohort  from  the beginning of 
cannabinoid administration was 24 weeks (95% confidence  interval:  15- 
33). Delta(9)-Tetrahydrocannabinol  inhibited tumour-cell  proliferation in 
vitro and decreased tumour-cell  Ki67 immunostaining when administered 
to two patients.Guzman, M.,  Duarte, M. J., 
Blazquez, C., Ravina, J. and 
others. (2006). A pilot clinical  
study of Delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  in patients 
with recurrent  glioblastoma  
multiforme. Br.J.Cancer. 95:  197-
203.
Olfaction 15 subjects 20 mg oral THCOlfactory thresholds were  increased and odour discrimination performance  
was 
reduced.Walter C,  Oertel  BG, Ludyga  D, 
Ultsch A, Hummel  T, Lötsch J. 
(2014) Effects of 20 mg oral Δ(9) - 
tetrahydrocannabinol  on the 
olfactory function of healthy 
volunteers. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
78(5):961-9
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 148  of 161Management    of   cannabis 
withdrawalA volunteer sample  
of 49
 dependent  
cannabis usersCannabisCannabis Withdrawal  Scale  has  excellent  psychometric  properties. 
Nightmares and/or strange  dreams was the most  valid item (Wald 
χ²=105.6, P<0.0001), but caused relatively little  associated distress (Wald 
χ²=25.11, P=0.03). Angry outbursts were  considered intense  (Wald 
χ²=73.69, P<0.0001) and caused much associated distress (Wald χ²=45.54, 
P<0.0001). Trouble  getting to sleep was also an intense  withdrawal  
symptom  (Wald χ²=42.31, P<0.0001) and caused significant  associated 
distress (Wald χ ²=47.76, P<0.0001).Allsop, D. J., Norberg, M.  M., 
Copeland, J., Fu, S. and others. 
(2011). The Cannabis Withdrawal  
Scale  development:  patterns and 
predictors of cannabis withdrawal  
and distress. Drug Alcohol  
Depend. 119: 123-129
Cannabis    dependence     or 
withdrawal51 DSM-IV-TR  
cannabis-dependent  
treatment seekers86.4 mg ofΔ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
and 80 mg of 
cannabidiol)    (Sativex) 
or placeboNabiximols treatment  significantly reduced the  overall  severity of 
cannabis withdrawal  relative  to placebo (F8,377.97 =  2.39;  P = .01), 
including effects on withdrawal-related irritability, depression, and 
cannabis cravings. Nabiximols had a more  limited, but still positive, 
therapeutic  benefit  on sleep disturbance, anxiety, appetite  loss, physical  
symptoms, and restlessness.Allsop DJ, Copeland J, Lintzeris 
N, Dunlop AJ, Montebello M,
 
Sadler C, Rivas GR, Holland RM, 
Muhleisen P, Norberg MM,Booth 
J, McGregor IS. (2014) 
Nabiximols as an agonist  
replacement  therapy during 
cannabis withdrawal:  a 
randomized clinical  trial. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 71(3):281-91
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 149  of 161Cannabis    dependence     or 
withdrawal7 cannabis usersAscending order in 
15 mg
 increments across 
separate  sessions, up to a 
maximum  of 90 mg oral 
THCConsiderable  variability in Cmax and tmax was observed. Doses of oral 
Δ(9) -THC  larger than those  tested previously can be
 administered to 
individuals with a history of cannabis use, although given the 
pharmacokinetic  variability of oral Δ(9) -THC  and individual  differences 
in sensitivity, individualized dose adjustment  is needed to avoid side 
effects and maximize therapeutic  response.Lile JA, Kelly TH, Charnigo RJ, 
Stinchcomb AL, Hays LR (2013)
 
Pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic  profile  of 
supratherapeutic  oral doses of Δ(9)
-THC  in cannabis users. J  Clin 
Pharmacol. 53(7):680-90
Cannabis    dependence     or 
withdrawalOne 20-year-old 
woman who 
developed 
protracted nausea  
and vomiting 
secondary to 
cannabis withdrawalNabilone The patient was successfully treated with nabilone.Lam PW, Frost  DW (2015)  
Nabilone  therapy for cannabis 
withdrawal  presenting as 
protracted nausea  and vomiting. 
BMJ Case  Rep. 2014 Sep 22;  2014
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 150  of 161Cannabis    dependence     or 
withdrawalNontreatment- 
seeking   
 marijuana  
smokers (8 men and 
3 women)Nabilone, different  dose  
(0,
 6, 8 mg/day)Both nabilone  dose conditions decreased marijuana  relapse  and reversed 
withdrawal-related irritability and disruptions in sleep and food intake  
(p<0.05). Nabilone  (8 mg/day) modestly worsened psychomotor task 
performance. Neither dose condition increased ratings of capsule  'liking' 
or 
desire to take the capsules relative to placebo.Haney M,  Cooper ZD, Bedi G, 
Vosburg SK, Comer SD, Foltin 
RW (2013) Nabilone  decreases 
marijuana  withdrawal  and a 
laboratory measure  of marijuana  
relapse.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 
38(8):1557-65
Dronabinol    Treatment    for 
Marijuana  Addiction156Dronabinol:  20mg bid 
for a
 daily maximum  
dose of 40mg vs PlaceboAlthough both groups showed a reduction in marijuana  use over time, there  
were  no
 differences between the groups. Treatment  retention was 
significantly higher at the end of the maintenance  phase  on dronabinol  
(77%), compared to placebo (61%) (P=.02), and withdrawal  symptoms 
were significantly lower on dronabinol than placebo (P=.02).Levin FR, Mariani  JJ, Brooks DJ, 
Pavlicova  M,
 Cheng W, Nunes EV 
(2011) Dronabinol  for the 
treatment of cannabis dependence:  
a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 116(1-3):142-50
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 151  of 161Smoking topography 
characteristics of heavy 
cannabis users20 CannabisSmoking characteristics generally were  not significantly associated with 
cognitive  performance. Smoking topographymeasures were  significantly 
correlated with self-reported measures of cannabis use, indicating validity 
of these  assessments, but topography measures were  more  sensitive  than 
self-report  in
 predicting cannabis-related outcomes.McClure, E.  A., Stitzer, M. L., and 
Vandrey, R. (2012).
Characterizing smoking 
topography of cannabis in
 heavy 
users. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 220: 309-318.
Clinical   and  forensic   drug 
testing.    Oral    fluid    (OF) 
cannabinoid 
pharmacokinetics during ad 
libitum  smoking11 cannabis smokers 
resided in a closed 
research unit for 
51 days5-day oraldelta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC) treatmentsCannabinoid disposition in OF was highly influenced by  Δtime  and 
composition of smoked cannabis. Furthermore, cannabinoid OF 
concentrations increased over ad libitum  smoking days, in parallel  with 
increased cannabis self-administration, possibly reflecting development  of 
increased cannabis tolerance.Lee D, Vandrey R,  Mendu DR, 
Murray JA, Barnes AJ, Huestis 
MA (2015) Oral fluid 
cannabinoids in chronic  frequent  
cannabis smokers during ad 
libitum  cannabis smoking. Drug 
Test         Anal.         7(6):494-501
Lee D, Vandrey R,  Milman G, 
Bergamaschi  M, Mendu DR, 
Murray JA, Barnes AJ, Huestis 
MA. (2013) Oral fluid/plasma  
cannabinoid ratios following 
controlled oral THC  and smoked 
cannabis administration. Anal  
Bioanal Chem. 405(23):7269-79
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 152  of 161THC  AEsRecreational     users 
(N = 24)Cannabis cigarettes with 
four doses of THC  
(placebo 29, 49 and 69 
mg of 
THC)A cubic relationship was observed between 'feeling the  drug' and 'wanting 
more'. The THC-induced decrease  in 'feeling stimulated' and increase  in
 
anxiety lasted up to 8 h post-smoking. Sedation at 8 h post-smoking was 
increased by a factor of 5.7 with the highest  THC  dose, compared to the 
placebo.Hunault  CC,  Böcker KB, Stellato 
RK, Kenemans JL, de Vries I, 
Meulenbelt  J. (2014) Acute  
subjective  effects after smoking 
joints containing up to 69 mg Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol in 
recreational  users:  a randomized, 
crossover clinical  trial. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
Dec;231(24):4723-33
Synthetic  cannabinoid (SC) 
AEsRespondents (N =  
42; 88%
participation rate) 
were  primarily 
young adults, male, 
racially diverse, and
 
high school  
graduates.Synthetic  cannabinoid 
(SC) smoking, despite  a
 
federal  ban on 5 
common SCs, which 
went  into effect  on 
March 1, 2011Common reasons reported for use included, but were  not limited to, 
seeking a
 new "high" similar to that produced by marijuana  and avoiding 
drug use detection via a positive  urine  screen. The primary side effects 
were  trouble  thinking clearly, headache, dry mouth, and anxiety. No 
significant  differences were found between synthetic  cannabinoid product  
users (ever or current) and nonusers by demographics or other 
characteristics.Gunderson EW1, Haughey HM,  
Ait-Daoud N, Joshi  AS, Hart CL. 
(2014) A survey of synthetic  
cannabinoid consumption by 
current  cannabis users. Subst  
Abus. 35(2):184-9
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 153  of 161THC AEs (brain 
morphometry)MRI scans  on young 
adult  recreational  
marijuana usersRecreational marijuanaGray matter density analyses revealed greater gray  matter density in  
marijuana  users than in control  participants in  the left nucleus accumbens 
extending to subcallosal  cortex, hypothalamus, sublenticular extended 
amygdala, and left amygdala, even after controlling for age, sex, alcohol  
use, and cigarette  smoking. Trend-level  effects were  observed for a volume  
increase  in the left nucleus accumbens only. Significant  shape differences 
were detected in the left  nucleus accumbens and right amygdala.Gilman JM, Kuster JK, Lee S, Lee 
MJ, Kim BW, Makris N, van der 
Kouwe  A, Blood AJ, Breiter HC. 
(2014)
 Cannabis use is 
quantitatively associated with 
nucleus accumbens and amygdala  
abnormalities in young adult  
recreational  users. J Neurosci. 
34(16):5529-38
THC AEs on 
neuropsychological  
functionsHeavy cannabis 
users, who had a
 
history of cocaine  
use (n = 61)Single  doses of cocaine  
HCl (300 mg), cannabis 
(THC  μg·kg(-1) )
 and 
placeboSingle  doses of cannabis impaired psychomotor function and increased 
response  errors during
 impulsivity tasks. Single  doses of cocaine  improved 
psychomotor function and decreased response  time in impulsivity tasks, 
but increased errors.van Wel JH, Kuypers KP, 
Theunissen EL, Toennes SW, 
Spronk DB, Verkes RJ, 
Ramaekers JG (2013)
  Single  
doses of THC  and cocaine  
decrease  proficiency of impulse  
control  in heavy cannabis users. Br 
J Pharmacol. 170(7):1410-20
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 154  of 161Cannabinoid levels in  serum  
or urine in abstinent  chronic  
cannabis users.6 chronic, daily 
cannabis users (one 
female, five males, 
average  age 30.0 
years;  BMI
 20.8)Moderate-intensity 
workout   
 and   a   24-hr 
period of food 
deprivation; analysed 
for ∆9-
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THC)  
 and   11-nor-9- 
carboxy-∆ 9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol  
(THCCOOH)  by liquid 
chromatography-tandem  
mass spectrometry 
(LCMSMS)There  were  no  major differences in the measured cannabinoid levels in 
serum  or urine before  and after physical  exercise  or food deprivation. We 
conclude  that exercise  and/or food deprivation are unlikely to cause  
sufficient  cannabinoid concentration changes to hamper correct  
interpretations in  drug testing programmes.Westin AA1, Mjønes G, Burchardt  
O, Fuskevåg OM,
 Slørdal  L. 
(2014) Can physical  exercise  or 
food deprivation cause  release  of 
fat-stored cannabinoids?   Basic  
Clin Pharmacol  Toxicol. 
115(5):467-71
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 155  of 161Safety and  adverse effects of 
coadministration of CBD 
and fentanylHealthy volunteers 
aged 21
 to 65 years 
with prior opioid 
exposure, regardless 
of the routeCBD, coadministered 
with intravenous 
fentanylSAFTEE  data  were  similar between groups without  respiratory depression 
or cardiovascular complications during any test session. After low-dose  
CBD, tmax occurred at 3 and 1.5 hours in sessions 1 and 2, respectively. 
After high-dose CBD, tmax occurred at 3 and 4 hours in sessions 1 and 2, 
respectively. Cannabidiol  does not exacerbate  adverse  effects associated 
with intravenous fentanyl  administration. Coadministration of CBD and 
opioids was safe and well  tolerated.Manini  AF, Yiannoulos G, 
Bergamaschi  MM, Hernandez  S, 
Olmedo R,
 Barnes AJ, Winkel  G, 
Sinha  R, Jutras-Aswad D, Huestis 
MA, Hurd YL (2015) Safety and 
pharmacokinetics of oral 
cannabidiol  when administered 
concomitantly with intravenous 
fentanyl in humans. J Addict  Med. 
9(3):204-10
Pharmacokinetics in chronic, 
daily cannabis smokers who 
received high-dose  oral THC  
pharmacotherapy and later a
 
smoked cannabis challenge11   daily   cannabis 
smokers0, 30, 60, or 120 mg/d 
THC  for four 5-day 
medication sessionsThe significant  withdrawal  effects noted during placebo dronabinol  
administration were  supported by
 significant  plasma  THC  and 11-OH- 
THC  concentration decreases. During active  dronabinol  dosing, significant  
dose-dependent  increases in THC  and 11-OH-THC  concentrations support  
withdrawal symptom  suppression.Milman G, Bergamaschi  MM, Lee 
D, Mendu DR, Barnes AJ, 
Vandrey R,
 Huestis MA (2014) 
Plasma cannabinoid 
concentrations during dronabinol  
pharmacotherapy for cannabis 
dependence. Ther Drug Monit. 
36(2):218-24
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 156  of 161Drug-drug interaction 
between cannabidiol  (CBD) 
and clobazam  (CLB) in
 
refractory epilepsy in 
children13    subjects    with 
refractory epilepsyCannabidiol  (CBD) and 
clobazam  
(CLB)CLB  and CBD  are both metabolized in the cytochrome  P450 (CYP) 
pathway. Nine  of 13 subjects had a >50% decrease  in seizures, 
corresponding to a responder rate of 70%. The increased CLB  and nCLB  
levels and decreases in seizure  frequency occurred even though, over the 
course  of CBD treatment, CLB  doses were  reduced for 10 (77%) of the 13 
subjects. Side effects were  reported in 10 (77%) of the 13 subjects, but 
were alleviated with CLB  dose reductionGeffrey AL, Pollack SF, Bruno  
PL, Thiele  EA (2015) Drug-drug 
interaction between clobazam  and 
cannabidiol  in children with 
refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia. 
2015 Jun 26.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 157  of 161Appendix 2:  Table of  Previously Conducted Trials using Palmitoylethanolamide
Indication & Trial  
DesignNumber  of 
PatientsPEA Dosage Main Results Ref
Sciatic pain 
Double-blind, 
randomized, two
doses of  PEA vs placebo636 1st arm: 300mg/die  
x
 3 weeks
2nd arm: 300mg/bid for 
weeksSignificant decrease of pain on 
VAS (from  7 to 2)G. Guida, A. de  Fabiani, F. Lanaia, A. et al. La palmitoiletanolamida  
(Normast) en el dolor neuropatico cronico por lumbociatalgia
de tipo compresivo:  estudio clinico multicentrico. Dolor 2010; 25:  
35-42
Sciatic pain 
Double-blind, 
randomized, two
doses of  PEA vs placebo111 1st arm: 300mg/die  
for 
3 weeks
2nd arm: 300mg/bid for 
weeksSignificant decrease in the  duration 
of treatment  with anti-inflammatory 
and analgesic  drugsCanteri  L et  al. Reduction of analgesics in patients suffering from  
lumbosciatic pain, treated with palmitoylethanolamide. Dolor 2010;  
25: 227-34.
Pudendal  neuralgia
Case  Report1 300mg/tid gradually decreasing 
to
 300mg/die
for1 yearResolution of chronic pelvic pain Calabrò RS, Gervasi  G, Marino S, et al . Misdiagnosed Chronic  
Pelvic  Pain: Pudendal Neuralgia Responding to a Novel  Use of 
Palmitoylethanolamide. Pain Med 2010; 11(5): 781-4.
Diabetic neuropathic pain
Open30 300mg/bid for 60  days Significant reduction of pain, burning, 
paraesthesia and numbnessSchifilliti C,  Cucinotta L, Fedele V, et  al. Palmitoylethanolamide  
reduces the symptoms of neuropathic pain in diabetic patients. XIV 
Congress of the European Shock Society. September, Taormina, Italy 
2011.
Postoperative pain 
(surgical extraction
of impacted lower third 
molars)
Single-blind, randomized, 
splitmouth30 300mg/bid for 6  days 
before and 9 days after 
surgerySignificant reduction in  pain intensity Bacci C,  Cassetta  G, Emanuele B, et al. Randomized split-mouth 
study on postoperative effects of palmitoylethanolamide for impacted 
lower third molar surgery. ISRN Surg. 2011 2011917350.
TMJ    pain    caused    by 
osteoarthritis
Double  blind randomized 
vs
NSAIDs24 300mg at  morning + 
600mg at evening for7 
days;  followed by 
300mg/bid for 7 days
Vs ibupfofen (600 mg/tid 
for 14 days)Significant decrease of pain on 
VAS (from  7 to 0.7) an significant  
better maximum  mouth opening 
compared to ibuprofen.Bortolotti  F, Russo M,  Bartolucci ML, et al. Palmitoylethanolamide  
versus NSAID in the treatment of TMJ’s pain. J Orofac  Pain
Diabetic  neuropathy pain 
associated
with carpal tunnel  
syndrome
Group-controlled, 
randomized,
PEA treatment  v standard 
care50 600 mg/bid for 60 days Significant relief of pain.
Significant improvement of 
neurophysiologic
parametersAssini  A, Laricchia  D, Pizzo R,  et al. The carpal tunnel syndrome  
in diabetes: clinical and electrophysiological improvement  after 
treatment with palmitoylethanolamide  Eur J Neurol 2010; 17(S3):  
295.
Carpal  tunnel  syndrome  in 
diabetic
patients
Group-controlled, 
randomized vs
non-treated patients40 600mg/bid for 60  days Significant reduction of pain and 
functional status.
Significant improvement  neurophysiologic  
parametersAssini  A, Laricchia  D, Pizzo R,  et al. Tunnel carpale nel paziente  
diabetico. Migliloramento clinico ed elettrofisiologico dopo trattamento 
con palmitoiletanolamide. [Carpal tunnel syndrome in the
diabetic patient. Clinical and electrophysiologic  improvement  after 
treatment with palmitoylethanolamide]. 34th National  Congress 
AISD –
 New frontiers in pain medicine. May, Riccione, Italy 2011.
Pain associated with 
carpal tunnel26 1st arm: 300mg/bid for 30 
daysSignificant dose-dependent reduction 
of 
pain and improvement  ofConigliaro R,  Drago V, Foster PS, et al. Use of palmitoylethanolamide  
in the entrapment neuropathy of the median in the wrist. Minerva
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 158  of 161syndrome
Group-controlled, 
randomized,
two doses of  PEA vs non- 
treated
patients2nd arm: 600mg/bid for 30 
daysneurophysiologic  parameters compared 
with control group.Med 2011; 102(2): 141-7.
Neuropathic pain
Open27 300mg/bid for 3  weeks 
followed by 
300mg/die for 4 weeksSignificant reduction of pain and 
improvement  of 
electrophysiological  
parametersBiasiotta     A,    Di    Stefano    G,    Leone     C,    et    al .    Efficacy    of 
palmitoylethanolamide
in patients with painful  neuropathy. A clinical  and neurophysiological open 
study. Preliminary results. Eur J Pain
2010; 4(1): 77.
Low back  pain
Open (Combination 
therapy)20 600mg/bid for 30  days
+
oxycodoneSignificant decrease of pain on 
VAS (from  7 to 2.5)Desio P. Combination of oxycodone and palmitoylethanolamide for 
low back pain treatment. Rivista Siared di Anestesia e Medicina  
Critica 2011; 1(2):  62-71.
Neuropathic  chronic  pain 
(Diabetic
neuropathy and 
postherpetic
neuralgia)
Open (Combination 
therapy)30 Combination of Pregabalin+
PEA 600mg bid 
for 
45 days
+
pregabalinSignificant decrease of pain on 
VAS, from  7.6 to 1.8Desio P. Associazione tra pregabalin e  palmitoiletanolamide per il 
trattamento del dolore neuropatico. [Association of palmitoylethanolamide  
and pregabalin in the management  of neuropathic pain].
Pathos 2010; 17(4): 9-14.
Various pain states
Open (Combination 
therapy)517 600mg/bid for 3  weeks 
followed by 600mg/die  
for 4 weeks
+
Pregabalin and oxycodone61% decrease of mean pain score  on 
Numeric Rating ScaleDi Paolo A, Gianfelice V, Silvestri  C, et  al. La palmitoiletanolamide  
nel trattamento del dolore attivato dal sistema  gliale:  nostra  esperienza. 
[Palmitoylethanolamide in the management  of gliaactivated
pain. Our  experience] 34th National Congress AISD –  
New frontiers in pain medicine. May 2011, Riccione, Italy.
Low back  pain
Open (Combination 
therapy)
Controlled (PEA
+standard analgesics 
group vs standard 
analgesics
only)81 600mg/bid for 3  weeks 
followed by 
600mg/die for 4 weeks
+/-
Standard analgesicsSignificant reduction of pain intensity 
in
 the PEA group compared to control  
groupPalomba R,  Adfiletta S, Candiello A, et al . Multimodal analgesia
for chronic pain: rationale and future directions. Naples Pain Conference. 
Napoli, Italy 2010.
Diabetic neuropathic pain
Group- controlled:
Combination
of  PEA   +Pregabalin  vs 
Pregabalin74 600mg/bid for 10  days 
followed by 
600mg/die for 20 days 
followed by 
300mg/die for 30 daysSignificantly higher rate of responders 
(i.e., <60% decrease in
pain score) in the combination therapy 
group compared to pregabalin       
only group.Adiletta     S,    Candiello    A,    Arminio    D,    et    al.    Pregabalin    and 
Palmitoylethanolamide
in diabetic neuropathic pain: an randomized
clinical  trial. 34th AISD (Italian Association for the Study of Pain)  
Congress, Riccione, Italy 2011.
Sciatic pain 
Group-controlled, 
randomized,
combination of PEA
+standard
analgesic     therapies    vs 
standard
analgesic therapies85 300mg/bid for 30  days Significant relief
of pain (scored both on VAS and 
Oswestry Low Back Pain Scale) in 
the PEA group compared to the  
analgesic-only group.Dominguez CM, Diaz Martin AA, Ferrer FG, et  al. Palmitoiletanolamida  
(PEA) en lumbociatica  en asociacion al  tratamiento habitual. 
[Palmitoylethanolamide  in lumbosciatic  pain in  association with standard 
therapy] 8th National  Congress of the  Sociedad
Española del Dolor. May  Madrid, Spain 2010.
Neuropathic     pain    and 
spasticity in
post-stroke  patients20 600mg/bid for 60  days 
followed by 
600mg/die for 30 daysSignificant decrease of pain and 
spasticityRusso G, Parabita M. Decrease of spasticity and pain after stroke  
due to treatment  with PEA. 14th congress European Shock Soc, 
Taormina, Italy 2011.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 159  of 161Open,  controlled  PEA  + 
Physiother()
vs group treated with only  
Physiother)
Neuropathic pain 
associated with
multiple sclerosis
Open20 300mg/bid for 60  days Significant decrease of neuropathic  
painMancardi  GL, Infante MT, Capello E,  et al. Palmitoylethanolamide  
relieves neuropathic pain associated to multiple sclerosis. XL  National  
Congress of the Italian Neurological Society. Padova, Italy
2009.
Chroni c pelvic pain 
associated
with endometriosis/  
dysmenorrhoea
/interstitial cystitis
Open25 200mg/tid (+polydatin 
20mg/tid) 
for 40 daysSignificant reduction of pain on 
VAS 
(from  6.8 to 1.7).
Significant decrease in the  use of 
NSAIDs.Palomba    R,    De   Simone    MG,   GIovannini     A,    et    al.    Use    of 
palmitotlethanolamide
(PEA) + polydatin in the chronic pelvic pain. 
SIAARTI, October 2010, Parma, Italy.
Adolescent primary 
dysmenorrhoea
Open20 400mg/bid (+ polydatin 
40mg/bid)
for 6 months70% decrease of pelvic  pain Fulghesu A, Magnini R  , Mazzella  S, et al . Treatment  of adolescent  
dysmenorrhea  by a new inhibitor of mast cells-induced inflammation 
(palmitoylethanolamide +  trans polydatin). 16th Congress of 
Pediatric and Adolescent  Gynecology, May Montpellier, France  
2010.
Chronic   pelvic   pain  and 
dyspareunia
associated with 
endometriosis
Open (case series)4 200mg/bid (+ polydatin 
20mg/bid) for 
3 monthsSignificant decrease of pelvic pain. 
Significant decrease of dyspareunia. 
Significant reduction in the use of 
analgesics.Indraccolo U, Barbieri  F. Effect  of palmitoylethanolamidepolydatin 
combination on chronic pelvic  pain associated with endometriosis:  
preliminary observations. Eur J Obstet  Gynecol  Reprod
Biol 2010; 150(1):  76-9.
Chroni c pelvic pain 
associated
with endometriosis
Double blind,
,randomized parallel- 
group, placebo-controlled61 400mg/tid (+  40mg/tid 
polydatin) 
for
3 months 
Vs
celecoxib 200 mg/bid for 
7
 consecutive daysSignificant decrease of cronic pelvic  
pain, dysmenorrhoea  and dyspareunia  
in the PEA group compared to  
placebo groupCobellis L, Castaldi MA, Giordano V, et  al. Effectiveness of the  
association micronized N-Palmitoylethanolamine (PEA)-
transpolydatin   in   the    treatment    of   chronic    pelvic    pain   related   to  
endometriosis
after laparoscopic assessment:  a pilot study. Eur J Obstet  
Gynecol Reprod Biol 2011; 158: 82-6.
Safety and  Efficacy Study 
of PEA and Polydatin on 
Intestinal  Inflammation 
and Visceral  Hyperalgesia  
in IBS Patients. Phase  II 
clinical  study  by CM&D 
Pharma Limited/NestleRecruitment  
status is
 
Recruiting200 mg Micronised 
Palmitoylethanolamide  (PEA)  and
 
20 mg Polydatin- http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Whether the anti- 
inflammatory agent  
palmitoylethanolamide  
(PEA) can
 counteract  the 
increase     of    intraocular 
pressure   (IOP)  that   may 
occur  after  neodymium- 
doped:  yttrium  aluminum  
garnet    (Nd:YAG)   laser 
iridotomy15 after 
bilateral laser 
iridotomy 
(Visulas 
YAG III
Laser;  Zeiss) 
for the
prevention of 
primary 
closed-angle  
glaucoma.Pretreatment   with  placebo  or  PEA 
(t0)
Visimast 300 mg, Epitech Group SrlPEA can counteract  the increase  of IOP that 
occurs after iridotomy. It is likely that
 PEA 
controls the inflammatory process after 
iridotomy.Pescosolido N, Librando A, Puzzono M, Nebbioso M. 
Palmitoylethanolamide  effects on intraocular pressure  after Nd:YAG laser 
iridotomy:  an experimental  clinical  study. J
 Ocul Pharmacol  Ther. 2011 
Dec;27(6):629-35.
Oral palmitoyl- 
ethanolamide   
 (PEA)   on42 PEA 300-mg/bid 
VsSystemic  administration of PEA reduces IOP 
in
   patients   with   glaucoma    and   ocularGagliano  C,  Ortisi   E,  Pulvirenti   L,  Reibaldi   M,  Scollo  D,  Amato  R, 
Avitabile   T,  Longo  A.  Ocular  hypotensive   effect   of  oral   palmitoyl-
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 160  of 161intraocular pressure  (IOP) 
in
 primary open angle  
glaucoma  (POAG) and 
ocular hypertension (OH). 
Randomized, double- 
blind, crossover clinical  
trialplacebo (PEA vehicle tablets bid) hypertension. PEA could be  a valuable  tool 
for the treatment  of glaucomaethanolamide:   a  clinical   trial.  Invest   Ophthalmol   Vis  Sci.  2011  Aug 
3;52(9):6096-100.
Vulvodynia and 
proctodynia.
Case Study1 baclofen 5 % and 
palmitoylethanolamide 400 mg, tidTopical  baclofen and palmitoylethanolamide  
can
 be a viable  treatment  option in chronic  
vulvodynia and proctodynia.Keppel  Hesselink JM, Kopsky DJ, Sajben NL. Vulvodynia  and proctodynia  
treated with topical  baclofen 5
 % and palmitoylethanolamide. Arch Gynecol  
Obstet. 2014 Aug;290(2):389-93.
Chronic     regional     pain 
syndrome (CRPS) 
intractable CRPS
type 1
Case  study1 PeaPure®  400  mg capsules
(JP Russell Sciences Ltd, Nicosia, 
Cyprus) and topical 10% ketamine  
creamThe combination of palmitoylethanolamide  
and ketamine  10% cream  reduced pain by 
more than 50% after 1 month of treatment, 
and a marked reduction in swelling and skin 
discoloration was noticed.Keppel Hesselink JM, Kopsky DJ Treatment  of chronic  regional  pain 
syndrome
type 1 with palmitoylethanolamide and topical
ketamine  cream:  modulation of nonneuronal  cells. J  Pain Res 2013 Mar 239- 
45
Atopic  Dermatitis
Investigator-blinded,
split-body, randomized 
trial of
 children and adults 
with atopic dermatitis.43 PEA-containing nonsteroidal  cream  
in
 combination with the designated 
midpotency topical  corticosteroid 
twice daily.PEA-containing nonsteroidal  cream  
demonstrated more  rapid clearance  than the 
sides treated twice  daily with a topical  
corticosteroid in
 combination with a 
designated moisturizer cream.James Q. Del Rosso Use of a Palmitoylethanolamide- Containing 
Nonsteroidal Cream  for Treating Atopic  Dermatitis: Impact  on the  
Duration of Response and Time Between Flares Cosmetic  Dermatology®  • 
APRIL  2007 • VOL. 20 NO. 4
Long-term     management  
of atopic  eczema
Multinational, 
multicentre, observational,
non- 
controlled, prospective  
cohort  study2456 Unique  lamellar  matrix  containing 
N-palmitoylethanolamine (PEA)Substantial relief of objective and subjective  
symptoms of atopic  eczema  after regular 
skin care with the study cream. The patient- 
related effectiveness (decline of pruritus and 
loss of sleep) indicated a gain in quality of
 
life in these  patients. The reduced use of 
topical  corticosteroids is important  in view 
of safety and pharmacoeconomic  
implications in the treatment  of atopic  
eczema.Eberlein B,  Eicke  C, Reinhardt  HW, Ring J. Adjuvant  treatment  of atopic  
eczema:  assessment  of an emollient  containing N-palmitoylethanolamine  
(ATOPA study). J Eur Acad Dermatol  Venereol. 2008 Jan;22(1):73-82.
to          compare           the
supplementation        with
Sinerga          with         the
supplementation with 
bacterial  extracts, for the 
effect  on the
 frequency of 
episodes of respiratory 
infection that had resulted 
in a prescription for 
antibiotics.167 children,
aged  3  to  7 
years, of both 
sexes, with a 
clinical  
history of 
recurrent  
respiratory 
infectionsSinerga  a  nutritional  product  
containing palmitoylethanolamide, 
bovine  colostrum, phenylethylamine  
and the new generation of probiotic  
kluyveromyces FM B0399The results showed a  greater reduction in the 
frequency of respiratory infections with 
antibiotic  therapy in the group of children 
supplemented with Sinerga  than in the group 
treated with bacterial  extracts. In particular, 
it was observed that 49.3% of the children 
supplemented with Sinerga, against  5% of 
those  supplemented with extracts, had no 
infectious episodes requiring the 
administration of an antibiotic. 100% of 
subjects supplemented with Sinerga  have 
had no more  than two episodes of respiratory 
infection, while  this condition, in the cohort  
treated with bacterial  extracts, was observed 
in only 51% of cases.Nigro A, Nicastro A, Trodella  R.  Retrospective  observational  study to 
investigate  Sinerga, a multifactorial  nutritional  product, and bacterial  
extracts in the prevention of recurrent  respiratory infections in children. Int 
J Immunopathol  Pharmacol. 2014 Jul-Sep;27(3):455-60
To determine  whether 
changes in
 seminal  plasma  
concentrations     of     the90 men 
attending an 
infertilityPalmitoylethanolamide  and OEA 
extracted from  seminal  plasma  were  
quantified by
 ultra  high-performancePalmitoylethanolamide  and OEA 
concentrations in seminal  plasma  were  lower 
in
    men    with    asthenozoospermia     andAmoako AA, Marczylo TH, Elson J, Taylor AH, Willets JM4,  Konje  JC. 
Relationship  between  seminal   plasma   levels  of  anandamide   congeners
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018Page 161  of 161endoge nous lipid
signaling molecules 
palmitoylethanolamide  
(PEA) and
oleoylethanolamide  
(OEA)  
 have    significant  
effects on sperm  qualityclinic for 
semen 
analysis.liquid    chromatography    (HPLC)- 
tandem  mass spectrometryoligoasthenoteratozospermia  compared with 
men with normal  semen parameters. 
Palmitoylethanolamide  and OEA rapidly 
and significantly improved sperm  motility 
and maintained viability without  affecting 
mitochondria  activity in  vitro.palmitoylethanolamide  and oleoylethanolamide  and semen quality. Fertil  
Steril. 2014 Sep 8. pii:
 S0015-0282(14)01394-6
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 9/27/2017 VALID THROUGH 10/25/2018