ORI IRB# 00000278   
 
Protocol Version 11.6.2018 
Official Title: Talk STEM Familia: A Language Acquisition Smart Speaker -Based App to 
Improve English Language Acquisition And Family Engagement and Promote Long -Term 
Educational and Health Outcomes Among First - and Second -Generation Latino Families  
Principal Investigators : Jessie Marquez, Patricia Vadasy, Ph.D.   
Influents Innovations  
Award No. R43MD013619 - 01 
Protocol Version Date: 11.6.2018   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol 
We conducted a 6 -week intervention among 50 dyads (4th/ 5th grade Latino English learners and 
their parent) to assess  feasibility of TSF in terms of its  usefulness, ease -of-use, cultural 
appropriateness, and potential for efficacy. The test used  a within-subjects pre -post design to 
detect changes in student and pa rent word knowledge, self -efficacy, and behavioral intention. 
We also collected a post -test evaluation of consumer satisfaction and student and parent 
recommendations for program modifications.  
 
Statistical Analysis  Plan 
The evaluation had three main goals: (a) determine whether statistically significant effects 
were found between T1 (pretest) and T2 (posttest) on the outcome measures; (b) determine the 
program effect sizes; and (c) determine the parent’s and student’s rea ction to the program and 
amount of program use. An intent -to-treat analysis using one fully -imputed dataset and paired t -
tests were used to determine whether or not there were significant increases in the outcome 
measures from pretest to posttest. The poin t-biserial r is provided as a measure of effect sizes 
with the convention .14 small, .36 medium, and .51 large (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 2008). 
Examination of descriptive statistics for the user satisfaction items informed on parent’s and 
student’s reaction to the program.  
 
 
Power Analysis  
Based on the pre -post within-subject design with  50 student-parent dyads,  accounting for 10% 
attrition, and a two -tailed alpha set to .05, the study would have sufficient statistical power (> 
.80) to detect a medium or larger effect size (Cohen’s d = .41) for change in the proposed 
outcomes. We believe that these differences are not so small as to be meaningless to participants, 
but not so large as to represent unrealistic expectations of changes brought about by the 
intervention.  For ancillary analyses inv olving correlations the study is powered to detect medium 
or larger effects ( r = .38). 
 