 
Revised June  2018  
 
 
 
Optical Head -Mounted Display Technology 
for Low Vision Rehabilitation  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
June 15, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised June  2018 Optical Head -Mounted Display Technology for Low Vision Rehabilitation    HUM00110408  
 
PROTOCOL  
1. Background  
Worldwide it is estimated that 191 million people have  moderate to severe visual impairment ( MSVI) 
and an additional 32.4 million are blind (1).  Patients with uncorrectable  MSVI may undergo  low vision  
rehabilitation  (LVR) , which has been shown  to improve functional abil ities, such as mobility (2).  
However, existing LVR strategies do not adequately address severe visual field constriction, and much of 
the evidence that points toward improved functional performance from  LVR is based on patient self -
report  (3).  Accor dingly, there is a critical barrier  to improving and measuring function among patients 
with severe visual field constriction that we seek to address.  
In this pilot study, we will test the hypothesis  that optical head -mounted display technology expands 
constricted visual fields and improves mobility and quality -of-life. While there are many causes and 
forms of visual impairment, our objective  is to assess optical head -mounted display technology in  LVR 
for patients with severely constricted visual fields resulting from retinal dystrophy.   
Objectives/Specific Aims  
We will test our hypothesis in the following aims:  
Primary Aims  
1. To demonstrate that optical head -mounted display technology increases the planimetric area of 
the visual field.  
Other  Aims 
2. To quantify the impact of optical head mounted  display technology on mobility using gait and 
head movement analyses.  
3. To measure the impact of optical head mounted display technology on vision -related quality of 
life and self -reported function.  
 
1. Methods  
a. Study Design  
Demographic data, m edical  history , laboratory results, medications  and clinical information will be 
extracted fro m the medical record, including  visual acuity and results of visual field, electro retinogram, 
ultrasound, optical co herence tomography, MRI and CT.  
Participation in the study wil l occur on two separate days 2-4 weeks apart.  
 
 
Revised June  2018 Upon enrollment all participants will complete:  
 Measurement of height, weight and limb length  
 Measurement of visual acuity and contrast sensitivity  
 Full ophthalmologic examination including  intraocular pressure measurement,  slit lamp 
biomicroscopy and indirect ophthalmoscopy  
 Goldmann visual field examination  
 Windows tablet visual field examination  
 Electroretinogram  (if not done in year prior to enrollement ; only done by patients, not control s) 
 Impact of Vision Impairment Questionnaire  (4) and Independent Mobility Q uestionnaire (6) 
 Mobility testing, as detailed in bel ow (Aim 2)  
Participants will be fit with HMD  technology ( Epson Moverio  www.epson.com/moverio ; Figure 2 ) and 
undergo a brief training with the investigators to learn about use of the device  and will receive materials 
describing how to charge the device and turn it on and off.   While wearing the device the subjects may 
have some discomfort relate d to the weight of the device on the ears and/or nose.  The nose piece can 
be adjusted with pads f or optimal comfort.  A band on the arm pieces of the frame ca n also be adjusted 
for comfort.  Initially, there may be the sense of disorientation , may feel dizzy or nausea , but with 
coaching/training the subject is  anticipate d to adapt.  In order to adapt to the technology, participants 
will be permitted to bring the HMD home to use (for 2-4 weeks) .   
When participants return after a period of adaptation to the HMD, they will undergo the following:  
 Impact of Vision Impairment Questionnaire (4), Independent Mobility Questionnaire (6), and 
the System Usability Scale (12)  
 Videotaped open -ended interview in which subjects will be asked  to describe their experience 
using HMD and to discuss any challenges and successes using the technology.  
 Goldmann visual field and tablet visual field examination (while wearing the HMD)  
 Mobility testing, as detailed below (Aim 2; white wearing the HMD)  
To accomplish A im 1 we will use the following approaches:  
After the period of in -home adaptation, participants will return to have their  visual field retested with 
Goldmann perimetry after a period of adaptation to the technology. We predict the outcome of 
increased planimetric area of the peripheral vision determined by Goldmann perimetry.  
To accomplish Aim 2:  
We propose to collect and analyze gait and head movement parameters in order to provide a 
quantitative analysis of mobility -associated factors  of per sons with severe visual field constriction  and 
controls  with and without the use of optical head -mounted display technology. We will mount an 
inertial measurement unit (IMU) data logger ( Actigraph GT9X “Link”,  
http://www.actigraphcorp.com/products/actigrap h-link/ ; Image 2 ) on the patients' shoe; it will be 
placed inside a small pouch that rests on top of the shoe laces. A second IMU  device will be mounted on 
 
Revised June  2018 the frames of the patients’ existing glasses (or on a mock frame if the patient does not wear glasse s) in 
order to measure head pitch, roll and yaw. The subjects will be asked to walk around a long empty 
corridor during which time t hey will be timed and videotaped  and IMU data will be acquired . Then, 
participants will be asked to walk the same corridor a fter obstacles are arranged in the corridor every 1 -
2 meters. Obstacles will be short pieces of foam lying on the floor, knee to waist high cardboard boxes, 
or pieces of foam hanging from the ceiling.  A research assistant will follow close to participants  in order 
to provide assistance should this be required. Testing mobility in the presence of obstacles is important 
in order to more closely approximate real -world scenarios. Video recording is essential in order to 
correlate aberrancies in IMU data with o bstacles in the patients’ environment. The same procedure will 
be repeated with the patients wearing optical head -mounted display technology after the period of in-
home adaptation to the technology  with the device turned off (to serve as a negative control ) and with 
the device turned on.  
To accomplish Aim 3:  
Participants will  all complete the Impact of Vision Impairment and Independent Mobility Questionnaire  
at the time of their enrollment in the study. These surveys will be completed a gain after the period  of in-
home adaptation to the OHMD.  We will also analyze qualitative data collected through open -ended 
interviews after use of HMD.  
We will conduct statistical analyses, as detailed in Section 2e, to describe associations between 
outcomes assessed througho ut our Aims . 
b. Eligibility  
Participants with retinal dystrophy will be recruited into this study from the Retinal Dystrophy Clinic in 
the Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences at the University of Michigan.  
Normal controls will be included to adjust for the baseline impact of HMD on visual fields and gait 
parameters and to compare these to data from patients with RP. Comparing to a group of age -matched 
control patients will allow us to investigate and understand the true impact of HMD on visual  fields, gait, 
and quality of life.  Control participants will be recruited from the Comprehensive and Pediatric 
Ophthalmology Services at the University of Michigan. We will seek to enroll up to 40 subjects in order 
to obtain ten patients and ten age -match ed controls with complete data , allowing room for those who 
don’t complete both study visits and technical errors with equipment.  
Criteria  
Inclusion criteria for subjects with retinal dystrophy:  
 diagnosis of retinal dystrophy  
 severe vision loss that consti tutes legal blindness  
 able to perform a reliable Goldmann visual field test  
 constricted visual field less than or equal to 20 degrees by Goldmann perimetry using the III4e 
stimulus in at least one eye with best -corrected visual acuity ≥ 20/60  
Inclusion cri teria for control subjects:  
 
Revised June  2018  healthy controls  
 able to perform a reliable Goldmann visual field test  
Exclusion criteria for subjects with retinal dystrophy:  
 movement disorder that precludes evaluation of mobility  
 functional vision loss  
 pregnant women  
Exclusion criteria for control subjects:  
 visually significant ocular condition other than correctable refractive error  
 movement disorder that precludes evaluation of mobility  
 functional vision loss  
 pregnant women  
 
c. Study Setting  
Patients will be recruited from the Retinal Dystrophy Clinic  of the Department of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Sciences at the University of Michigan ; controls will be recruited from the Comprehensive and 
Pediatric Clinics of the Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences at the University of Michigan. 
Study exams, clinical testing , surveys and interviews will be completed in the Kellogg Clinical Research 
Center. Mobility testing will be conducted in a hallway  located in the Kellogg Clinical Research Center.  
d. Outcome measures  
Primary Outcome Measures:  
 Change in the planimetric area of Goldmann visual field with the use of head -mounted display 
techn ology compared to baseline (measured in degrees squared):  
Using computer software we will calculate the area of participants' Goldmann visual fields in order to 
obtain a summary quantitative measurement of the extent of peripheral vision.  
 
Secondary Outcome Measures:  
 Change in gait speed compared to baseline (measured in seconds):  
Gait speed will be measured using an inertial measurement unit attached to participants' shoes and 
will quantify the time taken to move from the beginning to end of a short mobility course.  
 
Other Outcome Measures:  
 Change in patient -reported ability for independent mobility as assessed by subject responses a 
validated questionnaire:  
Independent Mobility Questionnaire (scored from 35 to 175 with 175 representing extreme mobili ty 
impairment)  
 Change in patient -reported mobility and independence as assessed by subject responses a validated 
questionnaire:  
Mobility and Independence domain of the Impact of Vision Impairment Questionnaire (scored from 
0 to 33 with 0 representing poor mobility and independence ) 
 
 Change in stride length compared to baseline (measured in mm):  
 
Revised June  2018 Inertial measurement units attached to participants' shoes will track the length of each step as they 
walk through a short mobility course.  
 Change in stride width compared to baseline (measured in mm):  
Inertial measurement units attached to participants' shoes will track the width of each step as they 
walk through a short mobility course.  
 
 Change in foot orientation compared to baseline (measured in degrees):  
Inerti al measurement units attached to participants' shoes will track the orientation of their feet as 
they walk through a short mobility course.  
 
e. Planned Data Analysis  
To address Aim 1  the visual field will be assessed before and after being trained to use optical head -
mounted display technology .  The Goldmann visual field plots will be scanned and the planimetric areas 
for each stimulus size will be measured using Adobe Photoshop CC (San J oe, CA) as previously described 
(8).  In brief, using a scale of 10 degrees on the visual field, the corresponding number of pixels are 
determined, and the units are set to millimeters.  Areas are measured in mm2 using the Magic Wand 
tool and are converted to degrees squared. Area s of scotomas are subtracted from the total area. We 
will analyze the change in area before and after a 2-4 week period of adaptation to  the OHMD.  The 
adaptation period is important as it will allow subjects to become familiar with how to use the device 
and to gain insight into how using such a device may impact their life.  The Mann -Whitney U test will 
used to compare change in visual field area between patients and controls.  
To address Aim 2  we will measure change in gait speed with and without the use of OHMD.  We will 
calculate percent preferred walk ing speed to compare the ratio of gait speed measured in the presence 
and absence of physical obstacles. We will also use our data processing algorithms  to reconstruct the 
paths of the feet and head movements during the planned experiments from which we can estimate 
mobility parameters  (9–11).  For gait, we will gather measures of stride length, width and period, and 
their variabilities, from straight -line walking, lateral/foot -angle relation, stride frequency, ground 
contact time, etc.  For head movement we will gather measures of head pitch, head roll and head yaw.  
The mean and standard deviation of each gait and head movement parameter will be compared before 
and after being trained to use optical head -mounted display  technology  (11,12) .  We will use Wilcoxon 
signed -rank test to test for significant differences.  Significant changes (an d trends) will be assessed for 
direction and magnitude, and resulting values will be compared to gait and head movement parameter 
norms before and after using the optical head mounted display.  The Mann -Whitney U test will used to 
compare changes in gait pa rameters between patients and controls.  
To address Aim 3  we will use the Wilcoxon signed -rank test to determine whether individual 
participants’ survey scores changed from baseline when using optical head mounted display technology.  
We will also use the Ma nn Whitney U test to compare changes in survey scores between patients and 
controls.  Cohen’s d will be calculated to measure the overall effect size of the intervention as measured 
by the surveys. Minimum clinically important differences will also be calcu lated (ratio of change in visual 
ability to 1.95 standard errors of the measured change) to determine if changes in each individual’s 
visual ability were clinically important.  
 
Revised June  2018  We will also calculate Spearman correlation s between variables ( visual field ar ea, mobility parameters 
and survey results ) and use multiple regression to investigate associations while controlling for 
covariates.  
 
Image 1 . The Epson Moverio® Head Mounted Display.  
 
 
Image 2. The Actigraph Link Inertial Motion Unit.  
  

 
Revised June  2018 References  
1.  Bourne RRA, Stevens GA, White RA, Smith JL, Flaxman SR, Price H, et al. Causes of vision loss 
worldwide, 1990 -2010: a systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2013 Dec;1(6):e339 -349.  
2.  Stelmack JA, T ang XC, Reda DJ, Rinne S, Mancil RM, Massof RW, et al. Outcomes of the Veterans 
Affairs Low Vision Intervention Trial (LOVIT). Arch Ophthalmol. 2008 May;126(5):608 –17.  
3.  Binns AM, Bunce C, Dickinson C, Harper R, Tudor -Edwards R, Woodhouse M, et al. How effective is 
low vision service provision? A systematic review. Surv Ophthalmol. 2012 Feb;57(1):34 –65.  
4.  Weih LM, Hassell JB, Keeffe J. Assessment of the Impact of Vision Impairment. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci. 2002 Apr 1;43(4):927 –35.  
5.  Stelmack JA, Szlyk JP, Stelmack TR, Demers -Turco P, Williams RT, Moran D, et al. Psychometric 
properties of the Veterans Affairs Low -Vision Visual Functioning Questionnaire. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci. 2004 Nov;45(11):3919 –28.  
6.  Turano KA, Geruschat DR, Stahl JW, Mas sof RW. Perceived visual ability for independent mobility in 
persons with retinitis pigmentosa. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1999 Apr;40(5):865 –77.  
7.  Mangione CM, Lee PP, Gutierrez PR, Spritzer K, Berry S, Hays RD, et al. Development of the 25 -item 
Nation al Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire. Arch Ophthalmol Chic Ill 1960. 2001 
Jul;119(7):1050 –8.  
8.  Zahid S, Peeler C, Khan N, Davis J, Mahmood M, Heckenlively JR, et al. Digital quantification of 
Goldmann visual fields (GVFs) as a means for genoty pe-phenotype comparisons and detection of 
progression in retinal degenerations. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;801:131 –7.  
9.  Ojeda L, Borenstein J. Non -GPS Navigation for Security Personnel and First Responders. J Navig. 
2007 Sep;60(3):391 –407.  
10.  Ojeda L, Re bula JR, Adamczyk PG, Kuo AD. Mobile platform for motion capture of locomotion over 
long distances. J Biomech. 2013 Sep 3;46(13):2316 –9.  
11.  Rebula JR, Ojeda LV, Adamczyk PG, Kuo AD. Measurement of foot placement and its variability with 
inertial sensors . Gait Posture. 2013 Sep;38(4):974 –80.  
12.  Ojeda LV, Rebula JR, Kuo AD, Adamczyk PG. Influence of contextual task constraints on preferred 
stride parameters and their variabilities during human walking. Med Eng Phys. 2015 
Oct;37(10):929 –36.  
12. Bango r A, Kortum PT, Miller JT. An empirical evaluation of the system usability scale. International 
Journal of Human -Computer Interaction. 2008 Jul;24(6):574 -594 