	 	 				Nair	1	
	
			
Predicting	Treatment	Response	to	Memantine	in	Autism	Spectrum	Disorder	using	MR	
Spectroscopy 	
	
	
Protocol	1 	
Version 	7	
March	8,	2017 	
		
Institution:	University	of	Missouri 	
Principal	Investigator:	Dr.	David	Beversdorf,	M.D. 	
Co-Investigator:	Neetu	Nair 	
						
	 	 				Nair	1	
	
Abstract	
Memantine,	an	 N-methyl-D-aspartate	 receptor	antagonist,	has	been	explored	as	a	possible	
therapeutic	agent	that	reduces	the	excitatory	(glutamate)	 –	inhibitory	(gamma	amino -butyric	acid,	
GABA)	 imbalance	 in	 autism	 pathology	 and	 improves	 social	 and	 communication	 deficits.	 While	
some	 studies	 have	 shown	 positive	 results,	 a	 large	 clinical	 trial	 failed	 to	 show	 benefit	 possibly	because	different	subsets	of	autism	responded	differently	to	the	treatment.	We	propose	a	pilot,	exploratory,	clinical	follow -on	study	using	proton	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	(
1H-MRS)	to	
determine	 whether	 baseline	 glutamate/GABA	 levels	 in	 certain	 regions	 of	 the	 brain	 may	 help	predict	treatment	response	to	Memantine	in	autistic	subjects.	At	study	onset,	subjects	will	be	assesse d	 on	 the	 behavioral	 scales	 such	 as	 the	 Aberrant	 Behavior	 Checklist	 and	 Clinical	 Global	
Impressions	scale,	followed	by	MRS	imaging.	Memantine	treatment	will	be	started	post	imaging.	Assessment	measures	will	be	repeated	at	week	12	during	treatment.	Glutamate 	and	GABA	levels	
in	brain	regions	will	be	correlated	to	improvements	on	assessment	measures.	We	expect	higher	glutamate	and/or	lower	GABA	levels	in	the	anterior	cingulate	cortex	at	baseline	in	responders	to	memantine.	If	our	hypotheses	are	confirmed,	we	wi ll	have	established	a	relevant	neural	biomarker	
to	predict	treatment	response	to	memantine	with	important	implications	for	clinical	care	including	improving	accuracy	of	individual	prognosis	and	individualizing	treatments.				
	
	 	 				Nair	1	
Objectives	
Specific	Aim	1: 	We	propose	a	pilot,	exploratory,	clinical	follow -on	study	using	proton	magnetic	
resonance	spectroscopy	(1H-MRS)	to	examine	whether	the	following	measures	can	be	used	to	
predict	treatment	response	to	memantine	in	ASD:	 	
(a)	Glx	and/or	GABA	and	the	Glx/GABA	 ratio	in	the	anterior	cingulate	cortex,	 	
(b)	Glx	levels	in	the	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	and	the	cerebellum		 	
(c)	 Markers	 of	 neuronal	 integrity,	 N -acetyl	 aspartate	 (NAA),	 myo -inositol,	 choline	 and	
creatine/phosphocreatine	levels	in	the	anterior	cingul ate,	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	
and	cerebellum			
Specific	Aim	2: 	To	examine	whether	resting	state	functional	connectivity	between	the	dorsolateral	
prefrontal	 cortex,	 anterior	 cingulate	 and	 the	 cerebellum,	 holds	 predictive	 value	 for	 treatment	
response	t o	memantine	in	ASD.	
Background	and	Rationale 	
Autism	Spectrum	Disorder	(ASD)	is	a	behaviorally	defined	complex	neurodevelopmental	
disorder	 characterized	 by	 early	 childhood	 onset	 of	 marked	 deficiencies	 in	 social	 and	communication	 skills	 and	 presence	 of	 restrictive,	 repetitive	 behaviors.	 	 Its	 phenotypic	heterogeneity	makes	studying	ASD	and	its	treatment	a	challenging	task.	Currently,	only	two	FDA	approved	drugs,	risperidone	and	aripiprazole,	are	available	to	treat	ASD
1	that	manage	irritability	
associated	with	the	disorder.	None	have	shown	conclusive	benefit	for	core	features	of	social	and	communication	deficits.	
	
Research	indicates	that	a	disrupted	balance	between 	excitation	(glutamate)	and	inhibition	
(gamma	amino -butyric	acid,	GABA)	is	likely	to	be	one	of	the	underlying	mechanisms	of	ASD.	This	
	 	 				Nair	1	
hypothesis	is	supported	by	a	number	of	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	studies	that	report	an	
excess	of	glutamatergic	excitation	and/or	a	reduction	in	GABAergic	inhibition	observed	in	different	brain	regions	including	the	limbic	system	and	the	anterior	cingulate	cortex.	
2–9	Similar	findings	have	
also	been	reported	in	post	mortem	studies	 of	the	ASD	brain	10–12.Thus,	it	is	expected	that	 drugs	
targeting	 this	 imbalance	 could	 be	 beneficial. 	For	 example,	 the	 GABA B	agonist,	 arbaclofen,	 was	
tested	 in	 ASD	 for	 this	 reason	 and	 showed	 promising	 results	 but	 a	 large	 trial	 failed	 to	 show	improvement	on	the	primary	endpoints	of	lethargy	and	social	withdrawal.
13		
Memantine,	 a	 moderate	 affinity	 N -methyl-D-aspartate	 (NMDA)	 receptor	 antagonist,	 is	
known	to	improve	communication	in	patients	with	Alzheimer’s	disease	and	is	an	FDA	approved	treatment	for	that	disease
14.	Examination	of	the	efficacy	of	memantine	in	treating	ASD	has	also	
been	 driven	 by	 the 	excitatory	 (glutamate)	 -	inhibitory	 (gamma	 amino -butyric	 acid,	 GABA)	
imbalance	hypothesis	of	ASD	pathology.	Memantine	binds	to	the	glutamatergic	NMDA	receptors	and	attenuates	glutamatergic	excitation.
15	This	reduction	in	excessive	glutamatergic	activation	is	
thought	 to	 decrease	 the	 “noise”	 in	 the	 neural	 network	 system	 and	 facilitate	 learning	 and	memory
16.	A	few	small	studies	have	shown	effectiveness	for	memantine	in	the	treatme nt	of	social	
and	communication	aspects	of	ASD	spectrum	disorder	(ASD)	as	well	1,15– 18.	However,	one	large	
clinical	trial	using	memantine	in	ASD	reported	a	failure	to	respond	18.	These	discrepancies	in	results	
could	possibly	be	due	to	the	heterogeneity	in	the	excitatory -inhibitory	imbalance	between	ASD	
patients	thereby	causing	a	variation	in	response1.	In	such	a	scenario,	having	a	biomarker	to	predict	
an	individual’s	treatment	response	would	be	invaluable.	 	
MR	Spectroscopy	is	a	non -invasive	tool	used	to	examine	the	biochemical	profile	of	brain	
tissue	 associated	 with	 different	 psychiatric	 and	 neurological	 conditions	 including	 ASD	19–21.	
	 	 				Nair	1	
Specifically,	1H-MRS	studies	in	ASD	demonstrated	the	excitatory-inhibitory	imbalance	in	various	
cortical	and	subcortical	regions	of	the	brain	2,3,5– 8,	a	finding	also	reported	in	post	mortem	brain	
tissue	studies	10–12.	The	use	of	this	technique	to	determine	if	Glutamate/GABA	concentrations	in	
certain	 regions	 of	 the	 brain	 can	 predict	 response	 to	 treatment	 with	 memantine	 would	 be	 an	
innovative	breakthrough	in	providing	more	effective	individualized	treatment 	for	patients	since	
very	little	research	has	been	done	to	explore	this	possibility.	 	
A	 similar	 approach	 has	 been	 adopted	 in	 a	 recent	 ongoing	 study	 that	 uses	 proton	 MR	
spectroscopy	to	map	changes	in	glutamate	and	GABA	following	use	of	riluzole	in	ASD22.	Riluzole	is	
a	drug	commonly	used	in	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(ALS)	and	is	a	glutamate	antagonist	that	works	 by	 blocking	 presynaptic	 glutamate	 release	 and	 noncompetitive	 inhibition	 of	 NMDA	receptors.
23	However,	riluzole	is	not	clinically	used	in	the	treatment	of	ASD.	To	our	knowledge,	
only	 one	 study	 so	 far	 (apart	 from	 the	 ongoing	 study	 mentioned)	 ha s	 examined	 the	 effects	 of	
riluzole	in	ASD,	but	as	an	adjunct	to	risperidone24.	The	primary	outcomes	of	the	Ghaleiha	et	al.	
study	 were	 irritability	 and	 repetitive	 motor	 behaviors	 and	 not	 core	 social	 and	 communication	deficits	as	in	the	present	proposal.	The	purpose	of	riluzole	in	this	MR	spectroscopy	study	is	a	proof	of	principle	for	its	effects	on	spectroscopy	based	on	its	glutam ate	antagonistic	effects.	By	contrast,	
memantine,	which	will	be	studied	in	the	present	proposal,	has	some	documented	evidence	from	small	studies	of	being	beneficial	in	treating	social	and	communication	deficits	associated	with	ASD	in	clinical	settings,	despite	the	failure	of	the	larger	trial.
16–18,25	
Our	 lab	 has	 previously	 utilized	 MR	 spectroscopy	 techniques	 to	 map	 these	 different	
compounds	in	a	group	of	14	subjects	with	ASD	and	identify	glutamate	and	GABA	alterations	in	the	
	 	 				Nair	1	
cerebellum ,	discovering	a	relationship	to	cerebrocerebellar	connectivity	and	behavioral	outcomes	
in	individuals	with	ASD26.	
Specific	Aim	1: 	We	propose	a	pilot,	exploratory,	clinical	follow -on	study	using	proton	magnetic	
resonance	spectroscopy	(1H-MRS)	to	examine	whether	the	following	measures	 can	be	used	to	
predict	treatment	response	to	memantine	in	ASD:	 	
(a)	Glx	and/or	GABA	and	the	Glx/GABA	ratio	in	the	anterior	cingulate	cortex,	 	
(b)	Glx	levels	in	the	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	and	the	cerebellum		 	
(c)	 Markers	 of	 neuronal	 integrity,	 N -acetyl	 aspartate	 (NAA),	 myo -inositol,	 choline	 and	
creatine/phosphocreatine	levels	in	the	anterior	cingulate,	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	
and	cerebellum			
Specific	Aim	2: 	To	examine	whether	resting	state	functional	connectivity	between	the	dorsolateral	
prefrontal	 cortex,	 anterior	 cingulate	 and	 the	 cerebellum,	 holds	 predictive	 value	 for	 treatment	response	to	memantine	in	ASD.	
The	anterior	cingulate	cortex,	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	and	the	cerebellum	have	been	
have	been	chosen	as	ROIs	due	to	known	atypical	glutamate	and	GABAergic	profiles	in	these	regions	associated	with	ASD
2,5,7,9,25– 32.	The	approach	of	limiting	to	selected	ROIs	has	been	adopted	in	order	
to	ensure	patient	comfort	during	the	imaging	process	by	reducing	the	time	spent	in	the	scanner.	Since	 altered	 levels	 for	 markers	 of	 neuronal	 integrity,	 such	 as	 NAA,	 choline,	creatine/phosphocreatine	and	myoinositol	have	also	been	reported	in	ASD,
3,5,6,9,29,33– 36	we	will	be	
mapping	these	biochemicals	as	well	in	order	to	explore	their	effect	on	treatment	response.	Resting	state	functional	connectivity	will	also	be	analyzed	for	possible	association	with	treatment	outcome	prediction	since	a	previous	study	from	our	lab	has	shown	a	link	between	alterations	in	resting	state	
	 	 				Nair	1	
cerebro cerebellar	 connectivity,	 excitatory -inhibitory	 ratio	 in	 the	 cerebellum	 and	 behavioral	
outcome	in	ASD	using	MR	spectroscopy26.	
Study	Design	
We	 propose	 to	 enroll	 25	subjects	 with	 ASD	 for	 this	 pilot,	 exploratory	 study	 who	 are	
interested	 in	 starting	 memantine	 off-label	 as	 a	 clinical	 follow	 on.	 Glutamate	 concentration	
variations	with	MRS	have	been	successfully	reported	with	this	sample	size	by	Page	et	al.,	200637.	
Subjects	 will	 be	 recruited	 from	 PI’s	 clinic	 at	 the	 Thompson	 Center	 for	 Autism	 and	
Neurodevelopmental	Disorders	at	the	University	of	Missouri. 	The	Thompson	Center	(TC)	is	one	of	
the	 leading	 sites	 for	 recruitment	 within	 the	 Autism	 Treatment	 Network	 with	 more	 than	 375	
participants	recruited	since	2008.	Our	group	and	 other	TC	researchers	have	successfully	recruited	
imaging	 patients	 from	 this	 resource	 for	 multiple	 federally	 funded	 research	 projects. 	We	 have	
preliminary	behavioral	data	on	15	ASD	patients	currently	on	memantine	treatment	showing	mixed	responses.	 	
Subjects	 will	 be	 approached	 to	 participate	 in	 the	 study	 during	 their	 clinic	 visit	 with	 a	
healthcare	professional .	For	potential	subjects	in	clinics	of	healthcare	professionals	who	are	not	
co-investigators	in	the	study,	a	recruitment	flyer	will	be	provided	with	con tact	information	for	
questions	and	queries	and	instructions	to	let	their	healthcare	provider	know	if	they	are	interested	in	participating	in	the	study.	The	recruitment	flyer	will	be	provided	to	healthcare	professionals	at	the	 Thompson	 Center	 who	 will	 distribute	 it	 to	 potential	 subjects	 upon	 request.	 Following	
indication	of	interest,	the	 researcher	from	the	study	team	 will	go	over	the	consent	(/assent,	as	
applicable)	 form	 with	 the	 subject	 in	 detail.	 Subjects	 will	 be	 informed	 that	 if	 they	 agree	 to	participate 	in	the	study,	they	will	be	asked	to	hold	off	on	starting	the	drug,	memantine,	till	the	
	 	 				Nair	1	
imaging	session	of	the	study	is	completed.	Subjects	will	also	be	informed	that	they	can	choose	not	
to	be	a	part	of	study	and	start	taking	memantine	immediately	if	they	 so	wish.	 The	subject/guardian	
will	be	able	to	ask	questions	throughout	the	process	and	the	researcher	will	pause	multiple	times	throughout	the	consent	process	to	ensure	understanding. 	The	study	physician,	who	is	authorized	
by	the	IRB	to	obtain	consent,	wil l	obtain	signatures	from	the	subjects	and	their	parents/caregivers	
(as	applicable).	Following	informed	consent,	a	researcher	from	the	study	team	will	go	over	the	MRI	screening	form	with	the	subject	and	ensure	compliance	with	MRI	safety	requirements.	If	the 	
MRI	screening	requirements	are	not	met,	the	subject	will	be	taken	off	the	study	and	the	study	
physician	will	discuss	appropriate	alternatives	with	the	patient.	 	
Once	informed	consent	is	obtained,	trained	researchers	will	obtain	 information	regarding	
autism	 diagnosis,	 medication	 information,	 IQ	 and	 medical	 history 	from	 the	 subject’s	 medical	
records.	For	subjects	who	do	not	have	an	Autism	Diagnostic	Interview	 -	Revised	(ADI-R)	in	their	
medical	record,	the	study	physician	 will	administer	the	ADI-R	over	the	ph one	and	document	the	
information.	 After	 the	 required	 information	 is	 obtained	 and	 the	 subject	 is	 found	 to	 meet	 the	
inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria	for	the	study,	the	subject	will	attend	3	sessions	(with	an	optional	4th	session	for	mock	scanning,	per	subject	request).	 	
Session	 1	 will	 involve	 collection	 of	 basic	 demographic	 information	 and	 behavioral	
assessments	 using	 the	 Aberrant	 Behavior	 Checklist	 (ABC),	 Social	 Responsiveness	 Scale 	(SRS),	
Clinical	Global	Impressions	 –	Severity	 (CGI-S)	 Scale,	 General	Social	 Outcomes	Measure	(GSOM)	 and	
the	Test	of	Language	Competence	(TLC).	Photographs	and	videos	of	the	subjects	will	be	recorded	during	 the	 GSOM	 test	 for	 scoring	 by	 an	 independent	 rater.	 A	 Wechsler	 Abbreviated	 Scale	 of	Intelligence	(WASI)	test	will	be	administered	to	subjects	who	do	not	have	IQ	information	on	file.	
	 	 				Nair	1	
Female	 subjects	 of	 childbearing	 age	 will	 undertake	 a	 urine	 pregnancy	 test.	 If	 pregnancy	 is	
indicated,	the	subject	will	no	longer	be	eligible	to	participate	in	the	study	and	will	be	withdrawn	from	the	study.	This	session	will	last	no	longer	than	2	hours.	 	
Session	2	will	be	either	the	optional	mock	scanning	session	(if	requested	for	by	the	subject)	
or	the	MR	imaging	session.	For	the	mock	scanning	session,	the	scanning	environment	of	the	real	scanner	will	 be	mimicked.	For	the	MR	imaging	session	(session	2	for	subjects	who	do	not	require	
a	mock	scanning	session	and	session	3	for	subjects	who	do),	the	researcher	will	go	over	the	MRI	screening	form	with	the	participant	in	detail	to	ensure	compliance.	The	imagi ng	session	will	last	
no	longer	than	90	minutes	during	which	the	subject	will	be	asked	to	lie	still	in	an	MRI	scanner.	 For	
subjects	 with	 potential	 behavioral	 concerns	 that	 are	 manageable	 by	 support	 staff	 or	 family,	support	staff	or	family	will	be	present	during	the	imaging	session	to	ensure	safety.	Subjects	with	potential	 behavioral	 concerns	 that	 cannot	 be	 managed	 by	 support	 staff	 or	 family	 will	 not	 be	imaged	and	will	no	longer	be	eligible	to	be	a	part	of	the	study.	The	study	physician	will	discuss	appropria te	alternatives	with	the	subjects.	 	
Post	 imaging,	 subjects	 will	 be	 started	 on	 memantine .	 Memantine	 is	 marketed	 in	 three	
forms:	Namenda	(pill),	Namenda	XR	(capsule)	and	the	liquid	formulation	of	Namenda.	Depending	on	subject	preference	and	insurance	approval,	the	subjects	will	be	started	on	one	of	these	three	forms	of	memantine.	Namenda	(pill)	will	be	started	 at	doses	of	5	m/day	and	titrated	up	to	20	
mg/day	based	on	patient	tolerance	and	response.	 	Namenda	XR	(capsule)	will	be	started	at	doses	
of	7	mg/day	and	titrated	up	to	28	mg/day	based	on	patient	tolerance	and	response.	The	liquid	formulation	of	Namenda	will	be	started	at	a	doses	of	5	mg/day	and	titrated	up	to	20	mg/day	based	on	patient	tolerance	and	response.	 	
	 	 				Nair	1	
After	week	12	of	treatment	with	memantine,	the	subjects	will	have	a	follow-up	behavioral	
assessment	 session	 (Session	 3	 for	 subjects	 who	 do	 not	 require	 a	 mock	 scanning	 session	 and	
Session	 4	 for	 those	 who	 do)	 using	 Clinical	 Global	 Impressions	 -	Improvement	 scale,	 Social	
Responsiveness	Scale,	Aberrant	 Behavior	Checklist ,	the	General	Social	Outcomes	Measure	(GSOM)	
and	the	Test	of	Language	Competence	(TLC).		The	GSOM	test	will	involve	recording	of	photographs	and	videos	for	scoring	by	an	independent	rater.	 This	session	will	last	no	longer	than	2	hours.	 	
Inclusion	and	Exclusion	Criteria: 	
Potential	participants	will	be	asked	to	take	part	in	this	study	because	he/she: 	
1)	has	autism	spectrum	disorder		2)	is	starting	memantine	off	label	for	managing	their	autism	symptoms 	
3)	is	deemed	safe	to	enter	the	MR	environment	using	the	attached	screening	form,	and	 	
4)	is	capable	of	lying	still	for	approximately	1.5	hour.	Subjects	would	be	excluded	if:		1)	they	have	certain	types	of	metallic	implants,	risk	of	exposure	to	metallic	foreign	bodies,	pacemakers,	magnetically	sensitive	implants	that	cannot	be	removed	or	are	not	securely	attached,		2)	pregnancy,	or	 	
3)	claustrophobia.	 	
All	of	these	issues	will	be	addressed	with	the	MR	screening	form.	Additional	exclusion	criteria	include:		4)	memantine	intolerance		5)	known	hypersensitivity	to	memantine	hydrochloride	or	 	
	 	 				Nair	1	
6)	inability	to	lie	still	for	approximately	90	minutes.	 	
7)	subjects	with	potential	behavioral	concerns	that	cannot	be	managed	by	support	staff	or	
family.		
Behavioral	Assessm ents:	
The	 Clinical	Global	Impressions	 –	Severity	(CGI-S)	scale 	is	a	clinician	rated	scale	to	assess	
severity	of	symptoms	and	is	used	fairly	commonly	in	ASD	research.13,17,18		
The	 Social	 Responsiveness	 Scale 	(SRS)	 is	 a	 well	 validated	 65	 item	 questionnaire	 that	
specifically	evaluates	social	deficits	associated	with	ASD38,39.	Each	question	on	the	SRS	is	rated	on	
a	scale	of	0-3	based	on	behavior	in	the	past	6	months	and	is	designed	to	provide	information	on	the	degree	of	social	deficits	present.	 The	SRS	is	particularly	well	suited	to	this	project	since	we	
intend	 to	 monitor	 improvements	 in	 social	 and	 communication	 deficits	 following	 the	 use	 of	memantine.	 A	 number	 of	 other	 studies	 in	 ASD	 have	 used	 SRS	 to	 track	 behavioral	 outcomes	following	pharmacological	intervention
1,3,8,9,13,26,40– 42.		
The	General	Social	Outcomes	Measure 	(GSOM) 	is	a	relatively	new	assessment	tool	that	
also	assesses	social	deficits	in	ASD43.	The	GSOM	is	experimenter	rated	and	evaluates	subjects	on	
five	 core	 domains	 of	 conversational	 reciprocity,	 facial	 expression	 recognition,	 social	 problem	solving,	 affect	 demonstration	 and	 emotional	 perception.	 Photographs	 will	 be	 taken	 during	 the	
mimicking	of	facial	expressions	test	of	the	GSOM.	These	photographs	will	be	used	for	scoring	by	an	independent	rater,	not	present	at	the	time	of	testing.	Photographs	will	be	captured	and	store d	
electronically	on	a	firewall	and	password	protected	network	drive	accessible	only	by	authorized	study	personnel	in	Dr.	Beversdorf’s	lab. 	All	photographs	will	be	used	just	for	the	study	and	will	be	
deleted	after	responses	are	scored.	 The	higher	the	score	 on	the	 GSOM	 scale,	the	better	level	of	
	 	 				Nair	1	
social	responsiveness	 in	the	subject.	The	SRS	and	the	GSOM,	used	in	combination,	would	provide	
a	 more	 detailed	 picture	 of	 the	 subject’s	 social	 and	 communication	 skills	 by	 including	 both	 the	
subject’s	 or	 caretaker’s	 and	 the	 trained	 researcher’s	 observations.	 The	 GSOM	 has	 successfully	been	used	in	our	lab	previously	for	the	evaluation	of	treatment	response	to	propranolol .
44		
The	 Aberrant	 Behavior	 Checklist 	(ABC )	was	 developed	 specifically	 with	 the	 intention	 of	
assessing	effectiveness	of	thera peutic	interventions .45	The	ABC	assesses	subjects	on	five	subscales	
of	 irritability,	 lethargy/social	 withdrawal,	 stereotypic	 behavior,	 hyperactivity	 or	 noncompliance	and	inappropriate	speech	and	has	been	used	widely	in	ASD	research	to	assess	effectiveness	of	treatment.
13,17,18  
The	WASI	test	 involves 	defining	and	relating	certain	words	and	solving	puzzles	to	obtain	a	
measure	of	intelligence.		
The	Test	of	Language	Competence	(TLC)	is	a	test	that	assesses	delays	in	language	skills	and	
the	use	of	higher	level	language	skills. 	
If	not	available	from	medical	records,	ASD	subject	diagnosis	will	be	confirmed	by	the	parent	
completing	an	Autism	Diagnostic	Inventory -Revised	(ADI -R)	with	Dr.	Beversdorf.	If	not	available	
from	medical	records	the	Social	Responsiveness	Scale	and	Aberrant	Behavior	Checklist	(ABC)	will	be	given	to	the	parent /guardian 	in	person/over	the	phone/or	through	mail/email	to	assess	the	
subject’s	social	skills	and 	behaviors. 	
1H-MRS	acquisition	and	analysis: 		
	 Following	 behavioral 	assessment,	 at	 the	 second	 session, 	subjects	 will	 undergo	 an	 MRI	
assessment,	 including	 structural	 MRI	 and	1H-MRS.	 This	 assessment	 will	 be	 performed	 on	 a	
	 	 				Nair	1	
research	dedicated,	Siemens	3-Tesla	 TIM	Trio	MRI	scanner	located	in	the	Brain	Imaging	Center	at	
the	MU.	Participants	will	be	asked	not	to	consume	any	forms	of	caffeine	or	alcohol	8	hours	before	
the	scanning	to	eliminate	possible	effects	from	caffeine/alcohol	on	GABA	metabolites46.	Subjects	
will	be	given	detailed	instructions	on	how	to	successfully	and	safely	complete	these	scans	and	will	be	monitored	by	study	staff	at	all	times.		
	 High -resolution	T1 -weighted	structural	images	are	acquire d	using	the	three -dimensional	
multiplanar	 rapidly	 acquired	 gradient	 echo	 (MP -RAGE)	 pulse	 sequence:	 repetition	 time	 (TR),	
2500ms;	echo	time	(TE),	438ms;	flip	angle,	8°,	256x256	voxel	matrix;	field	of	view	(FOV),	256	mm;	
176	axial	slices;	thickness,	1	mm.	This	is	collected	to	quantify	the	brain	tissue	composition	with	spectroscopic	voxel	and	exclude	any	pathology.		
For	 specific	 aim	 1,	 based	 on	 anatomical	 landmarks,	 we	 prescribe	 a	 single	 voxel	
spectroscopy	(SVS,	2×2×2cm
3)	in	our	region	of	interest,	the	anterio r	cingulate	cortex.	The	size	of	
the	voxel	and	number	of	averages	acquired	will	be	optimized	for	better	signal -to-noise	ratio	while	
keeping	 ensuring	 scanning	 time	 does	 not	 get	 prolonged.	 	 GABA	 and	 a	 complex	 consisted	 of	
glutamate	and	its	precursor	glutamine 	(labeled	as	Glx)	are	collected	using	 MEshcher-Garwood-
edited	Point	RESolved	Spectroscopy	(MEGA -PRESS,	TE=68ms,	TR=2000ms).	To	 avoid	lipid	artifact	
from	the	skull,	we	prescribe	 outer	voxel	suppression	 saturation 	bands	around	the	SVS.	We	perform	
automated,	 followed	 by	 manual,	 shimming	 to	 achieve	 an	 optimal	 full -width	 at	 half	 maximum	
of<20Hz	 of	 the	 water	 signal	 from	 the	 entire	 excitation	 volume54.	 We	 will	 also	 acquire	 internal	
reference	 water	 signal	 by	 using	 non –water	 suppressed	 MRS	 imaging	 to	 calculate	 absolute	
concentrations	 of	 our	 neurochemicals	 of	 interest.	 A	 recent	 study	 from	 our	 laboratory	 has	
  !,F
,.,,.%%2.,-!,-!'"*.,-(&)-!,"+'-(&)( .',"' +(.)(GJ,.#-,
0"-!  ' "'-"2  %.-&- '  %-+-"(', "' -! + %%.& "' +%-"(' -(
++(+%%+(''-"/"-2'!/"(+%(.-(&,"',. ,-("'"/".%,0"-!HL8
!/%,(+'-%2,.-()"%(-'0,*.'5=/ + ,&"=5(+
 %.-&-&,.+&'-8)+,'--"/,)-+(+'%1 ?@'%.?@*."++(&
%(-"')+"&+2&(-(+(+-1')++('-%+,+,)-"/%2"'!%-!2('-+(%+,!(0'"'" 8G8 	" !,)-+%
*.%"-2?!" !," '%=-(='(",+-"(5%(0+
+&+=((.',+(&
(%5,%(0@ 0, (',",-'-%2 (-"' "' ,&)%(K('-+(%,8 $,+(&5%15' %.-&-+%+%2",+'"%8+ 8"+,-0"%%
,.)+/",-!,,',8.+)+/"(.,,-.",(.'-!-,.#-, 0"-!+(&)%"'-0"-!-!
ALF&"'.-,*.","-"('-"&8
G	=
-'%2,",0,-"%)+/"(.,%2HO8+"%250.,

(%-(*.'-"2,(%.-5%15' %.-&-(''-+ -"(','(-!+&-(%"-,
&'-"('8
(%=(''-+-"(',+(++-(+)+-"%+ "'-",,./(%.&0"-!"'/(1%
.,"' ,(-0+0+"--'"'
-%,(-0+?HFGI
-!0(+$,5 -"$5
@', &'-
,-+.-.+%"& ,?
N5('('5@8(+,)"""&G?@' ?@5,)-+(,()2/(1%,0"%%
)% (/+ -! (+,(%-+% )++('-% (+-1 ' +%%.&  ' (''-+-"(', (
 %.-&-< %.-&"'5 =-2% ,)+-- ?@5 &2(="'(,"-(%5 ! (%"' '
+-"'<)!(,)!(+-"'%/%,0"%%1-+-8,-"' ,-- .'-"('%(''-"/"-2-0"%%
%,(*."+.+"' -!"& "' ,,,"('(+,)"""&H8 
 
Fig. 1 A. 1H-MRS spectrum using MEGA-PRESS. The LCModel output 
consisted in the acquired 1H-MRS spectrum (black line) and estimated 
spectrum (red). B. 1H-MRS spectrum using TE-averaged semi-LASER. Glx-
glutamate-glutamine, NAA-Nacetylaspartate, Cr-creatine, Cho-choline; ppm, parts per 
million.

	 	 				Nair	1	
Following	the	imaging	session,	subjects	will	be	started	on	memantine,	star ting	at	5	mg/day	
doses	to	be	titrated	up	20	mg/day	based	on	response	and	tolerability,	for	a	period	of	12	weeks 	as	
part	of	clinical	care .		
Follow-up	assessments: 		
Subjects	 will	 be	 assessed	 after	 week	 12	 of	 memantine	 administration	 using	 the	 same	
clinical	 testing	battery	used	prior	to	drug	administration.	We	will	also	use	an	additional	scale	to	
determine	improvement	in	symptoms:	Clinical	Global	Impression	 –	Improvement	(CGI-I)	scale.	The	
CGI-I	scale	assesses	the	patient’s	improvement	on	a	scale	of	1 -7	where 	1	represents	very	much	
improved	 and	 7	 represents	 very	 much	 worse	 when	 compared	 to	 baseline	 (before	 initiation	 of	
memantine).	The	reference	for	baseline	severity	will	be	derived	from	the	CGI -S	score	obtained	
before	initiation	of	m emantine.	Subjects	who	sco re	1-3	on	the	CGI -I	will	be	considered	responders	
while	those	who	score	4 -7	will	be	considered	non -responders,	a	technique	commonly	used	to	
categorize	 responders	 vs.	 non -responders	 in	 treatment	 response	 monitoring	 studies	40,47,48.	
Subjects	will	be	assessed	for	improvements	on	the	SRS,	GSOM ,	TLC 	and	each	of	the	5	subscales	of	
the	ABC	described	earlier.	 Additionally,	research	staff	will	review	ASD	subject	medical	records	to	
gain	a	better	understanding	of	clinical	benefit	from	drug	administration.	This	will	include	physician	clinical	notes	and	any	standardized	assessments	of	clinical/behavioral	improvement.	
Information	produced	by	this	study	will	be	stored	in	a	locked	cabinet	or	secure	server	in	
the	PI’s	offices	in	Galena	Hall.	Eac h	subject	will	be	assigned	an	anonymous	study	specific	code.	The	
code	key	will	be	kept	on	a	separate	secure	server.	Information	contained	in	records	will	not	be	given	to	anyone	not	associated	with	the	study	without	written	consent,	except	as	required	by	la w.	
	
Analyses: 		
	 	 				Nair	1	
Using	data	from	the	MR	spectroscopy	study	performed	at	baseline,	the	means	(SD)	for	
each	of	the	different	compounds	 –	GABA	(in	the	anterior	cingulate	cortex	only),	Glx,	NAA,	choline,	
myo-inositol,	creatine	and	phosphocreatine	 -	measured	from	 the	different	ROIs	mentioned	above	
will	be	analyzed	for	differences	in	responders	vs.	non -responders	to	memantine	treatment.	The	
ratio	of	Glx/GABA	from	the	anterior	cingulate	will	also	be	included	in	all	analyses	to	explore	effects	
of	the	excitatory-inhib itory	ratio	of	the	region	on	treatment	response.			Means	(SD)	of	the	different	
compounds	and	Glx/GABA	ratio	will	also	be	correlated	to	CGI-I	and	changes	in	SRS	scores	and	GSOM	and	ABC	measures	for	each	ROI	to	explore	additional	specific	differences	using	Spearman’s	
correlation	coefficients. 	A	significance	level	of	0.05	will	be	used.	Since	demographic	factors	such	
as	age	and	gender	are	known	to	influence	the	results	of	MR	spectroscopy	studies	
49,	demographic	
factors	 will	 be	 included	 in	 the	 analysis	 to	 account	 for 	the	 associated	 changes	 in	 metabolite	
concentrations.	 	
For	resting	state	functional	connectivity,	we	will	extract	time	series	from	the	regions	of	
interest	 and	 correlation	 analyses	 will	 be	 carried	 out.	 The	 strength	 of	 functional	 connectivity	
between	the	regions	will	then	be	correlated	to	changes	on	scores	in	the	battery	of	clinical	tests	to	determine	whether	resting	state	functional	connectivity	might	have	a	role	in	treatment	response	to	memantine.	
	
Hypothesis	 and	 Expected	 Results: 	We	 hypothesize	 that	 the	 be st	 responders	 will	 have	 higher	
concentrations	 of	 glutamate/glutamine	 and	 reduced	 levels	 of	 GABA	 in	 the	 anterior	 cingulate	
cortex	 at	 baseline.	 Consistent	 with	 previous	 studies,	 we	 also	 expect	 to	 see	 increased	glutamate/glutamine	levels	in	the	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	and	cerebellum
38,39	and	increased	
	 	 				Nair	1	
resting	 state	 functional	 connectivity	 in	 cortical	 networks51	that	 will	 be	 related	 to	 treatment	
response.	Data	from	this	pilot,	exploratory	study	will	be	used	to	derive	power	for	a	larger,	follow	
up	study. 	
	
Potential	Problems	&	Alternative	Strategies:	 Neurochemicals	depend	on	the	brain	tissue	sampled	
in	 the	 spectroscopic	 voxels.	 We	 will	 use	 brain	 t issue-corrected	 concentrations. 	The	 phases	 of	
menstrual	cycle	for	female	subjects	and	smoking	status	will	be	included	in	our	model	due	to	their	
known	 effects	 on	 GABA	 concentrations46,52,53.	 If	 recruitment	 falls	 behind,	 we	 will	 expand	 our	
recruitment	 to	 other	 institutions	 in	 Missouri,	 with	 whom	 the	 Thompson	 Center	 already	 has	relationships	for	research	purposes.	
	
	
Timeline:	 Subjects	 will	 be	 recruited	 through	 the	 Thompson	 Center	 for	 Autism	 and	
Neurodevelopmental	 Disorders	 and	 would	 involve	 patients	 who	 are	 interested	 in	 starting	
memantine	 off-label	 as	a	clinical	follow -on.	Subjects	will	be	informed	about	the	study	while	in	clinic	
by	the	study	physician	and	the	reseracher	will	go	over	the	consent(/assent	as	applicable)	with	the	
subject	(and	guardian,	 as	applicable)	in	detail .	The	study	physician	will	obtain	signatures	on	the	
consent	 and/or	 assent	 as	 applicable.	 Following	 informed	 consent	 to	 participate	 in	 the	 study,	
behavioral	assessments	and	imaging	sessions	will	be	scheduled	at	the	earliest	date	poss ible	(within	
30	 days	 of	 each	 other).	 Subject	 recruitment	 will	 extend	 over	 a	 period	 of	 18 -20	 months.	 Data	
collection	 will	 commence	 as	 soon	 as	 subjects	 are	 enrolled	 into	 the	 study.	 Since	 the	 follow -up	
assessments	extend	to	12	weeks	post	the	start	of	the	drug ,	data	collection	will	continue	into	the	
latter	 half	 of	 the	 second	 year	 of	 the	 project	 as	 well. 	Each	 subject	 will	 be	 in	 the	 study	 for	
	 	 				Nair	1	
approximately	20	weeks.	 Imaging	and	behavioral	assessment	data	will	be	analyzed	starting	in	the	
beginning	of	the	first	year	and	will	continue	till	the	end	of	the	project	timeline.	
	
Funding:	 Dr.	David	Beversdorf	has	been	awarded	a	University	of	Missouri 	Research	Board	grant	
to	cover	expenses	for	this	study. 	 	
	 	 				Nair	1	
References:	
1.	 Rossignol ,	D.	&	Frye,	R.	E.	The	use	of	medications	approved	for	Alzheimer	’	s	disease	in	
autism	spectrum	disorder :	a	systematic	review.	Front.	Pediatr.	2,	1–8	(2014). 	
2.	 Bejjani,	A.	et	al.	Elevated	glutamatergic	compounds	in	pregenual	anterior	cingulate	in	
pediatr ic	autism	spectrum	disorder	demonstrated	by1H	MRS	and	1H	MRSI.	PLoS	One 	7,	
(2012). 	
3.	 Brown,	M.	S.,	Singel,	D.,	Hepburn,	S.	&	Rojas,	D.	C.	Increased	glutamate	concentration	in	the	auditory	cortex	of	persons	with	autism	and	first-degree	relatives:	A	1H-MRS	study.	Autism	Res.	6,	1–10	(2013). 	
4.	 El-Ansary,	A.	&	Al -Ayadhi,	L.	GABAergic/glutamatergic	imbalance	relative	to	excessive	
neuroinflammation	in	autism	spectrum	disorders.	J.	Neuroinflammation	1–9	(2014).	 	
5.	 Harada,	M.	et	al.	Non -invasive	evaluation	of	the	GABAergic/glutamatergic	system	in	
autistic	patients	observed	by	MEGA -editing	proton	MR	spectroscopy	using	a	clinical	3	
Tesla	instrument.	J.	Autism	Dev.	Disord.	41,	447–454	(2011). 	
6.	 Horder,	J.	et	al.	Reduced	subcortical	glutamate/glutamine	in	adults	with	autism	spectrum	disorders:	a	[
1H]MRS	study.	Transl.	Psychiatry	3,	e279	(2013). 	
7.	 Joshi,	G.	 et	al.	Magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	study	of	the	glutamatergic	system	in	
adolescent	males	with	high-functioning	autistic	disorder:	A	pilot	study	at	4T.	Eur.	Arch.	Psychiatry	Clin.	Neurosci.	263,	379–384	(2013). 	
8.	 Rojas,	D.	C.,	Singel,	D.,	Steinmetz,	S.,	Hepburn,	S.	&	Brown,	M.	S.	Decreased	left	perisylvian	GABA	concentration	in	children	with	autism	and	unaffected	siblings.	Neuroimage 	86,	28–34	(2014). 	
9.	 Tebartz	van	Elst,	L.	et	al.	Disturbed	cingulate	glutamate	metabolism	in	adults	with	high-functioning	autism	spectrum	disorder:	evidence	in	support	of	the	excitatory/inhibitory	imbalance	hypothesis.	Mol.	Psychiatry	19,	1–12	(2014). 	
10.	Blatt,	G.	J.	et	al.	Density	and	Distribution	of	Hippocampal	Neurotransmitter	Receptors	in	Autism:	An	Autoradiographic	Study.	Journal	of	autism	and	developmental	disorders 	
31(6):	537 –543	(2001).	 	
11.	Fatemi,	S.	H.,	Folsom,	T.	D.,	Reutiman,	T.	J.	&	Thuras,	P.	D.	Expression	of	GABA(B)	receptors	is	altered	in	brains	of	subjects	with	autism.	Cerebellum 	8,	64–9	(2009). 	
12.	Purcell,	A.	E.,	Jeon,	O.	H.,	Zimmerman,	A.	W.,	Blue,	M.	E.	&	Pevsner,	J.	Postmortem	brain	abnormalities	of	the	glutamate	neurotransmitter	system	in	autism.	Neurology	57,	1618–1628	(2001). 	
13.	Frye,	R.	E.	Clinical	potential,	safety,	and	tolerability	of	arbaclofen	in	the	treatment	of	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Drug.	Healthc.	Patient	Saf.	6,	69–76	(2014). 	
14.	Schulz,	J.	B.	et	al.	Sustained	Effects	of	Once -Daily	Memantine	Treatment	on	Cognition	
and	Functional	Communication	Skills	in	Patients	with	Moderate	to	Severe	Alzheimer’s	Disease:	Results	of	a	16-week	Open-Label	Trial.	Journal	of	Alzheimer’s	Diseases	463–475	(2011).	 	
15.	Hosenbocus,	S.	&	Chahal,	R.	Memantine:	A	review	of	possible	uses	in	child	and	adolescent	psychiatry.	J.	Can.	Acad.	Child	Adolesc.	Psychiatry	22,	166–171	(2013). 	
16.	Chez,	M.	G.	et	al.	Memantine	as	adjunctive	therapy	in	children	diagnosed	with	autistic	
spectrum	disorders:	an	observation	of	initial	clinical	response	and	maintenance	
	 	 				Nair	1	
tolerability.	J.	Child	Neurol.	22,	574–579	(2007). 	
17.	Erickson,	C.	A.	et	al.	A	retrospective	study	of	memantine	in	children	and	adolescents	with	
pervasive	developmental	disorders.	Psychopharmacology	191:141–147	(2007).	 	
18.	Ghaleiha,	A.	et	al.	Memantine	as	adjunctive	treatment	to	risperidone	in	children	with	autistic	disorder:	a	randomized,	double -blind,	placebo-controlled	trial.	Int.	J.	
Neuropsychopharmacol.	16,	783–789	(2013) .	
19.	Baruth,	J.	M.,	Wall,	C.,	Patterson,	M.	C.	&	Port,	J.	D.	Proton	Magnetic	Resonance	Spectroscopy	as	a	Probe	into	the	Pathophysiology	of	Autism	Spectrum	Disorders	(ASD):	A	Review.	Autism	Res.	6,	119–133	(2013). 	
20.	Dager,	S.	&	Oskin,	N.	Research	applications	of	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	(MRS)	to	investigate	psychiatric	disorders.	Top	Magn	Reson	Imaging.	19,	81–96	(2008). 	
21.	Hugdahl,	K.,	Beyer,	M.	K.,	Brix,	M.	&	Ersland,	L.	Autism	spectrum	disorder,	functional	MRI	and	MR	spectroscopy:	possibilities	and	challenges.	Microb.	Ecol.	Heal.	Dis.	23,	1–11	(2012). 	
22.	Ajram,	L.	et	al.	Glutamate	and	GABA	in	autism	spectrum:	a	clinical	in-vivo	magnetic	
resonance	spectroscopy	assay.	Poster	Presentation	at	the	International	Meeting	For	
Autism	Research	Annual	Mee ting,	Salt	Lake	City,	Utah	19538	(2015).	 	
23.	Doble,	A.	The	pharmacology	and	mechanism	of	action	of	riluzole.	Neurology	47,	S233–S241	(1996). 	
24.	Ghaleiha,	A.	et	al.	Riluzole	as	an	Adjunctive	Therapy	to	Risperidone	for	the	Treatment	of	Irritability	in	Children	with	Autistic	Disorder:	A	Double -Blind,	Placebo-Controlled,	
Randomized	Trial.	Pediatr.	Drugs	15,	505–514	(2013). 	
25.	Van	Wageningen,	H.,	Jørgensen,	H.,	Specht,	K.	&	Hugdahl,	K.	A	1H-MR	spectroscopy	study	of	changes	in	glutamate	and	glutamine	(Glx)	concentrations	in	frontal	spectra	after	administration	of	memantine.	Cereb.	Cortex	20,	798–803	(2010). 	
26.	Hegarty,	J.,	Weber,	D.	&	Beversdorf,	D.	Q.	Cerebellar	Connectivity	and	Glutamatergic	Metabolite	Concentration	in	ASD	as	assessed	by	fcMRI/MRS.	 Poster	Present.	54th	Annu.	
Meet.	Am.	Coll.	Neuropsychopharmacol.	Hollywood,	Florida		
27.	Simms,	M.	L.,	Kemper,	T.	L.,	Timbie,	C.	M.,	Bauman,	M.	L.	&	Blatt,	G.	J.	The	anterior	cingulate	cortex	in	autism:	Heterogeneity	of	qualitative	and	quantitative	cytoarchitectonic	features	suggests	possible	subgroups.	Acta	Neuropathol.	118,	673–684	(2009). 	
28.	Schubert,	F.,	Gallinat,	J.,	Seifert,	F.	&	Rinneberg,	H.	Glutamate	concentrations	in	human	brain	using	single	voxel	proton	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	at	3	Tesla.	Neuroimage 	
21,	1762–1771	(2004). 	
29.	Fujii,	E.	 et	al.	Function	of	the	frontal	lobe	in	autistic	individuals:	a	proton	magnetic	
resonance	spectroscopic	study.	J	Med	Invest	57,	35–44	(2010). 	
30.	Fatemi,	S.	H.	et	al.	Downregulation	of	GABAA	Receptor	Protein	Subunits	Alpha6,	Beta2,	Delta,	Epsilon,	Gamma2,	Theta,	and	Rho2	in	Superior	Frontal	Cortex	of	Subjects	with	Autism.	J.	Autism	Dev.	Disord.	44,	1833–1845	(2014). 	
31.	Fatemi,	S.	H.	et	al.	Glutamic	acid	decarboxylase	65	and	67	kDa	proteins	are	reduced	in	autistic	parietal	and	cerebellar	cortices.	Biol.	Psychiatry	52,	805–810	(2002). 	
32.	Fatemi,	S.	H.	&	Folsom,	T.	D.	GABA	receptor	subunit	distribution	and	FMRP –mGluR5	
signaling	abnormalities	in	the	cerebellum	of	subjects	with	schizophrenia,	mood	
	 	 				Nair	1	
disorders,	and	autism.	 Schizophrenia	Research	In	press	(2014).		
33.	Bernardi,	S.	et	al.	In	vivo	1H-magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	study	of	the	attentional	
networks	in	autism.	Brain	Res.	1380,	198–205	(2011). 	
34.	DeVito,	T.	J.	et	al.	Evidence	for	cortical	dysfunction	in	autism:	a	proton	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopic	imaging	study.	Biol.	Psychiatry	61,	465–473	(2007). 	
35.	Corrigan,	N.	M.	et	al.	Atypical	developmental	patterns	of	brain	chemistry	in	children	with	autism	spectrum	disor der.	JAMA	psychiatry	70,	964–74	(2013). 	
36.	Mori,	K.	et	al.	Neuroimaging	in	autism	spectrum	disorders:	
1H-MRS	and	NIRS	study.	J.	
Med.	Investig.	62,	29–36	(2015). 	
37.	Page,	L.	a.	et	al.	In	vivo	1H-magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	study	of	amygdala-hippocampal	and	parietal	regions	in	autism.	Am.	J.	Psychiatry	163,	2189–2192	(2006). 	
38.	Bölte,	S.,	Westerwald,	E.,	Holtmann,	M.,	Freitag,	C.	&	Poustka,	F.	Autistic	traits	and	autism	spectrum	disorders:	the	clinical	validity	of	two	measures	presuming	a	continuum	of	social	communication	skills.	J.	Autism	Dev.	Disord.	41,	66–72	(2011). 	
39.	Constantino,	J.	N.	et	al.	Validation	of	a	brief	quantitative	measure	of	autistic	traits:	
Comparison	of	the	social	responsiveness	scale	with	the	Autism	Diagnostic	Interview -
Revised.	J.	Autism	Dev.	Disord.	33,	427–433	(2003). 	
40.	White,	S.	W.	et	al.	Randomized	controlled	trial:	Multimodal	anxiety	and	social	skill	
intervention	for	adolescents	with	autism	spectrum	disorder.	 J.	Autism	Dev.	Disord.	43,	
382–394	(2013). 	
41.	Gaetz,	W.	et	al.	GABA	estimation	in	the	brains	of	children	on	the	autism	spectrum:	Measurement	precision	and	regional	cortical	variation.	Neuroimage 	86,	1–9	(2014). 	
42.	Cochran,	D.	M.	et	al.	Relationship	Among	Glutamine,	γ-Aminobutyric	Acid,	and	Social	Cognition	In	Autism	Spectrum	Disorders.	J.	Child	Adolesc.	Psychopharmacol.	25,	150428120459000	(2015). 	
43.	Stichter,	J.	P.,	Herzog,	M.	J.,	O’Connor,	K.	V.	&	Schmidt,	C.	A	Preliminary	Examination	of	a	Gener al	Social	Outcome	Measure.	Assess.	Eff.	Interv.	38,	40–52	(2012). 	
44.	Zamzow,	R.	M.	et	al.	Effects	of	a	beta-adrenergic	antagonist	on	social	and	cognitive	functioning	in	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Poster	Presentation	at	the	International	Meeting	For	Autism	Research	Annual	Meeting,	Atlanta,	Georgia 	(2014).	at		
45.	Aman,	M.	G.,	Singh,	N.	N.,	Stewart,	A.	W.	&	Field,	C.	J.	The	Aberrant	Behavior	Checklist :	A	behavior	rating	scale	for	the	assessment	of	treatment	effects	.	American	Journal	of	Mental	Deficiency	,.	Am.	J.	Ment.	Defic. 	89,	485–491	(1985). 	
46.	O’Gorman,	R.	L.,	Michels,	L.,	Edden,	R.	a.,	Murdoch,	J.	B.	&	Martin,	E.	In	vivo	detection	of	GABA	and	glutamate	with	MEGA -PRESS:	Reproducibility	and	gender	effects.	 J.	Magn.	
Reson.	Imaging	33,	1262–1267	(2011). 	
47.	McDougle,	C.	J.	et	al.	Sertraline	in	adults	with	pervasive	developmental	disorders:	a	prospective	open-label	investigation.	J.	Clin.	Psychopharmacol.	18,	62–66	(1998). 	
48.	Masi,	G.	et	al.	Predictors	of	Nonresponse	to	Psychosocial	Treatment	in	Children	and	Adolescents	with	Disruptive	Behavior	Disorders.	J.	Child	Adolesc.	Psychopharmacol.	21,	51–55	(2011). 	
49.	Raininko,	R.	&	Mattsson,	P.	Metabolite	concentrations	in	supraventricular	white	ma tter	
from	teenage	to	early	old	age:	A	short	echo	time	1H	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	
(MRS)	study.	Acta	radiol.	51,	309–315	(2010). 	
	 	 				Nair	1	
50.	Fatemi,	S.	H.	The	hyperglutamatergic	hypothesis	of	autism.	Prog.	Neuro -
Psychopharmacology	Biol.	Psychiatry	32,	911	(2 008). 	
51.	Cerliani,	L.	et	al.	Increased	Functional	Connectivity	Between	Subcortical	and	Cortical	
Resting-State	Networks	in	Autism	Spectrum	Disorder.	JAMA	Psychiatry	72,	1–11	(2015). 	
52.	Epperson,	C.	N.	et	al.	Sex,	GABA,	and	nicotine:	The	impact	of	smoking	on	cortical	GABA	levels	across	the	menstrual	cycle	as	measured	with	proton	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy.	Biol.	Psychiatry	57,	44–48	(2005). 	
53.	Epperson,	C.	N.	et	al.	Cortical	gamma-aminobutyric	acid	levels	across	the	menstrual	cycle	in	healthy	women	and	those	with	premenstrual	dysphoric	disorder.	Arch.	Gen.	Psychiatry	59,	851–858	(2002). 	
					
	
							