Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 2authorized in writing by BMS. Any supplemental information (eg, amendments) that may 
be added to this document is also confidential and proprietary to BMS and must be kept in 
confidence in the same manner as the content s of this document. Any person who receives 
this document without due authorization fr om BMS is requested to return it to BMS or 
promptly destroy it. All other rights reserved. References to BMS in this protocol may apply 
to partners to which BMS has transferred obligations, eg, a Contract Research Organization 
(CRO).
Replace all previous version(s) of the protocol with this revised protocol and please provide a copy 
of this revised protocol to all study pers onnel under your supervision, and archive the previous 
versions.
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
SUMMARY OF KEY CHANGES OF REVISED PROTOCOL 03
Section Number & 
TitleDescription of Change
•Section 5.4.3  
Confirmation of 
Scansequivocal. 
•Section 5.1 , Flow 
Chart/ Time and Events Schedule, Table 5.1-2  On-
study Assessments Cycles 1 and 2 (CA209204)
•Section 5.1, Flow Chart/ Time and Events Schedule, Table 5.1-3 On-
study Assessments Cycles 1 and 2 (CA209204)•A note in the table header
now specifies that tumor 
assessments are to be conducted per protocol even if a dose is delayed. The footnote regarding dose delay and study assessments has beenremoved.
•Section 5.1, Flow Chart/ Time and Events Schedule, Table 5.1-1Screening 
Assessments
(CA209204)
•Section 5.1, Flow Chart/ Time and Events Schedule, 
Table 5.1-1 On-
study Assessments Cycles 1 and 2 (CA209204)
•Section 5.1, Flow Chart/ Time and 
Events Schedule, 
Table 5.1-3 On-study Assessments Cycle 3 and Beyond(CA209204)
•Section 5.1, Flow 
Chart/ Time and 
Events Schedule, Table 5.1-4 Follow-
up Assessments(CA209204)•Presentation of Tumor Assessment aligned to program-wide standards. No content change.
•Section 5.4  Efficacy 
Assessments•Revised to align with 
Schedule of Activities.  No 
content change. 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 7
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
SUMMARY OF KEY CHANGES OF REVISED PROTOCOL 03
Section Number & 
TitleDescription of Change
•Section 8.5.9 , 
Interim Analyses•Revised based on results of 
interim analyses.
Appendix 3: Image 
Assessment Criteria
1.1: Measurability of 
tumorRequired thickness of MRI scan 
slice for intracranial lesions 
≤10 mm LD and >10 mm LD 
are now specified in second 
bullet.
Throughout the document.Minor editorial or formatting changes/corrections
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 8
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
BMS will provide the investigator with an appropriate (ie, Global or Lo cal) sample informed 
consent form which will include all elements required by ICH, GCP and applicable regulatory 
requirements. The sample informed consent form w ill adhere to the ethi cal principles that have 
their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.
Investigators must:
1) Provide a copy of the consent form and written information about the study in the language in 
which the subject is most proficient prior to clinical study participation. The language must be 
non-technical and easily understood. 
2) Allow time necessary for subj ect or sub ject's legally acceptable representative to inquire about 
the details of the study.
3) Obtain an informed consent signed and personally dated by the subject or the subject's legally 
acceptable representative and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion. 
4) Obtain the IRB/IEC’s written approval/favorable opinion of the written informed consent form 
and any other information to be provided to the subjects, prior to the beginning of the study, 
and after any revisions are completed for new information.
5) If informed consent is initially given by a subject’s legally acceptable representative or legal 
guardian, and the subject subsequently becomes capable of making and communicating his or 
her informed consent during the study, consent must additionally be obtained from the subject.
6) Revise the informed consent whenever important new information becomes available that is 
relevant to the subject's consent. The investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, 
should fully i nform the subj ect or the subject's leg ally acceptable representative or legal 
guardian, of all pertinent aspects of the study and of any new information relevant to the 
subject's willingness to continue participation in the study. This communication should be 
documented. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects must be protected, respecting the privacy 
and confidentiality rules applicable to regulatory  requirements, the subject s' signed ICF and, in the 
US, the subjects’ signed HIPAA Authorization.
The consent form must also include a statement that BMS and regulatory authorities have direct 
access to subject records. 
Subjects unable to give their written consent (eg, stroke or subjects with or severe dementia) may 
only be enrolled in the study with the consent of a legally acceptable representative. The subject 
must also be informed about the nature of th e study to the extent compatible with his or her 
understanding, and should this subject become capable, he or she should personally sign and date 
the consent form as soon as possible. The exp licit wish of a s ubject who is unable to give his or 
her written consent, but who is  capable of forming an opinion and assessing information to refuse 
participation in, or to be withdrawn from, the clinical study at any time s hould be considered by 
the investigator.
The rights, safety, and well-being of the study s ubjects are the most important considerations and 
should prevail over interests of science and society.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 42
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
3.1 Study Design and Duration
This is an open-label, multi-site Phase 2 study  of nivolumab combined with ipilimumab followed 
by nivolumab monotherapy for the treatment of s ubjects with melanoma metastatic to the brain. 
Per Amendment 02 (August 2106), both asymptomatic and symptomatic patients are eligible for  
enrollment as described below:
Cohort A (asymptomatic ) Patients with histologically confirmed metas tatic melanoma  
presenting with intracranial metastases and at least 1 measurable index intracranial metastasis 
≥0.5 cm and ≤3 cm in diameter that has not been previ ously irradiated. No clinical requirement  
for local intervention (surgery, radiosurgery, cortic osteroid therapy) or other systemic therapy.  
Approximate enrollment in Cohort A is 90 patients.
Cohort B (symptomatic) : Patients with histologically confirmed metastatic melanoma presenting  
with symptomatic intracranial metastases who may be on steroids with doses no higher than a total  
daily dose of 4 mg of dexamethasone or equivalent that is stable or tapering within 10 days prior  
to treatment. P atients who are symptomatic and are not being treated with steroids are also eligible. 
Patients enrolled in Cohort B must have at least 1 measurable index intracranial metastasis  
≥0.5 cm and ≤3 cm in diameter that has not been previously irradiated, must not require  
immediate local therapy (SRT or surgery within 3 weeks prior to first treatment), have a  
performance status 0-2, and no experience of seizure within 10 days prior to first treatment.
Approximate enrollment in Cohort B is 20 patients.
Asymptomatic subject who are enrolling into Cohort A and become symptomatic during the  
screening evaluations may be considered for enro llment into Cohort B if they meet all other criteria  
for Cohort B. No crossover between cohorts is permitted after the start of treatment.
Subjects who have received prior treatment with  BRAF inhibitors and/or MEK inhibitors, and  
subjects who have been treated with ipilimumab in an adjuvant setting a re eligible for the study.
All patients will be tr eated with the combination regimen of nivolumab 1 mg/kg combined with  
ipilimumab 3 mg/kg Q3W (4 doses), followed by nivolumab monotherapy (3 mg/kg Q2W) for a  
maximum of 24 months, or until disease progre ssion or unacceptable toxicity. The use of SRT
(single episode) for disease progression for ≤ 3 intracranial lesions is permitted. ( Section 3.4.2.2 )
Recommended intervals between treatment with study drug and use of SRT, dose delay after SRT,  
allowable steroid use ( ≤ 16 mg dexamethasone PO QD), and tapered over no more than 4 weeks),
and observation of patients post SRT when tr eatment is resumed are also specified in Section
3.4.2.2. Any subject who meets criteria for discont inuation following SRT ( Section 4.5.5 ) will 
proceed to follow-up for safety, progression, and overall survival after discontinuation of study  
medication based on the assessment schedules presented in Section 5 . NOTE: To continue on-
study after SRT, at least 1 non-irradiated ta rget lesion must remain after SRT treatment.
A follow-up period of 3 years from the date of first treatment with study drugs is available for all  
subjects. The study will close after the last enrolled subject completes 3 years of follow up from 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 43
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
the date of first treatment or the study is discontinued by the Sponsor. The study design is presented
in Figure 3.1-1 :
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 44
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Additional imaging may be performed for patient care at the discretion of the investigator. All 
efficacy objectives will be based on Investigator assessment at the study site. 
All radiologic imaging from this study will be transmitted to a centralized imaging core laboratory 
for storage and analysis. Sites will be informed of quality issues or the need for repeat scanning 
via queries from the core lab. The details of the independent review performed by the Independent 
Radiologic Review Committee (IRRC) are outlined in a separate CA209204 Imaging Review 
Charter.
Safety will be evaluated for all tr eated subjects using the NCI CTCA E version 4.0. Safety 
assessments will be based on medical review of AE reports, vital sign measurement results, 
physical examinations, and clinical laboratory tests . In addition, a designated Steering Committee
composed of a core group of study investigators who are experts in treating patients with 
melanoma intracranial metastases and sponsor physicians/ staff will evaluate safety and efficacy 
throughout the trial as described in Section 7.
 
 
Safety and Tolerability Assessment Evaluation of Risk/Benefit 
An interim analysis was conducted when 20 subjects completed i nduction or discontinued 
treatment for any reason. At the completion of th e interim analysis by the steering committee, the 
combination was determined to be safe in patients with asymptomatic untreated melanoma 
intracranial metastases. Per Amendment 02 (August 2016), the patient population will be expanded 
to include C ohort B, which will enroll a pproximately 20 patients with symptomatic intracranial
metastases who may be on steroids provided ther e is no immediate need for SRT or surgery (within 
3 weeks prior to first treatment, performance status is 0-2, the patient has not experienced seizure 
within 10 days prior to first treatment, and does not require steroid therapy at a total daily dose of 
higher than 4 mg of dexamethasone or equivalent, which is stable or tapering for 10 days prior to 
first treatment. Patients who are symptomatic and are not being treated with steroids for CNS 
symptoms are elig ible for enrollment.
In the event unfavorable safety/tolerability event occurs in the interim analyses, the Steering 
Committee and the Sponsor will review the available d ata. Upon review of the risk/benefit profile,
the Sponsor and the Steering Committee will recommend continuation, modification, or 
termination of the study. 
The most frequent severe drug related AEs for the combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab in 
melanoma have been asymptomatic and reversible (eg, laboratory testing of liver function tests 
(LFT) and lipase levels) and preliminary evidence s hows deep and durable responses in advanced 
melanoma (CA209004) despite these events. In particular, any assessment of the risk/benefit will 
be examined if the following criteria are met:
•A majority of subjects have at least stable disease or a partial tumor response
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 46
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•All treatment-r elated AEs leading to discontinuation are non-fatal, reversible, and without 
severe sequelae 
•A majority of the treatment related AEs are laboratory in nature, asymptomatic, and 
monitorable by routine blood draws.
If a decision is made to continue because of a fa vorable risk/benefit profile (ie, non-fatal AEs in 
subjects with at least stable disease or a partial tumor response) and despite meeting the safety 
signals for ‘not tolerable’ criteria, the EC/IRBs must be notified, Informed Consent forms updated 
if necessary to add new information, and discussion of  the risk/benefit, if determined to be different 
than at the outset of the study, must be documented with all current and future subjects who are 
enrolled into the study. 
3.1.1 Screening Phase
•Screening begins by establishing the subject’s initial eligibility and signing of the ICF.
•Subject is enrolled using the IRT. Subjects will be enrolled into either Cohort A 
(asymptomatic) or Cohort B (symptomatic). Asymptomatic subjects who are enrolling into 
Cohort A and become symptomatic during the screening evaluations may be considered for 
enrollment into  Cohort B if they meet all other cr iteria for Cohort B. No crossover between 
cohorts is permitted after the start of treatment.
•Subject is assessed for study eligibility as described in Section 3.3.1 and Section 3.3.2 .
•Pre-treatment t umor tissue i s required from all patients and s hould be from an excisional, 
incisional, (preferred) , punch, or core needle biopsy. Tissue representing an extracranial 
metastasis collected after prior therapies is preferred, but archival primary or metastatic tumor 
tissue specimens are acceptable. A tumor tissue block or minimum of 15 slides should be 
submitted.
3.1.2 Treatment Phase
•A negative pregnancy test should be documented within 24 hours prior to start of each dose of 
investigational product.
•On study laboratory assessments should be drawn within 72 hours prior to dosing.
•Study assessments are to be collected as outlined in Table 5.1-2 (Cycles 1 and 2) and 
Table 5.1-3 (Cycles 3 and beyond). 
•Adverse event assessments should be documented at each clinic visit. 
•Outcomes Research Assessment (Healthcare Resources Utilization (HCRU) will be conducted 
prior to Cycle 1 dosing and at the time of progression.
•Exploratory Biomarker Testing will be conducted according to Table 5.6.1.3-1 .
•All enrolled participants will be treated with nivolumab IV ove r 60 minutes ± 10 minutes at 1 
mg/kg combined with ipilimumab administered IV over 90 minutes ± 10 minutes at 3 mg/kg 
every 3 weeks for a total of 4 doses of the combination therapy followed by nivolumab 
administered IV over 60 minutes ± 10 minutes at 3mg/kg every 2 weeks for a maximum of 24 
months or until progression or unacceptable toxicity.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 47
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Study drug dose may be delayed for toxici ty. Tumor assessment should be continued
as per protocol even if dosing is delayed.
•Response to treatment w ill be ev aluated by serial radi ographic assessment every 6 weeks 
(±7 days) for the first 12 months and every 12 weeks ( ±7 days) thereafter until documented 
progression.
•NANO Scale evalua tion to be conducted weekly duri ng Cycle 1, prior to dosing on Weeks 1 
and 4 in Cycle 1 and Cycle 2; and on Weeks 1, 3, and 5 during Cycle 3 and thereafter during 
the treatment phase. See Section 8.4.3.1.
•The treatment phase ends when the subject is discontinued from study therapy. For a complete 
list of reasons for treatment discontinuation see Section 3.5 .
3.1.3 Follow-Up Phase
•Begins when the decision to discontinue a subject from treatment is made (no further treatment 
with study therapy).
•After completion of the first two follow-up visits, subjects will be followed every 3 months for 
survival.
•Follow-up assessments are to be collected as outlined in Table 5.1-4 .
•Subjects who discontinue treatment for reasons other than tumor progression will continue to 
have tumor assessments beginning 6 weeks ( ±7 days) from the first dose of study drug for the 
first 12 months, and every 12 weeks ( ±7 days) thereafter until documented tumor progression.
•Subjects will be followed for drug-related toxicities until these toxicities resolve, return to 
baseline or are deemed irreversible. All advers e events will be documented for a minimum of 
100 days after last dose.
3.2 Post Study Access to Study Drug
At the end of the study, BMS will not continue to provide BMS s upplied study drug to 
subjects/investigators unless BMS chooses to exte nd the study. The investigator should ensure that 
the subject receives appropriate care to treat the c ondition under study. Subjects who continue to 
respond at the end of on study treatment may be prescribed study medication through commercial 
supply.
3.3 Study Population.
For entry into the study, the following criteria MUST be met.
3.3.1 Inclusion Criteria
1. Signed Written Informed Consent
a) Subjects must have signed and dated an IRB/IEC approved written informed consent form 
in accordance with regulatory and institutional guidelines. This must be obtained before 
the performance of any protocol-related procedure s that are not part of normal subject care.
b) Subjects must be willing and able to comply with scheduled visits, treatment schedule, 
laboratory testing, and other requirements of the study.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 48
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
2. Target Population
a) Histologically confirmed  malignant melanoma with measurable metastases in the brain
b)Cohort A : At least 1 measurable intracranial metastasis > 0.5 cm and < 3 cm in longest 
diameter that has not been previously irradiated. No clinical requirement for local 
intervention (surgery, radiosurgery, corticoste roid therapy) or other systemic therapy. 
Cohort B : Per Amendment 02 (August 2016) Subjects with neurologic signs and 
symptoms related to metastatic intracranial lesions are eligible per Amendment 02.
Subjects must have at least 1 measurable intracranial metastasis ≥ 0.5 cm and ≤3c mi n  
longest diameter that has not been previously irradiated. No immediate requirement 
(within 3 weeks prior to first treatment) for local intervention (surgery, radiosurgery, 
corticosteroid therapy). Steroid use is per mitted as defined in inclusion criterion 2e).
c) Prior stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) and prior excision of up to 3 melanoma intracranial
metastases is permitted if there has been complete recovery, with no neurologic sequelae,
and measurable lesions remain. Growth or change in a lesion previously irradiated will not  
be considered measurable. Regrowth in cavit y of previously excised lesion will not be  
considered measurable. Any prior SRT to intracranial lesions or prior excision must have  
occurred ≥3 weeks before the start of dosing for this study.
d) Must have tumor tissue available for biomarker analysis. Biopsy should be excisional,  
incisional, punch, or core needle. Fine needle aspirates or other cytology samples are not  
allowable.
e)Cohort A (asymptomatic): Subjects must be fr ee of neurologic signs and symptoms 
related to metastatic intracranial lesions and must not have required or received systemic 
corticosteroid therapy within 10 days prior to first treatment. 
Cohort B (symptomatic): Subjects with neurologic signs and symptoms related to 
metastatic intracranial lesions are eligible per Amendment 02. Subjects with neurologic 
signs and symptoms may be treated with a total daily dose of no more than 4 mg of 
dexamethasone that is stable or tapering for 10 days prior to first treatment. Subjects with 
neurologic signs and symptoms who are not being treated with steroids are eligible for 
Cohort B. No experience of seizure within 10 days prior to first treatment.
f) Allowable prior therapy
i) Approved adjuvant therapies, which ma y include molecularly-targeted agents, 
IFN-α, and ipilimumab. Patients who received ipilimumab as adjuvant therapy must 
have a 6 month washout before receiving any dosing on this study
ii) For advanced disease, interleukin-2 at any dose and/or IFN- α (any formulation, no 
washout required); MEK and BRAF inhibitors: washout for at least 4 weeks prior to 
the start of dosing in this study
iii) Steroids  for physiological replacement are allowed.
g) Cohort A (asymptomatic): ECOG performance status ≤ 1.
Cohort B: (symptomatic):  ECOG performance status ≤ 2
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 49
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
h) Screening laboratory values must meet the following criteria (using CTCAE v4):
•WBC ≥2000/uL
•Neutrophils ≥1500/uL
•ANC ≥1000/uL
•Platelets ≥100 x 103/uL
•Hemoglobin ≥9 g/dL 
•Serum Creatinine ≤1.5 x ULN or calculated creatinine clearance > 40 mL /min 
(using the Cockcroft-Gault formula)
Female CrCl = (140- age in years) x weight in kg x 0.85
72 x serum creatinine in mg/ dL
Male CrCl = (140- age in years) x weight in kg x 1.00
72 x serum creatinine in mg/ dL
•AST ≤3.0 x ULN 
•ALT ≤3.0 x ULN
•Total Bilirubin ≤1.5 x ULN, (except subjects with  Gilbert’s syndrome who must 
have a total bilirubin < 3.0 x ULN).
i) Subject Re-enrollment:  This study permits  the re-enrollment of a subject who has 
discontinued the study as a pre-treatment failure  (ie, has not been treated) if the reason for 
pre-treatment failure is related to the size of  potential index lesions. If re-enrolled, the 
subject must be re-consented.
3. Age and Reproductive Status
a) Males and Females, ≥18 years.
b) Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units of HCG) within 24 hours 
prior to the start of study drug.
c) Women must not be breastfeeding.
d) Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must agree to follow instructions for 
method(s) of contraception for a period of 30 da ys (duration of ovulatory cycle) plus the 
time required for the investigational drug to undergo approximately five half lives. 
WOCBP should use an adequate method to a void pregnancy for 23 weeks (30 days plus 
the time required for nivolumab to undergo five half-lives) after the last dose of 
investigational drug.
e) Males who are sexually active with WOCBP must agree to follow instructions for 
method(s) of contraception for a period of 90 days (duration of sperm turnover) plus the 
time required for the investigational drug to undergo approximately five half lives. 
Males who receive nivolumab who are sexually active with WOCBP must continue 
contraception for 31 weeks (90 days plus the time required for nivolumab to undergo five 
half-lives) after the last dose of investigational drug.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 50
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
f) Azoospermic males and WOCBP who are continuously not heterosexually active are 
exempt from contr aceptive requirements.  However th ey must still undergo pregnancy 
testing as described in this section.
Investigators sh all counsel WOCBP and male sub jects who are sexually active with WOCBP on 
the importance of pregnancy prevention and the implications of an unexpected pregnancy 
Investigators shall advise WOCBP and male subjects who are sexually active with WOCBP on the 
use of highly effective methods of contraception. Highly effective methods of contraception have 
a failure rate of < 1% when used consistently and correctly.
At a minimum, subjects must agree to the use  of two methods of c ontraception, with one met hod 
being highly effective and the other method being either highly effective or less effective as listed 
below:
HIGHLY EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION
•Male condoms with spermicide
•Hormonal methods of contraception including comb ined oral contraceptive pills, vaginal ring, 
injectables, implants and intrauterine devices (IUDs) such as Mirena®by WOCBP subject or 
male subject’s WOCBP part ner. F emale part ners of male subjects participating in the st udy 
may use hormone based contr aceptives as one of the acceptable methods of contr aception since 
they will not be receiving study drug
•Nonhormonal IUDs, such as ParaGard®
•Tubal ligation 
•Vasectomy.
•Sexual Abstinence
−It is not necessary to use any other method of contraception when complete abstinence is 
elected. 
−WOCBP participants who choose complete abstin ence must continue to have pregnancy 
tests.
−Acceptable alternate methods of highly effective contraception must be discussed in the 
event that the WOCBP participants chooses to forego complete abstinence.
LESS EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION
•Diaphragm with spermicide
•Cervical cap with spermicide
•Vaginal sponge
•Male Condom without spermicide 
•Progestin only pills by WOCBP subject or male subject’s WOCBP partner 
•Female Condom*.
* A male and female condom must not be used together
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 51
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
1) Target Disease Exceptions
a) History of known leptomeningeal involvement (lumbar puncture not required).
b) Previous stereotactic or highly conformal radiotherapy within 3 weeks before the start of 
dosing for this study. Note the stereotactic radiotherapy field must not have included the 
intracranial index lesion(s). 
c) Subjects previously treated with SRT > 3 lesions in the brain
d) Intracranial lesion size > 3cm 
2) Medical History and Concurrent Diseases
a) History of whole brain irradiation.
b) Subjects with an active, known or suspected autoimmune disease. Subjects with type I 
diabetes mellitis, hypothyroidism only requiring hormone replacement, skin disorders 
(such as vitiligo, psoriasis, or alopecia) not requiring systemic treatment, or conditions not 
expected to recur in the absence of an external trigger are permitted to enroll.
c) Subjects with major medical, neurologic or psychiatric condition who are judged as unable 
to fully comply with study therapy or assessments should not be enrolled. 
d) Any concurrent malignancy other than non-melanoma skin cancer or carcinoma in situ of 
the cervix.  For any prior invasive malignancy, at least 5 years must have elapsed since 
curative therapy and patients must ha ve no residual sequelae of prior therapy.
e)Cohort A : (asymptomatic): The use of corticosteroi ds is not allowed within 10 days prior 
to first treatment (based upon 5 times the expected half-life of dexamethasone) except 
patients who are taking steroids for physiological replacement. If alternative 
corticosteroid therapy has been used, consu ltation with the sponsor Medical Monitor is 
required to determine the washout period prior to initiating study treatment.
Cohort B : (symptomatic): Subjects with neuro logic sign and symptoms related to 
intracranial metastases who are being treated with a total daily dose of higher than 4 mg 
dexamethasone or equivalent within 10 prior to the start of treatment with study drug are 
excluded.
f) Subjects with a condition requiring systemic treatment with either corticosteroids (> 10 mg 
daily prednisone equivalent) or other immunosuppressive medications within 14 days of 
randomizatio n. Inhaled or topical steroids, and adrenal rep lacement steroid doses > 10 mg 
daily prednisone equivalent, are permitted in the absence of active autoimmune disease. 
g) Subjects with history of life-threatening toxicity related to prior ipilimumab adjuvant 
therapy except those that are unlikely to re-occur with standard countermeasures (eg. 
hormone replacement after adrenal crisis).
3) Physical and Laboratory Test Findings 
g) Any positive test for hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus indicating acute or chronic 
infection
h) Known history of testing positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or known 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) ev en if fully immunocompetent on ART—
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 52
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
All subjects who discontinue study drug should comply with protocol specified follow-up 
procedures as outlined in Section 5 . The only exception to this requirement is when a subject 
withdraws consent for all study procedures includi ng post-treatment study follow-up or loses the 
ability to consent freely (ie, is imprisoned or involuntar ily incarcerated for the treatment of either 
a psychiatric or physical illness).
If study drug is discontinued prior to the subject’s completion of the study, the reason for the 
discontinuation must be documented in th e subject’s medical records and entered on the 
appropriate case report form (CRF) page.
3.6 Post Study Drug Study Follow up
In this study, clinical benefit rate is the primary endpoint of the study. Post study follow-up is of 
critical importance and is essential to preserving subject safety and the integrity of the study. 
Subjects who discontinue study drug must continue to be followed for collection of outcome and/or 
survival follow-up d ata as required and in line with Section 5 until death or the conclusion of the 
study.
BMS may request that survival data be collected on all tr eated sub jects outside of the protocol 
defined window ( Table 5.1-4 ). At the time of this request, each subject will be con tacted to 
determine their survival status unless the subject has withdrawn consent for all contacts or is lost 
to follow-up.
3.6.1 Withdrawal of Consent
Subjects who request to discontinue study drug w ill remain in the study and must continue to be 
followed for protocol specified follow-up procedures. The only exception to this is when a subject 
specifically withdraws consent for any further c ontact with him/her or persons previously 
authorized by subject to provide this information. Subjects should notify the investigator of the 
decision to withdraw consent from future follow-up in writing , whenever possible. The 
withdrawal of consent should be explained in d etail in the medical records by the investigator, as 
to whether the withdra wal is from further tr eatment with study drug only or also from study 
procedures and/or post treatment study follow-up, a nd entered on the appropriate CRF page. In the 
event that vital status (whether the subject is alive or dead) is bei ng measured, publicly available 
information should be used to determine vital status only as appropriately directed in accordance 
with local law.
3.6.2 Lost to Follow-Up
All reasonable efforts must be made to locate subjects to determine and report their ongoing status. 
This includes follow-up with persons authorized by the subject as noted above. Lost to follow-up 
is defined by the inability to reach the subject after a minimum of three documented phone calls, 
faxes, or emails as well as lack of response by s ubject to one registered mail letter. All attempts 
should be documented in the subject’s medical records. If it is determined that the subject has died, 
the site will use permissible local methods to obtain the date and cause of death.
If investigator’s use of third-party representative to assist in the follow-up portion of the study has 
been included in the subject’s informed consent, then the investigator may use a Sponsor-retained 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 56
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
third-party representative to assist site staff with obtaining subject’s contact information or other 
public vital status data necessary to complete the follow-up portion of the study. The site staff and 
representative will consult publicly available sources, such as public h ealth registries and 
databases, in order to obtain updated contact information. If after all attempts, the subject remains 
lost to follow-up, then the last known alive date as determined by the investigator s hould be 
reported and documented in the subject’s medical records.
4 STUDY DRUG
Study drug includes both Investigational [Medicin al] Product (IP/IMP) and Non-investigational 
[Medicinal] Product (Non-IP/Non-IMP) and can consist of the following ( Table 4-1):
•All products, active or placebo, being tested or used as a comparator in a clinical trial. 
•Study required premedication, and 
•Other drugs administered as part of the study that are critical to claims of  efficacy 
(eg, background therapy, rescue medications)
•Diagnostic agents: (such as glucose for glucos e challenge) given as part of the protocol 
requirements must also be included in the dosing data collection.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 57
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 4-1: Study Drugs for CA209204
Product Description / 
Class and Dosage 
FormPotency IP/Non-IMP Blinded or Open Label Packaging/ Appearance Storage Conditions
(per label)
Nivolumab Solution 
for Injection100 mg 
(10 mg/mL)IP Open-label Clear to opalescent colorless 
to pale yellow liquid. May 
contain particles2 to 8° C. 
Protect from light, freezing and 
shaking.
Ipilimumab Solution 
for Injection200 mg 
(5 mg/mL)IP Open-label Clear, colorless to pale 
yellow liquid. May contain 
particles2 to 8° C. 
Protect from light and freezing.
Premedications or medications used to treat infusion-related reactions should be sourced by the investigative sites if availabl e and permitted by local regulations.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 58
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.1 Investigational Product
An investigational product, als o known as investigational medicinal product in some regions, is 
defined a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference 
in a clinical study, including products already wi th a marketing authorization but used or 
assembled (formulated or packaged) differently than the author ized form, or used for an 
unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further information about the authorized form.
The investigational product should be stored in a secure area according to local regulations. It is 
the responsibility of the investigator to ensure that investigational product is only dispensed to 
study subjects. The investigational product must be dispensed only from offic ial study sites by 
authorized personnel according to local regulations. 
In this protocol, investigational products are nivolumab and ipilimumab.
4.2 Non-investigational Product
Other medications used as support or escape medication for preventative, dia gnostic, or therapeutic 
reasons, as components of the standard of care for a given diagnosis, may be considered as non-
investigational products. 4.3 Storage and Dispensing
The product storage manager should ensure that the study drug is stored in accordance with the 
environmental conditions (temperature, light, and humidity) as determined by BMS. If concerns 
regarding the quality or appearance of the study drug arise, the study drug should not be dispensed 
and contact BMS immediately.
Investigational product documentation (whether supplied by BMS or not) must be maintained that 
includes all processes required to ensure dr ug is accurately administered. This includes 
documentation of drug storage, administration a nd, as applicable, storage temperatures, 
reconstitution, and use of required processes (eg, required diluents, administration sets).
Infusion-rel ated supplies (eg IV bags, in-line filters, 0.9% NaCl solution) will not be supplied by 
the sponsor and should be purchased locally if permitted by local regulations. 
For non-investigational product, if marketed product is utilized, it should be stored in accordance 
with the package insert, summary of product characteristics (SmPC), or similar. 
Please refer to the current version of the nivolumab and ipilimumab IBs and/or pharmacy reference 
sheets for complete storage, handling, disp ensing, and infusion information for BMS-936558 
(nivolumab) and BMS-734016 (ipilimumab).
Nivolumab 
Nivolumab vials must be stored at a temperature of 2° C to 8° C and should be protected from 
light, freezing, and shaking. If stored in a glass front refri gerator, vials s hould be stored in the 
carton. Recommended safety measures for prep aration and handling of nivolumab include 
laboratory coats and gloves.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 59
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
For details on prepared drug storage and use time of nivolumab under room temperature/light and 
refrigeration, please refer to the nivolumab IB section for “Recommended Storage and Use 
Conditions” and/or pharmacy reference sheets. Care must be taken to assure sterility of the 
prepared solution as the product does not contain any anti-microbial preservative or bacteriostatic 
agent. No incompatibilities between nivolumab and polyolefin bags have been observed.
Nivolumab is to be administered as a 60-minute IV infusion ± 10 minutes using a volumetric pump 
with a 0.2/0.22 micron in-line filter at the protocol-s pecified dose. The drug can be diluted with 
0.9% normal saline for delivery but the total drug concentration of the solu tion cannot be below 
0.35 mg/ml. It is not to be administered as an IV push or bolus injection. At the end of the infusion, 
flush the line with a sufficien t quantity of normal saline.
Ipilimumab
Ipilimumab injection can be used for IV administration without dilution after transferring to a PVC 
(polyvinyl chloride), non-PVC/non-DEHP (di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate) or glass containers and is 
stable for 24 hours at 2-8ºC or room temperature/room light (RT/RL). For ip ilimumab storage 
instructions, refer to ipilimumab IB and/or pha rmacy reference sheets. Recommended safety 
measures for preparation and handling include protective clothing, gloves, and safety cabinets. 
Ipilimumab is to be administered as a 90-minute IV infusion ± 10 minutes, using a volumetric 
pump with a 0.2 to 1.2 micron in-line filter at the protocol-specified dose. The drug can be diluted 
with 0.9% normal saline or 5% Dextrose Injection to concentrations between 1 mg /mL and 4 
mg/mL. It is not to be administered as an IV push or bolus injection. Care must be taken to assure 
sterility of the prepared solutions, since the drug product does not contain any antimicrobial 
preservatives or bacteriostatic agents.
When both study drugs are to be administered on the same day, separate infusion bags and filters 
must be used for each infusion. Nivolumab is to be administered first. The nivolumab infusion 
must be promptly followed by a saline flush to clear the line of nivolumab before starting the 
ipilimumab infusion.
4.4 Method of Assigning Subject Identification
CA209204 study is an open-label study. After th e subject’s init ial elig ibility is established and 
informed consent has been obtained, the subject mu st be enrolled into the study by calling an 
interactive voice response system (IVRS) to obtain the subject number. Every subject that signs 
the informed consent form must be assigned a subject number in IVRS. Specific instructions for 
using IVRS will be provided to the investigational site in a separate document. The investigator or 
designee will register the subject for enrollment by following the enrollment procedures 
established by BMS. The following information is required for enrollment:
•Date that informed consent was obtained
•Date of birth
•Gender at birth
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 60
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject.
All enrolled subjects will be treated in an open-label fashion as described below:  
•Nivolumab administered IV over 60 minutes ± 10 minutes at 1 mg/kg combined with 
ipilimumab administered IV over 90 minutes ± 10 minutes at 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks for a to tal 
of 4 doses of the combination therapy followed by nivolumab administered IV over 60 minutes
± 10 minutes at 3mg/kg every 2 weeks for a maximum of 24 months or until progression or 
unacceptable toxicity.
Dosing schedule is detailed in Table 4.5-1 and Table 4.5-2 .
.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 61
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 4.5-1: CA209204: Dosing Schedule for Cycle 1 and Cycle 2
1 Cycle = 6 weeks
Day 1
Week 1Day 1
Week 2Day 1
Week 3Day 1
Week 4Day 1
Week 5Day 1
Week 6
All Enrolled Subjects
Combination Treatment (Nivolumab 
1mg/kg + Ipilimumab 3 mg/kg) 1 mg/kg 
Nivolumab +
3 mg/kg 
Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg 
Nivolumab +
3 mg/kg 
Ipilimumab
Table 4.5-2: CA209204 Dosing Schedule Cycle 3 and Beyond 
Subjects may continue to receive treatment for a maximum of 24 months from the Date of the First Treament with Nivolumab +Ipili mumab.  
1 Cycle = 6 weeks
Day 1
Week 1Day 1
Week 2Day 1
Week 3Day 1
Week 4Day 1
Week 5Day 1
Week 6
All Enrolled Subjects
Nivolumab monotherapy3 mg/kg 
Nivolumab3 mg/kg 
Nivolumab3 mg/kg 
Nivolumab
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 62
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Subjects with baseline Grade 1 AST/ALT or total bilirubin who require dose delays for reasons  
other than a 2-grade shift in AST/ALT or total bilirubin may resume treatment in the presence  
of Grade 2 AST/ALT OR total bilirubin
•Subjects with combined Grade 2 AS T/ALT AND total bili rubin values meeting  
discontinuation parameters (Section 4.5.5 ) should have tr eatment permanently discontinued.
•Drug-related pulmonary toxicity, diarrhea, or colitis must have resolved to baseline before  
treatment is resumed. Subjects with persistent Grade 1 pneumonitis after completion of a  
steroid taper over at least 1 month may be eligible for retreatment if discussed with and  
approved by the BMS Medical Monitor.
•Drug-related endocrinopathies adequately controlled with only physiologic hormone  
replacement may resume treatment after cons ultation with the BMS Medical Monitor
Dose delay of tr eatment that results in treatment interruption of > 6 weeks requires treatment  
discontinuation, with exceptions as noted in Section 4.5.2.1 and Section 4.5.5  
There will be no dose reductions for study medications.
If the criteria to resume treatment are met, the subject should restart tr eatment at the next scheduled  
time point per protocol. However, if the tr eatment is delayed past the next scheduled time point  
per protocol, the next scheduled time point will be delayed until dosing resumes.
•If treatment is delayed > 6 weeks, the subject must be permanently discontinued from study  
therapy, except as specified in Section 4.5.2.1 and Secti on 4.5.5.
4.5.5 Discontinuation of Study Drug
Treatment should be permanently discontinued for the following:
•Any Grade 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain or blurred vision that does not respond to topical  
therapy and does not improve to Grade 1 severity within the re-treatment period OR requires  
systemic treatment 
•Any Grade 3 non-skin, drug-related adverse event lasting > 7 days, with the following  
exceptions for laboratory abnormalities, drug -related uveitis, pneumonitis, bronchospasm,  
hypersensitivity reactions, infusion reactions, and endocrinopathies::
−Grade 3 drug-related uveitis, pneumonitis, bronchospasm, hypersensitivity reaction, or  
infusion reaction of any duration requires discontinuation
−Grade 3 drug-related endocrinopathies adequately controlled with only physiologic  
hormone replacement do not require discontinuation
−Grade 3 drug-related laboratory a bnormalities do not require treatment discontinuation  
except: 
♦Grade 3 drug-related thrombocytopenia > 7 days or associated with bleeding requires  
discontinuation
•Any drug-related liver function test (LFT) abnor mality that meets the following criteria require  
discontinuation: 
−AST or ALT > 8 x ULN
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 65
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
−Total bilirubin > 5 x ULN
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x ULN and total bilirubin > 2 x ULN
•Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event or laboratory abnormality, ex cept for the following 
events which do not require discontinuation:
−Grade 4 neutropenia ≤7 days
−Grade 4 lymphopenia or leukopenia
−Isolated Grade 4 amylas e or lipase abnormalities that are not associated with symptoms or 
clinical manifestations of pancreatitis. The BMS Medical Monitor should be consulted for 
Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnormalities.
−Isolated Grade 4 electrolyte imbalances/abnorm alities that are not associated with clinical 
sequelae and are corrected with supplementation/appropriate management within 72 hours 
of their onset
•Any event that leads to delay in dosing lasting > 6 weeks from the previous dose requires 
discontinuation, with the following exceptions:
−Dosing delays to allow for prolonged steroid tap ers to manage drug-related adverse events 
are allowed. Prior to re-initiating treatment in a subject with a dosing delay lasting > 6 
weeks from the previous dose, the BMS medical monitor must be consulted. Tumor 
assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is delayed. Periodic study visits 
to assess safety and laboratory studies should also continue every 6 weeks or more 
frequently if clinically indicated during such dosing delays.
−Dosing delays lasting > 6 weeks from the previous dose that occur for non- drug-related 
reasons may be allowed if approved by the BMS med ical monit or. Prior to re-initiating 
treatment in a subject with a dosing delay lasting > 6 weeks, the BMS med ical monitor 
must be consulted. Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is 
delayed. Periodic study visits to assess safety and laboratory studies should also continue 
every 6 weeks or more frequently if clinically indicated during such dosing delays.
•Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment of 
the Investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued nivolumab or 
ipilimumab dosing.
Note: If a subject experiences a severe adverse event during induction tr eatment (ie, the 
combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab) that requires discontinuation from further treatment
with the combination, continuing treatment with nivolumab monotherapy may be considered
contingent on discussion with and approval by the BMS Medical Monitor.  
Exceptions to Permanent Discontinuation of study drug dosing under the following situations:
•Potentially reve rsible inflammation (< Grade 4), attributable to a local anti-tumor reaction and 
a potential therapeutic response. This include s inflammatory reactions at sites of tumor 
resections or in draining lymph nodes, or at sites suspicious for, but not diagnostic of 
metastasis.
•Subjects with the following conditions where in the investigator’s opinion continuing study 
drug administration is justified:
−Endocrinopathies where clinical symptoms are controlled with appropriate hormone 
replacement therapy.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 66
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
including description of reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts, or other alternative treatment 
options will st ill apply
For subjects who continue study therapy beyo nd progression, furthe r progression is defined as an 
additional 10% increase in tumor burden volume from t ime of initial PD. This includes an increase 
in the sum of diameters of all target lesions and/or the diameters of new measurable lesions 
compared to the time of initial PD. Treatment with study medication s hould be discontinued 
permanently upon documentation of further progression.
4.6 Blinding/Unblinding
Not applicable.
4.7 Treatment Compliance
Treatment compliance will be monitored by drug accountability as well as the subject’s medical 
record and eCRF.4.8 Destruction of Study Drug
For this study, study drugs (those supplied by BMS or  sourced by the investigator) such as partially 
used study drug containers, vials and syringes may be destroyed on site. 
Any unused study drugs can only be destroyed after being inspected and reconciled by the 
responsible Study Monitor unless study drug contai ners must be immediately destroyed as required 
for safety, or to meet local regulat ions (eg, cytotoxics or biologics). 
On-site destruction is allowed provided the following minimal standards are met:
•On-site disposal practices must not  expose humans to risks from the drug.
•On-site disposal practices and procedures are in agr eement with applicable laws and 
regulations, including any special requirements for controlled or hazardous substances.
•Written procedures for on-site disposal are available and followed. The procedures must be
filed with the site’s SOPs and a copy provide d to BMS upon request.
Records are maintained that allow for traceability of  each container, includi ng the date disposed 
of, quantity disposed, and identification of th e person disposing the containers. The method of 
disposal, ie, incinerator, licensed sanitary landfill, or licensed waste disposal vendor must be 
documented.
•Accountability and disposal records are comp lete, up-to-date, and available for the Monitor to 
review throughout the clinical trial period.
If conditions for destruction cannot be met the responsible Study Monitor will make arrangements 
for return of study drug.
It is the investigator’s responsib ility to arrange for disposal of all empty containers, provided that 
procedures for proper disposal have been established according to applicable federal, state, local, 
and institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appropriate records of disposal are 
kept.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 69
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.9 Return of Study Drug
If study drug will not be destroyed upon completion or termination of the study, all unused and/or 
partially used study  drug that was supplied by BMS must be returned to BMS. The return of study 
drug will be arranged by the responsible Study Monitor. 
It is the investigator’s responsib ility to arrange for disposal of all empty containers, provided that 
procedures for proper disposal have been established according to applicable federal, state, local, 
and institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appropriate records of disposal are 
kept. 
Arrangements for the return of study drug will be made by the responsible Study Monitor.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 70
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES
5.1 Flow Chart/Time and Events Schedule 
Table 5.1-1: Screening Assessments (CA209204)
Procedure Screening
VisitNotes
Eligibility Assessments
Informed Consent X
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria X All inclusion/exclusion criteria should be assessed at screening.  
Medical History X
Tumor Tissue Samples X •Pre-treatment tumor tissue is required from all patients and should be from an excisional, 
incisional, (preferred), punch, or core needle biopsy. Tissue representing an extracranial metastasis 
collected after prior therapies is preferred, but archival primary or metastatic tumor tissue specimens are acceptable.  A tumor tissue block or minimum of 15 slides should be submitted.
•The following are optional:
-H&E of primary cutaneous melanoma with accompanying pathology report; where available but 
strongly recommended (can be submitted at later date)
-Intracranial metastasis: Any biopsy specimen acceptable (block or minimum of 15 slides); where 
available 
•-Submit a copy of the original pathology reports that correspond to submitted specimens if available.
Safety Assessments
Complete Physical Examination X
Vital Signs and oxygen saturation X Including BP, HR, temperature, and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry. Pulse oximetry at rest and after exertion. Obtain vital signs at the screening visit and within 72 hours prior to first dose
Physical Measurements X Height and weight
Performance Status X
ECOG X Within 14 days prior to dosing
Assessment of Signs and Symptoms X Within 14 days prior to dosing
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 71
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-1: Screening Assessments (CA209204)
Procedure Screening
VisitNotes
Laboratory Tests X CBC w/differential, Chemistry panel including: LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, T.Bili, BUN or serum urea 
level, creatinine, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, Glucose, amylase, lipase, TSH, Free T4, Free T3, Hep B/C (HBV sAG, HCV antibody, or HCV RNA) within 14 days prior to dosing
Pregnancy Test (WOCBP Only) X S erum or urine must be performed.
Efficacy Assessments 
Tumor Assessment X Section 5.4
CT/MRI Chest, abdomen, pelvis and all known or suspected sites of disease within the prior 28 days.
Brain MRI is required within the prior 14 days.
Scans must follow sponsor-supplied Imaging Manual.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 72
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-3: On-study Assessments Cycle 3 and Beyond (CA209204) 
Procedure Cycle 3 and Beyond (Cycle = 6 weeks) Notes
•Tumor assessment should be continued
as per protocol even if dosing is delayed.
• Subjects may continue to receive 
treatment for a maximum of 24 months 
from the Date of the First Treatment with Nivolumab +Ipilimumab.Day 1
Week 1Day 1
Week 2Day 1
Week 3Day 1
Week 4Day 1
Week 5Day 1
Week 6
Administer Study Treatment 
Nivolumab 3 mg/kg X X X Dose will remain the same as long as current patient weight is within 10% of the Cycle 1/Day 
1/enrollment weight 
Doses may be administered within 2 days after 
the scheduled date if necessary. 
Subjects may continue to receive treatment for a 
maximum of 24 months from the Date of the First Treatment with Nivolumab +Ipilimumab
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 78
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-4: Follow-up Assessments (CA209204)
ProcedureFollow-Upa
Visits 1 and 2Survivalb
Follow-up VisitsNotes
Follow up is 3 years from start of treatment.
Efficacy Assessments
Tumor Assessments X Only for subjects who have not progressed on study therapy or who have 
discontinued study treatment for reasons other than documented disease 
progression.
Section 5.4
CT/MRI of chest, abdomen, pelvis and brain (MRI)
FIRST tumor assessment should first be performed at 6 weeks ( ± 7 days) 
from first dose date.
SUBSEQUENT tumor assessments should occur every 6 weeks ( ± 7 
days) up to first 12 months (w eek 48), then every 12 weeks ( ±7 days) until 
documented disease progression.
aFollow-up Visit 1 = 30 days from the last dose +/- 7 days or coincide with the date of discontinuation (+/- 7 days) if date of discontinuation is greater than 37  
days after last dose, Follow-up visit 2 = 84 days (+/- 7 days) from follow-up visit 1
bSurvival visits = every 3 months from Follow-up Visit 2 +/- 7 days
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 80
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5.1.1 Retesting During Screening or Lead-in Period 
Retesting of laboratory parameters and/or ot her assessments during the Screening or Lead-in 
period will not be permitted (this does not include  parameters that require a confirmatory result) 
unless there was a technical error in performance of the lab test and the first result is invalid.
Any new result will override the previous result (ie, the most current result prior to dosing) and is 
the value by which study inclusion  will be asse ssed, as it represents the subject’s most current, 
clinical state.
5.2 Study Materials
•NCI CTCAE version 4.0
•Nivolumab Investigator Brochure
•Ipilimumab Investigator Brochure
•Pharmacy Binder
•Laboratory manuals for collection and handling of blood (including biomarker) and tissue 
specimens
•Site manual for operation of interactive voice response system, including enrollment 
worksheets
•Pregnancy Surveillance Forms
•RECIST 1.1 pocket guide
•CA209204 Imaging Manual
5.3 Safety Assessments
5.3.1 Medical History, Physical Exam, Physical Measurements 
At baseline, a medical history w ill be ob tained to capture relevant underlying conditions. The 
baseline examinations  should include weight, height, ECOG Pe rformance Status, blood pressure 
(BP), heart rate (HR), temperature, and oxygen satura tion by pulse oximetry at rest (also monitor 
amount of supplemental o xygen if applicable) should be performed within 28 days prior to first 
dose. 
Baseline local laboratory assessments should be done within 14 day prior to first dose and are to 
include: CBC w/differential, Chemis try panel including: LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, T.Bili, BUN or 
serum urea level, creatinine, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, Gl ucose, amylase, lipase, TSH, Free T4, Free T3, 
Hep B/C (HBV sAG, HCV antibody, or HCV RNA).
While on-study and during follow-up, local laborat ory assessments are to be conducted as 
specified on Table 5.1-2 to Table 5.1-4 . Thyroid function testing is to be done every 6 weeks (every 
3 cycles) for subjects receiving nivolumab.
Subjects will be evalu ated for safety if they have received  any study drug. Toxicity asse ssments 
will be continuous during the treatment phase. Duri ng study tr eatment and nivolumab Follow-Up 
Visits 1 and 2, toxicity assessments should be done in person. Once subjects reach the survival 
follow-up, either in-person visits or documented telephone calls/email correspondence to assess 
the subject’s status are acceptable.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 81
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Adverse events and laboratory values will be  graded according to the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0.
Oxygen saturation by pulse  oximetry at rest (also monitor amount of supplemental oxygen if  
applicable) should be assessed at each on-study visit prior to dosing. The start and stop time of the  
study therapy infusions should be documented. 
Physical examinations are to be  performed as specified in Section 5.1 and as clinically indicated.  
If there are any new or worsening clinically significant changes since the last exam, report changes  
on the appropriate non-serious or serious adverse event page.
On treatment local laboratory assessments are to be completed within 72 hours prior to dosing.
Additional measures, including non-study required laboratory tests, should be performed as  
clinically ind icated or to comply with local regulations. Laboratory toxicities (eg, suspected drug  
induced liver enzyme evaluations) will be monitored during the follow-up phase via on si te/local  
labs until all study drug related toxicities resolve, return to baseline, or are deemed irreversible.
If a subject shows changes on pulse oximetry or other pulmonary-related signs (hypoxia, fever) or  
symptoms (eg. dyspnea, cough, fever) consistent with possible pulmona ry-related signs (hypoxia,  
fever) or symptoms (eg, dyspnea, cough, fever) consis tent with possible pulmonary adverse events,  
the subject should be immediately ev aluated to rule out pulmonary toxicity, according to the  
suspected pulmonary toxicity management al gorithm in the BMS- 936558 (nivolumab) IB.
Some of the assessments referred to in this section may not be captured as data in the eCRF. They  
are intended to be used as safety monitoring by the treating physician. Additional testing or  
assessments may be performed as clinically necessary or where required by institutional or local  
regulations.
5.3.2 Vital Signs
Vital signs consist of blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and temperature measurements.  
Vital signs will be obtained as outlined in Table 5.1-1 to Table 5.1-3 . 
5.3.3 Imaging Assessment for the Study
All subjects will undergo CT scanning and volu metric MRI of the brain at the time points  specified 
in Table 5.1-1 to Table 5.1-4 .
CT and MRI scans will be assessed locally per the modified RECIS T 1.1 criteria outlined in  
Appendix 3 . Up to 5 extracranial and 5 intracranial lesions will be followed for efficacy per the  
criteria. Please refer to Appendix 3 for guidelin es regarding images, target lesion selection and  
response criteria.
Any incidental findings of potential clinical relevance that are not directly associated with the  
objectives of the protocol should be evaluated and handled by the Study Investigator as per  
standard medical/clinical judgment.
Clinically significant radiologic findings or changes from baseline scans will be coded as adverse  
events or serious adverse events according to the criteria described in Section 6.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 82
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5.3.4 Pregnancy Testing
WOCBP are required to have several pregnancy tests performed as presented in Table 5.1-1 to 
Table 5.1-4 . A negative serum or urine pregnancy test mu st be documented at the screening visit
as per Table 5.1-1. Additionally WOCBP must e xhibit a negative serum or urine pregnancy test  
(minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units  of HCG) within 24 hours prior to the start of  
study drug; therefore the screening pregnancy test may need to be repeated prior to the start of  
study drug dosing. A serum or urine pregnancy test w ill also be c onducted at End of Treatment  
Visit.
5.3.5 ECOG Status
ECOG performance status w ill be evaluated at the screening evaluat ion and at each visit as outlined  
in Time and E. An outline of the ECOG performance status is provided in Appendix 2.
5.3.6 Adverse Event Monitoring
Adverse Events (AEs) will be evaluated according to the NCI CTCAE Version 4.0 on a continuous  
basis starting from when the subject takes the firs t dose of study administration, up to and including  
Follow-Up and End of Treatment visits (at minimum, for 100 days following last dose of study  
drug). Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) must be collected from the time period following written  
consent to participate in the study up to and including follow-up.5.3.7 Laboratory Test Assessments
Results of all safety la boratory collections must be obtained and reviewed in advance of study drug  
dosing, as applicable. Amylase and lipase s hould be collected with the ch emistry collection, but  
these lab results do not require review prior to dosing. 
Serum Chemistry is to be obtained as specified in Table 5.1-1 to Table 5.1-4. A free-T4 and free-T3  
will be performed reflexively for out of range TSH values. A CBC with differential is to be  
obtained. The CBC with differential includes hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cells, platelets  
(direct platelet count), erythrocyte sedimentation rate, WBC differential enumeration of total and  
percentage of neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils, basophils and monocytes.
5.4 Efficacy Assessments 
Assessment of extracranial disease (by CT scan  or other approved mod alities and intracranial
disease (by MRI scan) will be performed per the schedule in Table 5.1-1 to Table 5.1-4.  
Investigators may obtain more frequent follow-up MRI scans as medically indicated. 
Baseline assessments should be performed within 28 days prior to first dose of study drug utilizing  
CT or MRI for systemic lesions and within 14 days for brain lesions (MRI only). In addition to  
chest, abdomen, pelvis, and brain, all known sites of disease should be assessed at baseline.  
Subsequent assessments should include chest,  abdomen, pelvis, brain, and all known sites of  
disease and should use the s ame imaging method as  was used at baseline. Subjects w ill be  
evaluated for tumor response beginning at 6 weeks (± 7 days) from the first dose of study drugs  
for the first 12 months and every 12 weeks (± 7 days) thereafter, until disease progression is  
documented or treatment is discontinued (whichever occurs later). Tumor assessments for ongoing 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 83
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
study treatment decisio ns will be comp leted by the investigator using RECIST (Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) 1.1 criteria for all systemic lesions and modified RECIST 1.1 
for brain lesions (Appendix 3 ).
Radiographic images will be collected and sent to a centralized imaging core laboratory for storage 
and potential future central reading.
All radiologic imaging from this study will be assessed at the study site by the Investigator. Sites 
will be trained in image acquisition par ameters, image analyses, and submission process, prior to 
scanning the first study sub ject. These guidelines w ill be outlined in a separate CA209204 Site 
Imaging Manual. 
For extracranial disease assessment, contrast-e nhanced computed tomography (CT) scans acquired 
on dedicated CT equipment is preferred for this study. CT with contrast of the chest, abdomen and 
pelvis and other areas of disease are to be performed for tumor assessments per Table 5.1-1 to 
Table 5.1-4 . Should a subject have a contraindication for CT IV contrast, a non-contrast CT of the 
chest and a contrast enhanced MRI of the abdomen and pelvis may be obtained. MRI’s should be 
acquired with slice thickness of < 5 mm with no gap (contiguous). 
Use of CT component of a PET/CT scanner: Combined mod ality scanning such as with FDG-
PET/CT is increasingly used in clinical care, and is a mod ality/technology that is in rapid 
evolution; therefore, the recommendations outlined he re may change rather quickly with time. At 
present, low dose or attenuation correction CT por tions of a combined FDG-PET/CT are of limited 
use in anatomically based efficacy assessments and it is therefore suggest ed that they should not 
be substituted for dedicated di agnostic contrast enhanced CT scans for anatomically based 
RECIST measurements. However, if a site can document that the CT performed as part of a FDG-
PET/CT is of ident ical dia gnostic qu ality to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast) then the 
CT portion of the FDG-PET/CT can be used fo r RECIST 1.1 measurements. Note, however, that 
the FDG-PET portion of the CT introduces additional data which may bias an investigator if it is 
not routinely or serially performed.
MRI scans: Bi-dimensional and three-d imensional contrast enhanced MRI of the brain will be 
acquired per the CA209204 Imaging Manual re quirements. Every a ttempt s hould be made to 
image each subject using an identical acquisition protocol on the same scanner for all imaging time 
points. Cases of suspected radiologic disease progression will be confirmed by an MRI performed 
approximately 4 weeks after the initial radiological assessment of progression.
5.4.1 Computed Tomography Imaging (CT)
Baseline CT assessments s hould be performed within 28 days prior to enrollment. In addition to 
chest, abdomen, pelvis, all known sites of disease should be assessed at baseline. 
Subsequent CT assessments should occur at +/- 7 days per scheduled visits and should include 
chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and all known sites of disease.  The same imaging method used at 
baseline should be used for all CT asse ssments. Subjects will be evaluated for tumor response 
every 6 weeks for Year 1 and every 12 weeks thereafter until progression or discontinuation, 
whichever is later.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 84
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5.4.2 Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
All subjects will receive efficacy assessments with brain MRI at time points specified in Table 
5.1-1 to Table 5.1-4 .  Baseline brain MRI should be performed with 14 days prior to enrollment.
All MRIs should occur at ± 7 days per scheduled visits. Invest igators may obtain more frequent 
follow-up MRI scans as medically indicated.
5.4.3 Confirmation of Scans
Verification of Response: Confirmation of intracranial response will be confirmed by an MRI 
performed approx imately 4 weeks after the initial radiological assessment. If repeat scans confirm 
overall response (OR), then response should be declared using the date of the initial scan. If repeat 
scans do not confirm OR, then the subject is considered not to have had an OR. 
Verification of Progression: Progression of disease s hould be verified in cases where progression 
is equivocal and will be  confirmed by an MRI pe rformed approximately 4 weeks after the initial 
radiological assessment of progression. If repeat scans confirm PD, then progression should be 
declared using the date of the init ial scan. If rep eat scans do not confirm PD, then the subject is 
considered not to have progressive disease.
5.4.4 Algorithms for Response Assessments
5.4.4.1 Primary Efficacy Assessment
The primary endpoint of the study is intracran ial CBR > 6 months in subjects with malignant 
melanoma with intracranial metastases treated wi th nivolumab combined with ipilimumab 
therapy. Tumor response will be based on Investigator assessment using modified RECIST 1.1.
5.4.4.2 Secondary Efficacy Assessments
The secondary efficacy endpoints include extracranial CBR > 6 months using RECIST 1.1 and 
will be based on Investigator assessment.
Additional secondary endpoints are specified in Section 8.4.2 .
 
 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 85
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of  
the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were  
more severe)
•requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing hospitalization (see NOTE
below)
•results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity
•is a congenital anomaly/birth defect 
•is an important medical event (defined as a medical event(s) that may not be immediately life-
threatening or result in death or hospi talization but, ba sed upon appropriate medical and  
scientific judgment, may jeopardize the s ubject or may require intervention [eg, medical,  
surgical] to prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed in the definition above.) Examples  
of such events include, but are not limited t o, intensive treatment in an emergency room or at  
home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or co nvulsions that do not result in  
hospitalization.) Potential drug induced liver injury (DILI) is also considered an important  
medical event. (See Section 6.6 for the definition of potential DILI.)
Suspected transmission of an infectious agent (eg, pathogenic or nonpathogenic) via the study drug  
is an SAE. 
Although pregna ncy, overdose, cancer, and potential dr ug induced liver in jury (DILI) are not  
always serious by regulatory definition, these ev ents must be handled as SAEs. (See Sectio n 6.1.1
for reporting pregnancies).
NOTE : 
The following hospitalizations are not cons idered SAEs in BMS clinical studies: 
•a visit to the emergency room or other hospital department < 24 hours, that does not result in  
admission (unless considered an important medical or life-threatening event)
•elective surgery, planned prior to signing consent
•admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical procedure
•routine h ealth assessmen t requiring admission for baseline/trending of h ealth status (eg, routine  
colonoscopy)
•medical/surgical admission other than to remedy ill h ealth and planned prior to entry into the  
study. Appropriate documentation is required in these cases
•admission encountered for another life circumstance that carries no bearing on h ealth s tatus  
and requires no medical/surgical intervent ion (eg, lack of housing, ec onomic inadequacy,  
caregiver respite, family circumstances, administrative reason).
•Admission for administration of anticancer therapy in the absence of any other SAEs (applies  
to oncology protocols)
6.1.1 Serious Adverse Event Collection and Reporting
Sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 in the IB represent the Reference Safety Inform ation to determine  
expectedness of serious adverse events for expedited reporting. Following the subject’s written  
consent to participate in the study, all SAEs, whether related or not related to study drug, must be 
collected, including those thought to be associated with protocol-specified procedures. All SAEs 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 93
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
must be collected that occur during the screening period and within 100 days of discontinuation of 
dosing.
The investigator should report any SAE that occurs after these time periods and that is believed to 
be related to study drug or protocol-specified procedure. 
An SAE report should be completed for any event where doubt exists regarding its seriousness. 
If the investigator believes that an SAE is not related to study drug, but is potentially related to the 
conditions of the study (such as withdrawal of previous therapy or a complication of a study 
procedure), the relationship should be specified in the narrative section of the SAE Report Form.
SAEs, whether related or not related to study drug, and pregnancies must be reported to BMS (or 
designee) within 24 hours. SAEs must be recorded on the SAE Report Form; pregnancies on a 
Pregnancy Surveillance Form (electronic or paper forms). The preferred method for SAE data 
reporting collection is through the eCRF.  The paper SAE/pregnancy surveillance forms are only 
intended as a back-up option when the eCRF system is not functioning.  In this case, the paper 
forms are to be transmitted via email or confirmed facsimile (fax) transmission to:
SAE Email Address: Worldwide.Safety@BMS.com
SAE Facsimile Number:  See Contact Information list.
For studies capturing SAEs through electronic data cap ture (EDC), electronic submission is the 
required method for reporting. The paper forms should be used and submitted immediately, only 
in the event the electronic system is unavailable for transmission. When paper forms are used, the 
original paper forms are to remain on site.
SAE Telephone Contact (required for SAE and pregnancy reporting): Refer to Contact 
Information list.
If only limited information is initially available, follow-up reports are required. (Note: Follow-up 
SAE reports should include the same investigator term(s) initially reported.) 
If an ongoing SAE changes in its intensity or relationship to st udy drug or if ne w information 
becomes available, a follow-up SAE report should be sent within 24 hours to the BMS (or 
designee) using the same procedure used for transmitting the initial SAE report. 
All SAEs should be followed to resolution or stabilization.
6.2 Nonserious Adverse Events
Anonserious adverse event is an AE not classified as serious.
6.2.1 Nonserious Adverse Event Collection and Reporting
The collection of nonserious AE information should begin at initiation of study drug. Nonserious 
AE information should also be collected from the start of a placebo lead-in period or other 
observational period intended to establish a baseline status for the subjects. 
Nonserious AEs should be followed to resolution or stab ilization, or reported as SAEs if they 
become serious (see Section 6.1.1 ). Follow-up is also required for nonserious AEs that cause 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 94
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
interruption or discontinuation of study drug and for those present at the end of study treatment as 
appropriate. All identified nonserious AEs must be recorded and described on the nonserious AE 
page of the CRF (paper or electronic). 
Completion of supplemental CRFs may be requested for AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities that  
are reported/identified during the course of the study.
6.3 Laboratory Test Result Abnormalities
The following laboratory test result abnormalities  should be captured on the nonserious AE CRF  
page or SAE Report Form (paper or electronic) as appropriate:
•Any laboratory test result that is clinically  significant or meets the definition of an SAE 
•Any laboratory test result abnormality that require d the subject to have study drug discontinued  
or interrupted
•Any laboratory test result abnormality that required the subject to r eceive specific corrective  
therapy.
It is expected that wherever possible, the clinical rather than laboratory term would be used by the  
reporting investigator (eg, anemia versus low hemoglobin value).6.4 Pregnancy
If, following initiation of the study drug, it is subsequently discovered that a st udy subject is  
pregnant or may have been pregnant at the time of study exposure, including during at least 5 half  
lives after product administration, the investigator must immediately no tify the BMS Medical  
Monitor/designee of this event and complete and forward a Pregnancy Surveillance Form to BMS  
Designee within 24 hours and in accordance with SAE reporting procedures described in Section  
6.1.1 .
In most cases, the study drug will be permanently discontinued in an appropriate manner (eg, dose  
tapering if necessary for subject safety).
In the rare event that the benefit of continuing study drug is thought to outweigh the risk, after  
consultation with BMS, the pregnant subject may continue study drug after a thorough discussion  
of benefits and risk with the subject 
Protocol-required procedures for study discontinuation and follow-up must be pe rformed on the  
subject unless contraindicated by pregnancy (eg, x-ray studies). Other appropriate pregnancy  
follow-up procedures should be considered if indicated.
The investigator must immediately notify the BMS (or designee) Medical Monitor of this event  
and complete and forward a Pregnancy Surveillance Form to BMS (or designee) wi thin 24 hours  
and in accordance with SAE reporting procedures describe d in Section 6.1.1. 
Follow-up information regarding the course of the pregnancy, including perinatal and neonatal  
outcome and, where applicable, offspring infor mation must be reported on the Pregnancy  
Surveillance Form.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 95
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Cohort A will enroll asymptomatic subjects (n ~ 90), and Cohort B w ill enroll symptomatic
subjects (defined in Section 3.3.1 ).
Table 8.1-1 presents the clinical bene fit rates (CBRs) that would have to be observed to yield 
clinically meaningful results with respect to the lower bounds of th e Clopper-Pearson exact  
two sided 90% and 95% CI. The planned sample size ensures that the maximum width of the exact  
90% CI for any given CBR estimate does not exceed 18% and the maximum width of the exact  
95% CI for any given CBR estimate does not exceed 20%.
Table 8.1-1: CA209204: Clinical Benefit Rates – two sided 90% confidence 
interval (Clopper-Pearson)
Nivolumab + Ipilimumab
(n=110) 
Clinically 
meaningful CBRObserved CBR Clopper-Pearson 
exact two-side 90% 
CI Clopper-Pearson exact 
two-side 95% CI 
Brain 
(intracranial)40% 53/110 (48.2%) 
57/110 (51.8%)(40.0%, 56.4%)
(43.6%, 60.0%)(38.5%, 57.9%)(42.1%, 61.5%)
Systemic
(extracranial)/Global(intracranial+extracranial)50% 65/110 (59.1%) (50.8%, 67.0%) (49.3%, 68.4%)
CBR = Clinical Benefit Rate
If the observed intracranial CBR rate is 51.8%, the sample size of 110 will achieve 80.4% power  
to detect a difference of 11.8% (51.8% versus 40% historical intracranial CBR rate) with a type I  
error rate of 0.10 for the two-sided binomial test.  
8.2 Populations for Analysis
•All Enrolled Sub jects: All subjects who signed an informed consent form and were registered  
into the IVRS
•All Treated Subjects: All subjects who received at least one dose of any study medication. 
  
8.3 Endpoint  Definitions
8.3.1 Tumor Assessment Endpoints
8.3.1.1 Best Overall Response (BOR) per Subject 
The best overall response is determined once all the data for the subject is known. It is defined as  
the best response designation, as determined by the investigator, recorded between the date of first  
dose of study drug and the date of objectively doc umented progression or the date of subsequent  
therapy, whichever occurs first. For subjects without documented progression or subsequent  
therapy, all available response designations will contribute to the BOR assessment.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 97
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
In this study, BOR is specified for the intracranial, extracranial, and global compartments based 
on the (1) modified RECIST 1.1 criteria (intracran ial), (2) RECIST 1.1 criteria (extracranial), (3) 
combination of modified RECIST 1.1 criteria and RECIST 1.1 criteria (global). Image assessment 
criteria (modified RECIST 1.1 and RECIST 1.1) are presented in Appendix 3.
For the assessment of BOR, all available assessments per subject are considered. 
The best overall response for each patient is d etermined from the sequence of overall (lesion) 
responses according to the following rules, listed in order of priority:
•CR = At least two determinations of CR at least 4 weeks apart before progression.
•PR = At least two determinations of PR or better at least 4 weeks apart before progression 
(and not qualifying for a CR).
•SD = At least one SD assessment ≥6 months after start of treatment.
•PD = At least two determinations of PD at l east 4 weeks apart after start of treatment (and 
not qualifying for CR, PR or SD).
The BOR for each patient will also be determined by the IRRC as specified within the CA209204 
Imaging Review Charter.
8.3.1.2 Overall Survival
Overall Survival (OS) is defined as the time from the date of the start of treatment until the date of 
death. For those subjects who have not died, OS will be censored at the rec orded last date of subject 
contact, and subjects with a missing recorded last date of contact will be censored at the last date 
the subject was known to be alive.
8.4 Endpoints
8.4.1 Primary Endpoint
Intracranial clinical benef it rate (CBR) defined as the proportion of patients, whose best overall 
response according to modified RECIST1.1, is either complete response (CR), a par tial res ponse 
(PR) or stable disease (SD).
The primary endpoint is  intracranial CBR. It is defined as the proportion of all treated s ubjects 
whose best overall response is either a CR or PR or whose best overall response was SD with 
duration of >6 months, as determined by modified RECIST 1.1 criteria for index intracranial
lesions based on investigator review.  
8.4.2 Secondary Endpoint(s)
Secondary endpoints are as follows: 
•Intracranial ORR and intracranial PFS per modified RECIST 1.1 criteria; 
•Extracranial CBR, extracranial ORR, extracranial PFS per RECIST 1.1 criteria
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 98
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Global (intracranial + extracranial) CBR, global ORR, and global PFS per a combination 
of modified RECIST 1.1 criteria for intracranial lesions and RECIST 1.1 for extracranial
disease
•OS
•Safety and tolerability will be measured by the incidence of AE adverse events, serious 
adverse events (SAE), deaths, and laboratory  abnormalities.
Overall survival (OS) is defined as the time from fi rst dosing date to the date of death, w ill be 
estimated using the Kaplan-Meier product-limit method, with subjects censored at their last known 
date alive.  
Progression-free survival (PFS) is defined as th e time between the date of first dose of study drug
and the first date of documented confirmed progressi on, as determined by the investigator, or death 
due to any cause, whichever occurs first. Subjects who die without a reported progression will be 
considered to have progressed on the date of their death. Subjects who did not progress or die will 
be censored on the date of their last evaluable tumor assessment. Sub jects who did not have any 
on study tumor assessments and did not die will be censored on the date of first dose of study drug. 
Subjects who started anti-cancer therapy without a prior reported progression will be censored on 
the date of their last evaluable tumor assessment prior to the initiation of subsequent anti-cancer 
therapy.
Overall response r ate (ORR) is defined as the number of subjects who achieve a best overall 
response of complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) divided by the number of treated 
subjects. The best overall response is defined as the best response designation recorded between 
the date of first study dosing date and the date of progression, or the date of subsequent anticancer 
therapy (including tumor-directed radiotherapy  and tumor-directed surgery), whichever occurs 
first.
Safety and tolerability will be measured by the incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events, 
deaths, and laboratory abnormalities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 99
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
version 4.0 (CTCAE v4). Additionally, serious adverse events (SAE) w ill be re ported from the 
time of consent forward for all subjects. The analysis of safety will be based on the frequency of 
AEs and their severity for all treated subjects. Worst toxicity grades per subject will be used in the 
summary for AEs and laboratory measurements by using the CTCAE v4. 
Safety analyses will be summarized in all treated subjects by subgroup (prior to st udy with or 
without SRT and on study with or wit hout SRT) and for the overall population.  All treatment 
emergent AEs, drug-related AEs, SAEs and drug-rel ated SAEs will be tabulated using worst grade 
per NCI CTCAE by system organ class and preferred term. On-study lab parameters including 
hematology, chemistry, liver function and renal function w ill be su mmarized using worst grade 
per NCI CTCAE criteria.
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.5.9 Interim Analyses
To assess safety and tolerability, an interim analysis was conducted after 20 subjects completed 
induction treatment or discontinued treatment for any reason. At the completion of the interim 
analysis by the steering committee, the study drug tr eatment was deemed safe in asymptomatic 
patients. Per Amendment 02 (August 2016), the patie nt population was expanded to include Cohort 
B which will enroll approximately 20 symptomatic patients as specified in Section 3.3.1.
9 STUDY MANAGEMENT
9.1 Compliance9.1.1 Compliance with the Protocol and Protocol Revisions
The study shall be conducted as described in th is approved protocol. All revisions to the protocol 
must be discussed with, and be prepared by, BMS. The inve stigator should not implement any 
deviation or change to the protocol without  prior review and documented approval/favorable 
opinion from the IRB/IEC of an amendment, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate 
hazard(s) to study subjects. 
If a deviation or change to a protocol is implemented to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) prior to 
obtaining IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion, as soon as possible the deviation or change will be 
submitted to:
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 103
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•IRB/IEC for review and approval/favorable opinion
•BMS
•Regulatory Authority(ies), if required by local regulations
Documentation of approval signed by the chairperson or designee of the IRB(s)/IEC(s) must be 
sent to BMS.
If an amendment substantially alters the study desi gn or increases the potential risk to the subject: 
(1) the consent form must be revised and su bmitted to the IRB(s)/IEC(s) for review and 
approval/favorable opinion; (2) the revised form must be used to obtain consent from subjects 
currently enrolled in the study if they are a ffected by the amendment; and (3) the new form must 
be used to obtain consent from new subjects prior to enrollment.
If the revision is done via an administrative letter, investigators must inform their IRB(s)/IEC(s).
9.1.2 Monitoring
BMS representatives will review data centrally to identify potential issues to determine a schedule 
of on-site visits for targeted review of study records. 
Representatives of BMS must be allowed to visit all study site locations periodically to assess the 
data quality and study integrity. On site they will  review study records and directly compare them 
with source documents, discuss the conduct of the st udy with the investigator, and verify that the 
facilities remain acceptable. Certain CRF pages and/or electronic files may serve as the source 
documents.
In addition, the study may be evaluated by BMS internal auditors and government inspectors who 
must be allowed access to CRFs, source documents, other st udy f iles, and study facilities . BMS 
audit reports will be kept confidential.
The investigator must notify BMS promptly of any inspections scheduled by regu latory aut horities, 
and promptly forward copies of inspection reports to BMS. 
9.1.2.1 Source Documentation
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that the source data are accurate, legible, 
contemporaneous, original and attributable, whether  the data are hand-written on paper or entered 
electronically. If source data are cr eated (first entered), modified, maintained, archived, retrieved, 
or transmitted electronically via computer ized systems (and/or any other kind of electronic 
devices) as part of regulated clinical trial activities, such systems must be compliant with all 
applicable laws and regulations governing use of electronic records and/ or electronic signatures. 
Such systems may include, but are not limited to, electronic medical/health records (EMRs/EHRs), 
adverse event tracking/reporting, protocol required assessments, and/or drug accountability 
records).
When paper records from such systems are used in place of electronic format to perform regulated 
activities, such paper records should be certified copies. A certified copy consists of a copy of 
original information that has been verified, as indicated by a dated signature, as an exact copy 
having all of the same attributes and i nformation as the original. 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 104
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
9.1.3 Investigational Site Training
Bristol-Myers Squibb w ill provide quality invest igational staff training prior to study initiation. 
Training topics will include but are not limited to: GCP, AE reporting, study details and procedure, 
electronic CRFs, study documentation, inform ed consent, and enrollment of WOCBP.
9.2 Records
9.2.1 Records Retention
The investigator must retain all study rec ords and source docu ments for the maximum period 
required by applicable regulations and guidelin es, or institution procedures, or for the period 
specified by BMS, whichever is longer. The investigator must contact BMS prior to destroying 
any records associated with the study.
BMS will notify the investigator when the study records are no longer needed.
If the investigator withdraws from the study (eg, relocation, retirement), the records sh all be 
transferred to a mutually agreed upon designee (eg, another investigator, IRB). Notice of such 
transfer will be given in writing to BMS. 
9.2.2 Study Drug Records 
It is the responsibility of the investigator to en sure that a current disposition record of study drug 
(inventoried and dispensed) is maintained at the study site to include investigational product and 
the following non-investigational product(s): ipilimumab. Records or logs must comply with 
applicable regulations and guidelines and should include:
•amount received and placed in storage area
•amount currently in storage area
•label identification number or b atch number 
•amount dispensed to and returned by each subject, including unique subject identifiers
•amount transferred to another area/site for dispensing or storage
•nonstudy disposition (eg, lost, wasted) 
•amount destroyed at study site, if applicable
•amount returned to BMS
•retain samples for bioavailability/bioequivalence, if applicable 
•dates and initials of person responsible for Investigational P roduct dispen sing/accountability, 
as per the Delegation of Authority Form.
BMS will provide forms to facilitate inventory control if the investigational site does not have an 
established system that meets these requirements.
9.2.3 Case Report Forms
An investigator is required to prepare and maintain adequate and accurate case histories designed 
to record all observations and other d ata pertinent to the investig ation on each i ndividual treated 
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 105
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
or entered as a control in the investigation. Data that are derived from source documents and 
reported on the CRF must be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies must be 
explained. Additional clinical information may be coll ected and analyzed in an effort to enhance 
understanding of product safety. CRFs may be reque sted for AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities 
that are reported or identified during the course of the study.
For sites using the BMS electronic data capture tool, electronic CRFs will be prepared for all data 
collection fields except for fields specific to SAEs  and pregnancy, which will be reported on the 
paper or electronic SAE form and Pregnancy Surveillance form, respectively. Spaces may be left 
blank only in those circumstances permitted  by study-specific CRF completion guidelines 
provided by BMS. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify  subjects must be protected, respecting the privacy 
and confidentiality rules in accordance with  the applicable regulatory requirement(s).
The investigator will maintain a signature sheet to document signatures and initials of all persons 
authorized to make entries and/or corrections on CRFs. 
The completed CRF, including any paper or electronic SAE/pregnancy CRFs, must be promptly 
reviewed, signed, and dated by the investigator or qualified physician who is a subinvestigator and 
who is delegated this task on the Delegation of  Authority Form. For electronic CRFs, review and 
approval/signature is completed electronically th rough the BMS electronic data capture tool. The 
investigator must retain a copy of the CRFs including records of the changes and corrections.
Each individual electronically signing electronic CRFs must meet BMS training requirements and 
must only access the BMS electronic data capture tool using the unique user account provided by 
BMS. User accounts are not to be shared or reassigned to other individuals.
9.3 Clinical Study Report and Publications
A Signatory Investigator must be selected to sign the clinical study report. 
For this protocol, the Signatory Investigator will be selected as appropriate based on the following 
criteria:
•External Principal Investigator designated at protocol development.
The data collected during this study are confidential and proprietary to BMS. Any publications or 
abstracts arising from this study require approval by BMS prior to publication or presentation and 
must adhere to BMS’s publication requirements as  set forth in the approved clinical trial agreement 
(CTA). All draft publications, including abstracts or d etailed summaries of any proposed 
presentations, must be submitted to BMS at the earliest practicable time for review, but at any 
event not less than 30 days before submission or presentation unless otherwise set forth in the 
CTA. BMS shall have the right to delete any confidential or proprietary information contained in 
any proposed presentation or abstract and may delay publication for up to 60 days for purposes of 
filing a patent application.
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 106
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
10 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Term Definition
Complete Abstinence If one form of contraception is required, Complete 
Abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heterosexual 
intercourse and is an acceptable form of contraception for all 
study drugs. Female subjects must continue to have 
pregnancy tests.  Acceptable alternate methods of highly 
effective contraception must be discussed in the event that the subject chooses to forego complete abstinence.
If two forms of contraception is required, Complete 
abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heterosexual 
intercourse and is an acceptable form of contraception for all 
study drugs. Subjects who choose complete abstinence are 
not required to use a second method of contraception, but 
female subjects must continue to have pregnancy tests. 
Acceptable alternate methods of highly effective 
contraception must be discussed in the event that the subject chooses to forego complete abstinence.
Expanded definition Complete abstinence as defined as 
complete avoidance of heterosexual intercourse is an 
acceptable form of contraception for all study drugs. This also 
means that abstinence is the preferred and usual lifestyle of the 
patient. This does not mean periodic abstinence (eg, calendar, 
ovulation, symp tothermal, profession of abstinence for entry 
into a clinical trial,  post-ovulation methods) and withdrawal, 
which are not acceptable methods of contraception. Subjects 
who choose complete abstinence are not required to use a 
second method of contraception, but female subjects must 
continue to have pregnanc y tests. Acceptable alternate 
methods of highly effective contraception must be discussed 
in the event that the subject chooses to forego complete 
abstinence
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 107
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
11 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Term Definition
AE adverse event
AI accumulation index
AI_AUC AUC Accumulation Index; ratio of AUC(TAU) at steady state to 
AUC(TAU) after the first dose
AI_Cmax Cmax Accumulation Index; ratio of Cmax at steady state to Cmax after 
the first dose
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
ANOVA analysis of variance
aPTT activated partial thromboplastin time
AST aspartate aminotransferase
AT aminotransaminases
AUC area under the concentration-time curve
A-V atrioventricular
β-HCG beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin
BMI body mass index
BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb
BP blood pressure
C Celsius
C12 concentration at 12 hours
C24 concentration at 24 hours
Ca++ calcium
CBC complete blood count
CBR Clinical benefit ratio
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CI confidence interval
C1- chloride
CLcr creatinine clearance
CLR renal clearance
CLT total body clearance
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 108
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
cm centimeter
Cmax, CMAX maximum observed concentration
Cmin, CMIN trough observed concentration
CNS Central nervous system
CRF Case Report Form, paper or electronic
Ctrough Trough observed plasma concentration
CV coefficient of variation
CYP cytochrome p-450
D/C discontinue
dL deciliter
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF Electronic Case Report Form
EDC Electronic Data Capture
EEG electroencephalogram
eg exempli gratia (for example)
ESR Expedited Safety Report
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FSH follicle stimulating hormone
g gram
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GGT gamma-glu tamyl transferase
GFR glomerular filtration rate
h hour
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCV hepatitis C virus
HCO3- bicarbonate
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HR heart rate
HRT hormone replacement therapy
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 109
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
ICD International Classification of Diseases
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation 
ie id est (that is)
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IMP investigational medicinal products
IND Investigational New Drug Exemption
IRB Institutional Review Board
IU International Unit
IV intravenous
K+ potassium
kg kilogram
L liter
LD longest dimension
LDH lactate dehydrogenase
ln natural logarithm
mg milligram
Mg++ magnesium
MIC minimum inhibitory concentration
min minute
mL milliliter
mmHg millimeters of mercury
MS mass spectrometry
MTD maximum tolerated dose
μg microgram
N number of subjects or observations
Na+ sodium
N/A not applicable
ng nanogram
NIMP non-investigational medicinal products 
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 110
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209204
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
OS Overall survival
PD pharmacodynamics
PK pharmacokinetics
PO per os (by mouth route of administration)
PT prothrombin time
PTT partial thromboplastin time
QC quality control
QD, qd quaque die, once daily
RBC red blood cell
SAE serious adverse event
SD standard deviation
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
sp. species
Subj subject
t temperature
T time
TID, tid ter in die, three times a day
WBC white blood cell
WHO World Health Organization
WOCBP women of childbearing potential
xg times gravity
Revised Protocol No: 03
Date: 13-Nov-2017 111
4.0 Approved 930080194 4.0v