The Effectiveness of Peer -to-Peer Community Support to Promote Aging in Place  
 
Principal  Investigator : Jane Mahoney  
 
Protocol Version Date : 10/30/2017  
 
Coordinating Center : University of Wisconsin  
 
Co-Investigators  
KyungMann Kim -University of Wisconsin  
Laura Pinsoneault - Alliance for Children and Families  
Jennifer Frumer - Alpert Jewish Family and Children’s Service  
Katy Allen - Community Place  
Paul Castro - Jewish Family Service of Los Angeles  
 
Study Coordinator: Amy Amessoudji  
 
Funding Sponsor: Patient Ce ntered Outcomes Research Network (PCORI)  
 
 
 
Statistical Considerations  
 In this se ction, we outline in detail the strengths of our proposed sampling an d analysis plan 
and how it is designed to address and minimize the potential limitations of our study design.  
Specifically, we elaborate on how we plan to make our samples in the peer -support and 
standard community services group comparable, despite the fact we cannot randomize all 
participants ; how we will control for differences  across sites in our analyses ; and how we will 
deal with missing data (including loss to follow -up). 
  
Analysi s Plan The mixed experimental  and quasi -experimental, matched group comparison 
design allows us to conduct three different analyses to accomplish both Aims 1 and 2: (1) 
comparing the effectiveness of peer support to standard community services at 6 months 
comb ining data from all three sites; (2) analyzing the data from AJFCS and the combined data 
from the other two sites to assess the internal consi stency of the effectiveness across the 
randomized and non -randomized designs but also to assess whether the effect size is different 
between the two components of the study design; (3) analyzing data from AJFCS to test 
whether peer -support is more effectiv e when provided for 12 months compared to 6 months. For 
the third analysis  using AJFCS data only,  we will compare 12 vs. 6 month “dose” -levels of the 
peer-to-peer support intervention changes in the rates of health care utilization and nursing 
home placeme nt and self -rated health, wellness, depression, and anxiety of between baseline 
and 12 months in group  randomized to get peer support relative to  changes i n these same 
measures between 6 and 12 months  in the group randomized to standard community services;  
as reminder this group received standard services for 6 months and then transitioned into  
receiving peer -support  between 6 and 12 months (see Figure 3).    
     The primary analyses for comparative effectiveness will be based  on two -sample 
independent tests such as t -test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, Fisher’s exact test or chi -square test 
of the outcome measures. The choice of analytic method will depend on whether the outcome 
measures are continuous or categorical.  These tests w ill be performed at a two -tailed 
significance level of 0.05 without adjustment for multiplicity. Health care utilization and nursing 
home placement rates and self -rated health, wellness, depression, and anxiety between the two 
groups will be compared using  a two -sample test again at a two -tailed significance level 0.05. 
Subsequent to the primary analyses, regression analyses will be performed for the same 
outcome measures adjusting for stratification factors and other potential confounders that might 
influence the outcomes, including an  indicator for site.  Linear or gen eralized linear models such 
as logistic and Poisson regression models will be used depending on the outcome measures. 
As the intermediary measures of health and overall wellness such as self -rated health, 
depression, and anxiety in Aim 2 may serve as important mediators of the effect of the peer -to-
peer support intervention on the primary outcomes measures in Aim 1 , we will use exploratory 
mixed -effects regression techniques and structural equ ation models to test and quantify whether 
and to what extent the effect of the intervention is mediated by intermediary measures o f health 
and overall wellness. We expect missing data due to random drop -out of participants before 
month 12 and to a lesser e xtent loss due to death of participants before month 12.  Missing data 
will be handled as per the recent National Research Council report on the topic.77 Death before 
month 12 will be considered a competing event, and will be handled using the appropriate 
method.78 
     Given the divers e nature of our sample, we plan to carry out the statistical analyses for Aims 
1 and 2 for a limited number of subgroups.  We will conduct subgroup analyses based on 
race/ethnicity (African American, Hispanic and non -Hispanic  White), gender (male vs. female), 
age group (< 70, 70 -80 and ≥ 80 years), and language (English - vs. Spanish -speaking) and by 
the three sites.  These subgroup analyses will be conducted to evaluate the internal consistency 
of intervention effect, and subgr oup by intervention interaction tests will be used to assess the 
internal consistency.  
 
Randomization and matching  In order to reduce potential bias further, participants from the 
AJFCS of Palm Beach will be allocated either to peer -to-peer support (Intervention) or standard 
community support (Control) in a 1:1 ratio using permuted block randomization, stratified by 
age, gender and race/ethnicity. Barring randomization in JFS of LA and Community Place of 
Greater Rochester, older adults already partic ipating in peer -to-peer support and those on the 
waiting list will be matched on age, gender and race/ethnicity to mitigate potential differences 
between the two groups.  In order to avoid reporting/ascertainment bias, calls will be made to all 
participati ng older adults and support staff at 3 and 9 months as outlined in Figure 4 above.  
 
Sample Si ze Justification Given the total sample size of 720 at -risk older adults, the study has 
0.80/0.85/0.90 power to detect the effect size of 0.209/0.223/0.242 for the primary outco me 
measure of the annualized rate of hospitalization, ED use and institutionalization at a two -tailed 
significance level 0.05.  The effect size here is defined as the difference in the mean annualized 
rate of hospitalization, ED use and institutionalizatio n between the two groups divided by the 
standard deviation of the annualized rate assumed to be common in the two groups.  Due to 
random drop -out or loss to competing ev ent of death, the study will have less power to detect 
the stated effect sizes or will have the stated power for larger effect sizes.  
  
 