Protocol Title:   SCH: Context -aware Freezing of Gait mitigation in real -world setting  
 
Identification : NCT Number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Unique Protocol Id HM20020085  
 
PI: Ingrid Pretzer -Aboff 
 
Version D ate: 6/13/2023  
 
IRB appr oval date : 7/31/2023  
1 
 
Updated 13JUN 2023   Version 3.0 Full Study Title: SCH: Context -aware Freezing of Gait mitigation in real -world setting  
PROTOCOL DOCUMENT   
4.2. Study Design:  
 
4.2.a.    Narrative Study Description  
Design.  This is a single site clinical trial involving 3 tasks  with the purpose of development and testing 
feasibility of a device.  In total, 32 participants with Parkinson’s disease (PD)  who experience freezing of gait 
(FoG) will complete this 3-year study.  We will enroll up to 50 participants to account for screen  fails and  
withdrawals.  
 
Procedures . All procedures are performed exclusively for research purposes . After obtaining consent from the 
PD patient, a member of the research team will administer the  Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test to 
determine cogni tive eligibility (must score at 21 or higher to be  eligible). If the participant is eligible, they will be 
assigned a code number, then asked to complete a demographic  form, a physical performance test (10 -Meter 
Walk test) and the remaining scales in Table  1, to capture relevant physical  and neuropsychological 
covariates.  
 
Table 1. Physical and Neuropsychological Scales  (total participant time for all the below measures is 30 minutes ). 
 
Factor  Validated Scale  
Cognition  Montreal Cognitive Assessment [ 1] 
Fatigue  Parkinson’s Disease Fatigue Scale [ 2] 
Balance Confidence  Activities -specific Balance Confidence (ABC) scale [3]  
Fear of Falling  Falls Efficacy Scale -International [ 4] 
Quality of Life  Parkinson’s Disease Questionnaire -8 [5] 
Freezing of Gait  New Freezing of Gait questionnaire [ 6] 
Nonmotor Symptoms  MDS -UPDRS part 1 questionnaire [7] 
Walking Speed and Step Length  10 Meter Walk Test [8]  
 
All 32 participants will be screened with the same inclusion and exclusion criteria described in section 2.2 
above.  All will undergo the same consenting procedure described above. Each study participant will wear a 
safety belt  and have trained spotters to deter falls. The specific procedures for each of the 3 tasks are as 
follows:  
 
In Task 1 , a convenience sample of five participants will be recruited for CNN model training. For each patient,  
we plan to collect data for 2.8 hours, among which at least 17 minutes will be FoG data. Each participant will 
be asked to wear one UG motion sensor (watch like device with a soft band) around each ankle to collect raw 
data that will be used to detect FoG and develop models. They will be video -taped (for the purpose of 
validating the  FoG detection models) as they walk each of the five 5 -meter FoG triggering courses illustrated in 
Figure 1. All  assessments in Task 1 will be performed on PD participants who are OFF their PD medications 
(overnight  washout) to maximize the amount of time spent in FoG, thereby minimizing the length of evaluation 
time [19]. It  is common in both clinic al practice and research studies to bring PD patients in for assessments off 
their PD  medications; thus, this is not anticipated to be a barrier to recruitment. The 6 p articipants in Task 1 will 
not participate  in Task 2 & 3.   
 
Task #1: Each subject is exp ected to spend up to 4 hours in the clinical lab, one visit. This can be divided into 
two sessions if the subject prefers.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Updated 13JUN 2023   Version 3.0   
 
 
Figure 1: Five FoG Triggering Scenarios shall include  a 5-meter  walking path with one of 5 triggers inserted into  the path: (A) walking  
through a narrow passage, (B)  turning 540 degrees, (C) approaching a destination (e.g.,  chair), (D) walking while dual tasking (e.g., 
performing a  verbal fluency challenge while walking), and (E) a time sensitive task such as walking  through an elevator door  
before it closes.  
 
 
Table 2. Task 2 Neuropsychological Scales (total participant time for all the below measures is  88 to 118 minutes).  
 
Anxiety  State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI - State & Trait)  [9] 
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS -State)  [10] 
Semi -structured qualitative interview  
Salivary Alpha -Amylase  [11-13] 
Sleep  RegUlarity, Satisfaction, Alertness, Timing, Efficiency, and Duration (RU SATED)  [14] 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)  [15] 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality index (PSQI)  [16] 
Actigraph  
Consensus Sleep Diary  [17] 
Self-Efficacy  General Self -Efficacy Scale (GSE)  [18] 
Illness Self -Concept  Illness Self -Concept Scale (ISCS)  [19-20] 
 
The goals of Task 2  are to (1) determine the optimal frequency and vibration settings t o mitigate freezing of 
gait (FoG) and (2) explore the role of neuropsychological factors such as sleep and anxiety in FoG outcomes 
(see Table 1 & 2). Thus, response surface  methodology is proposed. Specifically, a central composite design 
(CCD) [38] will b e used to determine the best  dose of vibration (freq uency and amplitude) for each of five 
common triggers for FoG (Figure 1). Estimating the  response surface requires only a small sample of human 
participants, e.g., one participant for each design point  with five repeats at the center point. For the current 
project, a convenience sample of only 13 participants with  PD who experience FoG in at least two of the 
scenarios, confirmed by a neurologist will be needed. The 13  participants will be asked to walk thr ough each of 
five, 5 -meter walking courses that will each include one of the  triggering scenarios. Each of the 13 PD 
participants with FoG will be randomly assigned to one of 9 different ff and va settings as prescribed by the 
CCD. In the current case, the  goal is to estimate the ff and va settings that  will maximize the difference 
between the baseline (no vibration) and post -treatment time spent in a FoG state  for each of the 5 triggering 
scenarios individually and in total. Measurements will be taken once  at baseline and  again in triplicate as they 
walk the paths wearing the FoG detection/vibration device.  
 
Additional activities for Task 2 participants:  
Visit #1: After the consenting process is completed,  a sample of saliva will be collected (see procedure below) 
to measure salivary alpha amylase  levels at baseline. The UG device and PDVibe3 will be placed on the 
participant s who will then perform a 10-meter  walk test on site  and a baseline walk of the fiv e triggering 

3 
 
Updated 13JUN 2023   Version 3.0 scenarios . They will complete the  questionnaires /scales listed  in tables 1 and 2 . Participants will then be 
instructed on how to wear the actigraph device on their dominant wrist ( Actigraph GT9X Link)  to collect 
objective sleep data  for up to 14 days prior to their Visit #2. They will also be instructed on how to complete the 
sleep diary during the same time period during which the actigraph is collecting sleep data. Visit # 1 will last 
approximately 90 minutes.  
Participants will wear  the ActiGraph GT9X Link for  up to  14 consecutive, 24 -hour days beginning at  baseline , 
pre-intervention. Actigraphs are devices that are worn on the dominant wrist and contain a built -in 
accelerometer that records movements in order to estimate sleep param eters, including total sleep time, sleep -
onset latency, wake after sleep onset, and sleep efficiency. Sleep data will be analyzed using the ActiLife 6.0 
data analysis software platform and bedtime and waketime will be verified via sleep diary -reported data . Prior 
to receiving the actigraph, participants will receive verbal instructions regarding the purpose of the actigraph 
(i.e., that the actigraph records movement to estimate sleep parameters) as well as appropriate use (i.e. should 
be worn on the dominan t wrist at all times for  up to  fourteen consecutive days unless bathing, swimming, etc.). 
Participants will be provided with moleskin as necessary to minimize risk of skin abrasion. Participants will be 
encouraged to reach out to study personnel with any q uestions or concerns related to wearing the actigraph 
device while at home.  
 
Participant saliva will be collected with the aim to assess salivary alpha amylase, a biomarker shown to be a 
reliable indicator of anxiety and stress in individuals with PD. Saliva sample collection will occur three times 
over the course of Task 2 - at base line (Visit #1), pre walking tasks and post walking tasks (Visit #2). Saliva will 
be collected using a passive drool method, a method of saliva collection that requires participants to lean 
forward and allow saliva to naturally pool into the collection ves sel rather than actively spitting. This method of 
saliva collection allows for whole saliva to be collected, avoiding localized salivary secretions and providing for 
a more consistent biospecimen. Saliva samples will be collected utilizing Salimetrics Sali va Collection Aid, a 
mechanism which fits securely into a collection vial designed to reduce sample foaming and facilitates direct 
sample collection and storage. Samples will be refrigerated within 30 minutes of initial collection and frozen at 
or below -20 degrees Celsius within 4 hours of collection. Samples can be stored for up to 6 months and will be 
stored until all participant samples are collected, at which point an alpha amylase assay will be run. Prior to 
participating in saliva collection, partici pants will receive verbal instructions on how to correctly provide a saliva 
sample. Participants will be advised to avoid eating a major meal for at least one hour and will be asked to 
rinse their mouths thoroughly with water 10 minutes prior to collection .  
 
Visit #2:  In addition to what is described in Task #1 above, saliva sample s will be collected from participants 
before and after their participation in the walking tasks.  They will also complete 2 surveys, the STAI -State and 
PANAS -State  after they fin ish walking. The sleep diary that was filled out at home will be collected from 
participant and actigraphy will be retrieved. Following completion of walking tasks , participants will be invited to 
schedule a time to engage in a semi -structured qualitative interview virtually or by phone . Visit #2 will last 
approximately  120 to 180  minutes ). 
Visit #3: Participants will engage  in a semi -structured interview via telephone or virtually according to 
participant preference. The interview will ask participants to reflect on and engage in discussion related to 
experiences of FoG; perceptions of the association between sleep, anxiety, and FoG; illness self -concept; 
mobility self -efficacy; general feedback about the interview and  participation in the study overall  (see submitted 
interview protocol document) . Visit #3 will last approximately 30 to 60 minutes.  
 
Participants will be ON their PD medications during this phase of testing. The study staff, except for the PC, 
will be blin ded to the treatment allocation. The PC will be setting the VibeForward vibration parameters ( ff and 
va) for each participant according to a randomized list generated by the co -I and biostatistician, Dr. R.K. 
Elswick Jr. All participants will wear safety b elts and have trained spotters to deter falls.  Participants will be 
asked to also participate in Task 3.  
 
Task #2: Each subject is expected to spend up to 5 hours in the clinical setting, across three visits . 
4 
 
Updated 13JUN 2023   Version 3.0 In Task 3  we will test the device at the optim al vibration setting in a “real world” set ting. Due to the innovative 
nature of studying this device in a real -world environment, no pilot data exists from which to run a traditional 
power analysis. However, Van Belle proposed that a minimum of 12 observat ions should be used to calculate 
confidence intervals based on the t -statistic with n – 1 degrees of freedom. This rule is based on the fact that 
the half -width confidence interval for the mean decreases rapidly up to n = 12, at which point the decrease is  
less dramatic and the half -width curve begins to asymptotically decrease. Thus, in order to ensure the good 
estimates of the means and variances (pre - and post -) [39] a convenience sample of thirteen  volunteers who 
have been diagnosed with PD by a neurologist and who exhibit FoG will be asked to participate in the testing  
of the device.  
 
Participants will walk the path way once with out vibration  (pre-treatment ), and then three times with vibration  
(post treatment) . They will be ON their medications.  We will compare the differences in the duration and 
number of FoG episodes, time walking through the path, average  stride length, and speed of walking. It is 
anticipated that “pre” versus “post” trials for each of these five variables  will be compared usi ng a paired t -test.  
 
All participants in Task 3 will be described in terms of demographics,  disease, and psychological 
characteristics as in Task 2. Detailed field notes will be made of observations from  study staff and comments 
from subjects to record th e extent and type of unpredictable challenges faced by each  participant.  Qualitative 
questions will be asked after each participant finishes the walking portion of the study. If a participant from 
Task 2 does not participate in Task 3, they will be replaced. The replacement will then complete the baseline 
walking portion and scales (Table 1) from  Task  2 at a separate visit prior to completing Task 3. Patients from 
Task 2 will b e reconsented for Task 3.  
 
When the PC contacts participants who have already completed Task 2  to participate in Task 3, the PC  will ask 
if they want to participate in a follow -up phone call with the interviewer  they spoke with earlier . If yes,  the 
interviewer will contact the  participants and will share the main overall themes that surfaced from qualitative 
analysis of completed interviews. Participants will be asked (via phone, zoom, or in -person) to provide their 
feedback on these overall themes.  Their feedback will then be incorporated into final analysis and 
interpretation of qualitative interviews. It is anticipated that this will take from 15 – 30 minutes. Participants can 
decline this portion of the study.  
 
Participants in Task 3 will walk th e 5 triggering scenarios (Figure 1) in a community setting  (at the Short Pump 
Town Center)  while wearing the UG device and the PDVibe3. Prior to walking in the community setting, 
participants will be consented and complete the questionnaires in Table 3 in a private VCU space  (at the Short 
Pump Pavilion clinic).   
 
Table 3. Physical and Neuropsychological Scales (total participant time for all the below measures is 30 minutes ). 
 
Factor  Validated Scale  
Cognition  Montreal Cognitive Assessment [1]  
Freezing of  Gait New Freezing of Gait questionnaire [6]  
Motor Symptoms  MDS -UPDRS part 3 [7]  
Walking Speed and Step Length  10 Meter Walk Test [8]  
Fatigue  Rating of Fatigue Scale  [21] 
 
Task #3: Each subject that completed Task 2 is expected to spend up to 5 hours in the community setting  
(outside setting) , and clinical setting, across two  visits. Each subject that did not complete Task 2 is expected 
to spend up to 8 hours in the VCU clinical setting and an outside community setting, across two visits.  
 