APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 1 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormCOMPOUND AUTHORIZATION AND CONSENT FOR PARTICIPATION IN A  
RESEARCH  PROJECT
YALE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE – YALE-NEW HAVEN HOSPITAL
200 FR. 4
Study Title:  A Phase  2 Study of MK-3475 in Patients with Metastatic Melanoma  and Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer with Untreated Brain Metastases
Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger, MD
Study Doctor’s Phone Number: 203-737-2572
24-Hour Phone Number:  203-200-6622
Study Doctor’s Mailing Address: PO BOX 20856, New Haven, CT   06520
Funding Source: Yale Cancer Center and  Merck  and Co., Inc.
Invitation to  Participate and  Description of Project
You are invited to take part in a research  study. The research study is designed to explore 
whether or not an investigational drug, pembrolizumab (also known as MK-3475 or 
KEYTRUDA®), has beneficial effects  and is safe for use in subjects with metastatic melanoma or 
non-small cell lung cancer  who also have  untreated brain  metastases. You have been invited to 
take part because you have been diagnosed with metastatic melanoma  or non-small  cell lung 
cancer and you have untreated brain metastases.   
In order to decide whether or not you wish to be a part of this research study you should know 
enough about its risks and benefits to make  an informed decision.  This consent form gives you 
detailed information about  the study, which a member  of the research team will discuss with you.  
This discussion should go over all aspects of this research: the purpose and nature  of the research 
study, the procedures that will be performed,  the risks of the study drug(s) and procedures,  
possible benefits, possible alternative  treatments, your rights as a participant  and other 
information about the research study. You should  take whatever time you need to discuss  the 
research study with your physician and family. The decision to participate or not is yours. Once 
you understand the study, you will be asked  if you wish to participate; if so, you will be asked to 
sign and date where  indicated on this form.
If you choose to participate, you will be told of any significant new findings  that develop during 
the course of your participation in this study that may affect  your willingness to continue  to 
participate.
The research  study is being funded by Merck and Co., Inc. Merck and Co., Inc. is providing 
research support and study drug for this research  study. The Department of Defense is funding a 
portion of the analyses to be done  on tumor tissue and blood samples from  non-small cell lung 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 2 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  Formcancer subjects  enrolled on this study. Dr. Harriet Kluger  is the principal  investigator of this 
study at Yale Cancer Center.
Purpose
The purpose  of this  study is to explore whether or not the investigational drug, pembrolizumab, 
has beneficial effects and  is safe for use in subjects diagnosed with  metastatic melanoma who 
have at least  two untreated  brain  metastases  or non-small  cell lung  cancer (NSCLC)  who also  
have at least  one untreated  brain metastasis. 
Pembrolizumab is also known  as KEYTRUDA® (approved in USA  and several other  countries)  
and is available by prescription to treat malignant melanoma (a type of skin cancer), head and neck squamous cell carcinoma  and non-small cell lung  cancer that has spread to  other parts of 
your body.
Pembrolizumab/KEYTRUDA® is  being  studied by the Sponsor to  see if it is effective  in
treating more than 30 types of cancer, as a  single therapy or in combination with other
therapies, to see what  side effects are associated  with its  use.
Pembrolizumab is an  antibody with parts from mice  and humans  being developed for treatment 
of human cancers.  Pembrolizumab is  a highly selective antibody that  is designed to target a 
protein on the surface of some white  blood cells called PD-L1.   After pembrolizumab binds to its  
target on the white blood cells, they  may then begin attacking  your tumor.  In a  different study, 
some subjects who had  previously treated non-small cell lung  cancer had a decrease  in the size of 
their tumor after  treatment with pembrolizumab.
This study  will only be done at  the Yale  Cancer  Center. It  is expected that approximately 74 
subjects will be enrolled at Yale  Cancer Center.  It is expected that 20 subjects will have 
melanoma and 54 subjects will have  NSCLC.
Study Procedures
You will be entered into one of 2 study groups (arms) based upon your diagnosis: Arm A is for 
melanoma subjects  and Arm B is for NSCLC  subjects. Arm B has 2 cohorts: Cohort  1 for PD-L1  
positive NSCLC subjects and Cohort 2 for PD-L1 negative NSCLC subjects or those NSCLC  
subjects with a PD-L1  status that cannot be determined. PD-L1 is a protein and T-cell receptor 
which is thought to play a role in the ability of tumor cells to evade a person’s  immune system.  If 
you have NSCLC, you may have already  participated in PD-L1 testing during the pre-screening 
process if your tissue was able to be successfully tested and your PD-L1 status  has been 
evaluated.
Tests and procedures  that would be performed  for your regular cancer care whether you are on 
this study  or not, are called “standard  of care.” All of the tests and procedures  listed  below  that 
will be performed at your study visits,  should you choose to participate in this study, are standard 
of care unless noted with an asterisk  (*).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 3 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormScreening Period
If you agree  to participate and sign and date this form, you will need to undergo  a series  of tests 
and procedures to determine if you are eligible  to participate in the research study. You will be 
required to provide  a portion of tumor specimens to be stored  for research.  You will come to the 
study site for screening tests and it is possible that more than one screening  visit may be needed.  
The following tests or procedures will be performed  during the visit(s):
Physical Examination
Review of your medical history. If you are being considered for Cohort  2 of Arm B, you 
must have  received a  prior  platinum-based  chemotherapy regimen.
Measurement of height, weight and vital signs (including  blood pressure, heart rate, 
temperature, breathing rate  and oxygen  measurement)
Performance  status evaluation
Routine blood tests for safety:
oComplete  blood count
oBlood  chemistry
oLiver function tests
oThyroid stimulating hormone  (TSH)
oFree T3 and Free  T4
Blood  sample for research purposes*;  if you are found to not be eligible, but you still 
wish to provide a one-time  blood sample,  this sample may be banked for other future  
research studies.* This sample  is required for all subjects who are eligible to participate  
in this study. The blood samples will be tested  to see what  types of proteins the blood 
cells express,  a technique called  immunophenotyping. The samples will be stored, or 
banked, in a laboratory at Yale University  until  they are used by the researchers.
Pregnancy  test (blood or urine) for women of child bearing potential only. If the results  
are positive, you will not be eligible to participate in this research study. Women of child  
bearing potential  must agree to use an effective method of birth control or agree to 
remain abstinent during the course of the study. 
Computerized tomography (CT) scan  of the chest, abdomen and  pelvis
Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to assess  Central Nervous System (CNS) 
tumor involvement.  For Melanoma  Subjects Only:  In order to participate  in this 
research study, you must have at least one brain  lesion that requires local therapy  by 
surgical resection or Laser Interstitial  Thermocoagulation Therapy (LITT). Archival  or 
previously removed brain tumor tissue may  be used,  if available.
Your study doctor will review the results of these  tests to determine whether you qualify for the 
study. If you qualify  and agree to participate,  you will be assigned to study treatment  described 
in the next section. 
Treatment Period
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 4 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormFor Melanoma Subjects  Only:  Prior to  starting  study drug, pembrolizumab, subjects with  
melanoma will  have local therapy to a  brain lesion by surgical resection or LITT. Surgical 
resection uses surgery  to remove abnormal  tissue in your brain. LITT is a  surgical procedure that 
will require you to have general anesthesia (be put under). A  small incision will be made in  your 
scalp and  a small (2.5 mm) hole will be  drilled in your skull. A laser  catheter (tube) will be  
inserted into your tumor and used to obtain a  biopsy  from the tumor and also  to heat  the tumor so 
that the tumor cells will no longer be  alive.  This thermocoagulation process typically  lasts 2-3 
minutes. LITT is FDA approved for use in the  treatment of brain tumors.   The tissue removed 
during surgical resection  or LITT  will be studied for  PD-L1 expression and  other biomarkers that 
may help researchers determine what types of tumors may or may not  respond to  
pembrolizumab. Melanoma tumors are not required to  express  PD-L1  in order  for melanoma 
subjects to participate in this research  study.
For all Subjects: You will be required  to provide  a specimen from a tumor outside of your 
brain* for research, unless it is clinically not possible to obtain one, such as in subjects who do 
not have tumors outside of the brain. Your  study  doctor will discuss with  you which tumor 
specimen can be  used and whether  a new biopsy is necessary.
If at any time on study you have a  surgical  procedure or biopsy, you will be  required  to provide a 
portion of  the tumor specimen for research*.
For this research study, a  cycle is two weeks  (14 days). You will continue to  receive the study 
drug, pembrolizumab, in two-week cycles for a maximum of two years or until disease progression, unacceptable  toxicity,  withdrawal from the study or removal  by the study team, 
termination of the study or if you develop  an illness or complication that does not allow  you to  
safely continue on study. Subjects enrolled in both arms  will receive  pembrolizumab at 10 mg/kg 
every 2  weeks intravenously (through your vein).
 
The following is a  list of evaluations that you will undergo during  the treatment period of the 
study:
Day 1 of  each Cycle (every 2 weeks):
Physical examination
Review of your medical history
Review the  medications you have taken  and are currently taking including treatment 
received for your cancer*.  If you are not already taking anti-convulsants,  you will be 
started on medications to avoid seizures.
Performance  status evaluation
Review of any side effects you may  have had*
Measurement of height, weight and vital signs (including blood pressure,  heart  rate, 
temperature, breathing rate  and oxygen  measurement)
Routine blood tests for safety:
oComplete  blood count
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 5 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormoBlood  chemistry
oLiver function tests
Administer the  study drug,  pembrolizumab*
Cycle 3, Day 1 only  (after 4 weeks of study drug):
In addition  to the above-listed procedures  that are to be  done on Day 1 of each cycle,  you will 
also have:
Brain MRI*
Day 1 of  every 4th cycle  (every 8 weeks):
In addition to the above-listed procedures that are to be done on Day 1 of each cycle,  you will 
also have:
Blood  sample(s):
oThyroid stimulating hormone  (TSH)
oFree T3 and Free  T4 – this will be done  only if your TSH value is abnormal
Blood  samples for research purposes*
Tumor response  assessment by CT scan of the  chest, abdomen  and pelvis
Brain MRI
End of Treatment Visit
The following procedures will be performed within  28 days of your last dose of study drug:
Physical examination
Review of your medical history
Review the medications  you have taken  and are currently  taking including treatment  
received for your cancer*
Performance  status evaluation
Review of any side effects you may  have had*
Measurement of height, weight and vital signs (including  blood pressure, heart rate, 
temperature, breathing rate  and oxygen  measurement)
Routine blood tests for safety:
oComplete  blood count
oBlood  Chemistry
oLiver function tests
Blood  sample for research purposes*
Follow-up Period
You will continue to have  tumor assessments by CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis and a 
Brain MRI every 8 weeks until disease progression, withdrawal  of consent, start of a new anti-
cancer therapy, or death. 
Long Term Follow-Up
You will be contacted  by the study team every 3 months for survival follow-up information.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 6 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormPotential Risks, Side  Effects, Discomforts and  Inconveniences
While in this study, you may have side effects.  Most of these side effects are listed  here.  
However, there may be other  side effects unknown  at this time. You need to know and 
understand about side effects that could occur in this study before  you agree to be a study  
participant. In addition  to the risks listed below, there may be risks  that are currently  unknown.  
What is known about this study  drug? 
Pembrolizumab (also  known as KEYTRUDA® or MK-3475) is being studied by Merck to see if 
it has any effect in treating cancer.  Pembrolizumab has been given to men and women  with 
cancer to see  what  side effects would occur. 
Overall, as of 03-Mar-2018,  approximately 25,519  patients have  been treated with 
pembrolizumab in clinical studies.
Pembrolizumab works by helping your immune system  to fight your cancer.
However, pembrolizumab  can also cause your immune system to attack normal  organs and 
tissues in your body and can affect the way they work,  which  can result in side effects.  These 
side effects  may be serious (i.e. causing hospitalization or life-threatening), may lead to death.  
may result in death, and/or may occur after you stop taking pembrolizumab. These side effects 
can affect more than  one of your normal  organs and tissues at  the same time.
VERY COMMON
Out of 100 people who  receive pembrolizumab, 20 or more  people may have the following:   
Itching of the  skin
Loose or watery stools
Cough
COMMON
Out of 100 people who receive pembrolizumab, at least  5 but less than  20 people may have 
the following:
Joint  pain
Fever
Back pain
Rash
Pain in your belly
Loss of skin color
Not enough  thyroid hormone so you may feel tired, gain weight, feel cold, have 
infrequent or hard stools
Low levels of salt in the blood that may cause you to feel  tired, confused, have a 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 7 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  Formheadache, muscle cramps and/or feel sick to your stomach
UNCOMMON
Out of 100 people who  receive pembrolizumab, at  least  1 but less than 5 people  may have 
the following:
Inflammation of  the lungs so you may feel short of  breath and cough. Too  much thyroid 
hormone so  you may  feel anxious, angry,  have trouble sleeping,  feel weak, tremble, 
sweat, feel tired, have loose and watery stools
Infusion reaction, where you may feel dizzy or faint, flushed, get a rash, have a 
fever, feel short of breath, experience a decrease in your blood pressure at the time 
of receiving your infusion (IV) or just after, or pain at the site of infusion.
Inflammation of  the bowels/gut that can cause pain  in your belly with  loose or watery 
stools, and black, tarry, sticky stools or stools with blood  or mucus
Inflammation of  the skin so you may have peeling of the skin, itching, and/or skin 
redness. The skin  inflammation (i.e.  peeling, itching and redness) could also be  
widespread throughout  your body. More severe skin  reactions may involve the inside of 
your mouth, the  surface of your eye  and genital  areas, and/or may  cause the top  layer  of 
your skin to peel from  all over your  body which can cause severe infection. 
RARE
Out of 100 people who receive pembrolizumab, less than 1 person may have the 
following: 
Inflammation of the nerves that may cause pain, weakness or tingling in your hands and 
feet, and may spread to your legs, arms and upper body leading to severe muscle  
weakness and possible temporary paralysis
Inflammation of the muscles so you may feel weak or pain in the muscles
Inflammation of the pancreas (a gland in your abdomen that controls sugar levels) so 
you may have severe upper abdominal pain that may move to your back, feel sick to 
your stomach, and vomiting that gets worse when you eat
Inflammation of the eye so you may have eye redness, blurred vision, sensitivity 
to light, eye pain, see floaters or have headaches
Inflammation of the liver which may make you feel sick to your stomach and 
vomit, feel like not eating, feel tired, have a mild fever, have a pain in the right 
side of your belly, yellow eyes and skin, and dark urine
Inflammation of the pituitary gland (a gland in the head), which may you to feel sick to 
your stomach or have headaches, changes in your behavior, double vision, few to no 
menstrual cycles, weakness, vomiting and dizziness or fainting. 
Adrenal glands (glands on top of the kidneys)  that may  not make enough  hormone,  which  
could cause tiredness, weight loss,  muscle  weakness, feeling faint, joint,  muscle  and belly  
aches, nausea, vomiting,  loose or  watery  stools, fever, salt craving, and sometimes 
darkening of the skin like a suntan
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 8 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormType 1 Diabetes, a condition that can cause too much sugar in your blood, feeling 
thirstier than usual, frequent urination and weight loss. You are likely to need regular 
insulin shots.
Inflammation of the kidney so you may pass less urine or have cloudy or bloody urine, 
and experience swelling and/or low back pain
Inflammation of  the middle layer of your heart wall (myocarditis) that may cause your 
heart to have difficulty pumping  blood throughout your body, which can cause chest 
pain, shortness  of breath and swelling of  the legs. You  may  experience a  fast or irregular 
heartbeat that may cause dizziness  or fainting.  
Inflammation of  the thyroid gland, an  organ that makes and stores thyroid hormones. 
This condition may  lead to change in your heart rate,  blood  pressure, body temperature, 
and the rate at  which  food is converted into energy.
A condition that  may  make you feel weak  and tired and might have drooping of the 
eyelids, blurred or double vision, difficulty  swallowing, slurred speech, weakness in  your 
arms and legs, or  difficulty  breathing
The formation of small clusters of  immune cells (called granulomas) in parts  of your 
body such as your lymph nodes,  eyes, skin, or lungs (called sarcoidosis)
Inflammation of  the brain (called  encephalitis)  with confusion and  fever. This  may also  
include: disorientation, memory problems, seizures (fits), changes in personality and  
behavior, difficulty  speaking,  weakness or loss of movement in some  parts of your body, 
and loss of consciousness
In addition  to the above, if you have had an allogeneic stem cell  transplant (a procedure in  which 
a person receives blood-forming stem  cells from a donor), you may experience graft  versus  host 
disease (GvHD), which may include diarrhea,  skin rashes, and  liver damage,  after receiving 
pembrolizumab.  Sometimes this condition can lead  to death.
Additional serious  side effects in in <1.0% of subjects receiving pembrolizumab include  the 
following:
Dizziness or fainting (low blood pressure), flushing, rash, fever
Additionally, since pembrolizumab was approved  in September,  2014, the following side effects 
have been reported by people  receiving pembrolizumab.  These side effects  were  voluntarily 
reported from a group  of people of unknown size.  It is not possible  to estimate the frequency  of 
this side effect:
Inflammation of  the joints which may include joint pain,  stiffness and/or swelling
Severe responses of the immune system that cause  the body to attack its own blood cells,  
spleen, liver,  lymph nodes, skin and brain.  This may include  fever, rash, inflammation of 
the liver, yellowing of the skin,  an enlarged liver and spleen, low blood  counts,  and 
enlarged lymph nodes.  The nervous system may also be affected and cause  confusion,  
seizures, and even coma
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 9 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormThere has been one reported case of diabetes mellitus (DM) at Yale associated  with 
pembrolizumab (MK-3475), which required treatment with insulin.  At this time it is unknown  if 
this is a permanent condition.  Symptoms  typically experienced with diabetes  are frequent 
urination, increased thirst, and increased  hunger.   You should inform your study doctor if you 
have any of these symptoms.
Pneumonitis, also known as inflammation of the lungs, has been observed in 94 (3.4%) of the 
2,799 subjects with melanoma or non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)  treated  with 
pembrolizumab in four global clinical studies. Sixty-three (63) of these subjects  received 
additional steroid treatment to help with their recovery.  Thirty-six (36) of these cases were 
considered severe and resulted in 4 deaths  due to pneumonitis.  
If you have a history of pneumonitis that did not require additional  steroid treatment, your study 
doctor will  discuss additional risks that you may be exposed to.
Possible side effects in patients with brain metastases: Patients with untreated  brain  
metastases have not received pembrolizumab (MK-3475) in the past. However,  as with other  
immune therapies,  pembrolizumab (MK-3475) might cause swelling  around lesions  in the brain, 
which could result in symptoms such as seizures, weakness, confusion  or other neurological  
symptoms. It is important  to report any neurological symptom to your treating physician. These 
symptoms might have to be controlled with steroids and/or anti-seizure medications.
Other Risks
Brain Biopsy  (Melanoma Subjects Only):
We will obtain a brain biopsy while you undergo a surgical procedure (resection or LITT) that is 
necessary to treat the brain tumor. Although uncommon, infection or bleeding at the surgical site 
or brain could occur  as well the possibility  of temporary or permanent  neurological problems. 
These risks  depend on the location  of the tumor in the brain and will be reviewed with you in 
detail by your study doctors before the procedure.  
Blood Collection and Intravenous (IV) catheter placement:
The risks of taking blood may include pain, redness, swelling and/or bruising  where the needle 
enters your body, light-headedness and fainting. On rare occasions, local blood  clot formation or 
infection with redness and irritation  of the vein have occurred. The blood  pressure cuff may 
cause discomfort or bruising to the upper  arm. Approximately  40 mL of blood  will be taken 
during your  participation in this  research study for research purposes. 
Tumor Biopsy:
As with any procedure,  there are risks and discomforts.  You may feel some amount of pain or 
discomfort during a biopsy, including  slight, stinging pain when a local anesthetic is injected by 
needle to numb the area,  pressure and dull pain where the biopsy needle is inserted, discomfort  
from lying still for an extended time,  and soreness, inflammation,  bleeding, swelling,  and/or 
infection at the biopsy  site.  With a tumor biopsy, there is a rare possibility of tumor cells 
spreading into the nearby  area. If a general  anesthetic is used, you will not feel pain during  the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 10 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  Formprocedure because  you will be asleep.   Your physician will explain the details of the procedure  
and the risks to you, depending on how the biopsy will be obtained. 
Brain MRI scan:
You may not have an MRI done if you have metal in your body, for example,  some hip 
replacements, hearing aids, pacemakers, bullets, or jewelry that cannot be removed. You should 
inform the technologist  or physician if you have any metal in your body. During the MRI  exam, 
you may feel some heat and hear tapping noises but have no reason to worry. Some  people may 
have a ‘closed in’ feeling  while inside the machine. The injection may make you sick to your 
stomach or have pain,  warmth, swelling, bruising, a small blood clot or infection  at the injection 
site. Rarely, you may get a rash or other signs  of allergy from the injection or get a rare disease 
where some of your body parts get scarred.  If you have  a history of kidney problems you must  
inform the technologist or physician as you may not be able to receive an injection during the 
MRI exam. Please talk to your physician if  you have any concerns  or questions.
Risks associated  with gadolinium contrast:
You may have a small IV  catheter placed before the MRI scan so that gadolinium  contrast can be 
injected into a vein as  this may help  to better  determine if your cancer has spread.  With  
gadolinium contrast  severe reactions are  rare.  The FDA approves the contrast agent  Gadolinium 
for use with human  participants. You need to know that there  are certain risks associated  with  the 
use of that contrast. Some healthy subjects  (fewer  than 3%) may experience mild nausea,  
headache or dizziness after the injection.   These side effects usually resolve without need for 
treatment.  There is also a risk of allergic reaction  (less  than  1%).  An allergic reaction can cause  
hives and itching  or difficulty breathing.  In individuals with kidney dysfunction, the gadolinium 
can cause  a serious  condition called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.  Because of this, prior to your 
MRI scan you  will have  to undergo  blood work to make sure that your kidney function is  normal.  
Detailed information on the contrast  agent Gadolinium can  be provided to  you at your request.  
You should  inform your  study doctor: (1)  if you are pregnant or breast feeding, (2) if you have a 
history of allergic  reactions to MRI or CT contrast agents, (3) if you have a history of kidney 
disease, seizure, asthma, or allergic  respiratory disorders, and (4) if  you have  anemia or disease 
that affects red blood cells.  
Reproductive Risks:
It is not known if pembrolizumab may  affect an unborn or nursing baby  or if it has an adverse  
effect on sperm. Therefore, females  who are pregnant, trying to become pregnant or breast-
feeding, may not be in the  study.  The  study  doctor  will perform a urine and/or blood pregnancy 
test before the  start of the study, for females who are able to have a baby.  Women of child 
bearing potential must agree to use one  effective  method of birth control while participating in 
this research study.
There may also be side effects, other  than listed above that we cannot predict. Other drugs  will 
be given to make side effects  that occur  less serious  and less uncomfortable. Many side effects 
go away shortly after the drug or procedure is stopped, but in  some cases side  effects can  be 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 11 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  Formserious, long  lasting or  permanent.
For more information  about risks and side effects,  ask the researcher or contact  their office at 
203-737-2572. If  you are a  non-small cell lung cancer subject, you may also call Dr. Sarah  
Goldberg at 203-737-5649.
Benefits
If you agree  to take part in this research  study, we cannot and do not guarantee that you will 
receive any benefits.  We hope the information  learned from this research study may benefit other 
patients with melanoma or NSCLC  who have brain  metastases in  the future.
Economic Considerations
You will not be paid  for taking part in this study. Tests and procedures  that would be performed 
for your regular  cancer  care whether  you are on this study or not are called “standard of care.” 
There will be no charge to you or your insurance provider for the study drug, pembrolizumab. 
The following tests and  procedures are considered part of the standard of care for  patient  with  
your disease.  The costs associated with these tests and procedures  will be charged to  you or your 
insurance provider in the same manner as if you were not part of this  research study. Therefore, 
you or your insurance provider will need to assume responsibility for these costs. You  will be  
billed for all costs  or co-payments that are  not paid  by your insurance provider:
Physical examination
Medical history
Measurement of height, weight and vital signs 
Performance  status evaluation
Routine blood tests for safety
Pregnancy  test (blood or urine)  
Computerized tomography (CT) scan  of the chest, abdomen and  pelvis
Brain MRI (excluding at Cycle 8, Day  1)
Surgical resection or  Laser Interstitial Thermocoagulation  Therapy (LITT) of the brain
The sponsor  will pay  for any study related procedures that are not considered standard care for  
patients with your disease.  These  include:
Blood  samples for research purposes
Tissue samples  for research purposes
Brain MRI at  Cycle  3, Day 1 only (after 4 weeks  of study drug)
Study drug, pembrolizumab
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 12 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormTaking part  in this research study may lead to added  costs  for you or your insurance provider.  
You are encouraged to speak with your insurance provider prior  to entering the research  study to  
find out your  individual  coverage.   If you have difficulty determining your individual insurance 
coverage, you  may call Dr. Kluger’s office for  assistance at the contact information provided on 
page one of this form.  
You or  your  insurance provider will be charged for continuing medical care  and/or 
hospitalization that  are not a part of the research study.   
Treatment Alternatives
You do not have to participate in this study. Your other choices may include:
Getting treatment or care for your cancer without being in a  study. This includes  whole 
brain irradiation, stereotactic radiosurgery, chemotherapy and  taking other drugs  that are 
FDA-approved for melanoma or lung cancer  but have not been fully studied in  patients 
with brain  metastases.  These  drugs include chemotherapy and  targeted  therapies for 
melanoma or lung cancer and immune therapy for  melanoma.  Please discuss  alternative 
therapies with  your  treating  physician.  Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) is FDA approved  for 
patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma and disease  progression following 
Ipilimumab and,  if BRAF V600 mutation positive, a BRAF inhibitor. Nivolumab 
(Opdivo), an  immunotherapy drug, is approved by the  FDA for use in patients with a type 
of advanced  lung  cancer called squamous non-small cell lung  cancer that has grown  after  
they received platinum-based chemotherapy  regardless of PD-L1  status. Nivolumab 
(Opdivo) is also  approved by the FDA to treat advanced melanoma skin cancer that can’t 
be surgically removed  and isn’t responding to other drugs.  Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) is 
FDA approved for  patients with advanced,  metastatic non-small cell lung  cancer whose 
disease has  progressed  after  other treatments and with  tumors  that express a  protein 
called PD-L1.
Taking part in another  study.
Receiving no treatment at this time.
Getting comfort  care, also called palliative care; this type  of care helps  reduce  pain, 
tiredness, appetite problems, and  other problems caused by the cancer.  
Comfort care does not treat the cancer directly but instead  is meant to improve  how you 
feel.  Comfort care tries to  keep you as active and comfortable  as possible.   
Talk to  your doctor about your choices before you decide if you will take part in  this study.
Confidentiality and Authorization to collect,  use and disclose Protected Health Information
For purposes of this study, Yale  University, Yale-New Haven Hospital, and Dr. Harriet Kluger  
will use medical  information collected or created as part of the study, such as medical records 
and test results, which identifies you by name or in another way. Your consent to participate  in 
the study means you agree that Yale  University,  Yale-New Haven Hospital, and Dr. Harriet 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 13 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormKluger may obtain  your medical  information that they request for study purposes  from your 
physicians and your other health  care providers from the past or during  your participation in the 
study. 
The protected health information that will be collected in this study includes demographics, 
medical history,  physical examinations,  routine lab tests,  review of adverse events and 
medications you take (past and present), vital signs, diagnostic tests such as MRI scans, response  
assessments such as CT scans, pregnancy  tests, PD-L1 status  (NSCLC subjects only), blood 
samples for research purposes, and  records  about  any study drug that you received.
Any identifiable information  that is obtained  in connection with this study will remain 
confidential and will be disclosed only with your permission or as permitted by U.S. or State 
law.  Examples of information that we are legally required to disclose include abuse  of a child  or 
elderly person, or certain reportable diseases  such as HIV or hepatitis. When  the results of the 
research are published or discussed in conferences, no information will be included that would 
reveal your identity  unless your specific consent for this  activity is obtained.  
We understand that  information about you obtained in connection with  your health is personal,  
and we are committed  to protecting the privacy of that information.   If you decide to  be in  this 
study, the study staff will get information  that identifies you and  your  protected health 
information.  This may  include information  that might directly identify you, such as your  name,  
date of  birth,  and medical  record number . This information will be de-identified prior  to 
providing it to the  sponsor,  meaning we will replace your  identifying information with a code 
that does  not directly identify you. The  study doctor will  keep  a link that identifies you to  your 
coded information, and this link will be kept secure  and available only to  the Principal  
Investigator or  selected members  of the study team.  Any information that can identify you will 
remain confidential. 
Information about your study participation will be entered into your Electronic  Medical Record 
(EMR). Once  placed  in your EMR,  these  results are accessible to  all of your providers who  
participate in the EMR  system. Information within your EMR may also be  shared with  others  
who are appropriate to have access to your EMR (e.g., health insurance company, disability  
provider.)
The records for this  trial will  be stored in locked cabinets  and/or offices and password protected 
computers. The study  team will only give this coded  information to  others  to carry  out this 
research study or to sponsor representatives  to comply with  federal laws and regulations. It is  
anticipated that  records  containing the information  that links  you to your coded  information  will 
be maintained indefinitely,  as there  are no plans at this  time to  destroy these records at the end of 
the study.  
Information about you and your health  which might identify you may be  used by or  given to: 
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 14 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormRepresentatives from Yale University and the Human Investigation Committee (the 
committee or Institutional Review Board  that reviews, approves, and monitors research 
on human subjects),  who are responsible for ensuring research compliance.  These 
individuals are required to keep all  information  confidential. 
Your providers who are participants in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR) system
Those individuals at Yale who are responsible for the financial oversight of research 
including billings and payments
The study doctor, Dr. Harriet Kluger, and the Yale study team
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  This is done so that the FDA can review  
information about the new drug product  involved in this research.   The information  may 
also be  used to meet the reporting requirements of drug regulatory  agencies.   
The manufacturer of study drug, Merck and Co., Inc. and/ or their representatives
The Department of Defense, which is funding some of the studies on tumor and blood 
samples and may have access to research records
Drug regulatory agencies in other countries
Governmental agencies to whom certain diseases (reportable diseases) must be reported
Health care providers who provide services to you in connection with this study.
Laboratories and other individuals and organizations that analyze your health  information 
in connection  with this study, according to the study plan.
Data and Safety Monitoring Boards and others authorized to monitor the conduct of the 
Study 
By signing  this form, you authorize the use  and/or disclosure of the information described 
above for this research  study.  The  purpose for the uses and disclosures  you are  authorizing is 
to ensure that  the information  relating  to this research is available to  all parties who  may need  
it for research purposes.
All health care providers subject to HIPAA (Health  Insurance Portability and  Accountability 
Act) are required  to protect the privacy of your information.  The research staff at Yale School  
of Medicine  and Yale-New Haven Hospital is required to  comply  with  HIPAA and  to ensure 
the confidentiality  of your  information.  Some of the  individuals or agencies listed  above may  
not be subject to HIPAA and therefore  may  not be required to provide the same type of 
confidentiality protection. They could use  or disclose your information  in ways  not mentioned 
in this  form.  However, to better  protect your health  information, agreements are  in place  with  
these individuals and/or companies  that require that they keep your  information  confidential. 
Authorized representatives  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA ) and  the manufacturer 
of the study drug being  tested, Merck and Co., Inc., may need to review records of individual 
subjects.  As  a result,  they may see  your name,  but they are  bound by rules  of confidentiality 
not to reveal  your identity  to others.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 15 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormYou have the right to review and copy your health  information in  your medical record in  
accordance with institutional medical records policies.   However,  you will not be allowed to look 
at or copy  your study  related information  until after  the research  is completed.  
This authorization to use and disclose  your health information collected during your participation  
in this  study  will never  expire.
A description of this clinical trial will be available  on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required 
by U.S. Law.  This Web site will not include  information that can identify you.  At most, the Web 
site will include a summary of the results.  You can  search this  Web site at any time.
In Case of Injury
Yale School of Medicine  and Yale-New Haven Hospital do not provide funds  for the treatment 
of research-related  injury. If you are injured as a  result  of your participation  in this study, 
treatment will  be provided.  You should contact the study doctor  immediately  at the  number(s)  
listed on page one of this form. You or your insurance carrier will be expected to  pay the costs of 
this treatment.  No additional  financial compensation for injury or lost wages  is available. You 
do not waive any of your legal rights by signing  this form.
Voluntary Participation  and Withdrawal
Participation in this study  is voluntary. You are free to choose not to take part in this  research 
study.  Refusing to take part in this research  study will not  lead  to penalty or loss of  benefits  to 
which you are otherwise entitled. Your health  care outside the study and  the payment  for your 
health care will not be affected if you do not agree to participate.  However,  you will not be able 
to enroll  in this research study and will not receive study procedures  as a study participant if you 
do not allow use of your information as part  of this study.
Withdrawing From the  Study:
If you decide to participate in this  research study, you are free to  stop and withdraw from  this 
study at any time during its  course.  To withdraw from  the study,  you can  call a member of the 
research team at  any time and tell them  that you no longer want  to take  part.  They will make sure 
that proper procedures are  followed  and a final visit is made for your safety.  Future  research  
study appointments  will be cancelled. You may request that the researchers  destroy  your research  
blood sample(s) by contacting your study doctor.   As long as it is possible to identify your 
samples (i.e., your  samples have not been  anonymized or the  study site has not  destroyed the  first 
key), then  the researchers will destroy the sample.   However, data obtained from your samples 
prior to receiving your request for  destruction will not be deleted.   If you request destruction  of 
your sample(s), you will not lose any benefits,  medical treatment or legal  rights  to which  you are  
otherwise entitled.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 16 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormWithdrawing from the study does not mean  that your research sample(s)  will automatically  be 
destroyed. If you want your research samples to be destroyed after you withdraw from  the study,  
you will have to make a request  for them to be destroyed.  
At any time, you may  request that the  Yale researchers  destroy  your sample by contacting your 
study doctor.   As long as  it is possible to identify your samples (i.e., your samples have  not been 
anonymized or the study site has not destroyed the first key),  then the researchers  will destroy 
the sample.  However,  data obtained from  your samples prior to receiving your request  for 
destruction will not be  deleted.   If  you request  destruction of your sample(s), you will not lose  
any benefits, medical  treatment or legal rights to which you are otherwise entitled.
The researchers may withdraw  you from participating  in the research if necessary. You may be 
withdrawn by the researchers for progression of disease/poor response to treatment, development  
of serious  side effects, or non-compliance  (not following instructions from the study team).
If you choose not to participate  or if you withdraw it will not harm your current or future  
relationship with your own doctors or with Yale-New Haven Hospital.
If you fail to give your consent by signing this document, or if you cancel your consent later, 
then you will not be eligible to participate  in this study and will not receive any treatment 
provided as part of the study.  Unless and until you do cancel the consent,  it will remain valid and 
effective.
Withdrawing Your Authorization to Use and Disclose Your  Health Information:
You may withdraw or take away your permission to use and disclose your health  information at 
any time. You do this by telling the study staff or by sending  written  notice  to the study doctor,  
Dr. Harriet Kluger, at the address  listed on page  one of this form . If you withdraw your 
permission, you will not be able to stay in this study.
When you withdraw your permission, no new health information  identifying you will be 
gathered after that date.  Information that has already been gathered may still be used and given 
to others until the end of the research  study, as necessary to insure the integrity of the study 
and/or study  oversight.  
Questions
We have used some technical terms in this form.  Please feel free to ask about anything you don't 
understand and to consider this research and the consent form  carefully – as long as you feel is 
necessary – before  you make a decision.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020Principal Investigator: Harriet Kluger,  MD HIC #: 1401013290
Protocol Version: 8
Funding Source:Yale Cancer Center and Merck and Co., 
Inc. Protocol Date: 23-Oct-2017
Page 17 of 17
YCC v15.0 (24-Feb-2020)
Main Compound  Authorization  FormAuthorization and Permission
I have read (or someone has read to me) this form and have  decided to participate in the project as 
described above.   Its general purposes,  the particulars  of my involvement  and possible hazards and 
inconveniences have been explained to my satisfaction.  My signature also indicates that I have  received a 
copy of this  consent form.
By signing  this form,  I give permission  to the researchers to use and give  out information about  me for 
the purposes described in this form.   By refusing to give permission, I understand that I  will not be able  to 
participate in this research. 
I also confirm that  I have received a Trial Alert  Card providing contact details of the  study  doctor  and 
agree to  carry this card with me at all times. 
Patient (print name) Signature Date
 
Person obtaining consent (print name)
Signature Date
Person obtaining consent (print name) – only if applicable, otherwise blank
Signature Date
Interpreter/ Witness (print  name) 
– only if applicable, otherwise blankSignature Date
 
If after you have signed this form you have any questions about your  privacy  rights, please contact the 
Yale Privacy Officer at  (203) 432-5919.
If you have further questions about this project  or if  you have  a research-related  problem,  you may 
contact the Principal  Investigator, Dr. Harriet Kluger at 203-737-2572.  If you would like to talk with 
someone other than the researchers to discuss  problems, concerns, and  questions you may have 
concerning this research,  or to discuss your rights as a research  subject, you may contact the  Yale  Human 
Investigation Committee at  (203) 785-4688 . 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2020