 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community CARE Model ( OA CARE ) 
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 3/4/2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
2 
Protocol v 4.0 – 20240304   
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community CARE Model ( OA CARE ) 
 
Protocol Number: 22-0865  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Principal Investigator: Kelli D. Allen, PhD  
 
Sponsor: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
 
Grant Title: Optimizing Osteoarthritis Care through Clinical and Community Partnership  
 
Grant Number: 1 R21 AR080309 -01  
 
Funded by:  
 
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases of the National Institutes of 
Health  
 
Version Number: 4.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
ii 
Protocol v 4.0 – 20240304   
 
 
Summary of Changes from Previous Version:  
 
Affected 
Section(s)  Summary of Revisions Made  Rationale  
8.1 Added language that the 
questionnaires at the 12 -month follow -
up visit may be done over the phone 
instead of in -person  Change made to reduce in -person 
visit time and participant burden  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
iii 
Protocol v 4.0 – 20240304   
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE.……………………………………………… ……….. …………..... 1 
INVESTIGATOR’S SIGNATURE………………………………………………………… ……….. ……2 
1  PROTOCOL SUMMARY …………………………………………………………………………...  3 
1.1 Synopsis ……………………………………………………………………………………… 3 
1.2 Schema ……………………………………………………………………………………….  5 
1.3 Schedule of Activities ………………………………………………………………………. .6 
2  INTRODUCTION … ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  7 
 2.1 Study Rationale and Background ………………………………………………………….  7 
  2.1.1   Clinical Signficance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 7 
  2.1.2   Scientific Rationale ………………………………………………………………………….  7 
  2.1.3   Prior Studies and Rationale for Development……………………………………………. 8 
 2.2 Risk/Benefit Assessment ………………………………………………………………….  .. 8 
  2.2.1   Known Potential Risks ……………………………………………………………………  ... 8 
  2.2.2  Known Potential Benefits ………………………………………………………………….  . 9 
  2.2.3  Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits …………………………………………  ….9 
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  ................................ ................................ ...........  9 
4 STUDY DESIGN …………………………………………………………………………………  .. 11 
 4.1  Overall  Design ……………………………………………………………………………… 11 
 4.2  Scientific Rationale for Study Design  ................................ ................................ ....... 11 
 4.3   Justification for Intervention  ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
 4.4  End-of-Study Definition  ................................ ................................ ...........................  12 
5 STUDY POPULATION …………………………………………………………………………… .12 
 5.1  Inclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
 5.2  Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 13 
 5.3  Lifestyle Considerations  ................................ ................................ ..........................  13 
 5.4  Screen Failures …………………………………………………………………………….. 13 
 5.5  Strategies for Recruitment and Retention ……………………………………………….  13 
6 STUDY INTERVENTION S 
 6.1  Study Intervention  Administration  ................................ ................................ ............  14 
 6.2  Fidelity ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  16 
6.3  Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomizaiton and Blinding …………………………… ..17 
6.4  Study Intervention Adherence …………………………………………………………… . 17 
6.5  Concomitant Therapy ……………………………………………………………………… 17 
7 STUDY INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION AND   
 PARTICIPANT DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL ………………………………………  ... 17 
 7.1   Discontinuation of Study Intervention ……………………………………………………  17 
 7.2   Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study ………………………………  . 17 
 7.3   Lost to Follow -up…………………………………………………………………………  .. 18 
8 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES ………………………………………………  . 18 
 8.1  Endpoint and Other Non -Safety Assessments …………………………………………  18 
 8.2  Safety Assessments ………………………………………………………………………  . 19 
 8.3  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events …………………………………………  . 19 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
iv 
Protocol v 4.0 – 20240304  8.3.1  Definition of Adverse Events …………………………………………………………….  .19 
8.3.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Events ………………………………………………….. .. 19 
8.3.3  Classification of an Adverse Event …………………………………………………….  ... 19 
8.3.4  Time Period and Frequence for Event Assessment and Follow -up………………….. 20 
8.3.5  Adverse Event Reporting ……………………………………………………………….  ... 21 
8.3.6  Serious Adverse Event Reporting ………………………………………………………  . 21 
8.3.7  Reporting Events to Participants ………………………………………………………..  . 21 
8.3.8  Events of Special Interest ………………………………………………………………..  . 21 
8.3.9  Reporting of Pregnancy …………………………………………………………………..  . 21 
 8.4   Unanticipated Problems …………………………………………………………………  ..21 
8.4.1  Definition of Unanticipated Problems …………………………………………………….2 1 
8.4.2  Unanticipated Problems Reporting ………………………………………………………  22 
8.4.3  Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants …………………………………….  22 
9 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  ...………………………………………… ……………..  .. .22 
9.1   Statistical Hypotheses ……………………………………………………………………  . 22 
9.2   Sample Size Determination ………………………………………………………………  22 
9.3  Populations for Analyses ………………………………………………………………….  23 
9.4  Statistical Analyses ………………………………………………………………………  .. 23 
10 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  ...............  23 
 10.1 Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations ………………………………….  23 
10.1.1  Informed Consent Process ………………………………………………………………..  24 
10.1.2  Study Discontinuation and Closure ………………………………………………………  24 
10.1.3  Confidentiality and Privacy ……………………………………………………………….  . 25 
10.1.4  Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data …………………………………………….  26 
10.1.5  Key Roles and Study Governance ……………………………………………………….  26 
10.1.6  Safety Oversight ……………………………………………………………………………  27 
10.1.7  Clinical Monitoring …………………………………………………………………………  27 
10.1.8  Quality Assurance and Quality Control ………………………………………………….. 27 
10.1.9  Data Handling and Record Keeping ……………………………………………………..  28 
10.1.10 Protocol Deviations ……………………………………………………………………….  28 
10.1.11 Publication and Data Sharing Policy ……………………………………………………  28 
10.1.12 Conflict of Interest Policy …………………………………………………………………  29 
 10.2 Additional Considerations …………………………………………………………………  29 
 10.3 Abbreviations and Special Terms ………………………………………………………  .. 29 
 10.4 Protocol Amendment History…………………………………………………………….  . 30 
11  References ………………………………………………………………………………………3 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
1 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
 
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
 
 
The trial will be carried out in accordance with International Council on Harmonisation Good Clinical 
Practice (ICH GCP) and the following:  
 
• United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 CFR Part 
46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, 21 CFR Part 312, and/or 21 CFR Part 812).  
 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) -funded investigators and clinical trial site staff who are responsible for 
the conduct, management, or oversight of NIH -funded clinical trials  have completed Human Subjects 
Protection and ICH GCP Training.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be 
submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol 
and the consent form(s) must be obtained before any participant is consented. Any amendment to the 
protocol will require review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  
All changes to the consent form(s) will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regarding whether 
a new consent needs to be obtained from participants who provided consent, using a previously approved 
consent form.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
2 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
 
INVESTIGATOR’S SIGNATURE  
 
The signature below constitutes the approval of this protocol and provides the necessary assurances that this 
study will be conducted according to all stipulations of the protocol, including all statements regarding 
confidentiality, and according to local legal and regulatory requirements and applicable US federal regulations 
and ICH guidelines.  
 
Principal Investigator or Clinical Site Investigator:  
 
 
Signed:   Date:   
 Name:   
 Title:   
 
 
 
Investigator Contact Information  
Affiliation: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
Address: 3300 Thurston Bldg., CB #7280, Chapel Hill, NC  27599 -7280  
Telephone:919 -966-0558  
Email: kdallen@med.unc.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
3 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
1 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
 
1.1 SYNOPSIS  
 
 
Title:  OA Clinic -Community CARE Model ( OA CARE )  
Grant Number:  1 R21 AR080309 -01  
Study Description:  The overall objective of this study is to conduct a randomized pilot 
trial of OA CARE  among n= 60 patients with knee and/or hip 
osteoarthritis ( OA) and overweight / obesity who are not currently 
meeting physical activity recommendations. Participants will be 
randomly assigned to OA CARE  or a usual care (UC) group. 
Assessments will be conducted at baseline, 6 months and 12 
months.     
 
Objectives*: 
 Specific Aim 1:  Assess the feasibility and acceptability of OA 
CARE .  Feasibility metrics will include recruitment rate, completion 
rates for weight loss and exercise program visits, referrals to and 
utilization of services noted above and proportion of participants 
completing follow -up assessments. Acceptability of OA CARE  will 
be evaluated from both patient and P rimary Care Provider (P CP) 
perspectives.    
Specific Aim 2: Obtain preliminary  data on the efficacy of OA 
CARE  with respect to the primary outcome of change in total 
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis 
Index (WOMAC) score.   The WOMAC will be administered at 
baseline, 6 -months and 12 -months, along with secondary outcomes 
including body weight, physical activity, physical function, sleep 
measures and psychological measures. We will also collect 
preliminary data on costs of OA CARE . 
  
Endpoints*: Primary Endpoint:  
WOMAC  Total Score . This will be assessed at baseline and 6 -
month and 12 -month follow -up time points.   
 
Secondary Endpoints:  Objectively assessed physical activity ( PA), 
measured via accelerometer , body weight, and objective 
assessments of physical function ; WOMAC  self-reported pain and 
function . These will be assessed at baseline and 6 -month and 12 -
month follow -up time points.   
 
Exploratory Endpoints:  self-reported sleep and psychological 
measures , balance, and preliminary data on costs of OA CARE  
 
Feasibility  and acceptability  metrics include recruitment, retention, 
intervention delivery, and outcome assessment. Perceptions of 
acceptability will be obtained from patients and providers using 
open -ended questions.  
  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
4 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  Study Population:  N = 60 participants with knee and/or hip osteoarthritis ( OA) and 
overweight / obesity who are not currently meeting physical activity 
recommendations. We will enroll both male s and female s from all 
racial and ethnic  backgrounds.   
  
Phase* or Stage:  Exploratory pilot trial  
  
Description of 
Sites/Facilities Enrolling 
Participants:  
 We will recruit patients from UNC Health. In particular, we will 
partner with the UNC Internal Medicine Clinic  and UNC Family 
Medicine .  
 
Description of Study 
Intervention/Experimental 
Manipulation:  OA CARE  includes evidence -based behavioral weight management 
and exercise interventions, as well as tailored referrals to physical 
therapy, psychological interventions, additional weight / nutrition -
related services and sleep -related services based on patient -
specific needs and in coordination with the PCP. 
  
Study Duration*: 2 years  
  
Participant Duration:  12 months   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
5 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  1.2 SCHEMA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
6 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
 
 
1.3 SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
7 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  2 INTRODUCTION  
 
2.1 STUDY RATIONALE  AND  BACKGROUND  
 
 2.1.1. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE   
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a  Significant Burden for Individuals and Health Care Systems.   OA affects over 32 
million U.S. adults (1 in 7) and is a leading cause of pain and disability 1. OA also has substantial impacts on 
work participation, mental health, sleep, development of other chronic conditions and even mortality 2. Already 
associated with significant health care utilization and costs, the prevalence of OA is expected to rise 
substantially in coming decades 1. This will place increasing demands on health care systems, highlighting the 
importance of developing and implementing efficient models that ensure a high quality of care for patients.     
There are Persistent Deficiencies in Quality of Care for OA. Multiple studies have highlighted discordance 
between guideline -based OA care and actual clinical practice 3-7. Despite agreement across OA treatment 
guidelines regarding the effectiveness and centrality of lifestyle (e.g., weight management, physical activity) 
and rehabilitation therapies 8, pass rates for quality indicators related to these therapies are only about 40% 4. 
Data from primary care visits involving treatment for OA in the U.S. show that <50 out of 1000 addressed 
physical therapy as a potential treatment, and only about 250 out of 1000 addressed core lifestyle components 
9. Other studies have also documented low use of and recommendations for behavioral and rehabilitative 
therapies 3,5-7.  For example, in analyses of patients with knee OA across 3 different U.S. health systems, only 
40-50% of patients had ever received physical therapy for this condition 5. These gaps in care are highly 
problematic, as they fail to engage patients with evidence -based treatments that are known to improve key 
outcomes including pain, disability, mental health and even disease progression 10-13.    
Evidence -Based Care Models are Needed to Improve OA Care Quality in the US.   In response to the well -
established deficiencies in care quality for knee and hip OA, there has been increasing interest in the 
development of systematic OA care models internationally14-17. Care models are defined as organized, planned 
approaches to improving health, focusing on particular patient populations (e.g., individuals with OA) to ensure 
that every patient receives optimal medical care 18.  Although there have been several randomized controlled 
trials ( RCTs ) of OA care models 14,15,19, there are three major limitations with respect to how this research can 
inform care for OA in the U.S.  First, there have been no RCTs of OA care models in the U.S., and models 
developed in other countries are not designed to fit the organizational struc tures or payment models of U.S. 
healthcare systems. Second, the effectiveness of previously studied OA care models has been limited; we 
believe a key weakness has been the lack of robust incorporation of lifestyle components, particularly weight 
loss 15,19. Third, prior models have been limited in terms of reach and sustainability because of significant 
requirements for busy health care providers 14,15,17,19.  OA CARE will address each of these challenges, 
building an efficient, scalable model that is designed for sustainability and adequately addresses all 
components of guideline -concordant care. This exploratory trial will accomplish key steps toward the first RCT 
of an OA care model in the U.S.      
  
 2.1.2. SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE   
 The OA CARE  model incorporates the following 4 key principles and evidence from the scientific literature: 
1) In alignment with OA treatment guidelines,8,10,20 OA CARE  takes a multifactorial approach that includes both 
pharmacological and non -pharmacological components.  2) OA CARE  emphasizes delivery of lifestyle 
interventions, which are considered first -line treatments, appropriate for all patients with hip and knee OA 8,10,20.  
3) OA CARE  involves a stepped care approach, in which patients begin with first -line interventions (weight 
management and physical activity) and then advance to additional therapies as needed.21 A stepped care 
approach is efficient, patient -centered and supported by multiple studies, including our recent trial of a 
STepped Exercise Program for Knee Osteoarthritis (STEP -KOA).21,22 4) OA CARE will involve an innovative 
partnership with the YMCA to deliver weight management and exercise programs.  The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Institute of Medicine and other organizations have recommended and prioritized clinic -
community partne rships based on evidence for effectiveness 23. These partnerships address the problems of 
limited time in clinical visits and the large number of patients who need these types of services.   
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
8 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
 2.1.3. PRIOR STUDIES AND RATIONALE FOR DEVELOPMENT  
This study builds on our team’s successful trials, programs and collaborations, including the following:  
• We have collectively conducted over a dozen trials of behavioral interventions that support the 
evidence base for weight management, exercise, physical therapy, psychological and multi -component 
interventions as effective treatments for knee and hip OA 22,24 -37.  These trials have given our team 
ample experience in patient recruitment, behavioral intervention delivery and fidelity monitoring, 
outcome assessment, and robust statistical analyses. We also have experience in delivering 
interventions involving PCPs a nd the use of algorithms to guide patient referrals to specific OA 
treatments 29,30.  
• The Osteoarthritis Action Alliance (OAAA), a key partner (Dr. Callahan, Director), is a national coalition 
of over 130 organizations with a mission of reducing the public health burden of OA.  The OAAA has 
experience in working with the YMCA (one of their member organizations) and other community 
organizations to deliver evidence -based lifestyle interventions, has developed stakeholder -informed 
patient and provider OA educational tools, and is engaged with vast network of partner organizations 
that will be instrumental in future implementation of OA CARE .   
• OA CARE  has been developed in partnership with key stakeholders. At the outset of developing this 
care model, we convened a group of clinicians and clinic administrators representing Internal Medicine, 
Family Medicine, Orthopedics, Physical Therapy and Rheumatolo gy. OA CARE  is based on this 
group’s input regarding current gaps in care and processes that would be feasible and sustainable for 
clinics and providers.  We also received input from on the project from our Thurston Arthritis Research 
Center Patient Stakeholder Advis ory Board; they emphasized the importance of including rural patients 
and suggested that for patients who receive physical therapy during the study, we aim to integrate this 
with exercise opportunities at the YMCA, since this could enhance the benefits of physical therapy visits 
and augment integration of OA CARE  components.  We will engage with these stakeholder groups 
throughout all phases of this research program.  
• The YMCA is currently engaged in clinic -community partnership efforts of direct relevance to this study. 
In particular, our local partners at the Triangle YMCA are currently funded by Blue Cross Blue Shield to 
conduct a 5 -year project focused on referrals of patients from health systems to YMCA Medical 
Memberships, which include access to a variety of group programs plus health coaching. Their project 
aims to evaluate YMCA Medical Memberships as a population health approach and potential coverage 
as a healt h benefit; these goals are directly aligned with our plans for implementing and evaluating OA 
CARE . In addition, the Triangle YMCA has set up processes for sharing patients’ outcome data with 
their PCPs through the electronic health record (EHR). The Triangle YMCA has been very successful 
during their first year of this project, enrolling >700 patients  from 7 major health systems including 
University of North Carolina (UNC) Health.  
 
2.2 RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 2.2.1  KNOWN POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
Emotional distress:  it is unlikely that the types of questions participants will be asked in this study will result  
in emotional distress, but we understand th at participants may be uncomfortable with answering questions  
about some aspect of their health or other things about them. To minimize this risk, we will let participants  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
9 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  know they may choose not to answer any study questions and can still be involved in the study.  Additionally, 
participants in the OA CARE  intervention will have contact information for the study team (e.g. OA CARE  
Navigator) and a YMCA health coach to discuss any concerns . 
 
Breach of confidentiality: we will be collecting some elements of personal health information necessary for  
the study. To minimize breaches of confidentiality, all data will be stored on a secure UNC server or a UNC 
IRB approved platform for sharing PHI (with YMCA ) and paper  information will be stored in locked filing 
cabinets in the office of a study team member, and only approved study personnel will have access to those 
data.  
 
Personal health information (e.g. patient name and contact information  only) will be shared with YMCA health 
coaches and personnel conducting the YMCA weight loss and exercise programs .  Any information shared 
between approved UNC study team members and YMCA personnel will be done verbally by phone , by 
encrypted email  or a UNC IRB approved platform for sharing PHI.  
 
For participants in the OA CARE  intervention, p ersonal health information (e.g. patient name and DOB or 
MRN) will be shared with the participant’s PCP , as part of the  brief progress reports sent by the OA CARE  
Navigator . Any information shared between approved UNC study team members  (e.g. OA CARE  Navigator)  
and the participant’s PCP will be done by encrypted email  or UNC IRB approved platform for sharing PHI . 
 
Risks of Exercise:  Participants in the OA CARE  intervention will be involved in physical activity programming 
at the YMCA. This will be tailored to individuals with knee OA.  H owever, exercise programs may be 
associated with risk of injury, muscle soreness, and joint pain. The risk of sudden death during physical activity 
is about 1 death per 656,000 hours of physical activity. In general, the risk of these events with moderate 
physical activity is very low.  
 
Risks of weight loss interventions: Participants in the OA CARE  intervention will be involved in a weight 
management program at the YMCA. Side effects associated with weight loss in general may be hair loss, 
fatigue, weakness, gall bladder disease, and electrolyte abnormalities. Also, low blood sugar or low blood 
pressure (lightheaded or fainting) may occur during weight loss if a participant is taking medications  for 
diabetes or high blood pressure.  These risks are not specific to this research but also ap ply to usual care.  
2.2.2  KNOWN POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
Participants may experience improvements in pain, physical function or other symptoms related to OA, from 
participating in the OA  Care  program . It is possible that this study may not benefit participants directly, but 
participation in this study may lead to information that can benefit other patients with knee and /or hip OA, as 
well as their health care providers . 
 
 2.2.3 ASSESSMENT  OF POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
This is a minimal risk study with physical risks that are comparable to those that would be encountered with 
exercise programs in clinical or community settings.  Furthermore, w e do not anticipate any significant 
psychological, social, financial, or legal risks to be associated with participation in this study.  Given the high 
and increasing rate of OA, the persistent deficits of physical inactivity, and the lack of a standard, evidence -
based approach to address these deficits in primary care  settings, we believe the value of the information to be 
gained outweighs the risks of participation in the study.  
 
3  STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
10 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINTS  
Primary  
Assess the feasibility  
and acceptability of 
OA CARE  Feasibility metrics will 
include recruitment rate, 
completion rates for 
weight loss and exercise 
program visits, referrals to 
and utilization of services 
noted above and 
proportion of participants 
completing follow -up 
assessments. 
Acceptability of OA CARE  
will be evaluated from 
both patient and PCP 
perspectives. PCP 
perspectives and 
recommendations will be 
conducted as a 
stakeholder engagement 
activity; PCPs will not be 
considered research 
participants.   These metrics are essential for assessing the 
feasibility of conducting a larger scale trial of 
OA CARE .  
Obtain preliminary  data 
on the efficacy of OA 
CARE  with respect to the 
primary outcome of 
change in total Western 
Ontario and McMaster 
Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC) score.     
 Western Ontario and 
McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC) pain , stiffness,  
and function subscales, 
assessed at baseline, 6 
months and 12 months. We 
will separately examine 
WOMAC pain and function 
subscales  as secondary 
outcomes . This primary metric will be assessed because 
it is a  key outcome in OA and can be 
improved with regular PA. The 12 -month time 
point corresponds to the end of the OA CARE  
intervention, and the 6 -month time point will 
allow assessment of the time course of 
changes in outcomes .  
 
Secondary  
Obtain data on the 
efficacy of the OA CARE  
program with respect to 
improvement in body 
weight, physical activity 
and physical function.   
 Physical activity will be 
accessed via accelerometer.  
Moderate to vigorous 
physical activity ( MVPA ; 
primary metric), light 
intensity activity, sedentary 
minutes, step counts and 
other PA metrics, assessed 
at baseline, 6 months and 12 
months.   
 
Physical Function tests: 30-
second chair  stand test ,  
timed  up-and-go test , 2-
minute march test  and single These secondary metrics will be assessed 
because they are also key outcomes in OA , 
and they map onto the different components 
of the OA CARE  intervention . The 12 -month 
time point corresponds to the end of the OA-
CARE  intervention , and the 6 -month time 
point will allow assessment of the time 
courses of changes in outcomes.  
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
11 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINTS  
leg stance assessed at 
baseline and 12 months.   
 
Body Weight will be 
assessed using a research / 
clinical grade scale . 
Participants’ height  will also 
be measured to calculate 
body mass index  (BMI).  
 
Tertiary / Exploratory  
Obtain data on the 
efficacy of the  OA CARE  
program with respect to 
the change in 
exploratory outcomes . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exploratory outcomes 
include psychological 
measures  (Patient Health 
Questionnaire -8, Pain 
Catastrophizing Scale and 
Arthritis Self -Efficacy Scale ) 
assessed at baseline, 6 
months and 12 months. We 
will collect self-reported 
sleep measures (STOP 
Questionnaire and Insomnia 
Severity Index )  for the OA 
CARE  intervention. We will 
also collect preliminary data 
on costs of OA CARE .  
 
 
 
 These outcomes are also important for 
patients with knee OA and map onto OA 
CARE  intervention components . The 12 -
month time point corresponds to the end of 
the OA-CARE  intervention , and the 6 -month 
time point will allow assessment of the time 
courses of changes in outcomes.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4  STUDY DESIGN  
 
4.1  OVERALL DESIGN    
The aim of this study is to conduct a n exploratory  randomized controlled trial with 60 patients with 
knee and / or hip OA equally randomized to OA CARE  or a usual care (UC) control group (Figure 1) . 
Sub-aims are as follows :  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
12 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  Aim 1.  Assess the feasibility and acceptability of OA CARE .  Feasibility metrics will include recruitment 
rate, completion rates for weight loss and exercise program visits, referrals to and utilization of services noted 
above and proportion of participants completing follow -up assessments. Acceptability of OA CARE  will be 
evaluated from both patient and PCP perspectives.    
Aim 2.  Obtain preliminary  data on the efficacy of OA CARE  with 
respect to the primary outcome of change in total Western Ontario 
and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score.   The 
WOMAC will be administered at baseline, 6 -months and 12 -months, along 
with secondary outcomes including body weight, physical activity, physical 
function  (baseline and 12 months only) , sleep measures and psychological 
measures. We will also collect preliminary data on costs of OA CARE .  
 
This will be an exploratory RCT with 60 patients equally randomized to OA 
CARE  or a usual care (UC) control group (Figure 1) ; randomization will be 
in block sizes of 20 . Assessments will occur at baseline, 6 -month follow -up 
and 12 -month follow -up.  The UC group will be offered a 12 -month YMCA 
Medical Membership (described below) once they have completed follow -
up assessments.  
 
4.2   SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE FOR STUDY DESIGN  
Although this exploratory trial is not designed with statistical power to test the efficacy of OA CARE , we have 
included a UC group (rather than conducting a single -group study) for several reasons. First, this provides an 
opportunity to assess acceptability of randomization to a UC group, from the patient perspective.  Second, we 
will be able to evaluate follow -up rates for both groups, which will inform potential adaptations and sample size 
estimation for a larger trial. Third, this will provide a better preliminary  assessment of the efficacy of OA CARE  
(Aim 2) than a single group pre -post trial, since improvement is consistently observed in control groups within 
OA trials 22,29,31,38.  We have specifically selected a UC control group (versus an attention control condition) 
because our ultimate goal is to test how well OA CARE  performs relative to the typical care patients receive for 
OA. Assessments for this trial will be conducted at baseline, 6 -months (corresponding to the beginning of the 
second phase of OA CARE ), and 12 -months (intervention completion).  
 
4.3  JUSTIFICAT ION FOR INTERVENTION  
 
This research addresses a clear need to improve care for patients with OA through an evidence -based, 
comprehensive and sustainable care model. This project lays the groundwork for an implementation -focused 
RCT that will collect rigorous cost data to inform  payment models. Involvement of key stakeholders, as well as 
integration with national organizations including the YMCA and OAAA , will lead to a generalizable approach 
and strategies for widespread implementation in U.S. healthcare systems.       
  
4.4  END -OF-STUDY DEFINITION  
 
A participant is considered to have completed the study if he or she has completed 12-month follow -up 
assessment.  
 
5   STUDY POPULATION  
 
5.1  INCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
Participants for this trial will be patients with a clinician diagnosis of knee or hip OA, self -reported knee or hip 
pain of ≥3 (scale of 0 -10) on most days of the week, body mass index (BMI) ≥27 kgm2,, and not currently 
meeting physical activity recommendations 39. We will base study inclusion on a clinician diagnosis of hip or 

OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
13 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  knee OA, rather than obtaining new radiographs, because OA CARE  is designed for providers to initiate at any 
point in the course of care (not necessarily directly following a diagnosis or new imaging). The rationale for BMI 
and physical activity criteria is that patients with higher BMI and who are inactive are at gre ater risk for OA 
progression and worse outcomes, and weight management and exercise are key components of OA CARE  
42,43.  We chose a minimum BMI of 27 kgm2 because of the association with earlier mortality and the 
precedence of this threshold in other OA trials 11,32,44.   
 
5.2  EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
Exclusion Criteria and Sources of Information  
Criterion  EMR  Phone Screening  
No internet access and a device 
(computer, tablet, smartphone) to 
access the virtual weight loss 
intervention   X 
Pain in chest when performing 
physical activity   X 
Pain in chest when not performing 
physical activity   X 
No documented diagnosis of knee or 
hip OA  X X 
No lower extremity surgery in the past 
6 months  X X 
Significant cognitive impairment  X X 
Psychosis  X  X 
Uncontrolled Substance abuse 
disorder  X X 
Severe hearing or visual impairment  X X 
Serious/terminal illness as indicated 
by referral to hospice or palliative care  X X 
Hospitalization for cardiovascular 
event in last 6 months  X X 
History of ventricular tachycardia  X X 
Unstable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (2 hospitalizations 
within the previous 6 months and/or 
on oxygen)  X X 
Stroke with moderate to severe 
aphasia  X X 
Recent history (last 6 months) of 
three or more falls   X 
Planning total joint replacement in 
next 6 months   X 
Any other health conditions 
determined by the study team to be 
contraindications to a home exercise 
program or weight loss.  X X 
Current participation in other study 
related to knee or hip osteoarthritis , 
weight loss  or physical activity   X 
Unable to speak English  X X 
Pregnant or planning to become 
pregnant  X X 
 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
14 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  5.3  LIFESTYLE CONSIDERATIONS  
N/A 
 
5.4  SCREEN FAILURES  
 
Screen failures are defined as participants who consent to participate in this study but are not subsequently 
assigned to the study intervention or entered in the study. Individuals who do not meet the criteria for 
participation in this trial (screen failure) because of meeting one or more exclusion criteria  (e.g., development 
of an exclusionary health condition) will not be rescreened.   
 
5.5.  STRATEGIES FOR RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION   
We will recruit patients from UNC Health. In particular, we will partner with the UNC Internal Medicine Clinic  
and UNC Family Medicine , which serves high proportions of patients who are African American and non -white 
Hispanic, as well as uninsured patients. This is important because of disparities in OA among these 
demographic groups45, and our aim for OA CARE  to particularly reach the most vulnerable patients. Our team 
has a strong track record of recruiting African American and non -White Hispanic patients 28,31,46.  Our main 
recruitment method will mirror the process by which we envision OA CARE will ultimately function in clinical 
settings.  Specifically, PCPs will be asked to refer patients to OA CARE . This may occur via the EHR or 
another UNC approved method of transferring PHI.  A study team member will then screen the EHR for 
potential exclusion criteria and contact the patient to assess interest and administer a brief screening 
questionnaire.  If needed, we will also identify potential participants via an EHR data pull, then send 
introductory letters and follow up with a screening phone call.  However, a key goal for this exploratory study is 
to develop procedures to maximize provider referrals, as this will be critical for downstream implementation.  
All eligi ble patients will be asked to attend a baseline visit that will involve completion of consent, baseline 
assessments and receipt of an accelerometer.  Following return of the accelerometer, participants will be 
informed of their randomization assignment via  telephone. A participant will be considered enrolled once they 
have consented and been randomized.   
 
To facilitate completion of recruitment calls, as well as baseline and follow -up assessment calls, we will call 
participants on different times of day and different days, across multiple weeks.  We have used this strategy 
successfully in prior studies to r each participants at times convenient to them.  
  
6.0  STUDY INTERV ENTIONS  
6.1  STUDY INTERVENTION ADMINISTRATION  
 
OA CARE  Intervention   
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
15 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  Overview .  For patients, OA CARE  includes 
evidence -based behavioral weight management and 
exercise interventions, as well as tailored referrals to 
physical therapy, psychological interventions, 
additional weight / nutrition -related services and 
sleep -related services based on patient -specific 
needs and in coordination with the PCP (Figure 2).  
These referrals will be based on screening 
questions administered six months after initiating 
weight management and exercise interventions; the 
rationale for this timing is that it allows us to 
evaluate which additional services patients may 
need after engaging in “first line” therapies for a 
meaningful period of time 4,8,10. PCPs of patients 
enrolled in OA CARE  will be given a video -based 
summary of ACR treatment guidelines 10, 
collaborate on patient referrals, and receive brief 
progress reports on their enrolled patients.  An OA 
CARE Navigator  will facilitate all activities within the 
care pathway, including scheduling patients for 
weight management and exercise classes (in 
collaboration with the YMCA), conducting 6 -month 
screening questions, coordinating referrals with 
PCPs, preparing patient progress reports for PCPs, and serving as a point person for both patient and PCPs. 
Importantly for implementation, the OA CARE Navigator role does not require clinical or other specialized 
expertise, so in clinical settings this role could be performed by a variety of personnel (e.g., chronic care 
managers, nurses, schedulers).   
Weight Loss & Exercise Interventions. Evidence -based weight loss and exercise programs will be delivered by 
the Triangle YMCA, within the structure of the Medical Membership.  (All services provided to study 
participants by the YMCA will be their standard programming; they will note be delivering a study -specific 
intervention.) This membership provides access to multiple group exercise programs, exercise facilities, and a 
health coach who assists members with meeting health goals and selecting appropriate p rograms and classes. 
All patients in OA CARE will begin with participation in the YMCA’s Weight Loss Program  (Program) . This 
program involves 12 weekly sessions that include goal -setting, food and activity tracking, introduction to 
physical activity offerings, and weigh -ins. This Program is based on best practices from evidence -based 
behavioral weight loss programs.  Part icipants may repeat the program following the first 12 -week session if 
they have not met weight loss goals and / or would like continued s tructure and support for these behavior 
changes.  The Triangle YMCA will deliver the Weight Loss Program to OA CARE members in groups of 
approximately 10; this will provide cohesion for OA CARE participants. In the beginning  of the study , the 
Program will  be delivered virtually  (e.g. video conferencing platform)  for feasibility reasons  (e.g., potential for 
study participants to reside in different geographic locations that would make travel to a central location 
challenging) . However, the Program may be of fered in -person in the future.   During the screening call, we will 
assess whether the patient has internet access and a device (computer, tablet, smartphone)  on which they can 
access the Program . If the patient screens ineligible for this reason, we will ask the patient if they would like to 
be contacted, if the Program is offered in -person at a future date.  If we do offer the Program in person, this will 
no longer be considered an exclusion criterion. The YMCA offers many exercise programs and classes 
appropriate for individuals with OA. A YMCA health coach will assist participants with selecting an exercise 
program (including appropriateness based on their pa in and functional limitations) and continuing to engage 
with exercise -based therapies throughout their 12 -month involvement in OA CARE.  The UNC study team will 
also give p articipants instructions regarding how to access a free Walk With Ease workbook (through the 
OAAA’s online portal) and take advantage of other tools available through this program.   

OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
16 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  Additional Tailored Services. After  6-month s, we will administer a series of questionnaires to assess patients’ 
needs for and interest in additional interventions included in OA treatment guidelines (Table 1) 10,20.  Our 
multidisciplinary study team, which includes individuals with deep expertise in OA treatment and guidelines, 
has developed algorithms to guide these referrals. Patients will be given information on the types of 
interventions shown in Table 1  (via mail or email), and the OA CARE  Navigator will engage patients in a 
shared decision -making process  (via phone)  regarding additional referrals, with a focus on interventions for 
which they meet criteria shown in Table 1.  However, the OA CARE  Navigator will facilitate referrals and 
recommendations for any services of interest to patients, regardless of criteria shown in the table. Any referrals 
for clinically -based services (e.g., physical therapy, sleep testing) will be coordinated with the P CP.  Table 1 
also shows examples of interventions and resources within each category, ranging from free, publicly available 
programs to individual clinical services; some services will be relevant regardless of geographic location and 
some will be customized based on local resources, as we have done previously 33. The OA CARE  Navigator 
will also call participants about a month later to follow up on any questions they may have regarding resources 
or referrals.  The OA CARE  Navigator may also conduct additional calls with a participant if needed to 
coordinate connection with resources or referrals.  
Table 1.  Criteria and Examples of Additional Tailored Services  
Type of Service  Criteria  Example Interventions & Resources  
Psychological 
Interventions  Subgroups for Targeted Treatment (STarT 
Back) Tool 47-49: 4 or more psychosocial risk 
factors (pain bothersomeness, fear, worry, 
catastrophizing, depression) 50 Free, evidence -based pain coping skills 
training programs (e.g. painTRAINER) and 
referral to local mental health providers who 
specialize in pain management  
Physical Therapy  Persistent self -reported difficulty with 
walking or stair -climbing, balance 
difficulties, recent falls or pain as a limitation 
to engaging in regular exercise  Referrals based on based on patients’ 
preferences for location, geography, and 
health insurance coverage  
Weight Management & 
Nutrition Services  < 5% weight loss51   Referrals to registered dieticians and other 
credentialled clinicians who specialize in 
weight loss support  
Sleep Services  Sleep apnea: “high risk” based on the 
STOP questionnaire, score ≥  2 52.  
Insomnia: score ≥11 on the Insomnia 
Severity Index 53.      Referrals for sleep testing, recommendations 
for free, evidence -based cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia programs (e.g., CBTI -
Coach app), and referrals to local providers or 
group programs focusing on sleep -related 
therapies.    
Provider Intervention.  As noted above, we have intentionally designed the PCP intervention to be brief, 
therefore maximizing feasibility and engagement.  There are three components to the PCP intervention.  The 
first is a  set of  brief video s summarizing current OA treatment guidelines, with a focus on practical application 
and the role of the PCP.  Second, providers will receive progress reports for their enrolled patient s through 
encrypted email  or other UNC approved method of sharing PHI ; this  will include changes in symptoms and 
health behaviors from the study team at 6 - and 12 -months. Third, providers will be involved with referrals to 
additional clinical services, as described above.  The OA CARE  Navigator will provide the PCP with 
information on patient requests for referrals, based on the 6 -month assessment, and the referral process will 
follow the usual procedures within the primary care clinic.   
 
6.2  FIDELITY   
 
Interventionist Training  
OA Care Navigator : The OA Care will be trained by the principal investigator prior to delivering the intervention. 
This training will include general instruction in intervention delivery steps, processes for communicating with 
YMCA personnel and PCPs vis email and the electronic health records, content for notes to PCPs, 
administration of 6 -month screening questionnaires, and discussion of potential services and referrals during 
the 6 -month phone call. For the 6 -month screening questionnaire s and discussion  of referrals, training will 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
17 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  include mock sessions with both experienced study team members and non -study member volunteers 
(observed by the principal investigator). The OA Care Navigator will also view the video created for PCPs, as 
well as other materials from the OAAA , to become highly familiar with OA symptoms and care.  
 
Fidelity Monitoring  
Monitoring of Intervention Contacts . Dr. Allen or another experienced study team member will monitor study 
intervention contacts and provide feedback to the interventionists, including the following:  
 
• OA CARE Navigator 6 -month phone calls: The first 5 calls will be monitored  with potential for additional 
calls if deemed appropriate by the principal investigator or other study team member. Monitoring will 
involve checks to ensure that all questions are asked per protocol, services and referrals are appropriately 
explained to patients, and the Navigator engages th e patient in a meaningful discussion regarding their 
interest in services and referrals.  
 
 
6.3  MEASURES TO MINIMIZE BIAS: RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING  
 
The randomization scheme will be generated by the study statistician and stored within the study database.  
The database will be configured so that blinded study personnel (e.g., those conducting follow -up 
assessments) will not have access to randomization information. The participants will not be notified of 
randomization assignment until all baseline assessments are complete.  In addition , an individual participant’s 
randomization assignment will not be known to any study personnel until baseline assessments are complete.   
 
6.4  STUDY INTERVENTION ADHERENCE   
 
The study database will be used to track participants’ completion of all assessment visits, as well as all 
contacts with the OA CARE  Navigator . The coordinator  will also maintain close communication with the OA 
CARE Navigator  regarding facilitat ion of  all activities within the care pathway . The YMCA will provide  
documentation of patients’ participation in specific  YMCA  programs  to the OA CARE  Navigator ; this 
information will also be  summarized for P CPs. Also, f or each patient, the OA CARE  Navigator will maintain a 
checklist of intervention activities, target dates, dates of completion, and comments.  
 
6.5  CONCOMITANT THERAPY  
  
Participants will be p ermitted to continue any other OA treatment during the course of the study.  
 
7  STUDY INTERVENTION/ DISCONTINUATION AND PARTICIPANT 
DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL  
7.1  DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY INTERVENTION  
 
When a participant discontinues the OA CARE  intervention , they will be asked if they are willing to continue 
with other remaining activities (e.g., follow -up assessments) based on the  study protocol.   If a clinically 
significant finding is identified after enrollment  (e.g. health -related changes that may change the safety level of 
participation ), the investigator or qualified designee will determine if any change in participant management is 
needed. Any new clinically relevant finding will be reported as an adverse event (AE). The data to be collected 
at the tim e of study intervention discontinuation will include the reason(s) for discontinuing the participant from 
the intervention, and methods for determining the need to discontinue . 
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
18 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  7.2  PARTICIPANT DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY   
 
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  
An investigator may discontinue a participant from the study for the following reasons:  
 
• Lost-to-follow up; unable to contact subject  
• Any event or medical condition or situation occurs such that con tinued collection of follow -up study data 
would not be in the best interest of the participant or might require an additional treatment that would 
confound the interpretation of the study  
• The participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or not previously recognized) that 
precludes further study participation  
The reason for participant discontinuation  or withdrawal from the study will be recorded in the study database.   
Participants who discontinue or are withdrawn will be replaced up to the point of randomization assignment 
being given to the participant.  Once participants are given their randomization assignment, they will be 
counted toward the total study sample size and not replaced.  
 
7.3  LOST TO FOLLOW -UP 
A participant will be considered lost to follow -up if he or she fails to retur n for the final, 12-month follow -up 
assessment.  If a participant misses intervention calls or follow -up assessments prior to the 12 -month time 
point and cannot be contacted during the time frame, the study team will still attempt to contact the participant 
for remaining calls / assessments. The study team must attempt to contact a participant at least 3 times, on 
different days of the week, different times of day, and across at least 2 weeks, before they are considered to 
have missed a visit / assessment or be lost to follow -up.  These contact attempts will be documented in the 
study database.  
 
8   STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
 
8.1  ENDPOINT AND OTHER NON -SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
Measures will be collected at baseline, 6-months and 12 -months  by a trained study team member  blinded to 
randomization assignment. Measures will be administered in-person at baseline and 12 -months and at 6 -
months via phone.  We may schedule a time to call the participant before or after the in -person 12-month visit  
to complete the questionnaires over the phone. Participants will be paid $60 for baseline and 12 -month 
assessments ($45 for in -person visits + $15 to wear and return the accelerometer) and $40 for 6 -month 
assessments ($25 for phone -based assessments + $15 to wear and return the accelerometer).  
 
Feasibility Metrics . We will compute the proportion of patients who are eligible and who consent to participate 
in the study, mean number of intervention visits attended, and proportion of participants who complete follow -
up assessments. We will also determine the proportion s of participants who meet criteria for and are interested 
in each type of additional intervention (at 6 -month follow -up), and we will track participants’ use of these 
services during the study period.   
Acceptability of OA CARE . We will ask all participants in the OA CARE group to complete a series of 
satisfaction ratings and open -ended questions regarding different components of the intervention.  We will not 
collect formal measures from referring PCPs.  However, following the completion of the study, we will contact 
providers and ask for their suggestions on ways in which OA CARE  could be improved. This will be 
approached as a stakeholder engagement type of activity, and PCPs will not be considered research 
participants  for this purpose .  
Primary Patient Outcome:  Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC ).  The 
primary outcome for this study is the WOMAC, a measure of lower extremity pain (5 items), stiffness (2 items), 
and function (17 items).  All items are rated on a Likert scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 4 (extreme symptoms). The 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
19 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  WOMAC has well established psychometric properties including reliability, construct validity and internal 
consistency 54.  The WOMAC has been widely used in trials of behavioral interventions for patients with lower 
extremity OA, confirming its sensitivity to change in this context. In addition to the total WOMAC score (primary 
outcome), we will separately examine WOMAC pai n and function subscales.  
Secondary Patient Outcomes .  
Body Weight. We will assess body weight using a research / clinical grade scale (e.g., Tanita) that will be 
calibrated regularly.  We will also measure participants’ height in order to  calculate body mass index.   
Physical Activity. All participants will be asked to wear an Actigraph GT3X+ (Pensacola, FL) 55at the hip during 
waking hours for 7 days. We will use data processing and logistical methods we have used successfully in 
prior work 33.  Physical activity metrics will include minutes of any intensity activity (primary), minutes of 
moderate to vigorous intensity physical activity, step counts and sedentary time.  We will also ask participants 
to complete a modified version of the Community Health Activities Model Program for Seniors Physical Activity 
Measure 56, which provides  information on the types of activities in which participants are engaging.   
Physical Function.  We will administer tests recommended by the Osteoarthritis Research Society International 
for clinical trials of knee OA including a 30 -second chair  stand test and timed up -and-go test 57.  We will also 
include a 2 -minute march test as an assessment of endurance 58 These tests will be conducted in accordance 
with established protocols 57,58.  
Exploratory Patient Outcomes .  
Sleep Measures. Sleep apnea symptoms will be assessed with the STOP Questionnaire 52, and insomnia 
symptoms will be assessed with the Insomnia Severity Index 53.  These measures were selected based on 
clinical practice guidelines 59.   
Psychological Measures .  We will assess depressive symptoms via the Patient Health Questionnaire -8 (8-item 
measure, higher  60, the Pain Catastrophizing Scale 61, and the Arthritis Self -Efficacy Scale 62,63.  These are all 
validated scales used widely in the context of OA trials.  
Balance . We will assess balance with a single leg stance test , using established protocols  58.  The maximum 
possible standing time will be 30 seconds, and we will also designate whether participants achieve a 
commonly utilized threshold of 10 seconds.    
Participant Characteristics . We will collect the following information to characterize the study sample: age, race 
/ ethnicity, sex, education level, work status, household income, health insurance status, marital status, 
comorbid illnesses 64, joints with arthritis symptoms, and duration of knee / hip OA symptoms.  
Costs . Although costs are not a primary focus of this exploratory trial, we will collect these data to refine 
processes for the larger trial. This will include costs of the YMCA Medical Membership, costs (to both the 
health system and patients) associated with additional clinical services that result from 6 -month screening and 
referrals, and patients’ self -reported costs for engaging any additional community -based services or programs.   
 
8.2  SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
  If a study team member learns of a ny adverse events ( AEs) that occur in the course of participants’ home 
exercise , this  will be documented on the Adverse Events form , as described below.  
 
8.3  ADVERSE EVENTS AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS   
 8.3.1 DEFINITION OF ADVERSE EVENTS  
This protocol uses the definition of adverse event from DHHS Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP): 
Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, including any abnormal sign (for 
example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the 
subject’s participation in the research, whether  or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
20 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  research (modified from the definition of adverse events in the 1996 International Conference on 
Harmonization E -6 Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice).  
 
 8.3.2 DEFINITION OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  
This protocol uses the definition of serious adverse event from DHHS OHRP:  any adverse event that results in 
death;  is life -threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred);  results in 
inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  results in a persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity;  results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
may jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
other outcomes listed in this d efinition (examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in the emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
 8.3.3 CLASSIFICATION OF AN ADVERSE EVENT  
 
  8.3.3.1 SEVERITY OF EVENT  
All AEs will be assessed by the PI or co -investigators , if the PI is not available .  The following guidelines will be 
used to describe severi ty:  
 
• Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s daily activities.  
• Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic measures. 
Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
• Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic drug therapy or 
other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life -threatening or incapacitating.  Of note, the 
term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious” .] 
 
  8.3.3.2 RELATIONSHIP TO STUDY INTERVENTION/EXPERIMENTAL MANIPULATION  
All AEs  will have their relationship to study procedures, including the intervention, assessed by  the PI or co -
investigators based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. The degree of certainty about 
causality will be graded using the categories below.  
• Definitely Related  – There is clear evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and other possible 
contributing factors can be ruled out. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, 
occurs in a plausible time relationship to study intervention administr ation and cannot be explained by 
concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the study intervention 
(dechallenge) should be clinically plausible. The event must be pharmacologically or 
phenomenologically definitive, with u se of a satisfactory rechallenge procedure if necessary.  
• Probably Related – There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and the influence of other 
factors is unlikely. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs within a 
reasonable time after administration of the study inter vention, is unlikely to be attributed to concurrent 
disease or other drugs or chemicals, and follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal 
(dechallenge). Rechallenge information is not required to fulfill this definition.  
• Not Related – The AE is completely independent of study intervention administration, and/or evidence 
exists that the event is definitely related to another etiology. There must be an alternative, definitive 
etiology documented by the clinician.  
  8.3.3.3 EXPECTEDNESS  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
21 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  The PI or Dr. Saint -Surin  (co-investigator on the study ) will be responsible for determining whether an AE is 
expected or unexpected. An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event 
is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study procedures.  
 
 8.3.4 TIME PERIOD AND FREQUENCY FOR EVENT ASSESSMENT AND FOLLOW -UP 
The occurrence of an AE or serious adverse event ( SAE) may come to the attention of study team members 
during study visits.  All AEs, not otherwise precluded per the protocol, will be captured on the  Adverse Event 
Form.  Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, PI or co -investigator ’s assessment 
of severity, relationship to study procedures (assessed only by those with the training and authority to make a 
diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study will be 
documented appropriatel y regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution.  
Any medical or psychiatric condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be 
considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at 
any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event at 
each level of severity to be performed. Documentation of onset and duration of each episode will be 
maintained for AEs characterized as intermittent.  
The Project Coordinator will record events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent is 
obtained until 7 (for non -serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study participation.  
Participants are identified in the EMR as a study participant and for each AE/SAE occurrence, research team 
member s will receive  an alert through EMR. AEs or SAEs may also be reported to study physical therapist 
during the course of intervention visits.  Events will be followed for outcome information  until resolution or 
stabilization.  
 
 8.3.5  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Once Dr. Allen (or a co -investigator) is contacted about the adverse event, she / he will make a determination 
about the reporting requirements in accordance with UNC  IRB guidelines.   
The PI or a co -investigator will report any AEs to the UNC IRB that suggest new or increased risk to 
participants or others within 7 calendar days of when the PI became aware of the information. New or 
increased risk is defined as any incident, experience, outcome, or new information that are (1)unexpected, (2) 
related or at least possible related to participation in the  research, and (3) indicates that subjects or others are 
at a greater risk of  harm (including physical, psychological, economic, legal, or social harm)  
 For AEs that are not related to participation in the research and do not suggest new or increased risks to the 
participant, these will be reported to NIAMS on the bi -annual safety report  submitted to the SO     
 
 8.3.6 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Once Dr. Allen (or a co -investigator) is contacted about a serious  adverse event, she / he will make a 
determination about the reporting requirements in accordance with UNC  IRB guidelines.  This will include 
notification of the UNC  IRB within 24 -hours if a study -related death and  within 48 hours if another SAE.  
All SAEs will be reported to the NIAMS (through the NIAMS Executive Secretary) within 48 hours of the 
investigator becoming aware of the event . The SAE Report Form will be completed  and the SO’s review of the 
SAE report will be shared with the NIAMS once received.  
 
 8.3.7 REPORTING EVENTS TO PARTICIPANTS  
N/A 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
22 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
 8.3.8  EVENTS OF SPECIAL INTEREST  
N/A 
 
 8.3.9 REPORTING OF PREGNANCY   
N/A 
 
8.4. UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
 
 8.4.1 DEFINITION OF UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
 
This protocol uses the definition of Unanticipated Problems as defined by the Office for Human Research 
Protections (OHRP). OHRP considers unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others to 
include, in general, any incident, experience, or  outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
 
(1) Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research procedures that are 
described in the IRB -approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the participant population being studied;  
 
(2) Related or possibly related to participation in the research. Possibly related means there is a reasonable 
possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in 
the research); and  
 
(3) Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
OHRP recognizes that it may be difficult to determine whether a particular incident, experience, or outcome is 
unexpected and whether it is related or possibly related to participation in the research.  OHRP notes that an 
incident, experience, or outcome t hat meets the three criteria above generally will warrant consideration of 
substantive changes in the research protocol or informed consent process/document or other corrective 
actions in order to protect the safety, welfare, or rights of participants or o thers.   
The following corrective actions or substantive changes that could be considered in response to an 
unanticipated problem include:  
 
o Changes to the research protocol initiated by the investigator prior to obtaining IRB approval to 
eliminate apparent immediate hazards to subjects;  
o modification of inclusion or exclusion criteria to mitigate the newly identified risks;  
o implementation of additional procedures for monitoring subjects; suspension of enrollment of new 
subjects;  
o suspension of research procedures in currently enrolled subjects;  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
23 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  o modification of informed consent documents to include a description of newly recognized risks;  
o provision of additional information about newly recognized risks to previously enrolled subjects.  
 
Only a small subset of adverse events occurring in human subjects participating in research will meet these 
three criteria for an unanticipated problem. Furthermore, there are other types of incidents, experiences, and 
outcomes that occur during the conduc t of human subjects research that represent unanticipated problems but 
are not considered adverse events.  For example, some unanticipated problems involve social or economic 
harm instead of the physical or psychological harm associated with adverse events .  In other cases, 
unanticipated problems place subjects or others at increased risk of harm, but no harm occurs.   
 
 8.4.2 UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS REPORTING  
All UPs will be reported to UNC IRB  within 48 hours of the PI becoming aware of the event.   All UPs will be 
reported to the NIAMS and the SO (through the NIAMS Executive Secretary) within 48 hours of the PI 
becoming aware of the event.   
 8.4.3 REPORTING UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS TO PARTICIPANTS  
Participants will be given any new information gained during the course of the study that might affect their 
willingness to continue participation in the study.   
 
9  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
9.1  STATISTICAL HYPOTHESES  
The aim of this study is to conduct an exploratory randomized controlled trial with 60 patients with 
knee and / or hip OA equally randomized to OA CARE  or a usual care (UC) control group.  Sub-aims  and 
associated hypotheses  are:  
Aim 1.  Assess the feasibility and acceptability of OA CARE .  There are no specific hypotheses associated 
with this aim.  Analyses will be descriptive in nature.      
Aim 2.  Obtain preliminary  data on the efficacy of OA CARE  with respect to the primary outcome of 
change in total Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score.   We 
hypothesize that participants in OA CARE will have clinically meaningful improvements in WOMAC scores at 
6- and 12 -month follow -up relative to a UC control group.  Similarly, we hypothesize that participants in OA 
CARE will have greater improvements in secondary and exploratory outcomes compared with the control 
group.    
 
9.2  SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION  
 
Due to the exploratory nature of this trial, the objective is to inform estimates for a larger RCT. Accordingly, we 
do not necessarily expect this trial to be highly powered. However, we do note that for the projected total of 
n=60  enrolled  participants, equally allocated between the two arms of the trial at the two -sided 0.05 
significance level, and accounting for a conservative effect of clustering within the OA CARE  arm, we would 
exceed 80% power to detect an effect size of at least 1.7 SD. This choice of sample size is deemed to be 
feasible for completion within the time frame of this exploratory trial and will allow sufficient experience with 
intervention delivery to inform the larger trial. We expect some drop -out and loss -to-follow -up among 
participants, and this exploratory trial will contribute to our sample size estimation for the larger RCT in this 
regard. However, based on rates of drop -out in prior trials 28,29,31, our target sample size of 60 participants will 
allow ample experience with study procedures. Our analytic strategy (described below) will also accommodate 
missing data due to dropout, missed visits, and loss -to-follow -up.   
 
9.3  POPULATIONS FOR ANALYSES  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
24 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   
The primary analyses will be conducted using an intent -to-treat approach.  Supportive exploratory analyses 
may be conducted to consider samples with greater completion of study intervention visits.  Since this is a n 
exploratory trial, the nature of these supportive analyses will be based on observed patterns of intervention 
contacts .  
 
9.4  STATISTICAL ANALYSES PLAN  
 
The primary patient outcome of the total WOMAC score will be statistically analyzed between experimental 
groups across the follow -up time points through a general linear mixed model (GLMM).  Fixed effects will 
include indicators for the OA CARE  group, the 12 -month follow -up time point, and their interaction (group by 
time).  Additional fixed effects will be baseline total WOMAC score and possibly any covariates exhibiting 
random imbalance between groups.  Random effects will be included for pati ents (to acc ount for their repeated 
measures) and for grouping within the OA CARE  arm (e.g. 10 -participant Weight Management Program 
groups) to account for clustering. Customized statistical linear contrasts will be constructed to estimate the 
effect size via the difference in means for OA CARE  versus usual care, along with the corresponding 95% 
confidence limits, separately at 6 - and 12 - months, to provide useful estimates that will inform the sample size 
estimation for the subsequent trial.  Estimated correlations am ong the follow -up time points, as well as 
estimated within -cluster intraclass correlation for the OA CARE  arm, will also be useful in this regard. 
Exploratory testing of efficacy will also be conducted using these statistical contrasts. The approach outlined 
above will be repeated separately for the WOMAC pain and function subscale scores, as well as for the 
secondary outcomes identified above. If any of these outcomes exhibit distributions that deviate markedly from 
normality, alternatives will include tra nsformations to normalize the distribution and variable categorization with 
appropriate data analysis (e.g., mixed -effects logistic models or logistic models utilizing generalized estimating 
equations to accommodate correlated observations). An intent -to-treat approach will be followed in these 
analyses to provide a conservative approach. A two -sided 0.05 significance level will be applied to each 
outcome with no adjustment for multiple comparison in keeping with the exploratory nature of the trial. The 
GLM M approach utilizes all available follow -up data and accommodates missing data under a missing at 
random (MAR) paradigm. If missing data are extensive and deemed not to be MAR, analyses will be 
conducted using multiple imputation, yielding complete data fo r all participants. The feasibility and acceptability 
metrics will be summarized through descriptive statistics, along with corresponding 95% confidence intervals, 
separately by experimental arm when appropriate. This includes frequencies and proportions o f patients who 
are eligible, who consent to participate in the study, who complete follow -up assessments, who meet criteria 
for and are interested in each type of additional intervention (at 6 -month follow -up), and who use of these 
services during the stud y period.  Means and standard deviations will be computed for the number of 
intervention visits attended by participants.  
 
10  SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 REGULATORY, ETHICAL, AND STUDY OVERSIGHT CONSIDERATIONS  
 10.1.1 INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
 
10.1.1.1 CONSENT AND OTHER INFORMATIONAL DOCUMENTS PROVIDED TO 
PARTICIPANTS  
Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention, study procedures, and risks will be given to the 
participant and written documentation of informed consent will be completed prior to starting the study 
intervention.  The following consent materia ls are submitted with this protocol: Adult Consent Form.  
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
25 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  10.1.1.2 CONSENT PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION  
 
Once a potential participant meets the medical record and telephone screening criteria for eligibility, and is 
interested in participating , they will be asked to attend a baseline visit that will involve completion of consent, 
baseline assessments and receipt of an accelerometer . No other study activities will occur until this process is 
completed.    
 
We will use a UNC IRB approved consent form / script with included language that satisfies the HIPAA 
requirements and outlines the protection of health information utilized in the study.   
 
Written informed consent will be obtained by a trained study team member.  The study team member will read 
the IRB approved consent form to the potential participant and provide an opportunity for him/her to ask any 
questions that they may have about the research study.  We anticipate this process to take approximately 20 
minutes, but this time will not be limited should a participant have additional questions or concerns regarding 
the study.  During this phase of the consent process, it will be stressed th at the participant is not obligated to 
participate in the study, that participation is completely voluntary, and that he/she may withdrawal from the 
study at any time without penalty.  Also, potential risks from participating in the study will be outlined in the 
consent form, as are the measures taken to protect against study specific risks.  Once the information in the 
consent  form is fully reviewed and understood by the individual, he/she will be asked to decide at that time if 
they would like to voluntar ily participate in the research study.  If the individual does choose to participate in the 
study, both the study team member and the participant will sign two copies of the informed consent form.  The 
participant will receive one copy for their records and the other copy will be stored in a locked file cabinet of a 
study team member.     
 
If after review  of the consent form, the potential participant is not sure they would like to participate in the study 
at this time, they may choose to consider the study further, and then contact the study team if they decide later 
that they would like to participate.  
 
Once informed consent has been collected, the study team member will collect written  HIPAA authorization, 
and no activities will commence until this is received by the study team.  
 
Participants will only be included if they have capacity to give legally effective consent. Additionally, this study 
will only recruit participants whom are English speakers.    
 
 
10.1.2 STUDY DISCONTINUATION AND CLOSURE  
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause. 
Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be provided by the 
suspending or terminating party to study participants, invest igator, funding agency, and regulatory authorities. 
If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI will promptly inform study participants, the IRB, and 
sponsor/funding agency and will provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. S tudy participants will 
be contacted, as applicable, and be informed of changes to study visit schedule.  
 
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
• Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participants  
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stopping    
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
• Determination that the primary endpoint has been met  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
26 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  • Determination of futility  
 
The study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are addressed, and 
satisfy the funding agency, sponsor, IRB or other relevant regulatory or oversight b odies (OHRP, SO). 
 
10.1.3 CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY  
Participant confidentiality and privacy is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, their staff, the 
safety and oversight monitor(s), and the sponsor(s) and funding agency. This confidentiality is extended to the 
data being collected as p art of this study. Data that could be used to identify a specific study participant will be 
held in strict confidence within the research team. No personally -identifiable information from the study will be 
released to any unauthorized third party without p rior written approval of the sponsor/funding agency.  
 
Personal health information (e.g. patient name and contact information) will be shared with YMCA so they may 
contact participants to enroll in the medical membership and participate in programs .  Any information shared 
between approved UNC study team members and YMCA personnel will be done verbally by phone, by 
encrypted email or a UNC IRB approved platform for sharing PHI.   
 
All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the sponsor or funding agency, representatives of the 
IRB, regulatory agencies or representatives from companies or organizations supplying the product, may 
inspect all documents and records required to be maintained by the investigator, including but not limited to, 
medical records (office, clinic, or hospital) and pharmacy records for the participants in this study.  
 
The study participant’s contact information will be securely stored on a secure study database  for internal use 
during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a secure location for as long a 
period as dictated by the reviewing IRB, Institutional policies, or sponsor/funding agency requirements.  
 
Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific reporting, will be 
stored on a secure UNC server . The study data entry and study management systems used by research staff 
will be secured and password protected. At the end of the study, all study databases will be de -identified and 
archived on a secure UNC server.  
 
Measures Taken to Ensure Confidentiality of Data Shared per the NIH Data Sharing Policies  
It is NIH policy that the results and accomplishments of the activities that it funds should be made available to 
the public (see  https://grants.nih.gov/policy/sharing.htm ). The PI will ensure all mechanisms used to share data 
will include proper plans and safeguards for the protection of privacy, confidentiality, and security for data 
dissemination and reuse (e.g., all data will be thoroughly de -identified and will not be traceable to a specific 
study participant). Plans for archiving and long -term preservation of the data will be implemented, as 
appropriate.  
 
Certificate of Confidentiality  
To further protect the privacy of study participants, the Secretary, Health and Human Services (HHS), has 
issued a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) to all researchers engaged in biomedical, behavioral, clinical or 
other human subjects research funded w holly or in part by the federal government.   Recipients of NIH funding 
for human subjects research are required to protect identifiable research information from forced disclosure per 
the terms of the NIH Policy (see https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/index ). As set forth in  45 CFR Part 
75.303(a)  and NIHGPS Chapter 8.3 , recipients conducting NIH -supported research covered by this Policy are 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
27 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  required to establish and maintain effective internal controls (e.g., policies and procedures) that provide 
reasonable assurance that the award is managed in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the 
terms and conditions of award. It is the NI H policy that investigators and others who have access to research 
records will not disclose identifying information except when the participant consents or in certain instances 
when federal, state, or local law or regulation requires disclosure. NIH expec ts investigators to inform research 
participants of the protections and the limits to protections provided by a Certificate issued by this Policy.  
 
10.1.4 FUTURE USE OF STORED DATA  
 
Data collected for this study will be analyzed and stored on a secure UNC server. After the study is completed, 
the de -identified data will be made available to other researchers, available by request to the PI. Investigators 
requesting study data must adhere to regulatory requirements for data use (e.g., IRB approvals, data use 
agreements) . No biological samples are collected for this study.  
 
10.1.5 KEY ROLES AND STUDY GOVERNANCE  
 
Principal Investigator  Independent  Safety Monitor  
Kelli D. Allen, PhD  Michael K. Seifert, MD  
Assistant  Professor of Orthopaedics,  
Primary Care and Interventional 
Sports Medicine  
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill   University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill  
3300 Thursto n Bldg. , CB #7280  
Chapel Hill, NC  27599 -7280  102 Mason Farm Road  
2nd Floor  
Chapel Hill, NC  275 14 
919-966-0558  919-966-6441  
kdallen@med.unc.edu  michael_seifert@med.unc.edu  
 
 10.1.6 SAFETY OVERSIGHT  
Because this study involves only survey -based assessments and digital recordings and participation in mild / 
moderate physical activity programs, this is a minimal risk study we do not believe it requires a data safety 
monitoring board.    
Safety oversight will be under the direction of the S afety Officer  (SO) . The SO will be independent from the 
study conduct and free of conflict of interest. The SO’s role is to advise the PI (and not the NIAMS) regarding 
participant safety, scientific integrity and ethical conduct of the study.  On a biannual basis  or as requested , the 
PI will provide to the SO a study summary, a report of all AEs, and any problems or issues that have been 
identified.   
 
10.1.7 CLINICAL MONITORING  
 
Since this is a single site study there will not be site visits conducted by the PI or co -investigators.  However, 
we will monitor the fidelity of intervention delivery as described above.  Navitas  may conduct a site visit on 
behalf of the NIAMS, however, Navitas  will not have the responsibility of the overall clinical monitoring for this 
study.  
 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
28 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304   10.1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
 
Quality control (QC) procedures will be implemented as follows : 
 
Informed consent --- During the consenting process, the study team member will review the completed consent 
document to ensure the participant has signed and dated the consent form accurately prior to completing any 
other study activities.    
 
Source documents and the electronic data --- Data from the physical function and balance  will be initially 
captured on source documents and will ultimately be entered into the study database; all other data from study 
measures will be entered directly into the study database.  To ensure accuracy site staff will compare a 
representative sample  of source data against the database.  
 
Protocol Deviations  – The study team will review protocol deviations on an ongoing basis and will implement 
corrective actions when the quantity or nature of deviations are deemed to be at a level of concern.  
 
Should independent monitoring become necessary, the PI will provide direct access to all trial related sites, 
source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor/funding agency, 
and inspection by local and regulator y authorities.  
 
 10.1.9 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
 
 10.1.9.1 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Study data will be stored on a secure UNC server in a folder accessible only to IRB -approved study team 
members. We will use REDCap to store all patient information and dispositions, responses to screening and 
outcome assessments. REDCap is a secure web ap plication supported at UNC that can be used to build and 
manage case report forms, surveys, and other data capture mechanisms.  Additionally, for the OA CARE  
intervention, the participant ’s name and contact information will be shared with  the YMCA  verbally  by phone, 
by encrypted email or a UNC IRB approved platform for sharing PHI.  Paper copies will be  rare and if 
necessary will be  kept to a minimum and if shared will be done via a UNC IRB approved platform for sharing 
PHI.  Any paper copies will be stored in the participant’s individual study folder, which will be kept in a locked 
file cabinet of a study team member.  
 10.1.9.2 STUDY RECORDS RETENTION  
 
Research study records will be maintained for no less than 6 years following the completion of the study, after 
which time personal identifying information will be removed.  Research information in a subject’s medical 
record will be kept indefinitely. No r ecords will be destroyed without the written consent of the sponsor/funding 
agency, if applicable. It is the responsibility of the sponsor/funding agency to inform the investigator when 
these documents no longer need to be retained.  
 
 10.1.10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
This protocol defines a protocol deviation as any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol,  
ICH GCP, or Manual of Procedures (MOP) requirements. The noncompliance may be either on the part of the 
participant, the investigator, or the study site staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions will be 
developed by the site and implemented prom ptly.  
 
These practices are consistent with ICH GCP:  
• Section 4.5 Compliance with Protocol, subsections 4.5.1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
29 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  • Section 5.1 Quality Assurance and Quality Control, subsection 5.1.1  
• Section 5.20 Noncompliance, subsections 5.20.1, and 5.20.2.  
 
It will be the responsibility of the site investigator to use continuous vigilance to identify and report deviations 
that impact participant safety to the UNC IRB within 7 business days of the time the PI becomes aware to the 
event, if the protocol deviati on harmed participant(s) or others or placed participant(s) or others at increased 
risk of harm. Otherwise, protocol deviations/violations that occur but do not affect participant safety will be 
submitted with the routine safety reports as noted. Protocol deviations will be sent to the reviewing IRB per 
their policies. The site investigator will be responsible for knowing and adhering to the reviewing IRB 
requirements. Further details about the handling of protocol deviations will be included in the MOP.  
Additionally, protocol deviations impacting participant safety will be sent to the NIAMS (through the NIAMS 
Executive Secretary) and the SO within 48 hours of the investigator becoming aware of the event, and that the 
SO’s feedback will be shared with the NI AMS once received.  
 
 10.1.11 PUBLICATION AND DATA SHARING POLICY  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the following publication and data sharing policies and 
regulations:  
 
- National Institutes of Health (NIH) Public Access Policy, which ensures that the public has access to 
the published results of NIH funded research. It requires scientists to submit final peer -reviewed journal 
manuscripts that arise from NIH funds to the di gital archive PubMed Central upon acceptance for 
publication.  
 
This study will comply with the NIH Data Sharing Policy and Policy on the Dissemination of NIH -Funded 
Clinical Trial Information and the Clinical Trials Registration and Results Information Submission rule. As such, 
this trial will be registered at Clinica lTrials.gov, and results information from this trial will be submitted to 
ClinicalTrials.gov. In addition, every attempt will be made to publish results in peer -reviewed journals.  Data 
from this study may be requested from other researchers after the comp letion of the primary endpoint by 
contacting the study PI .  Considerations for ensuring confidentiality of these shared data are described in 
Section 10.1.3  
 
 10.1.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY  
 
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence is critical. Therefore, any actual conflict 
of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect of this trial 
will be disclosed and manage d. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of interest will be required 
to have such conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation in the design and conduct of 
this trial. The study leadership in conjunction with the National Institute on Aging  has established policies and 
procedures for all study group members to disclose all conflicts of interest and will establish a mechanism for 
the management of all reported dualities of interest.  
 
10.2 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
N/A 
 
10.3  ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ACR  American College of Rheumatology  
AE Adverse Event  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
30 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  BMI Body Mass Index  
DHHS  Department of Health and Human 
Services  
CoC Certificate of Confidentiality  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
EHR  Electronic Health Record  
EMR  Electronic Medical Record  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GLMM  General Linear Mixed Model 
HHS  Health and Human Services  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996  
ICH International Council on Harmonisation  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
MVPA  Moderate to Vigorous Intensity Physical 
Activity  
NIAMS  National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases  
NIH  National Institutes of Health  
OA Osteoarthritis  
OAAA  Osteoarthritis Action Alliance  
OARSI  Osteoarthritis Research Society 
International  
OA CARE  OA Clinic -Community CARE Model  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
PA Physical Activity  
PCP Primary Care Provider  
PI Principal Investigator  
QC Quality Control  
RCT Randomize Control Trial  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
UC Usual Care  
UNC  University of North Carolina  
WOMAC  Western Ontario and McMaster 
Universities Osteoarthritis Index  
 
 
10.4 PROTOCOL AMENDMENT HISTORY  
 
Version  Date  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
2.0 7.26.22  Revised column headers on 
Schedule of Activities  Revised to correspond with 
visits described on the 
Schema  
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
31 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  3.0 09.06.22  Updated Synopsis and Strategies 
for Recruitment and Retention  
 Revised because we will also 
be recruiting patients from 
UNC Family Medicine  
    
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. United States Bone and Joint Initiative. The Burden of Musculoskeletal Diseases in the United States, 
Fourth Edition 2018. https://www.boneandjointburden.org/fourth -edition . Accessed December 29, 2020.  
2. Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Osteoarthritis: a Serious Disease, Submitted to the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration. 2016. https://www.oarsi.org/research/oa -serious -disease . Accessed 
December 3, 2020.  
3. Dhawan A, Mather RC, 3rd, Karas V, et al. An epidemiologic analysis of clinical practice guidelines for 
non-arthroplasty treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthroscopy. 2014;30(1):65 -71. 
4. Basedow M, Esterman A. Assessing appropriateness of osteoarthritis care using quality indicators: a 
systematic review. J Eval Clin Pract. 2015;21(5):782 -789. 
5. Abbate LM, Jeffreys AS, Coffman CJ, et al. Demographic and Clinical Factors Associated With 
Nonsurgical Osteoarthritis Treatment Among Patients in Outpatient Clinics. Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken). 2018;70(8):1141 -1149.  
6. Hootman JM, Murphy LB, Omura JD, et al. Health Care Provider Counseling for Physical Activity or 
Exercise Among Adults with Arthritis - United States, 2002 and 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2018;66(5152):1398 -1401.  
7. Guglielmo D, Hootman JM, Murphy LB, et al. Health Care Provider Counseling for Weight Loss Among 
Adults with Arthritis and Overweight or Obesity - United States, 2002 -2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2018;67(17):485 -490. 
8. Meneses SR, Goode AP, Nelson AE, et al. Clinical algorithms to aid osteoarthritis guideline 
dissemination. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016;24(9):1487 -1499.  
9. Khoja SS, Almeida GJ, Chester Wasko M, Terhorst L, Piva SR. Association of Light -Intensity Physical 
Activity With Lower Cardiovascular Disease Risk Burden in Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken). 2016;68(4):424 -431. 
10. Kolasinski SL, Neogi T, Hochberg MC, et al. 2019 American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis 
Foundation Guideline for the Management of Osteoarthritis of the Hand, Hip, and Knee. Arthritis Care 
Res (Hoboken). 2020;72(2):149 -162. 
11. Messier SP, Mihalko SL, Legault C, et al. Effects of intensive diet and exercise on knee joint loads, 
inflammation, and clinical outcomes among overweight and obese adults with knee osteoarthritis: the 
IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310(12):1263 -1273.  
12. Kelley GA, Kelley KS, Hootman JM. Effects of exercise on depression in adults with arthritis: a 
systematic review with meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015;17:21.  
13. Gersing AS, Schwaiger BJ, Nevitt MC, et al. Weight loss regimen in obese and overweight individuals 
is associated with reduced cartilage degeneration: 96 -month data from the Osteoarthritis Initiative. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2019;27(6):863 -870. 
14. Allen KD, Choong PF, Davis AM, et al. Osteoarthritis: Models for appropriate care across the disease 
continuum. Best practice & research Clinical rheumatology. 2016;30(3):503 -535. 
15. Jordan KP, Edwards JJ, Porcheret M, et al. Effect of a model consultation informed by guidelines on 
recorded quality of care of osteoarthritis (MOSAICS): a cluster randomised controlled trial in primary 
care. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2017;25(10):1588 -1597.  
16. Tan BY, Pereira MJ, Yang SY, et al. Collaborative model of care between Orthopaedics and allied 
healthcare professionals in knee osteoarthritis (CONNACT): study protocol for an effectiveness -
implementation hybrid randomized control trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2020;21(1):684.  
17. Egerton T, Hinman RS, Hunter DJ, et al. PARTNER: a service delivery model to implement optimal 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
32 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  primary care management of people with knee osteoarthritis: description of development. BMJ Open. 
2020;10(10):e040423.  
18. Introduction to the Care Model (Module 16). https://www.ahrq.gov/ncepcr/tools/pf -
handbook/mod16.html . Accessed January 19, 2021.  
19. Osteras N, Moseng T, van Bodegom -Vos L, et al. Implementing a structured model for osteoarthritis 
care in primary healthcare: A stepped -wedge cluster -randomised trial. PLoS Med. 
2019;16(10):e1002949.  
20. Bannuru RR, Osani MC, Vaysbrot EE, et al. OARSI guidelines for the non -surgical management of 
knee, hip, and polyarticular osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2019;27(11):1578 -1589.  
21. Kongsted A, Kent P, Quicke JG, Skou ST, Hill JC. Risk -stratified and stepped models of care for back 
pain and osteoarthritis: are we heading towards a common model? Pain Rep. 2020;5(5):e843.  
22. Allen KD, Woolson S, Hoenig HM, et al. Stepped Exercise Program for Patients With Knee 
Osteoarthritis : A Randomized Controlled Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2020:Online ahead of print.  
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community -clinical linkages for the prevention and control 
of chronic diseases: a practitioner's guide 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/dhdsp/pubs/docs/ccl -practitioners -
guide.pdf . Accessed January 19, 2021.  
24. Allen KD, Bongiorni D, Bosworth HB, et al. Group Versus Individual Physical Therapy for Veterans With 
Knee Osteoarthritis: Randomized Clinical Trial. Phys Ther. 2016;96(5):597 -608. 
25. Callahan LF, Cleveland RJ, Shreffler J, et al. Evaluation of active living every day in adults with arthritis. 
J Phys Act Health. 2014;11(2):285 -295. 
26. Callahan LF, Cleveland RJ, Altpeter M, Hackney B. Evaluation of Tai Chi Program Effectiveness for 
People with Arthritis in the Community: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Aging Phys Act. 
2016;24(1):101 -110. 
27. Allen KD, Oddone EZ, Coffman CJ, et al. Telephone -based self -management of osteoarthritis: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2010;153:570 -579. 
28. Allen KD, Somers TJ, Campbell LC, et al. Pain coping skills training for African Americans with 
osteoarthritis: results of a randomized controlled trial. Pain. 2019;160(6):1297 -1307.  
29. Allen KD, Oddone EZ, Coffman CJ, et al. Patient, Provider, and Combined Interventions for Managing 
Osteoarthritis in Primary Care: A Cluster Randomized Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(6):401 -411. 
30. Allen KD, Yancy WS, Jr., Bosworth HB, et al. A Combined Patient and Provider Intervention for 
Management of Osteoarthritis in Veterans: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2016;164(2):73 -83. 
31. Allen KD, Arbeeva L, Callahan LF, et al. Physical therapy vs internet -based exercise training for 
patients with knee osteoarthritis: results of a randomized controlled trial. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 
2018;26(3):383 -396. 
32. Messier SP, Callahan LF, Beavers DP, et al. Weight -loss and exercise for communities with arthritis in 
North Carolina (we -can): design and rationale of a pragmatic, assessor -blinded, randomized controlled 
trial. BMC musculoskeletal disorders. 2017;18(1):91.  
33. Allen K, Vu MB, Callahan LF, et al. Osteoarthritis physical activity care pathway (OA -PCP): results of a 
feasibility trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2020;21(1):308.  
34. Allen KD, Sanders LL, Olsen MK, et al. Internet Versus DVD Decision Aids for Hip and Knee 
Osteoarthritis. Musculoskeletal Care. 2016;14(2):87 -97. 
35. Callahan LF, Shreffler JH, Altpeter M, et al. Evaluation of group and self -directed formats of the Arthritis 
Foundation's Walk With Ease Program. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;63(8):1098 -1107.  
36. Nyrop KA, Charnock BL, Martin KR, Lias J, Altpeter M, Callahan LF. Effect of a six -week walking 
program on work place activity limitations among adults with arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2011;63(12):1773 -1776.  
37. Callahan LF, Mielenz T, Freburger J, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the people with arthritis can 
exercise program: symptoms, function, physical activity, and psychosocial outcomes. Arthritis Rheum. 
2008;59(1):92 -101. 
38. Bennell KL, Nelligan R, Dobson F, et al. Effectiveness of an Internet -Delivered Exercise and Pain -
Coping Skills Training Intervention for Persons With Chronic Knee Pain: A Randomized Trial. Ann 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
33 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  Intern Med. 2017;166(7):453 -462. 
39. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, 2nd Edition 
2018.  
40. Altman R, Asch D, Bloch G, et al. The American College of Rheumatology criteria for the classification 
and reporting of osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 1986;29:1039 -1049.  
41. Altman R, Alarcon G, Appelrouth D, et al. The American College of Rheumatology criteria for the 
classification and reporting of osteoarthritis of the hip. Arthritis Rheum. 1991;34(5):505 -514. 
42. Bliddal H, Leeds AR, Christensen R. Osteoarthritis, obesity and weight loss: evidence, hypotheses and 
horizons - a scoping review. Obes Rev. 2014;15(7):578 -586. 
43. Dunlop DD, Song J, Lee J, et al. Physical Activity Minimum Threshold Predicting Improved Function in 
Adults With Lower -Extremity Symptoms. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2017;69(4):475 -483. 
44. Afzal S, Tybjaerg -Hansen A, Jensen GB, Nordestgaard BG. Change in Body Mass Index Associated 
With Lowest Mortality in Denmark, 1976 -2013. JAMA. 2016;315(18):1989 -1996.  
45. Allen KD. Racial and ethnic disparities in osteoarthritis phenotypes. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 
2010;22(5):528 -532. 
46. Callahan LF, Rivadeneira A, Altpeter M, et al. Evaluation of the Arthritis Foundation's Camine Con 
Gusto Program for Hispanic Adults With Arthritis. Hisp Health Care Int. 2016;14(3):132 -140. 
47. Hill JC, Afolabi EK, Lewis M, et al. Does a modified STarT Back Tool predict outcome with a broader 
group of musculoskeletal patients than back pain? A secondary analysis of cohort data. BMJ Open. 
2016;6(10):e012445.  
48. Hill JC, Whitehurst DG, Lewis M, et al. Comparison of stratified primary care management for low back 
pain with current best practice (STarT Back): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2011;378(9802):1560 -1571.  
49. Hay EM, Dunn KM, Hill JC, et al. A randomised clinical trial of subgrouping and targeted treatment for 
low back pain compared with best current care. The STarT Back Trial Study Protocol. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord. 2008;9:58.  
50. Cherkin D, Balderson B, Brewer G, et al. Evaluation of a risk -stratification strategy to improve primary 
care for low back pain: the MATCH cluster randomized trial protocol. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 
2016;17(1):361.  
51. Williamson DA, Bray GA, Ryan DH. Is 5% weight loss a satisfactory criterion to define clinically 
significant weight loss? Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015;23(12):2319 -2320.  
52. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et al. STOP questionnaire: a tool to screen patients for obstructive 
sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 2008;108(5):812 -821. 
53. Morin CM, Belleville G, Belanger L, Ivers H. The Insomnia Severity Index: psychometric indicators to 
detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep. 2011;34(5):601 -608. 
54. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study of WOMAC:  A health 
status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcomes to antirheumatic drug 
therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee . The Journal of Rheumatology. 1988;15:1833 -
1840.  
55. Carr LJ, Mahar MT. Accuracy of intensity and inclinometer output of three activity monitors for 
identification of sedentary behavior and light -intensity activity. J Obes. 2012;2012:460271.  
56. Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, Haskell WL, Gillis D, RItter PL. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire 
for older adults: outcomes for interventions. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 
2001;33(7):1126 -1141.  
57. Dobson F, Hinman RS, Roos EM, et al. OARSI recommended performance -based tests to assess 
physical function in people diagnosed with hip or knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis and cartilage / 
OARS, Osteoarthritis Research Society. 2013;21(8):1042 -1052.  
58. RIkli R, Jones J. Development and validation of a functional fitness test for community -residing older 
adults. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity. 1999;7:129 -161. 
59. Department of Veterans Affairs and Deparement of Defense. VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for the 
Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder and Obstructive Sleep Apnea. 2019.  
60. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a measure of 
OA Clinic -Community C ARE Model ( OA CARE ) Version 4.0 
Protocol # 22-0865     
34 
Protocol v 4.0 - 20240304  current depression in the general population. Journal of Affective Disorders. 2009;114(1 -3):163 -173. 
61. Sullivan MJL, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: development and validation. 
Psychological Assessment. 1995;7:524 -532. 
62. Lorig K, Chastain RL, Ung E, Shoor S, Holman HR. Development and evaluation of a scale to measure 
perceived self -efficacy in people with arthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism. 1989;32(1):37 -44. 
63. Sharma L, Cahue S, Song J, Hayes K, Pai YC, Dunlop D. Physical functioning over three years in knee 
osteoarthritis: role of psychosocial, local mechanical, and neuromuscular factors. Arthritis & 
Rheumatism. 2003;48(12):3359 -3370.  
64. Sangha O, Stucki G, Liang MH, Fossel AH, Katz JN. The self -administered comorbidity questionnaire: 
a new method to assess comorbidity for clinical and health services research. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 
2003;49(2):156 -163. 
 