 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 1 of 16 
 Date: 05/01/2017 
Principal Investigator: Maria Trent, MD, MPH 
Application Number: NA_00068846 
  
STUDY PROTOCOL 
OFFICIAL TITLE: Technology Enhanced Community Health Nursing (TECH-N) to Prevent Recurrent 
Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) after Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] Date of Document:  5/1/2017 Date of Upload: 1/18/18 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 2 of 16 
  
 
 
 
JHM IRB - eForm A  
 
  
 Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm A, inserting the appropriate material 
in each. If a section is not applicab le, leave heading in and insert N/A. 
 When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised ), enter the date submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM IRB eForm A. 
 *************************************************************************************************** 
1. Abstract  
 
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) remains a serious  reproductive health disorder and disease rates 
remain unacceptably high among minority adoles cent girls and young adult women. Each episode 
of this upper reproductive tract infection, usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI), 
increases the risk for multiple sequelae including tubal infertility, ectopic pregnancy, and chronic 
pelvic pain (CPP). Care for PID has shifted from the inpatient to the outp atient setting; however, 
our age-stratified analysis of national data shows that adolescents continued to have high rates of 
repeat STIs and CPP, regardless of treatment strategy. Our local clin ical trial data has also shown 
that urban adolescents have poor adherence to th e 3 day clinical follow -up visit recommended by 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC ), are at high risk for STI at the 90-day STI 
re-screening visit, and that brief interventions in  the acute care setting have positive, but modest 
effects on adherence to self-management behavior s. Inpatient treatment for PID is expensive 
without incremental increases in  effectiveness when compared with outpatient treatment so 
developing outpatient strategies to improve short and long-term reproductive health outcomes, 
including recurrent STI and PID, are warranted. Community health nurse (CHN) interventions have been shown to increase access to appropriate  resources enhance health care utilization and 
promote risk-reducing behavior among adolescents. Recent research has also shown that use of 
short messaging service (SMS) messaging can enha nce clinical care by improving attention to 
medical visits, medication adherence, and communi cation with the health care team.  The primary 
aim of this project is to comp are the effectiveness of a techno logy-enhanced community health 
nursing intervention (TECH-N) inte rvention to an optimized standard of care control group using 
randomized trial design. We hypothesize that re packaging the recommended CDC-PID follow-up 
visit using the TECH-N will be cost-effective compar ed with standard of care and reduce rates of 
short-term repeat infection by improving adhere nce to PID treatment and reducing unprotected 
intercourse. We have demonstr ated that our team of trained community-oriented health 
professionals can follow adolescent  girls with PID in the community  and that utilizing CHNs to 
optimize treatment in the post-PID period is feasible  and acceptable to adolescents and parents in 
urban communities. Our pilot using SMS communicati on also demonstrates that urban adolescent 
girls have access to cell phone technology, eag erly accept SMS as a communication strategy, and 
respond to health provider queries for sexual heal th maintenance support. We propose to enroll 350 
young women 13-21years old diagnosed with PID in Baltimore and randomize them to receive the 
TECH-N intervention which includes CHN clinical  support using a single post-PID face-to-face 
clinical evaluation that incorporates an evid ence based STI preventi on curriculum and SMS 
communication support during the 30-day period fo llowing diagnosis (intervention group) or the 
standard of care (control group).   
2. Objectives  
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 3 of 16 
 To compare the effectiveness of a PID intervention called Technology Enhanced Community Health Nurse 
(TECH-N) compared to a control group defined as optimized standard of care using a randomized control 
trial (RCT) among urban adolescents diagnosed with PID.  
 Hypothesis 1: Adolescents in the TECH-N intervention group will have a better rate of short term (3-5 day) 
clinical follow-up compared with adolescents in the control group.  Hypothesis 2: Adolescents with PID in the TECH-N interventi on group will have a lower rate of recurrent 
STIs at 90-days compared with the adolescents with PID in the control group.  
2. To compare the cost-effectiveness of TECH-N as comp ared to control (optimized standard of care) for 
management of PID in the outpatient setting.  
Hypothesis 3: The TECH-N intervention will be more cost-e ffective than the optim ized standard care 
control approach.  Hypothesis 4: The TECH-N intervention will be more cost-e ffective than hospitalization using modeled 
parameters of existing cost estimates among patients with mild to moderate disease.  
 
3. Background (briefly describe pre-clinical and clinical  data, current experience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research) 
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) re mains a serious reproductive health disorder and disease rates remain 
unacceptably high among minority adolescent girls and youn g adult women. Each episode of this upper 
reproductive tract infection, usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI), increases the risk for 
multiple sequelae including tubal infertility, ectopic pregna ncy, and chronic pelvic pain (CPP). Care for PID 
has shifted from the inpatient to the outpatient setting for cost containment and in response to efficacy data 
from the Pelvic Inflammatory Disease Evaluation and C linical Health (PEACH) study that demonstrated 
similar fertility outcomes for women treated in the inpatient and outpatient setting. Unfortunately, our age-stratified analysis of the PEACH study data show s that adolescent and young ad ult women continued to 
have high rates of repeat STIs and CPP, regardless of treatment strategy. Twenty percent of women less 
than 25 years experienced a repeat or persistent STI at 30 days and/or repeat PID over the 7 year follow-up 
period was associated with a 5-fold risk of CPP. Our local clinical trial data has also shown that urban 
adolescents and young adults have poor adherence to the developmentally appropriate 3 day clinical follow-
up visit recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), are at high risk for STI at 
the 90-day STI re-screening visit, and that brief interv entions in the acute care setting have positive, but 
modest effects on adherence to self-management behavi ors. Previous research demonstrates that inpatient 
treatment for PID is expensive without incremental increases in effectiveness when compared with outpatient treatment. Our work and that of others sugg est that additional outpatient cost-effective PID health 
care supports are needed for this vulnerable populatio n to improve short and long-term reproductive health 
outcomes, including recurrent sexually  transmitted infection and PID.  
 
Prior research has demonstrated that community h ealth nurse (CHN) interventions can increase access to 
appropriate resources enhance health care utilization and promote risk-reducing behavior. We propose that 
integrating a technology component conducted by the C HN will increase appeal to adolescent females. Cell 
phone penetration among youth in the United States has incr eased dramatically such that teens rely on text 
messaging in their daily lives. Recent research has sh own that use of SMS messaging enhances clinical care 
by improving attention to medical visits, medicati on adherence, and communication with the health care 
team. Our pilot data of a text messaging intervention for reproductive health clinical reminders has 
demonstrated that use of cell phones to assist urba n adolescents residing in high STI prevalent communities 
with self-care is both highly acceptable and feasible.   We hypothesize that repackaging the recommended CD C-follow-up visit using a technology-enhanced 
community health nursing intervention (TECH-N) with  integration of an evidence-based STI prevention 
curriculum will reduce rates of short-term repeat infe ction by improving adherence to PID treatment and 
reducing unprotected intercourse and be more cost-effec tive compared with outpatient standard of care (and 
hospitalization). We have demonstrated that our team  of trained community-ori ented health professionals 
can follow adolescent girls with PID in  the community and that utilizing CHNs to optimize treatment in the 
post-PID period is feasible and acceptable to adolescents and parents in urban communities. Our pilot using 
SMS communication also demonstrates that urban ad olescent girls have access to cell phone technology, 
eagerly accept SMS as a communication strategy, and r espond to health provider queries for sexual health 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 4 of 16 
 maintenance support. We propose to enroll 350 young women 13-21years old diagnosed with PID in 
Baltimore and randomize them to receive CHN clinical  support using a single post-PID face-to-face clinical 
evaluation and SMS communication support during the 30-day period following di agnosis (intervention 
group) or optimized standard of care (control group).  
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures   
(distinguish research procedures from t hose that are part of routine care). 
 
 
Overview of Study Design  
 
 
     
 
      
1. Setting:  This research study will be conducted in Baltimore, Maryla nd. Maryland cu rrently ranks 
12t h in the nation for incident infections with Neisseria gonorrhea (GC) and Chlamydia (CT) among 
its citizens and there are dispr oportionate rates of infection among individuals residing in 
Baltimore.87 The Johns Hopkins Hospital, is geographi cally located in one of the highest STI 
prevalence areas in the city and institutional providers diagnose approximately 150 cases of PID to 
adolescents 21 years of age or younger each year.  
2. Participants and Recruitment:  350 adolescents, aged 13-25 years with mild-moderate PID will 
be recruited from Johns Hopkins Hospital System  sites at the time of diagnosis by the TECH-N 
study staff. Johns Hopkins Hospital clinical sites include the Pedi atric Emergency Department and 
the Harriet Lane General Pediat ric and Adolescent Clinics.  
3. Enrollment, Consent, and Treatment:  Recruiters will be onsite in each clinical setting to 
recruit patients diagnosed with PID. Flyers will be  placed in physician and nursing work areas in all 
recruitment sites as a reminder of ongoing study recru itment. Patients will be screened for eligibility 
criteria, and study follow-up visits visit will be scheduled. At enro llment, a detailed review of the 
study with informed consent will be performed by the research staff. A ll patients who agree to 
participate will then complete an audio computerized assisted self-interview (ACASI)  to collect baseline information and be randomized to a research arm.  Study forms will be faxed to the project director at the time of enrollment and the ACASI interview will be automatically uploaded to a 
secure server for warehousing in the central database. After completion of initial study procedures and instruction, patients will receive remune ration of $10 and a 14-day course of 100 mg 
doxycycline tablets to be dispensed by the clinician prior to discharge accordi ng to hospital policy.  
Adolescents who are eligible for the trial and assi gned to the intervention ar m, but do not have a cell 
phone will be provided temporary use of a cell phone during the 1 month during which messages 
are sent.  We anticipate that this will be a small number of adolescents given that CTIA asserts that 
there is 93% cell phone penetr ation in the United States 
56and 88% of the girls approached for our 
Depo-Text study had a cell phone for their personal use.  
4. Randomization:   Following completion of the baseline ACASI survey, each adolescent will be 
randomly assigned to either the TECH-N or c ontrol group using a permutated block design. A 13-25 years 
with 
Mild-
Moderate 
PID SMS Welcome , daily 
Rx reminders x 14 
days ( Compliance for 
Life© ) 
TECH-N clinical visit 
3- 5-day 
14 day 
Research 
Visit 14-day 
Research visit 
 
SMS Health 
Messages  
Days 14-30 
30-day 
visit 
Research 
Visit 
(ACAS-
Interview/ 90-day 
Research 
Visit 
 
ACASI 
Interview 
  
STI 
testing 
 30-day 
visit 
Research 
Visit 
(ACAS- 
Interview/ 
STI Test) 
●Enrollment 
●Baseline Audio 
●Computerized 
Self Interview (ACASI) 
●Randomization 
3-5 day Clinical 
Exam  
(Self-Arranged 
at Local Clinic) Standard of Care Eligibility 
Screen 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 5 of 16 
 permutated block design will be used to ensure group balance based on JHH sites at the end of the 
trial and period balance. The period balance will help to minimize any systematic differences 
between patients enrolling at different times during the study.88 
5. Intervention 
TECH-N 
The TECH-N intervention involves contact a nd follow-up by a CHN trained in disease 
intervention protocols, clinical assessment of PID, and STI prevention case management so that 
they can effectively deliver the recommended CDC fo llow-up in the field.  The nurse will visit the 
adolescent at 3-5 days. While the CDC recommends follow-up within  72 hours, our work suggests 
that 72 hours is an unrealisti c timeline for tracking high risk girls in the community.18 The mean 
time to follow-up in our pilot study was 5.6 days (S ee Section 3.C.6) and is consistent with the 
follow-up evaluations timeline used for the PEACH trial.4, 35, 40 Given that only 20% of adolescents 
are making the follow-ups at all, extending the home  visit target to a 3-5 day window is practical, 
ethical, and justifiable. The TECH-N interven tion will be enhanced by the use of the SMS 
messaging system.  Adolescents in the TEC H-N arm will be enrolled in the online Health Cloud, 
SMS©  that will deliver a welcome message, a prompt to schedule the appointment for the 3-5 day 
follow-up with the TECH-N nursing team, and daily  medication reminders for 14 days.  After 2 
weeks, the patient will also receive positive health reminders 3 times per week for the rest of the 
month (total 30 days).    The TECH-N is based on the CDC STD Treatme nt Guidelines and modeled after the Johns 
Hopkins Children’s Center PID Treatment protocol for inpatient nursing staff. Integral to the TECH-N intervention is use of an effective be havioral intervention to  reduce STI/HIV risk 
reduction behaviors.  We will use the Sister-to-Si ster intervention that has a 20-minute one-on-one 
module to guide the patient thr ough skill-based risk re duction counseling.  This intervention was 
evaluated with young African American women in an urban community with high STI rates and 
was found to increase condom use, reduce unpro tected intercourse, and reduce new STIs among 
participants.
68, 69 At the end of the sess ion with the CHN, the patient will be able to 
state/demonstrate:  1.) Effective pain management; 2.) High understa nding of the definition of STIs 
including the difference between ce rvicitis and PID, modes of tran smission, signs of complications 
or problems for which they need to seek additiona l care, and how to preven t future PID episodes; 
3.) High understanding of optimal self-care includi ng: a) the date, time, and place of gynecologic 
follow-up if indicated, b) the contact phone numbers for the TECH-N nurse and an MD provider, c) 
medication schedule, route, dose, and side effects, d) proper use of male and female condoms e) 
reportable signs and symptoms (e.g. fever, increasi ng abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting, or inability 
to tolerate medication regimen), and f) effectiv e partner communication a nd negotiation strategies.
  
 While the TECH-N nurse will perform the basic clinical evaluation for patients enrolled in this arm, the TECH-N nurse may determine that additi onal physician follow-up is  indicated. At the end 
of the visit the TECH-N will determ ine a plan of action using two conditional algorithms based on 
the clinical assessment; one for patients requiring immediate attent ion (e.g. symptomatic worsening 
abdominal pain) and the other for patients fo r whom non-immediate follow-up is indicated (e.g. 
patient desires ongoing hormonal contraceptive me thod) The TECH-N nurse will also be given 
referrals resources to assist pa tients who may have other issues identified during the visit (child 
protection, housing, substance abuse in a family me mber, and/or other adolescent stressor, medical 
or mental health co-morbidity).  
We are using professional CHNs as the TECH- N, comparable to the STI case management 
model, rather than paraprofessionals. The TECH-N nur se will be trained on clinical assessment after 
PID, disease intervention protocols including pa rtner notification treatme nt/accessing community 
resources for partner care, ST D medication treatment, CDC-s upported Sister to Sister STI 
prevention protocol, use of conti ngency contracts with adolescents,  and TECH-N protocols.  The 
TECH-N nurse will also be an expert on the upda ted CDC PID Treatment gui delines. Despite the  
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 6 of 16 
 increase in cost of a professional nurse, consis tent evidence indicates th at paraprofessional home 
visiting interventionists produce smalle r effects compared to professionals89 and low-resource 
patients benefit most from nurse visit interventions.90 Our preliminary studies indicate that 
improved communication between an adolescent and her partner occurs with  the support of a CHN 
who can educate and motivate adolescents with an  STI, provide expertise on STI management, and 
encourage higher level service provision by primary ca re providers when problems are identified in 
the community-based environment. 79 
Control Condition 
In the control condition, patients wi ll receive standard of care. The Johns Hopkins Children's Center 
JHCC  has optimized  PID care to ensure delivery per CDC guidelines. All clinical sites use 
electronic medical records and ordering systems to f acilitate uniform care.  Dr. Trent has developed 
specialized institutional PID order sets to ensure integration of standard management protocols into usual clinical care.  After completion of study enrollment procedures, AC ASI baseline survey, and 
collection of a vaginal swab for Mycoplasma genitalium (not usually sent as a part of standard practice), the clinical provider will dispense the study-supplied doxycline and discharg e the patient 
with instructions for self-care using the JHH PID resources.  The team will have access to other medication treatment options, but in the last 5 ye ars we have not encountered a patient who could 
not use doxycycline due to medicatio n allergy.  Per institutional policy, patients with PID seen in 
the JHCC PED may follow-up in the JHH Harriet Lane Adolescent/Young Adult Clinic for the 72 
hour visit.  Patients can be seen in this setting for reproductive health servi ces regardless of ability 
to pay through the clinic's Title X program.  Patient's who use this service are encouraged to subsequently resume care with their primary care pr ovider given the limitations on the type of care 
that can be provided through this program.  Patient will return to the hospital for research visits at 
14 days, 30 days, and 90 days. STI testing will be performed at the 30- and 90 -day study visits.  
 
Outreach worker will contact all patients for a br ief quarterly interview about their reproductive 
health status will contact via phone and/or in person ACASI. The current consent form allows 
research team to contact patients for future rela ted studies. Patients who ha ve already been enrolled 
will be re-contacted and verbal consent fo r ongoing follow-up for up to 36 months after re-
enrollment.  
 
6.Quality Control  
a. Training of Personnel.  All research staff, P.I. and co-investigators received training in 
Protection of Human Subjects in re search studies. Research assistants and interviewing staff will be 
trained by Dr. Trent on the recruitment and consent protocol, interview surveys and confidentiality 
of data collection. The TECH-N CHN will cond uct all TECH-N visits and has expertise in 
managing STIs in the local health department and in the home/community. The TECH-N will be trained by Drs. Butz and Trent fo r delivery of the intervention. 
b. Recruitment Monitoring: Research staff will be available in on site order to make patient 
referral and recruitment as easy as possible.  Research staff will monitor weekly diagnosis reports to determine the number of eligib le patients and to ensure that none are missed.  Ongoing 
communication between Dr. Anders and Trent will enable the team to identify and address barriers to referral/recruitment. Research staff will also re cord all patients approached for study participation 
and document all referrals and tr ack numbers of eligible partic ipants, those who consent to 
participate and refusals. c. Retention Monitoring: Detailed contact information will be obt ained from the patient at the time 
of the initial recruitment, including home and work numbers, cell phone numbers, email addresses, 
school attended, and the names of 2 individuals who will always know thei r whereabouts and can be 
contacted to locate them. Participants are also ad vised to call into the study office for changes in 
their living environment and will receive a small $5 gift card incentive for notification of address 
change.  While we are seeking girls residing in Baltimore Metropolitan Area at the time of 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 7 of 16 
 diagnosis, we will continue to follow subjects for st udy visits as long as they continue to reside in 
the Baltimore Metropolitan Area that  includes surrounding counties.   
d. Treatment Fidelity: Dr. Arlene Butz who has significant expertise in community health nursing 
interventions and who has worked with Dr. Trent on several projects including the NANA 
feasibility trial will train and supervise the TECH-N staff to deliver the inte rvention as designed.  
She will also meet weekly with project nursing staff to ensure that they understand study procedures 
and can use effective strategies to solve problems in the field that maintain staff safety, prevent 
deviation from protocol, and ensu re subject retention in the TE CH-N arm of the trial. Video 
recordings of the first ten visits and thereafter 10 % of TECH-N visits will be reviewed by Drs. Butz 
and Trent for consistency in the TECH-N delivery of specific PID education and management. At any time that an inconsistency in the delivery of protocol is noted, retrai ning of the TECH-N CHN 
will occur.    Dr. Trent will provide medical supervisi on of the TECH-N intervention and serve as 
liaison between the TECH-N nurse and community PCPs .  We will also integrat e the fidelity checks 
included with the Sister to Sister intervention acco rding to the field guide.  Weekly meetings will be 
held between the P.I., co-investigators and research staff to review recruitm ent and data collection. 
Cross contamination between groups will be minimized because of the nature, vehicle, and field 
location of the intervention.  Patients may receive  additional advice by their doctor at the 3-5 day 
follow-up visit that assists them in completing th e course of medication and other actions involved 
in self-care, but this will be evenly distributed in both groups due to the study design.  We also 
assess patient satisfaction of th e TECH-N follow-up at the 30-day visit, track the number, purpose, 
and outcome of TECH-N contact between visits , and track scheduled contact behavior.   
 Study Measurements  
a.Recruitment Screener:  Includes collection of basic dem ographic data and the outcome of 
recruitment effort so that we can keep an accura te account of referral patients who are ineligible 
and/or refuse to particip ate in the intervention. 
b. Baseline ACASI Survey: We have developed a PID audio- computerized self-interview 
(ACASI) survey to collect reproduc tive and sexual health history, pe rceived barriers to treatment, 
and self efficacy data from adolescents with PID in acute care settings. The measures on the baseline survey contain: demographics, reprodu ctive and sexual history, PID adherence self-
efficacy and perceived barrier scales 
17, 71social provisions scale, 91, Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies Depression Scale ( CES -D) as a short measure of depressive symptoms and the short-form 
survey instrument (SF-12) as a measure of health-relate d quality of life 42, 92   One question on 
sexual orientation will be asked to bette r delineate the risks for this population.  
c. Clinical Data:   The TECH-N nurse will record cont act tracing data and perform a detailed 
clinical assessment that includes a pain rating scale, abdominal exam, medication usage, supportive 
care, side effects, activity level, , and patient teaching outcome.. Adolescents in the control arm will 
be given a short health provider assessment form  at enrollment to be completed by the medical 
professional who re-examines at their 3-5 day clinical follow-up visit. Perm ission to contact those 
health providers is requested at th e time of enrollment so that proj ect staff can verify self-reported 
clinical data in the case of unreturned forms. Time to clinical re-e valuation as well as a dichotomous 
variable indicating completion of the 3-5 day visit will be generated using these measures. 
Additional clinical data collected  at the 2 week research visit will include part ner notification, 
results, and treatment data, sexual abstinence,  coping strategies [COPE,  Carver 1997] and self-
reported medication adherence (pill counts). During th is brief face-to face in terview, we will also 
ask questions about partner factors and the partic ipants’ perspective the development of preventive 
PID strategies (e.g. vaccine) and factors affecting their willingness to participate in vaccine 
research. d. Follow-up ACASI Surveys:  The 30- and 90-day ACASI su rvey captures interim sexual 
behavior (current number of sexual partners, chan ge in sexual partners since the 2 week follow-up 
assessment, change in sexual partner(s), condom us e, and contraceptive use, interim diagnosis of 
STIs and pregnancy, current health st atus, the adolescent version of the 
Childbearing Motivation 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 8 of 16 
 Questionnaire (CBQ) 26, perceptions of partner influences on contraceptive decisions, and participant feelings 
about their fertility . The ACASI interviews have been used su ccessfully in our previous trial and are 
easily administered in the field. 
e. Cost Data:  The costs of administering the different in terventions will be ba sed on project records 
of hours worked, miles traveled, and other supp lies with additional amounts for overhead.  The 
primary cost components for patients in both groups  include the initial treatment for PID, follow-up 
therapy related to failure of initial treatment, trea tments for recurrent STIs and PID, chronic pelvic 
pain, ectopic pregnancy, time lost from work /school/household management by patients and 
parents, travel to PID-related care, and any therapy or evalua tion related to concerns about 
infertility by the patient. We will use these data to  estimate the direct (medical costs) and indirect 
(employment (patient/parent), impairment) costs a ssociated with PID treatment in the TECH-N and 
control interventions. Health serv ice utilization will be derived fr om the longitudinal interviews, 
care utilization data (hospitaliza tions, emergency department visits , public health clinic visits, 
primary care provider visits), prescription and ove r-the-counter medication us e, laboratory services, 
and radiological services (e.g. sonograms). Produ ctivity loss will be derived using the Workplace 
Productivity and Activity Impairment (WPAI) ques tionnaire that has been validated as an 
instrument to collect data on absenteeism and presenteeism both for patients and for care providers. It can also be modified for di fferent diseases and health st ates without compromising scale 
properties.
93, 94 
f. Biological Measurements 
1. Collection of Biological Samples:  Participants will be asked to provide a self-collected vaginal 
swab (SVS) for Mycoplasma genitalium (MG) a nd Trichomonas Vaginalis (TV) at baseline to 
accompany routine testing at the clinical site.  Neisseria gonorrhea (GC), Chlamydia trachomatis 
(CT), and MG will also be obtained at 30 days and 90 days and be processed at The Johns Hopkins 
University International STD and Biothreat Research Laboratory under the direction of Dr. 
Charlotte Gaydos. Laboratory tests include: 2. CT and GC assays:  The vaginal specimens will be processed and tested according to the 
APTIMA Combo 2 manufacturer’s package inserts for CT and GC.  All positive CT and NG APTIMA Combo 2 results from any specimen sour ce will be confirmed using the APTIMA ACT 
and AGC assays according to instructions provid ed in the package inserts. Description and 
performance of these assays have been previously published.
95 
3. MG and TV assays:  The APTIMA vaginal swab was tested using the GEN-PROBE 
transcription mediated amplification (TMA) resear ch assay in the same manner as for the other 
APTIMA assays. This assay targ ets MG rRNA and TV rRNA for de tection in genital specimens.  
4. Notification of STD-positive cases : All participants with positive tests for GC, CT, MG will be 
contacted by research staff, notifie d of their positive test result and referred to their physician in the 
clinic for an examination and treatment. By law,  the Johns Hopkins International STD Research lab 
and the research team have an obligation to report positive cases of GC/CT to the Baltimore City 
Health Department (BCHD).  Faxed reports wi ll be sent to the health department.  
5. Partner Notification and Treatment:   All participants will be encouraged to notify their 
partners for treatment at baseline as a part of standard of care. The TECH-N will provide additional 
support and resources for notification and treatm ent if indicated. We w ill obtain self-reported 
partner notification and treatment data from each  participant at the 14-day research visit. 
6. Specimen Storage : According to the JHU PID protocol, patients should have a CBC, CRP, RPR, 
and HIV testing at the time of PID diagnosis.  Th ree additional tube of blood (~10cc) will be drawn 
at the time of specimen collection and/or at the time of enrollment for storage and future RNA 
analysis and antibody testing.    
Sera from the TECH-N study will be analyzed usin g established CDC methods to determine whether 
antibody detection to pgp-3 correlates with active CT inf ection in PID patients. Sera  will be incubated with 
chemically modified microspheres (Luminex Corp., Au stin, TX) conjugated to the Ct antigens pgp3. After 
washing out unbound serum antibodies, bound antibody will be detected with biotinylated mouse anti-human 
IgG (clone H2; Southern Biotech, Birmingham,  AL) and biotinylated mouse anti-human IgG 4 (clone 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 9 of 16 
 HP6025; Invitrogen, South San Francisco, CA), followed by R-phycoerythrin-labeled streptavidin (SAPE, 
Invitrogen, South San Francisco, CA).  Beads are suspe nded in 125 µl PBS, shaken, and immediately read on 
a BioPlex 200 instrument (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) equippe d with Bio-Plex Manager 6.0 software (Bio-Rad).  
Cut off ratios will be determined by positive and negativ e controls.  If lateral flow POC cartridges are made 
available by researchers at CDC (anticipated), sera will be tested on this platform as well. 
 
Vaginal 16S rRNA gene sequencing:  Sequencing will be performed on stored specimens at the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine’s Ins titute for Genome Sciences (IGS, Brotman lab). 
We are proposing a broad 16S rRNA gene analys is of the vaginal bacterial populations. IGS has 
developed, validated and published procedures for extraction of genomic DNA from vaginal 
samples that maximize cell lysis, DNA recovery and quality.1-3 Dual index amplification and 
sequencing of the vaginal microbiota will be perfo rmed using the technique thoroughly validated 
and described by the IGS group.1 The total 16S rRNA gene copy number will be determined using a 
PanBacterial qPCR method.4  The IGS group has also demonstrat ed that duration of freezing does 
not impact specimens used for microbiome analyses.5 
 
1. Fadrosh DW, Ma B, Gajer P, et al. An improved dual -indexing approach for multiplexed 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
on the Illumina MiSeq platform.  Microbiom e. 2014;2:6-2618-2-6. 
2. Gajer P, Brotman RM, Bai G, et al. Temporal dynamics of the human vaginal microbiota.  Sci Transl Med. 
2012;4:132ra52. 
3. Yuan S, Cohen DB, Ravel J, Abdo Z, Forney LJ. Evaluation of methods for the extraction and purification of DNA from the human microbiome.  PLoS On e. 2012;7:e33865. 
4. Liu CM, Aziz M, Kachur S, et al. BactQuant: an en hanced broad-coverage bacterial quantitative real-time 
PCR assay.  BMC Microbiol. 2012;12:56-2180-12-56. 
5. Bai G, Gajer P, Nandy M, et al. Comparison of storage conditions for human vaginal microbiome studies.  PLoS On e. 
2012;7:e36934. 
 b. Study duration and number of study vi sits required of research pa rticipants. Each participant 
will be followed for 90 days.  After enrollment, girls in the intervention arm will have 3 study 
visits (1 by the community health nurse within  5 days of enrollment/diagnosis of PID and 3 
research visits at 2 weeks, 30 days, and 3 months and those in the control condition will have 3 
research visits at 2 weeks and 3 months. Girls in  the control condition will  be advised to arrange 
their own follow-up care with their primary care provider according to curre nt standards of care. 
 
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial,  if applicable. All data will 
be managed by an institutional data management service.  While the principal investigator is blinded to individual study assignm ent; per protocol if a patient ha s a clinical problem while the 
CHN is in the field individual assignment will be unblended so that Drs. Butz and/or Trent will can assist with patient management. 
d. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped. 
e. Justification for inclusion of  a placebo or non-treatment group. A control group is required to 
determine the efficacy of the intervention, howev er, in the control condi tion participants will 
receive optimized standard of care according to national and institutional guidelines. Definition 
of treatment failure or participant removal criteria. We will use an intention to treat approach so that all patients who enrolled will be followe d until the end as our ability to maintain 
communication with them represen ts a key adherence behavior. Pa rticipants who indicate that 
they no longer wish to participate in the trial w ill be the only individuals that would be removed 
from the study. 
f. Description of what happens to participants  receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant’s participatio n in the study ends prematurely. Afte r the final study vis it, participants 
will resume usual clinical care.  If a participant ends the study prematurely during the standard 
treatment period for PID care they will be encouraged to follow-up with their primary care provider according to national standards (Cen ters for Disease Control and Prevention). 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 10 of 16 
 Individuals who prematurely end th eir participation after the firs t 2 weeks; will be encouraged 
to follow-up with their primary care provider for follow-up clinical care per national guidelines 
(3-4 months after PID diagnosis) fo r routine STI re-s creening and care. 
 
7. Mycoplasma genitalium  macrolide resistance testing [V alidation/Reliability Sub-study] 
 
De-identified waste samples testing positive for Mycoplasma genitalium in the main study  will be 
screened for potential resistance to macrolides (Azithromycin) utilizing a novel high-resolution 
melting curve analysis (HRMA) assay that inerog ates a region of the 23S rRNA gene known to 
contain point mutations confe rring macrolide resistance to M. genitalium  using the following 
protocol in the Johns Hopkins Intern ational STI and Biothreat Laboratory. 
  
DNA from positive M. genitalium  samples will be extracted via the Roche MagNA Pure LC robot 
utilizing the DNA I isolation kit following the manufacturer instruc tions with 200 µl of sample 
input and 100 µl of elution vol ume. Lightscanner PCR for melti ng curve analysis: Primers for 
melting curve analysis are as follows: Mg23SF 5’CGGTGAAATCCAGGTACGG3’ and MG23SR 
5’ CAGTAAAGCTTCACGGGGTCT3’, with the fo llowing sequence as the predicted PCR 
product: 5’CGGTGAAATCCAGGTACGGGTGAAGACACCCGTTAGGC GCAACGGGACGGAAAGAC
CCCGTGAAGCTTTACTG3’, with the base pairs res ponsible for macrolide re sistance highlighted 
in red.  The primers and predicated PCR product is modified from J Clin Microbiol 2014, 52 (5), 
1549-1555.  Lighscanner reactions will be prepared using the following: 4 µl of 2.5X Lighscanner 
Mix, 1 ul of each primer at 1.5 µM concentration,  1 µl of Lightscanner grade water, 1 µl of 
temperature calibrators at 1.5 µM and 2 µl of template DNA.  Reaction conditions will consist of: 
95°C for 5 minutes followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 10 seconds, 58°C for 30 seconds and 72°C 
for 1 minute, followed by a 4°C cooling step for plate handling. HRMA anal ysis will be performed 
on Lighscanner plates using the Lightscanner (Biofire Diagnostics)  per manufacturer instructions 
for small amplicons.  Macrolide re sistance will be determined by shifts in melting temperatures of 
generated PCR products compared to control reactions containing both wild  type, and mutant 23S 
rRNA sequences for M. genitalium . 
 
Since the results from resistance testing will not be available for patient and/or provider use as these 
methods have not been validated and/ or approved for use by the FDA.   
 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
 
Inclusion Criteria: Eligible participants shoul d be aged 13-21 diagnosed with mild-moderate PID, 
given an outpatient treatment disposition, permanently  reside in the Baltimo re Metropolitan area, 
and be willing to sign informed consent (inclu ding communication with the adolescent’s primary 
care provider). Informed consent includes being willing to complete study procedures; including 
randomization and community-based follow-up by our team.  
 Exclusion Criteria:  Patients who are pregnant, have a concurre nt diagnosis of sexual assault, or are 
unable to communicate   
 
6. Drugs/
 Substances/ Devices 
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or  for choosing the device to be used.  N/A 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 11 of 16 
 b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non-FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of  administration or part icipant populations are 
changed. N/A 
c. Justification and safety information if non-FDA approved drugs without an IND will be administered.  N/A 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 12 of 16 
 Date: 11/29/11 
Principal Investigator: Maria Trent, MD, MPH 
Application Number: ___________ 
 
 
7. Study Statistics 
a. Primary outcome variable. Adherence to 3-5 day visit; STI infection rate at 3 months 
b. Secondary outcome variables. Cost differentials between study groups  
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis. 
 
Sample Size and Power: We conducted power analyses fo r Specific Aim 1, hypothesis 2. As 
described in the Preliminary Studies, we conducte d a longitudinal analysis of data to examine 
repeat STIs/PID following PID diagnosed in pedi atric ambulatory settings in Baltimore. The 
results suggested that at 3 months, the STI posi tivity rate was 25% and thus we will assume a 
25% STI infection rate for the control group. Our pr eliminary data also suggests that at baseline 
we will be able to recruit approximately 175 participants in each arm for a total of 350 participants. We expect about 30% attrition over the study period and thus each study arm will 
have an effective sample size of 122.5 participan ts, for a total of 245 pa rticipants. Using these 
assumptions, our power calculations suggest that we will have 80% power to detect a relative 
risk of 1.66.  Data Analysis Primary Aim :  
Overview: The overall approach will be an intention-to-t reat analysis. To test the hypotheses, in 
addition to data cleaning and e xploratory data analysis we wi ll first need to address the 
challenges presented by the study design. The challe nges include assessing the “success” of the 
randomization scheme, testing for differences in basic demographic characteristics between the 
clinical sites, and exploring missing data due to survey non-response and due to attrition. The 
plan for addressing each of the challenges and fo r hypothesis testing is described below. Data 
analysis for hypotheses 1 and 2 will be perfor med using STATA or comparable statistical 
software and analysis for hypothesis 3 will be performed using Tree Age software.  
Testing for Differences by Randomization Assignment and Clinical Site: Comparability of the randomization assignments will be statistical ly assessed. If the randomization assignment 
does not result in equivalent groups or if there are significant diffe rences by clinical site, we will 
adjust for nonequivalence in hypothesis testing (see below).  
Missing Data due to Survey Non-response: The extent of data missing due to survey non-
response will be assessed and if extensive, we will explore using imputation to deal with the missing data. We will take care to enter into im putation procedures with an exploratory yet 
principled approach as a naïve or unprinci pled imputation method may create more problems 
than it solves distorting estimates standard er rors and hypothesis tests. We will explore the use 
of Rubin’s multiple imputation procedure, as one example.  Attrition Analysis: We will examine the extent of attriti on over the course of the study. In 
particular, we will examine whether missing va lues are not missing at random and are non-
ignorable. Since the study partic ipants who drop out from the st udy may be different from those 
who remain, the propensity score method will be used to reduce selection bias, balancing the 
covariates in the data analysis.  
 Hypothesis testing:  
In Aim 1, Hypothesis 1, we will assess whether adolescents with PID in the TECH-N 
intervention show greater adherence, defined as  adherence to the 3 -5 day follow-up visit, 
compared to adolescents with PID in the control group. We will conduct a logistic regression 
analysis to determine whether the intervention group showed greater short-term adherence rate 
compared to the control group incl uding potential factors that may a
 ffect the difference in rates. 
In Hypothesis 2, we will determine whether adolescent women with PID provided with the 
TECH-N intervention have a lower rate of recurrent STIs at 90 da ys compared to adolescents in 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 13 of 16 
 the control group. We will conduct a logistic regression analysis  to determin e whether the 
intervention group showed a lower rate of recurrent STIs at 90 days compared to the control 
group, including potential factors that may affect the difference in rates. In an exploratory 
analysis, we will also determine whether the adolescent women with PID in the TECH-N group 
have on average over time – baseline, 30-day, and 90-day- lower rates of recurrent STIs as 
compared to the intervention group. This initial analysis will use logistic regression and 
generalized estimating equations to handle the co rrelation of multiple measures within a person 
over time. We will also explore the group – interv ention vs. control – trajectories over time to 
determine whether the two groups have statistica lly different slopes of recurrent STIs. We will 
also explore stratifying the curves  by measures such as race/ethnicity and level of poverty.  In 
Aim 2, Hypothesis 3, we will determine whether the TECH-N intervention is more cost-effective than the control for the prevention of  recurrent STIs and PID-related complications. 
The cost evaluation will examine the net difference in costs between TECH-N and control groups in relation to prevention of 1) recurrent STIs (includi ng PID) and 2) PID-related 
complications (e.g. re-hos pitalization, medical visi ts, ectopic pregnancies). The difference in 
costs will account for the net difference between  the outpatient strategi es in use of medical 
services and indirect costs for PID treatment. The analysis will also consider savings in medical-care costs and indirect costs from prevention of  the outcome variables. Two types of outcomes 
can be created. While the workplace and hom e productivity improvements are not the only 
monetary improvements associated with better car e, a cost-benefit analysis can be performed 
simply comparing the excess co sts of TECH-N with the medical care savings and productivity 
gains from cases averted. The distribution around th e point estimate of the net benefits can be 
ascertained using a bootstrapping approach to account for the l ack of the normal distribution 
that is likely in a net benefit calculation. We can also extend the analysis to a cost-effectiveness 
evaluation if TECH-N remains more expensive even  after accounting for me dical care costs and 
productivity loss averted. In this case, we can me asure the dollars spent pe r case of STI averted 
over the relevant time period. We can also us e published parameters to determine how the 
TECH-N intervention compares to hospitaliza tion. Decision makers can then focus their 
attention on whether the added cost s appear to be worth the hea lth improvement. In this case, 
we could also use a bootstrapping analysis to calculate the distribution of the ICER.  
Analyses will be performed to correlate positive antibod y for pgp-3 with active CT infection at baseline 
for females in the TECH-N study. 
 
a. Early stopping rules.  A data safe ty monitoring board consisting of senior researchers in related 
fields and who have no direct involvement with the study will review study data including preliminary outcomes and adverse events. While a ll enrolled girls will be followed until the end 
of the follow-up period, preliminary analyses that  demonstrate significant adverse findings prior 
to reaching sample size the team will discuss discontinuation of the trial. However, given the multiple pre-determined hypotheses related to cost-e ffectiveness, we will need to complete data 
collection even if we determine that si gnificant findings for the primary outcomes 
(adherence/STI reduction). 
 
8. Risks 
a. Medical risks, listing all proce dures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
There are no medical risks to pa rticipation in this study.  Collect ion of self-collected vaginal 
specimens, as a part of routine care, may pr oduce some discomfort during specimen collection, 
particularly if infected.  While we are examini ng STI infection as our outcome, girls in the trial 
are being tested according to the recommendations  for re-screening and the risk is no greater 
than if done in traditi onal clinical care and/or public hea lth settings. There is potential for 
breeches of confidentiality, but miniscule given the limited number of personnel with access to participant information. While the study will atte mpt to preserve patien t confidentiality, this 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 14 of 16 
 study involves community based and/or home visits for most adolescents therefore disclosure of 
study participation is encouraged. In the pilot study for this work and the our published RCT of 
over 150 adolescents, we followed adolescent girls with PID in their home by either nursing 
staff or disease intervention specialists as a pa rt of our public health approach to PID using 
structured outreach protocols without complain ts of undue exposure, confidentiality breach, or 
complaints by parents/guardians about their adolescent's participation in the study.    
 
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  All participants will provide informed consent an d will be informed that their participation in 
the study will have no effect on subsequent medical care at any referral site . All patient data will 
be kept confidential and secure.  A expert advisory panel will evaluate the progress of 
interventional trial(s), including periodic assessments of data quali ty and timeliness, participant 
recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk versus benefit, performa nce of trial sites, and 
other factors that can affect study outcome. The re search team on this project has been educated 
in the protection of human research particip ants and the treatment of protected health 
information as evidence by completion of their institutional compliance courses.  New research staff will complete the Johns Hopkins Committee on Clinical Investigation courses as a part of 
their training and be added to the protocol for review accordingly.  Maryland state law permits an adolescent under 18 years old to consent herself for research when receiving reproductive care and most adoles cents being seen in ambulatory sites at Johns 
Hopkins seek care   unaccompanied by a parent , we will not require parental consent for 
participation in this study.  The Johns Hopki ns Institutional Review Board approved this 
approach for the successful p ilot of this study design.  Due to the longitudinal approach 
involved in this study, we encourage adolesce nts to keep parents informed about their 
participation in the study. As with the pilot study, we will explain to the adolescents that while they can consent to participate in the study, th eir parent would need to approve a visit by a 
health professional within their home.  When the nurse interventionist cont acts the adolescent to 
schedule the appointment, she will offer to explain to the parent that her daughter agreed to participate in a study through the Johns Hopkins Un iversity and that we would like to come to 
the home to complete the study visit. Oral consen t via phone or in-person would be equivalent.  
If an adolescent wants to part icipate but expresses any concerns about home visits at enrollment 
or during the follow-up call with th e nurse interventionist, the option will be made for visits to 
occur at an alternate location. As a part of our previous work, pa tients could meet the patient at 
the clinic, a relative's home, and/or a Baltimore C ity Health Department school health clinic.   
 Collection of self-collected samples is a routin e part of clinical care. There are no additional 
steps, which can be taken to reduce discomfort associated with provision of a sample. Only members of our evaluation team will have access to  the patient chart and data extraction forms.  
Involved personnel will be trai ned and committed to confidentia lity and protection of patient 
rights and have received formal training through the institution.  No  identifying patient data will 
be included in any of the pres entations or publications  that may be generated as a consequence 
of this study.  Our database will  not contain any patient identifiers, as all participants will be 
assigned unique identifiers. Further, the study design provides for severa l alternatives for study 
participation that allow the adolescent to make  decisions about non-participation, participation 
with parental awareness/involvement, and part icipation through altern ate community outreach 
strategies. By offering these alternative strategies , our team is ensuring 
 protection of privacy as 
afforded by law while setting the stage for adult involvement that could potentially facilitate 
improved clinical outcomes for the patient.  We will document the strategy to be employed by 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 15 of 16 
 the team at the time of recruitment and evaluate  potential differential impacts observed based on 
follow-up approach.  Even if adolescents random ized to the TECH-N intervention arm choose 
not to have the visit done at home, they will still have their 3-5 day follow-up conducted by the 
TECH-N nurse and access to him/he r during the follow-up period as all other participants in this 
arm.  We will uses SMS services from H ealthCloudSMS, a ZeroSum Health, LLC product, 
provides a reliable, secure, and cost-effective solu tion for researchers to implement text message 
based interventions. ZeroSum Health Security Policies meet or exceed HIPAA’s privacy and 
security standards. The research team will acces s HealthCloudSMS through a secure web portal, 
where we can track participant progress. All da ta is encrypted before transmission, protected 
with SSL encryption during transmission, and is stored with 256-bit AES encryption on a dedicated, secure data server. The web applica tion is hosted on a separate, secure application 
server. Both servers can only be accessed usi ng key-based authentication (a 2048 bit RSA key 
pair), which facilitates highly secure access to ensure that PHI and all data is protected. 
HealthCloudSMS employs highly restrictive netw ork access, a rigorous data backup protocol, 
and strong auditing capabilities, in cluding detailed activity logs of database and application 
access. Finally, all participants will be encouraged  to use standard safety mechanisms such as a 
pin or password to lock access to their cell phones by others.   
 
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  Any unanticipated problems or adverse events  will be reported to the IRB immediately. 
Deviations from the original study protocol wi ll be requested through a change in research 
request.  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach  of confidentiality.  
 
There are no anticipated legal risks associated with study pa rticipation. We have been following 
girls in the community for many years and in th eir homes without consequence as we have put 
safeguards in place to protect conf identiality as outlined above. 
 
e. Financial risks to the participants. There are no anticipated financial risks to participations that are unaccounted for in the support and remuneration plan. 
  
9. Benefits 
a. Description of the probable benefits for the participant and for society. 
 
The proposed research is the first to measure, in a randomized clinical trial, the effectiveness of a 
technology enhanced community nursing strategy for short-term clinical management of PID in 
adolescents. If successful, this study will yield data to support a doption of an alternative cost 
conscious, but effective strategy for managing adoles cents with a complicated STI in the outpatient 
setting in accordance with CDC recommendations. To  date, the data clearly demonstrates that 
adolescents need additional supports  to self-manage PID in the outpa tient setting. While adolescents 
engage in technology use, our prel iminary work suggests that this is more likely when there is 
concurrent face-to-face interac tion and/or a relationship that  establishes a context for 
communication. This intervention provides a struct ure for the delivery of the necessary follow-up 
care, overcomes many of the barr iers (e.g. lack of me dical home, transportation) that often 
undermine adolescents ability to adhere, and prov ides for protection of confidentiality. The study 
also explores untested theories about acceptability of adult involvement 
 after diagnosis of PID and 
the use of technology to communicat e with a health provider during an acute medical illness in a 
community where the reproductive life course for young women is disproportionately influenced by 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 16 of 16 
 STI histories and for whom the cost-effectivenes s thresholds for cost-effectiveness of a new 
intervention have not yet been determined.  
 Antibody testing may result in a viable CT point of care test in the fu ture which will optimize 
clinical care in real time and preven t PID in general population samples.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
Patients will receive a $10 gift card at enrollment  and $10 for completed face-to-face research visit 
(14, 30,and 90 days) plus an addition $10 for each STI sample (N=3)provided according to the 
schedule as outlined below. Adolescents in the TECH-N arm will not receive remuneration for the 3-5-day clinical care visit given the current stan dards of care and because adherence to the CHN 
clinical visit is a behavior under study that must be made without any form of additional incentive. Patients will be remunerated $10 for each completed and/or in-person quarterly interview after the 3 month research visit.  Participants who complete all 4 interviews for the fi rst year will receive an 
added bonus of $50.   Adolescents who are eligible for the trial and assi gned to the intervention arm, but do not  have a 
cell phone will be provided with a disposable cell phone during the 1 month during which messages are sent by CFL. We anticipate that  this will be a small number of adolescents given that CTIA 
asserts that there is 93% cell phone penetration in the United States 56 and 88% of the girls 
approached for our Depo-Text st udy at JHU had a cell phone for their personal use. 96 We have 
found, however, that maintenance of  service can be a problem for low-income youth. We will also 
encourage enrolled participants to notify us if  their cell phone service is  discontinued during the 
intervention month so that we can  ensure the delivery of CFL messa ges through use of either a cell 
phone renewal card and/or use of a disposable phone . The rates of remuneration for interviews and 
specimen collection are based on our previous field experience with adolescents and young adults in 
Baltimore who often have competing agendas (e.g. part-time employment) that may preclude them from participating in study visits.   
11. Costs 
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participants and identify 
who will pay for them.   
 
There are no anticipated costs to participants that are unaccounted for in the support and remuneration plan for the study and/or usual care.  
  
 
3.D.9.  Sample Size and Power: We conducted power analyses for Specific Aim 1, hypothesis 2. As  
described in the Preliminary Studies, we conducted a longitudinal analysis of data to examine repeat STIs/PID following 
PID diagnosed in pediatric ambulatory settings in Baltimore.  The results suggested that at 3 months, the STI positivity 
rate was 25% and thus we will assume a 25% STI infection rate for the control group.77   Our preliminary data also 
suggests that at baseline we will be able to recruit approximately 175 participants in each arm for a total of 350 participants. We expect about 30% attrition over the study period and thus each study arm will have an effective sample size of 122.5 participants, for a total of 245 participants. Using these assumptions, our power calculations suggest that we will have 80% power to detect a relative risk of 1.66. (Figure3.D.7)
 
Figure 3.D.9.  Power by Relative Risk for Specific Aim 1, hypothesis 2 by Study Arm Sample Size  
 
1 
 
0.9 
 
0.8 
 
0.7 
 
0.6  
123 
105  n 
96 
 
0.5  
1.4  1.5  1.6  1.7  1.8  1.9  2.0 
Relative risk  
 
3 D.10. Data Analysis Primary Aim : 
Overview: The overall approach will be an intention-to-treat analysis .  To test the hypotheses, in addition to data cleaning 
and exploratory data analysis we will first need to address the challenges presented by the study  
design. The challenges include assessing the “success” of the randomization scheme, testing for differences  
in basic demographic characteristics between the clinical sites, and exploring missing data due to survey non- response 
and due to attrition. The plan for addressing each of the challenges and for hypothesis testing is described below.  Data analysis for hypotheses 1 and 2 will be performed using ST ATA or comparable statistical software and analysis for 
hypothesis 3 will be performed using Tree Age software.
 
Testing for Differences by Randomization Assignment and Clinical Site:  Comparability of the  
randomization assignments will be statistically assessed. If the randomization assignment does not result in equivalent groups or if there are significant differences by clinical site, we will adjust for nonequivalence in hypothesis testing 
(see below).
 
Missing Data due to Survey Non-response:  The extent of data missing due to survey non-response will be assessed and 
if extensive, we will explore using imputation to deal with the missing data. We will take care to enter into imputation 
procedures with an exploratory yet principled approach as a naïve or unprincipled imputation method may create more 
problems than it solves distorting estimates standard errors and hypothesis tests.97 We will explore the use of Rubin’s 
multiple imputation procedure, as one example.  
Attrition Analysis:  We will examine the extent of attrition over the course of the study. In particular, we will examine 
whether missing values are not missing at random and are non-ignorable.  Since the study participants who drop out from 
the study may be different from those who remain, the propensity score method will be used to reduce selection bias, 
balancing the covariates in the data analysis.98 
Hypothesis testing:  
In Aim 1, Hypothesis 1 , we will assess whether adolescents with PID in the TECH-N intervention show greater 
adherence, defined as adherence to the 3 -5 day follow-up visi t, compared to adolescents with PID in the control group. 
We will conduct a logistic regression analysis to determine whether the intervention group  
showed greater short-term adherence rate compared to the control group including potential factors that may  
affect the difference in rates. In Hypothesis 2 , we will determine whether adolescent women with PID  
provided with the TECH-N intervention have a lower rate of recurrent STIs at 90 days compared to adolescents in the 
control group. We will conduct a logistic regression analysis  to determine whether the intervention group showed a lower 
rate of recurrent STIs at 90 days compared to the control gro up, including potential factors that may affect the difference in 
rates. In an exploratory analysis, we will also determine whether the adolescent women with PID in the TECH-N group have on average over time – baseline, 30-day, and 90-day- lower rates of recurrent STIs as compared to the intervention group. This initial analysis will use logistic regression and
 
 
 
 
  
 
generalized estimating equations to handle the correlation of multiple measures within a person over time. We 
will also explore the group – intervention vs. control – trajectories over time to determine whether the two groups have statistically different slopes of recurrent STIs. We will also explore stratifying the curves by 
measures such as race/ethnicity and level of poverty.
 
In Aim 2, Hypothesis 3 , we will determine whether the TECH-N intervention is more cost-effective than 
the control for the prevention of recurrent STIs and PID-related complications. The cost evaluation will examine 
the net difference in costs between TECH-N and control groups in relation to prevention of 1) recurrent STIs  
(including PID) and 2) PID-related complications (e.g. re-hospitalization, medical vi sits, ectopic pregnancies). 
The difference in costs will account for the net difference between the outpatient strategies in use of medical services and indirect costs for PID treatment. The analysis will also consider savings in medical-care costs and 
indirect costs from prevention of the outcome variables. Two types of outcomes can be created. While the 
workplace and home productivity improvements are not the only monetary improvements associated with
 better 
care, a cost-benefit analysis can be performed simply comparing the excess costs of TECH-N with the medical 
care savings and productivity gains from cases averted. The distribution around the point estimate of the net 
benefits can be ascertained using a bootstrapping approach to account for the lack of the normal distribution that 
is likely in a net benefit calculation. We can also exte nd the analysis to a cost-effectiveness evaluation if TECH-
N remains more expensive even after accounting for medical care costs and productivity loss averted. In this case, we can measure the dollars spent per case of STI av erted over the relevant time period. We can also use 
published parameters to determine how the TECH-N intervention compares to hospitalization. Decision makers 
can then focus their attention on whether the added costs appear to be worth the health improvement.  In this 
case, we could also use a bootstrapping analysis  to calculate the distribution of the ICER.
 
 