Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 1  
 
 
 
Study Protocol:  
Open -Label Study  of N-Acetylcysteine in Children and Adolescents ages 5 -17 with Bipolar 
I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
Janet Wozniak, MD  
Massachusetts General Hospital  
Clinical and Research Program in Pedi atric Psychopharmacology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 2 1. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
As highlighted in NIMH Research Roundtables, pediatric bipolar disorder is now recognized as a 
significant public health concern (J Biederman et al., 2001) . Children with bipolar d isorder make 
up the most difficult psychopathologic group with poor functioning and high levels of 
psychiatric comorbidity, hospitalization and special education services. Aggressive behavior, 
suicidality and reckless impulsivity are common problems for bi polar youth and some are 
diverted to the youth criminal justice system  (Wozniak & Biederman, 1997) . Pediatric bipolar 
disorder is commonly characterized by high levels of irritability as well as mixed states, that is,  
concurrent features of both mania and depression. The clinical picture of concurrent depression 
and mania significantly complicates the diagnosis, course and treatment of pediatric bipolar 
disorder. The severity of illness associated with pediatric bipola r disorder  is so extreme that not 
treating is usually not a viable option.  
 
Common Pharmaceutical Treatments are Inadequate  
Part of the controversy surrounding the diagnosis of bipolar disorder in youth is the concern that 
children given the diagnosis may be subjected to treatments that are fraught with potentially 
serious side effects. Children with bipolar disorder are frequently treated with a multitude of 
medications despite unclear efficacy and inadequate safety data (J. Biederman et al., 1998; 
Kowatch & DelBello, 2003) . Medications such as lithium, which have been the mainstay of 
pharmacotherapy for bipolar adults, show only moderate effectiveness in children (Kowatch et 
al., 2000) , and side effects of newer atypical antipsychotic agents (e.g. risperidone, aripiprazole, 
olanzapine and quetiapine) have been found to limit these drugs’ utility (Liu et al., 2011) . 
 
For several decades,  mood stabilizers, including lithium, valproate, and carbamazepine, have 
been the cornerstone of acute and maintenance therapy for mania in bipolar adults (Sachs, Printz, 
Kahn, Carpenter, & Docherty, 2000; Sachs & Thase, 2000) . Despite various advantages of these 
compounds including putative neuroprotective effe ct, there is a gap between drug efficacy in 
controlled trials and the effectiveness of mood stabilizers in the clinical setting. For example, in 
controlled and naturalistic trials in children mood stabilizers were demonstrated to be only 
moderately effecti ve for the treatment of mania (J. Biederman et al., 1998; Geller et al., 1998; 
Kowatch et al., 2000) . In the naturalistic setting, mood stabilizer therapy was associated with a 
slow onset of action and substantial r isk of relapse (J. Biederman et al., 1998) . In the controlled 
trials, there were frequent adverse events, noncompliance , and treatment dropouts (Kowatch et 
al., 2000; Wagner et al., 2002) . In a chart review of our naturalistic experience in the treatment of 
pediatric bipolar disorder, we documented that the traditional mood stabilizers li thium, valproic 
acid and carbamazepine, were minimally effective in treating children and adolescents with 
bipolar disorder (J. Biederman et al., 1998) . 
 
In comparison to conventional mood stabilizers, which are limited in their efficacy and carry 
adverse side effect profiles, more encouraging results have emerged with the use of atypical 
antipsychotic medications. For years, li thium had been the only agent with FDA approval for 
bipolar disorder in youth. The atypical antipsychotic medications have been approved by the 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 3 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in mania in adults  (Perlis, Welge, Vornik, 
Hirschfeld, &  Keck, 2006) , and in the case of risperidone and aripiprazole, down to age 10 for 
children with mania (J. Biederman, McDonnell, et al., 2005; J. Biederman et al., 2007; J. 
Biederman, Mick, et al., 2005) . There is a  very real concern , however,  regarding the 
development of weight gain and diabetes in individuals treated with atypical antipsychotic 
medications (Leslie & Rosenheck, 2004; Lindenmayer, Nathan, & Smith, 2001; McElroy  et al., 
2004; Meltzer, 2005; Regenold, Thapar, Marano, Gavirneni, & Kondapavuluru, 2002; 
Rosenbloom, 2002) , and tardive dyskinesia remains a risk associated with these treatmen ts 
(Aggarwal & Burnett, 2013; Gardos &  Cole, 1995; J. Kim, Macmaster, & Schwartz, 2014) . 
 
In addition to weight gain, risperidone is associated with elevations of the hormone prolactin (J. 
Biederman, Mick, et al., 2005) , which can re sult in galactorrhea in youth and has unknown 
effects on pubertal development (Y. K. Kim, Kim, & Lee, 1999; Petty, 1999; Popli, Gupta, & 
Rangwani, 1998; Turgay, Binder, Snyder, & Fisman, 2002; Wudarsky et al., 1999) . 
 
Furthermore, adverse effects and noncompliance may be a more significant problem in  children 
than in adults. Side effects such as weight gain, acne, cognitive impairment , or gastrointestinal 
distress can make youth self -conscious and non -compliant. Also , adverse effects due to drug -
drug interactions or routine blood collection for serum level  monitoring increases the risk of 
refusing medications with the attendant consequences on  clinical course and adaptive life. 
Clinicians and parents would happily tur n to alternative  treatments were more information 
available regarding their efficacy and confirming their  presumed safety. In the absence of this 
data, the tenets of evidence based medicine dictate  the use of pharmaceutical agents with 
established efficacy , especially those with approval, despite miserable side effects (Kowatch et 
al., 2005) . 
 
N-acetylcysteine and Psychiatry  
Alternative  products , including N -acetylcysteine  (NAC) , may offer  a healthy option for treating 
developing youth with psychiatric disturbance. As bipolar disorder is severely impairing, 
intervention of some sort is usually necessary. Alternative treatments may be acceptable to a 
subset of individuals throughout the life cycle who refuse treatment with conventional agents.   
 
Nutritional products including NAC  have  demonstrated utility in the treatment of mood 
disorders. These agents offer the  promise of a safe and healthful approach to controlling the 
symptoms of bipolar disorder  in youth.  NAC is an acetylated amino acid  and a precursor of 
glutathione. When ingested, NAC increase s cysteine levels, leading to the synthesis of more 
glutathione in the brain; glutathione then acts as an anti -oxidant to reduce oxidative stress,  which 
has been implicated in bipolar disorder and major depression (Magalhaes et al., 2011; Smaga et 
al., 2012) . Ingesting gl utathione itself is not helpful, as it never reaches the brain due to poor 
absorption and  rapid metabolism. NAC, however, crosses the blood -brain barrier with ease 
(Dean, Giorlando, & Berk, 2011; Witschi, Reddy, Stofer, & Lauterburg, 1992) . 
 
NAC has an additional ro le in regulating glutamate level s. The cysteine portion of NAC is a key 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 4 player in the transport of glutamate out of the cell. Excessive glutamate levels have been 
implicated as a possible mechanism of psychopathology in psychiatric conditions.  Through a 
feedback mechanism with astrocytes, this  can result in diminished release of glutamate into the 
extracellular space. Thus, this additional role in regulating glutamate levels may  also be  
therapeutic, as malfunctions in the glutamate system result in consequent excito -toxic damage 
from activation  of the N -methyl -D-Aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor.  
 
Coupled with the purported mechanism of action, clinical trials have also  provided compelling 
interest in NAC as an evidence -based treatment for pediatric bipolar disorder.  Research has 
demonstrated  the utility of NAC in the treatment of bipolar disorder in adults: both open -label 
and double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled trials of NAC have found decreases in 
depression rating scale scores and improvements in global functioning (Berk, Copolov, Dean, 
Lu, Jeavons, Schapkaitz, Anderson -Hunt, & Bush, 2008; Berk et al., 2011) . NAC has also 
proven to be safe in pediatri c studies: children with autistic disorder have responded well to 
treatment with NAC without any serious adverse events or side effects (Ghanizadeh & Moghimi -
Sarani, 2013; Hardan et al., 2012) . NAC has been shown to be helpful in treating a multitude of 
disorders ( OCD; marijuana, nicotine, and cocaine addic tions ; gambling ; skin picking ; nail biting ; 
trichotillomania ; schizophrenia ; autism ; and bipolar disorder), suggesting it may address the end 
of the line pathway targets common to multiple disturbances  (Wozniak, in press) . 
 
Rationale  
Emerging research suggests that NAC may be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder,  but 
there are no published data to date in the pediatric bipolar population.  Additional research is  
needed on NAC’s optimal dosing, side effects, and efficacy in treating pediatric bipolar disorder.   
 
2. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Specific Aim I : Assessing the efficacy of NAC in the treatment of pediatric bipolar spectrum 
disorders. Other research suggests that NAC  is effective in the treatment of bipolar disorder in 
adults  (Berk, Copolov, Dean, Lu, Jeavons, Schapkaitz, Anderson -Hunt, & Bush, 2008; Berk et 
al., 2011) , but no work has assessed the effectiveness of NAC for pedi atric bipolar disorder  and 
associated symptoms . Hypothesis 1 : NAC will yield a reduction in the symptoms of pediatric 
bipolar spectrum disorders, as measured by scores on the YMRS and the Mania Symptoms 
Checklist . 
 
Specific Aim II : Assessing the side effec t profile of NAC. Medications used to treat bipolar 
disorder in youth are fraught with side effects including sedation, extra -pyramidal symptoms, 
cognitive clouding, weight gain and diabetes. In contrast, NAC has health benefits. Hypothesis 2 : 
The use of N AC will  have few side effects in youth, as measured by the number of adverse 
events.  
 
3. LENGTH OF STUDY  
 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 5 The study will last up to 15 weeks from the initial phone screen (it could take up to three weeks 
to schedule and complete the initial screening proce ss). Once subjects have completed the 
screening process, they will begin the 12-week open -label  phase. Subjects will be assessed 
weekly throughout the study for efficacy and tolerability.  
 
4. SOURCE OF SUJECTS  
 
We will recruit subjects from th e pool of exi sting subjects, patients, and new referrals to the  
Pediatric Ps ychopharmacology Program at MGH, as well as through advertising in the local 
media  and online . If a potential subject's clinician ascertains that the patient has an interest in 
study participat ion, the clinician will only offer contact information for the study to their 
patients. The patient can then contact the study coordinator for more information on the actual 
study. All subjects that enter the study will undergo standard screening and diagn ostic 
procedures.  
 
The majority of subjects referred to our program first participate in our general screening 
protocol entitled, “Screening Protocol for Children and Adolescents with Bipolar and Bipolar 
Spectrum Disorder” (Protocol # 2001 -P-001247). Afte r participating in this screening protocol, 
subjects are invited to participate in  specific studies based upon eligibility requirements (i.e. age, 
prior medication efficacy or tolerability).  
 
Subjects who have completed a previous medication trial in our p rogram may be eligible to 
participate in this study, as describ ed in the Study Design section.  
 
5. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
 
All subjects that enter the study will undergo standard screening and diagnostic procedures. 
Written informed consent will be obtained fr om subjects’ parent/guardian prior to initiation of 
the study protocol. Subjects aged 7 and older will sign age appropriate assent forms. Subjects 
ages 14 -17 will document their assent on a designated line of the general study consent form. 
Subjects who tu rn 18 years old during the trial must re -sign on a designated line in the 
parent/guardian consent when they reach age of maturity. The study subjects and their parent 
may take as much time as they feel necessary to consider their participation in the study  as well 
as consult with their family members or physician. Only patients who are not responding to their 
current treatment regimen will be tapered from their medications to enter this study. Subjects 
may remain on most current treatments while participati ng in this study. Participation in this 
study is voluntary, and subjects may withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
6. SUBJECT SELECTION CRITERIA  
 
A. Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Male or female subjects, 5-17 years of age.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 6 2. Subjects must have a DSM -5 diagnosis of a bipo lar spectrum disorder (type I, II, or 
Not Otherwise Specified (NOS)), and currently displaying mixed, manic, or 
hypomanic symptoms according to clinical assessment based on the DSM -5 and 
confirmed with structured diagnostic interview (Schedule of Affective  Disorders and 
Schizophrenia for School -Age Children - Epidemiological Version (K -SADS -E)). 
3. Subjects and their legal representative must have a level of understanding sufficient to 
communicate intelligently with the investigator and study coordinator, and to 
cooperate with all tests and examinations required by the protocol.  
4. Subjects and their legal representative must be considered reliable.  
5. Each subject and his/her authorized legal representative must understand the nature of 
the study. The subject’s auth orized legal representative must provide written consent 
and the subject must provide written assent.  
6. Subjects must have an initial total score on the YMRS of at least 15. 
 
B. Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Investigato r and his/her immediate family ( defined as the inves tigator’s spouse, 
parent, child, grandparent, or grandchild ). 
2. Serious or unstable illness including hepatic, renal, gastroenterological, respiratory, 
cardiovascular (including ischemic heart disease), endocrinologic, neurologic, 
immunologic, or hematologic  disease.  
3. Uncorrected hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.  
4. History of sensitivity to N-acetylcysteine , a history of intolerance to N-acetylcysteine  
or a non -responder  after 2 months of treatment at adequate doses as determined by the 
clinician.  
5. Severe allerg ies or multiple adverse drug reactions.  
6. Current or past history of seizures.  
7. Active substance abusers,  per clinician judgment . 
8. Judged clinically to be at serious suicidal risk.  
9. Currently displaying psychotic features.  
10. Any concomitant medication with primar y central nervous system activity other than 
specified in the Concomitant Medication portion of the protocol.  
11. Current diagnosis of schiz ophrenia.  
12. Pregnancy.  
13. C-SSRS score  ≥ 4. 
14. IQ < 70.  
 
7. DESIGN  
 
This will be a 12 -week, open -label study of NAC in the treat ment of bipolar disorder in children 
and adolescents. Subjects will include  youth  ages 5 -17 years with a bipolar spectrum disorder 
(type I, II, or NOS), mixed, manic, or hypomanic state, according to the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder s, Fifth Edition  DSM -5 (American Psychiatric Association, 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 7 2013) . The primary  outcome measures will be improvement in manic symptoms as measured by 
the Young Mania Rating Sc ale (YMRS) and improvement in depressive symptoms as measured 
by the Child Depression Rating Scale (CDRS).  
 
Bipolar diagnoses will be made according to the DSM -5 in a clinical evaluation by a Child 
Psychiatrist and confirmed using the Schedule for Affectiv e Disorders and Schizophrenia for 
School -Age Children - Epidemiological Version (K -SADS -E)(Orvaschel, 1994) . All subjects 
must have a YM RS score of at least 15. Only patients who are not responding to their current 
treatment regimen will be tapered from their me dications ; youth on concomitant psychiatric 
medications will be permitted to continue those medications as listed in the concomitant 
medication section.  
 
We will consent and screen 40 subjects to ascertain 20 subjects who complete 12 weeks of open -
label tr eatment. The subject’s first visit to the office consists of a meeting with a study clinician 
who explains the study, obtains informed consent  and assent , and administers an abbreviated 
form of the structured diagnostic assessment (45 -90 minutes). After th e evaluation with the study 
clinician, the subjects will undergo a neuropsychological assessment ( 35-45minutes ). 
 
We anticipate that subjects may enter this trial following completion of/withdrawal from other 
Bipolar Disorder protocols in our office, and t hat there may be procedural overlap.  So as to not 
burden subjects/parents/guardians with redundant time commitments, we will use the following 
diagnostic  data prev iously collected:  
 
• If a subject has completed an evaluation with one of the study clinicians and/or the 
structured assessment within the  12 months prior to entrance into this study, they will not 
be asked to repeat any overlapping diagnostic procedures.  We will use the previously 
collected data.  However, the study clinician will review the interva l time period to assess 
for clinically significant medically or psychiatric history to ensure that the subject meets 
appropriate study entrance criteria , including a DSM -5 diagnosis of a bipolar spectrum 
disorder . 
 
• If the subset of scales assessing intelli gence (WASI -II/KBIT-2) and cog nitive functioning 
(select WISC/ WPPSI-III tasks ) in the neuropsychological battery have been completed 
within 12 months prior to entrance into this study, subjects will not be asked to repeat 
these procedures.  We will use the previously collected data.  Study participants (or their 
parent/guardian) may request the results of their cognitive testing. In this case, the subject 
will receive a letter providing a basic interpretation of the results and referring the subject 
(or their  parent/guardian) to the department's supervising neuropsychologist for any 
questions or concerns.  
 
Eligible subjects will be required to come into the office for the following visits: Screening , 
Baseline (Week 0), Weeks 1 -4, Week 8, and the Week 12 final visit. Visits for Weeks 5-7 and 9 -
11 will be completed by the clinician over the phone ; however, if the parent and subject prefer to 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 8 come into the office for these visits instead, they may do so . During this time subjects will 
receive prescriptions from th e study doctor  for their NAC treatment.  
 
Although every effort will be made to encourage subjects to keep regularly scheduled 
appointments, in the event that a subject is unable to come into the office within a reasonable 
timeframe of a scheduled study v isit, and the study doctor feels that subject safety will not be 
jeopardized by doing so, the clinician may conduct the visit with the subject and parent/guardian 
over the phone; this will ensure that each subject will be continuously monitored by the clinic ian 
throughout the course of the study despite unforeseen scheduling circumstances. However, if a 
subject  completes a  phone visit  instead of a scheduled office visit , the office visit must be made 
up within two weeks . Neither t he Screening  visit, nor the Baseline visit, nor the final study visit 
may be conducted over the phone.  
 
Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, temperature) , height, and weight  will be measured at every 
office visit. A urine drug screen will be performed for all subjects aged 12 and over  at the 
screening visit. For female subjects  who have begun menstruating , a urine pregnancy test will be 
performed at the screening visit, followed by a serum pregnancy test if the urine test is positive.  
If a participant has a positive serum pregnancy tes t, the study doctor will inform the subject , and 
she will not be able to take part in the study. The decision whether to inform the parent of these 
results will be made by the physician based on the participant’s age and maturity level and the 
requirements  of the law, unless the participant a grees to parental notification.  
 
Those subjects who terminate study participation before the completion of the study will be 
asked to complete all tasks scheduled to take place on the final study visit at th e time of st udy 
discontinuation; however, if the subject refused to complete any portions  of the cognitive 
assessment at baseline,  or if the subject was not yet exposed to the study treatments,  it is possible 
that we will not ask him/her  to complete these tasks  at end point , per clinician judgment . 
Medication compliance for the study will be assessed at each study visit after Baseline.  
 
Dosing  
 
We plan to treat subjects  with the following dose:  
 
Subjects  ages 5 -12 
Week 1: 900mg  po daily  
Weeks 2+: 900mg po QAM, 900mg  po QPM  
 
Subjects  ages 13 -17 
Week 1: 900mg po d aily 
Week 2: 900mg po QAM, 900mg po QPM  
Weeks 3+: 1800mg po QAM, 900mg po QPM  
 
In Weeks 3 -12 for subjects  ages 13 -17, we w ill encourage twice per day dosing , but we will 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 9 permit daily dosing if needed for adherence . 
 
The rationale for the NAC  dosing is based on  two pilot clinical trials and one case report 
indicating t hat oral dose of NAC in the range of 800 -2700mg is well-tolerated in children 
(Ghanizadeh & Derakhshan, 2012; Ghanizadeh & Moghimi -Sarani, 2013; Hardan et al., 2012) . 
Hardan and colleagues’ (2012) use of increasing doses of NAC in the range of 900 -2700mg 
appears to have been more efficacious than Ghanizadeh’s and Moghimi -Sarani’s (2013) dosing 
of 1200mg per day. Therefore, we decided upon an age -appropriate forced titration dos ing within 
the 900 -2700mg range, which has been shown to be safe for children.  
 
PharmaNAC brand was chosen  to supply the NAC tablets  due to its palatability and ease of 
administration. Young er subjects have difficulty swallowing pills, but PharmaNAC tablets offer 
the advantage that they dissolve in water and do not require that subjects swallow pills. This 
brand of NAC has been used in previous studies  (Hardan et al., 2012; Miller & Angulo, 2014)  
and has excellent reliability of content. The Principal Investigator has successfully used this 
brand of NAC in clinical practice.  
 
The supplements will be stored in our research pharmacy and delivered  to the P ediatric 
Psychopharmacology Unit, where a clinician  will dispense them . Subjects are inst ructed to return 
unused tablets . Pill counts will be reviewed each visit to ensure compliance.  
 
Concomitant Medications  
 
A detailed past and present treatment history will be taken as part of initial evaluation. Patients  
who are partially responding to current psychotropic medication yet continue to have symptoms 
of mania and depression will be permitted to continue on their curr ent regimen, provided that the 
patient ’s regimen remains the same throughout the study. Patients  treated with these medications 
must be on a stable dose for at least one month prior to study entry. No new med ications (except 
for the use of the benzodiazepine lorazepam listed below)  or alterations  to the current regimen  
may be initiated throughout the duration of study participation.  
 
Only patients with a poor response to their current medication treatment will be advised to 
consider a taper off their medica tions for entry into the study. No patie nt will be tapered from 
medication that is useful to him or her.  
 
The use of the benzodiazepine lorazepam is permitted during the study  for exacerbation of 
symptoms of agitation . Patients may not exceed a dosage of 2mg lorazepam per day and 
lorazepam is p ermitted for a maximum of 3 days during the study. Any greater need for 
lorazepam will be considered evidence of poor treatment response and grounds for drop from the 
study.  
 
Additionally, participants who are on a stable dose of ADHD medications may conti nue on that 
dose throughout the study. However, no new medications for ADHD or alterations to the current 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 10 ADHD regimen may be started throughout the duration of participation in the study, per clinician 
judgment.  
 
Non-pharmacological treatments such as ind ividual, family or group therapy will be allowed if 
they were in place before the patient joined the study. The patient’s therapy regimen must remain 
the same throughout the study. No new non -pharmacological treatments may be initiated after 
study particip ation has begun.  
 
Washout Period  
 
Medication washout may be recommended by our clinicians on a case -by-case assessment, 
considering the duration on drug, the dose, the adverse effects associated with the treatment, and  
potential  effects of stopping that me dication/treatment. Only subjects not responding to current 
treatment will be tapered from medication. No subject on a useful treatment will be tapered from 
medication for entry into this study. The referring or study clinician will monitor medication 
tapers in agreement with the research subject and his/her legal guardians. Our office does not 
take over care for the patient, but remains available during this time period. The washout 
schedule will be discussed with the subject’s family as well as the curren t provider.  
 
Typically a 7 -day washout period is recommended for antidepressant medications and 
atomoxetine (with the exception of Prozac requiring 14 days). Mood stabilizers/atypical 
antipsychotics are generally washed out over the course of 7 days, whil e stimulants are 
discontinued in 2 or 3 days.  
 
Screening Visit  (Week 99)  
 
Before any participant can start the study, the study clinician will discuss the details of the study 
with the participant and his/her parent/guardian. Before starting the screening process, the study 
clinician will obtain informed consent from the parent or guardian and assent from the child 
subject. Assent will be obtained, in writing, from each child age d 7 or older who, in the opinion 
of the Investigator, is capable of providing a ssent based on his/her  age, maturity, and 
psychological state. When assent is not obtained, the Investigator will document his/her rationale 
in the research records.  
 
After the consent/assent form is signed, we will do the following:  
• Review medical and hea lth questions with the participant and his/her 
parents/guardians. (For example, “Does your child have a history of any medical 
conditions such as diabetes or hypertension?”)  
• Obtain psychiatric history and administer  the YMRS, the CDRS, the HAM -D, the 
C-SSRS, and the K -SADS -E mania and depression modules to determine that 
subject meets the diagnostic criteria of a current  DSM -5 bipolar spectrum disorder 
(mixed, manic, or hyp omanic) and has an YMRS score ≥ 15. 
 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 11 All exclusionary and inclusionary criteria will be reviewed. Appropriate patients will undergo:  
• Assessment battery (CBCL, SAICA, FES)  
• Cognitive evaluation (IQ and cognitive function [subtests of the WASI -II or 
KBIT -2, the WISC -IV or WPPSI-III]) 
▪ Select WPP SI-III subtests will be used in the place of the WISC -IV 
processing speed subtest for children younger than 6 years.  
▪ The KBIT -2 will be used in the place of the WASI -II to assess IQ in 
children younger than 6 years.  
• Physical exam  
• Vital Signs (blood p ressure, pulse, temperature) , height, and weight  
• Urine pregnancy test (for females who have begun their period ) 
• Urine drug screen  (for subjects age 12 years and older)  
 
The above may take place over two visits over the course of three weeks, if necessary. All are to 
be completed prior to the Baseline Visit. Any subjects requiring medication washout  must be 
tapered off this medication prior to Baseline Visit as indicated in the washout section. Patients 
who do not meet all the criteria for enrollment after t hese assessments will be discontinued.  
 
Baseline  Visit  (Week 0)  
 
Subjects must continue to meet all inclusionary and exclusionary criteria at this visit  
• The study clinician will ask the parents/guardians questions about their child’s 
symptoms of bipolar di sorder  
• Study clinician will administer  additional  scales: the ADHD Rating Scale and 
BPRS  
• The parent and subject will complete  
• Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, temperature) , height, and weight  
• Subject s will receive study treatment  
 
Weekly Visits (Weeks 1 through 12) 
 
Weekly study visits will have a visit window of  7 +/- 2 days to facilitate scheduling.  
 
During these visits:  
• The study clinician will ask the parents/guardians questions about their child’s 
symptoms of bipolar disorder  
• The study clinician wi ll also ask if the participant is having any side effects and if 
they have taken any other medications since the last visit  
• Blood pressure, pulse, height, weight, and temperature will be obtained  (unless it 
is a phone visit week)  
• At the last visit ( or at t ime of drop from study)  al subjects will unde rgo repeat 
cognitive evaluation . 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 12  
Study Discontinuation  
 
Subjects may drop at any time due to patient preference, physician decision, need for psychiatric 
hospitalization, or a poor response to treatment. Poor r esponse to treatment will be measured by 
a CGI -bipolar score that is 2 points higher (more severe) than baseline for 2 weeks in a row or a 
YMRS score that is 30% higher than baseline for 2 weeks in a row, which may lead to drop from 
the study as determined  by the clinician. Initial and emergent suicidality will be assessed weekly 
through administration of the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS). Subjects 
scoring 4 or higher will be dropped from the study. In addition, drop from study will occur at 
clinician discretion for lack of efficacy , non -compliance with treatment or inability to tolerate 
study treatment.  
 
Subjects will receive three months of optional pro bono clinical care visits  (one appointment per 
month) with a study doctor at the compl etion of the study, or if they are required to discontinue 
for the above reasons.  These appointments must take place within three months of the subject’s 
final study visit.  No research data will be collected at these follow -up visits. The three months of 
follow -up care are a courtesy that is offered to help find long -term care. Subjects will receive 
referrals to  clinicians  in their communities.  
 
Subjects who fail to return medication for two consecutive office visits, fail to keep study 
appointments, or are  non-compliant (less than 70% compliance for two weeks or longer) may be 
dropped from the study. These study subjects will be given a referral to clinicians  in their area.  
 
If a subject becomes pregnant or is found to be abusing substances during the study , he or she 
will be discontinued from the study and given a referral , as well . 
 
If a subject would like us to forward their clinical history to his/her primary care physician, or a 
new clinician, we will forward any pertinent information. If a subject who has come from the 
clinic of the investigator happens to drop out of the study, he or she will return to his or her 
treating physician.  
 
Audio Recordings  
 
For quality control purposes, the rating scales completed during office visits may  be recorded. 
The PI  will use these recordings to monitor quality control and inter -rater reliability in this study . 
Each recording will be coded with patient initials and  number to maintain confidentiality. These 
recordings will be stored in a password -protected  database . 
 
Data Collection  
 
Data will be collected using StudyTRAX. StudyTRAX is an electronic data capture system that 
streamlines data collection and management and ensures data integrity. StudyTRAX software 
allows researchers to design and implement study surveys f or collected, story, retrieving, and 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 13 manipulating data electronically.  
 
Participants and/or research staff will enter survey responses into electronic assessment forms, 
using computer terminals at the research site. The responses will then be transmitted s ecurely via 
an encrypted connection and stored in a secured database.  Electronic data capture obviates the 
need for subsequent data entry by staff, thus minimizing human error. However, it is still 
possible that rating scales will be collected in paper for m in the case that StudyTRAX is not 
working or unavailable.  
 
 
8. ASSESSMENTS (see Table 1)  
 
A. K-SADS -E (Epidemiologic Version)  
❖ We will collect information for psychiatric diagnoses in children with study relevant 
modules of  the KSADS -E (Epidemiologic Vers ion)(Orvaschel, 1994) . 
❖ This is a widely used, semistructured, diagnostic interview with established psychometric 
properties. Study staff  can effectively administer it  in 45 to 90 minutes, although more 
complex cases may require additional time.  This assessment w ill be administered by a 
study clinician.  
❖ For all children, psychiatric data will b e collected from the primary caretaker. All 
children and primary caregivers will be seen in dir ect clinical interview with a trained 
member of study staff.  
❖ The mania  and dep ression modules will be administered prior to the baseline visit to 
ensure entry criteria are met.  
❖ The subject’s parent/guardian  will also be asked a series of background information 
questions regarding the subject’s age, sex, education history (tutoring,  placement in 
special classes, repeated grade), intactness of family of origin, and psychological and 
psychiatric treatment history, including past and current therapy and medication for 
emotional, behavioral, and attentional problems. In addition, questio ns about occupation 
and level of education of the subject’s parents will be asked to determine socioeconomic 
status; t his information  will be entered on the study -specific form (“Background 
Information/KSADS face page”).  
 
B. Child Behavior Checklist -Parent  Form (CBCL)  
❖ The CBCL (T.M. Achenbach, 2000; T. M. Achenbach & Dumenci, 2001)  is a 
standardized assessment of child behavior problems and social competence. Due to its 
extensive use and available norms, it provides us with an effective method of comparing 
our sample with others in the literature.  
❖ The CBCL records, in standardized format, the behavioral problems and competencies of 
children aged 4 to 1 8, as reported by their parents/guardians.  
❖ The CBCL is scored on th e recently revised social competence and behavior problem 
scales of the Child Behavior Profile. A T -score above 70 is considered to be a clinically 
meaningful indicator of childhood psychopathology.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 14 ❖ Administered at beginning of study to characterize the gr oups and ensure their similarity.  
 
C. Social Adjustment Inventory for Children and Adolescents (SAICA)  
❖ The SAICA (John, Gammon, Prusoff, & Warner, 1987)  is a semi -structured interview of 
the child or parent that m easures social functioning in children 6 to 18 years old.  
❖ Content areas assessed include activities, peer relations, family relations, and academic 
performance. A total score is then calculated as the arithmetic mean of all global rating 
scores.  
❖ We will ad minister this scale to parents/guardians at beginning of study and endpoint to 
assess the impact of treatment on social functioning.  We will administer this scale for all 
subjects, including 5 year olds.  
 
D. Family Environment Scale (FES)  
❖ As an additional measure of the family environment, we will use the Moos Family 
Environment Scale (FES) (Moos, 1985)  
❖ The FES assesses the quality of interpersonal relationships amon g family members. This 
scale consists of 90 true -false items to be completed by the parents. This measure permits 
an assessment of the degree of stress in the family environment and of parental discord.  
❖ Administered at beginning of study to characterize th e groups and ensure their similarity.  
 
E. Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF)  
❖ The GAF (American Psychiatric Association, 1994)  will assess global functioning using 
a scale from 1 (worst) to 100 (best). Guidelines and examples of how to use this scale are 
provided with the scale.  
❖ This clinician rated scale will be used at baseline visit to characterize the sample, at each 
of the 12 weekly visits to assess change, and at  endpoint, to assess the impact of 
treatment on global functioning.  
 
F. Pediatric Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (PQ -LES -Q) 
❖ A 15 -item rating scale to assess the degree of life enjoyment and satisfaction for children 
(Endicott, Nee, Yang, & Wohlberg, 2006) . 
❖ We will administer this scale to parents/guardians a t baseline and endpoint.  
 
G. Neuropsychological Tests/Cognitive Evaluation  
❖ IQ Testing: At study beginning, subjects  will complete a brief cognitive screen . The 
scale s we will use  meet the demand for  quick reliable measure s of intelligence in clinical, 
educ ational and research settings. These tests will provide estimates of verbal and 
nonverbal ability respectively, as well as the direct measure of Full Scale IQ.  This portion 
of the cognitive evaluation will take approximately 30 minutes to complete. In the 
unlikely event that a subject’s estimated IQ is below 70, the subject will not be eligible to 
participate in the study.  Depending upon the subject’s age, the cognitive screen will 
consist of:  
 -  Subjects age 5: Verbal Knowledge, Riddles, and Matrices subt ests of the  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 15     Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition (KBIT -2)(Kaufman &  
    Kaufman, 2004)   
 -  Subjects ages 6 -17: Vocabulary and Matric es subtests of the Wechsler  
    Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI -II)(Wechsler, 2011)  
❖ Cognitive  Functioning Testing: At screening and endpoint, to evaluate  the impact o f 
treatment on cognition, we will assess basic intellectual and cognitive functions purported 
to be deficient in patients with bipolar disorder. Cognitive deficits that have been 
observed in bipolar disorder may reflect dysfunction in the frontal subcortic al circuits that 
support aspects of attention, executive functions processing speed, memory , and learning 
(Bearden, Hoffman, & Cannon, 2001) . The neuropsychological battery we have 
developed to assess these functions includes both published clinical measures with large, 
normative samples and experimental measures with strong empirical evidence of validity. 
This neuropsychological battery, which has been used widely in clinical trials and family 
studies in our office, h as been well -tolerated. The testing will take approximately  15 
minutes  to complete . The age-appropriate testing will include : 
 -  Subjects age 5: Symbol Search and Coding subtests of the Wechsler  
    Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI -III) (Wechsler &  
    Sattler, 2002)  to measure processing speed   
 -  Subjects ages 6 -16: Digit Span and Symbol Coding subtests from the  
    Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children -Fourth Edition (WISC -IV)  
    (Wechsler, 2003) to measure working memory and processing speed  
 -  Subjects age 17:  Digit Span and Symbol Coding subtests from the Wechsler  
    Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS -IV)(Wechsler, 2008)  
The working memory scale will be omitted  for subjects who are 5 years of age , as we do 
not have a n age -appropriate  scale  available.   
 
Efficacy Measures  
 
The primary efficacy  measures are the mean change from baseline to endpoint in the  
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) total score and the Children’s Depression Rating  
Scale (CDRS). These will be administered by the clinician at all visits . 
 
A. Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS)  
❖ The YMRS (Young, Biggs, Ziegler, & Meyer, 1978)  consists of 11 items rated on a scale 
from 0 (symptom not present) to 4 (symptom extremely severe).  
❖ Items 5, 6, 8, and 9 ar e rated on a scale from 0 (symptom not present) to 8 (symptom 
extremely severe). These items assess irritability, speech, content and 
disruptive/aggressive behavior) and are given extra weight in the overall score.  
❖ The YMRS score ranges from 0 -60. Question s are asked about the last week. This scale 
is generally accepted as the main outcome measure in studies of pediatric bipolar disorder 
and is linked directly to the core symptoms of mania.  
❖ Collected at the Screening Visit, Baseline Visit (only subjects wit h a YMRS score of 15 
or greater, but not above 40, are included), at each of the weekly visits and at endpoint to 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 16 assess the impact of treatment on manic symptoms.  
 
B. Children’s Depression Rating Scale (CDRS)  
❖ The CDRS (Poznanski, Freeman, & Mokros, 1985)  is mo deled after the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale for adults, but includes questions relevant to youth, such as 
questions about school, family and peer functioning.  
❖ This is a clinician -rated instrument with 17 items scored on a 1 to 5 or 1 to 7 scale. A 
rating of 1 indicates normal, thus the minimum score is 17. The maximum score is 113. 
Scores of 20 -30 suggest borderline depression. Scores of 40 -60 indicate moderate 
depression.  
❖ This scale is generally accepted as the main outcome in studies assessing childh ood 
depression and is linked directly to the core symptoms of depression.  
❖ Collected at all visits.  
 
C. Hamilton Depression Rating Scale  (HAM -D) 
❖ The HAM -D is a clinician rated instrument that measures the severity of depressive 
symptoms.  
❖ This is a clinician -rated instrument with 21 items scored on a 0 to 4 scale.  
❖ Collected at all visits.  
 
As secondary measures to assess severity and improvement relative to baseline for mania, 
depression and common comorbid conditions, we will use other measures including: a DSM -IV 
Mania Symptom Checklist; the Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Rating Scale; 
the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS); and the NIMH Clinical Global Impression scale 
(CGI) (Severity, Improvement and Efficacy Index) for mania, depressio n, Bipolar Disorder 
overall, ADHD, Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Anxiety. Most of these scales will be 
administered at baseline visit, at each of the weekly visits and at endpoint by the clinician to 
assess the impact of treatment on ADHD, anxiety, and  to have other measures related to the 
impact of treatment on bipolar disorder. We will also have the subject’s parent/guardian 
complete the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) and the Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Function – Parent Form (BRIEF) at the Baseline  Visit and Week 12  visit. 
 
A. DSM -IV Mania Symptom Checklist  
❖ This Checklist is adapted from the DSM -IV mania diagnostic criteria with items for 
each symptom of mania. Each item is scored 0 to 3 ranging (0=never or rarely; 
1=sometimes; 2=often; 3=very often).  
❖ Collected at baseline visit, at each of the weekly visits and at endpoint as an 
additional measure of manic symptoms.  
 
B. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Rating Scale  
❖ The ADHD Rating Scale is an 18-item scale with 1 item for each of the 18 DSM -IV 
ADHD symptoms. Each item is scored 0 to 3 (0=never or rarely; 1=sometimes; 
2=often; 3=very often).  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 17 ❖ Collected at baseline visit, middle and endpoint to assess the impact of treatment on 
ADHD symptoms , which often co -occur with pediatri c bipolar disorder.  
 
C. Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS)  
❖ The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) is a common scale used to assess overall 
psychopathology (Overall & Pfe fferbaum, 1982) .  The scale consists of 18 items; each 
rated on a scale from 1 (symptom not present) to 7 (symptom extremely severe).  
❖ Collected at Baseline Visit and at endpoint to assess the impact of treatment on 
depression, anxiety hallucinations and u nusual behavior , which often co -occur with 
pediatric bipolar disorder.  
 
D. Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS)  
❖ The SRS is a 65 item rating scale completed by the parent or guardian. This scale 
measures the severity of autism spectrum symptoms as they occur in natural social 
settings.  
❖ Collected at Screening and Endpoint visits as assessment of symptoms and capacities 
associated with social interaction.  
 
E. NIMH Clinical Global Improvement scale (CGI)  
❖ The CGI is a measure of illness severity adapted for specif ic disorders. It allows rating of 
mania, depression and overall bipolar disorder illness, as well as other conditions 
frequently comorbid with bipolar disorder.  
❖ The severity score ranges from 1 (normal, not at all ill) to 7 (among the most extremely 
ill pa tients). The improvement score ranges from 1 (very much improved) to 7 (very 
much worse).                                                                                               
❖ Collected at Baseline Visit, at each of the weekly visits and at endpoin t as an accepted 
measure of clinician rated improvement to assess the impact of treatment on bipolar 
disorder and other comorbid conditions.  
 
F. Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function – Parent Form (BRIEF)  
❖ The BRIEF is an 86 -item rating scale to a ssess level of executive function deficits (Roth, 
Isquith, & Gioia, 2004) . It is completed by the subject’s parent/guardian.  
❖ Collected at Baseline Visit and at  the Week 12 visit for  subjects who complete the study . 
 
G. MGH Autism Spectrum Disorder Rating Scale (MGH -ASD -RS-I) 
❖ This is a 37 -item scale that asks informants to rate subjects on their social competence 
and abilitie s on a Likert scale from 0 to 6.  
❖ Collected at Baseline and E ndpoint visits.  
 
Safety Measures  
 
❖ Adverse Experiences: to record any adverse health events experienced during the study along 
with duration, severity, cause, remedy, and outcome.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 18 ❖ Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS): to assess initial and emerge nt suicidality.  
 
9. DATA ANALYSIS  
 
A. Statistical Analysis  
 
Considering our open -label single group design, we will rely on comparisons of the participants’ 
performances at baseline (week 0) prior to the initiation of treatment relative to their score s at the 
last assessment (week 12 ).  Thus, statistics for paired samples will be utilized.  This design 
largely protects against the bias introduced by confounding factors.  That is, since the same 
participants are tested on two occasions, all static confoundin g factors are perfectly balanced, 
and can have no impact on the findings.  Bias can still result from time -varying factors that are 
not associated with the outcomes, but we are confident that any such factors will have a minimal 
impact on this study, consi dering the duration of the trial. Specifically, we will employ Wilcoxon 
signed rank tests for continuous or discrete outcome measures, and McNemar’s test for binary 
outcomes.  These tests are free from assumptions regarding the distribution of the outcome 
variables, which is appropriate since the scales we are proposing to utilize are not considered to 
have Gaussian distributions, and will not be amenable to parametric methods.  
 
B. Power  
 
As this is a single -arm, open -label study designed to demonstrate eff ectiveness and safety of 
NAC, formal power analyses are not warranted.  For the purposes of an approximate power 
calculation, we used the two -sample t -tests as a proxy for the power of a Wilcoxon signed rank 
test.  We used the responses we have observed in  previous trials of other atypical neuroleptics to 
estimate effect sizes for the primary outcome measure (the Young Mania Rating Scale).  Small 
and large effect sizes are estimated as mean reductions of 5 and 15 points, respectively.  With 20 
subjects and alpha set at 0.05, we estimate power to be 0.99 to detect small effects in YMRS 
scores (with a SD of 5) over the 12 -week trial.  
 
10. SAFETY  
 
Consistent with good clinical practice, safety will be monitored by each subject’s study clinician 
at each study vi sit. This clinician will be available 24 hours a day by page. The Principal 
Investigator will supervise all study activities including ratings, reported adverse events, 
laboratory tests, and vital signs. Subjects will be monitored for adverse events at eac h visit and 
adverse events will be recorded on an Adverse Events Form. Treatment -emergent adverse events 
will be monitored through changes in vital signs. All adverse events will be reported according to 
PHRC guidelines. Blood pressure, pulse, height, weig ht, and temperature will be recorded at 
each office visit.  
 
Poor response to treatment will be measured by a CGI -bipolar score that is 2 points higher (more 
severe) than baseline for 2 weeks in a row or a YMRS score that is 30% higher than baseline for 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 19 2 weeks in a row, which may lead to drop from the study as determined by the clinician. Subjects 
with individual YMRS item scores of 8 on Item #8 (Content), or scores greater than 6 on 
Disruptive -Aggressive Behavior for 2 weeks in a row will be dropped from t he study. In 
addition, drop from study will occur at clinician discretion for worsening of clinical course, non -
compliance with treatment or inability to tolerate study treatment. Finally, the Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) will be adminis tered weekly to assess initial and emergent 
suicidality in subjects. Subjects with scores of 4 or higher on the C -SSRS will be dropped from 
the study.  
 
Having treated hundreds of bipolar patients, we are aware that this is a group of very highly 
disturbed children at risk for psychosis, suicide and disruption in the family. Although it is 
unlikely that these risks will be exacerbated by the protocol, we will be vigilant regarding the 
potential for patient decompensation or dangerousness to self or others. I n the execution of 
research protocols, our primary concern is always the safety of the research participant.  Dr. 
Wozniak has extensive experience in working with youth with severe psychopathology in 
clinical trials and in designing and implementing safety plans in these trials. Also, Dr. Wozniak 
is expert in the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric bipolar disorder and high -risk pediatric 
psychiatry patients in clinical settings. Given the especially unstable nature of bipolar spectrum 
subjects, we are avai lable to handle clinical emergencies with subjects and their families at any 
time: at the time of visit, whether in person or over the phone, as well as between visits.  
 
 If needed, emergency evaluation and referral is available through coverage by the cli nician -
investigators on this study and through the Acute Psychiatry Service (APS) at the MGH. All 
subjects will have access to a 24 hour a day, 7 -day week coverage provided by Dr. Wozniak or 
her designated substitute by pager for psychiatric emergencies. A s part of the Massachusetts 
General Hospital, all research subjects can access the Acute Psychiatry Service (APS) in the 
emergency room at any time of the day or night. The APS is a well -staffed 24 hour/7 day per 
week emergency service for psychiatric emer gencies.  
 
11. CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
All research -related records, initiated as a result of a subject’s participation in this study that 
reveal the subject’s identity, will remain confidential except as may be required by law. Subjects 
will only be contacted reg arding future studies if they indicate that they are interested in being 
contacted by initialing in the specific section of the consent form.  
 
If subjects agree on the Consent Form, we may share subjects’ information with others within 
our research group f or future research on emotional dysregulation or other related conditions. We 
will label all subjects’ study materials with a code instead of their names. The study doctor will 
not share the key to code names with researchers outside of this institution.  
 
12. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 20 The Principal Investigator is responsible for monitoring the safety and data of this trial.  The PI 
will monitor  adherence to the protocol , subject participation (e.g. tolerance to medication, drop -
out rates, etc.), the  risk-benefit ratio, and all Adverse Events throughout the course of the study. 
The IRB will be informed of any serious adverse events occurring during the trial. If at any time 
during the study more than 10% of the patients have had a serious adverse even t, the study will 
be stopped. The primary concern of the investigators of this study is the safety of the subjects.  
 
13. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
Potential side effects are few and will be monitored for throughout the research study. Consent 
forms will clear ly list potential medication side effects. Since NAC is a  derivative of a naturally 
occurring amino acid , it appears to have a low potential for unwanted side effects or negative 
effects on the child’s growth and development. Although NAC is generally well  tolerated, 
animal (but not human) subjects have developed pulmonary hypertension with high doses.  
Seizure with NAC has been reported in an accidental overdose of 39,207mg NAC in a 30-month -
old girl, more than 10 times the dose she should have received.   Seizure has not been reported 
with recommended dosing (Bailey, Blais, & Letarte, 2004) . 
 
The most common side effects reported with use of NAC are gastrointestinal . Other less 
common side effects that have been repor ted include f atigue , nervousness, vivid dreams, 
heartburn, pruritus (without rash), and headaches (Berk, Copolov, Dean, Lu, Jeavons, 
Schapkaitz, Anderson -Hunt, Judd, et al., 2008; Ghanizadeh & Moghimi -Sarani, 2013; G ray et 
al., 2012; Hardan et al., 2012; Mardikian, LaRowe, Hedden, Kalivas, & Malcolm, 2007) . Serious 
side effects are uncommon.  
 
Other Adverse Events  
 
Problems and side effects not listed above and not known at this time could occur.  Subjects will 
be told  of any changes in the way the study will be done an d any newly discovered risks to 
which they may be exposed.  
 
Answering detailed questionnaires may create a mild degree of inconvenience or emotional upset 
for the subjects. Interviewers will be trained to  support the subjects who raise such concerns, and 
the PI will be available to respond to any concerns or to answer other questions about the study 
(available by pager 24 hours per day). All of the information about participants will be treated 
confidentia lly. Subjects may refuse to answer any of these questions.  
 
Having treated hundreds of bipolar patients, we are aware that this is a group of very highly 
disturbed children at risk for psychosis, suicide and disruption in the family. Although it is 
unlikel y that these risks will be exacerbated by the protocol, we will be vigilant regarding the 
potential for patient decompensation or dangerousness to self or others. In the execution of 
research protocols, our primary concern is always the safety of the resea rch participant. Given 
the especially unstable nature of bipolar patients, we will be available to the study staff and to 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 21 patients and their families to handle clinical emergencies . The Massachusetts General Hospital 
has an active and well -staffed psychiat ric emergency service that will be available to subjects if 
needed. This study has clearly defined exit criteria to ensure the safety of participants.  
 
Protection Against Risk  
 
Subjects’ confidentiality will be protected throughout the study. Information a bout subjects and 
their families will be stored in research files identified only by a code. The code key connecting 
the participant’s names to identifying information will be kept in a separate, secure location. 
Data in databases is similarly identified o nly by coded ID number and is password -protected. 
Data will not leave our institution in any form that would identify individual subjects or families. 
The information collected in our assessments and treatment outcome rating scales will not 
become part of the individual’s hospital medical record. In the case that serious psychopathology 
(suicidality, hom ocidality, psychosis) is uncovered in the course of the research study, the 
Principal Investigator or appointed proxy will be immediately contacted by the c linician. All 
efforts will be made to alert parents of the subject and, if necessary, treating clinicians, of the 
circumstances to enable the subject to secure appropriate treatment. If needed, emergency 
evaluation and referral will be available through co verage by the clinician -investigators on this 
study and through the Acute Psychiatry Service (APS) at the MGH. The APS is a well staffed 24 
hour/7 day per week emergency service for psychiatric emergencies. Subjects who do not 
respond to the study treatmen ts will be dropped from the study using clear drop criteria 
(“patients may drop at any time due to patient preference, physician decision, need for 
psychiatric hospitalization or a poor response to treatment. Poor response to treatment leading to 
drop from  the study will be measured by a CGI -mania score that is 2 points lower (more severe) 
than baseline for more than 2 weeks in a row, a YMRS score that is 30% higher than baseline for 
more than 2 weeks in a row”), or a C -SSRS score of 4 or higher.  
 
14. POTEN TIAL BENEFITS  
 
To the Subject  
 
The study will offer rapid access to treatment and provide subjects with a free detailed 
psychiatric and cognitive evaluation. Subjects will be provided with a potentially useful 
treatm ent, which has low risks associated with  it. 
 
To Others  
 
The study will further our understanding of the treatment of bipolar disorder in children by 
testing a novel treatment, N -acetylcysteine . This study will also be useful in the testing of 
specific hypotheses about the efficacy of alternativ e treatments.  
 
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
 
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 22 Little is known about the treatment of pediatric bipolar disorder, d espite the fact that it is 
recognized as a significant public health concern . This study  will further  our knowledge 
regarding poten tially useful treatments. As parents are often concerned about the effect of 
pharmaceutical agents on growth and development, this study examines the efficacy of a safe, 
alternativ e treatment that will be appealing to parents and children, due to its safet y profile and 
benign side effect profile. From a scientific perspective, this study also furthers our 
understanding of the role of NAC  in psychiatric disorders.  
 
 
Table 1  
Schedule of Events  
 
Visit  991 02 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Consenting                
Parenta l Consent & Child Assent  X              
Procedures                
Physical Examination  X             X 
Vital Signs, Height, Weight  X X X X X X    X    X 
Cognitive Tasks                
Cognitive Tasks: IQ Measures (WASI -II or 
KBIT -2) X              
Cognitive Tasks: EF Measures (WISC -IV or 
WPPSI -III) X             X 
Clinician Assessments /Rating Scales                
Clinician K -SADS -E (MDD, Mania)  X              
YMRS  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Mania Symptom Checklist   X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
CGIs (Mania, Depression, Anxiety, ADHD, 
ODD, BPD)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
CDRS  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
HAM -D X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
CSSRS  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
ADHD Rating Scale   X      X      X 
BPRS   X      X      X 
GAF   X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Concomitant Medications   X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Parent Assessments/Rating Scales                
K-SADS Face Page  X              
CBCL  X              
FES X              
SAICA  X             X 
PQ-LES-Q  X            X 
BRIEF Parent   X            X 
SRS X             X 
MGH -ASD -RS-I  X            X 
       
1 99 – Screening visit(s)  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 23 2 0 – Baseline visit  
 
 
 
15. REFERENCES  
 
Achenbach, T. M. (2000). Manual for the Child Behav ior Checklist/1 -1/2-5. Burlington, VT: 
ASEBA.  
Achenbach, T. M., & Dumenci, L. (2001). Advances in empirically based assessment: revised 
cross -informant syndromes and new DSM -oriented scales for the CBCL, YSR, and TRF: 
comment on Lengua, Sadowksi, Friedrich , and Fischer (2001). J Consult Clin Psychol, 
69(4), 699 -702.  
Aggarwal, S., & Burnett, P. (2013). Tardive dyskinesia with atypical antipsychotics in youth. 
Australas Psychiatry, 21 (5), 507 -508. doi: 10.1177/1039856213492864  
American Psychiatric Associatio n. (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (Fourth Edition) . Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
(5th ed.)  (5th ed.). Arli ngton, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.  
Bailey, B., Blais, R., & Letarte, A. (2004). Status epilepticus after a massive intravenous N -
acetylcysteine overdose leading to intracranial hypertension and death. Ann Emerg Med, 
44(4), 401 -406. doi: 10.1016/S0 196064404005451  
Bearden, C. E., Hoffman, K. M., & Cannon, T. D. (2001). The neuropsychology and 
neuroanatomy of bipolar affective disorder: a critical review. Bipolar Disord, 3 (3), 106 -
150; discussion 151 -103.  
Berk, M., Copolov, D., Dean, O., Lu, K., Jeav ons, S., Schapkaitz, I., . . . Bush, A. I. (2008). N -
acetyl cysteine as a glutathione precursor for schizophrenia --a double -blind, randomized, 
placebo -controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry, 64 (5), 361 -368. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.03.004  
Berk, M., Copolov,  D. L., Dean, O., Lu, K., Jeavons, S., Schapkaitz, I., . . . Bush, A. I. (2008). 
N-acetyl cysteine for depressive symptoms in bipolar disorder --a double -blind 
randomized placebo -controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry, 64 (6), 468 -475. doi: S0006 -
3223(08)00500 -3 [pii] 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.04.022  
Berk, M., Dean, O., Cotton, S. M., Gama, C. S., Kapczinski, F., Fernandes, B. S., . . . Malhi, G. 
S. (2011). The efficacy of N -acetylcysteine as an adjunctive treatment in bipolar 
depression: an open label trial. J Affe ct Disord, 135 (1-3), 389 -394. doi: 
10.1016/j.jad.2011.06.005  
Biederman, J., Birmaher, B., Carlson, G. A., Chang, K. D., Fenton, W. S., Geller, B., . . . Weller, 
E. (2001). National Institute of Mental Health Research Roundtable on Prepubertal 
Bipolar Disor der. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 
40(8), 871 -878.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 24 Biederman, J., McDonnell, M. A., Wozniak, J., Spencer, T., Aleardi, M., Falzone, R., & Mick, E. 
(2005). Aripiprazole in the treatment of pediatric bipolar disorder:  A systematic chart 
review. CNS Spectrums, 10 (2), 141 -148.  
Biederman, J., Mick, E., Bostic, J., Prince, J., Daly, J., Wilens, T., . . . Faraone, S. (1998). The 
naturalistic course of pharmacologic treatment of children with manic -like symptoms:  A 
systematic  chart review. J Clin Psychiatry, 59 (11), 628 -637; quiz 638.  
Biederman, J., Mick, E., Spencer, T., Doyle, R., Joshi, G., Hammerness, P., . . . Wozniak, J. 
(2007). An open -label trial of aripiprazole monotherapy in children and adolescents with 
bipolar dis order. CNS Spectr, 12 (9), 683 -689.  
Biederman, J., Mick, E., Wozniak, J., Aleardi, M., Spencer, T., & Faraone, S. V. (2005). An 
open -label trial of risperidone in children and adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Child 
Adolesc Psychopharmacol, 15 (2), 311 -317. doi: 10.1089/cap.2005.15.311  
CANTABeclipse Test Administration Guide . (2004). Cambridge: Cambridge Cognition Limited.  
Dean, O., Giorlando, F., & Berk, M. (2011). N -acetylcysteine in psychiatry: current therapeutic 
evidence and potential mechanisms of a ction. J Psychiatry Neurosci, 36 (2), 78 -86. doi: 
10.1503/jpn.100057  
Endicott, J., Nee, J., Yang, R., & Wohlberg, C. (2006). Pediatric Quality of Life Enjoyment and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (PQ -LES-Q): reliability and validity. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psy chiatry, 45 (4), 401 -407.  
Gardos, G., & Cole, J. O. (1995). The evaluation and treatment of neuroleptic -induced 
movement disorders. Harv Rev Psychiatry, 3 (3), 130 -139.  
Geller, B., Cooper, T., Sun, K., Zimerman, B., Frazier, J., Williams, M., & Heath, J. ( 1998). 
Double -blind and placebo -controlled study of lithium for adolescent bipolar disorders 
with secondary substance dependency. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 37 (2), 171 -178.  
Ghanizadeh, A., & Derakhshan, N. (2012). N -acetylcysteine for treatment of autism, a case 
report. J Res Med Sci, 17 (10), 985 -987.  
Ghanizadeh, A., & Moghimi -Sarani, E. (2013). A randomized double blind placebo controlled 
clinical trial of N -Acetylcysteine added to risperidone for treating autistic disorders. BMC 
Psychiatry, 13 , 196. doi: 10.1186/1471 -244X -13-196 
Gray, K. M., Carpenter, M. J., Baker, N. L., Desantis, S. M., Kryway, E., Hartwell, K. J., . . . 
Brady, K. T. (2012). A double -blind randomized controlled trial of N -acetylcysteine in 
cannab is-dependent adolescents. Am J Psychiatry, 169 (8), 805 -812. doi: 
10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12010055  
Hardan, A. Y., Fung, L. K., Libove, R. A., Obukhanych, T. V., Nair, S., Herzenberg, L. A., . . . 
Tirouvanziam, R. (2012). A randomized controlled pilot trial of  oral N -acetylcysteine in 
children with autism. Biol Psychiatry, 71 (11), 956 -961. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.01.014  
John, K., Gammon, G. D., Prusoff, B. A., & Warner, V. (1987). The Social Adjustment 
Inventory for Children and Adolescents (SAICA): Testin g of a new semistructured 
interview. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 26 (6), 898 -911.  
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (2004). Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition 
(KBIT -2). Circle Pines, MN: AGS Publishing.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 25 Kim, J., Macmaster, E., & Schwart z, T. L. (2014). Tardive dyskinesia in patients treated with 
atypical antipsychotics: case series and brief review of etiologic and treatment 
considerations. Drugs Context, 3 , 212259. doi: 10.7573/dic.212259  
Kim, Y. K., Kim, L., & Lee, M. S. (1999). Risper idone and associated amenorrhea: a report of 5 
cases. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (5), 315 -317.  
Kowatch, R. A., & DelBello, M. P. (2003). The use of mood stabilizers and atypical 
antipsychotics in children and adolescents with bipolar disorders. CNS Spectr, 8 (4), 273 -
280.  
Kowatch, R. A., Fristad, M., Birmaher, B., Wagner, K. D., Findling, R. L., & Hellander, M. 
(2005). Treatment guidelines for children and adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 44 (3), 213 -235.  
Kowatc h, R. A., Suppes, T., Carmody, T. J., Bucci, J. P., Hume, J. H., Kromelis, M., . . . Rush, 
A. J. (2000). Effect size of lithium, divalproex sodium, and carbamazepine in children 
and adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Chil d and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 39 (6), 713 -720.  
Leslie, D. L., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2004). Incidence of newly diagnosed diabetes attributable to 
atypical antipsychotic medications. Am J Psychiatry, 161 (9), 1709 -1711.  
Lindenmayer, J. P., Nathan, A. M., & Smit h, R. C. (2001). Hyperglycemia associated with the 
use of atypical antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry, 62 (Suppl 23), 30 -38.  
Liu, H. Y., Potter, M. P., Woodworth, K. Y., Yorks, D. M., Petty, C. R., Wozniak, J. R., . . . 
Biederman, J. (2011). Pharmacologic t reatments for pediatric bipolar disorder: a review 
and meta -analysis. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 50 (8), 749 -762 e739. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaac.2011.05.011  
Magalhaes, P. V., Dean, O. M., Bush, A. I., Copolov, D. L., Malhi, G. S., Kohlmann, K., . . . 
Berk, M. (2011). N -acetylcysteine for major depressive episodes in bipolar disorder. Rev 
Bras Psiquiatr, 33 (4), 374 -378.  
Mardikian, P. N., LaRowe, S. D., Hedden, S., Kalivas, P. W., & Malcolm, R. J. (2007). An open -
label trial of N -acetylcysteine for the tre atment of cocaine dependence: a pilot study. 
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 31 (2), 389 -394. doi: S0278 -
5846(06)00357 -5 [pii]  
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.10.001  
McElroy, S. L., Kotwal, R., Malhotra, S., Nelson, E. B., Keck, P. E., & Nemeroff, C. B. (20 04). 
Are mood disorders and obesity related? A review for the mental health professional. J 
Clin Psychiatry, 65 (5), 634 -651, quiz 730.  
Meltzer, H. Y. (2005). The metabolic consequences of long -term treatment with olanzapine, 
quetiapine and risperidone: ar e there differences? Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 8 (2), 
153-156.  
Miller, J. L., & Angulo, M. (2014). An open -label pilot study of N -acetylcysteine for skin -
picking in Prader -Willi syndrome. Am J Med Genet A, 164A (2), 421 -424. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.a.36306  
Moos , R. (1985). Family Environment Scale. In J. V. Mitchell (Ed.), The Ninth Mental Health 
Measurements Yearbook  (Vol. 1, pp. 573 -575). Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental 
Measurements, University of Nebraska.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 26 Orvaschel, H. (1994). Schedule for Affective D isorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age 
Children Epidemiologic Version  (5th Edition ed.). Ft. Lauderdale: Nova Southeastern 
University, Center for Psychological Studies.  
Overall, J. E., & Pfefferbaum, B. (1982). The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale for Chi ldren. 
Psychopharmacol Bulletin, 18 (2), 10 -16.  
Perlis, R. H., Welge, J. A., Vornik, L. A., Hirschfeld, R. M., & Keck, P. E., Jr. (2006). Atypical 
antipsychotics in the treatment of mania: a meta -analysis of randomized, placebo -
controlled trials. J Clin Ps ychiatry, 67 (4), 509 -516.  
Petty, R. G. (1999). Prolactin and antipsychotic medications: mechanism of action. 
Schizophrenia Research, 35 Suppl , S67 -73.  
Popli, A., Gupta, S., & Rangwani, S. R. (1998). Risperidone -induced galactorrhea associated 
with a prol actin elevation. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 10 (1), 31 -33.  
Poznanski, E., Freeman, L., & Mokros, H. (1985). Children's depression rating scale -revised. 
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 21 (4), 979 -989.  
Regenold, W. T., Thapar, R. K., Marano, C., Gavirneni,  S., & Kondapavuluru, P. V. (2002). 
Increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus among psychiatric inpatients with 
bipolar I affective and schizoaffective disorders independent of psychotropic drug use. J 
Affect Disord, 70 (1), 19 -26.  
Rosenbloom, A. L.  (2002). Increasing incidence of type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents: 
treatment considerations. Paediatr Drugs, 4 (4), 209 -221.  
Roth, R. M., Isquith, P. K., & Gioia, G. A. (2004). Brief -Atm Self report form: Psycholigcal 
Assessment Resources, Inc.  
Sachs, G. S., Printz, D. J., Kahn, D. A., Carpenter, D., & Docherty, J. P. (2000). Medication 
Treatment of Bipolar Disorder 2000: Institute for the Advancement of Human Behavior, 
Inc. and Expert Knowledge Systems, LLC.  
Sachs, G. S., & Thase, M. E. (2000). Bipolar disorder therapeutics: maintenance treatment. 
Biological Psychiatry, 48 (6), 573 -581.  
Smaga, I., Pomierny, B., Krzyzanowska, W., Pomierny -Chamiolo, L., Miszkiel, J., Niedzielska, 
E., . . . Filip, M. (2012). N -acetylcysteine possesses antidepressant -like activity through 
reduction of oxidative stress: behavioral and biochemical analyses in rats. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 39 (2), 280 -287. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.06.018  
Sweeney, J. A., Kmiec, J. A., & Kupfer, D. J. (2000). Neuropsycho logic impairments in bipolar 
and unipolar mood disorders on the CANTAB neurocognitive battery. Biol Psychiatry, 
48(7), 674 -684.  
Turgay, A., Binder, C., Snyder, R., & Fisman, S. (2002). Long -term safety and efficacy of 
risperidone for the treatment of disr uptive behavior disorders in children with subaverage 
IQs. Pediatrics, 110 (3), e34.  
Wagner, K. D., Weller, E., Carlson, G. A., Sachs, G., Biederman, J., Frazier, J., . . . Bowden, C. 
L. (2002). An Open -Label Trial of Divalproex in Children and Adolescents  with Bipolar 
Disorder. Journal of the American Acadamey of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41 (10), 
1224 -1230.  
Study Protocol: Open -Label Study of N -Acetylcysteine in Children and Ad olescents ages 5 -17 
with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Bipolar Spectrum Disorder  
Version: CR 4 RtR  
Last Modified : 08/22/2018  
 
 27 Wechsler, D. (2003). Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children -Fourth Edition (WISC -IV). San 
Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.  
Wechsle r, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale - Fourth Edition (WAIS -IV). San 
 Antonio, TX: NCS Pearson, Inc.  
Wechsler, D. (2011). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence - Second Edition (WASI -II). 
Bloomington, MN: NCS Pearson, Inc.  
Wechsler, D., & S attler, J. M. (2002). WPPSI -III: Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of 
Intelligence . San Antonio, TX: PsychCorp.  
Witschi, A., Reddy, S., Stofer, B., & Lauterburg, B. H. (1992). The systemic availability of oral 
glutathione. Eur J Clin Pharmacol, 43 (6), 6 67-669.  
Wozniak, J. (in press). Alternative and Complementary Treatments. In A. Yildiz, P. Ruiz & C. 
Nemeroff (Eds.), Bipolar Book: History, Neurobiology, and Treatment . New York: 
Oxford University Press.  
Wozniak, J., & Biederman, J. (1997). Childhood man ia: insights into diagnostic and treatment 
issues. Journal of the Association for Academic Minority Physicians, 8 (4), 78 -84.  
Wudarsky, M., Nicolson, R., Hamburger, S. D., Spechler, L., Gochman, P., Bedwell, J., . . . 
Rapoport, J. L. (1999). Elevated prolactin in pediatric patients on typical and atypical 
antipsychotics. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacoly, 9 (4), 239 -245.  
Young, R. C., Biggs, J. T., Ziegler, V. E., & Meyer, D. A. (1978). A rating scale for mania: 
reliability, validity and sensitivity. Br J Psychiatry, 133 , 429 -435.  
 