Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Kett ering cancer Center 
1275 York Awnue 
New York, New Y ork 10065   
  
 
 
 
MSK  PROTOCOL  COVER  SHEET  
Trial Of IRE in Cholangiocarcinoma  (TOn/C):  Phase  II 
PrincipalInvestigator/Departme nt: T. Peter  Kingham, MD/S urgery 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Kett ering cancer Center 
1275 York Awnue 
New York, New Y ork 10065   
  
 
 
Table of Contents 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ...........................  3 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC .AIMS ................................ ................................ .. 4 
3.0 BAC:KGROUND  .AND  RATION.Al..E  ................................ ................................ .............  4 
4 .1 OVERVIEWOF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVE NTDN ................................ ..........................  7 
4 .2 Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  7 
4 .3 Intervention ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  7 
5.0 THERAP EUTIC/ DIAGNOST IC AGENTS  ................................ ................................ ........  7 
6 . 1 CRITERIAFOR SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY ................................ ................................ .... 8 
6 . 2 Subject Inclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ..................  8 
6 . 3 Subject Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ .....................  9 
7.0 RECRUITME NT PLAN ................................ ................................ ............................  9 
8.0 PRETRE ATMENT  EV.ALUATION ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
9.0 TRE ATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ... 10 
10.0 EV.Al..U ATION DURING TRE ATMENT/INTERVE NTION ................................ ..... 12 
11.0 TOX ICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
12.0 CRITERIAFOR THERAP EUTIC RESPON SE/OllTCO ME ASSES SMENT  ...............  14 
13.0 CRITERIAFOR REMOVAi..  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ............................  15 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 
1 5 . 1 RESEARCH  PART ICIPANT  REGISTRATION .AND  RANDOM IZATION PROCE DURES 16 
1 5 . 2 Rese arch Partcipant Registration ................................ ................................ .......  16 
1 5 . 3 Randomization ................................ ................................ ...............................  17 
1 6 . 1 DATAM.ANAG EMEN TISSU ES ................................ ................................ ......................  17 
1 6 . 2 Qual ity Assur ance ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 17 
1 6 . 3 Data and Safety Monitoring ................................ ................................ ...................  17 
1 7 . 1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN  SUB JECTS  ................................ ................................ .........  18 
1 7 . 2 Privacy ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  18 
1 7 . 3 Serious Adverse  Event {SAE)  Reporting ................................ ................................ .... 18 
18.0  INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ..... 20 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 21 
20.0 APPENDICES ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 23 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
1.0   PROTOCOL SUMMARY  AND/ OR SCHEMA  
 
Rationale: The majority of patients with perihilar ch olangiocarc inoma (PHC) have locally advanced 
disease  {LAD}  upon prese ntation or exploratory laparotomy;  for this reason, they are not suitable 
candidates for curative resect ion[1]. Additionally some  of the patients develop locally advanced 
recurrence during their course of disease.  Therefor e, in most  patients with this type of biliary tract  
cancer,only palliative conce pts can beoffered.ERCPguided and/or percutaneous transh epatic biliary 
drainage offer  the best survival, beca use in combination with sufficient drainage, reduction of tuma 
masses  in the lumen of the bile duct was shown  to prolong patient survival[2]. Effect iveness  of 
photodyn amic therapy (PDT) was investigated in two randomized controlled and a few controlled 
studies[3-8]. But these  studies failed to prove efficacy  with clear impact  on clinical outcomes.  
Mlreover, PDT has not become part of normal  clinical practice because it causes  skin phototoxicity 
lasting for 3-4 weeks  and requires technology not availa ble at most  centers. Other therm alablative 
methods, such as radiofrequency  ablation, are affected  by a heat-sink effect  when tumors  are located 
close to vascular structures, such as the liver hilum, which can limit effect iveness, a nd there are 
concerns with injuries to biliary and vascular structures in treat ing these  areas. These limitations may 
be overcome by irreversible electrop oration {IRE},  which is a non-thermal  tissue  ablation method that 
has been  used to treat  liver tumors in over 60 patients at MSK.  By expos ing cancer cells toa sufficient 
electric field byIRE, cell plasma  membran esare disrupted and cells undergo apopt otic or necrotic cell 
death[9, 10]. Therefore,IRE is considered as non-thermal ablation technique and is currently applied 
to treat liver tumors where therm alablation techniques are contraindicated. 
Objective:  This study will investigate the outcomes  of IRE for the treatment of unresect able,locally 
advanced PHC.. 
Study design:A single center phase II study. 
 
Study population:20 patients withlocally advanced  PHC deemed  unresect able due to preoperatively 
determined primary tumor characteristics  and/or distant lymph  node metastases  (N2} or due to 
discovery  of unresecta bility on exploratory laparot omy. 
Mainstudy endpoints: 
 
The primary outcome  is patency of biliary drainage. In patients with plastic percutaneous drains this 
is defined as ability to remove plastic biliary drains within 1.5 months of the IRE proce dure without 
need for reinsertion of a drain or stent. For patients with metal stents in place the definition of patent 
biliary drainage is 4-months without cholangitis post IRE procedure. 
 
Second aryoutcomesarethe success  rateof completing IRE (defined as perce ntage of planned pulses 
completed}, complications, duration of hosp ital stay,  quality of life, impact  of IRE on post-procedural 
CT imaging and blood biomarker  respo nse,time between  IRE and start of palliative chemot herapy, 
metal stent patency,  progression-free and overall survival.  Prolonged hospital stay is defined  as 
hosp ital stay for morethan 10 days. The average length  of stay for major liver procedures  is 8 days. 
Patients with hilar cholangiocarcinomas often  have  biliary drains and stents so require ex tra care as 
inpatients after any procedur e. Com plications will be defined  as patients exper iencing a clinically 
relevant IRE-related complication within 30 days post-IRE, defined as CTCAE  (vers ion 5.0} grade 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
3 or higher complications requiring re-intervention, prolonged hospital  stay,  intensive careadmission, 
re-admissionor leading to mortality. 
Follow up: 30 days after intervention for the primary  endpoint. For surviv alendpoints, there  is a 2-year 
followup. 
 
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
 
Primary  objec tive: 
The primary  objective of this study is to assess  patency  of biliary  drainage. In patients with 
plastic percutaneous drains th is is defined  as ability to remove plastic biliary drains within 1.5 
months of the IRE proce dure without need for reinsert ion of a drain or stent. For patients with 
metal stents in place the definition of patent biliary drainage is 4-months without cholangitis 
post IRE proced ure. 
 
Secondary  objective:  
 
The secondary outcomes of interest  are 
• Duration of hospital stay  
• Complications 
• Quality of life 
• Tumor response on CT imaging and blood biomark er respo nse 
• Time betwe en IRE and start of palliative chemot herapy 
• Duration of palliative chemoth erapy 
• Progressio n-free and overall survival 
• Success  rate of completing IRE (defined as percentage of planned pulses completed) 
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
 
Perihilar cholangiocarcinoma  (PHC),also known  as Klatskin  tumor, is the most  commontype  
of bile duct cancer,  with an annual incidence of 1to 2 per 100,000 in Western  countries. It 
arises at or near  the confl uence  of the right and left main bile duct. Patients typically prese nt 
with obstructive jaundice and are staged with cross -sectional imaging of the abdomen  and 
chest. In the absence of metastatic diseas e, patients are eligible for  resect ion with curat ive 
intent, which is the only treatment  that confers a chance  of long-term  survival[11]. Five-year  
overall survival (OS) after resect ion varies from 13% to 40% across series with more  than 100 
patients[12]. The poor 5-year OS  reflects a high recurrence rate of 49 to 76% after curative 
intent resection of PHC [13]. Only 50% of the patients were  suitable cand idates for surgery 
due to unresect ability at presentation and another 40% are found to have locally advanced  or 
metastat ic disease during exploratory  laparotomy. In patients with disease  ultimately deemed  
unresectable, approximately half of tumors are cons idered locally advanced  because of 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
unreconstructab le vascular involvement or extensive biliary involvement. Liver transplantation 
in these cases is only performed  in a few experienced  centers worldwide with strict selection 
criteria and extens ive preoperative work-up including neoadjuvant treatment. Unfortunately,  
high dropout rates up to 30% prior to transplantation are reported. Systemic chemoth erapy is 
the mainstay  of treatment for patients who are not candidates for curative resection  or 
neoa djuvant thera py followed by liver transplantation.Traditionally, the preferred regimen has 
been the comb ination of gemc itabine and cisplatin and offers a median progression-free 
survival of 8 months and overall survivalof 12 months[14].The recently released results fran 
the BILCAP  randomized trial of adjuvant capec itabine compared to best support ive care  
showed  an apparent lack of benefit in the hilar cholangiocarc inoma patients (HR 1.09; 95% Cl 
0.68, 1.71;ASCO  2018 abstract).  Trials in patients with moreadvanced disease  suffer from  a 
lack of accru al of patients with locally advanced  hilar cholangiocarcinoma, so we have to 
extrap olate from trials like BILCAP.  
The goals of palliative biliary drainage are to relieve jaundice, prevent cholangitis and l iver 
failure, and improve quality of life [15]. Biliary stents are not without risk and have been  
assoc iated with occlusion, migration, cholecyst itis, and tumor ingrowth  and seed ing[16]. 
Successf ulbiliary drainage  has obvious palliative advantages to leaving patients undrained 
due to the morbidity of untreated  cholangitis. In addition, in one randomized trialof plastic vs. 
metalstents, there  was asurvival advantage with metal  stents compa redto plastic stents (due 
tolonger patency rates)  [17]."'1etal stents are a moredurable and cost-effective option as they 
have a patency super ior to that of plastic stents, with patients  requiring less frequent 
procedu res (Table 1) [18]. IVorbidity related to stents can occur  even within 30 days of 
placem ent (39% plastic stents and 12% metal  stents) [19]. Although the overall prognosis of 
unresectable PHC is poor, patients with locally advanced PHC or lymph node metastases  
 
 
 
 
 
beyond the hepatoduodenal ligament have significant longer surviv al (14 to 16 months) 
compared  to patients with organ  metastases  (3 to 5 months)[20]. 12% of these  patients even 
survive  for more than 36 months[20]. This particular subgroup  of PHC patients with primary  
locally advanced  disease may therefore  benefit from  ablative therapies that counteract  tuma 
growth and potentially improve  biliary stent patency and survival. In the past decad e,several 
different ablative techniques like stereotact ic body  radiation therapy, photody namic therapy 
(PDT), (intraductal) radiofrequency ablation {RFA), brachytherapy and microwa ve ablation 
have been investigated. Localtumor  reduction by PDT in combination with stent therapy is 
effective  for reducing cholestasis. For patients with unresecta ble hilar cholangiocarc inoma,two 
randomized studies and several controlled studies have shown an advantage in survivalover 
stenting alone, g iven improved stent patency[21]. Furthermo re,some  trials demonstrated a 
gain in Qol or in performance status[4-7]. But PDT has major limitations such as skin 
phototoxic ity for 3-4 weeks due to the use of slowly degradable photos ensitizers in PDT[22]. 
In addition, thermal ablative  modalities {i.e. RFA) are limited  by the disadvantages  of 
surrounding tissue heating causing strictures to bile ducts and thromboses  to portal  vein and Table 1.Time of patency (mont hs) 
 Plastic stents  "'1etal  stents  P value  
Sanachan  et al r171 1.0 3.0 <0.0001 
Raiu et alr181 1.9 5.6 <0.0001 
 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
hepatic artery  branc hes and the heat-sink effect.  This effect  is caused  by blood flow in 
surrounding vessels creating an area where  optimal temperatures are not reache d, leaving 
viable cancertissue in situ [23]. This is particularly challenging in PHC because  of the typical 
location in the liver hilum near the portal  vein and hepatic artery.  Considering these limitations, 
there  is a need  to investigate new non-thermal  ablative techniques in the treatm ent of locally 
advanced PHC. 
IRE is FDA approved for soft tissue  ablation. Bile duct cancers are consideredsoft tissue.The 
most  extens ively studied organ for use of IRE has been  the liver and the liver hilum, where 
delicate structures in the hepato duodenal ligament preclude interve ntion using thermal 
ablation techniques. Demonstration of lack of significant acute injury to hepatic vesse ls and 
bile ducts by the early work of Lee et al [24] has now been corrob orated by several authors  
with confirm ed safety  with up to 8 weeks  of follow-up[25, 26].An overall complication rate of 
16% has been recently descr ibed in a meta-analysis[27]. /ls a compariso n, in a review on 
hepatic RF ablation in 3,670 patients, the overall complication rate was 9%,with rates  of 7%, 
10%, 10%, and 32% for percutaneous, laparoscop ic, simple open, and combined open RF 
ablation[28]. 
In one study using serial computed tomograp hy (CT) scan ning, IRE lesions created around 
large  hepatic veins showed  minimal early narrowing, but with comp lete recovery over time and 
no evidence of late thrombos is or occlusion[26].IRE around hilar bile ducts similarly showed  
overall resistance to significant injury, with some  ducts exhibiting, at worst, clinically 
insignificant late strictures [29].Three major  studies have been  published by ourgroup at MSK  
in the past about irreversible electroporation in perivascu lar or peribiliary hepatic malignant 
tumors  [30-32]. Silk et al [32] evaluated biliary  complications after  IRE of 19 liver metastases  
in nine patients within 1 cm of the comm on,left, or right hepatic duct. One patient showed  
subsegm ental bile duct prominence without increased  bilirubin; this still existed  after  11 
months, without progressive dilation or segmentalatrophy. Retrospect ive review of computed 
tomo graphy images  showed that one needle was placed  in direct contact with the bile duct. 
Two other patients showed  bile duct dilation with increased  bilirubin, for which one requ ired 
stent placement; both conditions appeared to be secondaryto tumor  progression. Kingham et 
al [30] treated 28 patients with 65 tumors, of which most  were located < 1 cm from  a major 
hepatic vein or portal pedicle, similar to patients with PHC. The overall morb idity was 3%. 
Complications included 1intraoperative arrhythmia and 1postoperat ive portalvein thrombos is. 
There were  no treatment-associated  mortalities. At. median follow-up of 6 months, therewas 1 
tumor  with persistent disease (1.9%) and 3 tumors  recurred  locally (5.7%)[30]. In the 
Netherlands, a phase VII feasibility studyof IRE in patients with advanced  PHC (ALPACA -trial) 
was initiated this year[33]. A series of 26 patients with unresect able hilar cholangiocarcinoma 
was also recently published  {IV'art in et al, Safety and efficacy of irreversible electroporation in 
the treatment of obstruct ive jaundice in advanced  hilar cholangiocarc inoma. HPB, 2018 in 
press).  This retrospect ive review compa red these  patients to 137 patients with unresect able 
hilar cholangiocarcinoma who did not undergo IRE.The median catheter free time in the IRE 
patients was 305 days (range 92-458 days). Of the 137 control patients, 80 (59%) had an 
admissionfor biliary drain infection,occlusion,or other catheter related problem. This bolsters  
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
our hypothesis that IRE in patients with unresect able perihilar cholangiocarc inoma canprolong 
the stent  patency and therefore prevent septic complications. In addition,only 2 of 26 patients 
had a grade  3 or higher complication,. 
 
The demonstration of tissue  structure sparing in the many organs (espec ially in the liver)  
supports the relative saf ety of IRE, and bodes  well for this technology's  potential. However,  
several investigators have  pointed out the lack of complete understanding of how best to 
optimize IRE treatments in a variety of tissues, healthy, and neoplastic. Altering the treatment 
parameters  of the energy transm itted to the tissue may produce zones of IRE as well as zones 
that may be subjected to additional effects  including thermal  damage, espec ially in tissue  
immed iately surrou nding an electro de. As demonstrated by the work  of Faroja et al, tissue  
temp eratures  exceed ing protein denaturation can be achieved by manipulation of certa in 
dosing parameters. Rece nt work  also showed  differences in imaging and histopathology 
effects  as a funct ion of distance  from the IRE electrode,  with an immed iate perielectrode  zone 
that appeared to have more  coagulative changes in contrast to the expected  non-coag ulative 
IRE zone  marked  by congest ion.Choi et al. showed  potential damage to the bile duct mural 
architecture when the IRE electrodes  were  imme diately adjacent to the ducts. As a safety  
preca ution, placem ent of electrod es < 3 mm to centralbile ducts should be avoided. 
 
 
4.1 OVERV IEW OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENT ION 
 
4.2 Design  
 
This is a prospect ive, single-center phase II study to look at the outcomes of\ IRE with the use 
of NanoKnife® system  (AngioDynamics, Quee nsbury, NY) in patients with preoperatively 
diagnosed  locally advance d, unresect able PHC due to vascular or lymph  node involvement, 
or those with potentially resecta ble tumors (those  that are expected  to be fully resectab le 
before surger y) that appear  intraoperatively to be locally advanced  or metastasized to N2 
lymph nodes  at exploratory laparotomy. 
 
4.3 Interven tion 
The study will evaluate the outcomes of using IRE in patients with intraoperatively determined 
advanced unresecta ble PHC. The study will include data from 20 patients that have  this IRE 
proced ure performed  as standard of care by hepatopancreatobiliary surgeo nswith experi ence 
using  IRE. 
 
 
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUT IC/DIAGNOST ICAGENTS  
 
The NanoKnife (AngioDynamics, Queensb ury, NY) IRE device  will be used  in all patients. The 
device is cleared by the US Food  and Drug Adm inistration for use in ablating soft tissue.The 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
IRE device comprises a generator, a foot peda l, and 15- or 25-cm-long electrod es. The 
electrodes used  to treatthese patients have atip length ranging from5 to 40 mm.This distance 
represe nts the active tip of the electrode and  the remainder of the needle is insulated. The IRE 
device generates 1,500 to 3,000 V. Voltage is determined by a standard algorithm 
(AngioDynamics) that uses factors such as the intended size of  the ablation zone,the number  
of probes, the distance betwe en probes, a nd the length of the active electrode  tip.[15] The size 
or shape of the tumor determines the number  of electrodes  used. 
 
 
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY 
 
The study population consists of 20 adult patients who are diagnosed  with locally advanced, 
unresectable PHC. Unresectability will be established  either preoper atively, based  on imaging 
and other preoperative testing, or intraoper atively in patients undergoing planned exploratory 
laparotomy.  Patients will be recru ited at the outpatient clinic. In cases  of a planned  exploratory 
laparotomy,  patients will be asked to participate in the study in case disease  is deemed  
unresectable during surg ery. These patients will undergo IRE during the same operative 
session. Patients with unresect able tumors  based on imaging at initial visit or preoperat ive 
workup, will be asked to participate in the study and receive IRE via laparotomy. Prior to 
surgery, biopsies will be taken to verify perihilar cholangiocarc inoma.  Patients with resecta ble 
PHC, PHC eligible for liver transplantation or organ metastasized PHC at surgical exploration 
will be excluded. The  subject exlus ion criteria outlined below is evaluated per stand ard of care 
for the IRE proce dure and as such is listed  in this protoco l. 
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion Criter ia 
 
In order  to participate in this study,  a patient must  meet  all of the following criteria: 
 
• e 18 years or older 
• Capable of providing written  and oral informed  consent in English 
Mee ts criteria for unresecta ble disease:  
• Locally advanced disease based  onpreope rative work-up demonstratingthat the tumor 
is unresect able due to portal vein, hepatic artery, and/or bile duct involvement, 
insufficient hypertrop hy respo nse of the future  liver remn ant after portal vein 
embolization, or patients not able to tolerate  major liver surgery  
 
• Found to be unresectable intraoperat ively based on vascu lar, biliary, or lymph node 
(N2) involvement upon  exploratorylaparotomy 
 
• Patients will be assessed  for chemoth erapy prior to treatment with IRE, but given the 
common  problem of recur rent cholangitis, some  patients will not be candidates for 
chemot herapy until after  IRE is performed.  
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion Criteria 
 
• Locally advanced PHC eligible and acce pted for liver transplantation evaluation 
• PHC with > 5 cm extension along the common  hepatic duct or common bile duct on 
preoperative imaging or intraoperat ive ultrasound 
• Metastases  to peritoneum, liver or other organs confirmed  by percutaneo us biopsy,  
staging laparosco py or intraoperative frozen section 
• Lymph  node  metastases beyond  N2 stations, confirmed  by intraoperative  frozen 
sections or radiogra phic diagnosis 
• History of cardiac disease: 
• Congestive heart failure (NYHA  class >2) 
• .Active Coro nary Art ery Disease (defined as myocard ial infarction within 6 
months prior to screening) 
• Card iac arrhythmias  requiring  anti-arrhythmic thera py  or pacem aker  (beta 
blockers are permitted)  
• Ally  implanted stimulation device (defined as implantable card iac device and a 
pacemaker)  
• Uncontrolled hyperte nsion (blood pressure must  be 160/95  mmHg at the time of 
screening on a stable antihypertens ive regimen)  
• Uncontrolled infections (> grade 2 NCl-CTC,  version 3.0) 
• Epilepsy 
• Both  narrow ing (scleros is) of the main portalvein and a reduced diameter of either the 
common  hepatic artery,celiac trunk or superior mesenteric artery  of >50% 
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
All patients will be recruited in outpatient clinic by one of our hepa topancreatobiliary (HPB) 
attendings (PK, WJ,JD,VB, MD, AW, KS).  Full study informati on will be provided by the study 
physician or one of the investi gators  during the outpatient clinic appointment. 
 
 
 
8.0 PRETREA TMENT EVALUAT ION 
 
Due to the nature of disease,patients with PHC undergo  extensive pre-operative work-up (e.g., 
laboratory testing, CT or MR imaging, biliary drainage, liver function tests) prior to surgical 
exploration and pote ntial portal vein embolization. In the present study, patients  that will 
undergo open IRE during exploratory laparotomy  will have undergone these  preoperative 
work-up proced ures as standard of care. Additionally Quality of life will be assessed  duringthe 
pre-treatment visit  using the  Fu nctional Assessme nt of Cancer Therapy-Hepatobiliary  
instrument (FACT-Hep). FACT-Hep is a 45-item self-report  instrum ent designed to measure 
QoL in patients with hepatobiliary cancers.  It comprises  the FACT-Gener al (FACT-G) and the 
hepatobiliary subsc ale (Hep). The FACT-G consists of 27 items that measu re 4 domains of 
well being in cancer patients: physical well being (PWB),  social/family well being (SW B), 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
functional wellbeing (FWB),  and emot ionalwell being (EWB ).The instrumentemploys a Likert­  
type format (0 "not at all" to 4 "very much"). Lower total scores reflect lower  Qol.The FACT­ 
G score is a total of the subsc alescores. The FACT-G has demonstr ated intern alconsistency, 
score stability, reliability, and validity  [34-39]. The Hep is a reliable and validated disease­ 
spec ific subscale consisting of  questions  relating  to  pruritus,  jaundice, and  drainage 
catheters [40,41).Patients will not be replaced  if they do not complete these questionnaires. 
 
 
9.0 TREATME NT/INTERVE NTION PLAN  
Preoperat ive  biliar ydrainage 
Biliary  drainage for malignant hilar strictures or masses is a complex procedure requiring 
considerable skill and experienc e. Cand idates for IRE who initially prese nt with potentially 
resect able PHC undergo  preoperative biliary drainage as part of the standard preop erative 
work-up. In the present study, the exact  appro ach of biliary drainage (i.e.endosco pically or 
percutaneously, spec ified liver segments, unilateral or bilateral) prior to surgery is decided by 
surgeon. A metal biliary stent is not considered a contraindication for IRE as long as a no­ 
touch technique is pursued (i.e. IRE electrodes  are not in contact with the metalstent). 
Antibiotic   prophylaxi s 
 
Antibiotic prophylaxis will be admi nistered accor ding to the MSKCC 's protoc ol prior to biliary 
drainage and IRE.Patients will receive one 2g dose of Cefotetan IV, 30-60min prior to surgery. 
The same  antibiotic will be used for the treatment of cholangitis (2g Cefotetan  rv every 12 
hours). In case  of a patient allergy  to Cefotetan, patients will receive Clindamyc in/Ge ntamicin 
as alternative antibiotic treatment. 
lntraoperative IRE proced ure 
 
Antibiotic prophylaxis is administered prior to the operation. During exploratory  laparotomy, 
resecta bility of the tumor is assessed  by the attending surgeon. When  the tumor appe ars 
resecta ble, a resectionwill be performe d.In case of non-nodal (extra)hepatic dissem ination of 
the tumor, no proced ure will be performed.  In both cases the patients will be excluded  frcrn 
this study. Only when the tumor appe ars  n on-resect able, but non-metast asized, an IRE 
procedu re will be performed.The IRE proce dure will be performed  under ultrasound guidance 
by the attending surge on. 
NanoKnife®  device settings 
The NanoKnife® IRE device (AngioDynam ics, Queensbury, NY) will be used in this study in 
normalclinical fashion.This means the machine will be configured to deliver 90 pulses lasting 
one microsecond  each ,high-voltage (1500-3000 V) direct current (25-45 A) electrical pulses. 
Before administering the 90 one-microsecond  therapeutic pulses, a test pulse at 270 V is 
delivered. Typically, 90 pulses will be delivered in 9 sets of 10 pulses between  paired unipolar 
electrodes, with an exposed  tip of 1.5-2.0 cm. The voltage setting for each  electroporation will 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
be determ ined by the distance betwe en each  pair of electrodes  and will be aimed  at 1500 
V/cm,  with the intent to generate at least 1000 V between electrodes.  The electrodes  will be 
placed  in and around the tumor  under ultrasou nd guidance according to the manufacturer's 
guidelines, aiming at a macrosco pically complete ablation with a 5 mm margin,with the inter­ 
electrode distances 10-24 mm  and a maxim um angulation b etween  electrodes  of 15°. The 
predicted treatment zone will be automatically calculated using the NanoKnife generator 
softw areaccord ing to a system -based  protocol  that takes into account the exact position of all 
electrodes. The number of probes used  for ablation is dependent on tumor size. If the lesion 
islarger or has a different shape than the area that one set of probes can cover (according to 
manufacturer's guidelines), multiple ablations will be performed, until the whole tumor area is 
ablated. Number  of probes,  number of probe  replacements (per probe)  due to unsatisfactory  
placem ent, number of pulses (for each  pair of electro des), probe length, space  between  
probes,  pulse voltage (amplitude,Volt), pulse length (µsec),pulse interval(ms)will  be careful ly 
noted.All complications (cardiac and non-card iac) will be caref ully registered and mon itored). 
Spec ific attention will be paid to the placeme nt of electro des close to bile ducts as previous 
resea rch demons trated that biliary strict ures may occur  whenneed les are placed  within 3mm 
of the bie ducts[ 29,42]. 
Post IREtreatrrent 
 
Patients will be monitored  on the reco very and surgical wards  daily, accord ing to current 
medicalpract ice. Patients with endosc opic or percutaneo us plastic drains will be evaluated for 
definitive metal stents (fully-, partially- or uncovered self-expanding metal stents) or remo val 
of drains if obstruction appears  to be treated  by IRE in all patients through an endosc opic or 
percutaneous approach  atleast 7 days after the IRE proce dure. This 7-day window  is built in 
to avoid manipulation of the biliary tree immed iately after  IRE. Bile ducts to atrophic liver lobes 
will not be drained. Following exploratory laparotomy  and open IRE, patients will undergo  
treatme nt in an enhanced recov ery program.  Patients will be monitored on the recovery  and 
the surgicalward  daily and discharged  when fully recovered from  the laparotom y,according 
to current medicalpractice. 
Generaltreatment  
 
Patients with advanced PHC generally receive optimal palliative chemot herapy and adequate  
biliary drainage with metal stenting.In the current study,patients undergo  local ablative therapy 
of the tumor. As it may be difficult to distinguish local IRE-related effects  on computed 
tomo graphy scans or MRI from residualtumortissue or tumor progression, it was decided that 
all patients in the current study will be proposed  to receive palliative chemot herapy. 
Palliative chemotherapy 
 
All patients will be seen by the medical oncologist at l\llSKCC  prior to intraoperative IRE is 
performed,  and palliat ive chemoth erapy will be discussed.Patients will be offered  optimal 
palliative chemot herapy according to medical oncology prefere nces. Palliative chemotherapy 
is not mandatory to participate in the trial,as some  patients will not be eligible due to ongoing 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
cholangitis. Palliative chemoth erapy post proced ure is prefe rably started  within 6 weeks  after 
IRE when the patient has recovered from definitive metal  biliary stent placeme nt. The start of 
chemot herapy may be postponed inthe event of IRE-or biliary drainage-related complications. 
However,  delay of start to chemoth erapy is not expected.  In fact, we suspect  that patients will 
be likely have a better chance  of being treated  with ch emoth erapy and for a longer duration of 
time,due to stent patency. 
 
 
10.0 EVALUAT ION DURING TREAT MENT/INTERVENT ION 
 
Data  collect ion prior and during hospital admiss ion 
 
Prior to the procedure we will collect: 
 
Baseline parameters: Demographics, tumor  character istics and serum markers that will be 
routinely collected are: age, sex, comorb idity,body  mass  index (BMI), tumorsize,tumor growth  
pattern, arteri alorvenous vascular involveme nt,nodal  status, cancer  antigen (CA) 19.9, lgG4,  
albumin, C-reactive protein (CRP ), leukocytes.  If lgG4  level is normal at baseline further 
measurements are not necessary  and will therefore not been included in the follow up. 
 
 
During the hospital stay,we will collect data onserum liver enzymes  and inflamm atory 
parame ters (WBC,  CRP).  
Follow up 
 
During follow up,after discharge, patients will be seen in the outpatient clinic, as is routine 
pract icefor post-operative/post -procedural  patients, for clinical evaluation and laboratory 
testing of liver enzymes,  inflamm atory param eters (WBC,  CRP),  Albumin and tumor markers 
(CA 19.9). 
In this study, patients will also be seen  in the outpatient clinic at 2 weeks,  4 weeks,  and 
approximately 6, 12, and 24 months, as is routinely performed  for clinical follow-up curre ntly. 
Laboratory tests obtained  at visits after the first post-proced urevisit will be determined by the 
surgeon. 
The date of disease progression is defined  as the date of CT scan  onwhichthe firstsuspected  
lesion is defined. 
Quality of life will be assessed  at the initial clinic visit, initial post-operative visit (2 weeks  fran 
surgery), and at subse quent post-operative visits .±. 1 month from 3,6,9,12, and 24 months 
following the IRE proced ure. The Functional Assessme nt of Cancer Thera py-Hepatob iliary 
instrument {FAC T-Hep) will be used. If patients are unable to complete the questionnaires at 
the desginated visits for any reason,they will be offered the option of returning the QOL  via 
mail. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imaging 
 
CT and rvRI scans used for routine clinical care will be used  for this protocol.  If patients are 
receiving chemot herapy, a pre-chemot herapy scanwill be obtained 4-6 weeks post proced ure, 
as per standard clinicalpractice. If no chemoth erapy is planned a scan  at 4-6 weeks  will be 
clinically appropriate to assess disease progression,treatment  response, and stent patency. 
Scans  every 4-6 months will be used in patients on and off chemoth erapy to evaluate for 
disease  progress ion, which is consistent  with current practices for routine management of 
patients with PHC. Tumor respo nse is defined as a loss of enhancement  for hyperv ascular 
tumors  and as alack of persistent tumor rim  enhancement for hypovascu lar tumors  on contrast 
imaging studies.  Pers istent disease  is defined  as  residual  tumor enhanceme nt  on the 
posttre atment imaging studies, and local recurrence is defined as an enhancing tumor within 
1cm of an ablation zone.  
In order to diagnose  complications such as biliary leakage, intra-abdominal abscesses  or 
bleeding, ultrasound and CT are used. When disease  progression is expected,  a CT is 
performed  to confirm (or refute) the clinical suspicion.This procedure is consistent with normal 
clinicalstandards. 
Follow up ofsubjects withdrawn from  treatment 
 
Patients withdrawn  from  treatme nt will not have undergone the IRE proced ure and are 
therefore  considered not to have participated in this study.These subjects will receive normal 
follow-up outside this study. 
 
 
11.1 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  
 
In the post operative period we will obser ve for known IRE-specific  toxicities. These include 
(expected  frequency in parenthases):  
• Hemorrhage, requiring blood transfusion,radiological, or surgicalinterv ention (3%) 
• Hepatic abscess  requ iring surgery, drainage, or antibiotic therapy alone (5%) 
• Biliary stenosis requiring stent placement, bile leakage requiring radiological or 
surgicalintervention  (4%) 
• Portalhypertension, portobiliary fistula, hemobilia, thrombos is of hepatic artery or 
porta l vein (3%) 
• Hepatic infarction (3%) 
• Large biloma (above 5cm)  (3%) 
• Liver failure (1%) 
• Cardiac arrest, heart attack,  cardiac arrhythmia during IRE (1%) 
• Diaphragmatic paresis (lesion in liver segment VIII) {1%) 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
Expect ed adverse  events assoc iated with the delivery of strong electric  pulses are card iac 
arrhythm ias and severe musc le contractions. To prevent these events, pulses are generally 
delivered in the refract ory period of the heart  and with deep muscle paralysis [43]. Desp ite 
electrocardiographic synchron ization,passage of high-voltage  pulses into the body can still 
cause conduction disturbances  in the heart.  In a rece nt published meta-analysis by Scheff er 
et al., card iac arrhythmias occur red in 4 of 194 patients (2%), but they were all atrial 
arrhythm ias that resol ved spontaneously or within 24 hours after therapy[27]. With the 
administrat ion of muscle relaxants, no uncontrolled musc le contract ions were  reported[30, 32, 
44-48]. Only Thomson  et al. reported  a transient increase  in systolic blood pressure  in all 
patients directly after IRE (20-30 mm Hg), which normalized spontaneous ly[46]. 
Retrospect ive compar ison showed  that numero us liver caps ule punctures  during IRE did not 
cause subcapsular hemorrhage and pain after hepatic IRE and RF ablation showed similcr 
moderate pain intensity with comparable amounts of self-admin istered pain medication[49]. 
 
 
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUT IC RESPONSE /OUTCO MEASSESS MENT 
 
The primary endpoint is biliary  drainage patency. This will be measured as a marker  of 
therape utic respo nse. Biliary drainage  pate ncy in patients with metal stents is defined as the 
period between  IRE treatment and stent occlusion or patient death. Occlusionof the stent is a 
clinical event.  This  is defined  as  recurrent jaundice with  cholestasis, cholangitis  (fever, 
increase in serum  bilirubin,leukocytos is), stent failure that leads to replaceme nt of a stent, or 
need  toinsert  a new drain or stent within 4 months. Biliary drainage patency failure in patients 
that with plastic drains is defined as patients that cannot have  plastic drain remo ved within 1.5 
months of the IRE. 
 
The patients and caregivers are told about the symptoms of cholangitis and are asked  to 
contact our hospital immediately in case  of signs of obstr uction. If stent obstruction is 
suspected,  ERCwill be performed  and stents are changed  if necessar y. 
 
Tumor respo nse will not be evaluated  in this trial by imaging via REC IST criteria as Klatskin 
tumors  are difficult to measure as they are grow ing along the biliary tract. 
 
Subjective  evaluation of the ablation zone to determ ine the appear ance of an IRE assoc iated 
ablation zone in the hilar area will be performed  on postoperat ive scans.  
Persistent disease is defined as residual tumor enhancement on the first post-treatment 
imaging study, and local recur rence is defined as an enhancing tumor within 1 cm of an 
ablation zone. 
Ni a secondary  endpoint we are measuring overall survival. If there is a resp onse to our 
treatme nt, we would expect  there may be a longer overall surviv al. 
Resp onse on blood biomarker is defined  as decrease  of blood marker by >20%  from the pre­ 
treatme nt value. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
 
 
 
13.0 CRITERI AFOR  REMO VAL FROM  STUDY  
 
Subjects can leave  the study at any time for any reason if they wishto do so without any 
consequences. The investigator can decide to withdraw a subject from the study for urgent 
medical reasons. Patients who withdraw before 120 days due to complic ations will be 
counted as failures for the patency objective.Patients who withdraw  before 30 days will be 
counted as having exper ienced  a complication for the purposes  of the seco ndary objective. 
1 4 . 1 BIOST ATISTICS 
 
The primary  objective of this study is to assess  biliary drainage patency after IRE treatm ent of 
hilar cholangiocarcinoma.In patients with plastic percutaneous drains this is defined as ability 
to remove  plastic biliary drains within 1.5 months of the IRE procedure without need for 
reinsertion of a drain or stent. For patients with metal stents in place the definition of patent 
biliary drainage is 4-months without cholangitis post IRE procedur e. 
Wewill enroll 20 patients. f\fean patency  is approximately 1.5 months for plastic stents and 4 
months for metal stents. Assum ingan exponential distribution time to failure, we extrap olate 
that the patency rate at 1.5 months for plastic stents and at 4 months for metalstents  will 
approximately be 37% and we will use this number  as our historical control rate. If 10 or 
more  of the 20 patients we plan to enroll display patency  (at 1.5 months for plastic and 4 
months for metal stents) then we will recommend  IRE for further study.This decision rule has 
8% Type Ierror and 12% Type  II error for distinguishing betwe en patency rates of 37% and 
65%. 
The secondary outcomes of interest  are: 
• Safety will be assessed by determining the proportion of patients experienc ing a 
clinically relevant complication within 30 days post-IRE, defined as CTCAE  (version 
5.0) grade 3 or higher complications requiring re-interve ntion, prolonged hospital stay, 
intensive careadmission,re-admission or leading to mortality.After  accruing the first 8 
patients, we will do an interim analysis of safety. If 4 or more of these 8 patients 
experience a grade 3 complicationwithin 30 days post-IRE (as defined above) then the 
study will stopfor lack of safety.A 30 day observ ation window will follow after the eigth 
patient is enrolled. If one patient in the first 8 patients has a grade 4 or 5 complic ation 
the study will be halted. If none of  these conditions are met then the we will accrue  
another 12 patients. If 6 or fewer  of the total group of 20 patients have  a grade  3 
complication we will conclude that the safety  endpoint has been met. This safety 
monitoring rule has an 81% chance of stopping the study early for safety concerns if 
the true probability  of complications is 35%. If there is a death during the 30-day post­  
procedure period the study will be halted to examine the relationship of death  to the 
procedure. Wewill exam ine the cause of death for all 30-day deaths and determine if 
it could be related to the procedur e. If the death can poss ibly be related to the 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
procedure then the protoc olwill be stoppe d.To continue with the protocol  after a death, 
we will submit to IRB all the documentation related to the ascertainment of cause of 
death and descr ibe how it cannot be related  to the IRE proce dure. 
• Duration of hospital staywill summar izedwith med ian, range and quarti es. 
• Quality of life will be summar ized by average subscale scores at each  visit and 
change from previous visit will also be reported by the same  summ arystatistics. 
• Tumor resp onse on CT imaging and blood biomarker resp onse will be reported as a 
binomial prop ortion with a 95% confidence interval. REC IST criteria cannot be 
applied to Klatskin tumors  as they are radiographically difficult to assess.  This instead  
will be a subjective evaluation of the ablation zone to determine the appea rance of an 
IRE assoc iated ablation zone  in the hilar area. This is curre ntly unknown. 
• Time betwe en IRE and start of palliative chemot herapy will summar ized with median, 
range and quar tiles 
• Duration of palliative chemoth erapy will summ arized using Kaplan-fv1eier statistics 
• Progression-free and overall survi val will summ arized  using Kaplan-l'v'leier statistics 
• Success  rate of completing IRE reported  as a binomial proportion with a 95% 
confidence interval 
Expected  accrual  rate,  accrual  durati on, and study  durati on 
 
Our anticipated accru alrate is approximately 1 patient per month. This accrualrate is based 
on analyzis of potentially eligible patients seen at our Outp atient Clinic in the last 2 years  
(2016 and 2017). Thus, it should take approx imately 1.5 years  to accruethe 20 patients 
needed  for the trial. Allowing for 2 months of follow-up to obtain the primary endpo int on the 
last patient enrolled and 4 months to assem ble, analyze  and interpret the data the totalstudy 
duration is projected  to be at most  2 years.  Patients who consent to the procedure  but do not 
have it will be considered a screenfailure. They will be replaced  by another patient and their 
questionnaire data will be remo ved from  the study. 
 
1 5 . 1 RESEARCH  PART ICIPANT  REG ISTRATION AND  RANDOM IZATION PROCEDURES  
 
1 5 . 2 Rese archParticipant  Registration 
 
Confirm eligibility as defined in the sectionentitled Criteria for Patient/Subject Eligibility. 
 
Obtaininformed  consent, by following proce dures defined in section entitled Informed  
Consent Procedures. 
 
During the registrat ion proc ess registering individuals will be required to complete a protocol  
spec ific Eligibility Check list. 
The indMdual signing the Eligibility Checklist will confirm whether or not the participant is 
eligible to enroll in the study. Study staff  are resp onsible for ensuring that all institutional 
requireme nts necess aryto enroll a participant to the study have  been completed.See related 
ClinicalResearch Policy and Procedure  #401 {Protocol  Participant Registration). 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
 
All participants must be registered through the Cli nical TrialManagement System 
(CTMS).The comple ted signature page of the written consent/RA  or verbal script/RA,  a 
completed Eligibility Checklist and other relevant docum ents must  be uploaded  into CTMS.  
15.2 Randomization 
 
Not applicable 
 
 
 
1 6 . 1 DATA MANAG EMENT  ISSUES 
 
A ClinicalRese arch Coordinator (CRC)  will be assigned to the study. The responsibilities of 
the CRC  include project compliance,patient registration,eligibility  confirmation,data 
collection,abstr action and entry, data report ing, samp le de-identification, regulatory 
monitoring, problem resolution and prioritization and coord ination of the activities of the 
protocol  study team.  The data collected  for this study will be entered  into a REDCap  
database  on a secu reserver.  
1 6 . 2 Quality Assurance  
 
Weekly  registration reports will be generated to monitor patient accruals and completeness 
of consent and registration data.  Routine data quality reports will be generated to assess  
missingdata and inconsistencies. Accr ual rates and extent and accuracy of evaluations and 
follow-up will be monitored periodically throughout the study period and pote ntial problems 
will be brou ght to the attention of the study team  for discussionand action.The principal 
investigator will maintain final responsibility  for data during the study and during the final 
analysis of data. Breaches of protocol, problems with informed  consent, or discrepancies in 
data accuracywill be reported  to the IRB as required. 
1 6 . 3 Data  and Safety  Moni toring 
 
The Data and Safety M>nitoring (DSM)  Plans at l\llemorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
were approved by the National Cancer Institute  in September  2001.The plans address the 
new policies set forth by the NCI in the docum ent entitled "Policy of the National Canc er 
Institute for Data and Safety  M>nitoring of ClinicalTrials" which can be found at: 
http://www .cancer. gov/cli nical trial s/conducting/dsm -gui deli nes .The DSM  Plans at MSKCC  
were established and are monitored by the Off ice of Clinical Rese arch. The MSKCC  Data 
and Safety M>nitoring Plans can be found on the MSKCC  Intranet at: 
https://one.mskcc.org/s ites/pub/clinresearch/Docu ments/MSKCC %20Data%20a nd%20Safet 
y%20M>nitoring%20Plans.pdf 
 
There are severaldifferent mech anisms bywhich clinicaltrials are monitored for data, safety  
and quality. There  are institutional processes  in place for quality assura nce (e.g., protocol  
monitoring, compliance and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and  staff  
education on clinical research QA) and  departm ental proced ures for quality control,plus 
there  are two institutional comm ittees  that are respo nsible for monitoring the activit ies of our 
clinicaltrials programs.  The committees: Dataand Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  for 
Phase Iand II clinicaltrials, and the Data  and Safety  Monitoring Board (DSMB)  for Phase Ill 
clinicaltrials, report  to the Center's Research  Counciland Institutional Review Board. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
16.3 Regu latory Documentation 
 
Prior to implementing this protoc olat l'v1SK,  the protoco l, informed  consent form, HIPAA 
authorization and any other information pertaining to participants must be approved  by the 
MSK Institutional Review Board/Pr ivacy Board  (IRB/PB}.  Therewill be one protoc ol 
document an e ach participating site will utilize that document. 
 
 
1 7 . 1 PROT ECTIONOF HUM MI SUBJECTS  
 
The responsible investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in agreement with the 
Declaration of Helsinki (Tokyo, Venice, Hong Kong,Somers et West  and Edinburgh 
amendme nts). The study will seek  in every  way to protect  the rights of humansubjects.  The 
potential risks will be discussed  indetail with the patients. Potential side effects  as outlined 
above  will be discussed  withthe patients. No patient will be required to participate in the 
study and participation or lack of participation will not affect  the patient's subsequ ent careor 
treatme nt. The cost of getting the IRE proce dure is not paid by the study sponsor. sothe 
patient or their insurance comp any will have to pay for this. Participation will be purely 
voluntary and subjects will not be reimbursed for participation in the study.Throughout the 
study, patient confidentiality will be maintained. No results of the study will be presented or 
discussed  in a fashion that will allow identification of a particular patient in the study.All 
adverse events (AEs}  will be fully disclosed  to the IRB in a timely fashion as required. 
1 7 . 2 Privacy  
 
MSK's Privacy Office  may allow the use and disclosureof protected  health inform ation 
pursuant to a completed and signed Rese archAuthorization form.  The use and disclosureof 
protect ed health information will be limited to the individuals described in the Rese arch 
Authorization form.  A Resea rchAuthorization form must  be completed by the Principal 
Investigator and approved by the IRB and Privacy Board  (IRB/PB}.  
 
The consent indicates that individualized de identified information collected  for the purposes  of this 
study may be shared with other qualified researchers. Only  research erswho have received approval 
from MSK  will be allowed to access  this inform ation which will not include protected  health 
information,such  as the p articipant's name,except for dates. It is also stated in the Research  
Authorization that their researc hdata may be shared with other qualified resea rchers.  
 
1 7 . 3 Serious Adverse  Event (SAE)  Report ing 
 
An adverse event is considered serious if it results in "1NY  of the following outcomes:  
• Death 
• A life-threatening adverse  event 
• An adverse event that results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of exist ing 
hospitalization 
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct  
normal life functions 
• A congenital  anomaly/birth defect  
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
 
• Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threate ning, or 
require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient or participant and may require medicalor surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in this definition 
 
Note: Hospital admission for a planned procedure/ disease treatme nt is not considered an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting is required as soonas the participant starts investigational 
treatme nt/intervention. SAE reporting is required for 30-days  after the participant's last 
investigational treatment/intervention. Any event that occur  after the 30-day period that is 
unexpected and at least poss ibly related to protoc oltreatment must be reported. 
 
Please note: Any SAE that occurs  prior to the startof investigational treatment/intervention 
and is related to a scree ningtest or procedure  (i.e.,a screen ing biopsy) must be reporte d. 
 
All SAEs  must be submitted in PIMS. If an SAE requires submissionto the HRPP office  per 
IRB SOP  RR-408 'Reporting of Serious Adverse Events', the SAE report must  be submitted 
within 5 calendar days of the event. Allother SAEs  must  be submitted within 30 calendar 
days of the event.  
 
 
The report  should contain the following information: 
 
• The date the adverse event occurred 
• The adverse event 
• The grade of the event 
• Relationship of the adverse event to the treatment(s) 
• If the AE was expected  
• Detailed text that includes the following 
o An explanation of how the AE was handled 
o A description of the participant's condition 
o Indication if the participant remains on the study 
• If an amendment will need to be made to the protocol  and/or consent form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem 
 
For IND/IDE protoc ols: The SAE report should be completed as per above instruct ions. If 
appropriate,the report will be forwarded  to the FDA by the IND Office  
 
17.2.1 
 
Any additional SAE reporting inform ation required by the sponsor  or drug supplier should be 
included in this section. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
18.1 INFORM ED CONSEN T PROCEDURES  
 
Before protoc ol-specified  proce dures are carried out, consenting professionals will explain 
full deta ils of the protoc oland study proce dures as well as the risks involved to participants 
prior to their inclusion in the study. Participants will also be informed  that they are free to 
withdraw  from the study at any time.All participants must sign an IRS/PB -approved consent 
form  indicating their consent to participate. This consentform  meets the requ ireme nts of the 
Code  of Federal Regulations and theInstitutional Review Board/Pr ivacy  Board  of this Center. 
The consent formwill  include the following: 
 
1. The nature and objectives,  potential risks and benefits  of the intended stu dy. 
2. The length of study and the likely follow-up required. 
3. .Altern atives to the prop osed study. (This will include avai able standard and 
investigational therapies. In addition, patients will be offered  an option of supportive 
care for therape utic studies.) 
4. The name of the investigator(s)  responsible for the protoc ol. 
5. The right of the participant to acce pt or refuse  study interventions/interact ions and to 
withdraw from  participation at any time.  
Before any protoc ol-specific  procedures  can be carried out, the consenting profess ionalwill 
fully explain the aspects  of patient privacy concerning research  spec ific information. In 
addition to signing the IRBInformed  Consent, all patients mustagree to the Rese arch 
Authorization component of the informed  consent form. 
Each  participant and consenting profess ional will sign the consent form.  The participant must 
receive a copy of the signed informed  consent form. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Khan,S.A, et al., Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment  of cholangiocarcinoma:  an 
update. Gut, 2012. 61(12): p. 1657-69. 
2. Born, P.,et al., Long-term outcomein patients  wth advanced  hilar bile duct tumors 
undergoing  palliative  endosc opicor percutaneous drainage. Z Gastro enterol,2000. 38(6): p. 
483-9. 
3. Kahaleh, M.,et al.,Unresectable cholangioc arcinoma:  comp arison  of survivalin biliary 
stenting  alone versus stenting  wth photody namic therapy.  Clin Gastroe nterol Hepatol, 2008. 
6(3): p. 290-7. 
4. Ortner, M.E.,  et al., Successfu lphotodyn amic therapy for  nonresectable cholangioc arcinoma: 
a randomi zed prospective  study.  Gastroe nterology, 2003. 125(5): p. 1355-63. 
5. Shim, C.S.,et al., Prospective  study of the effectiven ess of percutaneous  transhepatic  
photodyn amic therapy for advanced  bile duct canc er and the role of intraduct al 
ultrasonograp hy  in respo nse assessment.  Endoscopy, 2005.37(5):  p.425-33. 
6. Wiedmann, M., et al., Photodyna mic therapy in patients  wth non-resect able hilar 
cholangioc arcinoma:  fryear follow-up of a prospective  phase II study.  Gastroi ntest Endosc,  
2004.60(1): p.   68-75. 
7. Witzigmann,H., et al., Surgical and palliative  management  and outcome  in 184 patie nts wth 
hilar cholangioc arcinoma:  palliative  photodynamic  therapy plus stenting  is comparable to 
r1/r2 resection.  Ann Surg, 2006. 244(2): p.230-9. 
8. Zoepf, T.,et al.,Palliation  of nonresectable bile duct cancer:  improved  surviv al a'ffe. r 
photodyn amic therapy.  Am  J Gastroe nterol,2005.100(11): p. 2426-30. 
9. Delemotte,  L. and M. Tarek, Molecular dynamics simulati ons oflipid mem brane 
electroporation.  J l\Aembr  Biol,2012. 245(9): p. 531-43. 
10. Tarek, M., Mem brane electroporation:  a molecul ar dynamics simulation.  Biophys J, 2005. 
88{6}:  p.4045-53. 
11. Jarnagin, W.R.,et al., Staging,  resectability, and outcome in 225 patients  wth hilar 
chola ngiocarcinoma. Ann Surg,  2001. 234(4): p. 507-17;discuss ion517-9. 
12. Popesc u,I. and T. Dum itrascu,Curativ e-intent  surgery for hilar cholangioc arcinoma:  
prognostic factors  for clinical decision  making.  Lang enbecks  Arch  Surg,2014. 399(6):p. 693- 
705. 
13. Groot Koerkamp,  B.,et al., Recurren ce Rate  and Pattern  of Perih ilar Cholangiocarcinoma  
after Curative  Intent Resection.  J Am Coll Surg,2015. 221(6): p.1041-9. 
14. Valle, J.,et al., Cisplatin  plus gemcit abine versus gemcit abine for biliary  tract cancer.  N Engl 
J IV'ed,  2010. 362(14): p.1273-81. 
15. Abu-Hamda, E.M. and T.H. Baron, Endosc opic management  of cholangioc arcinom a. Sem in 
Liver  Dis, 2004.24(2):  p.165-75. 
16. Patel,T., Cholangioc arcinoma. Nat Clin Pract Gastro enterol Hepatol, 2006. 3(1): p.33-42. 
17. Sangchan, A., et al., Efficacy  of metal and plast ic stents  in unresectable complex  hilar 
chola ngiocarcinoma:  a randomized contr olled trial. Gastroi ntest Endosc,  2012. 76(1): p.93-9. 
18. Raju, R.P.,et al., Optimum  palliation  of inoperable hilar cholangiocarcinoma:  comparative  
assessme nt of the efficacy  of plastic  and self-expanding metal stents.  Dig Dis Sci,2011. 
56(5):p.  1557-64. 
19. Perdue,D.G.,et al., Plastic  versus  self-expanding  metallic stents  for malignant hilar biliary 
obstruction:  a prospective  multicenter observational cohort  study.  J Clin Gastroenterol,2008. 
42(9):p.  1040-6. 
20. Ruys, AT., et al., Long-term survivalin hilar cholangiocarcinoma  also poss ible in 
unresect able patients.  World J Surg, 2012. 36(9): p.2179-86. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memorial Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York A-..enue 
New York, New York 10065   
  
 
 
21. Lee, T.Y., Y.K. Cheon,and C.S. Shim, Current  status of photodyn amic therapy for bile duct 
cancer. Clin Endosc, 2013. 46(1): p.38-44. 
22. Schmidt,A, et al.,Short -term effects  and adverse events  of endosc opically applied  
radiofrequency ablation  appe ar to be comp arable Vlith photodyn amic therapy in hilar 
chola ngiocarcinoma. United European Gastroe nterol J,2016. 4(4): p. 570-9. 
23. Goldberg,  S.N.,et al., Percutan eous radiofrequency  tissue  ablation:  does perfusion -mediated  
tissue  cooling  limit coagulat ion necrosis?  J Vase lnterv Radial, 1998. 9(1 Pt 1): p. 101-11. 
24. Lee, E.W., et al.,Advanced  Hepatic  Ablation  Technique for Creating  Complete  Cell Death : 
Irreversible Electr oporation.  Radiology, 2010.255(2): p.426-433. 
25. Charpentier, K.P.,et al., Irreversible electroporation  of the liver and liver hi/um  in svtine.  HPB 
(Oxford ),2011. 13(3):  p. 168-73. 
26. Lee, Y.J., et al., Irreversible Electr oporat ion in Porcine  Uver Short - and Long -Term Effect  on 
the Hepatic  Veins and Adjacent  Tissue  by CT With Pathological Correlati on. Investigative 
Radiology,2012.47(11):    p.   671-675. 
27. Scheffer,  H.J., et al., Irreversible electroporation  for nontherm al tumor ablation in the clinical 
setting:  a systematic reviewof safety and efficacy.  J Vase lnterv Radial, 2014. 25(7): p. 997- 
1011; quiz 1011. 
28. Mulier, S.,et al., Com plications  of radiofrequency  coagulation  of liver tumours.  Br J Surg,  
2002.89(10): p.  1206-22. 
29. Choi,J.W.,et al., Assessment  of chronological effects  of irreversible electr oporation  on hilar 
bile ducts  in aporci ne model. Card iovasc lntervent Radial, 2014.37(1): p. 224-30. 
30. Kingham,  T.P.,et al., Ablation  of perivascular hepatic  malignant tumors  Vlith irreversible 
electroporation.  J Am Coll Surg,2012. 215(3): p. 379-87. 
31. Langan, R.C.,et al., Recurrence  patterns follo'lting irreversible electr oporation  for hepatic  
malignancies. J Surg  Onee l,2017.  115(6): p.704-710. 
32. Silk, M.T., et al., Percutaneous ablation  of peribiliary tumors  Vlith irreversible electropora tion. 
J Vase lnterv Radial,2014. 25(1): p. 112-8. 
33. Coelen, R.J.S.,et al., Ablation  Vlith irreversible electrop oration in patients  Vtith advanced  
perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (ALPACA):  a multicentre  phase Ill/ feasibility study  protoc ol. 
BMJ  Open,2017.  7(9):  p. e015810. 
34.  Brady, M.J., et al., Relia bility and validity of the Functional  Assessment  of Cancer Therapy­  
Breast quality-of-life instrument.  J Clin Oneel,1997.15(3): p. 974-86. 
35. Cella, D.F.,et al., Reliability and validity of the Function al Assessment  ofCanc er Therapy­  
Lung (FACT -L) quality of life instrume nt. Lung Cancer,  1995. 12(3):  p.199-220. 
36. Cella, D.F.,  et al., The Funct ional Assessment  ofCancer Therapy scale: deve lopment  and 
validation of the general measure.  J Clin Onee l,1993. 11(3):p. 570-9. 
37. Esper,  P., et al.,Measuring quality of life in men !Nth prostate  canc er using  the function al 
assessme nt of canc er therapy-prostate  instrument.  Urology, 1997.50(6):  p. 920-8. 
38. List,M.A, et al., The Performance  Status  Scale for Head and Neck  Cancer Patients  and the 
Functional Assessme ntof Cancer Therapy-Head and Neck  Scale.A study  of utility  and 
validity. Cancer, 1996.77(11): p. 2294-301. 
39. Ward,W.L., et al.,Reliability and validity of the Funct ional Assessment  of Cancer Therapy­  
Colorectal (FACT -CJ quality  of life instrument.  Qual Life Res,  1999. 8(3}: p. 181-95. 
40. Heffernan,  N.,et al., Measuring health-related  quality of life in patients  Vlith hepa tobiliary 
cancers: the functional assessment  of cancer therapy-hepatobiliary questionnaire. J Clin 
Oncol,2002. 20(9}:  p.2229-39. 
41. Steel, J.,A Baum,  and B. Carr,  Quality of life in patients  diagnosed  !Nth primary  
hepatocellular carcinoma:  hepatic  arterial infusion  of Cisplat in versus 90-Yttrium 
microsph eres (Therasph ere). Psychoonc elogy, 2004.13(2): p.73-9. 
Mem orial Sloan Ketteri ng Cancer  Center  
IRB Number:  18-489 A(4)  
Approva ldate:04-Nov-2020  
Memoria l Sloan Ketterin g cancer Cente r 
1275 York  Awnue 
New York, New  York 10065   
  
 
 
42. Lu, D.S.,S.T.Kee,and E.W. Lee, Irrev ersible electrop oration: ready for prime  time?  Tech  
Vase lnterv Radial,2013. 16(4): p. 277-86. 
43. Deod har, A, et al.,Irreversible electr oporation  near the heart: ventricul ar arrhyt hmias can be 
prevented Wth ECGsync hronization.  AJR Am J Roentgenol, 2011.196(3):  p. W330-5. 
44. Narayanan, G., et al., Percutaneous  irreversib le electr oporation  for doV111staging  and control 
of unresectable pancreatic  adenocarcinoma.  J Vase lnterv  Radial,2012. 23(12): p. 1613-21. 
45. Cheung, W.,et al.,Irreversible electroporation  for unresect able hepatocel/ul ar carcinom a: 
initial  experi ence and review of safety  and outcom es. TechnolCanc er Res Treat, 2013. 
12(3):p.233-41. 
46. Thomson,K.R., et al., Investigation of the safety  of irreversible  electr oporation  in humans. J 
Vase lnterv Radial,2011. 22(5): p. 611-21. 
47. Martin, R.C.,2nd, et al., Irrev ersible electr oporati on in locally advanced  pancreat ic cancer: 
potential improved  overall surviv al.Ann Surg Oneal ,2013. 20 Suppl3: p.8443 -9. 
48. Martin, R.C.,2nd, et al., Irrev ersible electr oporati on therapy in the management of locally 
advanced  pancre atic adenocarcinoma. J Am Coll Surg,2012. 215(3): p.361-9. 
49. Narayanan, G., et al., Pain analysis in patients Wth hepatocellul ar carcinoma:  irreversible 
electroporation  versus radiofrequ ency ablation -initial observations. Cardiovase  lntervent 
Radial, 2013. 36(1): p. 176-82. 
 
 
 
 
20.0 APPEND ICES  
 
Appendix A:. FACT-Hep 