Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 1 of 33 
  
Pharmacokinetics of Centella asiatica in the Elderly  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL INCLUDING STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
Document Version Date: February 28, 2024  
 
 
 
  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 2 of 33 
 Title: A pharmacokinetic study of  Centella asiatica  in the elderly  
 
 
A. OBJECTIVES   
A.1. Purpose  
The purpose of this pilot study is to  measure  the oral bioavailability and pharmacokinetic s of 
known bioactive compounds from  a standardized  Centella asiatica water extract product  (CAP)  
in cognitively healthy elders . Compound levels will be measured in human plasma and urine 
over 12 hours after acute oral administration  of two doses  of the botanical extract product . The 
dose giving maximum plasma levels (C max) closest t o those observed in our mouse studies, as 
well as the rate of clearance (t ½) of the known  compounds , will be identified. These data will be 
used to inform decisions on  the dosage and dosing frequency for future phase 1 and phase 2 
clinical trials.  
 
A.2. Primary goal  
To determine the oral bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of known compounds fro m two single 
administration s of a Centella asiatica product  in non -demented elders .  
 
A.3. Endpoints   
• The primary endpoints for this study are the maximum concentration (C max), the area under 
the curve (AUC),  and the time of maximum concentration (t max) of known compounds from 
Centella asiatica (triterpenes and caffeoyl quinic acids  and their metabolites ) in human 
plasma.  
• A secondary endpoint is the half -life (t 1/2) of the known bioactive compounds  and their 
metabolites to help determine dosage intervals.  
• Additional secondary endpoints include temporal changes in ferric reducing ability of plasma 
(FRAP) as an  indicator of antioxidant potential  over time, tolerability and detection of acute 
adverse events through monitoring by participant  interviews, biometrics , vital signs and 
questionnaires.  
 
B. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Aim 1: To assess the bioavailabi lity and rate of clearance of Centella asiatica  derived 
compounds in cognitively healthy elders  through a pharmacokinetic study.  
• Hypothesis : We hypothesize that the trite rpene and caffeoylquinic acid components 
from Centella asiatica will be bioavailable, and a  dose giving similar plasma levels to 
those associated with cognitive effects in mice can be achieved.  
 
Aim 2: To d etermine the acute tolerability of a Centella asiatica product  in cognitively 
healthy elders .  
• Hypothesis: We hypothesize that acute  usage of the  Centella asiatica product will be 
well tolerated and produce no severe adverse events.  
 
 
C.BACKGROUND  
C.1. Alzheimer’s disease  
Alzheimer’s disease  is a severe form of cognitive impairment and one of the most expensive 
and debilitating conditions known to modern medicine. The National Institute of Aging suggests 
that greater than five million Americans may have Alzheimer’s  disease , making it the sixth 
leading cause of death in the United States.1 In 2016 alone, government health agencies 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 3 of 33 
 (Medicare and Medicaid) spent  an estimated $160 billion on Alzheimer’s  disease  with a 
projected 365% increase by 2050.2  
 
The pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease is highly complex. Current evidence suggests it is a 
combination of genetics, environment and lifestyle factors making the development of 
treatments very challenging. Its most striking pathological feature is the accumulation of -
amyloid (A ) plaques within the brain.3 Current pharmaceutical investigation is aimed at 
preventing the accumulation of, or promoting the clearance of these neurotoxic plaques (anti -
amyloid immunotherapy)4,5; however, recent trials of such agents have failed to produce a 
significant clinical effect on Alzheimer’s disease.6,7 Drugs currently FDA -approved for  the 
symptomatic treatment of Alzheimer’s  disease are either cholinesterase inhibitors8 or act at the 
N-methyl -D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor.9,10 Unfortunately, these treatments do not influence 
disease  progression, and  their effectiveness is highly variable .  
 
Beyond cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s  disease also has significant comorbidities including 
insomnia, depression11 and anxiety.12 Multiple interventions are often needed to manage these 
symptoms affecting patient compliance  and safety . This warrants further investigation into 
effective, inexpensive and well-tolerated treatments for Alzheimer’s  disease and its 
comorbidities.  
 
Gender differences have been observed in the incidence, development and progress ion of 
Alzheimer’s disease , and in  response to interventions targeting cognitive impairment . Women 
develop cognitive disability more rapidly compared to men.13,14 Previous studies of intranasal 
insulin for cognition showed functional abilities were better preserved in women compared to 
men.15 These differences highlight the importance of ev aluating responses to any agent  in both 
males and females. As part of thi s proposed project we will evaluate potential gender 
differences  in bioavailability and pharmacokinetics . 
 
C.2. Centella asiatica  
Centella asiatica  is a highly regarded botanical reputed in Eastern medicine to increase  
intelligence and memory.16 In Western countries, it is sold as the dietary supplement “gotu 
kola”17 for use in improving brain health and cognitive function. Preclinical studies have shown 
that Centella asiatica  extracts have biological effects of relevance to memory, learning, aging, 
mood and potentially  disease progression in Alzheimer’s disease .18 Water extracts of Centella 
asiatica  have improve d learning and memory in wild -type rats ,19 wild-type mice,20,21 and rats 
subje cted to central nervous system  toxicity .22,23 In addition, similar  extracts have been shown to 
modify the brain structure by increasing hippocampal neuron dendritic arborization in adult 
rats,24 neonatal rats,25 and neonatal mice,21 potentially contributing to the observed cognitive 
changes. With regards to mood and behavior, ethanol extracts given to mice subjected to 
chronic and acute stress26 and sleep deprivation27 demonstrated anxiolytic properties. Similar 
ethanol extracts revealed antidepressant properties  in rats.28  
 
Figure 1. Centella asiatica water extract improves learning and memory in aged female Tg2576 mice without 
altering β -amyloid accumulation. Tg2576 mice (20 month old) were exposed to  Centella asiatica water extract 
(200mg/kg/day) in their drinking water for 2 weeks before and during testing (total 5 weeks). Left – Morris water 
maze escape times. Right – Soluble and insoluble fractions of Aβ were extracted from cortical tissue and analyzed 
via ELISA (bar s represent means +/ - standard error).  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 4 of 33 
 With applications specific to Alzheimer’s disease, o ne study showed that long -term usage of a 
Centella asiatica  extract (six months) reduced -amyloid plaque burden  in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s  disease29; however, studies performed at Oregon Health and Science University 
(OHSU) suggest that water extracts of Centella asiatica  may to achieve its cognitive effects 
without a direct action on β-amyloid  (Figure 1).30 Rather, Centella asiatica  appears to affect 
downstream t argets protecting neurons from β-amyloid induced neurotoxicity.20,31,32 This 
suggests that Centella asiatica  may be able to limit  disease progression even when -amyloid  
deposition has already taken place, thereby representing a novel treatment mechanism, 
potentially complementary to the medications in development.  
 
Human studie s, although limited, support Centella asiatica’s  ability to affect cognition  and mood . 
Placebo -controlled trials show ed that herbal extract s, or dried herb, improved cognitive function 
in healthy elderly33 and middle -aged34 volunteers. In elderly participant s with  mild cognitive 
impairment , investigators found improvements in cognitive test results (Mini Mental State 
Examination) follo wing use of dried Centella asiatica for six months35; however, no control group 
was incorporated. Unfo rtunately, these studies used  highly variable Centella preparations  that 
were poorly characterized and were either performed in cognitively normal individuals thereby 
limiting clinical applicability, or were not placebo -controlled. This warrants a robust, randomized, 
double blind, placebo -controlled study in cognitively i mpaired humans to examine the effects of 
a chemically well -characterized Centella asiatica  extract on cognition.  
 
C.3. Phytochemistry  
Botanical agents  are complex mixtures that  show considerable variability due to growth 
conditions, geography, the parts utilized and preparation method.36,37 Limited regulation of the 
production of these agents makes the efficacy of commercial products unpredictable. To this 
end, it is imperative that pharmacokinetic and clinical studies of botanicals use botanically 
authenticated, chemically well -characterize d, stable products that are standardized to a specific 
content of active ingredients.  
 
Chemical analyses of Centella asiatica  performed by our group and others have identified 
unique substances known as triterpenoid saponins (asiatic acid, madecassic acid, asiaticoside 

Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 5 of 33 
 and madecassoside),38,39 which are believed to be associated with Centella asiatica’s  
neuroprotective and neurotropic effects.40-43 Previous pharmacokinetic studies of Centella  
products have focuse d primarily on these compounds  (most specifically asiatic acid) in plasma 
using purified extracts  or synthesized compounds .44-46 Our group has found, using high 
performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectral detection (HPLC -MS), additional 
active phenolic components known as caffeoylquinic acids  in water extracts of Centella .31 These 
acids have been shown to protect against excitotoxic and hypoxic damage47 and β-amyloid  
toxicity in primary neurons.31,48  To date, there are no pharmacokinetic studies of caffeoylquinic 
acids and triterpenes from water extracts of Centella asiatica in humans. This project aims to 
investigate the bioavailability of all of the aforementioned compounds from a water extract of 
Centella asiatica in human plasma and urine. 
 
C.4. Safety  
Centella asiatica  is an edible plant and the Botanical Safety Handbook49 classifies it as a Class 
1 herb that can safely be consumed when used appropriately. The widespread use of  Centella  
as a dietary supplement and the available human studies support its safety.17,33 -35 The 
recommended dose of this herb, which is consumed in India and Sri Lanka as a healthy addition 
to the diet, is between 0.5 and 1.5 g dried leaf daily .16,17 In multiple human studies using the 
fresh or dried whole herb , or in many clini cal studies using extracts of Centella asiatica , no 
adverse  effects were reported .35,50 -53 There have also been several clinical studies in which 
multi -component products containing Centella asiatica  herb or extract s were found to be well 
tolerated .54-60 One study in which elderly participants consumed  dried herb (1000 mg per day for 
6 months) found no change in their liver enzymes (Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 
(SGOT ) or serum glutamic -pyruvic transaminase ( SPGT )).35 In another study, adm inistration of 
a concentrated  extract at 750mg or 1000 mg per day daily for six weeks caused no change in 
liver enzymes Alanine Aminotransferase ( ALT) and Aspartate Aminotransferase ( AST) levels .61 
Two clinical studies on poly herbal preparations containing Centella asiatica  (albeit in small 
quantities) also reported no changes in safety laboratory results .54,57 
 
TTFCA (a purified triterpene mixture), was well -tolerated at a ll of the following doses in  
microcirculation studie s: 30 or 60mg daily for 7 days62; 30 or 60 mg administered twice daily for 
6 months63; and 60mg twice daily for 12 months .64 Two studies on femoral and carotid plaque 
formation respectively65,66 both used TTFCA at 180mg daily for 1 2 months. Again, TTFCA was 
well tolerated  at this highest reported dose.     
 
C.4.1. Reports of adverse effects  in humans : It is noteworthy that despite its presence in dietary 
supplements in the United States, there are no reports of adverse events associated with 
Centella asiatica  found in the FDA CFSAN Adverse Event Reporting System (CAERS accessed 
8/08/2017).  A recent review67 of hepatotoxicity linked to herbs or dietary supplements list s two 
reports associated with Centella asiatica . In the first report, hepatot oxicity was seen in three 
women following ingestion of Centella asiatica  products .68 The publication does not give any 
details of the products (dose, whole  herb or extract , etc), nor does it mention whether the 
products contained oth er ingredients in addition to Centella asiatica . Email correspondence 
between Dr. Amala Soumyanath (Principal Investigator on the present study) and the author 
(Dr. Oliver Jorge) established that the pro ducts contained “extracts” of Centella asiatica , and 
these were not the Centella asiatica  mixed triterpene products similar to CAST known as 
TTFCA or TECA. The second report69 was of a 15 -year-old girl who experienced acute hepatitis 
after taking a product containing “several ingredients, one of them Gotu kola ( Centella asiatica ) 
20mg for 6 weeks”.  The patient had also been on lymecycline for 8 weeks. While these reports 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 6 of 33 
 are concerning, the lack of detailed information on the products used in the first report ,68 and the 
presence o f additional ingredients, low Centella asiatica  dose and concomitant use of 
lymecycline in the second report69 make it unclear what role (if any) Centella asiatica  played in 
the hepatotoxicity seen in these individuals.    
 
In a recent clinical trial conducted at OHSU (unpublished), one female participant receiving 
CAST (a product similar to TTFCA) at 240mg per day withdrew due to abnormal liver enzyme 
levels, which returned to normal on stopping CAST. However, CAST was well tolerated by other 
participants who completed the 52 -week stud y (dose escalated from 120mg and 180 mg during 
weeks 1 -8, to 240mg CAST daily for weeks 9 -52). In this study, 29 of 43 randomized subjects 
(67%) experienced at least one adverse event (AE). The proportion of patients who experienced 
at least one AE in the Placebo (56%) and in the CAST (80 %) groups was n ot significantly 
different (p -value = 0.1). AEs included transient abnormal liver and kidney function or 
gastrointestinal symptoms, which resolved on their own. Abnormal electrocardiograms (ECGs) 
were noted in some subjects and were linked to either pre -existing conditions, or returned to 
normal on subsequent tests. All AEs were graded as minor.  
 
Two studies where Centella asiatica  herb or extrac t was taken for six  months35,70 noted 
decreases in systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure, and one also reported improved sleep 
patterns among participants .70 Due to their relatively mild nature, these effects were mentioned 
as potentially beneficial rather than noted as adverse effects of the intervention. In a study 
involving 48 subjects, one case each of constipation, abdominal bloating and itchiness were 
reported following 750mg or 1000mg daily o f a hydroethanolic extract of Centella asiatica .61 
Topical administration of CA extracts and triterpenes is reported to cause contact dermatitis in 
some individuals .71-73 
 
C.4.2. Non-clinical pharmacology/toxicology  
Rats administered dried Centella asiatica herb :74 Oral administration of dried Centella asiatica  
aerial parts to rats at 250, 500, and 1000 mg/kg body weight  over 30 days did not produce any 
clinical signs of toxicity, morbidity or mortality or show any behavioral effects.  However, 
significant increases in serum levels of liver enzymes (ALT and AST) and kidney markers ( BUN 
and creatinine ) were observed, mostly in a dose dependent manner, suggesting effects on both 
liver and kidney. No gross pathological lesions were see n in any organs after necropsy; 
however, histopathology revealed tissue alterations on microscopical examination in liver, 
kidney, and spleen particularly at the highest dose. A decrease in viable cell count of the liver 
was seen p articularly with the highest dose. Spleen weight was increased by Centella asiatica  
treatment; however, the  statistical comparisons given in this paper are not clear.  
 
Rats administered Centella asiatica extract “INDCA” :75 For acute toxicity studies, INDCA* was 
administered orally to male and female rats at a sin gle oral dose of 2000mg/kg body weight.  No 
deaths , weight loss or treatment -related gross pathological changes  occurred in the 14 days 
following treatment . This suggested that the LD 50 of INDCA was >2000mg/kg body weight.  For 
subchronic studies, INDCA was given orally at 250, 500 or 10 00 mg/kg body weight  for 90 days. 
No deaths were observed, nor were any clinical signs of toxic ity observed over this period. 
While so me significant differences to vehicle control were seen in hematological and 
biochemical parameters, these were not dose -dependent and the autho rs conclude that these 
were not  indicative of an adverse effect.  Mild focal lymphocytic infiltration and focal necrosis 
were seen in both liver and kidneys of INDCA treated animals. In this study, INDCA did not 
exhibit mutagenic activity i n an Ames  test either before or after metabolic activation. *INDCA 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 7 of 33 
 was prepared by initial isopropy l alcohol extraction of dried Centella asiatica  followed by 
concentration of the compounds of interest by solvent:solvent partition to yield a product 
containing 45.75% of the triterpene asiaticoside.76 
 
Mice administered Centella asiatica extract :77 The title and some sections of this paper state 
“acetone leaf extract” or “acetone ext ract”, while the method describes the Centella asiatica  
extract as being made with 50% ethanol. The extract is stated as 5.75% of the original dried 
plant material. For the acute study , mice were administered 100, 500,  1000, 2000, or 
4000mg/kg body weight  of extract by gastr ic intubation. No deaths occurred over a 24 hour  
observation period after administration of the extracts, showing that the LD50 is > 4000 mg/kg. 
For subacute toxicity, animals were treated with 500, 1000, 2000 or 4000 mg/kg/day of extract 
for 15 days. No significant advers e effects were obse rved in these animals, nor were any gross 
pathological chang es to organs seen at necropsy. The liver showed a significant decrease in 
weight in animals treated with 2000 or 4000 mg/kg/day. Hematological parameters were 
unaltered, and liver enzymes ( ALT and AST ) were not significantly diffe rent from control at any 
dose. Creatinine showed a significant decrease from control at the 1000 mg/kg/day dose on ly. 
The authors conclude that Centella asiatica  is “destitute of toxic effects”.  
 
Effect on reproductive system in rats :78 An extract of Centella asiatica  (solvent could not be 
verified as the original paper was not available) was administered to male ra ts at 100, 200 or 
300 mg/kg body weight  for 42 days. All treatment groups  showed some degeneration of 
spermatogenic cells, reduction of sperm count, and reduced testosterone levels compared to 
control rats.  
 
Other studies:  A manufacturer’s brochure on Centella asiatica selected triterpenes (CAST; 
Indena SpA) refers to two studies , which report that asiaticoside was not toxic at up to 1g/kg on 
oral administration to rabbits, whereas toxicity was seen at 50 -50mg/kg given intramuscularly.  
Rabbits gi ven a standardized extract of Centella asiatica  were reported not to show any 
teratogenic effects. Th ese data could not be verified.  We have ordered the two original 
publications and hope to include more details in our  formal FDA IND application  that is currently 
being composed . Test s in guinea -pigs show that the three  triterpenes in CAST are very weak 
sensitizers .79 The author concludes that the risk of developing contact sensitivity to the pla nt or 
its constituents is low. An increased incidence of skin papillomas compared to controls was 
observed in hairless mice painted for about 20 months with asiaticoside (0.1%) dissolved in 
benzene compared to benzene painted controls .80 The authors conclude that asiaticoside is a 
weak tumor promoter in this model, its effects only appearing with repeated app lications over a 
long period. A number of Internet sites erroneously quote a report of an increase in blood 
glucose in animals administered Centella asiatica  citing a paper by Ramaswamy e t al, 1970.81 
Careful reading of the original paper revea led no mention of this effect. Rats admin istered an 
ethanol extract of Centella asiatica  (300-330mg/kg per day for  18 days) or water extract of 
Centella asiatica  (200 mg/kg per day for 5 weeks) in our preclinical studies20,30,82 showed no 
obvious adverse effects.  These rodent doses are comparable, by interspecies scaling83,84 to the 
proposed 2g and 4g per  day human doses in this study .   
 
C.4.3 . Influence of CA on drug metabolizing enzymes:  In vitro  studies suggest that Centella 
asiatica  may contain compounds that are weak inhibitors of Phase  I drug metabolizing CYP450 
isoenzymes. These need to be evaluated in vivo . In studies on Phase I metabolic reactions, 
Centella asiatica  methanolic extract and asiaticoside were reported to weakly inhibit 
recombinant human Phase I metabolizing isoenzymes CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2C9 and 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 8 of 33 
 CYP1A2 compared to standard inhibitors of these isoforms .85 In another study, Centella asiatica  
was sequentially extracted with hexane, dichloromethane, ethanol and water. When tested 
against human CYP isoforms expressed by E. Coli , the ethanol and dichloromethane extracts 
showed a higher inhibitory effect on CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 compared to 
the water or hexane extracts. Madecassic and asiatic acid were stronger inhibitors compared to 
asiaticoside .86,87 A standardized Centella asiatica  extract (ECa223) containing mostly the 
triterpenes madecassoside (43%) and asiaticoside (39%) inhibited purified CYP3A4, CYP2C19 
and CYP2B6, but did not affect CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1 .88 Extracts of 
Centella asiatica  were inhibitory to CYP 1A2 and CYP2C989 CYP3A4 and CYP 2D690 in human 
liver micr osomes.  When ECa223 was administered to rats at 10, 100, and 1000 mg/kg/d for 90 
days, there was no significant effect on the Phase II metabolizing enzymes UDPGT, SULT, 
GST, and NQOR .91 The effect of a water extract of Centella asiatica  on these Phase I and 
Phase II enzymes is yet to be determined.  
C.4.4 . Conclusions : Based on the extensive use of Centella asiatica  herb globally as a food, tea, 
traditional medicine or dietary supplement, and the lack of serious adverse effects in clinical 
studies of TTFCA, CAS T or concentrated extracts of Centella asiatica , we expect that the 
product to be used in our trial (CAP) will be well -tolerated and safe. In particular, since hot water 
extract s of Centella asiatica  are consumed regularly in teas ,92-94 it appears that harmful 
components are not extracted by hot water. However, no human safety data is available on 
concentrated w ater extracts at the doses (2g and 4g) proposed in this study. There is some 
concern about possible hepatotoxicity, but a study in which 1g per day of concentra ted 
hydroalcoholic extract of Centella asiatica  was administered for six  weeks, did cause any 
change in liver enzymes .61 The total triterpenes (approximately 4% w/w) delivered by our 
proposed CAP doses is expected to be 80, 160 and 320 mg/day. The lower doses are 
comparable to the TTFCA and CAST studies described earl ier where these doses were well 
tolerated . We are also encouraged by the fact that no obvious adverse effects have been 
observed in our preclinical studies  where mice were administered Centella asiatica  water extract 
at 200mg/kg/day20,30 or 500 mg/kg/day (unpublished) for five  weeks. These murine doses are 
comparable, by interspecies scaling83,84 to the proposed 2g an d 4g per day human doses in this 
study . This study aims to provide preliminary safety data on this water extract product.  
 
D. SIGNIFICANCE  
Alzheimer’s disease is a severe form of memory loss, initially manifesting as mild cognitive 
impairment and followed by a decline in cognitive function. There is an acknowledged need95 to 
develop novel disease modifying agents to prevent progressive cognitive decline as patients 
and health providers are currently without viable pharmaceutical options for this debilitating 
disease. Concurrently, an interest in alternative therapies has in creased substantially over the 
past two decades, especially among the elderly.96-98 Centella asiatica  may offer an effective way 
to bridge this gap, providing a botanical -based therapy to reduce cognitive impairment in 
Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
Centella asiatica  shows remarkable cognitive enhancing and neuroprotective properties in 
extensive preclinical research performed by our group and by others ( Section C.2.).  The small 
number of human clinical studies favors the use of Centella asiatica  as a dietary supplement to 
improve cognitive function and brain health; however, limited regulation of these agents makes 
efficacy of commercial products unpredictable. Our ultimate goal is to develop an FDA -
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 9 of 33 
 approved, standardized, botanical extract of Centella asiatica  for evidence -based treatment of 
mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
This is the first human pharmacokinetic study of a standardized crude water extract of Centella 
asiatica . Previous pharmacokinetic studies have used refined combinations of Centella’s  unique 
triterpenes.44-46 Use of such extracts eliminates possible chemical interactions and  bioactive  
synergistic compounds that may result from crude extract preparation. Mouse studies have 
shown improvements in cognition in wild -type and Alzheimer’s disease models using crude 
water extracts with or without triterpenes20,30  suggestive of other neuroactive ingredients within 
Centella asiatica water extract. These appear to include caffeoylquinic acids and potentially 
other unidentified compounds. This study will preserve possible synergistic effects by using a 
crude water extract, but also standardize the product to the known bioactive constituents, which 
has not been done in previous human trials. In addition to studying the triterpenes, this study will 
investigate the pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of Centella derived caffeoylquinic acids and 
their metabolites, which has not be en previously evaluated. The observed  pharmacokinetic 
profile will inform dosage decisions and dosing frequency for future human clinical trials.  
 
E. PRELIMINARY DATA  
Centella asiatica water extract is comprised of 0.94 -2.41% triterpenes and 0.01-0.46% 
caffeoylquinic acids .31 The abundant triterpenes asiati coside and madecassoside are known to 
metabolize to the neuroacti ve metabolites asiatic acid and madecassic acid  in vivo .99 Similarly, 
the caffeoylquinic acids  metabolize to caffeic acid, ferulic acid, isoferulic acid, and their 
dihydroderivatives.100,101 Working with OHSUs ’ Bioanalytical Shared Resource/ Pharmacokinetic 
Core (BSR/PKC) we have developed a sensitive methodology using HPLC -MS/MS to separate 
and analyze the triterpenes , caffeoylquinic acids,  and their further metabolites within a human 
plasma matrix. Linear calibration curves have been obtained for each of these analytes  (25–
2000 ng/mL for asiatic acid, 5 -2000 ng/mL for madecassic acid , and 5 -100 ng/mL for several 
caffeoylquinic acids and their  metabolites).  
 
Previous pharmacokinetic literature in rodents and dogs has reported maximum  concentrations 
of the polar caffeoylquinic acid  compounds within one hour of ingestion101,102 and the less polar 
triterpenes at 4 -5 hours.103 We have performed a pharmacokinetic study  in wild -type mice  on a 
low phytochemical diet  to identify  the Cmax and time to reach C max (tmax) of Centella’s  known  
bioactive compounds  using th e standardized water extract. We were able to detect the bioactive 
caffeoylquinic acids and their metabolites in plasma following oral administration of the extract 
using reversed phase HPLC -MS/MS  (Figure 2). Maximum plasma concentrations (C max) of 
CQAs and metabolites (15 – 2350 ng/ml) primarily occurred within 45  minutes of oral 
administration  (Figure 2 ) and there were no observable adverse events after extract 
administration . These results demonstrate Centella asiatica water extract is orally bioavailable  
and well-tolerated in mice warranting further evaluation in humans. They also confirm the 
proposed metabolism of caffeoylquinic acids  from Centella asiatica water extract  into their 
respective metabolites. To assess for changes in the bioav ailability of  the standardized 
manufactured product to be used for thi s study  (CAP) , we will  perform another  mouse 
bioavailability  study.  
Table 1. Pharmacokinetic parameters of caffeoylquinic acids and metabolites in mouse plasma after single oral 
administration of Centella asiatica water extract.  
Analyte  Cmax (ng/mL)  tmax (min)  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 10 of 33 
 
-401060110160
0 100 200mean ng/mL + SEM
Time (minutes)Dicaffeoylquinic Acids
-505101520
0 100 200mean ng/mL + SEM
Time (minutes)Ferulic Acid  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
F. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
F.1. Study design  
This is a phase 1 pilot clinical study using a blinded randomized crossover design . 
Randomization will use an arm equivalence design to promote equal numbers of participant s for 
each order schema. We will  dispens e a single administration of a Centella asiatica water extract 
-20020406080100120140
0 50 100 150 200 250mean ng/mL + SEM
Time (minutes)Monocaffeoylquinic Acids
0102030405060
0 50 100 150 200 250mean ng/mL + SEM
Time (minutes)Caffeic AcidMonocaffeoylquinic acids  84.3 15 
Dicaffeoylquinic acids  37.8 60 
Caffeic acid  39.6 15 
Ferulic acid  15.2 7.5 
Isoferulic acid  2.5 7.5* 
Dihydrocaffeic acid  13.1 240* 
Dihydroferulic acid  Not detected  Not detected  
Dihydroisoferulic acid  124 30* 
4-methyl catechol  4.9 120* 
4-ethyl catechol  0.94 90* 
3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid  84.5 7.5* 
* Inconsistent time curve  
 
Figure 2.  Pharmacokinetic profile of monocaffeoylquinic acids, dicaffeoylquinic acids and metabolites caffeic acid 
and ferulic acid in wild -type female mice.  Six-month -old female mice (n=39) were administered Centella asiatica water 
extract (200 mg/kg) via oral gavage. Four mice were euthanized per time point and blood collected via cardiac puncture for 
analysis with HPLC -MS/MS.  
 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 11 of 33 
 product  to the research participant s at two doses  (2g and 4g) on two separate oc casions two to 
four weeks apart ( Figure 3 ). Participant s will be required to adhere to a “low phytochemical diet” 
known as a “low plant diet” designed by the Oregon Clinical and Translational Research 
Institute’s (OCTRI) Bionutrition Department for 48 hours  immediately preceding each study visit 
and for the duration of each study visit ( Section I.4. ). We will provide participants a handout at 
screening outlining the diet with meal examples. Serial blood samples ( 2 teaspoons; 10 
mL/sample) will be obtained through a peripheral i ntravenous catheter , once  prior to Centella  
asiatica  consumption and then over a 12 -hour post -administration period  (15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 
120, 180, 240, 360, 480, 600, and 720 min) . Participants will also perform a 12 -hour urine 
collectio n at each study visit to assess for excretion of Centella  asiatica  metabolites . Adverse 
events and tolerability will be assessed with questionnaires in -person at each study visit,  by 
phone 24 hours after each study visit , and one week following study completion ( Figure 3).  
F.2. Study Population  
F.2.1. Number of participant s 
Eight non -demented elderly volunteers (n=4  each female and male) 65 -85 years of age will be 
screened and enrolled in the study. We estimate that we will need to screen approximately 
twelve  potential participants to meet the eight  volunteers needed to complete the study. We 
expect a 10% drop out rate. We are still powered to see changes from baseline and differences 
between doses with a 25% drop out rate resulting in 6 subjects.  
 
F.2.2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age 65 -85, male and female  
2. Sufficient English language skills to complete all tests  
3. Sufficient vision and hearing to complete all tests  
4. No known allergies to Centella asiatica ,  (excipients redacted) or any of their 
derivatives  
5. Willingness to discontinue all botanical dietary supplement s for one week prior to and 
during each study visit  
6. Willingness to comply with a 48-hour low p lant diet for each study visit  
7. Absence of significant depression symptoms (Geriatric Depression Scale -15 score of 
<12) 
8. Body Mass Index (BMI) greater than 17 and less than 35 at screening  
9. Non-demented, defined as Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score of zero and Mini 
Mental State Examination (MMSE) score >28  
10. General health status that will not interfere with the ability to complete the study  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Current smoking, alcohol or substance abuse according to DSM -V criteria  
2. Women who are pregnant, planning to become pregnant or breastfeeding  
3. Men who are actively trying to conceive a child or planning to within three months of 
study completion  
4. Severe aversion to venipuncture  
5. Abnormal laboratory evaluation indicating asymptomatic and untreated urinary tract 
infection  
6. Cancer within the last five years, with the exception of localized prostate cancer 
(Gleason Grade <3) and non -metastatic skin cancers  
7. Comorbid conditions such as diabetes mellitus, kidney failure, liver failure, hepatitis, 
blood disorders, clinical symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, and unstable or 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 12 of 33 
 significantly symptomatic cardiovascular disease  
8. Significant disease of the central nervous system such as brain tumor, seizure disorder, 
subdural hematoma, cranial arteritis, or clinically significant stroke  
9. Major depression, schizophrenia, or other major psychiatric disorder defined by DSM -V 
criteria  
10. Medications: sedatives (except those used occasionally for sleep), central nervous 
system active medications that have not been stable for two months (including beta 
blockers, cimetidine, SSRIs, SNRIs), anticoagulants (i.e. Warfarin), investigational drugs  
used within five half -lives of baseline visit, systemic corti costeroids, neuroleptics, anti -
Parkinsonian agents, narcotic analgesics , nicotine (tobacco, patches, gum, lozenges, 
etc.), Cannabis sativa (herb or edibles)  
11. Diseases associated with dementia such as Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia, 
normal pressure hydrocephalus or Parkinson’s disease with a CDR score >0.5 and 
MMSE score <28  
12. Current drug or alcohol use or dependence that, in the opinion of the site investigator, 
would interfere with adherence to study requirements.  
13.  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 13 of 33 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone Screening  
Eligibility Criteria  
Phone Adverse Events Check  
Phone Adverse Events Check  
Phone Adverse Events Check  
Study End  
Screening Measures  
Cognitive assessment*, biometrics∧, 
physical exam, lab measures+ 
48h Low Plant Diet  
Dose 1 Measures  
12h serial plasma collection, 12h 
urine collection, biometrics**, 
adverse events questionnaire , EKG  
Dose 2 Measures  
12h serial plasma collection, 12h 
urine collection, biometrics∧, 
adverse events questionnaire , EKG  
Tolerability Measures  
Adverse event questionnaire  
Phone Adverse Events Check  
48h Low Plant Diet  
Tolerability Measures  
Adverse event questionnaire  
Screening Visit  
• Consent  
• Eligibility  
Visit 1: Dose A  
• Bioavailability assessment  
• Tolerability assessment  
Visit 1: Dose B  
• Bioavailability assessment  
• Tolerability assessment  
Visit 2: Dose B  
• Bioavailability assessment  
• Tolerability assessment  
Visit 2: Dose A  
• Bioavailability assessment  
• Tolerability assessment  
24 hours  
1 week  
24 hours  
 
Randomization  
48h Low Plant Diet  
 
 
 
2-4 weeks  
Figure 3. Study design.  *Cognitive assessments: Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS); ∧Biometrics: weight, height, body mass index (BMI), age, blood pressure, pulse rate, 
temperature; +Lab measures: complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), urinalysis . 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 14 of 33 
  
F.2.2.1. Concomitant interventions  
 
F.2.2.1.1. Allowed interventions : diphenhydramine, temporary use of sedatives for sleep (such as 
Ambien), probiotic supplements, non -plant based laxatives such as magnesium citrate 
or milk of magnesia, gastroesophageal reflux disorder medications such as antacids 
(non-flavored), central nervous system active medications that have been stable for 
greater than two months,  analgesics  
 
F.2.2.1.2. Required interventions:  none    
 
F.2.2.1.3. Prohibited interventions:  sedatives (except those used occasionally for sleep), central 
nervous system active medications that have not been stable for two months (including 
beta blockers, cimetidine, SSRIs, SNRIs), anticoagulants (i.e. Warfarin), investigational 
drugs used within five half -lives of baseline visit, systemic corticosteroids, neuroleptics, 
anti-Parkinsonian agents, narcotic analgesics, nicotine (tobacco, patches, gum, 
lozenges, etc.), Cannabis sativa (herb or edibles), any over the counter or prescribed 
products conta ining plant extracts such as herbal supplements, plant based over the 
counter vitamin supplements, plant based over the counter protein powder 
supplements  
 
F.2.3 . Vulnerable populations  
Based upon the age range and cognitive status needed in  our s tudy population , children  and 
decisionally impaired adults will be excluded. We will exclude women who are pregnant, 
planning to become pregnant or breast -feeding. We will also exclude prisoners. We will not 
exclude any ethnic group.  
 
F.3. Setting  
All participants will be enrolled at Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) and the OHSU 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) will oversee the study. There will be no additional sites for this 
study. All screening and study visits will be conducted at the Oregon Clinical and Translational 
Research Institute’s Clinical and Translational Research Center (CTRC). Screening visits will 
occur in the equipped outpatient rooms and the study vi sits will occur in the infusion suite  of the 
CTRC. All plasma and urine storage will occur in a -70°C freezer in Dr. Quinn’s laboratory in the 
Biomedical Research Building and processing  will occur in Dr. Soumyanath’s  laboratory in 
Richard Jones Hall  at OHSU . All sample analysis will occur at the Bioanalytical Shared 
Resource/Pharmacokinetic Core (BSR/PK) in Richard Jones Hall at OHSU  and/or the mass 
spectrometry service at Oregon State University .  
 
F.3.1. Data management  
We will use the Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute’s installment of REDCap to  
manage the data and prevent data corruption or loss. All analyzed data will be stored in a 
password -protected  folder on OHSU’s X -drive. All paper case report forms, consent forms and 
questionnaires will be scanned into the participant’s REDCap entry. Only people directly 
involved with the study will be grante d access to the REDCap database  and X -drive with access 
specific to their role in the project as determined by the Principal Investigator.  
 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 15 of 33 
 G. RECRUITMENT  
Participants will be enrolled on a rolling basis until the desired number of participants is 
achieved. We will  recruit from the Oregon Clinical and T ranslational Research Institute’s 
volunteer repository, with over 40 qualifying p articipants identified with preli minary searches,  the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) NeuroNext database , and the 
Oregon Alzheimer Disease Center’s participant database.  Potential participants available 
through the above databases will be mailed a study advertisement  describing the study and  
requesting they call  if they are interested in participation . The study will be advertised  using 
fliers in OHSU clinics and local retirement communities /elder care facilities and an online 
posting in the March Wellness “March Stride” e -mail newsletter. In addition, it will be advertised 
using the NIH Clinical Trials website , local newspapers and radio announcements . It will be 
emphasized that participation in the study is completely voluntary. Copies of all advertisements 
have been  submitted  with this application  for IRB approval  .  
 
G.1. Incentives  
Participants will be given the option of complimentary transportation by taxi to and from their 
study visits  (up to $50 per visit) or a parking permit  for each study visit . They will not be provided 
with transportation for screening visits.  To compensate them for their time and effor t, 
participants will receive $8 0 for completion of the study via the ClinC ard. Prorated amounts of 
$40 per study visit will be implemented for participants who do not complete the study and 
provided using the above card  at the end of the first study visit . While not a direct incentive, 
participants will be provided with three complete meals and snacks during each study visit that 
comply with a low plant  diet (section I.4. ).  
 
H. INTERV ENTION  
H.1. Centella asiatica  intervention  (Figure 4) (information on the preparation method is 
confidential/proprietary) : Centella asiatica  dried herb (aerial parts) has been  purchased through 
Oregon’s Wild Harvest (OWH; Redmond, OR) and authenticated by organoleptic  analysi s, thin 
layer chromatography (TLC) , and high-performance liquid chromatography -tandem mass 
spectrometry (HPLC -MS/MS) . Heavy metal testing of the raw herb and a pilot hot water 
extraction at OHSU was performed to ensure low levels of all heavy metals and compli ance  with 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and American Public Health Association’s (APHA) 
limits. Pharmachem Laboratories (PCL: Kearny, NJ), a Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) 
certified facility, perform ed a large -scale  hot water extraction of Centella asiatica  using a 
standardized p rotocol. The water extract was spray dried onto (matrix, redacted)   at PCL and 
then shipped to OWH  for blending with a food -grade sweetening and coloring agent before 
packaging into individual dose sachets . To yield different doses (equivalent to 2g and 4g of 
water extract)  the matrix , coloring agent and flavoring agent (excipients)  was blended in 
appropriate ratios so that each dose contai ns the same amount of the excipients but different 
amounts of the water extract.  The final product is to be referred to as Centella asiatica  product 
(CAP)  and is to be reconstituted in eight to twelve  ounces of room temperature water and 
consumed by mouth  once daily . Samples of the raw herb, extract and product have been  
retained for fingerprinting using high -performance liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry 
(HPLC -MS) and voucher samples deposited in Dr. Soumyanath’s (PI) laboratory  and the 
Oregon State University Herbarium .  
 
OWH will send  the sachets of intervention to the OHSU Research Pharmacy for storage at 4°C 
and dispensing following the Pharmacy’s applicable policies and procedures.  Dr. Soumyanath, 
members of the study team, and the mass spectrometry service at Oregon State University will 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 16 of 33 
 perform quality control and stability assessments throughout the study.  Investigation al New 
Drug (IND) approval has been obtained from the FDA .The drug will be used in compliance wi th 
the requirements of HRP -815.  
 
Each sachet will be dispensed to a member of the study team just prior to the participant’s study  
visit and recorded by the Pharmacy staff including the date, participants ID number and dosage 
for accountability. Participant s will receive two single administration doses of the Centella 
asiatica  product equivalent to 2g and 4g of  Centella asiatica water extract. The order in which 
they receive these doses will be random to prevent a tolerance effect. The doses selected  are 
based on allometric scaling104 from previous murine studies, which showed that 1.4  g/day of 
Centella asiatica  water extract for a 70  kg human was equivalent to the 200 mg/kg/day 
estimated intake in mice.  Participant s will consume CAP in the presence of a member of the 
research team following baseline measurements, in order to ensure adherence to the study 
protocol.  Following study completion, the  remaining  intervention  and placebo sachets  will be 
provided to Dr. Soumyanath for destruction.  
 
H.2. Administration  
The study intervention will be administered in an outpatient setting. The research pharmacy will 
dispense one dose of CAP to a member of the study team, who will reconstitute the CAP 
powder in 8 -12 ounces of warm water and provide it to the participant for oral cons umption. One 
dose will be administered at each study visit in a random order.  
 
H.3. Modification to study intervention  
There will be no modifications to the study intervention during the study unless there are 
adverse events are noted and recommendations are made by the study’s Independent 
Monitoring Committee (IMC).  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Redacted  
 
H.4. Criteria for intervention discontinuation and stopping guidelines  
Participant s will be advised during the informed consent process that they have the righ t to 
permanently discontinue the Centella asiatica product  and/or withdraw from the study at any 
time without negative repercussions. Participants will also be counseled during the consent 
process that they may be withdrawn from the study at the discretion of the Principal Investigator 
or designees.  A participant  may discontinue and/or withdraw and/or be withdrawn from the 
study for the following reasons:  
 
Administrative:  
1) Withdrawal of participant  consent  
2) Request of site investigator or designees  
3) Request of primary care physician  
4) Non-compliance  
5) Protocol deviation  
6) Premature termination of the study  
 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 17 of 33 
 Adverse event (AE)/experience:  
1) Worsening of pre -existing disease  
2) Intercurrent illness  
3) Death  
4) Major/clinically significant alteration in labor atory values  or biometric assessments after 
beginning product  
5) Other AE  
6) Other reasons concerning the participant ’s health or well -being  
 
The s tudy will be terminated if two  participant s terminate due to intervention -related adverse 
events. Severe adverse events will be reviewed immediately by the Principal Investigator, 
clinical investigators and the Independent Monitoring Committee (IMC) to determine if severity 
and relatedness warrant termination of the study  (Section N ). 
 
I. SCREENING AND STUDY ACTIVITIES  
I.1. Phone screening  
Potential participants will be screened over the phone by a member of the study team, primarily 
the study coordinator,  prior to coming in for the in -person screening visit. A standardize d 
telephone script wil l be used and has been submitted  for IRB approval.  The telephone 
screening w ill take approximately 10-15 minutes. Potential participants that meet eligibility 
criteria (S ection F.2.2) over the phone will be scheduled for a screening visit.  
 
I.2. Consent process  
To ensure full comprehension of all aspects of their participation in the study, all potential 
participants  will be mailed a copy of the IRB approved consent and HIPAA form prior to their in -
person screening visit. They will be instructed to review the form ahead of time but not to sign it 
until the visit. All in -person screening visits and consenting will occur in a CTRC outpatient 
room. At the in-person screening visit, a member of the study team  will review the 
consent/HIPAA form and then will ask th e participant  to de scribe key points in the  form (e.g. 
purpose of study, dietary requirements, length of study) before signing.  After the participant  
signs the consent, the participant will continue with screening assessments and baseline 
measurements. A physical copy of their consent  form will be provided to each participant and 
kept in the affiliated study folders to be made available as necessary to an Independent 
Monitoring Committee  or the OHSU IRB. To ensure ongoing consent, participants will be called 
three days prior to the ir second study visit to ask  if they wish to continue their participation in the 
study. At this time, participants will also be re minded of their upcoming study visit, to stop 
necessary supplements, and begin the necessary dietary changes (Section I.4. ). Appropriate 
language will be in included in the consent form to avoid coercion. We will underscore that they 
can decline to participate at any point in the study, even if they have signed the consent form, 
and it will not impact their participation in futu re research trials.  
 
I.3. Screening visit  
The participant ’s health status will be  evaluated by a study clinician  using a biometric 
assessment (blood pressure, height, weight and body mass index), vital signs (pulse rate and 
temperature), a screening exam, a mood assessment (Geriatric Depression Scale -15) and 
cognitive assessments  (Clinical Dem entia Rating and Mini Mental State  Exam ination ). A non -
fasting  plasma and urinary laboratory evaluation (complete blood count, comprehensive 
metabolic panel and urinalysis) will be performed and submitted to the OHSU clinical core 
laboratory to identify asymptomatic illnesses th at could impact study results ( Table 2 ). A 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 18 of 33 
 member of the study staff with venipuncture training or CTRC nursing personnel  will collect 
approximately  two teaspoons (10 mL) of venous blood by peripheral venipuncture and the 
participant will collect half a cup of urine (20 mL)  via a clean -catch method  for analysis. 
Participants will be provided with a handout describing the “low plant diet” (Section I.4.) that they 
are to follow prior to each study visit, should they qualify for the study.  The visit is expected to 
take 45 -60 minutes.  
 
A study clinician will review screening and laboratory results prior to participant enrollment. 
Participants will be contacted by phone and told whether they qualify for the study or not. 
Participants meeting all final eligibility criteria will be invited to participate in the intervention 
phase of the study and will be scheduled for Study Visit 1. Any participants with abnormal health 
screening or laboratory evaluation will be directed to their primary care physician for treatment 
and excluded from the stu dy. In the event that a participant does not qualify for the study, their 
data will be destroyed at the end of the study.  
 
I.4. Study visits 1 and 2  
Visit timing : Visit 1 will occur a minimum of 72 hours following the screening visit to ensure 
adequate time for the low p lant diet (Section I.4.), the screening laboratory results and for 
scheduling of appropriate facilities. Visit 2 will occur app roximately 2 -4 weeks following V isit 1 to 
allow for complete wash out of the study intervention  (Figure 3 ).  
 
Low phytochemical  “plant”  diet: Due to the nature of the bioactive compounds from Centella 
asiatica , participant s will be required t o adhere to a “low plant  diet” designed by the Oregon 
Clinical and Translat ional Research Institute  Bionutrition Department at OHSU . They will comply 
with this diet  for 48  hours prior to each study visit, for which they will be given a handout at the 
screening visit. The diet is essentially limiting intake of fruits, vegetables, coffee, whole grains, 
chocolate and tea , which may contain compounds similar to those found in Centella asiatica . 
Participants  will be provided with food conforming to this diet for the duration of each study visit 
including three full meals and snacks as needed. To assess for success of the diet, a small 
amount of the blood obtained at the screening visit will be analyzed for the presence of the 
bioactive compounds while the participant is following their normal diet and then compared to 
baseline levels at each study visit. To monitor for dietary compliance, a 48-hour diet diary will be 
provided to each participant to be filled o ut each day and brought to each study visit. The diary 
will also include areas for documenting supplement and medication usage. This has been 
submitted with this protocol for approval.   
 
Sample collection : Participants  will be asked to fast for 10 -12 hours  beginning at 9:00 PM the 
day prior to each study visit, excluding water, in an attempt to standardize gastrointestinal transit 
time and minimize delayed absorption of the study intervention due to the presence of food. A 
study clinician or CTRC nursing staff member  will place a  peripheral intravenous catheter in the 
participant’s arm or hand to allow for serial plasma specimen collection. Prior to administration 
of the Centella asiatica  product , a baseline plasma sample of one tablespoon (15  mL) will be 
collected through the catheter using a syringe and transferred immediately into a heparinized 
Vacutainer tube. The participant will be asked to consume by mouth one of the two doses of 
Centella asiatica product  dissolved in 8 -12 ounces  of warm water,  on an empty stomach in the 
presence of study personnel to ensure compliance. Participants will be  asked not to consume 
food for two  hours following consumption of the study intervention to allow for transition into the 
small intestine and absorption. If signs of hypoglycemia present, participant s will be allowed to 
consume a high glycemic food and monitored for improve ment. Serial blood samples (two 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 19 of 33 
 teaspoons (10 mL) /sample) will be obtained through the peripheral intravenous catheter using a 
syringe over a 12 -hour post -administration period (15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 360, 480, 
600, and 720 min) ( Table 2 ). Participants will collect their urine for the duration of the study visit 
(12-hours) to assess for excretion of Centella  asiatica  metabolites.  
 
Tolerability and safety : We will record weight, height, body mass index, age, blood pressure, 
temperature and pulse rate at each study visit to monitor for adverse events and asymptomatic 
illnesses that may impact study results  (Figure 3, Table 2 ). Participants will have an 
electrocardiogram (EKG) at the beginning of each study visit and six hours after intervention 
administration. Participant s will be interviewed and administered a standardized multi -system 
adverse events questionnaire at the beginning and  end of each study visit. This questionnaire 
has been adapted from the National University of Natural Medicine approved questionnaire and 
has been included in this IRB submission for approval.  
 
I.5. Visit 1 and 2 tolerability phone assessment  
Participants will be telephoned the day following each study visit to assess for delayed  adverse 
events and/or complications from the intravenous catheter placement using interviews and a 
standardized multi -system adverse events questionnaire ( Figure 3, Table 2).  Participants will be 
instructed to contact a study clinician i f they experience any reactions following the phone 
assessment , and prior to  their second study visit or one -week exit interview.  
 
I.6. Exit interview tolerability assessment  
Participants will be telephoned one week  following the completion of their second study visit, or 
first study visit if they elect to drop out of the study, to assess for delayed adverse events and/or  
complications from the intravenous catheter placement using interviews and a standardized 
multi -system adverse events questionnaire ( Figure 3, Table 2 ). 
 
Table 2 . Schedule of study visits and assessments.  
 Screening   Visit 1 Visit 1  
+ 1 
day Visit 2 Visit 2   
+ 1 
day Visit 2     
+ 7 days  
Event   Study 
visit Phone 
visit Study 
visit Phone 
visit Phone 
visit 
Informed consent        
Vitals✚       
Health screening, biometric assessment        
Electrocardiogram (EKG)        
Blood draw (CBC, CMP*) and urinalysis        
Low plant diet (starting 48 h prior to visit)        
Single dose of intervention        
Blood collected at intervals (0 -12hr) for 
bioavailability and antioxidant 
assessment  ^      
12-hour urine collection , baseline 
urinalysis        
Adverse events (AE) questionnaire        
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 20 of 33 
   Vitals include blood pressure, temperature and pulse rate  
* CBC = Complete Blood Count with differential; CMP = Comprehensive Metabolic Panel  
^ Single time point  
 
I.7. Subject participation duration  
Including the screening visit, a two to four -week interval between doses, and a n exit phone 
interview for adverse event monitoring, it wil l take a participant six to eight  weeks to complete 
the study.   
 
 
 
 
 
J. STUDY DURATION  
Recruitment and data collection is expected to begin upon approval from the IRB  and FDA  and 
continue for seven  months. We estimate a total of four  months  for final data analysis. Total 
estimated study d uration is  eleven  months  (Table 3 ). 
 
Table 3 . Study timeline.  
                                                     Month  
Activity  1-3 4-6 7-9 10-12 
Finalize product manufacture/quality 
control                          
Recruitment /enrollment                          
Data collection                          
Data analysis/summary                          
Reports, manuscripts              
 
K. DATA AND SPECIMENS  
The principal investigator will oversee the management of the participants, intervention, and 
analysis, which will be carried out by the clinical investigators, research statistician, and 
research assistant. Data entry, quality control and preparation, and participant management will 
be ongoing throughout the study.  
 
K.1. Data collection m ethods  
The procedures for obtaining research material will include a telephone screening form, a 
medical history form, cognitive screening questionnaires  (Mini Mental State Examination and 
Clinical Dementia Rating) , a mood screening questionnaire (Geriatric -Depression Scale -15), a  
standardized adverse event questionnaire , a diet diary,  electrocardiogram, urine collection and 
blood collection. Data will be collected directly from study participants specifically for research 
purposes. All blood collection will be performed at the CTRC. All data used for  this project will 
be obtained only after receiving participant informed consent.  
 
K.2. Handling of d ata and specimens  
Upon enrollment, each participant will obtain a  unique identification number. This number will be 
associated with all specimens and data collected from that participant. Following the collection 
of whole blood from the participant, a trained member of the study team will transfer the blood to 
the specified Vacutainer tubes and process the blood by centrifugation in the CTRC’s laboratory 
to separate the plasma for analysis. The isolated plasma will be transferred into labeled tubes 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 21 of 33 
 and placed on ice until transported by a member of the study team  via a sealed Styrofoam 
cooler  labeled with biohazard to The Oregon Alzheimer Disease Center Biomarker Core Lab 
(Biomedical Research Building , OHSU). The plasma and a 50mL  aliquot of the urine specimens 
will be stored in labeled boxes in Dr. Quinn’s -70°C freezer for up to five years. All written data 
will be stored in a locked cabinet in Dr. Soumyanath’s office (Richard Jones Hall, OHSU) for up 
to five years . All computerized data will be stored in OHSU’s installment of REDCAP and in a 
password  protected folder on the OHSU X -drive for up to five years .  
 
K.3. Detection of Centella asiatica  derived compounds in plasma and urine  
Biological levels of Centella asiatica  triterpenes, caffeoylquinic acids, and their  metabolites will 
be assessed in both plasma and urine using  high-performance  liquid chromatography coupled 
to tandem mass spectrometry ( HPLC-MS/MS). We will also conduct a dditional targeted and 
untargeted analysis to fingerprint the Centella asiatica derived compounds found in plasma and 
urine samples.  
 
Plasma c alibration curves will be made using pooled baseline  human plasma from the study 
participants (one teaspoon (5 mL)/participant) separated by gender . The  blank plasma will be 
spiked with increasing doses of commercially available reference triterpene s, caffeoylquinic 
acids and known metabolites, as wel l as appropriate  internal standard s (see below). If the blank 
plasma is found to contain traces of the analytes, we will calculate the true concentration by 
back extrapolation using the method of standa rd addition. A pooled baseline urine sample t aken 
from participant s (separated by gender) will be  used as a “blank” urine sample for spiking with 
standards.  
 
Triterpenes ; Plasma (200 µl)  and urine samples (3000 µl) will be mixed with phosphoric acid 
and internal standard  (chrysin) before incubation with E. coli  glucuronidase and S. aerogene  
sulfatase to release the analytes of interest from glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. Incubated 
samples are passed through a Supelco SupelcleanTM C8 column , washed with dilute aqueous 
acetic acid to remove salts, and eluted with a mmoniacal methanol. The eluant is vacuum dried, 
reconstituted in 200 µl of 1:1 methanol:  ammonium acetate and filtered throu gh a 0.2  µM 
spinfilter  to remove residual particles  before analysis . HPLC-MS/MS will be performed on an 
Applied Biosystems Q -Trap 4000 LC -MS instrument . The analytical method to be used is a 
modification of that described by Nair et al. (Nair, Menon et al. 2012)  Chromatographic 
separation will be achieved us ing a Poroshell 120 EC18 column  and metha nol:ammonium 
acetate gradient. Triterpenes will be detected  as their ammonium adducts with positive ion 
mode electrospray ionization  using the following MS/MS transitions: AA ( 506/453) and MA 
(522/451), and c hrysin will be detected as the molecular ion (255/255).  
 
Caffeoylquinic acids and metabolites : Plasma (200 µl)  and urine samples (3000 µl) will be  mixed 
with ascorbic acid and isotopic internal standards (13C9-caffeic acid, 13C3-ferulic acid, and d3-
isoferulic acid) before incubation with E. coli  glucuronidase and S. aerogene  sulfatase to release 
the analytes of interest from glucuronide and sulfate c onjugates. Incubated samples will be 
applied to a Phree® column along with acidified acetonitrile  (1 mL) and passed through by 
centrifugation, precipitating proteins an d removing lipids. The eluant will be  vacuum dried, 
reconstituted in 200 µl of 66% aqueous acetonitrile with 0.66% formic acid and filtered through a 
0.2µM spinfilter to remove residual particles. LC -MS/MS will be performed on an Applied 
Biosystems 5500 QTRAP HPLC -MS instrument. Chromatographic separation will be achieved 
using a C8 reversed -phase column and acidified  acetonitrile:water gradient. Caffeoylquinic 
acids (CQAs) , their metabolites and internal standards will be detected using negative ion mode 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 22 of 33 
 electrospray ionization and the following MS/MS transitions: mono -CQAs (353/191); di -CQAs 
(515/353; 515/191); caffeic acid (179/135); ferulic acid and isoferulic acid (193/134); 
dihydrocaffeic acid (181/109); 4 -methylcatechol (123/108); 4 -ethylcatechol (137/122); 13C9-
caffeic acid (188/143); 13C3-ferulic acid (196/136); d 3-isoferulic acid (196/134) . 
 
Additional targeted and untargeted analysis  of Centella asiatica  derived compounds : Frozen 
aliquots of de-identified plasma and urine samples will be shipped on dry ice to Dr. Claudia 
Maier, Director of the Mass Spectrometry Center at Oregon State University according to OHSU 
biological materials shipping procedures. Targeted or u ntargeted high -performance liquid 
chromatography coupled to high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC -MS) analysis will 
be performed to fingerprint the Centella asiatica derived compounds present in the samples.  
The analytical method  applied will be based on a method published in Alcazar Mag ana et al  as 
described below .105 
 
Samples will undergo chromatographic separation using an Intersil Phenyl -3 column with an 
ejection volume of 10µL. Triplicate analysis will be performed. Gradient elution will be performed 
using a mobile phase consisting of solvent A ( water containing 0.1% v/v  formic acid) and solvent 
B (methanol containing 0.1% v /v formic acid), with a flow rate at 0.4mL/min. HPLC -MS analysis 
will be performed using a Shimadzu Nexera UHPLC system connected to an AB  SCIEX 
TripleTOF® 5600 mass spectrometer equipped with a Tu rbo V  ionization source op erated in the 
electrospray ioniz ation (ESI) mode  will be used. Data -dependent acquisitions (DDAs) will be 
conducted to obtain precursor and fragment ion information using the negative (ESI -) and 
positive ionization (ESI+) modes. Level 1 annotations we will be based on accurate mass, 
fragment ion spectral similarity , and retention time  co-elution based on authen tic commercially 
available stan dards . Putative Level 2 annotations will be based on exact mass, isotopic pattern, 
and MS/MS spectral data.  
 
K.4. Analysis  of total antioxidant compounds  
Total antioxidant compounds in plasma will be measured a t each time point using the 
OxiSelect ™ kit (Cellbiolabs  Inc.) and following the manufacturer’s  instructions. The assay, 
performed in 96 -well plates , is a quant itative assay for measuring antioxidant potential within 
plasma  samples. Following the reduction of ferric iron (Fe3+) to ferrous iron (Fe2+) by 
antioxidants in the sample, the kit colorimetric probe develops a blue colo r that is read at 540 -
600 nm. The antioxidant potential of samples is determined based on an iron standard curve 
and results are calculated at Fe2+ equivalents (µM) or FRAP valu e.  
 
K.5. Sharing of r esults with participant s 
All screening laboratory results, performed by the CLIA certified OHSU Core Laboratory, will be 
provided to the participant. If a screening result is found abnormal  (an incidental finding) , the 
participant will be instructed to share their result with their primary care provider. 
Electrocardiograms (EKGs) will be performed at each study visit. If the EKGs are found to be 
abnormal, the participant will be instructed to share their result with their primary care provider. 
As there will be no additional laboratory a ssessments with clinical implications beyond the 
screening  visit, no results from the study will be shared with the research participant or their 
provider(s).  
 
K.6. Data and s pecimen banking  
All data obtained from this study will be used for research purposes only and will comply with 
HIPAA regulations.  No genetic research will be performed on these specimens. The specimens 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 23 of 33 
 and data collected relate specifically to this research project; however, plasma samples may be 
stored at -70°C in Dr. Quinn ’s laboratory or shipped to collaborators at Oregon State University 
for future analysis of bioactive compounds  of Centella asiatica .  No specimens will be sent to or 
used in a repository. All specimens will be labeled with each participant’s unique numeric ID 
code but will not contain any identifiable participant information , and will be maintained at 
OHSU.  
 
L. DATA ANALYSIS  
L.1. Specimen a nalysis  
Each analyte of interest from Centella asiatica will be identified by its retention time and 
characteristic mass spectral fragmentation pattern using selected rea ction monitoring  (MS/MS) . 
The peak area ratio to the appropriate internal standard will be identified and evaluated against 
the standard calibration curve of each analyte. Each analyte’s concentration will be used to 
generate a concentration -time curve for pharmacokineti c profiling. Pharmacokinetic  profiling will 
use non -compartmental analy sis to calculate common pharmacokinetic  parameters such as 
peak concentration (C max), the time at peak concentration (t max) and the total 12 -hour 
bioavailability represented by  the total area under the curve (AUC 0-12). These will be compared 
to our  mouse data in order to assess appropriateness of do sing level. Other calculable non -
compartmental analysis  metrics will also be determined, such as the elimination half -life (t 1/2) 
calculated from the profile tails and the mean residency time  of the compounds in plasma. 
Descriptive assessment will be done at ea ch of the doses to give basic pharmacokinetic 
summarization of the various Centella asiatica  compounds and total antioxidant compounds 
measured by ferric reducing ability of plasma . Dose dependence of the study outcomes will be 
determined by evaluation of the within -subject differences in study outcomes between the 
different  doses. For all continuous variables, dose effects will be evaluated both naively using 
paired t -tests and with ordinary least -squares regression with correction for commonly cited 
confounders including but not limited to baseline age and gender. Assumptio ns of normality will 
be confirmed using outcome density distributions alongside utility from formal tests, such as the 
Anderson -Shapiro. In instances of normality violation, statistical transformation such as natural 
logs and square roots will be considered , as will non -parametric equivalent tests such as the 
paired Wilcoxon rank -sum test. Standard diagnostics will be very conservative given the limited 
number of available participant s but the effect of removing clearly obvious outliers will be 
evaluated . Although all Centella a siatica  compounds of interest and  pharmacokinetic  
parameters are defined a priori , multiple comparison correction to p -values will be applied as 
necessary, with final two -tail significance defined at p<0.05.  
 
L.2. Sample s ize 
Power analysis and sample size estimation for the dose -dependent pharmacokinetics of 
Centella asiatica  analytes were derived from the literature, specifically the plasma dose 
response analysis of the triterpene asiatic acid  by Grimaldi et. al.45 after single acute 
administration of 30  mg an d 60 mg of a Centella asiatica triterpene fraction . In a repeated 
measures cohort of 12 males, they found signif icant differences (p<0.05) in asiatic acid ’s peak 
plasma concentration (C max) (30 mg: 0.70  μg/ml ± 0.38; 60  mg: 1.36  μg/ml ± 0.45; d=1.57) and 
24-hour total bioavailability (AUC 0-24) (30 mg: 4.16 ± 3.81; 60  mg: 9.39 ± 3.53; d=1.42) between 
the two doses. This paper was chosen as an  analog for the current study  since a proportionally 
equimolar dose resp onse shift in the pharmacokinetic profile of asiatic acid can be expect ed of 
the proposed  Centella asiatica product doses . Under that assumption, a significant within -group 
dose response at α=0.05 with at least 80% power would be found for C max with six participant s 
and for AUC 0-12 with seven participant s.  Even if the inclusion  of additional compounds in the 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 24 of 33 
 water  extract reduces the dose  effect anticipated in the current study, a significant difference in 
the pharmacokinetic outcomes would still be seen with eight participant s. We therefore, propose 
a cohort of four men and four women, which will enable dose responses to be seen within each 
gender individually, and allow for evaluation of an attenuated response by pooling gender or 
provide protection against study dropout.  
 
L.3. Data quality and m anagement  
The Principal Investigator will oversee study progress including recruitment, retention, 
demographics, study participant  status and error rates pertaining to inclusion/exclusion criteria 
and the study protocol. Tabulation of study data will have both physical  and digital formats 
available. A member of the study team will record data from each study visit and phone visit on 
paper case report forms. Physical copies of the case report forms  will be scanned into the 
participant’s REDCap encounter, kept in participant -specific binders and kept available for 
comparison against the final study database. Digital documentation will use the REDCap 
database system, which will maintain q uality of integrity using prescribed logic rules inherent to 
the system. Data will be input immediately upon the participant’s vi sit and double -checked within 
48 hours for accuracy by a separate member of the study team or the Principal Investigator. 
This will include limited options for responses, protection against redundancy and double -data 
entry, and locking of the database for information entry upon study completion. This 
combination of steps will promote cohesiveness of study outcomes from study visit to data entry 
while maintain ing the necessary protection of participant  privacy.  All plasma concentration 
calculations will be performed using a Microsoft Office Excel database by study person nel and 
double -checked within one week  by a second member of the study team to ensure accuracy.  
The computer files will be protected with a password and only appropriate study personnel will 
have access to the database.  
 
M. PRIVACY, CONFIENTIALITY, AND DATA SECURITY  
All participant information, and even the fact that an individual is in the study, is considered 
confidential. Confidentiality will be assured in this study through several mechanisms. 
Individuals  interested in participation in the stu dy will call the study coordinator’s  personal office  
telephone for a phone screening. The potential participant’s contact information (phone  number, 
name, and address), telephone screening responses , and any other paper records  will be 
documented in a secured binder that is kept in a secured and locked area when not in use  and 
only accessible to study staff . During screening and study visits, t he investi gators will ensure 
physical privacy by conducting interviews  and examinations  in a closed room. After enrollment, 
each participant will be assigned an anonym ous study ID number, which will  be used on all case 
report  forms , computerized data sheets  and specimen containers. In the case of computerized 
information, access to the study data on computers will be password protected. Finally, 
participants will not be identified by name in any reports or publications, nor will data  be 
presented in such a way that the identity of individual participants can be inferred. All staff are 
trained and annually re -certified regarding these procedures  in Responsible Conduct of 
Research and HIPAA .   
 
N. PROVISIONS TO MONITOR THE DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS  
Adverse event (AE) monitoring will occur in “real time” using a standardized Adverse Event 
Monitoring Form and reviewed weekly by the principal (Soumyanath) and clinical (Quinn) 
investigators. This form is a ninety -one point multi -system questionnaire that assesses all organ 
systems (eyes/ears/nose/throat, gastrointestinal, neurological/ musculoskeletal, 
psychological/general, cardiopulmonary, skin, genitourinary and whole body sy stems). It will be 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 25 of 33 
 completed at the screening visit in order to collect data on any/all pre -existing symptoms and 
their severity, and will serve as baseline data to determine attribution to the study intervention. 
The Adverse Event Monitoring Form will be administered in person at the beginning and end of 
Visits 1 and 2,  via telephone the day following Visit 1 and 2, and by telephone one week after 
Visit 2, to assess for acute and delayed adverse events. Electrocardiograms will be performed 
just prior to administration of Centella asiatica product and six hours after intervention to monitor 
for adverse events.  
 
Participants will be reminded and encouraged during clinic visits to contact a study clinician if a 
moderate or serious AE occurs. Participants will be given a telephone number they can call at 
any time to report potential adverse effects. All severe AEs will immediately be reported to the 
Independent Monitoring Committee (IMC) and the OHSU IRB by the study principal investigator. 
Severe AEs (SAEs) are defined as events that are life -threatening or result in hospit alization, 
permanent  disability, cancer, death, or another significant outcome.  
 
N.1. Attribution to i ntervention  
At each administration, items identified on the Adverse Event Monitoring Form will be compared 
to baseline levels to determine if the symptom was pre -existing. If the symptom was pre -existing 
at the same or a previously greater severity, the symptom will not be considered attr ibutable to 
the study intervention . If the symptom was pre -existing at lesser severity (or was not previously 
present), the symptom may be considered attributable to the study intervention . If the 
intervention is considered attributabl e, Dr. Quinn and Dr. Wright , in consultation with the 
Principal Investigator,  will determine if an alternative clinical explanation exists for the adverse 
event. If an alternative explanation does not exist, the adverse event will be considered 
attributable to the study intervention . If an alternative explanation does exist, the adverse event 
will not be considered attributable to the study intervention . 
 
N.2. Independent Monitoring Committee (IMC)  
Data monitoring and safety oversight is to be carried out via an independent monitoring 
committee (IMC) composed of at least three members beyond the principal study team . A 
clinician with experience in natural supplement research will chair the IMC and the other two 
members will be a statistician and a second clinician. An IMC is planned over a Data Safety 
Monitori ng Board (DSMB) based on the National Institute of Health (NIH) and National Center 
for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)  listed crit eria with respect to data safety and 
monitoring. This study is  single -site and phase I trial in scope. In addition, Centella asiatica  is 
expected to be largely safe based on pre -clinical work and its long -standing position  and 
extensive usage  in herbal medicine. However, the use  of blinded randomization and an elderly 
study cohort predicates the use of a multi -person committee and not just an independent 
monitor.  
 
N.3. Plan for review and reporting  
The IMC will meet biannually to study un -blinded AE data coded by organ system, and on an 
ad-hoc basis as necessary, based on the cited reporting of severe AEs and continuing reviews 
to OHSU’s IRB. Should the protocol be amended as a result of data review, the OHSU IRB and 
monitoring body will be notified and the amendment approved pr ior to study amendment 
implementation, unless immediate implementation is required to protect the safety of the study 
participant s. In such a case, the protocol amendment will be immediately implemented an d the 
OHSU IRB and IMC will be notified directly after protocol amendment implementation.  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 26 of 33 
 O. RISKS AND BENEFITS  
O.1. Risks to subjects  
Potential harm to participants will be minimized by excluding participants with the conditions 
detailed in section F.2.2. The risks to the subjects participating in this proposed research project 
are mainly those associated with venous access, potential toxicity of the test material, and time 
commitment.  
 
Venipuncture : The potential risks to participants are minimal and reversible. Likely risks include 
pain and bruising from the intravenous catheter or venipuncture needle insertion. Occasional 
risks include feeling lightheaded or faint during or immediately after a blo od sample is collected. 
Unlikely risks include swelling, infection, transient hematomas, transient thrombophlebitis, a 
fractured catheter embolus, or an allergic reaction to the adhesives or sterilization materials 
used at the venous access poi nt. To minimize risk, catheter insertions and blood draws will be 
conducted in a seated position and using aseptic technique by trained personnel.  
 
Centella asiatica product : Centella asiatica  is an edible plant. The Botanical Safety Handbook49 
classifies Centella asiatica  as a Class 1 herb, i.e. one that can safely be consumed when used 
appropriately. The widespread use of Centella  as a dietary supplement and human studies 
performed with Centella asiatica (Appa Rao, Srinivasan et al. 1973, Tiwari, Singh et al. 2008, 
Dev, Mohamed et al. 2009, Wattanathorn, Mator et al. 2008, Roushan, Tiwari et al. 2013)12 
support its safety. At the doses given in this study, the risks are expected to be minimal and 
unlikely. The lowest dosage is based upon allometric scaling from mouse studies in which no 
toxicity was observed; however, the present product is a concentrate d extract, and it is 
important to establish its safety, particularly in a vulnerable elderly population. We do not 
anticipate a great increase in adverse effects with the higher dosage, but are aware that they 
may occur. In particular, we anticipate potent ial transient gastrointestinal side effects such as 
nausea, gastric reflux/discomfort or diarrhea. Due to unknown interactions with pharmaceutical 
medications, we will exclude those on blood thinning medications (e.g. warfarin). See section 
C.4 above for further information.  
 
Treatment -emergent suicidal ideation and behavior  have been identified as a concern for a 
number of drugs and drug classes. Because of these concerns, a prospective assessment for 
suicidal ideation and behavior will be monitored. Heisel et al. (2011)106 have identified a “suicide 
ideation” subscale in the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). We are using the GDS as part of 
study procedures, and will pay special attention to the identified subscale questions to assess 
potential risk of suicidal ideation or b ehaviors.  
Risks associated with a breach of confidentiality:  There is a small risk that information about a 
study participant could be i nadvertently  disclosed to non -study personnel. Procedures to 
minimize this risk have been described in section M of this protocol.  
 
Other risks/discomforts associated with participation : The participants will experience a time 
burden by participation in the research study, as they will need to remain within the Clinical and 
Translational Research Center for 13 hours at each study visit (total 26 hours). Participants will 
be remunerated i n a prorated fashion ($40 per visit) for their participation. They will also be 
asked to follow a low plant diet, which may present an economic burden. To mitigate the burden 
associated with bringing food that  conforms to the diet or purchasing food during their study 
visits, participants will be provided with three meals and snacks that conform to the diet for each 
study visit at no expense. As this study is being conducted only at the OHSU Marquam Hill 
campus , there are travel and parking expenses associated with study participation. To address 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 27 of 33 
 this expense, participants will be provided with an option of a round trip taxi trip to their home 
(up to $50) or a validated parking pass for each study visit at no expense.  
 
O.2. Potential benefits to subjects  
As this is a pilot pharmacokinetic study with single administrations of the intervention, it is 
unlikely participants will experience any direct benefits. The data on dosing and tolerability will 
be extrapolated to trials of CAP in patients with mild cogni tive decline or Alzheimer’s disease . 
 
 
P. IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE GAINED  
Alzheimer’s disease is a debilitating disease with very limited successful treatments. Due to a 
lack of effective interventions, physicians are looking to alternative therapies that can address 
comorbidities and cognitive changes. Centella asiatica water extract has shown promising 
changes in preclinical models warranting further robust investigation in humans. Because there 
are no previous studies of a  well-characterized Centella asiatica  product in Alzheimer’s disease , 
it is an important public health iss ue to scientifically evaluate this therapy to be able to perform 
further studies investigating its effect on cognition.  This pharmacokinetic study of Centella 
asiatica will provide the bioavailability data for the selection of dosing and dosage intervals for 
future clinical trials. It will also provide preliminary acute safety and tolerability data on an extract 
of Centella asiatica  that has not been previously investigated in humans.  
 
Q. REFERENCE CITED  
1. National Institutes of Health NIoA. The Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral 
Center Alzheimer's Disease Fact Sheet. Accessed November 1, 2016, 2016. 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/alzheimers -disease -fact-sheet  
2. Association As. Factsheet. Accessed November 1, 2016, 2016. 
http://act.alz.org/site/DocServer/2012_Costs_Fact_Sheet_version_2.pdf  
3. Jack CR, Knopman DS, Jagust WJ, et al. Tracking pathophysiological processes in 
Alzheimer's disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol . Feb 
2013;12(2):207 -16. doi:10.1016/S1474 -4422(12)70291 -0 
4. Company ELa. A study of semagacestat for Alzheimer's patients (Identity XT)). 
Accessed November 15, 2016, 2016. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
5. Panza F, Frisardi V, Imbimbo BP, et al. Bapineuzumab: anti -β-amyloid monoclonal 
antibodies for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Immunotherapy . Nov 2010;2(6):767 -82. 
doi:10.2217/imt.10.80  
6. Wasilewski A. Johnson & Johnson Announces Discontinuation of Phase 3 Development 
of Bapineuzumab Intravenous (IV) in Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's Disease. Accessed October 
22, 2012, http://www.jnj.com/connect/news/all/johnsonand   
johnsonannouncesdiscontinuationofphase3developmentofbapineuzumabintravenousivinmildtom
oderatealz  heimersdisease%3E  
7. Announcement ELM. Eli Lilly and Company Announces TopLine Results on 
Solanezumab Phase 3 Clinical Trials in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease. Accessed October 
22, 2012, http://newsroom.lilly.com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid=702211%3E  
8. Tariot PN, Federoff HJ. Current treatment for Alzheimer disease and future prospects. 
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord . 2003 Jul -Sep 2003;17 Suppl 4:S105 -13.  
9. Tariot PN, Farlow MR, Grossberg GT, et al. Memantine treatment in patients with 
moderate to severe Alzheimer disease already receiving donepezil: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA . Jan 2004;291(3):317 -24. doi:10.1001/jama.291.3.317  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 28 of 33 
 10. Reisberg B, Doody R, Stöffler A, et al. Memantine in moderate -to-severe Alzheimer's 
disease. N Engl J Med . Apr 2003;348(14):1333 -41. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa013128  
11. Migliorelli R, Tesón A, Sabe L, Petracchi M, Leiguarda R, Starkstein SE. Prevalence and 
correlates of dysthymia and major depression among patients with Alzheimer's disease. Am J 
Psychiatry . Jan 1995;152(1):37 -44. doi:10.1176/ajp.152.1.37  
12. Ferretti L, McCurry SM, Logsdon R, Gibbons L, Teri L. Anxiety and Alzheimer's disease. 
J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol . 2001;14(1):52 -8. doi:10.1177/089198870101400111  
13. Sinforiani E, Citterio A, Zucchella C, et al. Impact of gender differences on the outcome 
of Alzheimer's disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord . 2010;30(2):147 -54. 
doi:10.1159/000318842  
14. Gambassi G, Lapane KL, Landi F, Sgadari A, Mor V, Bernabie R. Gender differences in 
the relation between comorbidity and mortality of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Systematic 
Assessment of Geriatric drug use via Epidemiology (SAGE) Study Group. Neurology . Aug 
1999;53(3):508 -16.  
15. Claxton A, Baker LD, Wilkinson CW, et al. Sex and ApoE genotype differences in 
treatment response to two doses of intranasal insulin in adults with mild cognitive impairment or 
Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis . 2013;35(4):789 -97. doi:10.3233/JAD -122308  
16. Kapoor L. Handbook of Ayurvedic Medicinal Plants . CRC Press; 1990.  
17. Newall C, Anderson L, Phillipson J. Herbal Medicines. A Guide for Healthcare 
Professionals . Pharmaceutical Press; 1996.  
18. Lokanathan Y, Omar N, Ahmad Puzi NN, Saim A, Hj Idrus R. Recent Updates in 
Neuroprotective and Neuroregenerative Potential of Centella asiatica. Malays J Med Sci . Jan 
2016;23(1):4 -14.  
19. Veerendra Kumar MH, Gupta YK. Effect of different extracts of Centella asiatica on 
cognition and markers of oxidative stress in rats. J Ethnopharmacol . Feb 2002;79(2):253 -60.  
20. Gray NE, Harris C, Quinn J, Soumyanath A. Centella asiatica modulates antioxidant and 
mitochondrial pathways and improves cognitive function in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacol . 
2016;180:78 -86.  
21. Rao SB, Chetana M, Uma Devi P. Centella asiatica treatment during postnatal period 
enhances learning and memory in mice. Physiol Behav . Nov 15 2005;86(4):449 -57. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.07.019  
22. Veerendra Kumar MH, Gupta YK. Effect of Centella asiatica on cognition and oxidative 
stress in an intracerebroventricular streptozotocin model of Alzheimer's disease in rats. Clin Exp 
Pharmacol Physiol . May -Jun 2003;30(5 -6):336 -42.  
23. Gupta YK, Veerendra Kumar MH, Srivastava AK. Effect of Centella asiatica on 
pentylenetetrazole -induced kindling, cognition and oxidative stress in rats. Pharmacol Biochem 
Behav . Feb 2003;74(3):579 -85.  
24. Gadahad MR, Rao M, Rao G. Enhancement of hippocampal CA3 neuronal dendritic 
arborization by Centella asiatica (Linn) fresh leaf extract treatment in adult rats. J Chin Med 
Assoc . Jan 2008;71(1):6 -13.  
25. Mohandas Rao KG, Muddanna Rao S, Gurumadhva Rao S. Centella asiatica (L.) leaf 
extract treatment during the growth spurt period enhances hippocampal CA3 neuronal dendritic 
arborization in rats. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med . Sep 2006;3(3):349 -57. 
doi:10.1093/ecam/nel024  
26. Wanasuntronwong A, Tantisira MH, Tantisira B, Watanabe H. Anxiolytic effects of 
standardized extract of Centella asiatica (ECa 233) after chronic immobilization stress in mice. J 
Ethnopharmacol . Sep 28 2012;143(2):579 -85. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2012.07.010  
27. Chanana P, Kumar A. Possible Involvement of Nitric Oxide Modulatory Mechanisms in 
the Neuroprotective Effect of Centella asiatica Against Sleep Deprivation Induced Anxiety Like 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 29 of 33 
 Behaviour, Oxidative Damage and Neuroinflammation. Phytother Res . Apr 2016;30(4):671 -80. 
doi:10.1002/ptr.5582  
28. Selvi P, Kumar M, Rajesh R, Kathiravan T. Antidepressant activity of ethanolic extract of 
leaves of Centella asiatica Linn by in vivo  methods. Asian J Res Pharm Sci . 2012;2(2):76 -79.  
29. Dhanasekaran M, Holcomb LA, Hitt AR, et al. Centella asiatica extract selectively 
decreases amyloid beta levels in hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease animal model. Phytother 
Res. Jan 2009;23(1):14 -9. doi:10.1002/ptr.2405  
30. Soumyanath A, Zhang Y, Henson E, et al. Centella asiatica Extract Improves Behavioral 
Deficits in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease: Investigation of a Possible Mechanism of 
Action. . Int J Alzheimers Dis, . 2012:381974.  
31. Gray NE, Morre J, Kelley J, et al. Caffeoylquinic acids in Centella asiatica protect against 
amyloid -beta toxicity. J Alzheimers Dis . 2014;40(2):359 -73. doi:10.3233/JAD -131913  
32. Gray NE, Sampath H, Zweig JA, Quinn JF, Soumyanath A. Centella asiatica Attenuates 
Amyloid -beta-Induced Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction. J Alzheimers Dis . 
2015;45(3):933 -46. doi:10.3233/JAD -142217  
33. Wattanathorn J, Mator L, Muchimapura S, et al. Positive modulation of cognition and 
mood in the healthy elderly volunteer following the administration of Centella asiatica. J 
Ethnopharmacol . Mar 2008;116(2):325 -32. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2007.11.038  
34. Dev RDO, Mohamed S, Hambali Z, Samah BA. Comparison on cognitive effects of 
Centella asiatica in healthy middle age female and male volunteers. 2009;4:553 -656.  
35. Tiwari S, Singh S, Patwardhan K, Ghlot S, Gambhir I. Effect of Centella asiatica  on mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and other common age -related clinical problems. 2008;4:215 -220.  
36. <Appa Rao 1973.pdf>.  
37. Forte J, Raman A. Regulatory issues related to herbal products part 3: Quality and its 
determination. J Med Food . 2000;3(1):59 -70.  
38. Brinkhaus B, Lindner M, Hentschel C, et al. Centella asiatic a in traditional and modern 
phytomedicine - A pharmacological and clinical profile - part I; Botany, chemistry, preparations. 
Perfusion . 1998;11(11):466 -474.  
39. James JT, Dubery IA. Pentacyclic triterpenoids from the medicinal herb, Centella 
asiatica (L.) Urban. Molecules . Oct 09 2009;14(10):3922 -41. doi:10.3390/molecules14103922  
40. Soumyanath A, Zhong YP, Gold SA, et al. Centella asiatica accelerates nerve 
regeneration upon oral administration and contains multiple active fractions increasing neurite 
elongation in -vitro. J Pharm Pharmacol . Sep 2005;57(9):1221 -9. doi:10.1211/jpp.57.9.0018  
41. Lee MK, Kim SR, Sung SH, et al. Asiatic acid derivatives protect cultured cortical 
neurons from glutamate -induced excitotoxicity. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol . 2000 Jul -
Aug 2000;108(1 -2):75 -86.  
42. Jew SS, Yoo CH, Lim DY, et al. Structure -activity relationship study of asiatic acid 
derivatives against beta amyloid (A beta) -induced neurotoxicity. Bioorg Med Chem Lett . Jan 
2000;10(2):119 -21.  
43. Mook -Jung I, Shin JE, Yun SH, et al. Protective effects of asiaticoside derivatives 
against beta -amyloid neurotoxicity. J Neurosci Res . Nov 1999;58(3):417 -25.  
44. Yuan Y, Zhang H, Sun F, Sun S, Zhu Z, Chai Y. Biopharmaceutical and pharmacokinetic 
characterization of asiatic acid in Centella asiatica as determined by a sensitive and robust 
HPLC -MS method. J Ethnopharmacol . Apr 02 2015;163:31 -8. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2015.01.006  
45. Grimaldi R, De Ponti F, D'Angelo L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the total triterpenic 
fraction of Centella asiatica after single and multiple administrations to healthy volunteers. A 
new assay for asiatic acid. J Ethnopharmacol . Feb 1990;28(2):235 -41.  
46. Zheng XC, Wang SH. Determination of asiatic acid in beagle dog plasma after oral 
administration of Centella asiatica extract by precolumn derivatization RP -HPLC. J Chromatogr 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 30 of 33 
 B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci . Feb 15 2009;877(5 -6):477 -81. 
doi:10.1016/j.jchromb.2008.11.045  
47. Kim J, Lee H, Hwang B, Kim S, Yoo J, Seong Y. Neuroprotection of Ilex latifolia and 
caffeoylquinic acid derivatives against excitotoxic ad hypoxic damage of cultured rat cortical 
neurons. Arch Pharm Res . 2012;35:1115 -1122.  
48. Xiao H, Cao X, Wang L, et al. 1,5 -dicaffeoylquinic acid protects primary neurons from 
amyloid B 1 -42- induced apoptosis via PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Chin Med J (Engl) . 
2011;124:2628 -2635.  
49. Botanical Safety Handbook . 1997.  
50. Liyanage C, Goonaratna C, Thabrew I. Iron absorption from a traditional Sri Lankan 
weaning food and the enhancing effect of ascorbic acid in adult male volunteers. The Ceylon 
medical journal . Dec 1996;41(4):135 -40.  
51. Rao MA, Srinivasan K, Rao To. The effect of Mandookaparni ( Centella asiatica ) on the 
general mental ability (Medhya) of mentally retarded children. 1973;4:9 -16.  
52. Bradwejn J, Zhou Y, Koszycki D, Shlik J. A double -blind, placebo -controlled study on the 
effects of Gotu Kola (Centella asiatica) on acoustic startle response in healthy subjects. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol . Dec 2000;20(6):680 -4.  
53. Dev RDO, Mohamed S, Hambali Z, Samah BA. Comparison on cognitive effects of 
Centella asiatica in healthy middle aged female and male volunteers. European Journal of 
Scientific Research . 2009;31(4):553 -565.  
54. Banerjee P, Maity S, Das T, Mazumder S. A double -blind randomized placebo -controlled 
clinical study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a polyherbal formulation in geriatric age 
group: A phase IV clinical report. Article. Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 2011;134(2):429 -433. 
doi:10.1016/j.jep.2010.12.044  
55. Carlson JJ, Farquhar JW, DiNucci E, et al. Safety and Efficacy of a Ginkgo Biloba -
Containing Dietary Supplement on Cognitive Function, Quality of Life, and Platelet Function in 
Healthy, Cognitively Intact Older Adults. Article. Journal of the American Dietetic Association . 
2007;107(3):422 -432. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2006.12.011  
56. Harris E, MacPherson H, Vitetta L, Kirk J, Sali A, Pipingas A. Effects of a multivitamin, 
mineral and herbal supplement on cognition and blood biomarkers in older men: A randomised, 
placebo -controlled trial. Article. Human Psychopharmacology . 2012;27(4):370 -377. 
doi:10.1002/hup.2236  
57. Katz M, Levine AA, Kol -Degani H, Kav -Venaki L. A compound herbal preparation (CHP) 
in the treatment of children with ADHD: A randomized controlled trial. Article. Journal of 
Attention Disorders . 2010;14(3):281 -291. doi:10.1177/1087054709356388  
58. Lewis JE, Melillo AB, Tiozzo E, et al. A double -blind, randomized clinical trial of dietary 
supplementation on cognitive and immune functioning in healthy older adults. BMC 
Complementary and Alternative Medicine . 2014;14doi:10.1186/1472 -6882 -14-43 
59. Sarokte AS, Rao MV. Effects of Medhya Rasayana and Yogic practices in improvement 
of short -term memory among school -going children. Ayu. Oct 2013;34(4):383 -9. 
doi:10.4103/0974 -8520.127720  
60. Udani JK. Effects of superulam on supporting concentration and mood: A randomized, 
double -blind, placebo -controlled crossover study. Article. Evidence -based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine . 2013;2013238454. doi:10.1155/2013/238454  
61. Farhana KM, Malueka RG, Wibowo S, Gofir A. Effectiveness of Gotu Kola Extract 
750 mg and 1000 mg Compared with Folic Acid 3 mg in Improving Vascular Cognitive 
Impairment after Stroke. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med . 2016;2016:2795915. 
doi:10.1155/2016/2795915  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 31 of 33 
 62. Grimaldi R, De Ponti F, D'Angelo L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the total triterpenic 
fraction of Centella asiatica after single and multiple administrations to healthy volunteers. A 
new assay for asiatic acid. Article. Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 1990;28(2):235 -241. 
doi:10.1016/0378 -8741(90)90033 -P 
63. Cesarone MR, Incandela L, De Sanctis MT, et al. Evaluation of treatment of diabetic 
microangiopathy with total triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica: A clinical prospective 
randomized trial with a microcirculatory model. Angiology . 2001;52:S49 -S54.  
64. Incandela L, Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, et al. Treatment of diabetic microangiopathy and 
edema with total triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica: A prospective, placebo -controlled 
randomized study. Angiology . 2001;52:S27 -S31.  
65. Incandela L, Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, et al. Modification of the echogenicity of femoral 
plaques after treatment with total triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica: A prospective, 
randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Angiology . 2001;52:S69 -S73.  
66. Cesarone MR, Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, et al. Increase in echogenicity of echolucent 
carotid plaques after treatment with total triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica: A prospective, 
placebo -controlled, randomized trial. Angiology . 2001;52:S19 -S25.  
67. Brown AC. Liver toxicity related to herbs and dietary supplements: Online table of case 
reports. Part 2 of 5 series. Review. Food and Chemical Toxicology . 2017;107:472 -501. 
doi:10.1016/j.fct.2016.07.001  
68. Jorge OA, Jorge AD. Hepatotoxicity associated with the ingestion of Centella asiatica. 
Revista Espanola de Enfermedades Digestivas . 2005;97(2):115 -124.  
69. Dantuluri S, North -Lewis P, Karthik SV. Gotu Kola induced hepatotoxicity in a child - 
need for caution with alternative remedies. Digestive & Liver Disease . 2011;43(6):500. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dld.2010.12.012  
70. Rakesh R, Sushma T, Sangeeta G, Gambir I. Response of Centella asiatica in the 
management of age related problems among elderly with special reference to cognitive 
problems as per Prakriti. 2013;2:163 -167.  
71. Danese P, Carnevali C, Bertazzoni MG. Allergic Contact -Dermatitis due to Centella -
Asiatica Extract. Contact dermatitis . 1994;31(3):201 -201.  
72. Izu R, Aguirre A, Gil N, Diazperez JL. Allergic Contact -Dermatitis from a Cream 
Containing Centella -Asiatica Extract. Contact dermatitis . 1992;26(3):192 -193.  
73. Eun HC, Lee AY. Contact dermatitis due to madecassol. Contact Dermatitis . Nov 
1985;13(5):310 -3.  
74. Oruganti M, Roy BK, Singh KK, Prasad R, Kumar S. Safety assessment of Centella 
asiatica in albino rats. Pharmacognosy Journal . 2010;2(16):5 -11. doi:10.1016/S0975 -
3575(10)80043 -4 
75. Deshpande P, Mohan V, Thakurdesai P. Preclinical safety assessment of standardized 
extract of Centella asiatica (L.) urban leaves. Toxicology International . 2016/12/14/ 2015;22:10.  
76. Kalshetty P, Aswar U, Bodhankar S, Sinnathambi A, Mohan V, Thakurdesai P. 
Antidepressant effects of standardized extract of  
Centella asiatica L  in olfactory bulbectomy model. Biomedicine & Aging Pathology . April -June 
2012;2(2):48 -53.  
77. Chauhan PK, Singh V. Acute and Subacute Toxicity study of the Acetone Leaf extract of 
Centella asiatica in Experimental Animal Models. Article. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed . 2012;2(2 
SUPPL.):S511 -S513. doi:10.1016/S2221 -1691(12)60263 -9 
78. Yunianto I, Das S, Mat Noor M. Antispermatogenic and antifertility effect of Pegaga 
(Centella asiatica L) on the testis of male Sprague -Dawley rats. Article. Clinica Terapeutica . 
2010;161(3):235 -239.  
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 32 of 33 
 79. Hausen BM. Centella -Asiatica (Indian Pennywort), an Effective Therapeutic but a Weak 
Sensitizer. Contact dermatitis . 1993;29(4):175 -179.  
80. Laerum OD, Iversen OH. Reticuloses and epidermal tumors in hairless mice after topical 
skin applications of cantharidin and asiaticoside. Cancer Res . Jul 1972;32(7):1463 -9.  
81. Ramaswamy AS, Periyasamy, S.M., and Basu, N. Pharmacological studies on Centella 
asiatica Linn (Brahma Manduki) (N.O. Umbelliferae). journal article  
Journal of Research in Indian Medicine . 1970;4(2):160 -173.  
82. Soumyanath A, Zhong YP, Gold SA, et al. Centella asiatica accelerates nerve 
regeneration upon oral administration and contains multiple active fractions increasing neurite 
elongation in -vitro. Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmacology . 2005;57(9):1221 -1229.  
83. Clymer J. Javascript Allometric Scaling calculator.  
84. Nair AB, Jacob S. A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and 
humans.   2016;7:27 -31. J Basic Clin Pharma. Journal of Basic & Clinical Physiology & 
Pharmacology . 2016;7:27 -31.  
85. Kar A, Pandit S, Mukherjee K, Bahadur S, Mukherjee PK. Safety assessment of selected 
medicinal food plants used in Ayurveda through CYP450 enzyme inhibition study. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture . 2017;97(1):333 -340. doi:10.1002/jsfa.7739  
86. Pan Y, Abd -Rashid BA, Ismail Z, et al. In vitro modulatory effects of Andrographis 
paniculata, Centella asiatica and Orthosiphon stamineus on cytochrome P450 2C19 
(CYP2C19). Journal of ethnopharmacology . 2011;133(2):881 -887. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2010.11.026  
87. Pan Y, Abd -Rashid BA, Ismail Z, et al. In vitro modulatory effects on three major human 
cytochrome P450 enzymes by multiple active constituents and extracts of Centella asiatica. 
Journal of ethnopharmacology . 2010;130(2):275 -283. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2010.05.002  
88. Seeka P, Niwattisaiwong N, Warisnoicharoen W, Winitthana T, Tantisira MH, 
Lawanprasert S. Effects of the standardized extract of Centella asiatica ECa233 on human 
cytochrome P450. Article. Thai J Pharm Sci . 2012;36(1):30 -37.  
89. Savai J, Varghese A, Pandita N, Chintamaneni M. In vitro assessment of CYP1A2 and 
2C9 inhibition potential of Withania somnifera and Centella asiatica in human liver microsomes. 
Drug Metabolism and Personalized Therapy . 2015;30(2):137 -141. doi:10.1515/dmdi -2014 -0035  
90. Savai J, Varghese A, Pandita N, Chintamaneni M. Investigation of CYP3A4 and 
CYP2D6 interactions of withania somnifera and centella asiatica in human liver microsomes. 
Article. Phytotherapy Research . 2015;29(5):785 -790. doi:10.1002/ptr.5308  
91. Seeka P, Niwattisaiwong N, Tantisira MH, et al. Effects of the standardized extract of 
Centella asiatica ECa233 on hepatic Phase II drug -metabolizing enzymes in rats. Article. Thai J 
Pharm Sci . 2017;41(2):41 -46.  
92. Hashim P. Centella asiatica in food and beverage applications and its potential 
antioxidant and neuroprotective effect. Short Survey. International Food Research Journal . 
2011;18(4):1215 -1222.  
93. Li DL, Zheng XL, Duan L, et al. Ethnobotanical survey of herbal tea plants from the 
traditional markets in Chaoshan, China. Article. Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 2017;205:195 -
206. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2017.02.040  
94. Naithani V, Nair S, Kakkar P. Decline in antioxidant capacity of Indian herbal teas during 
storage and its relation to phenolic content. Article. Food Research International . 
2006;39(2):176 -181. doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2005.07.004  
95. Cummings J, Aisen PS, DuBois B, et al. Drug development in Alzheimer's disease: the 
path to 2025. Alzheimers Res Ther . Sep 2016;8:39. doi:10.1186/s13195 -016-0207 -9 
Study Title: A pharmacokinetic study of Centella asiatica in the elderly  
Principal Investigator: Amala Soumyanath, PhD  
IRB#:  17697  
Date: Feb 28 2024  
Protocol v4.0  
 Page 33 of 33 
 96. Flaherty JH, Takahashi R. The use of complementary and alternative medical therapies 
among older persons around the world. Clin Geriatr Med . May 2004;20(2):179 -200, v. 
doi:10.1016/j.cger.2004.02.003  
97. Flaherty JH, Takahashi R, Teoh J, et al. Use of alternative therapies in older outpatients 
in the United States and Japan: prevalence, reporting patterns, and perceived effectiveness. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . Oct 2001;56(10):M650 -5.  
98. Astin JA, Pelletier KR, Marie A, Haskell WL. Complementary and alternative medicine 
use among elderly persons: one -year analysis of a Blue Shield Medicare supplement. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . Jan 2000;55(1):M4 -9.  
99. Rush WR, Murray GR, Graham DJ. The comparative steady -state bioavailability of the 
active ingredients of Madecassol. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet . 1993 Oct -Dec 
1993;18(4):323 -6.  
100. BOOTH AN, EMERSON OH, JONES FT, DEEDS F. Urinary metabolites of caffeic and 
chlorogenic acids. J Biol Chem . Nov 1957;229(1):51 -9.  
101. Wittemer SM, Ploch M, Windeck T, et al. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of 
caffeoylquinic acids and flavonoids after oral administration of Artichoke leaf extracts in humans. 
Phytomedicine . Jan 2005;12(1 -2):28 -38. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2003.11.002  
102. Erk T, Williamson G, Renouf M, et al. Dose -dependent absorption of chlorogenic acids in 
the small intestine assessed by coffee consumption in ileostomists. Mol Nutr Food Res . Oct 
2012;56(10):1488 -500. doi:10.1002/mnfr.201200222  
103. Pagano I, Piccinelli AL, Celano R, et al. Chemical profile and cellular antioxidant activity 
of artichoke by -products. Food Funct . Dec 2016;7(12):4841 -4850. doi:10.1039/c6fo01443g  
104. Nair AB, Jacob S. A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and 
human. J Basic Clin Pharm . Mar 2016;7(2):27 -31. doi:10.4103/0976 -0105.177703  
105. Alcazar Magana A, Wright K, Vaswani A, et al. Integration of mass spectral fingerprinting 
analysis with precursor ion (MS1) quantification for the characterisation of botanical extracts: 
application to extracts of Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. Phytochem Anal . Nov 2020;31(6):722 -
738. doi:10.1002/pca.2936  
106. Heisel MJ, Duberstein PR, Lyness JM, Feldman MD. Screening for Suicide Ideation 
among Older Primary Care Patients. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine : 
JABFM . Mar -Apr 2010;23(2):260 -269. doi:10.3122/jabfm.2010.02.080163  
  
 