Therapeutic Plasma Exchange Alone or in Combination With Ruxolitinib in 
COVID-19 Associated CRS
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan
Dated:  June 04, 2020
Page 1 of 14 Study  Title:  PHU COVID -19-002 Interventional Study to Evaluate the Efficacy of  Therapeutic 
Plasma Exchange (TPE) Alone or in Combination with Ruxolitinib in COVID -19 
Positive Patients with PENN Grade 2, 3, 4 Cytokine Released Syndrome  (CRS)  
Principal  Investigator:  W. Larry Gluck,  MD
Medical Director, Cancer Institute
Prisma Health
900 West Faris Rd
Greenville, SC 29605
864-455-5862
Larry.Gluck@prismahealth.org
Co-Investigators:  
Sean  Callahan,  MD Antine Stenbit,  MD 
Pulmonary -Critical  Care  Pulmonary -Critical Care  
Prisma  Health  Prisma  Health  
Sean.Callahan@prismahealth.org  Antine.Stenbit@prismahealth.org  
Rob Brevetta,  MD Julie Martin, DNP, ACON,  NP 
Pulmonary -Critical  Care  Director, Cancer  Research  
Prisma  Health  Prisma Health Cancer Institute  
Rob.Brevetta@prismahealth.org  Julie.Martin@prismahealth.org  
W. Jeffery Edenfield, MD
Medical Director, Institute for Translational Oncology Research
Prisma Health Cancer Institute
Jeffery.Edenfield@prismahealth.org
Study  Location:  Prisma Health, South  Carolina  
Greenville Memorial  Campus
North Greenville  Campus
Version  No. 1 June 4, 2020  
Page 2 of 14  Background and Rationale  
A virally mediated pandemic of 2020 is linked to a novel Beta Coronavirus (COVID -19) sharing 
subgenus classification with the SARS virus. The predominant modes of transmission are 
respiratory aerosolization and contaminated surface contact.1,2 COVID -19 infection is 
characterized by a wide range of severity and diseas e manifestations from asymptomatic to 
respiratory and multi organ failure. Definitive treatment is lacking, but there is an increasing 
awareness of its associated systemic cascade of inflammatory molecules that offers avenues to 
explore therapeutically.  
P. Conti3 and colleagues have recently outlined the binding of COVID -19 to the Toll -like receptor 
(TLR) with subsequent multi step generation of mature IL -1 β to trigger fever and pneumonitis. 
Many investigators draw similarity to the evolving understanding of cytokine storm or the cytokine 
release syndrome. Mehta et al4 note the resemblance of severe COVID -19 expression to secondary 
hemaphagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH) long regarded as a fatal hypercytokinemic state with 
excessive elaboration of IL2, IL -7 TNF and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 -alpha among 
others.  
Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) offers an immediate and scientifically grounded intervention 
for the removal of a host of pathogenic antibodies and toxic molecules by centrifugal separation  of 
plasma or plasma membrane filtration. Xiao5 and colleagues successfully incorporated TPE in the 
management of a patient with severe CRS following CAR -T treatment in conjunction with 
Tocilizumab and steroids with daily documentation of cytokine levels.  
Precedence for consideration of TPE in a variety of inflammatory dominant disease states is well 
known. Interest in adjuvant treatment for management of sepsis and multi organ dysfunction is 
reflected in Busund6 and Rimmer7 manuscripts. Patel et al8 succes sfully used TPE in three pediatric 
patients with pH1N1 influenza A acute respiratory failure and hemodynamic shock despite failure 
of best supportive care. All three survived with “good functional  recovery.”  
Ruxolitinib is a JAK/STAT pathway inhibitor whic h is FDA approved for polycythemia rubra vera, 
myelofibrosis and graft versus host disease. Kenderion et al9 reported a murine model of CRS 
following CAR -T cellular therapy with marked elevation of IL -6, interferon -gamma, TNF alpha 
mimicking human CAR -T therapy induced CRS. Ruxolitinib treated mice demonstrated clinical 
amelioration and decrement in inflammatory cytokines. Incyte Corporation has announced plans to 
launch a Phase III trial of single agent ruxolitinib for COVID -19 associated cytokine storm.  
This protocol will evaluate the efficacy of TPE alone or in combination with ruxolitinib in COVID 
positive patients with PENN grade 2, 3, 4 CRS. It is hypothesized that dual intervention of acute 
aphaeretic depletion of cytokines and concomitant suppression  of production will produce superior 
amelioration of the cytokine load and to help to prevent cytokine load rebound. This protocol is 
envisioned as a pilot study (n=20) for hypothesis generation for future investigation.  
Page 3 of 14  Primary Endpoint s 
1. To document the efficacy of TPE alone or in conjunction with ruxolitinib in decreasing the 
cytokine load over a 14 -day intervention  study  
2. Analysis of all therapy related adverse events (AEs)  
Secondary Endpoints  
1. To correlate the clinical course of participants with the degree of specific cytokine reductions  
3. To calculate time to independence from mechanical  ventilation  
4. To calculate time to independence from supplemental oxygen  therapy  
5. To measure CRP, ferritin and cytokine levels (IL -6, IL -8, IL -10, TNFα, IFNγ, GM -CSF)  to 
map the cytokine landscape over the course of the  study  
6. To explore correlative biomarker  studies  
7. To bank plasma and other blood derivatives in the Prisma Health ITOR Biorepository  for 
future  investigation  
 
Study Design  
Study  type:  Interventional Pilot Clinical  Trial 
Estimated  Enrollment  20 patients  
Allocation  Two sequential cohorts, 10 patients per  cohort  
First 10 patients will receive TPE alone (Cohort 1A)  
Second 10 patients will receive TPE in combination with ruxolitinib  
Masking  None (open  label)  
Primary  purpose  Treatment efficacy  
Official  title: Interventional Study to Evaluate the Efficacy of Therapeutic  Plasma  
Exchange (TPE) Alone or in Combination with Ruxolitinib in 
COVID -19 Positive Patients with PENN Grade 2, 3, 4 Cytokine 
Released Syndrome (CRS)  
 
 
Study Population  
COVID -19 positive patients with PENN grade 2, 3, 4 CRS and respiratory failure.  
Page 4 of 14  Eligibility  
Inclusion:  
1. Patients positive for COVID -19 by PCR or alternative accepted  methodology  
2. PENN class 2,3,4  CRS10 
3. Respiratory insufficiency with supplemental oxygen to maintain O2 sat greater than  89% 
4. Clinically positive imaging by CXR or CT scan with evidence of bilateral pulmonary 
infiltrates, ground glass opacification or other pattern of consolidation felt likely to be 
linked to COVID infection or complication  thereof  
5. Adults 22 years of age or older  
Exclusion:  
1. Pregnancy  
2. Breast  feeding  
3. Class 3 -4 NYHA  heart  failure  
4. Current use of synthetic disease modifying anti -rheumatic drugs (DMARDS), with the 
exception of hydroxychloroquine, or IL -6 inhibitors or other immunosuppressive 
therapies outside of number five  below  
5. Current use of chronic corticosteroids i f in excess of prednisone 10mg per day  or 
equivalent  
6. Suspected or confirmed clinically significant bacterial  infection  
7. History of  TB 
8. History of  HIV 
9. History of  IBD 
10. JAK inhibitor use within last 30  days 
11. Creatinine clearance less than 15 ml /  min 
12. Absolute neutrophil count <  1000  
13. Platelet count <  50,000  
14. AST or ALT > 5 times the upper limit of normal  
15. Clinical assessment that TPE or ruxolitinib  could pose unacceptable risk by study  
participation  or the treatment is deemed inappropriate by a study investigator  
16. Current enrollment on another investigational protocol for COVID -19 induced  CRS  
17. Stage 4 obstructive lung disease with chronic hypoxic respiratory failure requiring 
supplemental O2 at baselin e, or ILD with chronic hypoxic respiratory failure requiring 
supplemental O2 at  baseline  
 
Treatment Plan  
Device:  Spectra Optia Apheresis  System  
Intended Use of Device: Therapeutic Plasma Exchange performed per marketed labeling  
Drug:  Ruxolitinib (generic) marketed as brand name, Jakafi ,manufactured by 
Incyte Corporation, will be used per the marketed package  insert.  
Page 5 of 14  Cohort  1A: TPE, five single plasma volume exchanges over 7 days (every day x 2  then 
every other day x 3) with albumin or FFP rep lacement if underlying 
coagulopathy per institutional protocol (Appendix  A). 
Other – standard medical care  
Cohort  1B: TPE as in cohort 1A combined with ruxolitinib 5mg po BID beginning day 
prior to first TPE and continuing BID for total of 14 days. On days  of TPE, 
ruxolitinib dosing will be immediately post procedure and a second dose 
approximately 8 hours  later.  
Other – standard medical care  
Schedule of Assessments  
 
Pre Treatment   
Standard of Care Assessments   
 Complete Blood Count  (CBC)   PT/INR  
 Comprehensive Metabolic Panel  (CMP)   Partial Thromboplastin 
Time  (PTT)  
 C-Reactive Protein  (CRP)   Fibrinogen  
 Ferritin   type and screen  
 lipid panel   serum pregnancy  test 
 Hepatitis B Surface Antigen, Hepatitis  B 
Surface Antibody, Hepatitis B Core 
Antibody and  Hepatitis C  Antibody   physical  examination  
Study Related Assessments   
 cytokine  panel   
 peripheral blood for  biorepository   
 peripheral blood for  pharmacogenomics   
Page 6 of 14   
 
During Treatment (On Study)  
Standard of Care Assessments   
 daily  CBC   daily Basic Metabolic Panel 
BMP)  
 daily  CRP   physical  examination  
 PaO2/FiO2 ratios days (with 
ABGs) per Appendix  B 
 amount of supplemental O2, SPO2%, respiratory rate, imaging per  MD 
discretion (for non -intubated  patients)  
 measure daily SPO2% , FiO2; PEEP; and lung compliance (inspiratory  pause  
– Vt/Pplat – PEEP) or plateau pressures (mechanically vented patients)  
Study Related Assessments   
 daily collection  of study related adverse events and/or serious adverse events  
 Fibrinogen (on days of TPE  only)  
 daily cytokine panel and  GM-CSF 
 repeat cytokine panel and GM -CSF within 60 minutes post TPE (on days of 
procedure  only)  
 serum ferritin per Appendix B  
 perhipheral blood and plasma waste for biorepository per Appendix  B 
 day 28 office visit or virtual health visit to assess clinical status of the patient  
 
Risk Analysis  
The proposed patient population is not anticipated to be at an increased risk compared to a clinically 
similar population without COVID -19 infection. The device and drug will be used as marketed.  
Standard risks for the device and drug are outlined in the patient informed consent document. Risks 
will be minimized by conducting the trial in the inpatient setting of an acute care hospital with 
dedicated and trained therapeutic aphere sis staff, licensed medical personnel and experienced 
research team members under the direction and oversight of the principal investigator. In the event 
of patient status improvement, discharge will be acceptable after completion of therapeutic plasma 
exchange.  Daily outpatient follow -up through patient completion of study required assessments 
will occur in a dedicated phase I research  unit. 
 
Removal of medications with TPE is a risk.  However, consultation with a hospital pharmacist will 
occur as needed to determine if a change in timing of medication administration is needed or if 
medication reloading should occur post TPE.  
  
Page 7 of 14  Dose Modificati ons 
The starting dose of ruxolitinib is 5mg po bid.   The need for dose adjustments will be assessed on a 
daily basis by the research team and pharmacist.  
 AST/ALT > 5x ULN, reduce dose of ruxolitinib to 5mg po once  daily11 
 Platelet count between 25,000 and 35,000, reduce dose of ruxolitinib to 5mg po once  daily .  
Platelet count < 25,000, hold ruxolitinib.  May resume once platelet count >25,000 with 
dosing based on actual platelet count.  
 Absolute neutrophil count < 500, hold ruxolitinib until > 500 then resume at full  dose 
 Creatinine Clearance <15ml/min, discontinue  ruxolitinib  
 
Duration of Investigations  
A six month patient recruitment period is anticipated. Patient participation is 15 days in duration. 
An additional six mo nth period of data analysis is anticipated for an overall period of investigation 
equaling 12 months  
 
Treatment Discontinuation  
Treatment d iscontinuation will occur under the following conditions:  
 The patient  withdraw s consent either from treatment or from the study  
 The patient is  lost to follow -up 
 The patient experience s a side effect that per the protocol requires treatment to end  
 The physician deems treatment discontinuation is in the  best interest of the patient  
 The patient is found to be  eligible to participate in the study  after being enrolled  and 
continued treatment in this study is not in the best interest  of the patient  
 The patient is  found to be pregnant or intend s to become pregnant  
 The patient is noncompliant  with the study requirements your disease worsens  
 
Data Handling and Recordkeeping  
The principal investigator will carefully monitor study procedures to protect the safety of 
research subjects, the quality of data, and the integrity of the study. All study  subject 
material will be assigned a unique identifying code or number. The key to the code will be 
kept in a locked file in the Research Division of the Prisma Health Cancer Institute.  
 
Data Collection, Analysis and Outcomes  
REDCap EDC software will be us ed for data management and future statistical analysis. 
Designated Cancer Institute research staff will perform extraction of patient records.  
Overall Response Rate (ORR) will be defined as > 33% decrease in the cytokine load from 
peak value through study day 14 in one -third or more participants.  
 
Ethical Considerations  
This study will be conducted in accordance will all applicable government regulations and 
Prisma Health research policies and procedures. This protocol and any amendments will be 
Page 8 of 14  submitted a nd approved by the Prisma Health Institutional Review Board (IRB) prior to any 
study activity.  
All study participants will provide informed consent allowing for their tissue and de - 
identified clinical information to be used for research purposes.  
 
Safety Monitoring and Reporting  
A Drug Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be established consisting of a hematologist, 
pulmonologist and infectious disease specialist not associated with the research team for this 
investigation.   The committee will review all se rious adverse events within 48 hours and 
will review all patient outcomes for cohort 1a before proceeding to enrollment of cohort 1b.  
 
Adverse Events  
Adverse events (AEs) are defined as an unexpected medical problem that happens during 
treatment with a dru g or other therapy.  The NCI Common terminology criteria for adverse 
events (CTCAE Version 5.0) will be used as the standardized severity grading system.  AEs 
will also b e reported by degree of relatedness as not related, possibly related, likely related o r 
related to the study drug or st udy therapy.  
 
SAE Reporting to Incyte  
The Principal Investigator (PI) must report all Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) to Incyte 
within 24 hours of learning of an event, regardless of the PI’s causality assessment. This 
notifi cation will be provided on a completed Serious Adverse Event (SAE) form. SAE 
reporting for each subject begins the day the informed consent is signed by the patient and 
within 30 days after subject has completed or discontinued from the study or has taken last 
dose of the study drug, or as described in the protocol.  
SAEs, occurring using Incyte study drug, are reported in accordance with the effective 
protocol. SAEs occurring with any other commercial drug are reported to the manufacturer 
of that drug in accordance with regulations and protocol.  
Initial SAEs and/or subsequent follow -up reports will be reported via email to 
SafetyReporting@Incyte.com  or fax (+) 1 -866-981-2057.  SAE reports sh ould be for a 
single subject. SAE forms should be sent with a cover sheet and any additional  attachments.  
All adverse event information is reported to Incyte on MedWatch Form FDA 3500A. The 
Principal Investigator does not provide medical records (e.g., dis charge summary) to Incyte, 
unless specifically requested.  
In addition, all SAEs will be reported to the Prisma Health IRB per the institutional policy for 
reporting.  
Reporting of Pregnancy to Incyte  
An “Initial Pregnancy Report” or equivalent must be compl eted in full and emailed to 
SafetyReporting@Incyte.com  or faxed to (+) 1 -866-981-2057 within 24 hours of discovery 
of a pregnancy of a subject who has taken the Incyte product or the pregnancy of a partn er 
Page 9 of 14  for a subject who has taken the Incyte product. The “Follow -up Pregnancy Report Form” or 
equivalent must be completed and emailed to SafetyReporting@Incyte.com  or faxed to (+) 
1-866-981-2057 within 30  days after delivery, so that Incyte is provided with information 
regarding the outcome of the pregnancy. If the pregnancy results in any events which meet 
the serious criteria (i.e., miscarriage or termination), the SAE reporting process needs to be 
follo wed and the timelines associated with a SAE should be followed.  
 
Statistical Analyses  
 
General Statistical Considerations  
Standard statistical methods will be employed to analyze all data.  It is anticipated that the 
following techniques may be used: descriptive statistics, t -test, Chi -square, Fisher’s exact test, 
Kaplan -Meier analysis, and graphical displays.  This protocol may not reflect all analyses 
planned for the study; additional analyses may be conducted for observational purposes only.   
 
Summary statistics will consist of numbers and percents of responses in each category for 
discrete measures, and of mean, n, standard deviation, median, minimum, maximum and 95% 
confidence intervals for continuous measures.  
 
Sample Size Determination  
The initial sample size is 20.  Each cohort will enroll 10 patients.  This number is considered 
sufficient for an exploratory  pilot study to provide information for planning further 
investigations.  
 
Analysis of Safety  
The safety evaluation will compare the proportion of Subjects in each treatment group who 
exhibit treatment -related adverse effects.  These adverse events will be prese nted for individual 
patients as a listing of events.  
 
Dissemination of Results  
Results of this study may be used for presentations, posters, publications, or extramural 
grant applications. The publication will not contain any identifiable information that could 
be linked to a study patient.  
Page 10 of 14  References  
1. Zhou, P., Yang, X., Wang, X. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a  new 
coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270 –273 (2020).  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -020-2012 -7 
2. World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus situation report -2. January 22, 2020.  
https://www.who.int/docs/default -source/coronavirus/situation -reports/20200122 -sitrep -2- 
2019 -ncov.pdf  (Accessed on April 7, 2020).  
3. P. Conti, G. Ronconi, A. Caraffa, C. Gallenga, R. Ross, I. Frydas, S. Kritas. Induction of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL -1 and IL -6) and lung inflammation by COVID -19: anti - 
inflammatory strategies . J Biol Regul Homeost Agents . 2020 Mar 14;  34(2).  
4. Puja Mehta,Daniel F McAuley, Michael Brown, Emilie Sanchez, Rachel S Tattersall, 
Jessica J Manson. COVID -19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. 
The Lancet . 28 March –3 April 2020.  
5. Xia Xiao, Xia oyuan He, Qing Li, Huan Zhang, Juanxia Meng, Yanyu Jiang, Qi Deng and  M 
ingfeng Zhao. Plasma Exchange Can Be an Alternative Therapeutic Modality for Severe 
Cytokine Release Syndrome after Chimeric Antigen Receptor -T Cell Infusion: A Case 
Report. Clin Cance r Res. January 1 2019 (25) (1) 29 -34; doi: 10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -18- 
1379  
6. Busund R, Koukline V, Utrobin U, et al. Plasmapheresis in severe sepsis and septic shock: a 
prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Intensive Care Med. 2002;  28:1434 -9 
7. Rimmer E, H ouston BL, Kumar A, et al. The efficacy and safety of plasma exchange in 
patients with sepsis and septic shock; a systematic review and meta -analysis. Crit Care. 
2014:  18(6):699  
8. Patel P, Nandwani V, Vanchiere J, Conrad S, Scott K. Use of therapeutic plasma  exchange 
as a rescue therapy in 2009 pH1N1 influenza A -An associated respiratory failure and 
hemodynamic shock. Pediatr Crit Care Med . 2011 March; 12(2):e87 -e89. 
doi:10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181e2a569  
9. Kenderian S, Ruella M, Shestova O. et al. Ruxolitinib prevents cytokine release syndrome 
after Car T -Cell therapy without impairing the anti -tumor effect in a xenograft model. Biol 
Blood Marrow Transplant . 23(2017)  S19-S20 
10. Porter D, Frey N, Wood P, Weng Y, Grupp S. Grading of cytokine release synd rome 
associated with the CAR T cell therapy tisagenlecleucel. J Hematol Oncol . 2018; 11: 35. 
doi:10.1186/s13045 -018-0571 -y 
11. Package Insert JAKAFI (ruxolitinib). Revised 05/2019.  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2019/202192s017lbl.pdf  
Page 11 of 14  APPENDIX A:  
 
TPE -Plasma Therapy Plan  
 
Apheresis Orders  Frequency  
 Therapeutic Plasma Apheresis with Plasma  Replacement  As Ordered  
IV Access   
 Initiate peripheral IV  Protocol  Daily  
 Access Central Venous  Catheter  Daily  
 Access A/V Fistula for  Procedure  Daily  
Pre-Procedure Labs (Baseline)   
 CBC with  Differential  Once  
 CMP  Once  
 LDH  Once  
 Haptoglobin  Once  
 PT/INR  Once  
 PTT Once  
 Reticulocyte  Count  Once  
 ADAM TS 13  Activity  Once  
 Type and Screen  Once  
 Bilirubin Total and  Direct  Once  
 Prepare  Plasma  Once  
Labs   
 CBC with  Differential  Daily  
 CMP  Daily  
 LDH  Daily  
 Haptoglobin  Daily  
Anticoagulant Prime   
 Anticoagulant citrate dextrose injection 500  ml PRN  
Medications   
 diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 25 mg  IV Once  
 calcium gluconate 3g in NS 250ml  IV Once  
 calcium gluconate 3g in NS 250ml  IV PRN  
 calcium carbonate tablet 1500 mg  PO PRN  
 alteplase 2mg in 10ml  syringe  PRN clot clearance  
Hypersensitivity Regimen   
 at any sign of anaphylaxis, stop infusion, notify MD  and 
administered prescribed  medications  PRN  
 diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 50 mg  IV PRN  
 methyleprednisolone (Solu -Medrol) 40 mg  IV PRN  
 famotidine (Pepcid) 20 mg  IV PRN  
Nursing Orders   
 Transfuse  Plasma  Once  
Page 12 of 14  TPE -Albumin Therapy Plan  
 
Apheresis Orders  Frequency  
 Therapeutic Plasma Apheresis with Albumin  Replacement  As Ordered  
IV Access   
 Initiate peripheral IV  Protocol  Daily  
 Access Central Venous  Catheter  Daily  
 Access A/V  Fistula for  Procedure  Daily  
Pre-Procedure Labs (Baseline)   
 CBC with  Differential  Once  
 CMP  Once  
 Fibrinogen  Once  
Anticoagulant Prime   
 Anticoagulant citrate dextrose injection 500  ml PRN  
Medications   
 calcium carbonate tablet 1000 mg  PO PRN  
 calcium gluconate 2.5g in NS 250ml  IV PRN  
 alteplase 2mg in 10ml  syringe  PRN clot clearance  
Hypersensitivity Regimen   
 at any sign of anaphylaxis, stop infusion, notify MD  and 
administered prescribed  medications  PRN  
 diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 50 mg  IV PRN  
 methyleprednisolone (Solu -Medrol) 40 mg  IV PRN  
 famotidine (Pepcid) 20 mg  IV PRN  
Nursing Orders   
 Infuse  Albumin  Once  
Page 13 of 14 
 Appendix  B: COHORT 1A Schedule of Assessments: Therapeutic Plasma Exchange  alone  
Assessment  Screening  
(24 hours)  Study Day 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 28 
Inform ed Consent and Medical History  X                 
Physical Examinationa X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  X 
Complete Blood Count (CBC)  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)  X                 
Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
C-Reactive Protein (CRP)  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Ferritin  X   X   X   X     X   
Hepatitis Serologyb X                 
Lipid Panelb X                 
PT/INR  X                 
PTT X                 
Fibrinogen  X X X  X  X  X         
Type and Screenb X                 
Serum Pregnancy Testb X                 
Cytokine Panel (IL -6, IL -8, IL -10, TNFα, IFNγ)c X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
GM-CSFc X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Peripheral Blood for biorepository  X     X   X       X  
Peripheral Blood for pharmacogenomics  X                 
PaO2/FiO2 ratios (with ABGs) - (mechanically vented patients only)   X  X  X            
Supplemental O2, SPO2%, Respiratory Rate, Imaging at MD  
discretion (for NON -intubated patients)   
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
SPO2%, FiO2, PEEP, Lung compliance (inspiratory pause - Vt/Pplat - 
PEEP) or plateua pressures (mechanically vented patients only)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Therapeutic Plasma Exchange (TPE) (plus waste for biorepository)   X X  X  X  X         
a If patient is discharged from the hospital, daily physical examination will not be required. Perform one physical exam prior to the pat ient’s last study visit.  Day 28 may be  a virtual 
visit if needed.  
b Hepatitis serology, Lipid panel, Type and Screen, Serum Pregnancy Test acceptable within 7 days prior to enrollment.  
c Cytokine Panel and GM -CSF are to be repeated within 60 minutes post TPE on days of plasma exchange procedure only.  
Page 14 of 14  Appendix  B: COHORT 1B Schedule of Assessments: Therapeutic Plasma Exchange Plus  Ruxolitinib  
Assessment  Screening  
(24 hours)  Study Day  
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 28 
Informed Consent and Medical History  X                 
Physical Examinationa X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  X 
Complete Blood Count (CBC)  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)  X                 
Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
C-Reactive Protein (CRP)  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Ferritin  X   X   X   X     X   
Hepatitis Serologyb X                 
Lipid Panelb X                 
PT/INR  X                 
PTT X                 
Fibrinogen  X  X X  X  X  X        
Type and Screenb X                 
Serum Pregnancy Testb X                 
Cytokine Panel (IL -6, IL -8, IL -10, TNFα, IFNγ)c X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
GM-CSFc X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Peripheral Blood for biorepository  X     X   X       X  
Peripheral Blood for pharmacogenomics  X                 
PaO2/FiO2 ratios (with ABGs) - (mechanically vented patients only)   X  X  X            
Supplemental O2, SPO2%, Respiratory Rate, Imaging at MD  
discretion (for NON -intubated patients)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
SPO2%, FiO2, PEEP, Lung compliance (inspiratory pause - Vt/Pplat - 
PEEP) or plateua pressures (mechanically vented patients only)   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Therapeutic Plasma Exchange (TPE) (plus waste for biorepository)    X X  X  X  X        
Ruxolitinib Dosing   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
a If patient is discharged from the hospital, daily physical examination will not be required. Perform one physical exam prior to the patient’s last study visit.   Day 28 may be a virtual 
visit if needed.  
b Hepatitis serology, Lipid panel, Type and Screen, Serum Pregnancy Test acceptable within 7 days prior to enrollment.  
c Cytokine Panel and GM -CSF are to be repeated within 60 minutes po st TPE on days of plasma exchange procedure only.  