v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 1 of 9 
  
Intermittent pneumatic compression to improve 
the outcome of revascularization for severe 
peripheral artery disease: a pilot study 
 
Identifiers: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Unique Protocol ID: 1907961196  
  
   
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 2 of 9 
 Table of Contents: 
 
Study Schema 
1.0 Background 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
5.0 Study Procedures 
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
8.0 Statistical Considerations 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues 
10.0  Follow-up and Record Retention 
  
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 3 of 9 
 1.0 Background 
 
Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is character ized by atherosclerotic obstruction of the 
arteries in the lower extremities and affects approximately  10% of individuals older than 65 years. 
Patients with symptomatic PAD experience wa lking impairment and d eclines in physical 
performance and quality of life. At the extreme end of  the clinical spectrum, patients with critical 
limb ischemia (CLI) have ischemic pain at rest  and develop nonhealing or gangrenous wounds that 
might necessitate limb amputation. These patients with severe PAD require comprehensive 
medical management and effec tive limb revascularization to augment tissue oxygenation, promote 
wound healing and reduce pain. Endovascular and surg ical interventions are considered in patients 
with PAD who have developed li festyle-limiting claudi cation no longer respons ive to conservative 
therapy and CLI. Patients with symptomatic P AD receiving intensive evidence-based therapies 
undergo peripheral revascularization frequently, with approximately 1 in 5 (19.3%) undergoing 
procedures at 3 years. Despite major technological advances in surgical and endovascular care, a 
significant number of patients with severe PAD that undergo revasculari zation procedures are 
readmitted because of persistent symptoms an d loss of patency. Restenosis occurs frequently, 
within the first year af ter an intervention. There remains an ur gent need for adjunctive therapies 
that aid in the improvement of  tissue blood flow and consequent ly relieve pain  and improve 
functional capacity in these patients. 
  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims 
 
One emerging adjunctive therapy that has th e potential to enhance the benefits of 
revascularization procedures fo r severe PAD is the application of intermittent pneumatic leg 
compressions (IPC). This is a non-invasive interven tion, consisting of an air pump inside inflatable 
cuffs that are wrapped around th e feet, ankles, and calves and 
worn for two hours daily. Every 20 second, the cuffs rapidly 
inflate, followed by rapid de flation. We and others have 
previously shown that exposur e to IPC markedly enhances 
leg blood flow and vascular shear-s tress in the arteries of the 
leg (2, 6, 7). Our preliminary work shows that 2 weeks of daily application of IPC enhances exercise tolerance in a model of PAD, in part by enhancing blood flow to collateral-dependent tissues (4). IPC has also been shown to reduce amputation rates in patients with CLI without a revascularization option. The objective of this pilot study is 
to establish evidence to support the validity of IPC in 
improving the outcome of lower-extremity revascularization 
for severe PAD. Our central hypothesis is that  the treatment with IPC will lead to greater 
improvements in leg hemodynamics as  compared to a sham device. As  a result, we anticipate that 
patients treated with IPC will repor t less rest pain, have enhanced  walking endurance and improved 
calf muscle oxygenation resulting in  a subsequent improvement in quality of life. To test this 
hypothesis, we propose the following specific aim: 
 
SPECIFIC AIM : Determine the effects of IPC following re vascularization in patients diagnosed 
with severe PAD.  Figure 1: Intermittent pneumatic 
compression device  

v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 4 of 9 
  
Patients will be enrolled in the study approxi mately 3 months after the revascularization 
procedure and will be randomly assigned to one of two groups: IPC or placebo pump. Patients will 
receive a commercially available IPC device (ArtAssist, ACI Medica l, San Marcos, CA) and will 
be asked to apply the treatment to  both legs at home for 2 hours daily during 3 consecutive months.  
Prior to the onset of the treatment and 1 and 3 m onths after daily home-based IPC , we will assess 
patient’s leg hemodynamics, re st pain, calf muscle oxygena tion during exercise, walking 
endurance and quality of life. We expect benefici al changes in leg hemodynamics, reduced rest 
pain, increased levels of exer cise tolerance, impr oved calf muscle oxygenation during exercise, 
and improved quality of life, (QOL) as as sessed by responses to VascuQol and SF36 
questionnaires. The ankle-brachial index (ABI), the toe-brachial index (TBI), and rest pain will be 
assessed on the leg undergoing the revascul arization procedure and the opposite leg. 
Transcutaneous PO2 (TcPO2) a nd calf muscle oxygenation will only  be assessed in the leg 
undergoing revascularization.  
 
 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
Inclusion criteria 
 
1) At least 18 years of age 
2) Evidence of significant obstructive disease for on e or multiple lower extremity arteries, as 
identified by prior ABI, TBI, CT  angiography, ultrasound, or MR imaging 
3) Completed endovascular or surgical revascul arization of one or both lower extremities 
within the past 3 months (± 14 days) 
 Exclusion criteria 
 
1) Chronic kidney disease (eGFR <30 by MDRD  or Mayo or Cockcroft-Gault formula) 
2) Open and/or non-healing wounds in the areas covered by the IPC cuff 
3) Inability to walk  on the treadmill 
4) Abnormal baseline tr eadmill stre ss test 
5) Walking limited by a symp tom other than PAD 
6) Inability to independently and correctly  position the IPC cuff on legs and feet 
7) Presence of any clinical conditi on that makes the patient unsu itable to participate in the 
trial 
8) Concern for inability of the patient to comp ly with study procedures and/or follow up 
(e.g., alcohol or drug abuse) 
9) Acute deep vein thrombosis (DVT ) either suspected or diagnosed 
10) Uncontrolled infection 
11) Increased pain with ArtAssist device operating or with wors ening skin tissue condition 
12) During episodes of inflammatory phlebitis or pulmonary embolism 
13) When increased venous or lymphatic retu rn is undesirable including presumptive 
evidence of congestive heart failure 
 
 
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 5 of 9 
 4.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
 
Patients will be recruited by Dr. Raghu Motagana halli and his associat es at the Indiana 
University Health Methodist Ho spital, Indiana University Hea lth West Hospital and Indiana 
University Health Arnett. Patients that fulfill the inclusion criteria and are interested in 
participating in the protocol w ill receive detailed inst ructions about the experimental set-up and 
measurements and will be given a consent form. After pr oviding consent, patients will be asked to 
complete the baseline assessmen t, including the assessment of le g hemodynamics, rest pain, calf 
muscle oxygenation during exercise, walking endur ance and quality of life . Patients will be 
randomized into one of two groups: IPC (n=4) or  placebo pump (n=4). Patients will receive an 
IPC device and will be asked to a pply the treatment at home for 2 hours daily during 3 consecutive 
months. Outcomes will be reasse ssed 1 and 3 months after the ons et of home-based treatment.  
 
5.0 Study Procedures 
 
After enrollment, subjects will be asked to comp lete two experimental sessions for baseline 
testing. The procedures involved in each visit are listed on Table 1. S ubjects will be asked to fast 
overnight and refrain from smoking or using alcohol for 4 hours prio r to attending all experimental 
sessions. Subjects will be permitted to take th eir usual morning medication. Although fasting and 
refraining from tobacco, alcohol and exercise are desired for testing consistency, it will not be 
considered a protocol deviation if the subject does not follow these instructions prio r to one of the 
study visits. On visit 1 , demographic and anthropometric characteristics from participants will be 
initially recorded. Patients will be asked to report  the pain in their legs using visual analog scale 
(VAS). The study coordinator will demonstrate ho w to operate the IPC pump on how to wear the 
legs cuffs. Participants will be given the opport unity to independently place the cuffs around their 
legs. Individuals that are unable to  successfully complete this task  without help will be excluded 
from the study. Participants will then perform  a standard symptom- limited cardiopulmonary 
exercise test on a treadmill. A ne ar-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) sy stem, which measures skeletal 
muscle oxygenation, will be placed on the calf of th e most symptomatic leg. Participants with an 
abnormal baseline tread mill stress test, including signs of co ronary ischemia a nd an exaggerated 
pressor response, will be excluded from the study. This session (Visit 1) will be performed at 
Methodist Hospital and is expected to last approximately 3 hours. 
At least 72 hrs after visit 1, subjects will be asked to return for visit 2 . Participants will be 
asked to lay supine and a member  of the Vascular Access Team (VAT) will draw a blood sample 
(20 mL) from one antecubital vein in the arm.  Next, participants will undergo the bilateral 
assessment of the ankle-brachial index (ABI), the toe-brachial index (TBI) and transcutaneous 
PO2 (TcPO2) following standard of care practices. Pati ents will be asked to re port the pain in their 
legs using visual analog scale (VAS). Patients will then be escorted to the exercise testing lab to 
undergo a graded, symptom-limited cardiopulmonary exercise test on a treadmill as described for 
visit 1. At the end of the session, subjects will be asked to fill out two questionnaires to assess 
generic (36-item Short-Form Health Survey ) and disease-specific  (Walking Impairment 
Questionnaire) quality of life. Ne xt, patients will be trained on how to operate the IPC pump on 
how to wear the cuffs and will undergo a 15-min practice treatment sessi on. At the end of the 
practice session, participants will be trained on: 1) how to wash and care for the inflatable cuffs, 
2) how to turn the pump on and off, 3) how to record usage t ime on a logbook. Participants will 
receive the ArtAssist device (ACI  Medical Inc, San Marcos, CA, USA) for IPC application. This 
device applies compressions to both the calf an d foot, at a pressure of 120 mmHg for 3 seconds 
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 6 of 9 
 per cycle, and this continues for three cycles per minute with a 1-second delay between different 
segment inflation. Patients alloca ted to the control group will recei ve a sham device, that applies 
a pressure of 30 mmHg at the frequency specified above. Participants on both groups will be asked 
to apply the cuffs to both  legs and use the device while seated  for 2 hours daily for 3 months. This 
session (Visit 2) will be performed at IU’s Me thodist Hospital and is expected to last 
approximately 4 hours. 
Patients in both groups will receive weekly telephone calls from the study coordinator to 
verify compliance and w ill receive a logbook to record their se ssions. A timer built into the IPC 
unit, and inaccessible to patients, will also provide an estimate of the patients’ compliance with 
the treatment regimen. The logbook is  intended to assist the partic ipant keep track of the daily 
treatments; it will not be a prot ocol deviation if the logbook is not returned at the end of the 
treatments.  Compliance with daily treatment will  be formally assessed and documented with the 
weekly phone call from the study team.  A protocol deviation will occur when  either 3 consecutive 
home treatments are not performed or when 8 or  more home treatments are not performed during 
the 3-month treatment period. 
 Outcomes will be reassessed after 1 m onth of treatment (end of week 4 ±  7 days) and at 
the completion of the inte rvention (end of week 12 ±  7 days). The protocol for these outcome 
visits will be similar to visit 2 as detailed in the table below. To ensure that the chronic rather than 
the acute effects of IPC are investigated, participan ts will be asked to interrupt the treatment 48 
hrs prior to the outcome sess ions. Although interrupting the tr eatment 48 hours prior to the 
outcomes sessions is desired for testing consistency it will not be a protocol deviation if a subject does not interrupt the tr eatment as instructed. 
  
Visit 
# Time point  Procedures 
1 Baseline  Consenting  
Rest pain measurement  Demonstration of device operation and proper cuff placement Familiarization with Cardiopulmonar
y Treadmill test   
2 Baseline Blood draw 
ABI, TBI and TCPO 2 
Rest pain measurement  Cardiopulmonary Treadmill test Quality of life questionnaires Familiarization with treatment 
3 1 month Blood draw 
ABI, TBI and TCPO 2 
Rest pain measurement  Cardiopulmonary Treadmill test Qualit
y of life questionnaires 
4 3 months Blood draw 
ABI, TBI and TCPO 2 
Rest pain measurement  Cardiopulmonary Treadmill test Qualit
y of life questionnaires 
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 7 of 9 
  
Table 1:  Study timeline and experimental procedures  that will be performed on each session 
 
Outcome Measures: 
 
Rest pain: Rest pain will be measured bilaterally wi th a 10-cm visual analog scale (VAS) at 
baseline and each follow-up visit. Patients will be instructed to place a mark on a line from 0 cm 
(no pain) to 10 cm (worst pain previously experien ced) that would best desc ribe the level of pain 
in the index limb during the previous 24 hours prio r to examination. The distance from the 0-cm 
mark will then be measured and recorded.  Cardiopulmonary Treadmill Exercise Test : Participants will perform a graded, symptom-limited 
exercise test on a treadmill following the Gardne r protocol (treadmill sp eed of 2 mph, 0% grade 
with increments of 2% every 2 min), as describe d previously by our group (5). During the test, the 
microvascular oxygenation status of the gast rocnemius muscle of the leg undergoing 
revascularization will be continuously monitored using a near-infrared sp ectrometer (NIRS) (5). 
Gas exchange and ventilatory va riables will be measured breat h-by-breath during exercise and 
recovery using a comput er-based system (5). 
 Leg hemodynamics : The ankle-brachial index (ABI) and th e toe-brachial index (TBI) will be 
measure bilaterally following standard of care practices. Transcutaneous PO2 (TcPO2) will be 
measured only in the leg undergoing revascularization.  
 Quality of life assessment : Participants will be asked to fill out the the 36-item Short-Form Health 
Survey and the Vascular quality of life questionnaire (VascuQoL-6)  health-related quality of life 
questionnaires.  Biomarkers of coagulation and fibrinolysis : Blood levels of markers of coagulation and 
fibrinolysis will be measured in the Pa thology laboratory using standard methods. 
  Potential risks to subjects: 
 Treadmill Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test:  Intervention trials in PAD have demonstrated the 
ability of the graded treadmill exer cise test to safely and robustly  quantify changes associated with 
efficacious interventions (3). This  test has been shown to be very  safe, even in populations with 
underlying high-risk cardiova scular diagnosis (8), including pa tients with PAD (1). However, 
there is a chance that patients may experience  chest pain, intolerable dyspnea, leg cramps, 
staggering, diaphoresis, and dizzine ss. The Treadmill Test will be conducted in the Heart Station 
where a Cardiologist is presen t 8AM to 5PM daily. Participan ts with an abnormal baseline 
treadmill stress test, including signs  of coronary ische mia and an exaggerate d pressor response, 
will be excluded from the study.  IPC: There are no known side effects to IPC. It has been reported that patients with severe PAD 
may experience pain during initial exposure to the treatment.   
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 8 of 9 
 Venous blood sampling : During blood sampling there is a risk  of pain from the needle. Bleeding, 
local swelling, bruising and fo rmation of a hematoma might also occur around puncture site.  
 Measurement of calf muscle oxygenation : There are no risks associated with calf muscle 
oxygenation measurements.  Rest pain measurement:  There are no risks associated w ith rest pain measurements.  
  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others 
 
If the patient is injured due to pa rticipation in this study, he/she w ill be instructed to contact the 
study investigators. Patients will al so be advised to contact the Hu man Subject Office at Indiana 
University if they have questions about th eir rights while taking  part in the study. 
 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
 
Participation in this study is voluntary. Participants may choose not  to participate or, if they agree to 
participate, they can withdraw thei r participation at any time without penalty or  loss of benefits to 
which they are otherwise entitled.      
 
8.0 Statistical Considerations 
 
The results obtained in this pilot experiment w ill allow us to demonstrate the feasibility of 
recruitment, randomization and in tervention implementation and will  provide the necessary data 
to support pursuit of a larger ra ndomized clinical trial. Walki ng tolerance, limb hemodynamics 
and muscle oxygenation parameters will be comp ared between groups with two-way repeated-
measures ANOVA, followed by Tukey's post hoc te st when appropriate. We estimate that 4 
subjects per group are needed to show feasibility and to provide support to our hypothesis that 
repeated exposure to IPC improves leg hemodynamics and reduces leg pain in patients with severe 
PAD recovering from periphe ral revascularization. 
 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues 
 
Information produced by this study w ill be stored in the investigator ’s file and identified by a code 
number only. The code key connecting the patient’s name to specific information about the patient 
will be kept in a separa te, secure location. Information contai ned in the patient’s records may not 
be given to anyone unaffi liated with the study in a form that could identify the patient without their 
written consent, except as required by law.   The results of this study may be published in a medical book or journal or used for teaching 
purposes. However, the patients’ name or other id entifying information will not be used in any 
publication or teaching materials wi thout their specific permission.   
 
The patient’s name and social security number w ill be given to the business office for facilitating 
payment, but will not be used for any other purposes.  
 
v. 09/APR/2021 (IRB Approval Date: 29/APR/2021)  Page 9 of 9 
 10.0  Follow-up and Record Retention 
 
Records relating to this study will be  retained for at least 7 years after completion of the research. 
Paper records will be shredded an d recycled.  Records stored on a computer hard drive will be 
erased using commercial software applications designed to remove all data from the storage 
device.  
 
 
References: 
 1. Brass EP, Cooper LT, Morgan RE, and Hiatt WR . A phase II dose-ranging study of the 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor K-134 in patients with  peripheral artery disease and claudication. J 
Vasc Surg 55: 381-389 e381, 2012. 
2. Delis KT, Nicolaides AN, Labropoulos N, and Stansby G . The acute effects of 
intermittent pneumatic foot vers us calf versus simultaneous f oot and calf compression on popliteal 
artery hemodynamics: a comparative study. J Vasc Surg 32: 284-292, 2000. 
3. Hiatt WR, Rogers RK, and Brass EP . The treadmill is a better functional test than the 6-
minute walk test in therapeutic trials of patients with peripheral artery disease. Circulation 130: 
69-78, 2014. 4. Roseguini BT, Arce-Esquivel AA, Newcomer SC, Yang HT, Terjung R, and Laughlin 
MH. Intermittent pneumatic leg compressions enha nce muscle performance and blood flow in a 
model of peripheral ar terial insufficiency. J Appl Physiol (1985) 112: 1556-1563, 2012. 
5. Roseguini BT, Hirai DM, Alencar MC, Ramo s RP, Silva BM, Wolosker N, Neder JA, 
and Nery LE . Sildenafil improves skeletal muscle oxyge nation during exercise in men with 
intermittent claudication. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 307: R396-404, 2014. 
6. Roseguini BT, Sheldon R, Stroup A, Bell JW, Maurer D, Crist BD, Laughlin MH, and 
Newcomer SC . Impact of chronic interm ittent external compress ions on forearm blood flow 
capacity in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol 111: 509-519, 2011. 
7. Sheldon RD, Roseguini BT, Thyfault JP, Crist BD, Laughlin MH, and Newcomer SC . 
Acute impact of intermittent pneumatic le g compression frequency on limb hemodynamics, 
vascular function, and skeletal mu scle gene expression in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) 112: 
2099-2109, 2012. 8. Skalski J, Allison TG, and Miller TD . The safety of cardiopulm onary exercise testing in 
a population with high-risk cardiovascular diseases. Circulation 126: 2465-2472, 2012. 
 