1 
 Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Study Title: Mental Imagery Therapy for Autism (MITA) - an Early 
Intervention Computerized Brain Training Program for Children With ASD  
 
Clinical Trial ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Andrey Vyshedskiy, Boston University,  
Founder and CEO, ImagiRation LLC 
Document Date: 09/30/2019 
 
Abstract  
Imagination  exercises administered by caregivers were investigated in a three -year-long 
observational trial of 3,540  children with autism  ages 2 -12 years . Tablet -based verbal and 
nonverbal tasks modeled on language therapy and emphas izing mental juxtaposition of objects 
were organized into an app called Mental Imagery Therapy for Autism  (MITA). MITA children 
were matched to the ‘treatment -as-usual’ participants (TaU, N= 5,226 ) using propensity -score 
analysis. Both younger (2 -5 years of  age) and older children (5 -12 YOA) in MITA and TaU 
groups improved their symptoms over time, but on an annualized basis, younger MITA children 
improved their language and communication skills 3 -fold faster than TaU group. We conclude 
that imagination exer cises delivered by caregivers may be an effective supplement to language 
therapy administered by  specialists.  
 
2 
 Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
MITA group  
The MITA app was made available gratis at all major app stores in February 2016. Once the app 
was downloaded, the caregiver  was asked to register and to provide demographic details, 
including  the child’s diagnosis and age. Caregivers consente d to anonymized data analysis and 
completed Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC ) (Rimland & Edelson, 1999) . The 
first evaluation was administered approximately one month after the first use of MITA and once 
100 puzzles had been completed. The  subsequent evaluations were administered at three -month 
intervals . Parents were asked to complete evaluations independently of a child’s actual use of 
MITA.  
From this pool of potential study participants, we selected participants based on the following 
criteria:  
1) Consistency:  Participants must have filled out at least three ATEC evaluations  and the 
interval between the first and the last evaluation was six months  or longer.  
2) Diagnosis:  The subject must have self -reported their diagnosis as ASD.  
3) Maximum age:  Participant s older than twelve years of age were excluded from this study.  
4) Minimum age:  Participants who completed their first evaluation before the age of two years 
were excluded from this study . 
5) Minimal ATEC severity:  Participant s with initial  ATEC scores of less than 20 were 
excluded . 
3 
 6) Language : Participants who indicated their primary language was not English were excluded 
from the study.  
After excluding participant s that did not meet the se criteria, there were  3,540  total participants .  
Control group  
Independently from MITA, ATEC responses were collected  by the Autism Institute from 
participant s voluntarily completing online ATEC evaluations  from 2013 to 201 9. Little is known 
about their treatment, but it is unlikely that many  of them used MITA. Accordingly, these 
participants served as a ‘treatment as usual’ control. Participant selection was described in detail 
in Ref. (Mahapatra et al., 2018) . In short, participants  were selected based on the following 
criteria:  
1) Completeness:  Participant s who did not provide a date of birth ( DOB ) were excluded. As 
participant s’ DOB  were utilized to determine age, the  availability of DOB  was necessary .  
2) Consistency:  Participant s had to have completed  at least three questionnaires and the interval 
between the first and the last evaluation was one year or longer.  
3) Maximum age:  Participant s older than twelve years of age were excluded from this study.  
As diagnosis was not part of the ATEC questionnair e, some neurotypical participants could be 
present in the database. To limit the contribution from neurotypical children, we excluded 
participants that may have represented the neurotypical population by using the Minimum age  
and the Minimal ATEC severity  criteria.  
4) Minimum age:  Participants who completed their first evaluation before the age of 2  were 
4 
 excluded from this study , as the diagnosing of ASD in this age group is uncertain and the parents 
of some of these young cases may have completed the ATEC  because they wanted to check 
whether their normal child had signs of autism.  
5) Minimal ATEC severity:  Participant s with initial  ATEC scores of less than 20 were 
excluded . 
6) Language : Participants who indicated their primary language was not English were  excluded 
from the study.  
After excluding participant s that did not meet the se criteria, there were  5,226  total participants .  
Outcome measures  
A caregiver -completed  Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC ) (Rimland & Edelson, 
1999)  was used to track  the efficacy of a treatment. ATEC is comprised of four subscales: 1) 
Speech/Language/Communication, 2) Sociability, 3) Sensory/Cog nitive Awareness, and 4) 
Physical /Health/ Behavior. The first sub scale, Speech/Lang uage/ Communication, contains 14 
items  and its  score ranges from 0  to 28 points. The Sociability sub scale  contains 20 items within 
a score range from 0 to 40 points . The third sub scale , Sensory/Cognitive awareness, has 18 items 
and scores range from 0  to 36 points . Finally, the Health/Physical/Behavior sub scale  contains 25 
items  and scores range from 0  to 75 points . The scores from each sub scale  are combined in order 
to calculate a Total Score, which ranges from 0 to 179 p oints. A lower score indicates  lower  
severity of ASD symptoms  and a higher score correlates with more severe symptoms of ASD.   
 
5 
 Statistical  analysis  
The framework for evaluation  of ATEC score change s over time was explained in detail in Ref. 
(Mahapatra et al., 2018) . In short, the concept of a “Visit” was developed by dividing the three -
year-long observation interval into 3 -month periods. A ll evaluations were mapped into 3 -month -
long bins with the first evaluation placed in the first bi n. When more th an one evaluation was 
completed within a bin, the ir results  were averaged to calculate a single number representing this 
3-month interval. It was then hypothesized that there was a three -way interaction between an age 
group, Visit, and treatment. Statistic ally, this hypothesis was modeled by applying the Linear 
Model with repeated measures, where a three -way interaction term was introduced to test the 
hypothesis. Least squares means (LS Means) and LS Means differences were calculated for all 
ATEC subscales (Language, Sociability, Cognitive awareness, and Health) at all visits. 
Participants in the MITA group were matched to those in TaU group using propensity score 
analysis (Schneider, Carnoy, Kilpatrick, Schmidt, & Shavelson, 2007)  based on age and all four 
ATEC subscales at baseline.  
 
References  
Mahapatra, S., Khokhlovich, E., Martinez, S., Kannel, B., Edelson, S. M., & Vyshedskiy, A. 
(2018). Longitudinal Epidemiological Study of Autism Subgroups Using Autism 
Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) Score. Autism and Developmental Disorders , 
1(12). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803 -018-3699 -2 
Rimland, B., & Edelson, S. (1999). Autism Research Institute. Autism Treatment Evaluation 
6 
 Checklist (ATEC) . 
Schneider, B., Carnoy, M., Kilpatrick, J., Schmidt, W. H., & Shavelson, R. J. (2007). Estimating 
causal effects using experimental and observational design . American Educational & 
Reseach Association.  
 
 