Study Protocol and  
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)  
 
 
 
Official Title:    Noninvasive Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) for Neuromotor Adaptations  
 
Principal Investigator:  Minoru Shinohara, PhD  
Associate Professor  
School of Biological Sciences  
Georgia Institute of Technology  
 
Author :   Minoru Shinohara, PhD  
 Study ID: [REMOVED] 
 
Document date:   04/16/2021 
 
IRB approval date:   04/16/2021 
 
 
   
Study Protocol 
 
Noninvasive Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) for Neuromotor Adaptations 
 
Aims  
Motor function is compromised with advanced age, and motor impairment is involved in various neuromotor 
injuries and disorders including stroke, spinal cord injury, and amputation. Development of effective 
interventions for facilitating neuromotor adaptati on for motor skills and strength is essential for accelerating or 
augmenting rehabilitation outcomes in the voluntary control of impaired limbs or attached assistive devices. 
Our ultimate goal is to find non-pharmacological, noninvasive, and affordable neuromodulating interventions 
for enhancing the rehabilitation outcome. Our idea stems from animal studies in which invasive (implanted) 
afferent vagus nerve stimulation (VNS, i.e. stimulation of cranial nerve X) paired with motor training enhanced neuromotor  plasticity and motor recovery, most likely through increased releases of central neuromodulators 
from the brainstem (e.g. norepinephrine). In a rat model of stroke, implanted VNS paired with rehabilitative 
training facilitated and enhanced motor recovery and retention in motor function substantially (full recovery 
with implanted VNS vs. half recovery without implanted VNS). Not only in the injured model, but also in non-
injured rats, implanted VNS paired with motor training facilitated neural plasticity in the motor cortex. 
Applicability of these facilitating effects of VNS in injured/non-injured rats to human neuromotor adaptation is unknown. Additionally, implanted VNS in humans would involve potential risks, higher costs, and 
inconvenience for rehabilitation. Hence, it is important to investigate the efficacy of adding noninvasive VNS to 
motor training for neuromotor adaptation in motor skills and strength in humans. As a noninvasive form of VNS 
for humans, transcutaneous VNS (tVNS) at the outer ear has been developed for studying its potential effect 
on several neurological conditions including epilepsy, depression, tinnitus, and pain, but not on motor impairment. tVNS can be applied by electrically stimulating the afferent auricular branch of the vagus nerve 
located medial of the tragus at the entry of the ear canal. In healthy humans, tVNS activates the brainstem 
including locus coeruleus, where norepinephrine (i.e. neuromodulator) is synthesized. It is unknown whether 
the noninvasive VNS (i.e. tVNS) actually leads to the facilitation of neuromotor adaptation in humans when 
combined with motor training in healthy or clinical populations. With potential applicability of this novel 
intervention to various clinical populations (e.g. stroke survivors, spinal cord injury, amputees, and older 
adults) in future vision, it is essential to start with the basic understanding about the effect of paired tVNS on 
the training-induced neuromotor adaptations in non-disabled humans. We have preliminary observations that 
would suggest the facilitating effect of tVNS on neuromotor adaptations in non-disabled humans. The 
overarching hypothesis is that an addition of paired tVNS to motor training increases central noradrenaline and 
facilitates training-induced neuromotor adaptations in human adults. In line with the concept of an R03 
mechanism, the scope of this proposal is to produce pilot data demonstrating the proof of concept that would 
allow us to further investigate this promising approach in humans. To demonstrate the proof of concept of the 
overarching hypothesis, the specific aim of the study is to examine the effects of paired tVNS during motor 
training on central norepinephrine and neuromotor adaptations in humans. 
 
Project design 
 Population.  Non-disabled young adults (18 -39 years old, men and women)  
 Intervention.  Subjects  will be  randomly assigned to the tVNS or Sham group.   There will be  5 experimental 
days, and the tasks  on each  day are summarized as below. 
 
Day 1 (Baseline) : Visuomotor Test  TMS (preparation &  Test)   Visuomotor  Training  TMS (Test)  
Day 2: Visuomotor  Test  Visuomotor Training 
Day 3: Visuomotor  Test  Visuomotor  Training  and Alpha- Amylase  Activity Measurement  
Day 4: Visuomotor  Test  Visuomotor Training 
Day 5 (Post):  Visuomotor  Test  TMS  (preparation & Test)   Visuomotor  Training  TMS  (Test)  
 Visuomotor  tasks with  the index finger will  be performed for the test and training.  The first day is primarily  the 
test day for assessing the baseline skill  and neural excitability  before training.  Subjects  will perform training 
after the initial  tests  on the first day and subsequent days.  The last day  is the final test day to assess  the 
effects of training with tVNS  or Sham  on neuromotor adaptations.  On the first and last days, the TMS test will  
be performed at the beginning and after the visuomotor  tasks in  both groups.  In between these days,  paired 
tVNS  and Sham will  be applied during training execution in the tVNS and Sham  groups, respectively.  The 
changes in visuomotor skill and corticospinal excitability  will be  compared between tVNS  and Sham  groups.  
On Day 3, salivary  alpha-amylase activity will be determined as a biomarker of central norepinephrine. 
 
Protocol. All subjects performed visuomotor task as training and test.  TMS test and central noradrenaline test 
were also performed.  
 
Visuomotor  tasks.  Visuomotor tasks  will be performed to induce and examine the adaptations in the 
visuomotor skill  and neural excitability  due to training.  Visuomotor tasks  include 1) visuomotor test on the first 
and last days and 2) visuomotor training on all days.  The setup is the same across  tasks.   Subjects  will 
receive tVNS or Sham during the training but not during the tests.  A sensitive force transducer  will be 
attached to the lateral aspect of the index finger and the little finger .  The metacarpophalangeal joint will be  in 
the neutral  position.  Subjects  will adjust the abduction force of the index finger  and the little finger  to track  
the corresponding target force trajectory  as accurately  as possible with visual feedback.  The target force 
trajectory  for the test and training will be the same complex  trajectory  composed of multiple sinusoidal waves 
of various frequencies (<5 Hz).  Every trial  will use  the same  waves.  The target force level will range from 0-
10% of their maximal  voluntary  contraction force.   All subjects  will perform 50 trials  (10 trials × 5 sets)  with the 
same  target trajectory across days.  During training, subjects  in the tVNS and Sham  groups will receive paired 
tVNS and Sham  during the execution phase of these training trials, respectively.  All subjects  will perform  the 
visuomotor test without tVNS  or Sham . 
 
Paired tVNS and  Sham  during training.  In the tVNS group, tVNS will be applied electrically to the afferent 
auricular branch of the vagus nerve located medial of the tragus  at the entry of the left ear canal.  One small 
surface electrode will be attached to the inner surface and another  to the outer surface of the tragus .  In the 
Sham  group , the same  stimulation will  be applied  to the ear  lobe, where the vagus nerve is absent.  The 
electrodes will be connected to an isolated electrical stimulator.  In both groups, electrodes will  be attached to 
the tragus and the earlobe.  Subjects  will receive  stimulation in one of the electrode locations.  Stimulation will  
be delivered only during the execution of the motor  task.  
 
TMS  test.  TMS test will be performed immediately  before and after the visuomotor training on the first and last 
days to examine corticospinal  excitability.   Subjects will  not receive tVNS or  Sham during the TMS test.  Basic  
procedures  with TMS will  follow those in our previous studies.   The head of the subjects  will be secured with a 
vacuum  cushion molded  for their neck  and head.  Surface EMG electrodes  will be  attached over the first 
dorsal  interosseous muscle in the hand in a belly-tendon configuration.  Baseline EMG  and motor  evoked 
potential (MEP) will  be obtained from surface EMG using a high-gain EMG preamplifier.  A figure- of-eight TMS 
coil will be placed over the primary  motor  cortex.  A TMS coil navigation system and a coil  holder will  be used 
to maintain the coil position in 3-dimensional space relative to the head.  After identifying the hot spot for 
evoking MEP in  the first dorsal  interosseous  muscle, the resting motor threshold will be  determined.   To 
examine corticospinal  excitability  in the resting muscle, TMS will be  applied at 8 TMS intensities ranging from  
90%-160% of the resting motor threshold in random order.  At each TMS intensity,13 TMS will be  applied with 
5-7 s randomized intervals, and the first response in each intensity will be discarded.   Subjects  will maintain  
relaxed muscles  during the TMS test, and the relaxation will be ensured by monitoring and quantifying their 
background EMG.  To obtain the reference value for normalizing MEP amplitude across days, compound 
muscle  action potentials  (M-waves)  of the first dorsal  interosseous muscle will be obtained just before the 
TMS test.  Stimulation electrodes  will be attached to the skin  overlying the ulnar nerve of the forearm  just 
proximal to the wrist.   Using  a constant-current isolated electrical stimulator, single supramaximal electrical 
stimuli  will be applied to the nerve to obtain the maximal  peak -to-peak  amplitude of the M -wave (M max). 
 
Central noradrenaline. Central noradrenaline will be assessed indirectly with the salivary measure of alpha-
amylase activity  as a biomarker .  Saliva  will be sampled via salivette strips  before and after the training on 
Day 3. Three saliva samples  will be analyzed for  each set and averaged.   
Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Noninvasive Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) for Neuromotor Adaptations 
 
Aim 
The aim of the study is to examine the effects of paired tVNS during motor training on central norepinephrine 
and neuromotor adaptations in humans.  
Sample size 
24 participants  
 
Outcomes and analyses (all primary outcomes)  
For assessing the visuomotor skill, the mean squared error of the produced force trajectory  in reference to the 
target will be determined.  For assessing  corticospinal  excitability,  peak -to-peak amplitude of MEP will be 
averaged across  responses.  MEP amplitude will  be normalized to the corresponding M
max. As the dependent 
variable for  visuomotor  skill, mean squared error, normalized to the baseline value, will be compared for group 
and day using a two-way  ANOVA with repeated measures.  As the dependent variable for corticospinal 
excitability, MEP amplitude will  be compared for group, time, and day  using a three-way ANOVA with repeated 
measures.  As the dependent variable for central norepinephrine activity, alpha-amylase activity will be compared for group and time using a two-way  ANOVA  with repeated measures.  An alpha value of 0.05 w ill 
be used for statistical  significance.  Post-hoc comparison will be performed when appropriate.  
 