Assessment of and Treatment Applied to Food Addiction to Encourage Self -Management of Obesity in a 
Rural Healthy Behaviors Clinic   
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
31 Mar  2017   
Study Protocol and Statistic al Analysis Plan  
 
Summary  
The purpose of th is pilot study is to assess obese clients for two  phenotypes, those testing positive and 
those testing negative for Food Addiction (FA) (Yale  Food Addiction Scale, YFAS) and determining the 
efficacy of four treatments: usual care  (IC, dietary and physical activity instruction), individual 
motivational interviewing alone (MI),  individual MI with pharmacotherapy (MI+P) for improving outcome 
measures within each  phenotype, and pharmacological therapy (P).  
 
Background/significance   
The ongoing epidemic of obesity is of great con cern, especially among rural Americans,  where the rate 
of obesity is greater than that of Americans living in urban areas . The costs related to obesity and its 
comorbidities continues to rise and includes the  psychological implications of obe sity. Scotts Bluff has an 
overweight/obesity rate of 71%  according to the 2014 Scotts Bluff County Health Dept Community 
Health Assessment . Recently it has been sug gested that addiction -like tendencies toward foods,  
(especially highly processed foods that are high in fat and sugars) (HPFS) is contributing to  the epidemic 
(Schulte 2015, Flint 2014, Iozzo, 2012; Pursey, 2014). In order to assess  addictive -like eating b ehavior, the 
Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS) has been developed in  relation to DSM V Substance -Related and 
Addictive Disorders (SRAD) symptom criterion or  clinical impairment/distress. The YFAS has been tested 
to be psychometrically sound . One study using the YFAS found that nearly 20% of obese  persons tested 
positive for food addiction (FA) , yet few if any  inter ventions to address obesity have specifically targeted 
individuals who test positive for  FA. 
Empirical evidence is growing for the idea that food addiction may be a contributor to  obesity and 
eating -related problems (Gearhardt, Corbin, & Brownell, 2009a,b) . This  hypothesis proposes that highly 
processed foods, high in fat and sugar (HPFS) (e.g., pizza,  chocolate, chips), may be capable of triggering 
an addictive response in individuals with  vulnerable characteristics (e.g., impulsivity) . Early evidence in 
animal and human studies suggests that HPFS foods may activate reward  related  neural circuitry in a 
similar manner as drugs of abuse . Additionally, behavioral in dicators of substance -use disorders,  such as 
loss of control and use despite negative consequences, have been observed in  response to HPFS foods . 
Shared mechanisms  (e.g., reward dysfunction, emotion regulation difficulties) and genetic profiles also 
appear  to contribute to both food addiction and substance -use disorders . Thus, existing evidence 
demonstrates biological and behavioral  parallels between individuals with food addiction and substance -
use disorders and suggests  that HPFS foods may be most likely to have an addictive potential for some 
individuals.  
The Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS) is currently the only validated measure to assess  symptoms of food 
addiction . The current  version is the YFAS 2.0 is a 35 -item self -report questionnaire that applies the 
DSM -5 diagnostic criteria for substance -use disorders to consumption of HPFS  foods. The YFAS  2.0 
provides two scoring options: a symptom count (a sum of the eleven diagnostic criteria)  and a diagnostic 
threshold that reflects the criteria for a substance dependence diagnosis  (the presence of two or more 
symptoms plus clinically si gnificant impairment or distress).  
The YFAS has good internal consistency ranging from á = .76.92 and demonstrates convergent validity 
with measures of eating  pathology (e.g., emotional eating, food craving ) and incremental validity in 
predicting binge  eating frequency above and beyond existing measures . The YFAS has been used to 
assess food addiction in both  community and treatment -seeking samples . Reducing highly processed 
foods, especially those high in fat and sugar  Highly processed foods that are high in fat and sugar (HPFS) 
are typically low -nutrient  simple carbohydrates (LNSC). There is growing recognition that the nature of 
carbohydrates  consumed is an important dietary consideration. A key to healthy eating is reducing  
consumption of LNSC(e.g., sugars and starches) in favor of complex carbohydrates [e. g., fruits, vegetables 
(except potatoes), legumes, and whole grains] and minimally processed  proteins (nuts, fresh lean 
meats).   
Low-nutrient simple carbohydrates: LNSC are composed of single chain carbon atoms and  are rapidly  
digested and absorbed, resulting in rapid peaks in blood glucose and insulin,  followed by a drop in blood 
glucose and increased perceptions of hunger. Commonly, these  foods have little nutritional value and 
tend to be high in calories . They  include processed and homemade foods made with white flour, sugar, 
and corn syrup such  as white breads, tortillas, cold cereals, pastas, candies, pastries, and sugar -
sweetened  beverages (e.g. fruit drinks, soda, and sports/energy drinks), many of which are commonly  
consumed in American households. Particularly concerning is that these foods may have  addictive 
properties, affecting dopamine levels . LNSC contr ibute to  many chronic diseases, including type 2 
diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease,  obesity, inflammation, and metabolic syndrome, and 
acute conditions such as hunger,  satiety, mood, and glycemic load.  
High die tary intake of LNSC is  associated with lower HDL cholesterol concentrations, an important 
coronary risk factor . Obesity itself is also associated with low HDL  cholesterol levels, as well as increased 
triglyceride level s, in both children and adults . Results from interventions limiting LNSC intake show 
promise, with  individual studies showing decreases in one or more variables of energy intake, blood  
pressure, lipid levels, and weight and improved glucose  tolerance and hyperinsulinemia in  adults age 18 
and older . 
Complex carbohydrates and natural fats: There is growing evidence that deriving dietary  carbohydrates 
primarily from  complex (e.g., whole fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains) rather than simple  
carbohydrate sources may help reduce the risk of developing or aid in the treatment of  cardiovascular 
disease, type II diabetes, and metaboli c syndrome and may aid in weight  loss.  These benefits are thought 
to derive from the non -starch  polysaccharide, dietary fiber, and possibly other components of these 
foods . Therefore, limiting HPFS foods and increasing CC and natural fat intake is an  integral component 
of our intervention and is consistent with recommendations advocating  intake of slowly absorbed 
complex carbohydrates rather than rapidly absorbed simple  carbohydrates. Healthy fats such as nuts,  
fresh lean meats, avocados, olive oil are also absorbed slowly and have nutrients important  in reducing 
risk of developing cardiovascular disease, type II diabetes and metabolic  syndrome . 
Motivational Interviewing to limit HPFS intake and increase CC and natural fat intake  The framework for 
the proposed study was adapted from the Predicting and Changing  Behavior Theory (PCBT), which 
proposes that an individuals ’ attitudes/beliefs (perception s toward a behavior), perceived norms 
(including social pressures within a culture or family),  and perceived behavioral control (self -efficacy or 
belief about the ease or difficulty of  performing a behavior) are the primary determinants influencing 
intenti on to engage in a  particular behavior . The PCBT has been used to predict behaviors  such as weight 
loss, physical activity, and self -efficacy for healthy eating in American  populations . However, few, if any, 
studies have focused on using this approach to encourage  obese Americans to reduce their HPFS intake 
and increase their CC and natural fat intake  in an effort to move them toward self -management of 
obesity, nor have they assessed the  impact of such interventions on their diet and/or biometrics. Our MI 
intervention with and  without pharmacotherapy is designed to effect behavior change by sharing 
information on  the benefits of limiting HPFS intake and i ncreasing CC and natural fat intake (addressing  
attitudes/beliefs), and providing support to increase perceived behavioral control by  decreasing 
participants ambivalence and barriers (addressing self -efficacy), which will  support participants in 
limiting their HPFS intake and increasing their CC intake. MI is  evidence -based, client -centered, and 
individualized, empowering individuals to establish  their own realistic goals for behavior change by 
emphasizing personal choice and affirming  client decisions . 
 
Pharmacotherapy for Obesity/Addiction (naltrexone -bupropion)  
Recent studies have assessed the efficacy of combination treatments of long -acting acting  opioid 
antagonists (naltrexone) and antidepressant drugs (bu proprion) in lowering the body  weight of obese 
patients. Buproprion seems to have a complementary effect of decreasing  hunger in combination with 
naltrexone, producing significant long -term decreases in weight.  A multicenter phase III trial was 
conducted that randomly assign ed 1,742 overweight individuals to receive an oral preparation of a 
sustained release  pharmaceutical. The intervention continued for 56 weeks after which mean reduction 
in body weight was significantly higher in the pharmaceutical groups than placebo groups.  
Pharmaceutical groups were treated with naltrexone 16 mg plus buproprion and 32 mg  naltrexone plus 
buproprion. In the proposed study, dosing protocols will be followed for  treatment of obesity: 1 tablet 
(90mg/8mg)  initially week 1; increase by 1 tablet/day each  subsequent week until daily maintenance 
dose of 2 tablets twice daily (360 mg bupropion/32  mg naltrexone) is achieved at the start of week 4. 
Use will be discontinue used at month 4 if  no clinical response i s observed.  
Contribution to Science  
This study addresses a critical topic and will contribute to the science of treating obese  patients, 
particularly those with FA as diagnosed by the YFAS. We hypothesize that using a  team of 
interventionists delivering an  addiction -adapted MI intervention to support obese  patients in reducing 
their HPFS intake and increasing their CC and natural fat intake will  enhance the success of our 
interventions, thereby helping reduce the incidence of  addiction/overweight/obesity, i mproving 
biometric measures, and reducing the risk for comorbidities  associated with obesity. Use of the YFAS and 
evaluating the interventions in  both obesity phenotypes, is expected to help identify better targeted 
approaches for  addressing self -management of obesity by clients in each phenotype. Though this study  
focuses on a rural population, inves tigators  anticipate that this approach can be adapted to broa der 
populations, including those in urban settings.  
 
  
Statistical justification for the total number of subjects needed  to complet e the research to achieve the 
scientific objectives . 
The prevalence of FA is estimated to be 25% in the population of urban adult women who  have a BMI 
classification of overweight or obese . Using this prevalen ce along with a medium effect size, a statistical 
power analysis was performed for sample size  estimation with G*Power 3.1 . The design is a  stratified 
four-group design with a pre and post measurement. Stratificatio n by obesity  phenotype (positive or 
negative for FA) will occur first, followed by random assignment to  one of four treatment groups 
[Information Control (dietary and physical activity instruction),  MI alone(diet and physical activity 
instruction supported  by MI), MI((diet and physical activity  instruction supported by MI+P(Contrave). 
Using an f = 0.25, an alpha = .05 and power =  0.95, the a priori F test, analysis of variance, omnibus, one -
way model gives a projected  sample size of 252. As a pilot study, this study is underpowered for 
statistical hypothesis  testing, and analyses will focus on descriptive statistics, estimation of effect sizes, 
and hypothesis generation and a sample of 40 eligible patients will be enrol led (10 in each  group). This 
meets the pilot study guideline of at least 10% of a fully powered trial and  remains realistic in terms of 
time and cost (Hertzog, 2008) while allowing for 50% attrition. It  is expected that 25% of the population 
will meet the criteria of FA and therefore will need to  screen and consent a total of 160 participants to 
reach the 40 people positive for FA. No  more than 160 subjects will be consented for the entire pilot 
study.  
 
Proposed methods/approach  
Investigators propose assessing obese clients with the YFAS as part of their intake once they are referred 
to the Healthy Behaviors Clinic by Regional West physicians/practitioners. A nurse researcher with 
expertise in MI and a nurse practitioner will perf orm intake assessments, obtain consent and randomly 
assign participants in each phenotype (positive or negative for FA) to one of three treatment groups 
(usual care, individual MI alone, and individual MI with pharmacotherapy). Interventions will occur ove r 
6 months. A clinical psychologist with expertise in the YFAS (University of Michigan) will serve as a 
consultant on this project and a registered dietitian (University of Nebraska Lincoln) will serve as a co -
investigator.  
 Investigators expect that MI an d MI+P and P will be more effective in improving outcome measures than 
IC. We also expect that response to the treatments will differ between the two obesity phenotypes 
(those testing positive and those testing negative for FA).  
To determine if MI alone or  MI+P or P is effective in treating obese patients with and without FA (based 
on the YFAS) as determined by :  
 -Higher MI confidence, importance and readiness to change scores  
-Reduced intake of foods that are highly processed and high in fat and sugar (HP FS) and 
increased intake of complex carbohydrate foods(fresh fruits, vegetables, whole grains) and 
minimally processed proteins (nuts, fresh meats) (ASA24 -2016® dietary recall)  
-Improved biometric measures (BMI, body composition, waist circumference, and b lood 
pressure)  
-To determine whether the two obesity phenotypes (with and without FA) differ in their 
response to the four treatments.  
 
Initial Screening for Eligibility  (Suicidal Ideation, Pregnancy test (urine test), Lactation,  Recruitment ): 
Participants will be recruited from obese patients referred to the Healthy  Behaviors Clinic by Regional 
West Physicians. Nurse research ers who work at the Healthy  Behaviors Clinic will inform potential 
participants about the study and, if they agree to  participate, will consent them.  
Both treatment groups,Those who test positive for and those who test negative for FA (food  addiction) 
will be assigned to one of four treatment arms, IC, MI, MI/P and P . All will receive  dietary and exercise 
information.  After consenting, each participant be administered the YFAS to determine their obesity  
phenotype (positive or negative for FA). Participants within each phenotype will be randomly  assigned to 
one of the intervention (MI or MI+P , or P) or the IC information control (diet and  physical activit y 
instruction, which will be no less than current standard of care) treatment  groups using a randomization 
schedule (assignments in numbered, sealed, opaque  envelopes; one set for each phenotype) 1:1:1:1 
ratio, provided by our statistician, Dr.  Struwe. Phe notype assessment and treatment assignment will 
continue until the sample  size (n=10) is met for each phenotype -treatment group category. Those in the 
control group  will be seen at the same time periods as each treatment group to maintain their 
interaction  time with the clinic. They will receive diet and exercise instruction at each time point.   
 
Intervention Conditions (MI, MI+P):  MI is theorized to decrease a patients ambivalence and increase 
his/her perceived  behavioral control (self -efficacy) for limiting  HPFS and increasing CC intake by 
emphasizing  personal choice and control in decision -making and by affirming the patients self  -
management  ability. Interventionist nurses will deliver MI sessions following data collection  at baseline, 
1, 2,3, and 4 weeks and 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 months to promote sustained  behavioral change.50 A written MI 
algorithm will be used to ensure uniform implementation  of the intervention.  
MI will be operationalized by the nurse asking the patient about his/her knowledge , limiting  
HPFS/increasing CC and natural fat intake, defining FA, and explaining why it is important  to limit their 
HPFS/increase their CC and natural fat intake. The nurse will ask the patient to  rate the importance of 
limiting HPFS/increasing CC and natural fat intake (scale of 1 -10) and their confidence in their ability to 
do so (scale of 1 -10). The nurse will focus on the lower  score and ask the pati ent why they chose that 
score and what they thought it would take to  increase the number. If the patient rates the importance of 
understanding of limiting  HPFS/increasing CC and natural fat intake low, the nurse will provide 
information on the  benefits of limiting HPFS/increasing CC and natural fat intake to reduce the their risk 
of obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and numerous other co -morbidities associated with  overweight. If 
the patient rates their confidence in their ability to limit HPFS/increase CC and  natural fat intake as low, 
the nurse will provide the patient with strategies to decrease  barriers and increase confidence, such as a 
list of healthy snack food choices, stepped  changes (3 sodas per day to 2 sodas and 1 water per day, 
etc.), and having the  patient  choose healthy foods at the store. The same questions will be asked at each 
time point.  
Nurse responses will be tailored to the specific motivational issues of each individual patient  at each 
time point. During each session, the nurse will documen t the patients responses to  the MI algorithm 
(levels of confidence, importance, and readiness to change), their  perceived barriers and concerns, and 
suggestions to address them/setting achievable goals.  The MI documentation form will ensure that all 
nurses  collect the same data and provides a  record that the nurses can reference during their sessions to 
help them adjust each MI  session to the patients ’ individual needs. If a patient reveals a new barrier that 
is not   included in the training materials, the nu rses will meet with team members to discuss the  new 
barrier and strategies to address it will be shared with all interventionists.  
In the group with pharmacotherapy added to the MI, the naltrexone -buproprion (Contrave)  protocol will 
be added to the patient s intervention. Dosing protocols will be followed for   treatment of obesity: Orally, 
1 tablet (90mg/8mg) initially week 1; increase by 1 tablet/day each subsequent week until daily 
maintenance dose of 2 tablets twice daily (360 mg  bupropion/32 mg naltrexone ) is achieved at the start 
of week 4. Use will be discontinued at  month 4 if no clinical response is observed. This drug (Contrave) is 
to be taken with a high  fat meal.  
In the pharmacotherapy group alone, dosing protocols will be followed for treatment of  obesity: Orally, 1 
tablet (90mg/8mg) initially week 1; increase by 1 tablet/day each  subsequent week until daily 
maintenance dose of 2 tablets twice daily (360 mg bupropion/32  mg naltrexone) is achieved at the start 
of week 4. Use will be discontinued at m onth 4 if no  clinical response is observed. This drug (Contrave) is 
to be taken with a high fat meal.  
The IC control group will receive diet and physical activity information to encourage them to  adopt 
healthier eating (limit HPFS/increase CC intake) and p hysical activity behaviors. IC  information sessions 
will occur at the same time points as the intervention sessions  (baseline, 1, 2,3, and 4 weeks and 2, 3, 4, 
5, and 6 months) and will be similar in length.  The PI and co -PIs will develop information packets for each 
session, (self -management,  avoiding highly processed LNSC foods, low intensity physical activity, 
avoiding highly  processed fatty foods, medium intensity physical activity, avoiding LNSC beverages , 
importance of water as a beverage to hydrate and reduce cravings, avoiding high fat  beverages, high 
intensity physical activity, importance of CC intake).  
 
Data Collection  
All research personnel will be CITI -trained. A nursing student will assist the nurse  researchers with data 
collection. Each data collector will undergo fidelity checks (performed  by the PI) for each measurement 
procedur e before they will be allowed to collect data. They  will also be trained in using the ASA24 -2016® 
dietary recall, so they can assist the patients  as needed.  
The current version of the YFAS, the YFAS 2.0, will be  used to assess participants obesity phenotyp e 
(positive or negative for FA). This measure  adapts the eleven DSM -5 diagnostic criteria for substance -
related and addictive disorders  when the substance is HPFS foods. In order to meet the diagnostic 
threshold on the YFAS,  individuals must report at lea st two of the eleven diagnostic indicators of FA plus 
clinically  significant impairment or distress.   
 
The Automated Self -Administered 24 -hour Recall, version ASA24 -2016®  will be completed at ea ch time 
point to assess  changes in patients dietary intake. This web -based 24 -hour dietary recall instrument has  
been used effectively by hundreds of researchers and has face validity and similar intake  results to the 
AMP .10 A strength of the ASA24 -2016® i s that it includes most traditional  American foods/ingredients .  
Height: The patients height will be used in determining BMI and BIA measures. We will use  the average 
of 2 heights (cm) measured with the Seca EC0123 stadiometer. During  measurement, patients will be in 
socked feet with heels placed against the back of the  platform and facing straight forward.  
Body Composition: Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) will be used to determine body  composition. 
Estimated standard error for BIA is ± 3.5 -5%.  We will use a Tanita  SC-250 body composition analyzer and 
follow a  standardized protocol to measure percent body fa t, body fat mass, fat free mass, percent  body 
water, muscle mass, bone mass, BMI, and visceral fat. The software also classifies  patients as underfat, 
healthy, overfat, or obese based on percent body fat, age and gender.  
Waist circumference: We will use th e average of 2 measurements (cm) performed with the  patient 
standing erect with their arms at their sides. Waist circumference will be measured at  the uppermost 
lateral border of the right ilium at the end of normal expiration using an  inelastic tape measu re 
positioned around the trunk parallel to the floor. This measure is  included because it is a better indicator 
of body fat and, therefore, health risk than  
BMI:  In addition, results of a recent study in this population demonstrated  that w aist circumference has 
potential as a means of identifying patients with or at risk for  obesity and hypertension . 
Blood Pressure: We will use the average of 2 blood pressure measurements performed  using an Omron 
HEM - 907 automatic blood pre ssure monitor. The measurements will be  performed while the patient is 
quiet and still using the appropriate sized cuff placed snugly  around the upper arm approximately 2 to 3 
cm above the antecubital fossa with the mark on  the cuff aligned with the artery . 
Determinants of Change Measures:  MI Algorithm Questions: These reflect the PCBT determinants of 
behavior change (the  patients perceptions toward limiting HPFS/increasing CC intake). They assess 
patient  attitudes/beliefs (importance score), perceived norm s (perceived barriers), and perceived  
behavioral control/self -efficacy (confidence score). These measures will be recorded by the  
interventionist nurses during each MI session for their assigned patients.  
If a subject experiences success in managing their weight while participating in the  study,(which will be 
determined by a 5% decrease in BMI or body fat or total body mass  over 4 months) the subject may 
continue with the weight management plan after completing  all study related visits.  All participants may 
continue with clinic visits following the study and may have available to  them, usual care, MI, Contrave 
(unless they ha ve taken it in the study and it was not  effective), and bariatric surgery options.  All subjects 
taking Contrave will be screened at each visit for suicidal ideation. In addition,  they will be asked to call 
Dr. Bowman immediately if they have any such feeli ngs or  symptoms of suicidal ideation. If they present 
with suicidal ideation, Dr. Bowman will  interview them using the Suicide Screening Algorithm (see 
documents) to determine the  severity of the symptoms and make additional medical referrals as 
necessary.  If the case is  emergent, they will be immediately escorted to the ER or asked to come into the 
ER, if it is a  phone visit. . If the case is urgent, they will be referred to psychiatric personnel in the office  
where Dr. Bowman practices as a Psychiatric NP . They will be withdrawn from the study at  this time and 
Dr. Aguirre will be notified. Dr. Bowman will follow up with these patients.  At the six month visit a PHQ -9 
and the YFAS (from the WALI) will be readministered. An  appt for a 12 month sustainability measure will 
be set up.  
 
Statistical Methods to Analyze Data  
Missing data will be evaluated. For summated scales on which fewer than 20% of an  individuals 
responses are missing, the individuals mean on the remaining items m ay be  substituted, as appropriate. 
For analyses requiring complete data, imputation of missing  values using the EM algorithm or multiple 
imputations will be considered, as appropriate.  Scoring algorithms for each instrument will be used per 
the published u se manual. Each  statistical test will be conducted at p=.05 level. Data will be analyzed 
using descriptives  (means, medians, standard deviations of scores), independent t -tests, correlation  
coefficients and analysis of variance. In Aim 1, ANOVA will be use d to assess differences  between the 
three treatment groups on the YFAS to determined changes in MI confidence,  importance and readiness 
to change scores as well as ASA24 -2016® dietary recall and  biometric measures. Correlational analysis 
will be used to ex plore the relationships between  ASA24 -2016® dietary recall and biometric measures. In 
Aim 2 independent t -test will be  used to determine if the positive and negative YFAS groups differ across 
treatment  responses.   
 