Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 1 
 Study Protocol  
 
 
Weight loss and Exercise for Communities with Arthr itis in North Carolina (WE -CAN)  
 
 
8/26/20 
Principal Investigator  
Stephen P. Messier, PhD  
 
Co- Principal Investigator  
Leigh Callahan, PhD  
 
Site Principal Investigators  
Dan Beavers, PhD, Leigh Callahan, PhD, Stephen P. Messier, PhD, Kate Queen, MD  
 
Co-investigators  
Richard Loeser Jr., MD, Mary Lyles, MD, Shannon Mihalko, PhD, Gary Miller, R.D. PhD, 
Joanne Jordan, MD, MPH , Jeffery Katz, MD, MSc, Elena Losina, PhD, MSc, Sara Quandt, PhD  
 
Consultants  
Paul DeVita , PhD, David Hunter, MD  
 
 Project Description:  
The global prevalence of knee osteoarthritis (OA) is estimated at greater than 250 million persons or 3.6% of the world population, ranking 23
rd on the list of the most common sequelae. 
Knee OA is the most prevalent cause of mobility dependency and disability, with the time spent living with symptoms averaging 26 years. More than two- thirds of Americans age ≥ 20 years are 
overweight or obese. Two in thr ee people who are obese will develop symptomatic knee OA in 
their lifetime.  In addition to the strong relationship between obesity and knee OA, a recent systematic review found no healthy consequences of overweight/obesity, even in individuals 
who are met abolically healthy.  
 
In 2004 we reported that a 5% weight loss, when combined with exercise, resulted in a 30% decrease in pain and a 24% improvement in function. Our recently completed trial entitled Intensive Diet and Exercise for Arthritis (IDEA) sough t to improve on our work with a more 
intensive weight loss intervention, 2 to 3 times the weight loss we had recently achieved.  IDEA compared intensive diet (D) and exercise (E) interventions, separately and in combination, across an 18- month intervention  period in 454 overweight and obese older adults with radiographic 
knee OA.  An intent -to-treat analysis revealed that after 18 months the D+E group reduced pain 
by 51% compared to 25% and 28% for the D only and E only groups, respectively. The D+E group wa s also superior to the E group on self -reported physical function, health related quality 
of life, and walking speed, and had significantly lower knee joint loading and serum levels of IL -
6, a pro- inflammatory cytokine.  On average, our D+E intervention wa s twice as effective at 
Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 2 
 relieving pain as previous long- term OA trials. We concluded that wider adoption of intensive 
weight loss with a goal of at least 10% of baseline body weight combined with exercise could 
reduce the burden of disability related to knee OA.    
 IDEA was an efficacy study with impressive results, a trial designed to determine the effects of intensive diet and exercise under ideal circumstances .  However, a common concern from 
physicians who treat people with knee OA is lack of practical means to implement this treatment 
in the clinical environment.  Indeed, there is no evidence regarding how this efficacious 
intervention could be successfully adapted to be effective in real world clinical and community settings and also be cost effective.    
 We plan to conduct the first long- term ( 18 months) pragmatic (i.e., effectiveness) trial of 
intensive diet and exercise in older adults with knee OA under more usual conditions in both rural and urban communities across North Carolina.  Participants (age ≥ 50 years; BMI ≥ 27 kg/m
2 ) will be random ized to one of 2 groups: diet -induced weight loss  and exercise or a n 
attention  control group.  The sample will consist of 8 20 ambulatory, community- dwelling 
persons that meet the ACR clinical criteria for knee osteoarthritis. The primary aim is to compare the intervention effects on knee pain.  Secondary aims will  compare the intervention effects on 
self-reported function, mobility, health related quality of life, and the cost effectiveness and 
budgetary impact of the intervention.  This program will delive r state -of-the-art weight -management techniques using procedures that 
are new to this area of research in a community setting. Our proposed study is innovative in at least 6 important ways.  
 
1. The first long -term trial of diet- induced weight loss and exerci se in adults with knee 
OA delivered in a practical, less rigorously monitored, community setting. We will design and implement this intervention to make it cost -effective and to serve as a 
blueprint for diverse communities nationwide. If successful, the re sults can inform 
healthcare payers about the first non -pharmacologic treatment of proven benefit for 
overweight and obese adults with knee OA that also promises to decrease medical care costs.  
2. The first pragmatic behavioral health trial targeting rural an d urban sites . Few 
pragmatic trials have focused on rural populations ( Fortney et al; Gooch et al; Schmidt et 
al), and none was designed to affect behavior change using community health 
interventionists. About 25% of the US population lives in diverse rura l communities. 
Most have fewer services and resources than urban communities ( US Dept. of Agr ). They 
report poorer health- related quality of life (
National Rural Health Assoc. ), reflecting 
higher prevalence of many disorders, including OA. Tailoring a non- pharmacologic 
intervention for communities with limited healthcare access would be a breakthrough for public health (
National Rural Health Assoc. ). 
3. The first evidence that this non -pharmacologic intervention can be implemented cost -
effectively in US commun ities. Successful results will lead to step -by-step guidelines 
regarding the selection of community intervention sites, ways to engage the medical 
community, and how to deliver a weight -loss and exercise intervention. In addition to the 
well-established as sociation between obesity and knee OA, strong relationships exist 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 3 
 between high BMI/obesity and coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, stroke, dyslipidemia, and certain types of cancer ( Bhaskaran et al; Campbell ). 
This trial will provide a model for community leaders to develop and execute an effective diet and exercise program at a reasonable cost that will engage local physicians and healthcare providers who treat knee OA, obesity, and related comorbidities. 
4.  A practical treatment option for physicians who treat the comorbidities associated with high BMI. Both the CDC and the American Cancer Society have strategic initiatives that 
encourage community-based interventions to effectively reduce overweight and obesity (Bauer et al; Campbell ). 
5. Focus on implementation and scalability of treatment approaches . The innovative 
features of the proposed study will bridge short- term efficacy and long -term outcomes. 
Identifying and applying the factors critical for intervention sustainability ensure translation from research to practice.  
6. Formal assessment of cost -effectiveness and Budget Impact Analysis . Although rarely 
performed in pragmatic trials, we will formally assess the cost- effectiveness of the 
implemented strategies. Results will allow clinicians and policymakers to assess the feasibility of community -based implementation  
 
The proposed study is uniquely designed to identify a practical, effective, non-pharmacologic therapy capable of reducing knee pain and improving function and quality of life in rural and urban communities of older, overweight and obese adults with knee OA.   
Primary Hypothesis and Aim 
 Hypothesis 1. A pragmatic, community -based, diet-induced weight- loss and exercise 
intervention will significantly redu ce knee pain among overweight and obese adults aged ≥ 50 
years with knee OA compared to an attention-control group.  Aim 1.  To determine whether a pragmatic, community -based, 18-month diet-induced weight-
loss and exercise intervention implemented in three North Carolina counties with diverse residential (from urban to rural) and socioeconomic composition significantly decreases knee pain [as measured by the Western Ontario McMasters Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) pain subscale] in overweight and obese adults with knee OA compared to an attention -control group.  
 
Secondary Hypotheses and Aims  
 Hypothesis 2. A pragmatic, community -based, diet-induced weight- loss and exercise 
intervention will significantly improve self -reported function, health-related quality of life, and 
mobility among overweight and obese adults aged ≥ 50 years with knee OA compared to an attention -control group. 
 Aim 2.   To determine whether a pragmatic, community -based, 18-month, diet-induced weight-
loss and exercise intervention improves WOMAC self-reported function, health- related quality 
of life as measured by the physical subscale of the SF -36 questionnaire and 6- minute walk 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 4 
 distance (an accepted measure of mobility) in overweight and obese adults with kne e OA 
compared to an attention control group. 
. Hypothesis 3.  A pragmatic, community -based, diet-induced weight- loss and exercise 
intervention will be a cost-effective addition to treatment modalities in overweight and obese persons with knee OA. 
 
Aim 3.  To establish the cost- effectiveness of this pragmatic, community -based, multimodal diet-
induced weight-loss and exercise program by conducting cost- effectiveness and budgetary 
impact analyses using data from the current trial in a validated computer- simula ted model of 
knee OA.  
 
Study Design  
We will randomize 8 20 overweight and obese (BMI 27 ≥ kg/m2), adults age ≥ 50 yrs knee OA 
into one of 2 groups: an intensive dietary restriction-plus- exercise (D+E)  group or an attention  
control (nutrition and health) group.  Persons who have begun screening once we hit our overall 
recruitment goal of 820 will be allowed to complete the screening process therefore up to 840 persons may be enrolled into the study.  Forsyth, Johnston, and Haywood Counties’ recruitment goals are 4 20, 210, and 210, (total 840) respectively.  Our minimum weight -loss goal for the 
weight-loss group will be 10% of body weight.  The exercise intervention  will meet 3 days/wk at 
the clinical site.  The intervention will be comprised of both aerobic an d strength training 
exercises.  When participants are unable to come into the facility for intervention, sessions will be conducted via phone or through video conferencing. The nutrition and health group will meet 5 times over an  18 month period and receive a combination of webinars, video messages , text 
messages, emails  (via personal email or Facebook) , phone calls, and mailings for the remaining 
months.  Participants will be allowed to choose their preferred method.        
Primary Endpoint  
Western Ontario McMasters Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC).   We will measure 
self-reported physical function and pain using the WOMAC (scores  will be pulled from the 
KOOS Questionnaire in which the WOMAC is embedded).  The LK  version asks participants 
to indicate on a scale from 0 (none) to 4 (extreme) the degree of difficulty experienced in the last week  due to knee OA. Individual scores for t he 17 items are totaled to generate a summary 
score that could range from 0-68, with higher scores indicating poorer function. The pain index assesses participants’ pain on the same scale, ranging from 0 (none) to 4 (extreme). The pain subscale consists of 5 items and total scores can range from 0-20, with larger scores indicating greater dysfunction. This instrument has been validated and recommended by the Osteoarthritis Research Society as the health status measure of choice in older adults with knee OA .  In order 
to measure the minimal clinically improvement difference (MCID) participants will be asked to compare their knee pain to how it was at the beginning of the study.   
 
Secondary Endpoint  
Mobility.  Our primary mobility measure will be 6 -minute walk distance. Participants are told to 
walk as far as possible in 6 minutes on an established course. No personal timing devices are permitted, and participants are not provided feedback during the test. Results are significantly correlated to treadmill time and symptom-limited maximal oxygen consumption (r = 0.52 and r 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 5 
 = 0.53, respectively) and have a 3-month test- retest reliability of 0.86  (Pennix et al) .  The Short 
Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) will a lso be used to measure mobility (Guralnik et al) .  
The SPPB is comprised of the following tests (balance, walking speed, and chair rise).   A test 
of ascending and descending stair activity measured by the time (in seconds) it takes to ascend 
and descend a flight of 8 steps with 20cm (8 inch) step height and handrail will also be 
performed . 
 
Cost Effectiveness Resource utilization will be collected by questionnaire, with domains 
including visits to clinicians (physicians, nurses, physical therapists, others), tests, medications, injections, surgery, alternative therapies. The Work Productivity and Activity Impairment index (WPAI)  will be used to assess absenteeism and reduced productivity while at work 
(presenteeism).  
 
Body weight, height, hip/waist circumfe rence, BMI.  Body weight and height will be obtained 
using standard techniques. Only persons with a BMI ≥  27 kg/m2 will be eligible .  
Circumference measurements will be collected using standard techniques.  
 
Medical History , Medications, and Blood Pressure . Participants will be given forms to assess 
medical history and presence of comorbidities.  Participants will also be asked questions about their medical history during the phone screen so as to reduce participant burden by identifying potential e xclusion criteria.  Participants will be administered a medication questionnaire 
adapted from the ARIC study and widely used in field research and in our prior studies at each testing visit (A RIC).  
 It is designed to obtain information about all prescription and over-the- counter medicines and 
supplements used during the 2 weeks prior to the interview (home or clinic). The participants will be mailed the medication form to fill out at home and will return the form to the interviewer.  Participants may also be asked to provide the interviewer with all medicine containers so that the interviewer can transcribe the information.  In addition participants will 
be encouraged to notify the study staff of any medication changes during the course of the study.  
In ad dition to the medical history and medication questionnaires, participants will also be given a 
risk stratification questionnaire at the first screening visit.  The purpose of this questionnaire is to determine if participants will need medical clearance prior to enrolling into an exercise program.  The determination is based on the presence/absence of cardiovascular /pulmonary/metabolic 
disease risk factors, sign and symptoms, and known medical history.  The following schematic 
demonstrates how medical clearance will be determined  (Figure 1).  The American College of 
Sports M edicine recommends that all patients are first screened to determine if they are 
participate in regular exercise (defined as performing planned, structured p hysical activity at 
least 30 min at moderate intensity on at least 3  days per week f or at least the last 3 months ).  If 
the participant responds with no medical clearance will be not be needed for those who have not been diagnosed with any CV, Metabolic, or renal disease and are showing no signs/symptoms.  If the response is yes those who have not been diagnosed as well as those with a diagnosis and are asymptomatic will not need physician clearance (Riebe et al., 2015).  Like the previous 
recommendations this is only for moderate intensity exercise.  Our exercise  protocol falls within 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 6 
 this moderate intensity range.  The  original protocol called for participants to exercise in the 
range of 50- 75% of their maximal heart rate reserve (i.e., moderate to high intensity).  The range 
was previously modified to 40-60% of maximal heart rate reserve (i.e., moderate intensity).  
Hence, participants that have no diagnosis of CV, Metabolic, or renal disease or those that have 
been diagnosed but are asymptomatic will be enrolled without the need for physician clearance.  
Those who have signs and symptoms or who have been diagnosed but do not meet the exercise 
criteria will require medical clearance from their physician.  Final approval and acceptance into 
the program for patients will be provided by our study physician.  It’s worth noting the risk of 
serious adverse events occurring during properly supervised exercise is extremely low (< 1 per 
100,000 hours of exercise) even in older adults, with cardiovascular disease.  Blood pressure will 
also be measured.  
  Figure 1: Exercise preparticipation health screening logic model for aerobic exercise participation 
(Updating ACSM’s Recommendations for Exercise Preparticipation Health Screening, MSSE 2015)  
 
 
 
Measures of Quality of Life and Self -Efficacy . The SF -36 is the most widely used and carefully 
validated measure of health related quality of life and will be used to yield 2 broad summary scores: physical health and mental health (Ware and Sherbourne).  The Eurqol Quality of Life will also be u sed to  measure quality of life  and health state  (Brooks ; EuroQuol ).  The walking 
efficacy for duration scale measures one’s ability to walk/jog at a moderately fast pace for various durations (McAuly and Mihalko).  The Positive and Negative Affect (PANAS) measures 

Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 7 
 both positive and negative affect, leading to more insightful outlooks regarding participants' 
feeling states. This scale consists of 20 items that reflect the intensity of how the participant "feels" right now (Watson et al).  The gait efficacy/environmental efficacy scale will ask the participants’ confidence in performing certain activities (McAuley et al.).  Among the various 
components of subjective well-being, the Satisfaction with life scale is focused to assess global life satisfaction (Diener et al).   The Weight Efficacy Lifestyle Questionnaire (WEL) is a 20- item 
measure employed to assess self -efficacy for weight management (Clark et al).  The Perceived 
Stress Scale (PSS) will measure the degree to which people perceive their lives as stressful (Cohen et al).  The adherence self -efficacy questionnaire is designed to assess beliefs in one’s 
ability (confidence) to continue exercising at various intensities and frequencies (McAuly and Mihalko).  
Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) .  The PCS questionnaire will be used to assess 
catastrophizing (rumination, magnification, and helplessness) (Sullivan et al ). 
 
Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome S core (KOOS).  The KOOS questionnaire will be used 
to assess the patient’s opinion about their knee and associated problems. The KOOS evaluates 
both short-term and long-term consequences of knee injury and also consequences of primary 
osteoarthritis (OA)  (Roos & Lohmander). 
 
Intermittent and Constant Osteoarthritis Pain (ICOAP) .  The ICOAP  assess es pain in 
individuals with  knee osteoarthritis taking into account both constant and intermittent pain 
experiences  (Hawker et al) . 
 
Dietary Intake.   National Cancer Institute Modified Health Habits and History Questionnaire 
(HHHQ) provides nutrient assessment of dietary intake.    
 
Health Literacy.      Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System measures health literacy.    
 
Physical Activity.  The Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE)  has proven reliable in 
many of our clinical trials, including a group of 254 men and women aged ≥ 65 yrs (Washburn 
et al) .    
 
Cognitive Functioning/Depression .  The MOCA will be used to measure cognitive function 
(Nasreddine et al).   Depression will be measured using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies 
Depression Scale (Burnam et al).   
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria   
Inclusion Criteria: 
(1) Age ≥ 50 years  
 
(2) Knee Pain plus ACR Criteria for Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
(3) BMI = 27 ≥ kg/m2 
 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 8 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Significant co -morbid disease that would threaten safety or impair ability to participate in 
interventions or testing (Method: Medical history; medications ; physical exam; telephone 
pre-screen ; risk stratification ) 
a. Blindness 
b. Type 1 diabetes 
c. History or symptoms of coronary artery disease or pulmonary disease with no 
medical clearance (symptoms include angina, unreasonable breathlessness, dizziness/fainting/blackouts)  
d. Unable to walk without a device 
e. Lower extremity fracture ( within previous 3 months) 
f. Joint Replacement ( excluded if double KR or within previous 6 months) 
g. Knee injection or surgery (within previous 3 months) 
h. Lower extremity injury that affects activities of daily living  
i. Bariatric Surgery  
2. Not sufficiently overweight or obese, BMI < 27 kg/m
2  (Method: Ht/Wt)  
3. Not having knee pain: (Method:  < 1 on the pain scale, WOMAC and Telephone Screen)  
4. Inability to finish 18 -month study or unlikely to be compliant (Method: Telephone 
Screen, Screening Interviews)  
a. Planning to leave area > 2 month during the next 18 months 
b. Unwilling to change eating or physical activity habits 
c. Unwilling to attend exercise/diet sessions  
d. Participating in another intervention study (only if the other study has requested 
they not be enrolled) 
e. Living > 30 minutes from the intervention site  
5. Age, age < 50 (Method: Telephone Screen & Demographics Forms) 
6. Other conditions that may prohibit the effective delivery of the intervention (Method: Telephone Screen)  
a. Unable to provide own transportation to exercise center 
b. Unable to read  or write, cannot speak or read English 
Randomization Procedures 
We propose a stratified block randomization with block size unknown to investigators and staff 
will ensure equal accrual to each study arm. Prestratification will balance pretrial BMI values (27.0-34.9 kg/m
2, 35.0-44.9 kg/m2, ≥45 kg/m2) and gender, which could predict intervention 
effect and associations between secondary outcome variables. We will also use county as a fixed 
effect for randomization. A computer program will randomize participants into the 2 groups, 
verify eligibility, and provide identification number and intervention assignment. This system worked very successfully in the IDEA study. 
 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 9 
 Interventions  
Diet-induced weight loss plus exercise  
Months 0 -6  
There will be two individual sessions per month and 2 group sessions per month for the 
first 6 months. The behavioral sessions will focus on awareness of changing eating habits to lower caloric intake. Educational content information regarding what food changes to make, how to make them, and why they are important will be clearly explained and discussed with participants and significant others. Each group session will include problem solving, review of a specific food topic, and tasting of several well-balanced, low-fat, nutritious foods prepared with widely available ingredients. 
During the individual sessions, the counselor will review individual progress, solve problems, answer questions, and set goals.  During the initial individual session, the nutrition counselor will give the participant a weight history background questionnaire.  The major emphasis for Period 1 is to enhance participant awareness of the importance and the need to change eating habits, i.e. lower caloric intake for weight loss.  Each participant should be given the opportunity to practice skills using goal setting in a stepwise approach.  Participants will follow a weekly menu plan which will incorporate meal replacements  into their diet plan .  Lean Shakes, a General Nutrition Center (GNC), 
product will be the meal replacement used.  Participants may replace the Lean Shakes with a healthy, low- calorie meal of their choice, such as Lean Cuisine.  Motivation and 
encouragement through the combined efforts of the nutrition counselor, the participant, signific ant others and the nutrition staff will enhance adherence.    
Months 7-12   
In period 2 participants will focus on continued weight loss to reach the study weight 
loss goal of 10% of baseline weight.  Participants will attend one group and one 
individual session per month. Once the weight loss goal is achieved an individual may either begin weight maintenance, or they may continue to lose additional weight using safe and healthy nutrition practices.  Pa rticipants will follow a weekly menu plan with 
recipes using traditional foods and the option to incorporate meal replacements. The traditional meals will contain 400 -600 kcals, be low in fat and added sugars, and high in 
vegetables, fruits, and whole grains. Snacks may be a bar, fruit, or vegetable providing ~100-120 kcals. Daily caloric intake for each participant will be adjusted to his or her rate of weight change. Each group will be encouraged to take a daily multivitamin/mineral supplement containing no more than 100% of the Dietary Reference Intake for any particular nutrient. As fewer meal replacements are consumed, intervention staff will assist in developing meal plans to provide the prescribed macronutrient-balanced energy intake.   
Months 13-18   
Period 3 will emphasize weight management over time, with 1 monthly individual 
contact.  Weight loss can continue throughout the intervention, provided the participant wants to and has not reached a level associated with health hazards; i.e. a 20% body weight loss at 6 months or >30% at 12 months.  Participants will continue to follow a 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 10 
 weekly menu plan with recipes using traditional foods and the option to incorporate meal replacements.  
 
The exercise intervention will cover an 18-month period.  The exerc ise program will 
consist of a 15-minute aerobic phase, a 20- minute strength -training phase, a second 15-
minute aerobic phase, and a 10-minute cool-down phase.  These sixty- minute exercise 
sessions will be conducted three days per week (two days/week will be center based) .  
Each participant will be prescribed an individual walking prescription by the exercise leader, which will be adjusted accordingly, as each participant progresses throughout the 18 months.  The exercise will be of moderate intensity.  Alte rnate forms of aerobic 
exercise, such as but not limited to stationary bike, elliptical trainer, or treadmill w alking, 
can be used in place of over -ground walking. This choice could be based on participant 
preference, the limitations of the exercise facili ty, or the participant’s pain level.  To 
motivate participants to be physically active intervention staff will plan an optional fun walk.  The walk will take place at Wake Forest University. Participants do not have to participate in the walk in order to be in the study.  If a participant chooses to participate 
in the walk they will be asked to sign a waiver.   Intervention Locations: Forsyth County:  The diet and exercise classes will be offered at a 
number of sites within Winston- Salem.  Participants will be allowed to pick the location 
that is most convenient for them to attend.  Classes will take place at th e Clinical 
Research Center on the Wake Forest University Campus, at St. Peter’s World Outreach Center, and at Smiley’s Fitness.   Hay wood County:  The diet and exercise classes will be 
held at the Haywood Regional Health & Fitness Center in Waynesville, NC.  Johnston County:  The diet and exercise classes will be held at the Clayton Community Center and 
the Johnston Medical Mall.  Partici pants will also be allowed to exercise outdoors at the 
intervention sites when the weather permits .  Staff will schedule set times when outdoor 
walking will be allowed.  
 The following measures will be taken in the event participants are unable to come into the facility : 
1. Virtual Sessions  - Participants  will be given the option to attend virtual 
exercise and diet classes.  Intervention classes will be taught via Zoom. Partic ipants will be provided with the class login information. The group and 
diet exercise sessions will be recorded and posted to our study Facebook page as well as sent to participants who are unable to attend the live sessions. Recordings will be edited so that only the class exercise and diet instruction can be viewed (beginning and end of the session as participants log in and out will be cut out of the video).  As a security measure the virtual classes will be locked after 10 minutes so that no others can join the class. Additionally participants will not be given access to record the session.  Individual sessions will also be conducted via Zoom. 
2. P
hone Sessions – Staff will call participants to deliver the diet group and 
individual session content.  All participants have previously been provided with at home exercise manuals.  Staff will also use this time to review our non-facility -based exercise plans.   
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 11 
 3. Email Sessions – Participants may also choose to receive the diet group and 
individual session content via email.  All participants have previously been provided with at home exercise manuals.  Staff will also use this time to review our non- facility -based exercise plans .   
 
 
All intervention staff in the WE -CAN study will be CPR certified.  The exercise 
coordinator, who is part of the coordinating center and is responsible for maintaining 
exercise protocol congruity between the intervention sites, will train and supervis e the 
intervention staff.  Intervention staff will meet monthly with the exercise coordinator to 
discuss any potential problems, risks, and concerns that have risen.  AEDs will be available at each location.   Emergency drills will be performed monthly in a ddition the 
AED will be checked monthly.  The clinical research center (Forsyth), Johnston Medical Mall (Johnston), and the Haywood Regional Health and Fitness Center (Haywood) also house cardiac rehabilitation  programs and will also have crash carts avail able.       
 
Nutrition & Health  Intervention  
The nutrition and health (attention control) intervention will cover an 18-month period.  There will be five total face to face group meetings over the 18 months, with one meeting each at months 1, 3, 6, 9, and 15; and during the other months (months 2, 4-5, 7-8, 10-14, 16-18) participants will receive a combination of informational packets, webinars, text messages, and 
emails.   Participants will be able to  select their preferred method.   Each group meeting will last 
approximately one hour and will be held at St. Peter’s World Outreach Center and at Senior Services in Winston -Salem, NC .   The sessions will be interactive and will provide useful 
information on such topics as proper foot care, general nutrition, health behaviors, management of medications, and sleep practices. The Community Advisory Board  will give input on the class 
sessions.    Experts across a broad range of relevant topics that are of interest to older adults will provide information via information packets, webinars , text messages  or emails. These monthly contacts 
and email blasts will keep the participants in the nutrition and health group engaged in the WE-CAN study and will increase adherence to the group sessions and the testing visits.     Participants in both interventions will be provided with items with the study logo such as t- shirts 
and tote bags to promote group bonding and study adherence.  Additionally, giftcards will be raffled at various class sessions.  In order to better balance the amount of money spent on the two groups participants in the Nutrition & Health group will receive a $100 ( gift card s) for 
completing the testing appointments.  They will be given $25 at 6 months and $75 at 18 months.   At the 12-month testing appointments the participants will receive an  incentive with the s tudy 
logo.  Participants in the Diet & Exercise group will be receiving meal replacements for the first year of the study.     
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 12 
 Procedures -Screening and Follow- up Visits .  
           
Procedures -Screening and Follow- up Visits .   
Prescreening visit (PSV).  Individuals who contact our recruitment office in response to 
advertising will be asked a series of brief questions that focus on major eligibility criteria.  A screening visit appointment will be made for participants who meet major eligibility criteria.   A 
medical history form and a medication form will be mailed to the participants for them to complete.  If participants are unable to come in for testing appointments research staff will call 
participants via Webex to collect study data (participants can choose whether to attend virtually or only via phone).  Staff will use a HIPPA compliant version of Webex (set up by Wake Measurements  PSV SV1 FU6 FU12  FU18  Explanation  
Questionnaires  
Informed Consent   x     
Eligibility Questionnaire  x     To determine  eligibility  
Medical History /Med History 
FU xc x x x x For  eligibility  and to document changes in health  
Risk Stratification  xc x    Used to screen cardiovascular risk  
Comorbidities Questionnaire   x  x x  
Randomization   x     
WOMAC   x x x x Pain is primary and function secondary outcomes .  
Will be taken from the KOOS  
Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis 
Outcome Score (KOOS)   x x x x Assesses patient’s opinion about their knee and 
associated problems  
PASE scale   x x x x Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly  
MOCA   x   x Montreal Cognitive Assessment  
EuroQol Quality of Life(EQ5D)   x x x x Quality of life measure  
Resource Utilization    x x x x Visits to clinicians, tests, medications, injections, 
surgery, alternative therapies  
Work Productivity and Activity 
Impairment Index   x x x x assesses absenteeism and presenteeism  
DHQ II   x x x x NIH Diet History Questionnaire  
SF-36  x x x x Health related quality of life (physical, mental ) 
Health Literacy   x x x x  
Adherence Self Efficacy   x x x x Confidence in exercising at various intensities and 
frequencies  
Adherence for Duration   x x x x Confidence in walking for different durations  
Gait Efficacy   x x x x Confidence in completing tasks  
Demographics   x     
Medication form   x x x x Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities form  
Weight Efficacy Questionnaire   x x x x Self-Efficacy for Weight Management  
PANAS   x x x x Positive and Negative Affect Scale  
SWL   x x x x Satisfaction with Life  
Perceived Stress   x x x x Stress  
Pain Catastrophizing Scale   x x x x Catastrophizing  
Intermittent and Constant 
Osteoarthritis Pain (ICOAP)   x x x X Intermittent and Constant Pain  
CES-D  x x x X Depression  
Transition Questionnaire    x x X Knee pain  
Adverse Events    x x X Also collected as they occur  
Physical Performance Tests/Knee Exam  
height  xc x    To determine BMI  
weight  xc x x x X To determine BMI  
Knee exam   x    To determine  eligibility  
6 minute walk   x x  X Measure of mobility  
Expanded Short Physical 
Performance Battery (SPPB)   x x x X Gait speed, sit to stand, balance tests; predicts 
disability  
GaitRite   x x x X mobility measures   
Stair Climb   x x x X mobility measure  
xc = brief screen by self -report, P SV = Prescreening Visit. SV = screening visit. FU = follow -up. 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 13 
 Forest University).  To reduce participant burden only the following questionnaires will be 
collected: cost effectiveness questionnaires, WOMAC, KOOS, Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE), Health -Related Quality of Life (HRQL), a nd efficacy measures .  In the event 
participants do not wish to conduct a phone or virtual session a questionnaire packet  will be 
mailed to participants to complete and return.  The webex testing session will last approximately 1 hour.  
Screening Visit One (SV1) Individuals will come to Worrell Professional Building on the 
campus at Wake Forest University .  SV1 includes an explanation of the study and obtaining 
informed consent.  Other assessments include medical history and medication use (previously maile d), cardiovascular risk, height and weight (to calculate BMI), hip/waist circumference 
measurements, blood pressure, and a knee exam.  The MOCA & CES -D will be administered.  
The following questionnaires will be given:  demographics, cost effectiveness questionnaires, WOMAC, KOOS, Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE), Health -Related Quality of 
Life (HRQL) , dietary intake questionnaires, health literacy, perceived stress, pain 
catastrophizing, and efficacy  measures .  Physical performance measures include the SPPB , 6 
minute walk, GaitRite, and stair climb .  This s creening visit will last approximately 3 - 4 hours.  
 
Randomization Visit ( RV) Individuals will come to Worrell Professional Building on the 
campus at Wake Forest University.  At the RV an orientation to the group will be done. 
 
6-month Follow- up Data Collection Visit (FU6): Participants will return to Worrell 
Professional Building to repeat all measures collected at baseline (minus the MOCA, knee exam,  and demographics).  The testing session  will last approximately 2.5 – 3.5 hours.   
 
12-month Follow- up Data Collection Visit (FU12): Participants will return to Worrell 
Professional Building to repeat all measures collected at baseline ( minus the knee exam  and 
demographics).  The testing session will last approximately 2.5 – 3.5 hours.   
 
18-month Follow- up Data Collection Visit (FU18): Participants will return to Worrell 
Professional Building to repeat all measures collected at baseline (minus the knee exam and demographics).  The testing session will last approximately 2.5 – 3.5 hours.  At the end of 18 months the participants will have a mini session on what the other group received.    
 
Usag e of Facebook 
The research study would like to incorporate the usage of Facebook in the study.  We plan on using Facebook in the following ways.   
1) Recruitment  
a. The study has created digital ads (submitted with this amendment) that will be 
used in Facebook ads.  Ads posted will be pop up ads.  
2)     Study Notifications & Contact Method 
a. The study will set up a Facebook page in which participants will be given the link (usage will not be required but will be an additional method that participants can 
Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 14 
 use to cont act study staff or find out study information).  A description of this 
usage is listed below. 
i. Study info such as press releases, news articles, manuscripts will be posted 
to the study Facebook page.  This information will also be provided in study newslett ers (for those not on Facebook).  
ii. Information regarding site closings (such as in the event of inclement 
weather or holidays) or intervention materials (group intervention classes) 
will be posted on the Facebook page.  Please note all participants will be given information regarding holiday closings and weather policies in their intervention classes.  A study phone number will be given to each participant which will be updated in the event of a closing.  It will not be 
necessary to check Facebook to learn of  a study closing. 
iii. Participants in the study will also be able to use Facebook as a means of 
contacting the staff by sending a private message (email) to the staff.  This 
method may be useful to the nutrition and health group in which 
participants will be g iven a choice to their preferred method of contact 
(email, phone, Facebook private message).   
 
3) Participant Posting  
a. The study will set up its account as a page therefore it will not be a private group.  
Therefore the study will only post study information (press releases, articles, etc.) and site information.  We will not post pictures or study participant information.  However participants whom are on Facebook will be allowed to post to the study page.  All posts will be reviewed by the study staff to ensure no other participants are identified as being a part of the study.   
 
Informed Consent
 
 
Signed informed consent will  be obtained from each subject.  Consent will be obtained by study 
coordinator , interventionists,  and testing staff.  Participants will b e consented at screening visit 
one (SV1).  Upon arrival each potential subject will meet with a staff member to review the 
study consent form. No study specific procedures will be done prior to the signing of the consent form. Staff members administering the informed consent must use the following steps in order to orient the potential subject to the purpose of the research.   
• The staff member will verbally explain the study to the potential subject, providing all pertinent information (purpose, procedures, risks, etc.), and will allow the potential subject ample opportunity to ask questions.   
• Following this verbal explanation, the potential subject will be provided wi th the consent 
form and schedule to review. The potential subject will be given as much time as they need to consider whether or not to participate in the research.   
• After allowing time for the potential subject to read the consent form, the staff member, will meet with the potential subject to answer any additional questions he /she may have.  
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 15 
 • Once the potential subject has all of their questions answered and has agreed to participate, they will be asked to sign and date the consent form. The staff member will also sign and date the consent. 
• A copy of the informed consent will be made and given to the subject.  
In the event a person wishes to discuss the study with a family member or would like additional time to think about participating in the study, the staff member will make a note of this in the subject file and the staff will follow -up with the potential subject.  
Once a person has completed the screening appointment and the data has been entered into study webs ite the project manager will randomize the subject by select ing the randomization program 
in the WE -CAN website.  Participants will be placed into either the diet & exercise group or the 
attention control ( nutrition & health ) group.  
Safety Monitoring Plan 
An internal safety committee has been established to monitor participant safety and to evaluate 
the progress of the study.  In addition NIAMS has selected a DSMB to monitor study safety and progress.   
Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event Collection and  Reporting  
Adverse Event (AE)  - An AE is any unfavorable and unintended diagnosis, sign (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporarily associated with the study 
intervention, which may or may not be related to the intervention,  including excessive delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) as some minimal muscle soreness will be expected after the training session. AEs include any new events not present during the pre-intervention period or events that were present during the pre-intervention period which has increased in severity.  Participants will be asked if any events have occurred on a monthly basis prior to their intervention class and at each testing session.  Participants will be encouraged to report AEs as 
they occur. 
Study staff will report non -serious adverse events (related and unrelated to the study) to site project 
manager and principal investigator within 7 days of notification of the event and will be reported to the coordinating center quarterly. Testing staff will inquire about adverse events prior to testing to ensure there are no unreported events.  The site physician/PA will review non serious adverse events (AE) on a weekly basis.  Non serious adverse events will be included in the NIAMS safety report and submitted bi-annually.    
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  - An SAE is any untoward medical occurrence that results in 
death, is life -threatening, requires or prolongs hospitalization, causes persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, results in congenital anomalies/birth defects, or, in the opinion of the investigators, represents other significant hazards or potentially serious harm to research participants or others. 
Staff will report serious adverse events (related and unrelated to the intervention) to the site project manager , principal investigator , and study physician.  The clinical site will reports SAEs 
Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 16 
 to the coordinating center within 24 hrs of notification.  SAEs will be reported to NIAMS within 
24 hours of being reported to the PI  (within 48 hours of initial report) .  The WFU IRB does not 
require the reporting of adverse events unless it is serious, unexpected and related to the study. Follow -up information will be provi ded to the PI, DSMB/Safety Officer, and IRB, as 
appropriate.   
 
NIAMS has assigned  a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) or safety monitor to monitor all 
aspects of the study.  
 
 The DSMB /Safety Monitor  will have the following charges:  
• To review the entire study protocol, the operations manual, and the informed consent and assent forms for recruitment, randomization, intervention, participant safety, data management, auditing plans for participant records, and quality control and analysis plans, and to identify needed modifications.  • To review data related to efficacy, recruitment, randomization, compliance, retention, protocol adherence, trial operating procedures, forms completion, intervention effects, gender and minority inclusion , and participant safety over the course of the trial.  
• To identify problems related to safety over the course of the study and to report them in writing to the PIs, who will ensure that the appropriate individuals receive the report.  • To identify a ne ed for additional data relevant to safety and to request them from investigators.  
• To propose appropriate analyses and periodically review developing data on safety and 
endpoints.  • To make recommendations regarding recruitment, intervention effects, re tention, compliance, 
safety, and continuation of the study.  • To send the Program Administrator and PIs written reports following each DSMB meeting, addressing all issues raised, and subsequently sent to the IRB.  
• At any time, the DSMB may recommend dis continuation of any component/intervention of the 
study for any of the following reasons:  
1) Compelling evidence from this or any other study of an adverse effect sufficient to override any potential benefit of the interventions to the target population.  2) Compelling evidence from this or any other study of a significant beneficial effect whose continued denial to other study group(s) would be unethical.  
3) A very low probability of addressing the study hypothesis within a feasible time frame.  
 Statistical Considerations  
Data Management  
The Data Management Group, part of the Coordinating Center, has primary responsibility for randomization and analyzing data generated by the clinical centers. Data will be collected on hard-copy forms at each site and tr ansformed to an electronic database. Our web -based 
management system will assure integrity and validity. Dynamic reports and periodic statistical analyses will monitor quality. A participant- based inventory system will track recruitment, 
retention, adherence, and missing data from entry through exit, close -out, and lock- down of final 
datasets. Our team developed a similar database for the IDEA and START studies.   
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 17 
 Statistical Analyses   
Statistical analyses will be conducted according to intention- to-treat p rinciples using SAS. 
Primary Aim.  
The primary hypothesis of long-term reduced WOMAC pain at 18 months will be tested based 
on a two- tailed significance level of 0.05 using contrast statements from a repeated measures 
mixed linear model with time (6, 18 mos), randomization arm (D+E vs control), and the 
interaction, which adjusts the means at each time point for potential missing data bias  (Laird and 
Ware). Intervention-effect estimates will be further adjusted for baseline pain values, BMI, 
county, and ge nder; analysis will match design, so the variance estimate will not be biased. 
Participant ID number will be included as a random effect to control for within- subject 
variability, and the longitudinal model will use an unstructured covariance matrix. In the unlikely event the model does not converge, a first- order autoregressive (AR[1]) covariance structure will 
be fit instead. Maximum- likelihood techniques will estimate parameters, as in the IDEA trial 
(Messier et al). Preliminary analyses will be conducte d to check the shape of the distributions 
and variances between groups and as a function of the covariates. Regression diagnostics and residual plots will help to find appropriate transformations, if necessary. We will include 
exploratory analyses of subgr oups, defined by gender, age (<70 vs ≥70 years), baseline BMI 
(27.0-34.9, 35- 44.9, ≥45 kg/m2), county, and race to determine any differential pain responses. 
Secondary Aims  
Repeated measures mixed linear models similar to Aim 1 will be used to analyze WOMA C 
function, 6-minute walk, and SF-36 physical subscale. Each outcome will be modeled separately, and 18- month effectiveness will be tested based on a two -tailed significance level of 0.05. The 
model will include the fixed effects study arm, time, time -group interaction, county, gender, 
baseline BMI, and baseline values of the outcome; participant ID number will be included as a random effect, and an unstructured covariance will be used assuming model convergence is not a problem (AR[1] otherwise). Preliminary analyses will be conducted to check the shape of the distributions and variances between groups and as a function of the covariates. Regression diagnostics and residual plots will help to find appropriate transformations, if necessary. 
Missing Data  
If missing data are related to outcomes, our results could be biased. Our models will include 
variables from previous visits determined to predict loss to satisfy Little and Rubin’s conditions for data considered missing at random (MAR). If “informative censoring” occurs, we will compare analyses using subjects with complete data, multiple imputations, or explicit modeling of the censoring mechanism (Conaway, 1993, Wu and Bailey, 1989). 
Primary Outcomes  
Aim 1 . A total sample of 820 (410/group) will provide 94% statistical power to detect differences 
≥15% in pain at the 2-sided 0.05 significance level with 80% retention (2- sample t-test, Nquery 
Advisor). Based on ADAPT (Messier et al).  The D+E group in IDEA reduced pain by an 
average of 51%. This approach utilizes the conditional variance approach of Borm et al. for the 
estimation of power for ANCOVA models using group standard deviation 𝜎𝜎 = 3. 50, Pearson 
correlation between baseline and 18 -month pain score of 𝜌𝜌= 0.4  for a conditional standard 
deviation 𝜎𝜎 𝑐𝑐= 3. 21 (𝜎𝜎𝑐𝑐=�1−𝜌𝜌2×𝜎𝜎), and 18- month treatment WOMAC pain means ~D+E 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 18 
 = 5.03 vs E- only control = 5.92 (Δ = -0.887). Variations of anticipated power due to 
modifications in 
retention and treatment effect are presented in Table  
1. Correlation between baseline and 18 month pain values are 
estimated from the IDEA trial, while anticipated treatment effects and standard deviation for pain were obtained using weighted averages of D+E and non- D+E treatments from the ADAPT and 
IDEA studies, with some attenuation of the anticipated treatment effect due to the pragmatic nature of WE -CAN (Table 1).  
  
Secondary Outcomes  
Aim 2 . Our sample size provides a moderate effect size of 0.234 at 85% power with relevant 
detectable differences. However, all estimates from IDEA and ADAPT were collected under 
rigorously controlled conditions; therefore the estimates for the pragmatic trial are conservative. We assume in Table 8 a total baseline sample size of N=820, 80% retention at 18 months, and a 0.05 level of significance for all tests. The detectable and % differences from control aim to achieve 85% power. The mean differences in WOMAC function for D+E compared to D only and E only in IDEA were -3.3 and -4.3, respectively. Likewise, the differences in 6- minute walk 
distance for the D+E group versus D only in IDEA and ADAPT (41.5 and 42.1, respectively) indicate that the mean difference to achieve 85% power (15.2 m) is modest. IDEA indicated that SF-36 physical subscale was significantly improved in the D+E arm, with an observed difference 
of 2.8 compared to E alone (Table 2).       
 Table 1:    Power estimates for WOMAC pain, assuming baseline N=820, correlation between BL and 18 months=0.4, 
and common group SD = 3.50.  
18 month Control 
Mean WOMAC 
Pain 18 Month D+E WOMAC 
Pain (% difference from 
Control)  
18-Month Retention   
70% 75% 80% 85% 
Power  
5.92 
  5.15 (13%)  81% 84% 86% 88% 
5.03 (15%)  91% 92% 94% 95% 
4.91 (17%)  96% 97% 97% 98% Table 2: Detectable absolute and relative (%) differences for secondary outcome s, n = 
410/group, 80% retention, 85% statistical power, α = 0.05. Correlation between baseline and 
18M values is ρ. 
Variable  Anticipated 18m 
Control mean*  Standard 
Deviation  𝜌𝜌 D+E Mean (% change 
from C)  
WOMAC Function  17.5 11.5 0.6 15.3 ( -12.3%)  
Mobility: 6 -Minute Walk (m)  509 90.7 0.7 524 (3.0%)  
SF-36 Physical Score (0 -100) 42.0 10.1 0.5 44.1 (4.9%)  
Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 19 
  
 
 
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 20 
 References:  
The ARIC investigators. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study: design and 
objectives. Am.J.Epidemiol. 1989 Apr;129(4):687- 702. 
 
Baker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, Gazmararian JA, Nurss J, Development of a brief 
test to measure functional health  literacy , Patient Educ Couns. 1999 Sep;38(33-42)   
 Bauer UE, Briss PA, Goodman RA, Bowman BA. Prevention of chronic disease in the 21st 
century: elimination of the leading preventable causes of premature death and disability in the 
USA. Lancet. 2014;384(9937):45-52  Bhaskaran K, Douglas I, Forbes H, dos-Santos-Silva I, Leon DA, Smeeth L . Body- mass  
index and risk of 22 specific cancers: a population-based cohort study of 5.24 million UK adults. Lancet. 2014;384(9945):755-65.  Brooks R  (1996). EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy 37(1):53- 72. 
 Burnam, M.A., Well, K.B., Leake, B., Landsverk, J. (1988).  Development of a brief screening instrument for detecting depressive disorders.  Medical Care, 26, 775- 789. 
 Campbell PT . Obesity: a certain and avoidable cause of cancer. Lancet. 2014;384(9945):727-8. 
 Clark, M.M., Abrams, D.B., Niaura, R.S., Eaton, C.A., & Rossi, J.S . (1991). Self- efficacy in 
weight management. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 59, 739- 744. 
 Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385-396.   Conaway MR . Non-ignorable non-response models for time-ordered categorical response data. 
Applied Statistics 42: 105-115, 1993.  
Diener E, Emmons RA, Larsen RJ and Griffin S. The Satisfaction With Life Scale. J Pers 
Assess 49: 71- 75, 1985. 
 
The EuroQol  Group (1990). EuroQol- a new facility for the measurement of health -related 
quality of life. Health Policy 16(3):199-208.  
 
Fortney JC, Pyne JM, Mouden SB, Mittal D, Hudson TJ, Schroeder GW, et al. Practice -
based versus telemedicine- based collaborative care for depression in rural federally qualified 
health centers: a pragmatic randomized comparative effectiveness trial. AmJ Psychiatry. 2013;170(4):414-25.  Gooch K, Marshall DA, Faris PD, Khong H, Wasylak T, Pearce T, et al . Comparative 
effectiveness of alternative clinical pathways for primary hip and knee joint replacement patients: a pragmatic randomized, controlled trial. OsteoarthritisCartilage. 2012;20( 10):1086-94.  
Version: Amendment 42 
Template updated 8.26.20 21 
  
Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, Glynn RJ, Berkman LF, Blazer DG, Scherr PA, Wallace RB. A short physical performance battery assessing lower extremity function: association with self -reported disability and prediction of mortality and nursing home admission. 
J Gerontol. 1994 Mar;49(2):M85-M94.  Hawker GA, Davis AM, French MR, Cibere J, Jordan JM, March MB, Suarez- Almazor 
M, Katz JN, Dieppe P. Development and preliminary psychometric testing of a new OA pain measure – an OARSI/OMERACT i nitiative. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 16: 409-14, 2008. 
 Little RJA and Rubin DB . Statistical analysis with missing data . New York: John Wiley and 
Sons, 1987.  McAuley E and Mihalko SL . Measuring Exercise- Related Self -Efficacy. In: Advances in Sport  
and Exercise Psychology Measurement, edited by J.L.Duda. Morgantown, W.V: Fitness  Information Technology, Inc., 1998, p. 371-389.  McAuley E, Mihalko S, and Rosengren . Self Efficacy and Balance Correlates of Fear  of 
Falling in the Elderly .  Journal of Aging and Physical Activity. 5: 329- 240. 1997. 
 Messier, S.P. et al . Effects of intensive diet and exercise on knee joint loads, inflammation, and 
clinical outcomes among overweight and obese adults with knee osteoarthritis.  JAMA  310: 
1263- 1273. 2013. 
  Messier SP, Loeser RF, Miller GD, Morgan TM, Rejeski WJ, Sev ick MA, Ettinger WH, 
Jr., Pahor M, Williamson JD. Exercise and dietary weight loss in overweight and obese older adults with knee osteoarthritis: the Arthritis, Diet, and Activity Promotion Trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 May;50(5):1501-10. 
Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, 
Cummings JL, Chertkow H.  The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening 
tool for mild cognitive impairment. J.Am.Geriatr.Soc. 2005 Apr;53(4):695-9.  National Rural Health Association . What's different about rural health care? : National Rural 
Health Association; 2014  
 Penninx BW, Messier SP, Rejeski WJ, Williamson JD, DiBari M, Cavazzini C, Applegate B, Pahor M  Physical exercise and the prevention of disability in activities of daily living in older persons with osteoarthritis. Arch.Intern.M ed. 2001 Oct 22;161(19):2309 
 
Riebe D, Franklin B, Thompson P, Garber C, Whitfield G, Magal M, Pescatello L. (2015). 
Updati ng ACSM’s Recommendations for Exercise Preparticipation Health Screening. Medicine 
and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2015 Nov; 47 (11) 2473-9. 
 
Roos, E. M. and L. S. Lohmander. (2003). "Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score 
(KOOS): from joint inju ry to osteoarthritis." Health Qual Life Outcomes 1: 64. 
Version: Amendment 42  
Template updated 8.26.20 22 
  
Schmidt B, Wenitong M, Esterman A, Hoy W, Segal L, Taylor S, et al. Getting better at  
chronic care in remote communities: study protocol for a pragmatic cluster randomised controlled of community based management. BMCPublic Health. 2012;12:1017.  Sullivan M , Bishop S and Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: Development and  
Validation.  Psychological Assessment. 7: 524- 532, 1995. 
 Thompson FE et al ., J American Dietetic Association 2002, vol 102, pp 212- 225 
United States Department of Agriculture. Rural america at a glance: Economic Research  
Service; 2013 [updated 11/1/2013]  
 Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD . The MOS 36- item short- form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med.Care 1992 Jun;30(6):473 -83. 
  Washburn, R. A., Smith, K. W., Jette, A. M., & Janney, C. A. (1993). The Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE): development and evaluation. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 
46(2), 153–162.  
 Watson D, Clark LA and Tellegen A . Development and validation of brief measures of 
positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol  54: 1063- 1070, 1988. 
 Wu MC and Bailey KR . Estimation and comparison of changes in the presence of informative 
right censoring: conditional  linear model. Biometrics 45: 939- 955, 1989. 
 