1 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021  The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston  
Research Protocol # 21-0127  
 
Title: A Feasibility  Trial of Intravenous  Iron vs. Oral Iron Supplementation for the Treatment of 
Postpartum  Anemia (IVIRON MAN)  
 
Princip al Investigators: Antonio Saad, MD ; George R Saad e MD  
 
Funding Sponsor: Departmental  
 
 
1. Introduction and Purpose:  
Postpartum anemia is a major  global maternal health problem.  In developing countries, p ostpartum 
anemia affects more than two thirds of women. In the United States, it affects 50% of mothers ( 1) and 
it has  been linked to maternal morbidities such as impaired cognition, depression, and fatigue  (2-5). Its 
negative impact on infant -mother bondi ng and neonatal care ( 6) has been reported . A major risk factor 
for postpartum  anemia is iron deficient anemia  in the antepartum period . The latter results from 
physiological changes  in pregnancy ; total blood volume increases by approximately 50% and red 
blood cell mass increases by 25% (7). The relative increase of blood volume compared to red blood 
cell mass causes a physiologic al anemia of pregnancy and therefore the hemoglobin and hematocrit 
threshold for diagnosing anemia in preg nancy are different than that of a non -pregnant adult. This 
increase in red blood cell mass, combined with the needs of the fetus, placenta, and normal anticipated 
blood loss from vaginal delivery represent a total additional need of 1,000 mg iron for a pr egnancy, 
depleting maternal iron reser ve (8-11). Oral iron supplementation is currently the standard of care for 
women with iron deficiency postpartum  anemi a (12,13). Up to 40% of patients  do not  tolerate oral iron  
(13), mainly due to gastrointestinal effects,  leading  to poor compliance and persistent anemia (1 4).   
Intravenous (IV) iron has  advantages that bypass absorption challenges and  may lead to faster recovery 
of iron stores and hemoglobin concentrations  (11), with a proven  safet y record (1 6-17). Despite its 
advantages, IV iron is more costly and needs to be administered under supervision  in a hospital or  
outpatient clinical setting . Two major reviews have evaluated the impact of IV iron in the postpartum 
period (1 8, 19). The first review  did not find differences in maternal  fatigue or maternal deaths , but did 
not report hematological effects such as postpartum hemoglobin. Four  new randomized trials have 
been published  comparing IV iron to oral iron  therapy  (20-23). An updated review  of 15 randomized 
control trials  (N=2182)  concluded that hemoglobin concentrations at 6 weeks postpartum were almost 
1 g/dL higher in women who received IV iron compared to oral iron  (19). The safety profile of IV iron 
was also reassuring. Among the 15 trials included, only 2 were from the United States and neither one 
had 6 weeks postpartum hemoglobin as primary outcome. Hence , a large multicenter clinical trial is 
needed to adequately assess the impact of both modalities on hematological effects of postpartum 
anemia. Our aim  is to perform a feasibility trial in order to guide  a larger definite trial.  
 
 
 
 
Brief Study Design  and Rationale  
Patients randomly assigned to 2  groups will be compared:  
1. Oral Iron group:  Ferrous sulfate 325 mg (65 mg elemental iron) by mouth for a total of 6 
weeks TID .  
1.1 IV placebo in sodium chloride 0.9% 500mL infusion will be given before discharge ho me 
over 1 .5 hour, preceded by placebo test dose IV infusion of 100mL 0.9% sodium chloride . 
2 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021  2. IV Iron group:  Low molecular weight iron dextran (infed) 1000mg in sodium chloride 0.9% 
500mL IV infusion over 1 .5 hour, preceded by test dose of 25 mg IV low molecular weight iron 
dextran  infusion in 100mL 0.9% sodium chloride . 
2.1 Oral placebo will be given by mouth for a total of 6 weeks TID . 
 
 
The standard of care at UTMB for the detection and treatment of postpartum iron deficiency anemia 
is as follows. A ll postpartum  patients undergo blood draws at their first postpartum day  for anemia  
screening . Those patients who are identified as anemic (hemoglobin < 12 g/dL) then receive oral 
iron supplementation. There are many diffe rent iron supplements that are used at UTMB to treat 
iron deficiency in pregnancy. These supplements vary in elemental iron content, enteral coatings, 
and supplements combined with vitamins and minerals. The choice of which iron supplement is left 
to the discretion  of the provider caring for  the patient.  Among these choices,  ferrous sulfate (325mg, 
with 65mg elemental iron) is very common ly prescribed to UTMB patients and thus is the oral iron 
therapy that will be used for this study. Standard UTMB t reatmen t surveillance includes blood 
draws  at the 3 and 6 weeks routine postpartum visits. This study will follow the UTMB standard 
treatment surveillance protocol and thus study participants will have no study specific blood 
collections.  
 
 
Primary outcomes : 
• Postpartum hemoglobin and hematocrit  at 6 weeks postpartum visit  
 
Secondary outcomes : 
• Assessment of adverse effects (such as: arthralgia, backache, chills, dizziness, moderate to high 
fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, nausea, and vomiting ) 
• Analysis of CBC  indices including reticulocyte count, MCV, etc. 
• Iron studies at time of diagnosis  (Total Iron binding capacity, Ferritin, serum Iron levels: this 
panel measures the amount of iron used from the body’s stored iron in contrast to reticulocyte 
counts that measures amount of red blood cells the bone marrow is making).  
• Need for transfusion in the peripartum period  
• Postpartum  hemoglobin and hematocrit  
• Neonatal weight  
• Postpartum fatigue  (multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI) instrument validated by Smets et 
al.) at 6 weeks visit.  
• Postpartum depression ( Edinburgh postnatal depression scale) at 6 weeks visit.  
• Neonatal outcomes such as NICU admission, hyperbilirubinemia, and APGAR scores  
• Relationship of obesity to effectiveness of supplementation in both study arms  
• Drug compliance  
 
Study Risks and Benefits : 
The known risks of IV iron therapy ar e minimal infusion reactions: nausea, vomiting, chills, headache, 
flushing, constipation, mild arthralgia/myalgia of the chest or flank or facial flushing. All of these 
symptoms routinely abate after therapy, and plasma tryptase levels drawn after the reaction are always 
normal. The symptoms are most likely due to minor reactions to labile plas ma iron released with any 
of the formulations. Compared to the side -effects present in the majority of people taking oral 
preparations, such as constipation, metallic taste, gastric cramping and thick green tenacious stool, the 
adverse events with IV iron are minor, infrequent and short -lasting. Another concern is anaphylaxis, it 
3 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021  has been reported to be very rare (0.6%) with the new IV iron formulation currently in use. IV iron is 
consequently moving rapidly forward in the treatment paradigm. Published evid ence supports a wider  
and earlier role for IV iron in the management of postpartu m anemia and raises the question of whether 
it should be frontline therapy in such condition.   
 
2. Concise Summary of Project:  
This trial will be a comparative  pragmatic  double blinded  feasibility  randomized controlled trial of 
daily versus IV iron in anemic postpartum patients.  
 
Two randomly assigned groups will be compared during the postpartum  period:  
1. Oral Iron group:  Ferrous sulfate 325 mg (65 mg elemental iron) by mouth for a total of 6 
weeks TID .  
IV placebo in sodium chloride 0.9% 500mL IV infusion will be given before discharge 
home over 1 .5 hour preceded by placebo test dose IV infusion of 100mL 0.9% sodium 
chloride . 
 
2. IV Iron group:   Low molecular weight iron dextran (infed) 1000mg in sodium chloride 0.9% 
500mL IV infusion over 1 .5 hour preceded by test dose 25 mg IV low molecular weight iron 
dextran  infusion in 100mL 0.9% sodium chloride . 
2.1 Oral placebo will be given by mouth for a total of 6 weeks TID . 
 
 
The number of subjects studied will be 40 at UTMB, we plan to approach and consent up to 40 patients 
to allow for screening failures, early withdrawals,  and patients lost to follow -up, and patients who must 
withdraw due to failure of therapy . This number was decided for the aim as a feasibility trial goal.  
Study to last a n anticipated  length  of 1 year.  If our sample size is not achieved  by that time , we will 
consider the trial as not feasible at UTMB only . This trial will pr ovide important information such as 
eligibility, consent, and outcomes rates on which to base fe asibility and sample size calculations for a 
larger definitive trial , as well as how many clinical sites would be needed . 
 
 
3. Study Procedures:  
Patient Population  
The patient population will be selected from obstetric patients who delivered at UTMB  health system. 
This population can broadly be divided into patients care d for by one of the UTMB faculty obstetric 
providers and those who receive care through  the Regional Maternal and Child Health Program 
(RMCHP). We anticipate that the majority of the patients in this study will be recruited from the 
RMCHP patients.  
 
Locations  
John Sealy hospital  will be our recruitment site . Research staff will be present at  the location  and 
consenting and enrolling will only occur when research staff are present.  
 
Research Team  
The research team (or research staff) will consist of the PI, trained research coordinator, and additional 
staff to be trained and added to the resea rch protocol. All members of the research team will be able to 
screen and consent subjects. The PI will work to ensure that the team is of sufficient size to carry out 
the project.  Consenting and enrollment of subjects will only occur when a research team member is 
physically present at the study location.  
4 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021   
Screening  
All pregnant patients who deliver in our unit undergo a laboratory screen for anemia at the first 
postpartum day as part of the UTMB standard of care  while recovering in the hospital . Eligible patients 
(PPD#1  patients with a hemoglobin less than 9 g/dl) will be screened and approached while inhouse  
(detailed under section 8). 
 
The anticipated procedures flow is as  follows  
1. Research staff will go to postpartum ward . 
2. Research staff will co nfirm with provider that possible subjects are appropriate candidates for 
treatment with ferrous sulfate . 
3. Research staff will approach screened patients to obtain consent from possible subjects . 
4. Subjects will be randomized using a computer -generated sequen tial randomization log with 
group assignment, subject name, and medical record number . 
5. After patient is consented and enrolled , the provider will be notified orders will be placed in 
EPIC by providers with the assistance of the research staff; and a note will be placed in the 
electronic chart indicating that the patient is enrolled in the study.  
6. Subjects will continue to receive standard, routine postpartum  care and surveillance of 
postpartum iron anemia .  
a. Research staff and PI will periodically monitor surveillance data by chart review . 
7. During their routine 6 weeks postpartum visit, patient’s hemoglobin  level will be  obtained 
(standard  of care at UTMB).  If subjects have a hemoglobin level drawn before the 6 weeks 
visits , such as in the 3 weeks postpartum visit , we will also collect this information.  
8. Research staff will conduct chart review to obtain the data points  for the primary and s econdary 
outcomes (described in section 1)  
 
 
Additional details  
Our primary outcome as well as secondary outcomes are convenient data points collected in the 
standard treatment and surveillance of postpartum anemia. As such patients will not need any study  
specific venipuncture or  visits. The frequency and availability of appointments ensures that any 
symptomatic patient will quickly be seen  and evaluated.  
 
Any subject  who requires escalation of treatment beyond oral  or IV  supplementation (blood 
transfusion ) will be referred  to receive appropriate intervention.  These subjects will still be included in 
the intent -to-treat analysis.  The routine surveillance of anemic postpartum  patients described above 
ensures that any treatment failure will be quickly identified and addressed.  
 
Outcomes  
Our primary outcome will be hemoglobin level at  6 weeks postpartum . Based on the available 
evidence we hypothesize that IV iron supplementation  will be superior or at least not inferior  to oral 
iron supplementation. Additionally , we aim to assess the secondary outcomes  as listed in the 
introduction  obtained by chart review . Data to be collected includes population characteristics 
including demogr aphics and data points described in the outcomes listed under  the introduction  
obtained by chart review .  
 
4. Disposal and Administration of Drug and Placebo /Drug compliance  
5 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021  The intervention drugs ( IV/PO Iron  and placebo) will be provided  by Greenpark Comp ounding 
Pharmacy  and UTMB Investigational Drug Service (IDS). The latter will receive, store and dispense 
the drugs for the study.  
Once a qualified subject is consented and randomized, an order will be entered in Epic. The UTMB 
IDS will be notified to disp ense the study drug according to the treatment assignment per study 
protocol . The assigned drug and placebo  will be  delivered to the nursing unit to be administered by the 
nurse assigned to the subject. The assigned nurse will document the administration in Epic using 
Medication Administration Record (MAR). Any unused study drug will be returned to IDS for 
documentation and disposal. Medications used in this study will not be billed to the subject or her 
insurance company.  
The IDS will dispe nse the pills in a container/bottle and the subject will be given the bottle and given 
instructions to come to clinic at 6 weeks postpartum to see provider with bottle/container. The supplies 
given will be enough for total treatment of 6 weeks . 
 
The subjec t will be included in the analysis by intent -to-treat once the assigned pills are dispensed 
from IDS and sequential number posted on the subject specific randomization form . 
 
Drug compliance: subject will be instructed to bring pill container to all clinic  visits. The provider will 
document number of pills in the container in order to account for compliance  at best in each 
postpartum visit and emphasize compliance . At the end of the treatment period  (6 weeks postpartum 
visit) , the research team will collect  the container and count the returned pills prior to returning it to the 
IDS for reconciliation  within 2 weeks of receiving the bottle . Study participation will end at 6  weeks 
postpartum. However, if subject does not come to their scheduled postpartum visi ts, we will do our 
best to attempt to contact and retrieve drug container up to 10 weeks postpartum.  
 
If subject misses her regular postpartum visit, we will make every effort to contact the subject by 
phone and enquire about the outcomes.  
 
5. Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects:  
• Maternal age ≥ 18 years and <  50 years  
• Delivery  at UTMB  
• Hemoglobin below 9 g/dl in postpartum day 1: This  population has the highest risk to have 
complications from postpartum anemia, protracted recovery and the most to  benefit from IV  
iron (4 studies showed benefit of IV iron at 6 weeks PP in subjects with baseline hemoglobin 
values ranging from 7.4 to 8.1 g/dL .)19 
• Singleton gestation  
 
 
6. Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects:  
• Enrolled in another trial that may affect outcome  at the discretion of the PI  
• Diagnosis of malabsorptive disorder or history of gastric bypass procedure  
• Known diagnosis of anemia other than iron deficiency (thalassemia, macrocytic anemia, sickle 
cell, etc.) 
• Significant cardiovascular diseas e, including but not limited to myocardial infarction or unstable 
angina within 6 months prior to study inclusion or current history of NYHA Class III or IV 
congestive heart failure  
• Patient has received blood transfusion or there is a plan to transfuse  
• Lactose intolerance  
6 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021   
7. Sources of Research Material:  
The primary and secondary outcomes for this trial will be obtained from chart review for enrolled 
patients.  
 
8. Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process:  
Patients delivered  at UTMB  Galveston campus  will be screened to  identify patients with a hemoglobin below 9 
g/dl in postpartum day 1  who also satisfy the other eligibility  criteria.  Clinical providers will be educated about 
the trial prior to enrollment. We plan to identify these patients by screening the charts of patients delivere d in 
our labor and delivery unit  to identify  potential subjects. I nformation to be reviewed as part of th e screening 
process will be hemoglobin laboratory data and relevant exclusion and inclusion history. Research staff will 
function as the screeners and will alert providers that their patient is a potential subject. The provider caring for 
that patient will  then be informed of the patient’s eligibility. Research staff will work with the provider to ensure 
that the study intervention  is appropriate therapy for the patient. If the provider agrees that the study intervention 
is appropriate, t he provider will th en approach the patient to ascertain interest  in participation . If the patient is 
interested , the provider will introduce the research staff to the patient who will then explain the study  to the 
patient as part of the  consent ing process . A screening  log wi ll be used to track all subjects approached for the 
study. At the time of consent and randomization, the patient will be educated as to the dosing regimen a s well as 
the routine treatment surveillance that will occur. This will be done by the research staf f consenting the patient.  
 
Spanish speakers : 
Spanish speaking patients will be screened by use of a Spanish interpreter and all patient study materials will be 
translated into Spanish.  
 
Consenting process : 
Written consent will be obtained in a private room in the hospital postpartum ward  by direct person -to-person 
conversation. The PI or a collaborator will be responsible for the informed consent. Subjects will be given the 
time needed in order to fully unde rstand and read the consent forms  up to 12 hours . All efforts will be made by 
the research staff to answer all questions the subject has and to ascertain that the subject ha s the right to refuse to 
participate in the study. The consent form and process wil l describe that patients will be randomly assigned to 
either the study or control group. Each patient will be informed that participation is completely voluntary and in 
no way will affect the postnatal care they receive.  
 
9. Potential Risks:  
Randomization Risk: 
Since treatment will be randomized, it is possible that one or more of the other treatment groups 
will have more benefit or lower side effects than the other group.  
 
Loss of Confidentiality : 
Any time information is collected, there is a potential risk for loss of confidentiality. Every effort 
will be made to keep the subject’s information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed.  
 
Blood Draw Risk : 
Each subject will have two  blood dra ws collected throughout their participation in the study. Risks of 
taking a blood draw include  pain, a bruise at the point where the blood is taken, redness and swelling 
of the vein, and infection. There is a rare risk of fainting.  These blood draws are pa rt of the standard of 
care and will not place study subjects at any additional risk.  
IV Placement Risk:  
Each subject will receive IV Iron or placebo based of randomization group. Risks of IV placement 
are possible pain, bruising, and infection at the site of the needle stick where the IV is placed. 
Anxiety (nervousness) may possibly be experienced during the placement of the IV.  
7 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021   
10. Subject Safety and Data Monitoring:  
The PI and research coordinator will be responsible for monitoring the safety of this stu dy, this will 
occur on a quarterly basis . The monitoring will include participant demographics, expected versus 
actual recruitment rates, summary of any quality assurance or regulatory issues, summary of adverse 
events (AEs) or serious adverse events (SAEs ) which may have occurred . AEs and SAEs will be 
reported per IRB policies.  
 
11. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality:  
Data collection will be identified with a participant ID number. Data will be collected and stored with 
the participant ID code only. Th e master enrollment log linking subject identifiers with study ID 
numbers will be kept in a password -protected database. Relevant data variables (specified under 
outcomes) will be collected by chart review and placed into an Excel or Access file. These fil es will 
not contain identifiable information and will be stored in password protected, secured UTMB servers . 
The research coordinator and PI will be available to monitor the data and correct any discrepancies 
based on source documents if needed.  
 
12. Potential Benefits:  
The potential benefits of the study to the intervention group (IV iron ) include : 
1. Improved fractional absorption of iron with corresponding improvement of anemia compared 
to standard oral iron replacement therapy  
2. Decreased GI side effects with IV iron  
3. Faster increase in hemoglobin  
 
13. Biostatistics:  
We hypothesize that the IV iron  group will have a higher hemoglobin level at 6 weeks postpartum  
compared with the oral group . The primary analysis will be conducted on  an intention -to-treat basis. 
Between -group differences in continuous variables will be assessed using Student t test or Man -
Whitney rank sum test and results will be given as mean, standard deviation or median range as 
appropriate. Categorical variables w ill be assessed using the Pearson chi -square test or Fisher exact test  
as appropriate . For dichotomous endpoints, relative risk (RR) and 95% CI values will be calculated. P 
<0.05 will be considered significant. The analysis will be performed after study co mpletion . 
Based on data from the literature19, we estimate that women who received oral iron will have a mean 6 
week postpartum hemoglobin of 11.2 g/dL with a standard deviation of 1.2 . We anticipated that 
women that receive IV Iron  will have a postpartum 6 weeks mean hemoglobin of 12.4 g/dL. Using 
calculated  effect size, power of 80% and 2 -sided alpha of 0.05, we estimate that we will need 38 
(19/group)  subjects with complete ascertainment. Accounting for 5% lost to follow up, the final sample 
size would b e 40. 
We will be performing a superiority  approac h. Stata 16 will be used for the statistical analysis.  
t tests  - Means: Difference between two independent means (two groups)  
 
Analysis:  A priori: Compute required sample size  
Input:   Tail(s)                        = Two 
   Effect size d                  = 0.9592329  
   α err prob                     = 0.05  
   Power (1 -β err prob)           = 0.8 
   Allocation ratio N2/N1         = 1 
Output:  Noncentrality parameter δ      = 2.9565544  
8 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021     Critical t                     = 2.0280940  
   Df                             = 36 
   Sample size group 1            = 19 
   Sample size group 2            = 19 
   Total sample size              = 38 
   Actual power                   = 0.8203999  
 
 
 
References  
 
1. Milman N. Postpartum anemia I: definition, prevalence, causes, and consequences. Ann 
Hematol 2011;90:1247 –53. 
2. Gaynes BN, Gavin N, Meltzer -Brody S, et al. Perin atal depression: prevalence, screening 
accuracy, and screening outcomes. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ) 2005;119:1 –8. 
3. Corwin EJ, Murray -Kolb LE, Beard JL. Low hemoglobin level is a risk factor for postpartum 
depression. J Nutr 2003;133:4139 –42. 
4. Lee KA, Zaf fke ME. Longitudinal changes in fatigue and energy during pregnancy and the 
postpartum period. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 1999;28:183 –91. 
5. Beard J, Hendricks M, Perez E, et al. Maternal iron deficiency anemia affects postpartum 
emotions and cognition. J  Nutr 2005;135:267 –72.   
6. Murray -Kolb LE, Beard JL. Iron deficiency  and child and maternal health. Am J Clin Nutr  
2009;89:946s –50s. 
7. ACOG Practice Bulletin 95: Anemia in Pregnancy. 2008.  
8. Milman N. Postpartum anemia I: definition, prevalence, causes, and consequences. Ann 
Hematol 2011;90:1247 –53. 
9. Butwick AJ, Walsh EM, Kuzniewicz M, Li SX, Escobar GJ. Patterns and predictors of severe 
postpartum anemia after cesarean section. Transfusion 2017;57:36 –44. 
10. Wagner KS, Ronsmans C, Thomas SL, et al. Women who expe rience obstetric haemorrhage 
are at higher risk of anaemia, in both rich and poor countries. Trop Med Int Health 2012;17:9 –
22. 
11. Milman N. Postpartum anemia II: prevention  and treatment. Ann Hematol 2012;91:143 –54. 
12. World Health Organization. WHO Guideline: Iron supplementation in postpartum women. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2016. Available at: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/249242. Accessed Oct 15, 2020.  
13. Munoz M, Pena -Rosas JP, Robinson S, et al. Patient blood management in obstetri cs: 
management of anaemia and haematinic deficiencies in pregnancy and in the post -partum 
period: NATA consensus statement. Transfus Med 2018;28:22 –39. 
14. Friedman AJ, Shander A, Martin SR, et al. Iron deficiency anemia in women: a practical guide 
to detectio n, diagnosis, and treatment. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2015;70:342 –53. 
15. Peyrin -Biroulet L, Williet N, Cacoub P. Guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of iron 
deficiency across indications: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:1585 –94. 
16. Avni T, Bieber A , Grossman A, Green H,  Leibovici L, Gafter -Gvili A. The safety of 
intravenous  
iron preparations: systematic review and  meta -analysis. Mayo Clin Proc 2015;90:12 –23. 
17. Lopez A, Cacoub P, Macdougall IC, Peyrin -Biroulet L. Iron deficiency anaemia. Lancet  
2016;38 7:907 –16. 
18. Markova V, Norgaard A, Jorgensen KJ, Langhoff -Roos J. Treatment for women with 
postpartum iron deficiency anaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD010861.  
9 | P a g e  
Version 1.4 
11/10/2021  19. Sultan P, Bampoe S, Shah R, Guo N, Estes J, Stave C, Goodnough LT, Halpern S, Butwick AJ.  
Oral vs intravenous iron therapy for postpartum anemia: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2019 Jul;221(1):19 -29.e3.  
20. Damineni S, Thunga S. IV ferric carboxymaltose vs oral iron in the treatment of postpartum 
iron deficiency anaemi a. J Clin Diag Res 2016;10:QC08 –10. 
21. El Khouly NI. Comparison of intravenous ferrous sucrose and oral ferrous sulphate in treatment 
of postpartum iron deficiency anemia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2017;30:967 –71. 
22. Holm C, Thomsen L, Norgaard A, Langhoff -Roos J. Single -dose intravenous iron infusion or 
oral iron for treatment of fatigue after postpartum haemorrhage: a randomized controlled trial. 
Vox Sang 2017;112:219 –28. 
23. Rathod S, Samal SK, Mahapatra PC, Samal S. Ferric carboxymaltose: a revolution in the 
treatment of postpartum anemia in Indian women. Int J Appl Basic Med Res 2015;5:25 –30. 
 
 
 
 