Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay  
TITLE: The Peer Assisted Lifestyle (PAL) intervention protocol:  A technology -assisted weight -loss intervention within 
Patient Aligned Care Teams at the VA  
(PI: Melanie Jay, MD MS)  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
Veterans shoulder a d isproportionate burden of obesity and its c o-morbidities, including d iabetes, hypertension, 
and hyperlipidemia.  Modest weight loss in o bese patients through diet and exercise  improves health and prevents 
chronic disease, but prim ary care  providers (PCPs) often fail to adequately counsel patients about their weight due to 
lack of time and training. Thus, tools and brief interventions are needed to support pro viders’ behavior change 
counseling. The VA cu rrently offers the MOVE! program to treat overweight and obese patients, b ut fewer than  8% of 
eligible pa tients attend. At the same time, Veterans on average see their PCPs 3.6 times per year, which supports the 
importance of developing prima ry care (PC) -based interventions. The United States Preventive Services Task force 
(USPSTF) recommends the use of the 5As framework (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, Arrange) for counseling patients 
about weight.  
Interactive beh avior change technologies utilizing expert system software programs are an innovative way to 
facilitate 5As counseling to pro mote beh avior change in primary care. These programs perform computerized risk, 
lifestyle, and theory- based, behavioral assessment to provide computer-generated, tailored  advice to pa tients. They 
also can pro vide information to healthcare teams. The MOVE !11 software is an expert system program  for VA patients 
referred to MOVE!, but is not currently used in primary care  by Patient -Aligned Care Teams ( PACT). 
Collaborative goal setting can be used to ach ieve beh avior change in this intervention. This construct, a critical 
compon ent of several b ehavior change theories and models and corresponding to “agree” in the 5As model,  has been 
widely recommended for health pro motion in primary care.  Our formative work (MIRB #01333) using key informant 
interviews with PACT teamlets and MOVE! staff and focus groups with Veterans  demonstrated that goal setting is 
feasible and acceptable to patients and PACT teamlets and provided insight on  barriers to goal setting, and ways to 
facilitate goal -setting conversations.  
We developed a primary care -based intervention called Peer Assisted Lifestyle (PAL) to facilitate delivery of 5As 
weight management counseling within primary care and increase adoption of inte nsive VA programs such as MOVE!. 
The PAL intervention uses a software tool (that we developed) delivered on tablets to facilitate 5As -based weight 
management counseling with a Veteran health coach and VA PACT healthcare team  to pro mote goal-setting, behavior 
change, and weight loss in the primary care setting. The PAL intervention also includes up to 12 health coaching calls to 
patients over 1 year.  
As part of a clustered randomized control trial , we will randomize  up to 17 PACT teams  to either Enhanced Usual 
Care or the PAL Intervention , recruiting up to 520 subjects .  
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
- Test the impact of the PAL intervention on weight change and behavioral/clinical outcomes  
- Identify predictors of weight loss in Veterans participating in the intervention group related to goal setting 
processes and intervention components  
- Determine the impact of the PAL intervention on PACT obesity -related counseling practices and attitudes  
 
RESEARCH PLAN   
 
A. BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE  
 
VETER ANS/OBESITY  
The burden of obesity among Veterans is substantial, and modest weight loss can have significant benefit.  The 
majority of Americans are either overweight or obese1 and obesity is associated with higher mortality.2 Approximately 
36-37% of patients seen at the VA are obese,3,4 and obese patients have a high degree of chronic disease. For instance, 
84% of obese Veterans have hypertension, 78% have hyperlipidemia, and 45% have diabetes.4 Modest weight loss (7%)  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay via a 1 6-session program can reduce the risk of diabetes in high -risk patients by 58%.5  Thus, the United States 
Preventive Services Task Force  recommends that all patients are screened for obesity and offered intensive lifestyle 
counseling.6 
The VA offers the MOVE! program, an intensive lifestyle behavior change program, nationally. Patients who 
attended 2 or more MOVE! sessions lost 2.6 pounds more over 6 months than matched controls.7  They were also more 
likely to have clinically significant (>5%) weight loss (19% vs. 12%) and less likely to gain weight (29% vs. 38%).7 Another 
study of MOVE! demon strated improved weight loss trajectories ( -1.6kg/yr) compared to weight gain (+2kg/ yr.) prior to 
enrollment.8 Unfortunately, many obese patients are either unwilling or unable to attend intensive weight management 
programs, and barriers are poorly understood. Only 8% of eligible patients attend at least 1 MOVE! visit9. While this is 
partly due to poor patient adherence to the MOVE! program, another reason is variable implementation of MOVE!  
across VA sites. In addition, while one of the goals of the MOVE! program was to integrate weight management into 
primary care (PC), in practic e, this program often operates more like a specialty service where treatment is provided 
outside of the PC visit or setting where patients receive frequent care.   
 
PACT  
The PC setting is critical to reducing the burden of obesity; primary care-based interventions ha ve a broad 
potential reach. The VA/Department of Defense (DOD) guidelines for screening and management of overweight and 
obesity recommend that pro viders treat all patients with obesity.10 Vete rans in the VA system see a primary care 
provider (PCP) an average of 3.6 times per year,11 providing multiple opportunities for weight management counseling 
and referral to MOVE!. PC is an  important venue to promote weight loss, and effective PC -based interventions can h ave 
a significant public health impact. Physicians’ and other providers’ co unseling is associated  with pos itive beh avioral a nd 
weight-loss o utcom es.12,13 However, PCPs  frequently fail to effectively counsel obese p atients to lose weight.14,15 This is 
due to lack of training,16 poor competency,17 perceived lack of effectiveness,18 and competing de mands on time during 
the medical visit.19 PCPs may fail to recognize that a patient is obese. In a recent study, only 53.5% of obese p atients at 
the VA had an obesity diagnosis in their electronic medical record.4 Those that had a d iagnosis of obesity were much 
more likely to receive couns eling.4 Thus, interventions are needed to support p hysicians’ and other pro viders’ obesity 
identification and co unseling. 
To improve counseling opportunities and enhance care coordination during a primary care visit, the VA adopted 
a patient centered medical home model called Patient Aligned Care Teams (PACT) in 2010. The PACT model pro vides a 
team-based, patient-centered approach to health care that utilizes a multidisciplinary prac tice team that includes a RN 
Care Manager, a Clinical Assoc iate (LPN), and Administrative Assoc iate, and the primary care  provider (the “teamlet”) as 
well as social workers, dietitians, and specialists (other team members) to de liver patient-centered care.9,20 This recent 
implementation of PACT provides the opportunity for longitudinal, team -based care that is integra ted with the MOVE!  
program. However, in the 2013 MOVE! progress report, the majority (55%) of VA sit es surveyed reported that MOVE! 
programs were separate from PACT.21  Improving weight management counseling by PACT teamlets could increase 
patient motivation to attend the  MOVE! program and facilitate weight loss for those who do not attend.  
 
THE 5As  
The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that providers use the 5As framework 
to counsel patients for weight management. This model, which has been shown to promote weight loss and smoking 
cessation,22,23 guides the provider to Assess risk and stage of change, Advise weight loss and behavior change, Agree on 
goals, Assist via addressing barriers (motivational interviewing), and Arrange  to follow -up or refer patient for further 
treatment.24 Our previous work has allowed us to determine which aspects of the 5As framework need  to involve the 
healthcare team (e.g. agree and assist) and also identified which are particularly time -consuming (assessing multiple 
behaviors and providing advice).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay Compu terized interventions may be effective in 
helping deliver 5As-based obesity counseling in the primary 
care  setting. Interactive beh avior ch ange technologies use  
expert system comp uter software to evaluate patients’ risk 
and current behaviors (assess), a nd then generate 
personalized, tailored  behavior change ad vice (advise) .25 They 
have the po tential to help providers counsel obese p atients25 
and ha ve been sh own to facilitate goal setting (agree)  and 
lifestyle beh avior change in prima ry care settings,26,27 but have 
been  criticized for not including acti ve provider counseling.26,27 
Patients want and expect their primary care  providers to 
deliver lifestyle and weight-loss counseling28 and may be more 
likely to cha nge their lifestyle beh avior when couns eled by  
their own provider.16 Further, patient-provider com munication 
has been directly  linked to adherence a nd hea lth outcom es.29 
Figure 1 shows how the PAL intervention corresponds to the 
5As framework.  
 
GOAL -SETTING  
Goal setting is a critical comp onent of the PAL  
intervention , cor responds to the “Agree” component of the 
5As frame work24 and is  associated  with effective weight 
manageme nt.26,30 Effective weight loss interventions need to 
include the patients’ perspective, and having them set individualized goals is a  strategy supported by many behavior 
change theories including the Theory of Planned Behavior.31 Based on this theory, having an intention to change a 
behavior predicts behavior change. Thus, forming specific goals or “goal intentions” increases the likelihood of behavior 
chage.32,33 Goal setting is also commonly used to promote beh avior change in primary care  settings34 and fits well into 
other b ehavior change theories and models including the chronic care  model,35 chron ic disease se lf-manageme nt 
programs,36,37 and social cognitive theory.38 A systematic review of goal setting for lifestyle beh avior change in primary 
care sh owed that it was effective in pro moting diet and physical acti vity changes.38 Another systematic review showed 
that technology -assisted interventions combined with counseling promoted weight loss.39 Thus, technology -assisted goal 
setting has the potential to overcome barriers and facilitate weight management.  
Health-related  goals can be general (losing weight, exercis ing more) or specific (substituting water for so da, attending a 
weekly aerobics class).34 Goals can be a ssigned by a health care provider or set collaboratively. 34 Current goal setting 
theory, much of which is de rived from occupational psychology literature, states  that to maximize goal at tainment, 
behavior change goals should be specific, difficult, proximal, and set collaboratively with the provider.34,37,40,41 However, 
less is known abo ut how to best a pply goal setting to the prima ry care setting at the VA  or the specific soc ioeconomic,42 
environmental,  nutrition knowledge and behavior,43,44 and hea lth literacy factors45 that may affect goal setting proc esses 
and outcomes. Prior to our own qualitative studies, a review of the literature revealed no studies examining the 
barriers, preferences, and facilitators to goal-setting in obese VA patients. We used this information to optimize  the goal 
setting proce ss for the intervention. 
 
RELEVANCE OF PROPOSED RESEARCH TO VA  
The VA is a national leader in providing comp rehensive obesity screening and treatment programs. The VA 
currently screens all patients for obesity, and h igh-risk overweight and obese p atients are referred by their provider to 
the MOVE! program to receive comprehe nsive o besity counseling. Performance measures from the Office of Healthcare 
Transf ormation (OHT) stipulate that screening for BMI and offer of referral to MOVE! occur for all eligible patients ( the 
average screening and referral rate is 94%) . The MOVE!11 questionnaire is currently used prima rily by the small subset 
of patients who a ttend MOVE!  programs (use varies by institu tion). However, this tool is not currently used for PC 
patients outside of the MOVE! program, and our own formative research showed that it needed increased 
functionality in order to help patients use the tailored advice to set behavior change goals.  
 Figure 1: PAL Intervention in the 5As framework  
 •PAL tool assesses current weight management 
related behaviors and barriersASSESS
•Patient receives tailored advice by PAL tool 
and health coach. Advice is facilitated by 
educational handouts.ADVISE
•PAL tool guides patient to choose goals. Health 
coach and healthcare team work further with 
patient to agree on goals.AGREE
•Health coach and healthcare team do brief 
motivational interviewing to address barriersASSIST
•Referral to MOVE! program and/or other 
resources; Health coach follows up with 
telephone counseling.ARRANGE
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay THE PEER A SSISTED LIVING  INTERVENTION:  
The PAL Intervention will use an online tool to deliver 5As -based obesity counseling. Our systematic review 
showed that technology -assisted interventions combined with counseling by various members of the healthcare team 
promo ted weight loss. The VA’s MOVE!11 software (formerly the MOVE!23) is an example of this technology that has 
been used as an intake tool for the MOVE! program by thousands of Veterans and utilizes reliable and valid measures to 
help tailor weight management  treatments. Based on the MOVE!11, we created the  Goals for Eating and Moving (GEM)  
tool, optimizing it for use in primary care and adding goal setting functionality to facilitate 5As weight management 
counseling by PACT teams.  
The PAL Intervention will use health coaches integrated within PACT. It is a priority to hire Veteran h ealth 
coaches from diverse educational backgrounds who will work with individuals to achieve health -related goals. If 
circumstances restrict availability of a V eteran health coach, we will supplement the intervention with trained, non -
Veteran health coaches to maintain frequency of the phone coaching calls. All health coaches  can successfully deliver 
interventions to promote weight management within PC. We will u se non-clinician, health coaches integrated within 
PACT teams to facilitate 5As counseling.  
The PAL Intervention will use telephone coaching to facilitate weight management. Higher frequency 
interventions are associated with better outcomes. Since telepho ne counseling may be as effective as face -to-face 
counseling and more cost -effective, the PAL Intervention will incorporate  up to  12 telephone coaching calls over 12 
months (with initial high frequency) and follow.  
 
B. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
OVERVIEW 
 
Project Objectives  
The objectives of this study are to: (a) test the impact of 
the PAL intervention on weight change and 
behavioral/clinical outcomes; (b) identify predictors of 
weight loss in Veterans participating in the intervention 
group related to goal setting processes  and intervention 
components; and (c) determine the impact of the PAL 
intervention on PACT obesity -related counseling practices 
and attitudes.  
 
Project Methods  
To achieve these objectives, we will conduct a cluster 
randomized controlled trial of 17 PACTs  (randomized at the 
provider  level)  and 520 of their  overweight or  obese 
Veteran patients at the Brooklyn campus of the NY Harbor 
Healthcare System to study the impact of the 12 -month 
PAL intervention when compared to Enhanced Usual Care. 
Patients in the PAL intervention will complete the GEM  tool 
and receive health coach ing, followed by telephone 
coaching from the  health coach over 12 months. The GEM  
tool is a mobile -friendly software program designed to be delivered on tablet computers in the clinic setti ng to assess 
lifestyle behaviors and barriers, provide tailored advice and patient education materials, create initial weight loss and 
behavior change goals, and facilitate counseling by the health coach and PACT staff. Patients in the Enhanced Usual Care 
arm will receive patient education materials (standard VA Healthy Living Messages)  and information on the MOVE! 
program . All patient participants will attend follow -up visits at 6 - and 12 -months to assess Body Mass Index, waist 
circumference,  blood pressur e, diet, blood  tests , physical activity , and goal attainment. PACT staff and health coach 
outcomes  will include 5As -related competency, as well as quality and frequency of counseling.  If circumstances restrict 
the availability of in -person visits  (e.g. COV ID-19) or based on Veteran’s preference , this study will provide a 
remote/tele -visit option for the baseline and follow up visits . Figure 3 : Study Design Flowchart  
 
 Patient completes Baseline Survey  
Patient receives  
Enhanced Usual Care  Patient receives  
PAL Intervention  
6-month follow -up study visit in -person  
12-month follow -up study visit in -person  Regular PACT visits as needed  Telephone counseling  
Regular PACT visits as needed  
Regular PACT visits as needed  Telephone counseling  
Regular PACT visits as needed  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay  
 
 
DESIGN  
Identifying PACT T eams  – PACT teams at each site that meet the eligibility criteria below will be selected to be enrolled 
in the study. Individual PCPs will be allowed to opt out of the study.  We do not anticipate that primary care providers 
will opt out or drop out once enrolle d based on the VA PROVE study where all 18 eligible RN care managers and 51/52 
PCPs participated for the duration of the study.10 
 
Exclusion criteria  
• PCP does not agree to participate.   
• Not seeing a general primary care population with at least 20% of Veterans eligible for the study (e.g., will 
exclude Geriatrics, MH, ID, and HBPC)  
• PCPs with less than 250 patients  
 
Identifying and Recruiting Veterans – Using the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture 
(VISTA), the VA’s Health Information Technology system, we will continuously identify Veterans who meet the eligibility 
criteria below. Research staff  will review charts to confirm eligibility and send lists to their PCPs who will identify other 
contraindicatio ns to participating. One to two weeks before their potential baseline visit, potential participants will be 
sent a letter signed by the Principal Investigator (PI) describing the study and giving them the opportunity to opt out (i.e.  
request not to be cont acted). We will then call Veterans to recruit, screen for eligibility, and schedule the baseline visit 
which allows enough time for all intervention components to be completed. A similar recruitment strategy was used in 
the VA PROVE study,10 as well as in our focus group recruitment. We have IRB approval to use this strategy, and 
successfully recruited Veterans using this protocol in our pilot studies. We will aim for 20% of our sample to be 
comprised of women so that we can explore whether the intervention  needs to be tailored differently for women.46 To 
oversample women, we will contact a random sample of eligible male Veterans and all eligible female Veterans 
consecutively (in a 5:1 ratio). With consultation from local and national leaders in women’s heal th research , we will 
provide tailored recruitment materials, monitor recruitment targets, and make iterative changes to our recruitment 
strategy if these targets are not met.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Age 18 -69 (this age range represents MOVE! eligibility)43 
• BMI of ≥30kg/m2 or 
            OR 
•  BMI of ≥25kg/m2  AND one of the following obesity -associated condition s: 10,58 
o Hypertension: 401 -405 
o High Cholesterol: 272  
o Sleep Apnea: 780.57  
o Osteoarthritis: 715.9  
o Metabolic Syndrome: 277.7  
• Under the care of PCP with at least 1 prior visit with the provider in the past 24  months  
• Access to a telephone  
• Be patients of the New York Harbor Brooklyn  campus only  
 
Exclusion Criteria  (note that we are no longer excluding Veterans with specific health issues)  
• Non -Veterans  
• A documented current history of active psychosis or other cognitive issues via ICD -10 codes  
• Has participated in ≥4 MOVE! sessions in the past year  
• Pregnancy  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay • PCP stating that Veteran should not participate  
• Self-reported inability to read at a 5th grade level due to literacy level or vision problems  
With an expected 20% participation rate (based on pilot data) and a 75% retention rate (based on rates from another VA  
study and other technology -based interventions)  39,41, we will need to screen 2 ,615 Veterans with overweight/obesity to 
enroll a baseline sample of up to 520 Veterans and end with 392 Veterans completing the study. With a screening rate of 
approximately 3 0-35 Veterans per week (6 women, 24 men), we will be able to recruit our target population by the 
middle  of Year 3 (recruitment will start the first quarter of Year 2). 
 
Study Arms/Randomization  – Under the direction of the study statistician, the PACT teams will be randomized at the 
provider level using a random number generator to either the PAL Intervention or Enhanced Usual Care intervention 
arms.  
 
• PAL Intervention group : Participants will arrive  and complete consenting materials , a Baseline Survey, and the 
GEM  tool. They will then have a brief break if needed . After the break, they will work collaboratively with the 
Health Coach using tool -generated materials to modify the ir goals into SMART goals (specific, measurable, 
attainable relevant, and timely). The patient will then receive materials  containing an individualized report 
with a summary of their personalized advice, initial goals, and barriers and facilitators to weig ht loss. They will 
also receive a packet of MOVE! handouts tailored to their questionnaire responses  and schedule 10 -12 follow -
up health coaching phone calls during the next 12 months of intervention . The Health Coach will also inform 
the patient of the re sources available to them at the VA (e.g. MOVE, TeleMOVE!) that can assist them in 
achieving their goals.  
During the baseline visit we will encourage patients to sign -up for M yHealth eVet, if they have not already 
done so . If patients are signed -up for MyHealth eVet, they can choose to receive reminders for their upcoming 
study visits or health coach phone calls electronically via myHealth eVet. Alternatively, patients can choose to 
rece ive reminder phone calls from secure V A phones lines. Before upcoming phone coaching calls and study 
visits, we will send reminders via the secure messaging system My Health eVet or make phone calls via secure 
VA phone lines.    
At the end of the visit, the Health Coach will enter a research note  into the CPRS system detailing the 
patient’s goals and other important information in the form of a provider report for the provider to review 
(generated by the tool). At a later date, the  patient will meet with a PACT member (either the PCP or another 
participating PACT member) during their regularly scheduled PC visit who will review the goals and agree on 
them and/or modify their goals based on a collaborative discussion and conduct brief motivational 
interviewing to address potential barriers (3 -5 minu tes).  The PACT member will summarize this interaction in 
a specific CPRS note.   Also, over the next 12 months of the intervention, the PACT teamlet will receive CPRS 
reminders to discuss the goals with the patients when they return for their regularly sch eduled PC visits. 
Patients will follow up with VA resources if indicated/desired.   PAL intervention participants will return for 
separate 6 and 12 month  follow -up study visits to measure intermediate behavior change and weight 
outcomes . 
If circumstances restrict the availability of in -person visits  (e.g. COVID -19) or based on Veteran’s 
preference , this study will provide a remote/tele -visit option for the  baseline, 6 and 12 month follow 
up visits. For the remote baseline visit,  a scale,  a tape measure for the waist circumference, informed 
consent form documents, and the study resource materials will be mailed  to the participant . 
Participants who enroll via  a remote visit will have  IRB approval for written consent documentation  
to be waived  anda verbal assent  will be obtained through telephone /video  confirmation  by reading 
the informed consent form to the participant . Through the verbal assent process, the study will 
document in the patient’s medical records on the willingness to be contacted for future research 
about similar weight loss management research.   
 
• Enhanced Usual Care : Participants will complete the same consenting materials and Baseline Survey as the 
intervention group. Instead of the completing the PAL tool and receiving health coaching, they will receive 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay weight management handouts (Healthy Living Me ssages handouts and MOVE! handouts) as well as 
information about intensive weight management programs at the VA including MOVE !  Participants will 
follow -up with their PACT teamlets as needed when they return for their regularly scheduled PC visits. 
Patien ts will follow up with VA resources if indicated/desired. Enhanced Usual Care participants will return 
for separa te 6 and 12 month follow -up study  visits to measure intermediate  behavior change, and weight 
outcomes.  
If circumstances restrict the availabili ty of in -person visits  (e.g. COVID -19) or based on Veteran’s 
preference , this study will provide a remote/tele -visit option for the baseline, 6 and 12 month follow 
up visits. For the remote baseline visit, a scale, a tape measure for the waist circumference, the 
informed consent forms, and the resource materials will be maile d to the participant. Participants 
who enroll via a remote visit will have IRB approval for consent documentation  to be waived  and 
verbal assent  will be obtained through  telephone /video  confirmation  by reading the informed 
consent form to the participant . Through the verbal assent process, the study will document in the 
patient’s medical records on the willingness to be contacted for future research about similar weight 
loss management research .  
 
PAL INTERVENTION  ARM : BASELINE VISIT  
For Veterans in the PAL Intervention , they will need to complete the following (items 1  and 2  will be completed at the 
baseline visit). Average times to complete are included below based on pilot testing.  
1. Complete the PAL tool (20 minutes)  
2. Meet with a health coach and review materials  with tailored educational materials (30 minutes)  
3. Receive 10-12 telephone coaching calls from health coach (20 -30 minutes each)  
4. Follow up as needed with PACT teams for PC (varies)  
 
Baseline Health Coach  Visit  – After completing the PAL tool, a health coach meets with the Veteran for approximately 30 
minutes (based on our pilot study). All sessions will be audio -recorded for fidelity checks and health coach training  if 
recording equipment is available . The health coaching manual will help the coaches to do the following tasks:  
- Make initial goals into SMART goals (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, Timely)47 using worksheets  
- Encourage participation (using MI) in MOVE, TeleMOVE!, or other VA or community -based programs/gyms  
- Teach how to self -monitor weight, diet, and PA behaviors via pedometer, food log, and/or weight management 
apps (e.g., MOVE! Coach48,49   on iPhones, My Fitn ess Pal50 on Androids)  
- Provide brief MI and Brief Action Planning51 to address barriers and increase Veteran self -efficacy  
- Facilitate meetings with PACT dietitian if needed  
- Enter a report for PACT teams into CPRS summarizing the encounter (generated by the  PAL tool)  
- Communicate potential barriers/concerns to the PACT team  
- Encourage utilization of MyHealth eVet 
- After baseline visit, provide 10- 12 telephone coaching calls (described below)  
 
Telephone Coaching/Self -Monitoring Visit  – To achieve sufficient intensity according to VA/DOD and USPSTF 
guidelines,19,26 we will incorporate 12 telephone coaching calls by a health coach over 12 months. Scheduled calls will 
occur  two weeks and four weeks post -baseline, then once every month for the remainde r of the study . PAL Intervention 
arm Veterans will receive a reminder call to self -monitor their weight, food intake, and PA for at least 3 days prior to the 
coaching call. Studies suggest that episodes of short, consistent self -monitoring (for 3 days) lea d to weight loss and may 
promote better adherence.63 Health coaches will use self -reported self -monitoring data to determine goal adherence 
and counsel Veterans to encourage small changes.39 Data from health coaching sessions will be documented in REDCap, 
our research  database . They will help Veterans create new goals when appropriate and use MI techniques to address 
barriers to behavior change. Veterans will be able to contact health coaches  for additional support.  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay  
CPRS Research Note/Reminders – The PAL tool creates a provider report that the health coach will cut and paste into 
CPRS as a research note to summarize and communicate information to the Veteran’s PACT team about the health coach 
session. This note generates a CPRS reminder for the PCP. The reminder facilitates documentation about whether the 
PACT team discussed goals and provided further counseling. This research note and reminder system will also be used to 
document both health c oach telephone counseling and PACT counseling during future PC visits.  
 
PACT Team Role  – PACT teams randomized to the intervention arm will provide at least 3 -5 minutes of counseling. They 
will choose who on the team counsels (based on formative data indic ating variability in team member roles). They will 
document counseling with the help of CPRS reminders, provide brief MI to address barriers (depending on time and 
Veteran needs), and briefly discuss weight management goals during future PC visits. Each PA CT team dietitian will co -
sign the health coach CPRS note and will be available as a resource. Health coaches will attend PACT meetings to 
communicate the progress of enrolled Veterans. They will also communicate PACT team barriers to the PI.  
 
Tailoring th e PAL Intervention for Participants with Diabetes – We will use data from Veterans with diabetes from prior 
pilot studies (unpublished data) and input from our Executive Committee to develop additional diabetes -related content. 
We will also revise the healt h coach curriculum to include common counseling needs and concerns for patients with 
diabetes and linkages to diabetes resources at the VA. Gail Schechter, RD, the MOVE! coordinator, and Joanna Dognin, 
PhD, a behavioral psychologist and Health Behavior Coo rdinator (HBC) at the VA NYHHS, both Co -Is, will help create the 
content and curriculum.  
 
PACT Team Training  – PACT team staff will receive training sessions during Year 1 of the study with follow up training by 
Drs. Melanie Jay (PI) and Joanna Dognin (Co -I). As part of her role as HBC, Dr. Dognin has provided the majority of RN 
care managers and PCPs 2 -4 hours of MI training, as well as 6 hours of TEACH for Success Health Coaching Course64 
during the past 4 years. We will build upon this VA training to include 5As -based obesity counseling and additional MI 
skills practice based on a 5As training intervention conduc ted by Dr. Jay36 and other adapted MI materials through 
CCMI.52 We will invite PACT staff to observe MOVE! sessions since we and others have found that clinicians often lack 
knowledge about program specifics which negatively impacts referrals.8,66 Training  will also include indications and 
processes for referring to bariatric surgery. The first training will be approximately one hour with 2 -3 subsequent 
trainings for 15 -30 minutes. We will provide an overview of the 5As and the intervention components and p ractice brief 
MI (using role playing) to support Veterans’ weight management goals and address barriers to change. Finally, we will 
assist in incorporating the health coach into each PACT team (e.g., include health coach at monthly PACT team 
meetings). We will use an academic detailing approach scheduled either one -on-one or in small groups so as not to 
interfere with VA clinical or administrative duties. This delivery approach is well accepted and similar to that used in the 
PROVE study.10 
 
Data Collection   
Veterans:  Assessment will occur at the following time points:  
- In person study visits at Baseline , 6, and 12 months: Veterans will meet with research staff to complete surveys 
(described below), weight, height (Baseline only), blood pressure and waist circumference measurement, and 
blood tests (Baseline, 6, and 12 months only). If circumstances restrict in -person visits (e.g. COVID or if Veteran 
opts for a re mote visit, the weight and waist circumference will be obtained  via telephone /video . Height and 
blood pressure will be obtained through the patient’s most recent VA visit from the electronic medical record.  
The Baseline will include a survey (completed bef ore receiving PAL Intervention/Enhanced Usual Care). Veterans 
will receive accelerometers (described below). Electronic chart review will also occur at these time points. At 6 
months, Veterans in the intervention arm will participate in a short qualitative  interview as part of the RE -AIM 
evaluation Telephone Coaching Calls (Veterans in PAL Intervention arm only): Health coaches will use a 
counseling tool that also facilitates data collection.  
Chart reviews (24 months post -baseline visit) to explore maintena nce of weight and focus groups post -
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay intervention  
PACT Teams:   At 6 and 12 months, we will give surveys to PCPs  and audiotape select visits .  
 
Measures   
All variables described below will be collected and analyzed by research staff. Core measures are listed and described 
below. Baseline surveys have been pilot tested in 45 Veterans.  
BASELINE DEMOGRAPHIC DATA – We will collect socio -demographic information,  health literacy (2 -item screen53), and 
depression (PHQ970) via surveys. Co -morbidities will be determined via electronic chart review.  
AIM 1: WEIGHT AND CLINICAL OUTCOMES – 
- Weight & Height: R As (in-person visit) will obtain Veteran weight measurements using a standardized protocol 
which includes: 1) weighing without shoes or heavy garments using a digital scale that will be calibrated 
monthly; 2) at each study time point (Baseline, 6, and 12 months).   Height will be measured with a stadiome ter 
and rounded  up to the nearest half-centimeter , at Baseline only.  
- RAs (remote visit) will obtain Veteran weight measurements via telephone /video  using a standardized protocol 
which includes: 1) weighing without shoes or heavy garments using a digital sc ale; 2) at each study time point 
(Baseline, 6, and 12 months). Height will be obtained through chart review . Waist Circumference: Waist 
circumference will be measured using procedures adapted from National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES).54 RAs (in-person visit) will measure to the nearest quarter inch at the high point of the iliac 
crest at minimal respiration. This will be measured at Baseline, 6, and 12 months.  RAs (remote visit) will guide 
the Veteran on how to take the waist circumference  measurement  and obtain measurements through  
telephone /video . 
 
- Blood Pressure: RAs (in-person visit) will obtain 2 blood pressure measurements using an automated 
sphygmomanometer (Omron HEM -907XL). The cuff will be placed on the Veteran’s left upper arm, with the 
bottom of the cuff placed approximately 1  in above the crook of the elbow as per a standard protocol.55 
RAs (remote visit): Blood pressure will be obtained through chart review from the Veteran’s most recent visit to 
the VA.  
COMPENSATION  
To compensate for travel and time spent completing survey measures and basic measurements, study 
participants will be given a  cash voucher in the amount of 60 dollars for the Baseline study visit, 45 dollars for the 6 
month study visit, and 50 dollars for the 12 month study visit. This proposed payment is reasonable and commensurate 
with the expected contributions of participants and is meant to provide additional incentives for participants to 
complete all 3 study visits. This amount of paymen t and the terms of the payment are included in the informed consent 
form. This payment is fair and appropriate and does not constitute undue pressure or influence, or coercion of, the 
prospective research participant to volunteer for or continue participat ion in the research study.  
 
POT ENTIAL BENEFIT/RISK  
Benefits:  
- Patients : The patients who participate in the study will have the opportunity to receive weight management 
information, and potentially set lifestyle behavior change goals to improve their diet and increase physical 
activity, which may lead to weight loss and improved health outcomes. Even for patients who do not change 
their lifestyle behaviors, talking about these topics with trained researchers could serve as support or motivation 
to move them  closer to doing so in the future.  
 
- Providers  and other VA employees : VA employees who participate in the study may gain improved obesity -
related knowledge and patient counseling skills, which could enhance their career, job performance, and 
satisfaction.  Specifically, VA employees may have the opportunity to receive (additional) training in 5As weight 
management counseling and practice brief motivational interviewing. Training in these could help to facilitate 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay and/or improve discussions around weight mana gement and health behavior change with patients, as well as 
encourage the use of individualized techniques to improve diet and exercise and setting health behavior change 
goals with patients.  
 
Risk:   
- Patients: This research involves minimal risk for physical, psychological, social, and economic harm. The 
researchers understand that exploration of these topics and a persons’ individual struggle with their weight can 
be emotionally charged for many people, particu larly considering the stigma placed on obesity in our society. 
The researchers have been trained in order to effectively facilitate conversations on this sensitive topic and will 
seek to minimize any emotional discomfort you may feel during the study. Addi tionally, any potential behavior 
changes related to diet or exercise will be assessed and approved by properly trained individuals including select 
research staff, the Primary Investigator, and health professionals. Patients will be encouraged to slowly in crease 
their physical activity under the supervision of their PCP. While there is always the risk of injury from starting or 
increasing physical activity, the benefits usually outweigh  potential harms. We will monitor patients for adverse 
events.   
 
- VA emp loyees : This research involves minimal risk for physical, psychological, social, and economic harm.  
 
 
 
MEASUREMENTS  
Assessment will occur at the following time points : 
A. Baseline study visit:  
a. In person: b aseline survey, basic physical measurements (weight, height, waist circumference, and blood 
pressure) . 
b. Remote visit: baseline survey, basic physical measurements (weight and waste circumference)  via 
telephone /video , height  and blood pressure  results  through chart review  
B. Follow -up study visits at 6 and 12 months:  
a. In person visit: Follow -up in -person questionnaire and basic physical measurements (weight, waist 
circumference, blood pressure) . 
b. Remote visit: Follow -up questionnaire, basic physical measurements (weight and waist circumference)  
via telephone /video , blood pressure results through chart review  
C. Follow -up telephone calls (only patients in PAL intervention): Follow -up telephone questionnaire  
D. Chart review: This will occur periodically to assess MOVE! attendance, P ACT teamlet visits (documentation of 
weight management -related conversations), and medical co -morbidities. Outcomes will be assessed through 
chart review up to 2 years after the baseline visit.  
 
Baseline Data:  Prior to the intervention, patients will recei ve a Baseline survey. To evaluate recruitment for the 
intervention, baseline data including socio -demographic information, perceived health status, health literacy, perceived 
environmental factors, and depression will be collected.56-59 Co-morbidities will be determined through chart review of 
the electronic medical record. We will also collect health -related attitudes, beliefs, and baseline behaviors.  
 
Weight & Height:  In person visit, s tudy personnel will obtain patient weight measure ments using a standardized 
protocol which includes; 1) weighing without shoes or heavy garments using a digital scale that will be calibrated 
monthly; at each study time point (Baseline, 6, and 12 months).   2) Height will be measured using the primary care  clinic 
stadiometer and rounded up to the nearest  half-centimeter  at Baseline.  For remote visit s, study personnel  will obtain 
Veteran weight measurements via telephone /video  using a standardized protocol which includes: 1) weighing without 
shoes or heavy g arments using a digital scale; 2) at each study time point (Baseline, 6, and 12 months). Height will be 
obtained through chart review.  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay  
Waist Circumference:  Waist circumference will be measured using procedures adapted from National Health and 
Nutrition Ex amination Survey (NHANES)54. In person visit, s tudy personnel will use measuring tape to the nearest 
quarter inch  at the high point of the iliac crest at minimal respiration. This will be measured at baseline, 6, and 12 
months.  For remote visit s, study personnel  will guide the Veteran on how to take the waist circumference  via 
telephone /video .  
 
Blood Pressure : Study  personnel  will obtain 2 blood pressure measurements using an automated sphygmomanometer 
(Omron HEM -907XL). The cuff will be placed on the Veteran’s left upper arm, with the bottom of the cuff placed 
approximately 1‖ above the crook of the elbow as per a s tandard protocol.55  For remote visit s, study personnel  will 
obtain blood pressure through chart review from the Veteran’s most recent visit to the VA.  
 
 
 
Feasibility:  We will use process measures from direct observation to determine the feasibility of implementing the PAL 
intervention at the initial visit. Data on  the time to complete the PAL tool, number and types of goals made, number of 
patients reporting that their  PACT teamlets engaged in goal setting conversations, number of reminders completed by 
the PACT teamlets, time spent doing the intervention, the impact of the intervention on workflow (physician report, 
qualitative interviews ) will be collected. At 6 month s into the study period, participating PACT teamlet staff will 
complete an attitudes survey based on one we have used previously pertaining to intervention implementation. We will 
also perform qualitative interviews with providers.  We will use chart review  to note the number of times patients in the 
telephone support arm actually receive telephone counseling.  
 
Acceptability:  We will collect data on patient satisfaction with the int ervention and the overall visit60,61 using patient and 
provider surveys. We w ill conduct interviews with participating providers  to obtain qualitative data on acceptability.  
 
Intermediate Outcomes:  Our intermediate outcomes are based on the theory of planned behavior 31 where motivation 
and intention to perfo rm a behavior, mediated by self - efficacy, predict behavior change. These constructs will be 
measured with  previously used items that have been adapted for our survey measures by adding other elements of the 
Theory of Planned Behavior including behavioral beliefs, attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control.  
We will also assess goal attainment at 6  and 12 months.  
 
Physical Activity (PA) Outcomes:  We will measure duration and intensity using the International Physical Activity 
Questionnaire (IPAQ) items62 and accelerometers63. The ActiGraph Link (GT9X) accelerometer, worn on the wrist, will be 
used to objectively measure PA for 7 days at Baseline, and at 6 and 12 months. Study staff will place the Link monitor on 
the non -dominant wrist to measure PA for 24 hours a day during the Baseline 7-day measurement period. Veterans will 
then mail the monitor back to the study team in a supplied mailer with po stage. At 6 and 12 months,  the accelerometer 
will be distributed to the Veteran with a supplied mailer with postage to be mailed back to the study team.   Veterans will 
not be able to see their data on these monitors so as to minimize measurement influence on PA behaviors. This 
approach has been used in the NHANES Physical Activity Monitor study.54 The acceleration data will be used to 
characterize PA behavior. Examples of PA behavior include steps per day, ambulatory time, as well as daily sum of vector 
magnitude units per day. The daily sum of vector magnitude units are a quantification of all movement including 
ambulatory and non -ambulatory activity.  
 
Behavioral Outcomes:  We will assess diet and physical activity behaviors at Baseline and again a t 6 and 12 months. Our 
main dietary outcomes will be servings of fruits and vegetables, fat intake, refined carbohydrates, and sweetened 
beverage intake via surveys. A subset of up to 20 participants will complete 24 -hour dietary recalls, and this will all ow us 
to assess total energy intake and energy density in this subgroup. Physical activity outcomes will be changes in duration 
and intensity. We will use chart review to evaluate attendance to TeleMOVE! or MOVE! (# of sessions) pre - and post -
baseline visi t and 6 and 12 months post - intervention.  
 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay Treatment Fidelity:  We will do detailed chart reviews using a chart abstraction tool to monitor how often providers see 
patients and document goal -setting discussions during subsequent visits after the index visit . 
 
Data Storage/Security  
- Research Activities:  The following will all take place in private room at the Brooklyn VA with the PI and/or 
research staff – filling in consent forms, using PAL tool, receiving weight management information, receiving 
weight manag ement counseling, completing survey measures.  
 
- Storage of data:  All written data will be kept in locked filing cabinets in a locked room only accessible by the PI 
and approved study personnel and all electronic data (including survey responses, audio files, and responses to 
online tool) on secure local VA servers and only accessible on VA password protected computers by the PI and 
study personnel. Original audio files will be removed from recorders. The data key link will be maintained as a 
password -protected Excel datasheet on a secure VA Harbor computer within a lock ed VA Harbor office by the PI, 
and destroyed upon completion of the final study dataset.  The data key link will be kept separate from all 
survey responses.  Only study investigators will perform data entry, access either the surveys or datasets, or 
perform  any analysis of the dataset.  
 
- Transcription:  For transcription of audio files, files will be sent as encrypted files through the secure server to the 
VA-contracted transcription company, Transcription Outsourcing, LLC. Transcripts will be de -identified by  leaving 
all identifiable information out of the transcript and using only a unique coded identifier generated by the 
Principal Investigator. This unique identifier will not use any identifying information (i.e. it will not be generated 
using the subject’s  social security number, name, etc.) Recorded information will be transferred to Transcription 
Outsourcing via a HIPAA -compliant web portal using a VA computer. The transcripts will then be stored and 
analyzed on a VA secure server. This transcription proc edure was approved by the IRB previously ( MIRB 01333 ) 
under the consultation of the ISO and PO.  
 
- The PAL tool: The PAL tool uses a web -interface to ask health questions and collect the data in order to deliver 
tailored advice . This website will be hosted o n either a hired private programmer’s server (approved research 
personnel) or an NYU server. In both cases, Data Use Agreements have been setup with both parties and the VA 
to protect ownership and use of collected coded data. Data will be regularly migrat ed from either server (private 
programmer or NYU) to the VA server via encrypted USB drive.  This data storage procedure was approved by the 
IRB previously ( MIRB 01333 ) under the consultation of the ISO and PO.  
 
Other Quality Control Procedures:  The study staff will meet biweekly for the duration of the study to review patient 
recruitment and data collection procedures to ensure standardization. Research assistants will send reminders to Health 
Coaches when it is time to call patients in the tele phone support arm.  To monitor for and address unanticipated adverse 
events, there will be discussions during meetings with research staff, PI, mentors  of PI, and providers/VA staff.  
 
DATA ANALYSIS  
Sample Size and Power Analysis:  We base our sample size on  within -person weight change at Baseline and 12 months in 
each arm. We assume an interclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.05 for Veterans within each PCP and an ICC of 0.01 
for PCPs within each PACT team. Assuming that at the end of the study we have 5 teams in each intervention arm and 
recruit and obtain baseline data for 52 Veterans per PACT team  (392 Veterans total at 12 months), we will have 
sufficient power to detect a 2.2kg (SD=6.0kg) difference in weight between the intervention and non-interven tion arms. 
If we do not have PACT attrition (5 PACT teams per arm),  then we will have additional power. This amount of weight loss 
is consistent with findings from the ASPIRE VA study39 and a systematic review of technology -assisted weight loss 
interventio ns in primary care.41 We will also have the power to detect our hypothesized difference of 15% of PAL 
Intervention Veterans achieving 5% weight loss (clinically significant —as little as 5% weight loss can improve 
cardiovascular risk), 85% assuming 12% of i ntervention arm Veterans achieve this amount of weight loss.23 We will be 
able to detect 2.9cm  change in waist circumference . 
 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay Statistics Analysis:  First, all the variables will be summarized using mean with standard deviation and median with 
interquartile range for continuous variables and frequency table for categorical variables, overall and by randomized 
arms, respectively. Mann -Whitney tests for continuous variables and Fisher exact tests for categorical variables will be 
used to check if baseline characteristics are balanced between two arms. Second, Mann -Whitney tests for continuous 
outcomes and Fisher exact tests for categorical outcomes will b e used to compare outcome variables (including 
intermediate outcomes, behavioral outcomes, and weight outcomes) between two arms at 6 months and 12 months, 
respectively. Wilcoxon rank tests for continuous outcomes and McNemar tests for binary outcomes will  be used to 
compare them between follow -ups and baseline within each arm. Third, repeated measures modeling based on mixed 
models will be conducted to compare outcome variables between two arms, utilizing all the data at baseline and three 
follow -ups. Such  modeling can adjust for baseline characteristics, take into account the correlation among repeated 
measures within subjects, and deal with missing data automatically assuming missing at random. Finally, we will conduct 
sensitivity analysis based on multip le imputation procedure s to examine the impacts of missing data under some missing 
not at random assumptions.  
We will conduct  several  statistical  analyses  to describe  Veterans  participating  in the study.  Descriptive  statistics,  
including  numerical summaries, frequency  tables  and graphical  displays,  will be used  to present  baseline  participant  
characteristics. Exploratory tests,  such  as chi-square  tests and t -tests,  will be used  to investigate if baseline  characteristics  
are balanced betwe en two randomized arms . Analysis  of missing data  due to drop out or incomplete  surveys  will be 
investigated  by inferring  a relationship  between  baseline  characteristics/risk  factors  and 0-1 indicator that  defines  
whether  or not a measurement  is observed.  This analysis  will help  to identify  factors  that are likely  to be associated with  
drop out. Additionally,  we will investigate  whether  the drop out rates are different between two arms . For instance,  
participants  with  higher levels  of motivation  may  be more  likely  to be retained  in the study.  To deal with these missing, 
we will incorporate the multiple imputation procedure with the regression analyses to be discussed in the following, 
along with some sensitivity analysis.  
In order to assess the impact of neighborhood -level covariates that may help predict weight loss  and behavior 
change , as well as to better understand and report the environmental context of our study participants, we will 
determine the Veteran’s census tracts and block groups. To do this, we will send a csv file  containing the patients’ 
address es to the VA’s geocoding service , Geospa tial Service Support Center (GSSC) , which uses VA’s secured proprietary 
Enterprise Geographic Information System ( GIS) software  (https://www.va.gov/oei/docs/va -spatial -data -strategy.pdf ), 
via the VA’s encrypted email . The data will not include the patient’s name or apartment number.  GSSC will process the 
data and return a copy of the spreadsheet with the census tract and block group codes added. Once the data is 
geocoded, the addresses will be purged from the GSSC’s database. All applications of geospatial data will be compliant 
with the objectives and standards established under the VA Spatial Data Strategy (2022).  
 
Qualitative Data:  The audio recordings of provider interviews and patients visits will be transcribed by a VA -contracted 
transcription company (methods used in our previo us IRB -approved study MIRB 01333  and MIRB 01496 ). We will use 
detailed grounded theory -based procedures including open, axial, and selective coding.61 After multiple readings of the 
transcripts and making marginal notes with a second researcher, we will develop, test, and refine a systema tic coding 
scheme of themes and sub -themes, and relationships thereof using NVIVO qualitative data analysis software accessed 
through VINCI to assist in data analysis and interpretation. Analysis will be facilitated through constant comparison 
techniques.  
 
 
EXPLORATORY AIM  
Exploratory Aim: To compare the intervention arm to a third study arm of non -enrolled PC patients matched for age, 
gender, and BMI (“Usual Care”).  
 
Analyzing the Third Arm : We will compare the two randomized study arms (Enhanced Usual Care and PAL intervention) 
arms with the third study arm of non -enrolled  PC patients who are from the same cohort (seen by the same providers 
and eligible according to the same inclusion and exclusion criteria). Because the third study arm is not randomized, we 
do not expect the three arms are balanced at baseline characterist ics and comparable. We will first identify important 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay confounders (such as age, gender, BMI) and then use propensity score to adjust for these confounders when comparing 
the outcomes between the three arm s. 
 
STATISTICAL AND DATA ANALYSIS  
First, all the vari ables will be summarized (intention -to-treat approach) using mean (with standard deviation) and 
median (with interquartile range for continuous variables and frequency table for categorical variables) overall and by 
interventions arms, respectively. Then, Mann -Whitney tests for continuous variables and Fisher’s exact tests for 
categorical variables will be used to check if both providers’ and Veterans’ baseline characteristics are balanced between 
the intervention arms.  
Specific Aims Analysis  (main outcomes will be analyzed using intention -to-treat methodology).  
1. Test the impact of the PAL intervention on weight change, clinical, and behavioral outcomes  
 1a: Veterans in the PAL Intervention arm will lose 2.2 kg and 27% will achieve ≥5% weigh t loss after 12 months of 
treatment. There will be 0kg weight change in the Enhanced Usual Care arm, and 12% will achieve ≥5% weight loss.  
 1b: The PAL Intervention will result in improvements in behavioral outcomes (e.g., increased number of steps, 
increa sed fruit/vegetable intake, increased attendance to MOVE!) and clinical outcomes (blood pressure, Low Density 
Lipoprotein (LDL), Hemoglobin A1C, and waist circumference).  
 1c: The PAL Intervention will increase attendance to MOVE! and/or other intensive pr ograms.  
Method: The primary outcome is mean weight loss at 12 months. Mann -Whitney tests for continuous outcomes (e.g., 
weight loss) and Fisher’s exact tests for categorical outcomes (e.g., whether or not Veterans achieve ≥5% weight loss) 
will be used to c ompare the two intervention arms at 12 months, respectively. Unadjusted confidence intervals will be 
computed to measure the effects of the PAL intervention on the outcomes compared with the Enhanced Usual Care. 
Repeated measures modeling based on mixed mo dels will be conducted to compare outcome variables between 
intervention arms, utilizing all of the data at Baseline and at follow -up visits. Such modeling can adjust for baseline 
characteristics (e.g., diabetes, gender), taking into account: a) the correl ation among Veterans within providers , b) the 
correlation among repeated measures within Veterans. Model -based adjusted confidence intervals will be provided to 
measure the effects of the intervention on the outcomes as well. Although repeated measures mod eling can address 
missing data automatically, assuming it is missing at random, we will use a multiple imputation procedure to conduct 
sensitivity analyses under the practical assumption of missing not at random. The sensitivity analyses will be conducted 
using pattern -mixture models to examine if the statistical findings are robust when considering several scenarios, 
including the least -favorable scenario where the missing data from the PAL intervention arm were to follow the same 
pattern as that of the ob served data from the Enhanced Usual Care arm.  
 
2. Identify predictors of weight loss in Veterans participating in the intervention arm related to intervention 
components and goal -setting processes  
2a: Participation in MOVE!,  number of telephone coaching calls received, the use of self -monitoring, and 
counseling by PACT teams will be associated with weight loss.  
2b: Veteran self -efficacy and goal attainment will be associated with weight loss.  
 
Method: Visualization tools such as scatterplots and descriptive analyses such as Spearman correlation coefficients will 
be used to display associations between weight change and potential predictors. Multivariate regression  models will be 
used to examine the effects of those predictors that are suspected to be associated with weight loss in the intervention 
arm. Multivariate linear regression models will be considered for continuous outcomes  and multiple logistic regression 
models will be considered for bi nary outcomes. We will construct classification and regression trees (CARTs), which will 
generate the variable importance for each intervention component. Missing data will be dealt with using inverse -
probability -weighted methods.  
 
3. Determine the impact of the PAL Intervention on provider and nurse obesity -related counseling practices and 
attitudes  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay 3a: Veterans in the PAL intervention arm will receive more frequent and higher quality weight management 
counseling from PCPs than those in the control arm. Th e intervention will improve PCP self -efficacy, attitudes, and 
perceived competency in weight management counseling.  
 
Method: Mann -Whitney tests for continuous provider -level outcomes and Fisher’s exact tests for categorical provider -
level outcomes will be used to compare the two intervention arms at each survey. Confidence intervals of the effects will 
be computed as well.  
 
Missing Data Analysis  (to adjust for response bias) -- Although the repeated measures modeling can address missing data 
automatically under the assumption of missing -at-random, we will further analyze the missing data due to loss of follow -
up or non -response using two popular missing data tools, inverse -probability -weighting approach and multiple -
imputations approach. Both missing data approaches utilize the baseline characteristics to adjust for response bias. In 
addition, we will use multiple -imputations procedure to conduct sensitivity analyses under the practical assumption of 
missing not at random. Specifically, the sensitivity analyses will be conducted using pattern -mixture models to examine if 
statistical findings are robust when considering several scenarios, including the least -favorable scenario where missing 
data from the intervention arm were to follow the same pattern as that of the observed data from the Enhanced Usual 
Care arm.  
 
Sample Size and Power Analysis  – We base our sample size on within -person weight chang e at Baseline and 12 months in 
each arm. We assume an interclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.05 for Veterans within each PCP and an ICC of 0.01 
for PCPs within each PACT team. Assuming that at the end of the study we have 5 teams in each interventio n arm and 
recruit and obtain baseline data for 52 Veterans per PACT team  (392 Veterans total at 12 months), we will have 
sufficient power to detect a 2.2kg (SD=6.0kg) difference in weight between the intervention and non-intervention arms. 
If we do not hav e PACT attrition ( 5 PACT teams per arm),  then we will have additional power. This amount of weight loss 
is consistent with findings from the ASPIRE VA study39 and a systematic review of technology -assisted weight loss 
interventions in primary care.41 We wi ll also have the power to detect our hypothesized difference of 15% of PAL 
Intervention Veterans achieving 5% weight loss (clinically significant —as little as 5% weight loss can improve 
cardiovascular risk),  85% assuming 12% of intervention arm Veterans achieve this amount of weight loss.23 We will be 
able to detect 2.9cm  change in waist circumference . 
If we assume the missing rate at 12 months is 15%, then we will have 44 evaluable Veterans per team. We assume a n 
interclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.03 -0.04 for Veterans within each PACT team and an ICC of 0.01 for PCPs 
within each team. If the ICC of Veterans within each PACT team is 0.03, the power is 85% to detect a 2.2kg (SD=6.0kg) 
difference in weigh t between the intervention and intervention arms; the power is 87% to detect a 2.9cm (SD=7.7cm) 
difference in waist circumference. This amount of weight loss and waist circumference change is consistent with findings 
from the ASPIRE VA study and a systemat ic review of technology -assisted weight loss interventions in primary care.5 In 
addition, the power is 91% to detect our hypothesized difference between 25% Veterans in the intervention arm and 
10% of Veterans in the control arm achieving 5% weight loss (c linically significant). If the ICC of Veterans within each 
PACT is 0.04, the powers are 81%, 83%, and 87% to detect the same effect sizes of weight loss, waist circumference, and 
proportion of 5% weight loss, respectively.  
 
REFERENCES  
 1.  Das SR, Kinsinger LS, Yancy WS, et al. Obesity prevalence among veterans at Veterans Affairs medical facilities. 
Am J Prev Med. 2005;28(3):291 -294.  
 2.  Noël PH, Copeland LA, Pugh MJ, et al. Obesity diagnosis and care practices in the Veterans Health 
Administratio n. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25(6):510 -516.  
3.  Knowler WC, Barrett -Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes with Lifestyle 
Intervention or Metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393 -403.  
 4 5.  Kinsinger LS, Jones KR, Kahwati L , et al. Design and dissemination of the MOVE! Weight -Management Program 
for Veterans. Prev Chronic Dis. 2009;6(3):A98.  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay 6.  Moyer VA. Screening for and management of obesity in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Inter n Med. 2012;157(5):373 -378   
7.  Jay M, Mateo KF, Horne M, Squires A, Kalet A, Sherman S. “In the military, your body and your life aren’t your 
own:” Unique factors influencing health behavior change in overweight and obese veterans [abstract]. J Gen Inter n Med. 
2014;April(Supplemental 1).  
8.  Dahn JR, Fitzpatrick SL, Llabre MM, et al. Weight management for veterans: examining change in weight before 
and after MOVE! Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011;19(5):977 -981.  
9.  VHA National Center for Health Promotion an d Disease Prevention. MOVE! Weight Management Program for 
Veterans Fiscal Year 2013 Evaluation Report: Narrative Summary.; 2013. c  
10.  Whitlock E. Evaluating primary care behavioral counseling interventions An evidence -based approach. Am J Prev 
Med. 2002; 22(4):267 -284.  
11.  Damschroder LJ, Lutes LD, Kirsh S, et al. Small -changes obesity treatment among veterans: 12 -month outcomes. 
Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(5):541 -553.  
 12.  Jay M, Gillespie C, Ark T, et al. Do Internists, Pediatricians, and Psychiatrists Feel  Competent in Obesity Care? 
Using a Needs Assessment to Drive Curriculum Design. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23(7):1066 -1070.  
13.  Abid A, Galuska D, Khan LK, Gillespie C, Ford ES, Serdula MK. Are healthcare professionals advising obese 
patients to lose weight? : A trend analysis. Medscape Gen Med. 2005;7(4):10.  
14.  U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs, National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. MOVE! 
Implementation Best Practices: Evaluation Results, Final Report 2010.  
 15.  . Maciejewski ML, Pe rkins M, Li Y -F, Chapko M, Fortney JC, Liu C -F. Utilization and expenditures of veterans 
obtaining primary care in community clinics and VA medical centers: an observational cohort study. BMC Health Serv 
Res. 2007;7(1):56.  
 16.  Huang J, Yu H, Marin E, Bro ck S, Carden D, Davis T. Physicians’ weight loss counseling in two public hospital 
primary care clinics. AAMC Acad Med J Assoc Am Med Coll. 2004;79(2):156 -161.  
 17.  Jay M, Chintapalli S, Oi KK, Squires A, Sherman S, Kalet A. Identifying barriers and facil itators to improving the 
implementation of weight management services within a patient -centered medical home [abstract]. J Gen Intern Med. 
2014;April(Supplemental  
12 18.  Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotio n interventions: the RE -
AIM framework. Am J Public Health. 1999;89(9):1322 -1327.  
19.  Yarnall KSH, Pollak KI, Ostbye T, Krause KM, Michener JL. Primary care: is there enough time for prevention? Am 
J Public Health. 2003;93(4):635 -641.  
20.  . Ajzen I. Perceived Behavioral Control, Self -Efficacy, Locus of Control, and the Theory of Planned Behavior. J Appl 
Soc Psychol. 2002;32(4):665 -683.  
21. U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs and Department of Defense. Management of Obesity and Overweight (OBE) 
(2014). VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of Overweight and Obesity.  
22.  Kahwati LC, Lance TX, Jones KR, Kinsinger  LS. RE -AIM evaluation of the Veterans Health Administration’s MOVE! 
Weight Management Program. Transl Behav Med. 2011;1(4):551 -560 
23. Arigo D, Hooker S, Funderburk J, et al. Provider and staff perceptions of veterans’ attrition from a national primary 
care weight management program. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2014;(February):1 -10.  Rosland A -M, Nelson K, Sun H, 
et al. The patient -centered medical home in the Veterans Health Administration. Am J Manag Care. 2013;19(7):e263 -
e272.  
24.  Jacques L, Jensen TS, S chafer J, McClain S CJ. Decision Memo for Intensive Behavioral Therapy for Obesity (CAG -
00423N).; 2011.  
25.  Ockene IS, Hebert JR, Ockene JK, et al. Effect of Physician -Delivered Nutrition Counseling Training and an Office -
Support Program on Saturated Fat Intake, Weight, and Serum Lipid Measurements in a Hyperlipidemic Population: 
Worcester Area Trial for Counseling in Hyperlipidemia (WATCH). Vol 159. 1999.  
26.  Unrod M, Smith M, Spring B, DePue J, Redd W, Winkel G. Randomized Controlled Trial of a Computer -Based, 
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay Tailored Intervention to Increase Smoking Cessation Counseling by Primary Care Physicians. J Gen Intern Med. 
2007;22(4):478 -484.  
27.  Goldstein MG, Whitlock EP, DePue J. Multiple behavioral risk factor interventions in primary care. Summary of 
rese arch evidence. Am J Prev Med. 2004;27(2 Suppl):61 -79. 
28.  Jay M, Gillespie CC, Schlair SL, et al. The impact of primary care resident physician training on patient weight loss 
at 12 months. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(1):45 -50. 
29.  Nelson T, Jay M, Yin S, Squires A, Hung C, Altshuler L. Adventures in piloting an interprofessional obesity 
curriculum. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;April(Supplemental 1).  
30.  Bodenheimer T, Handley MA. Goal -setting for behavior change in primary care: an exploration and status  report. 
Patient Educ Couns. 2009;76(2):174 -180.  
31.  Damschroder LJ, Lutes LD, Kirsh S, et al. Small -changes obesity treatment among veterans: 12 -month outcomes. 
Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(5):541 -553.  
32.   Foster GD, Wadden TA, Makris AP, et al. Primary care  physicians’ attitudes about obesity and its treatment. 
Obes Res. 2003;11(10):1168 -1177  
33.  Locke EA, Latham GP. Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35 -year odyssey. 
Am Psychol. 2002;57(9):705 -717.  
34.  Shilts MK, H orowitz M, Townsend MS. Goal setting as a strategy for dietary and physical activity behavior 
change: a review of the literature. Am J Heal Promot. 2004;19(2):81 -93. 
35.  Levine DM, Savarimuthu S, Squires A, Nicholson J, Jay M. Technology -assisted weight l oss interventions in 
primary care: a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30(1):107 -117.  
36.  Mateo KF, Sikerwar S, Squires A, Kalet A, Sherman SE, Jay M. Development of a tailored, 5A’s -based weight 
management intervention for Veterans within primary  care. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;April(Supplemental 2).  
37.  Del Re AC, Maciejewski ML, Harris AHS. MOVE: weight management program across the Veterans Health 
Administration: patient - and facility -level predictors of utilization. BMC Health Serv Res. 2013;13: 511.  
38.  Wolever RQ, Simmons LA, Sforzo GA, et al. A Systematic Review of the Literature on Health and Wellness 
Coaching: Defining a Key Behavioral intervention in Healthcare. Glob Adv Health Med. 2013;2(4):38 -57. 
39.  Appel LJ, Clark JM, Yeh H -C, et al. Comparative Effectiveness of Weight -Loss Interventions in Clinical Practice. N 
Engl J Med. 2011;365(21):1959 -1968.  
40.  Digenio AG, Mancuso JP, Gerber RA, Dvorak R V. Comparison of methods for delivering a lifestyle modification 
program for obese patients:  a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150(4):255 -262.  
41.  Garvin JT. Weight reduction goal achievement with high -intensity MOVE! treatment. Public Health Nurs. 
2015;32(3):232 -236.  
42.  Neuwirth EB, Schmittdiel JA, Tallman K, Bellows J. Understanding P anel Management: A comparative study of an 
emerging approach to population care. Perm J. 2007;11(3):12 -20. 
43.  Schwartz MD, Jensen A, Wang B, et al. Panel Management to Improve Smoking and Hypertension Outcomes by 
VA Primary Care Teams: A Cluster -Randomiz ed Controlled Trial. J Gen Intern Med. February 2015.  
44.  Peterson JC, Czajkowski S, Charlson ME, et al. Translating basic behavioral and social science research to clinical 
application: The EVOLVE mixed methods approach. Spec Issue Behav Med Clin Heal Ps ychol. 2013;81(2):217 -230.  
45.  Czajkowski S, Powell L, Adler N, et al. From ideas to efficacy: The ORBIT model for developing behavioral 
treatments for chronic disease. Heal Psychol. 2015;Epub.  
46.  Perez HR, Nick MW, Mateo KF, Sherman SE, Kalet A, Jay M.  “None of them apply to me”: A usability study of the 
VA’s MOVE!23 online weight management software in Latina Women [abstract]. J Gen Intern Med. 
2014;April(Supplemental 1).  
47.  Gutnick D, Reims K, Davis C, Gainforth H, Jay M, Cole S. Brief action planni ng to facilitate behavior change and 
support self -management. J Clin Outcomes Manag. 2014;1(1).  
48.  U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. MOVE! Coach [online]. 2015  
Version: 0 3/1/202 3 
Jay 49.  U.S. Department of Veterans. MOVE! Coach app [online]. 2015.  
50.  . MyFitnessPal [online]. 2015.  
51.  Robertson C, Avenell A, Boachie C, et al. Should weight loss and maintenance programmes be designed 
differently for men? A systematic review of long -term randomised controlled trials presenting data for men and women: 
The ROMEO project. Obes Res Clin Pract. April 2015.  
52.  The Centre for Collaboration, Motivation and Innovation (CCMI) [online]. 2015  
53.  Wallace LS, Rogers ES, Roskos SE, Holiday DB, Weiss BD. Brief report: screening items to identify patients with 
limited health literacy skills. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21(8):874 -877.  
54.  U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. MOVE! Coach [online]. 2015. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES): Physical Activity Moni tor (PAM) Procedures Manual 
[online].; 2011.  
55.  Friedberg JP, Rodriguez MA, Watsula ME, et al. Effectiveness of a tailored behavioral intervention to improve 
hypertension control: primary outcomes of a randomized controlled trial. Hypertension. 2015;65( 2):440 -446.  
56.  Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med. 
2001;16(9):606 -613.  
57.  Thompson FE, Midthune D, Sabar AF, Kahle LL, Schatzkin A, Kipnis V. Performance of a short tool to a ssess 
dietary intakes of fruits and vegetables, percentage energy from fat and fibre. Public Health Nutr. 2004;7(8):1097 -1106.  
58.  Peterson ND, Middleton KR, Nackers LM, Medina KE, Milsom VA, Perri MG. Dietary self -monitoring and long -
term success with we ight management. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22(9):1962 -1967.  
59.  VHA National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. Fiscal Year 2011 Highlights.; 2011.  
61.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance S ystem 2013 Questionnaire. 
Atlanta, Georgia; 2012.  
62.  Hagströmer M, Oja P, Sjöström  M.  the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ): A study of 
concurrent and construct validity.  Pub Health Nutr. 2006;9(6):755 -62. 
63.  Murphy SL. Review of physical activity measurement using accelerometers in older adults: considerations fo r 
research design and conduct. Prev Med (Baltim). 2009;48(2):108 -114.  