 
1 
  
 
APPROVED  BY SALUS  IRB: 07 MAY  2024  
 
 
 
 
TITLE:  Comparative  Study  of the DMM  and Conventional  Toric  Marker  
 
PROTOCOL  NO:  IIT# 92162521  
 
AMENDMENT  NO:  Version  1.0 
 
IRB:  Salus  IRB     
 2111  West  Braker  Lane,  Suite  400 
Austin,  TX 78758  
 
SPONSOR:   Ganesha  Ramana  ‘Rom’  Kandavel,  MD 
 
INVESTIGATOR : Ganesha  Ramana  ‘Rom’  Kandavel  MD 
 5363  Balboa  Blvd Suite  540 
 Encino,  CA 91316  
 United  States  
 
STUDY -RELATED  818-906-2929  (During  business  hours)  
PHONE  NUMBER:  818-446-2312  (24-Hour  line) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  
1. Executive  Summary  
 
NEED  
There  is currently  a paucity  of data comparing  ARGOS  combined  with the Digital  Marker  Microscope  and 
other  Conventional  Marking  Modalities  for Toric  IOL alignment  during  cataract  surgery.  
 
STUDY  OBJECTIVE  
To evaluate  the postoperative  refractive  accuracy  of the common  toric Intraoperative  marking  method  of 
Toric  CAM  and Mendez  marking  when  compared  to ARGOS  combined  with the Digital  Marker  Microscope  
(DMM)/Vision  Suite.  
 
STUDY  HYPOTHESIS  
The DMM  linked  to Argos  preoperative  measurements  with limbal  registration  determines  the angle  for 
toric IOL alignment  intraoperatively  more  accurately  than the manual  Mendez  marker.  
 
SUPPORTS  CLINICAL  MESSAGE  
The use of ARGOS  with intraoperative  image  guidance  improves  the toric alignment  error  significantly  and 
allows  for more  % of eyes  within  0.5D  residual  CYL (20%  more  eyes)  as compared  to manual  marking.  
 
STUDY  DESIGN  
Sample  size   35 eyes  
 
Endpoints    Primary:  Difference  in intraoperative  axis marks  with Mendez  marker,  in 
      degrees  and direction,  when  compared  to the DMM  as viewed 
      in the intraoperative  heads -up display  
Secondary:   % of eyes  less than 0.25,  0.5, 0.75,  1.00 and 1.25 D of residual  
   refractive  cylinder  (CYL)  in each  group  at 1 month    
   postoperatively  
 
Design :   Single -site, head  to head,  prospective,  interventional  (all eyes  will be 
planned/implanted  using  ARGOS  with image  guidance  axis; and the manual  
 marker  results  will be back  calculated  utilizing  IOL position  and post-operative  
 refraction)  
 
DURATION/FOLLOW -UP: Preoperative  to 1 month  postoperative  
 
 
This study  will be registered  with clinicaltrials.gov.  The study  will be conducted  in compliance  with the 
protocol,  GCP,  and applicable  regulatory  requirements .  
 
 
3 
 2. Study  Background  
 
Toric  IOLs  offer  patients  with corneal  astigmatism,  increased  spectacle  independence  after  
cataract  surgery.  Toric  marking  aims  at improving  the accuracy  of incision  location  and IOL 
alignment.  Conventional  markers  rely on a reference  mark  tied to gravitational  alignment  
and the accuracy  in manual  marking  methods  is affected  by head  position,  errors  on 
marking  and smearing  of ink. Digital  marking  methods  aim to reduce  intraoperative  IOL 
misalignment  using  images  captured  in the sitting  position  which  are used  as overlay  for 
IOL alignment  intraoperatively¹.  The DMM  linked  to ARGOS  preoperative  measurements  
with limbal  registration  determines  the exact  angle  for toric IOL alignment  intraoperatively.  
 
The purpose  of this study  is to compare  the outcome  of toric IOL implantation  guided  by 
manual  or digital  marking  techniques.  The intrinsic  difference  in the toric axis alignment  
may lead to a significant  difference  in the marked  alignment  axis intraoperatively  resulting  
in superior  refractive  outcomes  and less residual  astigmatism  using  intraoperative  
alignment  from the ARGOS  Vision  planner  and DMM.  
 
3. Study  Design  
• A single  site, interventional  study  comparing  the ARGOS/  DMM  axis to the Mendez  
toric marker  paired  with the toriCAM  smart  phone  app.  
• There  will be 35 eyes  total that meet  the inclusion  criteria.  Patient’s  refraction  will be 
evaluated  4 weeks  after  cataract  surgery  with a monofocal  toric IOL (Clareon  Toric).  
• Intraoperative  difference  in toric marks  will be recorded  in degrees  and direction  of 
marking  difference  (clockwise  and counterclockwise).  
• Post  operative  refraction  will be obtained  at 4 weeks  after  surgery  using  standard  
Snell en acuity  chart  and phoropter.  IOL position  will be verified  with slit lamp  
photography  aligned  with preoperative  Argos  toric imaging  to ensure  that IOL position  
is NOT  a source  of refractive  error.   
• We will perform  back  calculation  of theoretical  refraction,  as if the IOL was positioned  
at Mendez  marking  axis rather  than the Argos  axis.  This will be calculated  using  the 
IOL position  and post operative  refraction  with Astigmatismfix.com  calculator  or 
equivalent  calculat or 
 
 
4 
 4. Study  Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion  Criteria  
Subjects  are eligible  for the study  if they meet  the following  criteria:  
 
• Subjects  willing  and able to participate  in this study.  
• Subjects  that have  signed  a consent  to participate  in the study.  
• Subjects  that are 50-80 years  of age that have  had uncomplicated  femto -second  
assisted  cataract  surgery  
• Subjects  will have  been  implanted  with the toric Alcon  Clareon  Toric  monofocal  IOL 
• Subjects  with IOLs  implanted  based  on digital  marking  performed  using  ARGOS  DMM  
• Subjects  will have  BCDVA  of LogMar  0.20 (20/32)  or better  in both eyes  
• Subjects  able to perform  a post-op refraction.  
 
4.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
 
If any of the following  exclusion  criteria  are applicable  to the subject,  the subject  should  not 
be included  in the study:  
 
• History  of amblyopia,  macular  disease,  glaucoma,  corneal  disease,  prior  corneal  
surgery,  or diabetes  
• IOL final position  greater  than 2 degree s from intended  axis.  
• Ocular  comorbidity  that might  hamper  post operative  visual  acuity  
• Previous  ocular  or refractive  surgery  
• Expected  post-op VA worse  than 20/25  (Snellen)  
• Irregular  corneal  astigmatism  and keratoconus  
• Difficulties  comprehending  written  or spoken  English  language  
• Patients  that are unable  to fixate  due to physical  or intellectual  disability  (e.g.  Down’s  
Syndrome,  Parkinson’s  Disease)  
• Sever e/uncontrolled  Ocular  surface  disease/Dry  Eye Disease  
• Intraoperative  complications  during  procedure  
  
 
5 
 5. Study  Procedures  
5.1 Preoperative  
At the preoperative  exam,  subjects  will undergo  all routine,  usual  standard -of-care 
procedures,  including  a medical  history,  demographics,  ARGOS  biometry,  and a slit-lamp  
and dilated  fundus  examination . Subjects  will then be consented  for the study,  and a review  
of inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  will be done  prior  to the surgery.  
5.2 Operative  (Day  of Surger y) 
All subjects  will undergo  femto -second  assisted  cataract  surgery  with implantation  of the 
Clareon  monofocal  toric IOL. 
The toriCAM  smartphone  app will be used  to mark  the horizontal  axis as a reference  
preoperatively  in a sitting  position.  The target  axis of the IOL, as calculated  by the Argos,  will 
be marked  intraoperatively  with a Mendez  marker  based  on the horizontal  reference  marker  
from the Toric  Cam.  
After  phacoemulsification,  the Digital  Marker  Microscope  (DMM)  will be used  to determine  
the target  axis by using  an image  overlay   
 
The difference  in the final marked  IOL axis and the DMM  axis will be measured  using  the 
DMM  degree  overlay  intraoperatively.  The difference  in degrees  and the direction  will be 
recorded.  
5.3 Postoperative  Visits  
Subjects  will undergo  all routine,  usual  standard -of-care postoperative  procedures  and follow  
up appointments.   
In addition,  4 weeks  following  cataract  surgery,  the final position  of the IOL will be confirmed  
using  a slit lamp  photograph  compared  to the ORIGINAL  Argos  reference  image.  The 
surgeon  will confirm  that the IOL is within  2 degrees  of the final intended  axis as calculated  
by the Alcon  Vision  Planner.  
Then  the postoperative  subjective  refraction  shall  be measured  by Snellen  and Phoropte r 
method  and the theoretical  refraction  shall  be back  calculated  using  the double  vector  
method  to arrive  with the refraction  that would  have  been  obtained  by the Mendez  marking  
 
6 
 method.  This will be calculated  using  the IOL position  and post operative  refraction  with 
Astigmatismfix.com  calculator  or equivalent  calculation.  
6. Statistical  Analysis  
A summary  of the data will be prepared  for all measurements.  For variables  measured  on a 
continuous  scale,  these  summaries  will include  the sample  size,  as well as the mean,  
standard  deviation,  median,  minimum,  and maximum.  For variables  measured  on a 
categorical  scale,  summaries  will provide  the number  and percentage  of eyes  in each  
category.  These  summaries  will be provided  for all eyes  completing  the study.   
The statistical  analyses  will be performed  using  R, version  4.2.2  or higher.  Any statistical  
tests  of hypotheses  will employ  a level  of significance  of alpha=0.05.   
The primary  endpoint  will be compared  using  the paired  t-Test.  Secondary  endpoints  will be 
compared  using  McNemar’s  test. Analysis  will follow  a step down  approach:   
• Difference  in intraoperative  axis marks  with Mendez  marker,  in degrees  and direction,  
when  compared  to the DMM  viewed  in the intraoperative  HUD   
•  % of eyes  less than 0.5D  CYL in each  group  
•  % of eyes  less than 0.25D  CYL in each  group   
•  % of eyes  less than 0.75D  CYL in each  group   
•  % of eyes  less than 1.0D  CYL in each  group   
•  % of eyes  less than 1.25D  CYL in each  group  
  
 
7 
 7. Sample  Size  Justification  
Based  on the primary  endpoint,  the study  would  require  a sample  size of 21 pairs  (to achieve  
a power  of 80%  and a level  of significance  of 5% (two sided),  for detecting  a mean  of the 
differences  of 4.4 between  pairs,  assuming  the standard  deviation  of the differences  to be 
6.5.1  
However,  in order  to achieve  a sample  size that allows  for statistical  analysis  of the 
secondary  endpoints,  we estimate  the sample  size required  for detecting  a difference  of 0.20 
between  the percentage  of with postoperative  residual  astigmatism  0.5 D or less (85%  
compared  to 65%),  power  of 85%,  correlation  between  paired  observations  0.80,  and a two-
sided  significance  of 5% is 30.2  
To account  for dropout,  the sample  size will be increased  to 35 eyes.   
 
 
References   
1. Lipsky  L, et al. Comparison  of toric intraocular  lens alignment  error  with different  toric 
markers.  J Cataract  Refract  Surg.  2019;  45:1597–1601.   
2. Webers  VSC,  Bauer  NJC,  Visser  N, Berendschot  T, van den Biggelaar  F, Nuijts  R. 
Image -guided  system  versus  manual  marking  for toric intraocular  lens alignment  in 
cataract  surgery.  J Cataract  Refract  Surg.  2017;  43: 781-788. 
 
 