 
 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL 
 
A Randomized, Active-Controlled Study to Evaluate the Efficacy 
and Safety of Intravenous Sulbact am-ETX2514 in the Treatment of  
Patients With Infections Caused by Acinetobacter 
baumannii-calcoaceticus Complex 
Investigational Product:  Sulbactam-ETX2514 (ETX2514SUL) 
Protocol Number: CS2514-2017-0004 
EudraCT Number:  2018-002526-23 
 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Gatehouse Park BioHub 
35 Gatehouse Drive 
Waltham, MA 02451 
United States 
Telephone: +1-781-810-0120 
Fax: +1-781-810-0122 
   
Version Number: 4.0  
Original Protocol:  10 December 2018 
Amendment 1:  29 April 2019 
Amendment 2:  14 January 2020 
Amendment 3:  17 December 2020  
 
Confidentiality Statement 
The information in this document is confidentia l and is not to be disclosed without the written 
consent of Entasis Therapeutics except to the extent that discl osure would be required by law and 
for the purpose of evaluating and/or conducting a clinical stud y for Entasis Therapeutics. You 
are allowed to disclose the cont ents of this document only to y our Institutional Review Board or 
Independent Ethics Committee and study personnel directly invol ved with conducting this 
protocol. Persons to whom the information is disclosed must be informed that th e information is 
confidential and proprietary to Entasis Therapeutics and that it may not be further disclosed to 
third parties. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 2 SIGNATURE PAGE 
STUDY TITLE: A Randomized, Act ive-Controlled Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and 
Safety of Intravenous Sulbactam-ETX2514 in the Treatment of Patients With Infections 
Caused by Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus Complex 
 
I, the undersigned, have read this protocol and agree that it contains all necessary information 
required to conduct the study. 
S i g n a t u r e         D a t e  
 
Steven LaRosa, MD 
Vice President, Clinical Development Entasis Therapeutics 
 
          
 
 
 
   
 
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 3INVESTIGATOR AGREEMENT 
By signing below I agree that: 
I have read this protocol. I a pprove this document and I agree that it contains all necessary details 
for carrying out the study as described. I will conduct this st udy in accordance with the design and 
specific provision of this protocol and will make a reasonable effort to complete the study within 
the time designated. I will provi de copies of this protocol and  access to all information furnished 
by Entasis Therapeutics to st udy personnel under my supervision. I will discuss this material with 
them to ensure they are fully informed about the study product and study procedures. I will let 
them know that this information is confidential and proprietary  to Entasis Therapeutics and that it 
may not be further disclosed to third parties. I  understand that the study may be terminated or 
enrollment suspended at any time by Entasis Therapeutics, with or without cause, or by me if it 
becomes necessary to protect the  best interests of the study pa tients. 
I agree to conduct this study in full accordance with Food and Drug Administration Regulations, 
Institutional Review Board/Ethic Committee Regulations and Inte rnational Council for 
Harmonisation Guidelines for  Good Clinical Practices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________  ____________________ 
I n v e s t i g a t o r ’ s  S i g n a t u r e       D a t e  
 
 
 
______________________________________________ 
Investigator’s Printed Name 
 
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 4SYNOPSIS 
TITLE:  A Randomized, Active-Controlled  Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety o f 
Intravenous Sulbactam-ETX2514 in the Treatment of Patients With  Infections Caused by 
Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus Complex 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  CS2514-2017-0004 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT:  Sulbactam-ETX2514 (ETX2514SUL) 
PHASE:  3 
INDICATION(S):  Treatment of serious infections caused by Acinetobacter baumannii
(A. baumannii) -calcoaceticus complex (ABC) 
OBJECTIVES: 
This is a 2-part study, with Part A being the randomized, contr olled portion of the study in patients 
with ABC hospital-acquired bacterial pneumonia (HABP), ventilator-associated bacterial 
pneumonia (VABP), ventilated pne umonia (VP), or bacteremia. Par t B is the single-group portion 
of the study and includes ABC infections that are resistant to or have failed colistin or polymyxin B 
treatment, as detailed in the inclusion criteria. 
The primary objectives of this  study are the following: 
 To compare the efficacy of ETX 2514SUL plus imipenem/cilastatin to colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin in patients with carbapenem-resistant ABC ( CRABC) infections in Part A; 
and 
 To compare the incidence of nephrotoxicity, as measured by the Risk–Injury–Failure–Loss–
End-stage renal disease (RIFLE) criteria, of ETX2514SUL to coli stin in patients with ABC 
infections in Part A. 
The secondary objectives of thi s study are the following: 
 To compare the efficacy of ETX 2514SUL plus imipenem/cilastatin to colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin in all randomized patients in Part A; 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514S UL plus imipenem/cilastatin  in patients with colistin- or 
polymyxin B-resistant ABC infections in Part B;  
 To estimate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL plus imip enem/cilastatin for each primary infection 
site;  
 To evaluate and compare the s afety of ETX2514SUL and colistin; 
 To describe the overall safet y profile of ETX2514SUL; and 
 To determine the systemic exposure of ETX2514 and sulbactam in a small cohort of severely 
ill patients administered ETX2514SUL in Part A. 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 5 
The exploratory objectives of thi s study are the following: 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to pharmacok inetics (PK) exposure; 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to minimum i nhibitory concentration 
(MIC) distribution of ETX2514SUL; 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to total duration of treatment received; 
and 
 To compare the resource utilization of patients receiving ETX25 14SUL plus 
imipenem/cilastatin to patients receiving colistin plus imipene m/cilastatin.  
POPULATION: 
The population for this study i s male and female patients 18 years of age with documented ABC 
infections.  
INCLUSION CRITERIA: 
General Inclusion Criteria: 
Patients who meet all of the following general inclusion criter ia, in addition to the specific inclusion 
criteria listed below for Parts A and B, will be eligible to pa rticipate in the study: 
1. A signed informed consent form; Note: If a study patient is unable to provide informed consent due to their medical condition, 
the patient’s legally authorized representative may consent on behalf of the study patient, or 
the decision can be made according to the procedure permitted b y local law and institutional 
Standard Operating Procedures. 
2. Male or female 18 years of age; 
3. A confirmed diagnosis of a seriou s infection and the expectatio n, in the judgment of the 
Investigator, that the patient’s infection will require treatme nt with intravenous (IV) antibiotics;
4. A known infection caused by ABC (bacteremia, HABP, VABP, VP, co mplicated urinary tract 
infection [cUTI] or acute pyelone phritis [AP], or surgical or p ost-traumatic wound infections) 
as either a single pathogen or member of a polymicrobial infect ion based on evidence from 
culture or, if available, rapid diagnostic test from a sample c ollected within 72 hours prior to 
randomization (HABP/VABP/VP patients), AND 1 of the following: 
a. Has received no more than 48 ho urs of potentially effective (ie , Gram negative 
coverage) antimicrobial therapy prior to the first dose of stud y drug; OR 
b. Is clinically failing prior treat ment regimens (ie, clinical de terioration or failure to 
improve after at least 48 hours  of antibiotic treatment); 
Note: Rapid testing of respiratory specimens utilizing Biofire
® FilmArray® 2.0 Pneumonia 
Panel (BPP) technology should be used to enable early identific ation of ABC pneumonia. 
Patients can be randomized based on the results of the BPP rapi d test while awaiting results o f 
cultures from the local laboratory. However, if the respiratory  sample does not grow ABC in 
the local microbiology laboratory culture, these patients will be withdrawn from the study drug 
treatment. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 6Note: Isolation of ABC from pleural effusion (empyema) is allow ed, if concurrent pulmonary 
infiltrate is confirmed. 
5. Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score between 10 and 30, 
inclusive, OR Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score between 7 and 11, inclusive, 
at the time of diagnosis of infection. Patients who are not bei ng treated in an intensive care unit 
and cannot have an APACHE II or SOFA score performed should have a quick SOFA (qSOFA) 
score 2 for enrollment; 
6. Expectation, in the judgment of the Investigator, that the pati ent will benefit from effective 
antibiotic therapy and appropriate supportiv e care for the anti cipated duration of the study; and
7. Women of childbearing potential  (ie, not post-menopausal or sur gically sterilized) must have 
a negative highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test before randomization. Participating 
women of childbearing potential must be willing to consistently  use one highly effective 
method of contraception (ie, condo m, combined oral contraceptiv e, implant, injectable, 
indwelling intrauterine device, or a vasectomized partner) from  Screening until at least 30 days 
after administration of th e last dose of study drug. 
Part A-Specific Inclusion Criteria: 
In addition to the general inclu sion criteria above, patients m ay enroll in Part A if they meet the 
criteria below. All patients must  be categorized in 1 infection  type that is judged to be the primary 
infection by the Investigator: 
1. Diagnosed with HABP, VABP, VP,  and/or bacteremia, defined as: 
HABP With ABC in Sputu m/Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Onset of symptoms >48 hours 
after admission or 7 days after 
discharge from an inpatient 
acute or chronic care facility (eg, LTAC, rehabilitation 
center, hospital, or skilled 
nursing home); OR 
 Admission from LTAC or 
rehabilitation center, or 
admission from home <7 days after discharge from an LTAC 
or rehabilitation center; AND 
 New or evolving infiltrate on chest X-ray, MRI , CT scan, or 
ultrasound obtained within 
48 hours prior to randomization. 
Note: If an ultrasound is 
performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT scan should be 
performed within 24 hours.  A new onset of cough (or 
worsening of baseline cough); 
 Auscultatory findings consistent with pneumonia/pulmonary 
consolidation (eg, rales, dullness on percussion, bronchial breath 
sounds, or egophony); 
 Dyspnea, tachypnea, or 
respiratory rate 
>25 breaths/minute; OR 
 Hypoxemia (oxygen saturation 
<90% or pO
2 <60 mmHg while 
breathing room ai r, or worsening 
of the oxygen saturation/FiO 2); 
OR the following ALONE: 
 New onset need for mechanical ventilation.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR 
hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral WBC count (>10,000/mm
3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils 
(bands) regardless of total 
peripheral WBC count; OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC 
count <4500/mm3). 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; CT = computed tomography; FiO 2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; 
HABP = hospital-acquired bacteria l pneumonia; LTAC = long-term acute care; MRI = magn etic resonance imaging; 
pO2 = partial pressure of ox ygen; WBC = white blood cell.
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 7  VABP With ABC in Sputum /Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the following : 
 Onset of symptoms >48 hours 
after receivi ng ventilator 
support via an en dotracheal (or 
nasotracheal) tube;  
 Requires ventilator support; 
AND 
 New or evolving infiltrate on chest X-ray, MRI , CT scan, or 
ultrasound obtained within 
48 hours prior to 
randomization. Note: If an ultrasound is performed, a 
confirmatory X-ray or CT scan 
should be performed within 24 hours.  Auscultatory findings consistent 
with pneumonia/pulmonary 
consolidation (eg, rales, dullness 
on percussion, bronchial breath 
sounds, or egophony); 
 An acute change in the ventilator 
support system to enhance 
oxygenation, as determined by a worsening oxygen 
saturation/FiO
2 ratio; 
 Increased suctioning; OR 
 Tracheal aspirate change to purulence.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature 
<35°C [<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral WBC count (>10,000/mm
3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils (bands) regardless of total peripheral WBC count; OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC <4500/mm
3). 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; CT = com puted tomography; FiO 2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; 
MRI = ma gnetic resonance ima ging; VABP = ventilato r-associated bacterial pneumonia; WBC = w hite blood cell. 
Ventilated Pneumonia With ABC in Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the following : 
 Requires ventilator support; AND 
 New or evolving infiltrate on chest X-ray, MRI, CT scan, or ultrasound 
obtained within 48 hours 
prior to randomization. Note: If an ultrasound is 
performed, a confirmatory 
X-ray or CT scan should be performed within 
24 hours.  Auscultatory findings consistent 
with pneumonia/pulmonary 
consolidation (eg, rales, dullness 
on percussion, bronchial breath sounds, or egophony); 
 An acute change in the ventilator support system to enhance oxygenation; 
 Increased suctioning; OR 
 Tracheal aspirate change to 
purulence.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C [100.4°F] 
or rectal/core temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]) OR 
hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral WBC 
count (>10,000/mm
3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils (bands) regardless of total peripheral WBC count; OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC count <4500/mm
3). 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; CT = computed tomography;  MRI = magnetic resonance ima ging; 
WBC = white blood cell.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 8 
Bacteremia With ABC 
All of the following: AND at  least 1 of the following: 
 Isolation of ABC from at least 1 blood culture collected 
from a peripheral vein OR ne wly placed intravenous line.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 
38°C [100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature 
38.3°C [100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature <35°C [<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral WBC count 
(>10,000/mm3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils (bands) 
regardless of total peripheral WBC count; 
 Leukopenia (total WBC count <4500/mm3);  
 Tachycardia >100 bpm; 
 Tachypnea >25 breaths/minute; OR 
Hypotension, s ystolic <90 mmH g.
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; b pm=beats per minute; WBC = w hite blood cell. 
Part B-Specific Inclusion Criteria: 
Part B will include patients with the following ABC infections:  HABP, VABP, VP, or bacteremia 
who do not qualify for Part A, and c UTI/AP or surgical or post- traumatic wound infections.  
1. Patients with HABP, VABP, VP, or bacteremia should be considere d for enrollment in Part B 
if they meet ANY of the following criteria ( a, b, c, OR d), in addition to the general inclusion 
criteria above: 
a. Has an infection caused by ABC organisms known to be resistant to colistin or 
polymyxin B (defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method); 
For known colistin- or polymyxin B-resistant infections, the fo llowing must be satisfied: 
o Has a known resistant infection based on evidence from culture and susceptibility 
testing by a non-agar based method within 72 hours prior to randomization, alone or 
as a single organism of a poly microbial infection; AND has rece ived no more than 
48 hours of an antimicrobial agent to which the ABC is suscepti ble prior to the first 
dose of study drug; OR 
o Has documented clinical evidence of failure (ie, clinical deter ioration or failure to 
improve that is attributable to ABC infection) after at least 4 8 hours of treatment with 
colistin or polymyxin B; OR 
b. Has known intoleran ce to colistin;  
Note: Patients whom the Investig ator feels may have a potential  intolerance to colistin can 
be enrolled in Part B on a case-by-case basis after discussion with the Medical Monitor; 
OR 
c. Has myasthenia gravis or another neuromuscular syndrome(s) that  contraindicates colistin 
and is not ventilated;  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 9Note: Ventilated patients with m yasthenia gravis or other neuro muscular syndromes 
where, in the opinion of the Inv estigator, colistin administrat ion is reasonable are 
permitted for considerat ion for the study; OR 
d. Has acute kidney injury and is re ceiving renal replacement therapy at study entry; 
2. Patients diagnosed with cUTI, AP,  or surgical or post-traumatic  wound infections may enroll 
in Part B if they meet the general inclusion criteria as well a s either a, b, c, d, OR e  in addition 
to the indication requirements for f: 
a. Has an infection caused by ABC organisms known to be resistant to colistin or 
polymyxin B (defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method); OR 
b. Has known intoleran ce to colistin;  
Note: Patients whom the Investig ator feels may have a potential  intolerance to colistin can 
be enrolled in Part B on a case-by-case basis after discussion with the Medical Monitor; 
OR 
c. Has myasthenia gravis or another neuromuscular syndrome(s) that contraindicates 
colistin; OR 
d. Has acute kidney injury and is re ceiving renal replacement therapy at study entry; OR 
e. Has documented clinical evidence of failure (ie, clinical deter ioration or failure to 
improve) after at least 48 hours  of treatment with a polymyxin- based regimen; AND 
f. Is diagnosed with cUTI, AP, or surgical or post-traumatic wound  infection, defined as: 
cUTI With ABC 
At least 1 of the following: AND at least 2 of the following signs 
and symptoms: AND at least 1 of 
the following: 
 Indwelling urinary catheter or 
intermittent bladder catheterization; 
 Neurogenic bladder with presence or 
history of urine residual volume of 
100 mL; 
 Obstructive uropathy (eg, nephrolithiasis, 
tumor, fibrosis) that is expected to be medically or surgically treated within 
48 hours post-randomization; 
 Azotemia due to intrinsic renal disease; 
OR 
 Urinary retention in men due to previously diagnosed benign h
ypertroph y.  Chills, rigors, or fe ver [1] (oral or 
tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]); 
 Elevated WBC count (>10,000/mm
3) or left shift 
(>15% immature PMNs); 
 Nausea or vomiting; 
 Dysuria, increased urinary frequency, or urinary urgency; OR 
 Lower abdominal pain or pelvic 
pain.  Positive LCE on urinalysis; 
 WBC count 
10 cells/mm
3 
in unspun urine; 
OR 
 WBC count 
10 cells/hpf in 
urine sediment. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; cUTI = complicated urinary tract infection; hpf = high -power 
field; LCE = leukoc yte esterase; PMN = polymorphonuclear leukoc yte; WBC = white  blood cell. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10AP With ABC 
Presence of an ascending tract inf ection including at least 2 o f the 
following signs or symptoms: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Chills, rigors, or fever [1] (o ral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C [100.9°F]); 
 Elevated WBC count (>10,000/mm3) or left shift (>15% immature 
PMNs); 
 Nausea or vomiting; 
 Dysuria, increased urinary frequency, or urinary urgency;  
 Flank pain; OR 
 Costovertebral an gle tenderness on ph ysical examination. Positive LCE on 
urinalysis; 
 WBC count 10 cells/mm3 
in unspun urine; OR 
 WBC count 10 cells/hpf 
in urine sediment. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; AP = acute pyelonephritis; hpf = high-power field; 
LCE = leukocyte esterase; PMN = polymorphonuclear leukocyte; WB C = white blood cell.
Surgical Wound Infection With ABC 
Superficial SSI meeting all of  the following criteria: AND at least 1 of the following 
regional or systemic signs of 
infection: 
 Follows clean surgery (elective, not emergency, nontraumatic, primarily closed, no acute inflammation; no break in technique;  
respiratory, gastrointestinal, biliary, and genitourinary tract s not 
entered); 
 Involves only the skin or subcutaneous tissue around the incisi on, 
does not involve fascia; 
 Occurs within 30 days after procedure; 
 Original surgical incision 3 cm; AND 
 Purulent drainage (spontaneous or therapeutic) that is positive  for 
ABC by culture with surrounding erythema, edema, and/or 
induration extending at least 5 cm  in the shortest distance fro m the 
peripheral margin of the wound an d with a minimum total lesion 
surface area of 75 cm
2.  Lymph node tenderness and 
increase in volume or palpable proximal to the primary ABSSSI; 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C [100.4°F] or 
rectal/core temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]); 
 WBC count 10,000/mm
3 or 
<4000/mm3; OR 
 >15% immature neutrophils. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; ABSSSI = acute bacterial skin and skin structure infec tion; 
SSI = sur gical site infection; W BC = white  blood cell.
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 11EXCLUSION CRITERIA: 
Patients who meet any of the following criteria will be exclude d from participation in the study: 
1. Presence of suspected or confirmed deep-seated infection (eg, lung abscess in patients with 
pneumonia, skin abscess, or dec ubitus ulcer) that  is not planned on being drained or debrided 
within 24 hours after randomization; 
Note: Patients with an empyema who will have drainage within 24  hours of Screening and who 
are expected to be able to be t reated with 14 or fewer days of antibiotics are allowed. 
2. Evidence of active concurrent pneumonia requiring additional an timicrobial treatment caused 
by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus , Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae , Chlamydia pneumoniae , Legionella pneumophila , respiratory syncytial virus, 
influenza and parainfluenza viru s e s ,  M i d d l e  E a s t  r e s p i r a t o r y  s y ndrome coronavirus, 
mycobacteria, aspergill us, mucormycosis, etc; 
Note: If these organisms are id entified but it is deemed by the  Investigator that no treatment is 
warranted and their presence does not significantly change the prognosis of the patient, then 
the patient may be considered for this study. 
3. Pulmonary disease that precludes evaluation of a therapeutic re sponse (such as lung cancer 
resulting in bronchial obstruction or on the same side as the pneumonia, active tuberculosis, cystic fibrosis, granulomatous disease, fungal pulmonary infection, lung abscess, pleural empyema, post obstructive pneumonia, or COVID-19 infection with out clinical improvement);
Note: Patients with an empyema who will have drainage within 24  hours of Screening and who 
are expected to be able to be t reated with 14 or fewer days of antibiotics are allowed. 
4. Presence of suspected or confirmed deep seated bacterial infect ions such as bacterial Gram 
negative osteomyelitis, endocardi tis, or meningitis requiring p rolonged therapy, as determined 
by history and/or physical examination; 
5. Acute infective endocarditis due to Gram positive bacteria that  require urgent/emergent 
indication of sur
gery (ie, heart failure because o f valvular insufficienc y or septic shock), or Post-Traumatic Wound Infection With ABC 
Post-traumatic wound (including 
penetrating trauma) characterized by 
the following within 24 hours of 
Screening: AND at least 1 of the following r egional or systemic signs of 
infection: 
 Purulent drainage (spontaneous or 
therapeutic) that i s positive for ABC 
by culture with surrounding erythema, edema, and/or induration extending at least 5  cm in the shortest 
distance from the peripheral margin of the wound and with a minimum total lesion surface area of 75 cm
2.  Lymph node tenderness and increase in volume or palpable proximal to the primary ABSSSI; 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C [100.4°F] or 
rectal/core temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature <35°C [<95°F]); 
 WBC count 10,000/mm
3 or <4000/mm3; OR 
 >15% immature neutrophils. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; ABSSSI = acute bacterial skin and skin structure infec tion; 
WBC = white blood cell. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 12patients in whom surgery is contraindicated due to prohi bitive risk for surgery due to 
comorbidities; 
6. Irremovable implantable device or line thought to be the potent ial source of ABC infection; 
7. Sustained shock with persisting hypotension requiring vasopress ors to maintain mean arterial 
pressure (MAP)  60 mmHg; 
Note: Patients who can maintain MAP 60 mmHg on a reasonable dose of pressors or are 
weaning off of pressors may be considered. Patients who require  more than the maximal dose 
of 2 vasopressors to maintain MAP 60 mmHg are ineligible. If va sopressors are weaned to 
below these levels, patient en rollment can be reconsidered. 
8. For patients to be enrolled with  the primary indication of HABP , VABP, or VP, any of the 
following conditions: 
a. Diagnosis of ventilator-associ ated tracheobronchitis; or 
b. Inability to provide proper respiratory specimens for culture. Respiratory samples from 
expectorated or induced sputum s hould show <10 squamous epithel ial cells and 
>25 polymorphonuclear neutrophils per 100  field; 
9. For patients to be enrolled with the primary indication of cUTI or AP, any of the following 
urologic conditions: 
a. Likely to receive ongoing antibacterial drug prophylaxis after treatment of cUTI 
(eg, patients with vesico -uretal reflux); 
b. Suspected or confirmed prostatitis; 
c. Requirement for bladder irrigation with antibiotics or for anti biotics to be administered 
directly via urinary catheter; 
d. Previous or planned cystect omy or ileal loop surgery; 
e. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection (eg, female patients with  urinary frequency, 
urgency, or pain or discomfort with out systemic symptoms or signs of infection); 
f. Complete, permanent obstruc tion of the urinary tract; 
g. Suspected or confirmed perinephri c or renal corticomedullary ab scess; 
h. Polycystic kidney disease; or 
i. Any recent history of trauma to the pelvis or urinary tract; 
10. Pregnant or breastfeeding women; 
11. APACHE II score >30 and SOFA sc ore >11 at the time of diagnosis  of infection; 
Note: A qSOFA score must be calculated for all patients without  an APACHE II score. 
Glasgow coma score for APACHE II calculation should be the best response prior to initiation 
of sedation/neuromuscular blockade, even if sedation has been in use for >24 hours. 
12. Receiving peritoneal dialysis;  
13. Requirement for temporary or acu te onset treatment with antisei zure medication that, in the 
opinion of the Investigator, woul d prohibit the patient from co mplying with the protocol. 
Patients at risk of seizure or requirin g proph ylactic antiseizure medications durin g the stud y 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 13can be considered for enrollment at the discretion of the Inves tigator. Patients with a history o f 
epilepsy or who are on stable treatment (ie, no recurrent episo des in the past 30 days) and no 
history of imipenem-associated s eizures may be considered for enrollment in the study; 
14. Requirement for continuing treatme nt with probenecid, methotrex ate, ganciclovir, valproic 
acid, or divalproex sodiu m during the study; 
15. Evidence of significant hepatic disease or dysfunction, includi ng known acute viral hepatitis, 
hepatic cirrhosis, hepatic failure, chronic ascites, or hepatic encephalopathy; 
16. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (A LT) >3  upper limit o f 
normal (ULN) AND total bilirubin >2  ULN at Screening; 
Note: Patients with AST or ALT up to 5  ULN are eligible if these elevations are acute and 
are documented as being directly r elated to the infectious process being treated. 
17. Requirement at the time of rando mization for any reason, or lik ely to require during the 
patient’s participation in the s tudy (from randomization through the Late Follow-up [LFU]
Visit), for additional systemic  Gram negative antimicrobial the rapy; 
18. Requirement for inhaled antibiotics; 
19. Known history of human immunodeficiency virus infection and kno wn recent CD4 count 
<200/mm3 within the last year or presence of significant immunologic di sease or dysfunction, 
as determined by a current diagnosis of an Acquired Immune Defi ciency Syndrome-defining 
illness; 
20. Presence of neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count <500/mm3) obtained from a local laboratory 
at Screening; 
21. A QT interval corrected us ing Fridericia’s formula 480 msec; 
22. History of significant hypersen sitivity or allergic reaction to  any β-lactam (BL), any 
contraindication to the use of cilastatin based on local approv ed prescribing information 
(eg, Summary of Medicinal Product Characteristics), any contraindication to the excipients 
used in the respective formula tions, or any contraindication to  the use of BL antibiotics; 
23. Participation in a clinical study involving investigational med ication or an investigational 
device within the last 30 days or 5 half-lives, whichever is lo nger, prior to Day 1; 
24. Any condition that, in the opinion of the Investigator, would c ompromise the safety of the 
patient or the quality of the da ta or require greater than 14 d ays of treatment w ith antibiotics; 
25. Unable or unwilling, in the opinion of the Investigator, to com ply with the protocol;  
26. Has previously receive d ETX2514 in this study; or 
27. For Part A only, patients with a n infection known to be resista nt to colistin or polymyxin B
(defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method ), with a known intolerance to  colistin, 
or taking any drug that prevents  them from rece iving colistin. 
STUDY DESIGN AND DURATION: 
This study is a randomized, active-controlled study to evaluate  the safety and efficacy of IV 
ETX2514SUL in patients with ABC infections. Patients providin g informed consent and meetin g 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 14all study eligibility criteria will be enrolled in the study an d have pretreatment blood and infection 
site-specific samples obtained and submitted to the local laboratory.  
The study will be enrolled in 2 parallel parts, with the PK dat a from the first approximately 
30 patients in Part A (with only 15 patients dosed with ETX2514SUL) reviewed prior to initiating 
enrollment in Part B: 
a. Part A will be the pivotal, assessor- blind, randomized, comparative portion of the study in 
patients with documente d ABC HABP, VABP, VP , or bacteremia. Whi le study drugs will not 
be masked due to logistical reasons, every attempt will be made to maintain the blind for 
patients, all staff at the site, and the Sponsor or its designe es, except for the treatment physician 
and other immediate healthcare pr oviders. In Part A, patients w ill be randomized 1:1 to 1 o f 
the following treatment groups: 
o Group 1: 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours every 6 hours (q6h) plus 
1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h; or 
o Group 2: 2.5 mg/kg colistin IV infused over 30 minutes every 12  hours (q12h) plus 1.0 g 
imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
Patients will be enrolled until there are 120 patients in the C RABC Microbiologically Modified 
Intent-to-Treat (m-MITT) Population in Part A, as determined by  the central microbiology 
laboratory. Approximately 200 patients are expected to be enrol led in Part A, assuming 
approximately 60% of patients will have CRABC (see the statisti cal methods for complete 
details). The HABP/VABP/VP pati ents who are randomized to Part A based on a positive 
screening of a respiratory sampl e for ABC by the BPP, but who s ubsequently do not have 
growth of ABC in their respira tory sample culture processed by the local microbiology 
laboratory, will be withdrawn from the study drug treatment. 
Randomization will be stratifie d by indication (HABP/VABP/VP ve rsus bacteremia), severity 
of illness (based on APACHE II [10 to 19 versus 20 to 30], SOFA  [7 to 9 versus 10], or 
qSOFA [2 versus 3] score at Screening), and geography (China Mainland versus Rest o f 
World). In the situation where a patient has more than one scor e reported, the scores will be 
used in the following order:  APACHE, SOFA, and qSOFA. 
Enrollment of HABP, VP, and bact eremia patients will be limited  to a total of no more than 
40% of patients in Part A, reg ardless of resistance. 
b. Part B will be the open-label, supportive portion of the study that will include patients known 
to have HABP, VABP, VP, and/or bacteremia infections associated  with ABC organisms that 
are known to be resistant to co listin or polymyxin B, those fai ling a colistin or polymyxin B
regimen prior to study entry or are on acute renal replacement therapy, and patients with 
infections due to colistin- or p olymyxin B-resistant ABC with sources of infect ion other than 
HABP, VABP, VP, and/or bacterem ia, as detailed in the inclusion  criteria. 
Any patient who has a qualifying ABC infection and meets study inclusion criteria but has 
a contraindication to colistin due to underlying conditions, intolerance, or evidence o f 
failing colistin or polymyxin B therapy prior to study entry, and/or has a colistin- or 
polymyxin B-resistant ABC infec tion cannot be enrolled in Part A but can be considered for 
enrollment in Part B (see the  inclusion and exclusion criteria for details).  
Patients with ABC infections who are not otherwise eligible for  Part A are expected to be 
enrolled in Part B. Patient enrollment in Part B will continue until Part A enrollment in the 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 15CRABC m-MITT Population is complet e. In Part B, patients will r eceive the following 
treatment: 
o Group 3: 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h plus 1.0 g 
imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
Transfer from Part A to Part B: Since Part A will be the first time patients in intensive care are 
receiving ETX2514SUL, PK in the first approximately 30 patients must be verified prior to 
initiating Part B to ensure the treatment planned in Part B is optimal for the targeted patient 
population. Patients randomized to either group of Part A can only be transferred to Part B, once 
Part B is open for enrollment, if  the ABC identified from the b aseline culture is subsequently 
determined to be resistant to co listin or polymyxin B by the lo cal microbiology laboratory. If Part B 
is not yet open for enrollment in a given country and a patient  in Part A has a baseline culture 
determined to be colistin- or po lymyxin B-resistant but is resp onding to therapy, the patient may 
remain in Part A at the discre tion of the Investigator. A patie n t  i n  P a r t  A  w h o s e  c u l t u r e  i s  
determined to be colistin- or polymyxin B-resistant and who has  not shown improvement or whose 
condition has worsened will be withdrawn from the study drug treatment. All such cases must be discussed with the Medical Monitor. 
Any organism isolated from the b lood or infection site-specific  cultures will be identified by genus 
and species by the local laboratory. Organisms will be cultured  and quantified (urine and 
bronchoalveolar lavage only) at the local laboratory, and susce ptibility of the organism(s) will be 
performed per local laboratory sta ndards. Isolates of pathogens  cultured at the loc al laboratory are 
to be sent to the central labor atory for confir mation of identi fication and suscept ibility testing.  
No dosing regimen changes, other than those specified in the pr otocol for renal insufficiency or for 
patients on imipenem who develop a seizure that is thought to b e directly related to imipenem, can 
occur without discussion with the Medical Monitor. Patients wit h cultures growing organisms with 
evidence of carbapenem resistance should remain on their assign ed treatment regimen; treatment 
regimen changes can occur after 5  days after discussion with th e Medical Monitor. If changes to 
the regimen are needed due to uns atisfactory clinical response,  patients should be classified as 
clinical failures a nd discontinued from study drug. All patients should receive at least 48 hours o
f 
IV study drug (ie, 8 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 8 doses of imipen em/cilastatin or 4 doses o f 
colistin plus 8 doses of imipenem/cilastatin in patients withou t dose adjustments) before the 
Investigator considers the patient to be a clinical failure and  discontinues the patient from study 
drug therapy. Note: Patients who experience fo cal tremors, m yoclonus, or seiz ures at any point  during the study 
should be evaluated neurologically, placed on anticonvulsant th erapy (if not already instituted), 
and the dose of imipenem/cilasta tin should be evaluated to determine whether it should be 
decreased or discontinued.  Day 1 is defined as the first day of study drug administration.  The subsequent study days are 
defined by the number of treatment days thereafter. Treatment d ays should constitute 24 hours o
f 
treatment. For those patients wit h no dose adjustments, the dur ation of antibiotic treatment with 
study drug therapy will be 28 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses  of imipenem/cilastatin or 
14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses o f imipenem/cilastatin (ie, treatment for 7 days for those without 
dose adjustments), with a prolong ation of therapy up to 14 days  if clinically indicated. Refer to the 
Pharmacy Manual for specifics  on dosing for all patients. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 16The overall study design is shown in the figure below.  
*Part B: Part B will be the open-label, supportive portion of t he study that will include patients known to have HABP, VABP, 
VP, and/or bacteremia infections associated with ABC organisms that are known to be resistant t o colistin or polymyxin B, thos e 
failing a colistin or polymyxin B regimen prior to study entry or are on acute renal replacement therapy, and patients with 
infections due to colistin- or polymyxin B-resistant ABC with sources of infection other th an HABP, VABP, VP, and/or 
bacteremia. The total number of patients enrolled in Part B may  be adjusted based on the number needed to be enrolled in Part A 
to achieve the number needed to be treated in the CRABC m-MITT Population. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; APACHE = Acute Physiologic Assessment and Chronic Hea lth 
Evaluation; CRABC = Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii- calcoaceticus  complex; cUTI = comp licated urinary tract 
infection; ETX2514SUL = sulbact am-ETX2514; HABP = hospital-acqu ired bacterial pneumonia; IMI = imipenem/cilastatin; 
LFU = Late Follow-up; m-MITT = Microbiologically Modified Inten t-to-Treat; q6h = every 6 hours; q12h = every 12 hours; 
TOC = Test of Cure; VABP = ventila tor-associated bacterial pneu monia; VP = ventilated pneumonia.  
Patients who have early discontinuation of study drug dosing sh ould perform all End of Treatment 
(EOT) Visit procedures and should be followed through the LFU V isit for safety assessments, even 
if the reason for disconti nuation is clinical failure. 
In Part A, clinical outcome asse ssments will be performed by a blinded assessor, in addition to the 
unblinded Investigator. Whenever possible, the same blinded assessor should comple te all clinical 
outcome assessments for a study pa tient. If there is a discrepancy between the assessment of the
blinded assessor and unblinded Investigator, the assessment fro m the blinded assessor will be used. 
If there is a missing assessment from either the blinded assessor or unblinded Investigator, the 
other available assessment will be used. An adjudication committee may be organized for endpoint 
adjudication should it be deemed necessary as determined by the  Data Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB). In such a case, a charter will be developed that describes their activities. 
Intense PK sampling will be performed on the first approximatel y 30 patients randomized in 
Part A. The purpose of the intense PK sampling is to ensure tha t exposures observed in this severely 
ill cohort are comparable to those observed thus far in prior c linical studies. The PK samples will 
be collected for both treatment groups in Part A to keep the study data blinded. Pharmacokinetic 
assessment of the initial 15 patients on ETX2514SUL in Part A w ill be performed b y a n  

Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 17independent PK assessor, prior t o the opening of enrollment in Part B. To explore the PK profile 
of the ETX2514SUL combination in C hinese patients with severe i nfection, the intense PK sample 
will also be collected from the first approximately 20 patients  r a n d o m i z e d  i n  P a r t  A  a t  C h i n a  
Mainland sites. All other patients enrolled in the study (Parts A and B) will have samples collected 
for sparse PK analysis, which will be used to better inform the population PK model. 
Patients will be enrolled in the study for approximately 28 day s, with a maximum duration o f 
32 days. Screening laboratory analytes can be performed as stan dard of care up to 48 hours prior 
to randomization on Da y 1, with the excepti on of local laborato ry serum creatinine determination, 
which must be obtained at the l ocal laboratory within 24 hours of the first dose of study drug. The 
Treatment Period begins on Day 1, and study drug will be admini stered for 7 days (ie, 28 doses o f 
ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses of imipen em/cilastatin or 14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses o f 
imipenem/cilastatin for those without dose adjustments) with a prolongation of therapy of up to 
14 days if clinically indicated. The EOT Visit will be complete d on the final dosing day or the 
following day. The Test of Cure (TOC) Visit will be completed 7  d a y s  (2 days) after the 
EOT Visit for all patients. The LFU Visit will be completed 14 days (2 days) after the EOT Visit
for all patients. For patients w ith an LFU Visit occurring befo re Day 28, a telephone call to assess 
survival will be made on Day 28 or anytime thereafter. Every at tempt must be made to record 
survival status at Day 28 or anytime thereafter for all randomi zed patients (including 
HABP/VABP/VP patients who are randomized to Part A based on a positive BPP rapid test, but 
who subsequently do not have growth of ABC in their respiratory  sample culture), regardless o f 
their status of treatment, as long as the patient has not withd rawn consent from participation in the 
study.  
DOSAGE FORMS AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION: 
In Part A, the following study drugs will be administered in a 1:1 randomized manner: 
 Group 1 (experimental group): 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h 
plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilasta tin IV infused over 1 hour q6h; or 
 Group 2 (control group): 2.5 mg/kg colistin IV infused over 30 minutes q12h (after an initial 
loading dose of colistin 2.5 to 5  mg/kg) plus 1.0 g imipenem/1. 0 g cilastatin IV infused over 
1 hour q6h. 
In Part B, the following study drugs will be administered: 
 Group 3 (experimental group): 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h 
plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilasta tin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
EFFICACY VARIABLES:  
The primary efficacy endpoint for the study is 28-day all-cause  mortality in the CRABC m-MITT 
Population in Part A. 
The secondary efficacy endpoints for Part A and Part B include the following: 
 28-day all-cause mortality in the  Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Populat ion; 
 Clinical cure at TOC in the CRABC m-MITT Population; 
 Clinical cure at TOC in the m-MITT, Clinical Evaluable (CE), Mi crobiologic Evaluable (ME), 
and CRABC ME Populations; 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 18 Clinical cure at Day 5, Day 7, EOT, and LFU in the m-MITT, CRABC m-MITT, CE, ME, and 
CRABC ME Populations; 
 Microbiological favorable assessment at Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC,  and LFU in the m-MITT, 
CRABC m-MITT, ME, and CRABC ME Populations; 
 14-day all-cause mortality in the CRABC m-MITT and m-MITT Popul ations;  
 28-day all-cause mortality in the  m-MITT and CRABC ME Populatio ns; and 
 PK exposure of ETX2514 and sulba ctam in the PK Population. 
The exploratory efficacy endpoints include the following: 
 Clinical cure based on PK exposure; 
 Clinical cure based on MIC distribution of ETX2514SUL;  
 Clinical cure based on baseline resistance to ETX2514SUL, carba penems, or colistin;  
 Number of days in the intensive care unit; 
 Number of patients transferre d to the intensive care unit; 
 For patients with VABP, VP, or ventilated HABP, number of days on ventilators;  
 Number of days in the hospital; and 
 Number of days on study drug treatment. 
Outcome Definitions: 
Clinical Outcome: 
Clinical outcome will be used to determine a response of clinic al success for all patients. Based on 
the assessment of signs and symp toms, the unblinded Investigato r will choose 1 of the following 
clinical outcomes at the Day 5, Day 7, EOT Visit, TOC Visit, LF U Visit, and ET Visit, i f 
applicable. In Part A, in addition to the unblinded Investigato r, a blinded assessor will also 
determine clinical outcome. If t here is a discrepancy between t he assessment of the blinded 
assessor and unblinded Investigat or, the assessment from the blinded assessor will be used. If there 
is a missing assessment from either the blinded assessor or unblinded Investigator, the other 
available assessment will be used. An adjudication committee ma y be organized for endpoint 
adjudication should it be deemed necessary by the DSMB. In such  a  c a s e ,  a  c h a r t e r  w i l l  b e  
developed that describe s their activities. 
Clinical cure: complete resoluti on or significant improvement o f signs and symptoms that were 
present at baseline and no new symptoms, such that no additiona l Gram negative antimicrobial 
therapy is warranted. Clinical failure: symptoms present at study entry have not significantly improved or completely 
resolved, or new symptoms have developed and require the initia tion of a non-study Gram negative 
antibacterial drug therapy, death, or intolerance to study drug  leading to discontinuation from the 
study treatment. Clinical indeterminate: determin ation cannot be made because of  missing data or the patient is lost 
to follow-up. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 19Microbiologic Outcome: 
Microbiologic outcome for bacter emia, complicated urinary tract  infection, or acute 
pyelonephritis: 
For patients with bacteremia, cUTI, or AP, per-patient microbio logical response will be determined 
programmatically as 1 of the following outcomes based on the re sults of blood and/or urine cultures 
at the Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC, and LFU Visits. A microbiological favorable assessment will 
include eradication and presumed  eradications, as detailed belo w. 
Microbiologic eradication: 
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the baseline strain of ABC is red uced to <103 colony-forming 
units (CFU)/mL on urine culture a nd negative on repeat blood cu lture (if positive at baseline);
or 
 For patients with bacteremia: ab sence of the baseline strain of  ABC on culture. 
Microbiologic presumed eradication:  no culture was done, and the patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical cure. 
Microbiologic persistence: 
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the demonstration that the urine culture grew 103 CFU/mL o f 
the baseline strain of ABC identified at study entry and/or a blood culture demonstrates the 
same baseline pathogen(s); or 
 For patients with bacteremia: pr esence of the baseline strain o f ABC on repeat culture. 
Patients who are a persistence at EOT will be considered a pers istence at TOC. 
Microbiologic presumed persistence:  no culture was done, and the patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical failure. 
Microbiologic indeterminate:  if clinically indicated (for cU TI and bacteremia only), no fol low-up 
culture is available, the culture cannot be interpreted for any  reason, or the culture is considered 
contaminated.  Microbiologic recurrence:   
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the demonstration that the urine culture grew 10
3 CFU/mL o f 
the baseline strain of ABC identified at study entry at any tim e after documented eradication at 
the TOC Visit up to and including the LFU Visit; or  
 For patients with bacteremia: a positive blood culture for ABC at any time after documented 
eradication at the TOC Visit  up to and including the LFU Visit.  
Microbiologic outcome for hospi tal-acquired bacterial pneumonia , ventilator-associated bacterial 
pneumonia, ventilated pneumonia, o r surgical or post-traumatic wound infections: 
Microbiologic presumed eradication:  no culture was done, and the patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical cure. For patients with HABP/VABP/VP or surgical o r post-traumatic wound 
infections, where repeat culture samples may not be indicated, presumed eradication based on 
clinical improvement  will be inferred. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 20Microbiologic presumed persistence:  no culture was done, and the patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical failure. 
SAFETY VARIABLES: 
The safety parameters include the incidence, severity, causality, and seriousness o f 
treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and adverse events of  special interest, including 
nephrotoxicity as measured by RI FLE criteria, and the evaluatio n of changes from baseline in 
safety laboratory test results , electrocardiograms (ECGs), vita l signs, physical examinations, and 
chest X-ray/radiology/ultrasound and mechanical ventilator asse ssments for patients with HABP, 
VABP, or VP. Newly emergent infections that appear after baseli ne will be reported as adverse 
events and summarized separately. 
STATISTICAL ANALYSES: This study is designed to estim ate treatment efficacy of ABC infections with a p ivotal component 
in Part A.  Continuous variables will be summarized using the number of non -missing observations, 
arithmetic mean, standard deviati on, median, minimum, and maxim um values as descriptive 
statistics. Categorical variables  will be summarized by using the frequency count and the 
percentage of patients in each c ategory as descriptive statisti cs.  
All comparisons in Part A will be for ETX2514SUL plus imipenem/ cilastatin versus colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin. The efficacy endpoints for Part B will be summarized descriptively only and 
will be used to supplement results  in Part A. Listings of indiv idual patient data will be produced. 
The ITT Population will include  all patients randomized to stud y drug treatment (ETX2514SUL 
plus imipenem/cilastatin or colistin plus imipenem/cilastatin) in Part A or enrolled in Part B, 
regardless of whether the patien t actually receives study drug.  
The Modified ITT (MITT) Population will include patients in Par ts A and B who meet ITT criteria 
and receive any amount of study drug. The MITT Population will be considered the Safety 
Population. Patients with HABP/VA BP/VP who were r andomized to P art A on the basis of a BPP 
rapid test result but were subsequently withdrawn due to a lack  of a culture growing ABC will be 
counted in the MITT and Safety Populations.  The m-MITT Population will include patients who meet MITT crite ria and have an ABC organism 
isolated as the qualifying cu lture specimen, as confirmed by the central and/or local microbiology 
laboratory. If an isolate for test ing at the central laboratory  is not available, the local laboratory 
data can be used to confirm the presence of ABC organism, as lo ng as the local laboratory uses 
modern methods of diagnosis such as molecular-based tests, matr ix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-f light mass spectrometry, Vitek, Phoenix, etc (ie, not conventional 
biochemical or manual phenotypic methods). Patients with HABP/V ABP/VP who are enrolled 
based upon a positive BPP rapid test for ABC, but subsequently are found to have respiratory 
sample cultures that do not grow ABC (by the local laboratory),  will be withdrawn from the study
drug treatment. These patients wi ll not be included in the m-MI TT Population but will remain in 
the MITT Population. The CRABC m-MITT Population will i nclude patients who meet m-MI TT criteria and 
have a baseline ABC organism that is confirmed to be carbapenem -resistant (MIC to 
imipenem/meropenem 8 mg/L) by the central laboratory or by the local laboratory if  the central
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 21laboratory is not able to identif y the isolate for any reason. Patients will be excluded from the 
CRABC m-MITT Population if they ha ve isolates that are deemed b y the central laboratory to be 
resistant to ETX2514SUL (MIC >4 mg/L) or colistin (MIC 4 mg/L), if their blood culture or 
respiratory samples are collected more than 72 hours prior to r andomization, if they are transferred 
from Part A to Part B, or if they are enrolled with infections other than ABC pneumonia or 
bloodstream infection (ie, ABC infections other than HABP, VABP, VP, and bacteremia). A 
sensitivity analysis for the pr imary efficacy endpoint will be performed for patients whose eligible 
culture is >48 hours fro m the first dose of study drug, as well  as for all patients with and without 
evidence of non-susceptibilit y to colistin and ETX2514SUL at ba seline. 
The CE Population will include pa tients who meet m-MITT criteri a and meet evaluability criteria 
(meet key inclusion criteria, do  not have key exclusion criteria, received at lea st 72 hours of study 
drug [ie, 12 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 12 doses of imipenem/cila statin or 6 doses of colistin plus 
12 doses of imipenem/cilastatin in patients without dose adjust ments] to be a clinical cure, received 
at least 48 hours of study drug [ie, 8 doses of ETX2514SUL plus  8 doses of imipenem/cilastatin or 
4 doses of colistin plus 8 doses  of imipenem/cilastatin in pati ents without dose adjustments] to be 
a clinical failure, received 80% of anticipated doses, and di d not have a clinical response of 
indeterminate at the TOC Visit). 
The ME Population will include patients who meet m-MITT criteri a and CE criteria and have an 
appropriately collected culture s pecimen and interpretable culture result when specimen collection 
is clinically indicated at the TOC Visit. The CRABC ME Population will incl ude patients who meet ME crite ria and who have a baseline 
ABC organism that is confirmed t o be carbapenem-resistant (and susceptible to ETX2514SUL for 
Parts A and B and susceptib le to colistin for Part A). 
The PK Population will include patients who receive any amount of study drug and have evaluable
PK data. Efficacy:  
The primary efficacy endpoint for the study is 28-day all-cause  mortality in the CRABC m-MITT 
Population in Part A. Patients in the CRABC m-MITT Population who discontinue study drug 
prematurely in Part A for any r eason will be included in the assessment of 28-day all-cause 
mortality, provided consent  has not been withdrawn.  
A sensitivity analysis for the primary efficacy endpoint will b e performed for patients whose 
eligible culture is >48 hours from the first dose of study drug , as well as for all patients with and 
without evidence of non-suscepti bility to colistin and ETX2514S UL at baseline. 
The non-inferiority assessment will be based on the 2-sided 95%  confidence intervals (CIs) for the 
difference ([ETX2514SUL + imipene m/cilastatin] – [colistin + im ipenem/cilastatin]) in 28-day 
all-cause mortality rates between the treatment groups. Non-inf eriority will be concluded if the 
upper limit of the 2-sided 95% CI is less than +20%.  If non-inferiority is achieved, a test of superiority will be p erformed. 
The analysis of the primary ef ficacy endpoint 28-day all-cause mortality will also be performed in 
the ITT Population. The number and percentage of patients in each response category  for the secondary efficacy 
endpoints will be summarized b
y treatment group for the populations defined earlie r. Two-sided 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 229 5 %  C I s  f o r  t h e  d i f f e r e n c e  i n  o u t c o m e  r a t e s  b e t w e e n  t h e  t r e a t m e nt groups in Part A will be 
provided.  
Part B data will be analyzed sep arately from Part A using descriptive statistics. 
Further subgroup analyses will be conducted, and details of the  analysis will be described in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP). Exploratory endpoint analysis will be described in the SAP. Exp loratory endpoints for health 
resource utilization difference b etween treatment groups (such as length of ventilation, intensive 
care unit stay, hospitalization, additional antibiotic use, etc ) will be reported separately. Efficacy 
analysis for patients with HABP/VABP/VP who are identified as p ositive for ABC by BPP 
molecular methodology will be explored. Pharmacokinetics:  
Descriptive statistics will be provided for PK concentration da ta and PK parameters. All PK 
analyses will be performed using the PK Population.  For the intense PK group, PK sam ples will be obtained from the first approximately 30 patients 
randomized in Part A. The PK samples will be collected for both  treatment groups in Part A to 
keep the study data blinded. The PK samples obtained from the E TX2514SUL group will be 
analyzed for ETX2514 and sulbacta m concentrations using a valid ated assay by a central 
bioanalytical laboratory. Pharm acokinetic assessment of the ini tial 15 patients on ETX2514SUL 
in Part A will be performed by an independent PK assessor, prior to the opening of enrollment in 
Part B. The independent PK assessor will conduct sequential PK analysis from patients as they are 
enrolled. An initial aggregate assessment of PK parameters will  be done after enrollment of the 
first 8 HABP/VABP/VP patients ra ndomized to ETX2514SUL. The ind ependent PK assessor will 
report results to the DSMB, relative to concentrations projected in the population PK model, once data from all 15 patients on ETX2514SUL is available. However, if the preliminary analysis of the 
first 8 patients with HABP/VABP/ VP on ETX2514SUL reveals eviden ce of inadequate exposure
this will be escalated to the DSMB. 
The intense PK sampling will also be performed on the first app roximately 20 patients randomized 
in Part A from China Mainland sites. The PK samples obtained fr om patients who have received 
the ETX2514SUL treatment will be analyzed for ETX2514 and sulba ctam concentrations, which 
will be applied to build the populat ion PK model combined with data from the sparse PK group. 
For the sparse PK group, PK samples will be obtained from all o ther patients enrolled in the study 
(Parts A and B), which will be us ed to better inform the popula tion PK model. 
Analysis of the PK data and incorporation into the population P K analysis and 
PK/pharmacodynamic model will be des cribed in a separate PK Analysis Plan. 
Safety:  
All patients who receive any amount of study drug (MITT Populat ion) will be included in the 
safety analyses. Patients who received the wrong study drug for  their entire course of treatment 
will be analyzed in the gr oup based on the drug received. 
A primary analysis of safety will  be performed for Part A to assess the proportion of patients with 
nephrotoxicity, as measured by t he RIFLE criteria based on the Safety and CE Populations. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 23Overall safety will be assessed for Part A and Part B in the Safety Population. The number and 
percentage of patients in each treatment group reporting at lea st 1 occurrence of a TEAE for each 
unique system organ class and pref erred term will be tabulated.  A TEAE is defined as an adverse 
event occurring on or after the a dministration of the first dos e of study drug. Treatment-emergent 
adverse events will also be tabulated by treatment group, sever ity, and the relationship to study 
drug as assessed by the Investigator. The number and percentage  of patients in each treatment 
group reporting at least 1 occurren ce of a treatment-emergent s erious adverse event will be 
tabulated. The number and percentage of patients (in each treatment group) prematurely discontinuing study drug treatment due to a TEAE will be tabula ted by system organ class and 
preferred term. Adverse events o f special interest in Part A wi ll be summarized for all patients by 
treatment. 
Safety laboratory data will be presented by descriptive statist ics of the post-
baseline value and the 
change from baseline, as well as the number and percentage of patients with potentially clinically 
significant laboratory values. Descriptive statistics of vital signs and ECG parameters and the 
change from baseline will also be presented. An outlier analysi s of the ECG parameters will be 
conducted. 
SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION: 
Patients will be enrolled until t here are 120 patients in the C RABC m-MITT Populat ion in Part A. 
The study will have 80% power to demonstrate non-inferiority be tween Group 1 and Group 2 using 
a 20% non-inferiority margin and a 2-sided 95% CI. This assumes  a  m o r t a l i t y  r a t e  i n  t h e  
comparator group (Group 2) of 41% and in the ETX2514SUL group ( Group 1) of 36%. To have 
120 patients in the CRABC m-MITT Population, Part A will need t o enroll approximately 
200 patients, assuming 60% of ABC clin ical isolates are carbape nem-resistant. Patient enrollment 
in Part B (Group 3) will continue until Part A enrollment in th e CRABC m-MITT Population is 
complete. Rates of carbapenem resistance among isolates from Pa rt A patients will be monitored 
by the unblinded data manager/designee at the Clinical Research Organization on an ongoing basis. 
SITES:  Approximately 100 global sites. 
SPONSOR: Entasis Therapeutics 
Gatehouse Park BioHub 35 Gatehouse Drive Waltham, MA 02451 United States Telephone: +1-781-810-0120 Fax: +1-781-810-0122 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 24TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Signature Page ................................................................................................................................ 2  
Investigator Agreement ........................................ ........................................................................... 3  
Synopsis .......................................................................................................................................... 4  
Table of Contents ............................................. ............................................................................. 24  
List of Tables ................................................................................................................................ 29  
List of Figures ............................................................................................................................... 30  
List of Abbreviations and Definition of Terms.................. ........................................................... 31  
1 Introduction and Background Information ....................... ...................................................... 33  
1.1 Nonclinical Experience With ETX2514 ........................... ............................................ 34  
1.2 Clinical Experien ce With ETX2514 .............................. ............................................... 34  
1.3 Rationale ........................................................................................................................ 36  
1.4 Risk/Benefit ................................................................................................................... 37  
2 Study Objectives ..................................................................................................................... 40  
2.1 Primary Objectives ........................................................................................................ 40  
2.2 Secondary Objectives .................................................................................................... 40  
2.3 Exploratory Objectives .................................................................................................. 40  
3 Study Description.................................................................................................................... 41  
3.1 Summary of Study Design ....................................... ..................................................... 41  
3.2 Study Indication .............................................. .............................................................. 44  
4 Selection and Withdrawal of Patients ..................................................................................... 45  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria ............................................ ............................................................... 45  
4.1.1 General Inclusion Criteria ................................................................................. 45  
4.1.2 Part A-Specific Inclusion Criteria ..................................................................... 46  
4.1.3 Part B-Specific Inclusion Criteria ............................ ......................................... 48  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria .......................................................................................................... 51  
4.3 Withdrawal and Discontinuation Criteria ....................... .............................................. 54  
5 Study Treatments .................................................................................................................... 56  
5.1 Treatment Groups .............................................. ............................................................ 56  
5.2 Rationale for Dosing .......................................... ........................................................... 56  
5.3 Dosing in Patients With Renal Insufficiency ................................................................ 57  
5.4 Randomization and Blinding ......................................................................................... 57  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 255.4.1 Unblinded Investigator ...................................................................................... 58  
5.4.2 Blinded Assessor .............................................. ................................................. 58  
5.5 Drug Supplies ................................................................................................................ 59  
5.5.1 Formulation and Packaging ............................................................................... 59  
5.5.2 Study Drug Preparation and Dispensing ........................................................... 59  
5.5.3 Study Drug Administration ............................................................................... 60  
5.5.4 Treatment Compliance ...................................................................................... 60  
5.5.5 Storage and Accountability ............................................................................... 60  
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Medications and/or Procedures ........... ..................................... 60  
5.6.1 Excluded Medications a nd/or Procedures ......................................................... 60  
5.6.2 Restricted Medications and/or Procedures ...................... .................................. 61  
5.6.3 Allowed Medications and/or Procedures .......................................................... 61  
5.6.4 Documentation of Prior and Concomitant Medication Use ......... ..................... 62  
6 Study Procedures .................................................................................................................... 63  
6.1 Informed Consent .......................................................................................................... 63  
6.2 Screening Visit (-48 Hours to Day 1) ............................................................................ 63  
6.3 Treatment Period – Day 1 Through End of Treatment ............. .................................... 65  
6.3.1 Day 1 ................................................................................................................. 65  
6.3.2 Day 2 ................................................................................................................. 66  
6.3.3 Day 3 ................................................................................................................. 66  
6.3.4 Day 4 ................................................................................................................. 67  
6.3.5 Day 5 ................................................................................................................. 68  
6.3.6 Day 6 ................................................................................................................. 69  
6.3.7 Day 7 to Day 14 and End of Treatment Visit .................... ................................ 69  
6.4 Test of Cure Visit .......................................................................................................... 70  
6.5 Late Follow-Up and Day 28 Visit ............................... .................................................. 71  
6.6 Early Termination Visit/W ithdrawal Procedures .......................................................... 71  
7 Efficacy Assessments .............................................................................................................. 73  
7.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint ............................................................................................ 73  
7.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoints ...................................................................................... 73  
7.3 Other Efficacy Endpoints .............................................................................................. 73  
7.4 Assessment of 28-Day Survival ................................. ................................................... 73  
7.5 Assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms ............................................................... 74  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 267.6 Clinical Outcome ........................................................................................................... 75  
7.7 Microbiologic Assessments ..................................... ...................................................... 76  
7.7.1 Respiratory Tract Specimens ................................... ......................................... 77  
7.7.2 Blood Specimens ............................................................................................... 78  
7.7.3 Urine Specimens ............................................................................................... 78  
7.7.4 Surgical or Post-Traumatic Wound Specimens..................... ............................ 79  
7.8 Microbiologic Outcome ......................................... ....................................................... 79  
7.8.1 Microbiologic Outcome for Bacter emia, Complicated Urinary Tract Infection, 
or Acute Pyelonephritis ..................................................................................... 79  
7.8.2 Microbiologic Outcome for Hospit al-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia , 
Ventilator-Associated Bacterial Pneumonia, Ventilated Pneumonia , or 
Surgical or Post-Traumatic Wound Infections .................................................. 80  
7.9 Pharmacokinetic Assessments ................................... .................................................... 80  
7.9.1 Intense Pharmacokinetic Sampling .............................. ..................................... 80  
7.9.2 Sparse Pharmacokinetic Sampling ............................... ..................................... 81  
8 Safety Assessments ................................................................................................................. 83  
8.1 Adverse Events .............................................................................................................. 83  
8.1.1 Adverse Drug Reaction ......................................... ............................................ 83  
8.1.2 Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction .............................. ................................... 84  
8.1.3 Assessment of Adverse Even ts by the Investigator .............. ............................ 84  
8.1.4 Adverse Events of Special Interest ............................ ........................................ 85  
8.2 Serious Adverse Events ........................................ ......................................................... 85  
8.3 Serious Adverse Event Reporting −  Procedures for Investigators ................................ 86  
8.4 Pregnancy Reporting ........................................... .......................................................... 87  
8.5 Expedited Reporting ........................................... ........................................................... 87  
8.6 Clinical Laboratory Evaluations .................................................................................... 88  
8.7 Vital Signs ................................................... .................................................................. 88  
8.8 Medical/Surgical History Assessments ......................................................................... 89  
8.9 Electrocardiograms ............................................ ............................................................ 89  
8.10 Physical Examinations .................................................................................................. 89  
8.11 Chest X-Ray/Radiology/Ultrasound ............................................................................. 90  
8.12 Mechanical Ventilator Assessments ............................. ................................................. 90  
8.13 Safety Monitoring and Assessmen t of Abnormal Liver Function Tes ts ....................... 90  
9 Statistics .................................................................................................................................. 93  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 279.1 Analysis Populations ..................................................................................................... 93  
9.2 Statistical Methods ........................................................................................................ 94  
9.2.1 Patient Population and Characteristics ........................ ...................................... 94  
9.2.2 Analysis of Efficacy .......................................................................................... 94  
9.2.2.1 Primary efficacy analysis ..................................... ............................... 94  
9.2.2.2 Secondary efficacy analysis ................................... ............................. 95  
9.2.2.3 Exploratory efficacy analysis ................................. ............................. 95  
9.2.3 Pharmacokinetic Analysis ...................................... ........................................... 95  
9.2.4 Analysis of Safety ............................................................................................. 96  
9.2.5 Sample Size Determination ............................................................................... 96  
9.3 Data Safety Monitoring Board ...................................................................................... 97  
10 Data Management and Record Keeping ............................ ..................................................... 98  
10.1 Data Management ......................................................................................................... 98  
10.1.1 Data Handling ................................................................................................... 98  
10.1.2 Computer Systems .............................................. ............................................... 98  
10.1.3 Data Entry ......................................................................................................... 98  
10.1.4 Medical Information Coding ............................................................................. 98  
10.1.5 Data Validation ................................................................................................. 98  
10.2 Record Keeping ............................................................................................................. 98  
11 Investigator Requirement s and Quality Control ..................................................................... 99  
11.1 Ethical Conduct of the Study .................................. ...................................................... 99  
11.2 Institutional Review Board/I ndependent Ethics Committee ......................................... 99  
11.3 Informed Consent .......................................................................................................... 99  
11.4 Patient Card .................................................. ................................................................. 99  
11.5 Study Monitoring Requirements ................................. ................................................ 100  
11.6 Disclosure of Data ....................................................................................................... 100  
11.7 Retention of Records .......................................... ......................................................... 100  
11.8 Publication Policy ............................................ ........................................................... 101  
11.9 Financial Disclosure .................................................................................................... 101  
11.10 Insurance and Indemnity ............................................................................................. 101  
11.11 Legal Aspects ................................................. ............................................................. 101  
12 Study Administrative Information .............................. .......................................................... 102  
12.1 Protocol Amendments ........................................... ...................................................... 102  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 2812.2 End of Study ................................................................................................................ 102  
12.3 Address List ................................................................................................................. 102  
12.3.1 Sponsor ............................................................................................................ 102  
12.3.2 Contract Research Organization ...................................................................... 102  
12.3.3 Serious Adverse Event Reporting ............................... .................................... 102  
12.3.4 Biological Specimens .......................................... ............................................ 103  
13 References ............................................................................................................................. 104  
Appendix A: Schedule of Procedures (Parts A & B) .................................................................. 106  
Appendix B: Central Clini cal Laboratory Analytes .................................................................... 109  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 29LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1. Study Drug Dose Adjustments by Renal Function ..................................................... 57  
Table 2. Unit Conversion Guidance .......................................................................................... 59  
Table 3. Signs and Symptoms for Presenting Indications ........................................................ 75  
Table 4. Sampling Times for Intense Pharmacokinetic Assessments ........ ............................... 81  
Table 5. Sampling Times for Sparse Phar macokinetic Assessments ......... ............................... 81  
Table 6. Definition of RIFLE Criteria .................................. .................................................... 85  
Table 7. 28-Day All-Cause Mortality Rates i n the CRABC m-MITT Population  Required to 
Demonstrate Non-Inferiority and Superiority ................... .......................................... 97  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 30LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1.  Study Design ............................................................................................................... 43  
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 31LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AN D DEFINITION OF TERMS  
Abbreviation Definition 
A. baumannii Acinetobacter baumannii  
ABC Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex 
ALT Alanine aminotransferase 
AP Acute pyelonephritis APACHE Acute Physiology and C hronic Health Evaluation 
AST Aspartate aminotransferase BAL Bronchoalveolar lavage BL β-lactam BLI β-lactamase inhibitor 
BPP Biofire
® FilmArray® 2.0 Pneumonia Panel 
CBA Colistin base activity 
C. difficile  Clostridium difficile  
CE Clinical Evaluable 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CFU Colony-forming units 
CI Confidence interval 
CLSI Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute 
CMS Colistimethate sodium 
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CRA Clinical research associate 
CRABC Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex
CT Computed tomography 
CTA Clinical trial authorization 
cUTI Complicated urinary tract infection 
DSMB Data Safety Monitoring Board 
ECG Electrocardiogram 
eCRF Electronic case report form 
EDC Electronic data capture 
eGFR Estimated glome rular filtration rate 
EOT End of Treatment 
ET Early Termination 
ETX2514SUL Sulbactam-ETX2514 
FDA Food and Drug Administration 
FiO 2 Fraction of inspired oxygen 
GCP Good Clinical Practice 
HABP Hospital-acquired bacterial pneumonia 
ICF Informed consent form 
ICH International C ouncil for Harmonisation 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 32Abbreviation Definition 
IRB Institutional Review Board 
IRT Interactive Response Technology 
ITT Intent-to-Treat 
IU International unit 
IV Intravenous(ly) 
LFT Liver function test 
LFU Late Follow-up 
MAP Mean arterial pressure 
MDR Multi-drug resistant 
ME Microbiologic Evaluable 
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
MIC Minimum inhibitory concentration 
MITT Modified Intent-to-Treat 
MIU Million international unit 
m-MITT Microbiologically Modified Intent-to-Treat 
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging 
P. carinii Pneumocystis carinii  
PD Pharmacodynamic  
PEEP Positive end-expiratory pressure 
PK Pharmacokinetic(s) 
q6h Every 6 hours 
q12h Every 12 hours 
qSOFA Quick Sequential Organ Failure Assessment 
QTcF QT interval correcte d using Fridericia’s formula 
RIFLE Risk–Injury–Failure–Lo ss–End-stage renal disease 
SAE Serious adverse event 
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan 
SOFA Sequential Orga n Failure Assessment 
TEAE Treatment-emergent adverse event 
TOC Test of Cure 
ULN Upper limit of normal 
US United States 
VABP Ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia 
VP Ventilated pneumonia 
WBC White blood cell 
WHO World Health Organization 
XDR Extremely drug resistant 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 331 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
There is a significant unmet medical need to identify new agent s to treat Acinetobacter baumannii 
(A. baumannii) -calcoaceticus  complex (ABC) infections. Sulbactam-ETX2514 (ETX2514SUL) 
is a novel bactericidal β-lactam (BL)/β-lactamase inhibitor (BLI) combination, which is being 
developed for the treatment of infections caused by ABC, includ ing multi-drug resistant (MDR) 
and carbapenem-resistant ABC (CRABC) isolates. 
Acinetobacter baumannii , a non-fermenting Gram negative bacterial species, is increasi ngly being 
recognized as an important cause  of severe infections, particul arly in compromised hospital 
patients. It is a significant  public health concern and is clas sified as a “serious  threat” pathogen in 
the recent United States (US) Centers for Disease Control and P revention “Antibiotic Resistance 
Threats in the United States” report1 and is ranked as “critical” on the World Health Organization 
(WHO) global priority list of antibiotic-resistant bacteria to guide research, discovery, and 
development of new antibiotics.2 Acinetobacter baumannii causes severe infections that are 
associated with high mortality. Approximately 2% of healthcare- associated infections are caused 
by A. baumannii .3 Patients on mechanical ventilators and those with central line- catheters have the 
highest proportion of infections caused by A. baumannii . Serious infections caused by 
A. baumannii , including hospital-acquired ba cterial pneumonia (HABP)/ventil ator-associated 
bacterial pneumonia (VABP), vent ilated pneumonia (VP), complica ted urinary tract 
infection (cUTI), bacteremia, a nd wound infections, are estimat ed to occur in 70,000 patients to 
90,000 patients in the United States per year, of which approximately 63% are caused by MDR 
isolates.4 Multi-drug resistance in A. baumannii is an evolving problem, with some countries in 
Europe reporting carbapenem resistance rates >50%.5 Mortality associated with bacteremia and 
pneumonia caused by A. baumannii  ranges from 30% to 50%.6,7 The risk of death associated with 
infections caused by A. baumannii  isolates resistant to carbapenems is even higher,1,7 and MDR 
A. baumannii is an evolving global problem. While most reports focus on A. baumannii  as the 
etiological agent of these infections, several very closely rel ated Acinetobacter  species that are 
genotypically distinct but phenot ypically indistinguishable fro m A. baumannii  also cause human 
disease. Therefore, this group is referred to as the “ Acinetobacter baumann ii-calcoaceticus 
complex”.8 
In the early 1960s to 1970s, infections due to A. baumannii  were managed effectively with BL 
antibiotics, as the rates of resi stance to available antimicrobial classes were low.9,10 However, by 
the end of the 1970s, resistance to aminoglycosides and BL anti biotics had been reported. In the 
1980s, carbapenems such as imipenem became the drug of choice f or treatment of A. baumannii  
infections; widespread carbapene m resistance, however, has now been observed in many 
countries.1,10 
In the late 1990s to 2000s, the in  vitro activity and clinical effectiveness of sulbactam against 
A. baumannii  were demonstrated.9 There has been a steady decline, however, in the in vitro 
susceptibility of A. baumannii  to sulbactam. Presently, the majority of A. baumannii  isolates are 
MDR, defined as non-susceptible to  at least 3 or more antimicro bial categories, and many are 
extremely drug resistant (XDR), defined as non-susceptibility to at least 1 agent in all but 2 or fewer antimicrobial categories.
11 For example, data from the Healthcare Safety Network 
summarizing healthcare-associated infections reported that appr oximately 60% to 70% of 
A. baumannii  isolates causing pneumonia or b acteremia were resistant to car bapenems and were 
identified as MDR.3  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 34ETX2514 is a novel, rationally designed diazabicyclooctenone BLI. It is a potent inhibitor of 
Classes A and C β-lact amases and a broad-sp ectrum inhibitor of Class D β-lact amases. ETX2514 
has no activity against Class B β-lactamases. ETX2514 is not a BL. It displays a covalent, 
reversible mechanism of inhibition through β-lactamase active-s ite serine carbamoylation. 
ETX2514 exhibits intrinsic  activity against some Enterobacteriaceae  but has no significant 
clinical activity against A. baumannii . 
Sulbactam is a penicillin derivative and is used widely as an i nhibitor of β-lactamases. Although 
sulbactam is available as a standalone product in a small numbe r of countries (eg, Combactam™, 
Germany), the vast majority of human use is in combination with  BL (eg, Unasyn™, 
ampicillin/sulbactam). Unas yn is approved by regulatory authori ties in the United States, Europe, 
and the Asia-Pacific region. 
Entasis Therapeutics is devel oping ETX2514SUL for the treatment  of serious infections caused 
by A. baumannii . The dose of sulbactam, 1 g on ce every 6 hours (q6h) (maximum daily dose in 
patients with normal renal clearance of 4 g), that will be used  in combination with ETX2514 is the 
highest dose approved for human use. 
1.1 Nonclinical Experience With ETX2514 
Nonclinical data are provided i n more detail in the Investigato r’s Brochure. 
The nonclinical safety program f or ETX2514 includes toxicology studies up to 14 days duration 
in rats and dogs, safety pharm acology, and genetic toxicity. Th ese studies demonstrate that 
ETX2514 was generally well tolerated and was not associated wit h target organ toxicity when 
administered in doses up to 2000 mg/kg. ETX2514 did not exhibit  high protein binding, and in 
vitro data did not indicate significant drug-drug interactions via cytochrome P450 pathways or 
interactions with hepatic or re nal transporters. ETX2514 was la rgely excreted unchanged in the 
urine. Reproductive toxicology s tudies are currently ongoing. 
1.2 Clinical Experience With ETX2514 
A summary of clinical experience is provided in greater detail in the Investigator’s Brochure. 
ETX2514 has been evaluated both alone and in combination with s ulbactam and/or 
imipenem/cilastatin in a Phase 1 first-in-human study. This stu dy evaluated single ascending doses 
and multiple ascending doses of ETX2514 to fully characterize t he safety and pharmacokinetics 
(PK) profile of ETX2514. In addition, this study evaluated if t here was any clinically significant 
drug-drug interacti on between sulbactam, ETX2514, and imipenem/ cilastatin. 
Additionally, a Phase 1 study evaluated lung penetration by ETX 2514 and sulbactam in 30 healthy 
volunteers. Administration of single doses of ETX2514SUL was al so studied in patients with mild, 
moderate, or severe renal insufficiency, as well as in hemodial ysis patients.  
A Phase 2 study in patients with cUTI or acute pyelonephritis ( AP) has been completed. The 
primary objective of t his study was to assess the safety of ETX 2514SUL in moderately ill 
hospitalized patients. Study CS2514-2514-2017-0003 was conducte d at 20 sites in 4 countries 
(Belarus, Bulgaria, Russia, and Ukraine). This study was a double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of  intravenous (IV) ETX2514SUL in 
patients with cUTIs or AP who were otherwise relatively healthy . Patients providing informed 
consent 
and meeting all study eligibility criteria were enrolle d and had a pretreatment urine and 
blood sample obtained and submitte d to the local laboratory. Ei ghty patients were randomized in 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 35a 2:1 ratio (53 patients rando mized into the ETX2514SUL group a nd 27 patients randomized into 
the placebo group) to receive either 1 g ETX2514/1 g sulbactam IV (infused over 3 hours) or 
matching placebo q6h, respectivel y. All patients received backg round therapy with 
500 mg/500 mg IV imipenem/cilastat in q6h (infused over 30 minut es). Therapy was continued for 
7 days, with the option to increase for up to 14 days if bacter emia was present.  
Key findings from the above st udies are summarized below: 
 ETX2514 demonstrated linear PK a nd had no evidence of accumulat ion. 
 ETX2514 did not interact with sulbact am and/or imip enem/cilasta tin. 
 ETX2514 was predominantly excreted  renally and dose adjustments  were necessary for 
patients with moderate or severe  renal insufficiency including dialysis. Similarly, higher doses 
are recommended for patients with  augmented renal clearance or receiving continuous renal 
replacement therapy. 
 ETX2514SUL demonstrated good penetra tion of the lung epithelium . 
Efficacy results: 
 ETX2514SUL when dosed with imipene m/cilastatin showed comparabl e efficacy to 
placebo + imipenem/cilastatin in treatment of hospitalized patients with cUTI or AP. Among 
patients with imipenem nonsusceptible infections, imipenem comb ined with ETX2514SUL 
was able to successfully treat 3 out of 3 infections. 
Safety and tolerability results: 
 ETX2514 was generally safe and well tolerated when given alone or with sulbactam and/or 
imipenem/cilastatin. 
 To date, there have been no seri ous adverse drug reactions or deaths in clinical studies. 
 The most common adverse events reported were headache and infus ion site reactions, 
including phlebitis and vascula r pain at the infusion site. 
 Mild reductions in total white blood cell (WBC) and absolute ne utrophil counts have been 
observed with multiple doses of ETX2514, although no events of leukopenia or neutropenia 
have been observed. 
 Asymptomatic, transient increases in hepatic enzymes (unaccompa nied by increases in 
bilirubin) have been observed with ETX2514SUL, and these are th ought to be related to known 
effects of sulbactam. 
 Mild to moderate allergic reactions including urticaria have be en observed at rates <1% with 
ETX2514SUL. 
 No clinically significant change s in vital signs or electrocard iogram (ECG) parameters have 
been observed in patients treated with ETX2514SUL. Transient in creases in systolic blood 
pressure within normal ranges were observed in healthy elderly subjects dosed with 
ETX2514SUL. 
 ETX2514, at the studied doses, had no clinically relevant effects on studied ECG parameters 
in a thorough QT study conducte d in healthy volunteers. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 361.3 Rationale 
Entasis Therapeutics is devel oping ETX2514SUL for the treatment  of serious infections caused 
by ABC, particularly those that are resistant to carbapenems. The dose of sulbactam, 1.0 g q6h 
(maximum daily dose in patients with normal renal clearance of 4 g), that will be used in 
combination with ETX2514 is the highest dose approved for human use, often in combination with ampicillin or cefoperazone. 
ETX2514 is a novel diazabicyclooctenone BLI with a spectrum of activity that encompasses 
clinically important β-lactamases of Ambler Class A and C and b road-spectrum inhibition of 
Class D β-lactamases. ETX2514 is not a BL. ETX2514 has greater potency than com parator BLIs, 
including clavulanic acid, tazoba ctam, and avibactam against al l Class A, C, and D enzymes tested. 
ETX2514 does not inhibit the Class B New Delhi Metallo-β-lactam ase 1.  
Sulbactam is classified as a BLI but also has intrinsic antibac terial activity against A. baumannii  
due to its inhibition of Penicillin Binding Protein 3, a transp eptidase that is essential for the final 
step of bacterial peptidoglycan synthesis.
12 Although no breakpoint for A. baumannii  has been 
established by the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing or Clinical and 
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) for sulbactam alone, sulb actam is used in combination with 
ampicillin (in a 2:1 ampicillin:sulbactam ratio) in therapy for  A. baumannii . The CLSI has 
established breakpoints of 8/4 (am picillin/sulbactam) mg/L for this agent for Acinetobacter  
species. Because the activity of ampicillin/sulbactam versus A. baumannii  can be attributed to the 
sulbactam component alone, the CLSI-defined susceptible breakpo int of 
8/4 (ampicillin/sulbactam) mg/L that applies to the combination  suggests a susceptible breakpoint 
of 4 mg/L for sulb actam alone in A. baumannii .  
The addition of ETX2514 to sulbactam in vitro restores the acti vity of sulbactam such that the 
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) to inhibit 90% of growth  versus a collection of recent 
A. baumannii  clinical isolates shifts from >32 mg/L to 2 mg/L in the presen ce of ETX2514 (held 
constant at 4 mg/L). In vitro experiments supported a susceptibility-testing paradigm of holding the concentration of ETX2514 cons tant at 4 mg/L while varying t he sulbactam concentration in 
2-fold increments. This activit y of sulbactam-ETX2514 was consi stent across A. baumannii  
isolates from different geogra phic regions and infection types and did not change in subsets of 
meropenem-resistant, colistin-resistant, or MDR isolates, nor d id it change over time (a total of 
3611 isolates collected from 2011 to 2018 were tested). A detai led assessment of human dose 
projection of sulbactam-ETX2514 was performed utilizing PK para meters from human Phase 1 
and Phase 2 data, lung penetration data, PK/pharmacodynamic (PD ) targets, and current MIC 
distribution versus A. baumannii . A preliminary probability of target attainment was completed. 
The result of these analyses sugg ested a 3-hour infusion of 1.0  g sulbactam/1.0 g ETX2514 
administered 4 times a day is predicted to be effective to trea t patients infected with A. baumannii  
with MICs 4 mg/L. Complete details of this assessment can be found in the  Investigator’s 
Brochure. 
Current treatment guidelines (In fectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society) 
for the treatment of HABP/VABP/VP due to A. baumannii  recommend the use of carbapenems or 
ampicillin/sulbactam as first-line agents as long as the isolat es are sensitive to these drugs. 
However, in the event of carbapenem resistance, the current rec ommended regimens are to use 
polymyxins such as colistin to treat these infections. This stu dy utilizes a combination of colistin 
and imipenem as the comparator. The combination of a carbapenem  with a polymyxin has been 
shown to have increased activity in vitro against A. baumannii .
13 The selection of the comparator 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 37for this study is challenging. The possibility of utilizing “best-available care” as the comparator 
was considered, but it was determined that this was not a satis factory option because of the size of 
the study and the potential to confound assessment of comparati ve efficacy. On a world-wide basis, 
including Europe, the majority o f ABC isolates are MDR. Common regimens that are utilized 
include colistin either alone or plus a carbapenem and tigecycl ine plus 1 or more agents. It is of 
interest that tigecycline is not  indicated for treatment of pat ients with pneumonia in Europe or for 
the treatment of HABP/VABP/ VP in the United States. 
Based on these considerations, th is study will use colistin plu s imipenem/cilastatin as the 
comparator. Imipenem/cilastatin is indicated for the treatment of HABP/VABP/VP and is widely 
used in this indication. Part A w ill enroll patients prior to t he availability of antibiotic sensitivities, 
and it is anticipated that appr oximately 40% of ABC infections could be sensitive to carbapenem. 
Imipenem/cilastatin would be th e drug of choice in this populat ion. For those patients with 
CRABC infection, colistin would be the drug of choice. Although recent data14 suggest that the 
addition of a carbapenem to co listin may not be synergistic in the treatment of CRABC infections, 
there was no suggestion of a negative effect of this combinatio n. Moreover, discontinuation of 
imipenem/cilastatin in these patients after randomization will result in unblinding of treatment 
assignment. Lastly, assessment of efficacy of the combination o f ETX2514 with both sulbactam 
and imipenem/cilastatin in the treatment of CRABC infections would  entail not discontinuing the 
carbapenem in the investigationa l treatment group. Hence, all p atients in this study will receive 
imipenem/cilastatin regardless of the carbapenem sensitivity of  the ABC infection. 
This is a Phase 3, randomized, active-controlled pivotal study to evaluate the efficacy and safety 
of IV ETX2514SUL plus imipenem/cilastatin compared to colistin plus imipenem/cilastatin in the 
treatment of patients with ABC infections. In Part A, all patie nts will receive imipenem/cilastatin 
as the best treatment option for HABP, VABP, VP, and/or bactere mia caused by ABC. In addition, 
the experimental group will receive ETX2514SUL, while the compa rator group will receive 
colistin, both agents targeting drug-resistant ABC. These combi nations of drugs should provide all 
patients with the best treatment  options for ABC infections, wh ile anticipating a high rate of drug 
resistant ABC infections.  
Part B will be the open-label, supportive portion of the study that will include patients known to 
have HABP, VABP, VP, and/or bacteremia infections associated wi th ABC organisms that are 
known to be resistant to colistin  or polymyxin B, those failing  a colistin or polymyxin B regimen 
prior to study entry or are on acute renal replacement therapy,  and patients with infections due to 
colistin- or polymyxin B-resistan t ABC with sources of infectio n other than HABP, VABP, VP, 
and/or bacteremia. The goal is to  gather preliminary efficacy a nd safety data in the setting of these 
other infections and provide a salvage option for XDR strains o f ABC infections; hence, Part B 
will not be pivotal and will not have a comparator. The objecti ve of Part B will be to estimate 
efficacy of the combination of sulbactam and ETX2514 against co listin- or polymyxin B-resistant 
ABC infecting various sites, as supporting evidence for Part A results. Safety of ETX2514SUL 
will be assessed as a whole in Part A and Part B. 
1.4 Risk/Benefit 
No unique contraindications have been determined for ETX2514. C ontraindications to the use of 
sulbactam include a history of hypersensitivity or allergic rea ctions to sulbactam or any 
cephalosporin, penicillin, or carbapenem. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 38ETX2514 was well tolerated in rep eat dose animal toxicology stu dies; no specific safety signals 
were observed that require special monitoring in human subjects . Reductions in absolute 
neutrophil count and monocytes were reported in the dog repeat dose toxicity studies and will be 
monitored by routine he matology assessments  in human subjects. 
Studies in healthy adult and elde rly subjects and in patients w ith renal impairment or cUTI have 
revealed no serious adverse drug r eactions or deaths to date, a nd the withdrawal rate due to adverse 
events has been low (1%). Adverse events have generally been mi ld to moderate in severity. The 
most common treatment-emergent a dverse events (TEAEs) in both healthy elderly subjects and in 
patients have included injecti on site reactions/pain and headac he; the less common TEAEs in 
patients were nausea, diarrhea , and vomiting. Overall, ETX2514S UL has been well  tolerated, and 
only 1 drug-unrelated serious adv erse event (SAE) has been repo rted to date. Doses of 
ETX2514SUL must be adjusted in pat ients with impaired renal fun ction. Mild decreases from 
baseline in mean WBC and neutro phil counts have been observed i n subjects receiving ETX2514 
alone or multiple doses of ETX2514 with imipenem/cilastatin. Mi ld increases in alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) were observed with administration of ETX 2514SUL with 
imipenem/cilastatin. These findings were not considered clinica lly significant since mean values 
remained within the reference range at all time points. However , WBC counts and hepatic function 
will be monitored closely in ongoing clinical studies. No clini cally significant changes in vital 
signs or ECG parameters have been observed in patients treated with ETX2514SUL with or 
without imipenem/cilastatin. 
Although sulbactam is available as a standalone product in a sm all number of countries 
(eg, Combactam, Germany), the va st majority of human use is in combination with BLs 
(eg, Unasyn, combination of ampicillin/sulbactam). The clinical  s a f e t y  o f  s u l b a c t a m  h a s  b e e n  
established by nearly 30 years of experience with Unasyn. Based  on the product label, Unasyn is 
generally safe and well tolerated. The dose of sulbactam that w ill be used in combination with 
ETX2514 is the highest dose approv ed for human u se (1.0 g q6h, maximum daily dose in patients 
with normal renal clearance of 4.0 g).15 The most frequently reported adverse events reported with 
Unasyn are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, pain at the injection site, and skin rash. Hepatic 
dysfunction, including hepatitis  and cholestatic jaundice, has been associated with the use of 
sulbactam. Hepatic toxicity is us ually reversible; however, dea ths have been reported. Routine 
monitoring of liver function will be conducted at baseline and during and after administration of 
ETX2514SUL. 
D o s e  a d j u s t m e n t s  a r e  n e c e s s a r y  f o r  severe renal insufficiency a nd hemodialysis patients. It is 
expected that the combinati on of ETX2514SUL with imipenem/cilas tatin will have high levels of 
penetration in the lung and, hence, should show good efficacy i n treatment of patients with 
ABC pneumonia. Reproductive stud ies for ETX2514 have not yet be en completed, so precautions 
against exposure in pregnant women and avoidance of pregnancy o f participants in this study are 
necessary. Allergic and hypersensi tivity reactions are a potent ial risk, as with all antimicrobials, 
and patients with serious known allergies to BLs will not be en rolled in the study. 
Colistin is now used routinely for Gram negative infections tha t are resistant to carbapenems, based 
on treatment guidelines in most countries with high prevalence of such infections. The risk of 
nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity a re well described in the coli stin label and the li terature. Dosing 
of colistin in this trial is weight-based and will be adjusted based on daily calculations of estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).  Patients will be monitored f or worsening renal function and 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 39signs of neurotoxicity. Patients with contraindications for col istin treatment may be considered for 
enrollment in Part B of the study. 
Imipenem/cilastatin is indicated f or a broad variety of infecti ons and has been approved for use 
for many years for the treatment  of serious infections, includi ng those caused by ABC. Key risks, 
including hypersensitivity and seizures, are well documented in  the literature. Dose adjustments 
for renal insufficiency are being implemented in the dosing of patients in this protocol as a key 
risk mitigation. Drugs that are c ontraindicated with the use of  imipenem/cilastatin are not allowed 
for use in this protocol. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 402 STUDY OBJECTIVES 
This is a 2-part study, with Part A being the randomized, controlled portion of the study in patients 
with ABC HABP, VABP, VP, or bacteremia. Part B is the single-gr oup portion of the study and 
includes ABC infections that are resistant to or have failed co listin or polymyxin B treatment, as 
detailed in the in clusion criteria. 
2.1 Primary Objectives 
The primary objectives of this  study are the following: 
 To compare the efficacy of ETX2514SUL plus imipenem/cilastatin to colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin in patients with CRABC infections in Part A; and 
 To compare the incidence of nephrotoxicity, as measured by the Risk–Injury–Failure–Loss–End-stage renal disease (RIFLE) criter ia, of ETX2514SUL to 
colistin in patients with ABC infections in Part A. 
2.2 Secondary Objectives 
The secondary objectives of thi s study are the following: 
 To compare the efficacy of ETX2514SUL plus imipenem/cilastatin to colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin in all randomized patients in Part A;  
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514S UL plus imipenem/cilastatin  in patients with colistin- or 
polymyxin B-resistant ABC infections in Part B;  
 To estimate the efficacy of ETX2514S UL plus imipenem/cilastatin  for each primary infection 
site;  
 To evaluate and compare the s afety of ETX2514SUL and colistin; 
 To describe the overall safet y profile of ETX2514SUL; and 
 To determine the systemic exposu re of ETX2514 and sulbactam in a small cohort of severely 
ill patients administered ETX2514SUL in Part A. 
2.3 Exploratory Objectives 
The exploratory objectives of thi s study are the following: 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to PK exposure; 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to MIC distr ibution of ETX2514SUL; 
 To evaluate the efficacy of ETX2514SUL in relation to total dur ation of treatment received; 
and 
 To compare the resource utilizati on of patients receiving ETX25 14SUL plus 
imipenem/cilastatin to patients receiving colistin plus imipene m/cilastatin. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 413 STUDY DESCRIPTION 
3.1 Summary of Study Design 
This study is a randomized, active-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of IV 
ETX2514SUL in patients with ABC in fections. Patients providing informed consent and meeting 
all study eligibility criteria will be enrolled in the study an d have pretreatment blood and infection 
site-specific samples obtained and submitted to the local laboratory.  
The study will be enrolled in 2 parallel parts, with the PK dat a from the first approximately 
30 patients in Part A (with only 15 patients dosed with ETX2514SUL) reviewed prior to initiating 
enrollment in Part B: 
a. Part A will be the pivotal, assessor-blind, randomized, compara tive portion of the study in 
patients with documente d ABC HABP, VABP, VP,  or bacteremia. Whi le study drugs will not 
be masked due to logistical reas ons, every attempt will be made  to maintain the blind for 
patients, all staff at the site, and the Sponsor or its designe es, except for the treatment physician 
and other immediate healthcare pr oviders (see Section 5.4). In Part A, patients will be 
randomized 1:1 to 1 of the fol lowing treatment groups: 
o Group 1: 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h plus 1.0 g 
imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h; or 
o Group 2: 2.5 mg/kg colistin IV infused over 30 minutes every 12  hours (q12h) plus 1.0 g 
imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
Patients will be enrolled until there are 120 patients in the C RABC Microbiologically Modified 
Intent-to-Treat (m-MITT) Populati on in Part A, as determined by  the central microbiology 
laboratory. Approximately 200 patients are expected to be enrolled in Part A, assuming approximately 60% of patients wi ll have CRABC (see Section 9 fo r complete details). The 
HABP/VABP/VP patients who are randomized to Part A based on a positive screening of a 
respiratory sample for ABC by the Biofire
 FilmArray 2.0 Pneumonia Pane l (BPP), but who 
subsequently do not have growth o f ABC in their respiratory sam ple culture processed by the 
local microbiology laboratory, wi ll be withdrawn from the study  drug treatment. 
Randomization will be stratified  by indication (HABP/VABP/VP ve rsus bacteremia), severity 
of illness (based on Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evalua tion [APACHE] II [10 to 
19 versus 20 to 30], Sequential Organ Failure Assessment [SOFA]  [7 to 9 versus  10], or quick 
SOFA [qSOFA] [2 versus 3] score at Screening), and geography (China Mainland versus Rest 
of World). In the situation where a patient has more than one s core reported, the scores will be 
used in the following order:  APACHE, SOFA, and qSOFA. 
Enrollment of HABP, VP, and bacteremia patients will be limited  to a total of no more than 
40% of patients in Part A, reg ardless of resistance. 
b. Part B will be the open-labe l, supportive portion of the study that will include patients known 
to have HABP, VABP, VP, and/or b acteremia infections associated  with ABC organisms that 
are known to be resistant to colistin or polymyxin B, those fai ling a colistin or polymyxin B 
regimen prior to study entry or are on acute renal replacement therapy, and patients with 
infections due to colis tin- or polymyxin B-resistant ABC with s ources of infection other than 
HABP, VABP, VP, and/or bacter emia, as detailed in Section 4.1.3 .  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 42Any patient who has a qualifying ABC infection and meets study inclusion criteria but has a 
contraindication to colistin due to underlying conditions, into lerance, or evidence of 
failing colistin or polymyxin B therapy prior to study entry, a n d / o r  h a s  a  c o l i s t i n -  o r  
polymyxin B-resistant ABC infect ion cannot be enrolled in Part A but can be considered for 
enrollment in Part B (see  Section 4 for details). 
Patients with ABC infections who are not otherwise eligible for  Part A are expected to be 
enrolled in Part B. Patient enrollment in Part B will continue until Part A enrollment in the 
CRABC m-MITT Population is complet e. In Part B, patients will r eceive the following 
treatment: 
o Group 3: 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h plus 1.0 g 
imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
Transfer from Part A to Part B: Since Part A will be the first time patients in intensive care are 
receiving ETX2514SUL, PK in the first approximately 30 patients  must be verified prior to 
initiating Part B to ensure the treatment planned in Part B is optimal for the targeted patient 
population. Patients randomized to either group of Part A can o nly be transferred to Part B, once 
Part B is open for enrollment, if the ABC identified from the b aseline culture is subsequently 
determined to be resistant to colistin or polymyxin B by the local microbiology laboratory. If 
Part B is not yet open for enrollment in a given country and a patient in Part A has a baseline 
culture determined to be colistin - or polymyxin B-resistant but  is responding to the rapy, the patient 
may remain in Part A at the disc retion of the Investigator. A p atient in Part A whose culture is 
determined to be colistin- or polymyxin B-resistant and who has  not shown improvement or whose 
condition has worsened will be withdrawn from the study drug tr eatment. All such cases must be 
discussed with the Medical Monitor. 
Any organism isolated from the bl ood or infection site-specific  cultures will be identified by genus 
and species by the local laboratory. Organisms will be cultured  and quantified (urine and 
bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL] only) at the local laboratory, and  susceptibility of the organism(s) 
will be performed per local laboratory standards. Isolates of p athogens cultured at the local 
laboratory are to be sent to the central laboratory for confirm ation of identification and 
susceptibility testing.  No dosing regimen changes, other  than those spec ified in the pr otocol for renal i nsufficiency (see 
Section 5.3) or for patients on imipenem who develop a seizure that is thought to be directly related 
to imipenem, can occur without discussion with the Medical Moni tor. Patients with cultures 
growing organisms with evidence of carbapenem resistance should  remain on their assigned 
treatment regimen; treatment reg imen changes can occur after 5 days after discussion with the 
Medical Monitor. If changes to t he regimen are needed due to un satisfactory clinical response, 
patients should be classified as clinical failure s and disconti nued from study drug. All patients 
should receive at least 48 hours of IV study drug (ie, 8 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 8 doses of 
imipenem/cilastatin or 4 doses of colistin plus 8 doses of imip enem/cilastatin in patients without 
dose adjustments) before the Inve stigator considers the patient  t o  b e  a  c l i n i c a l  f a i l u r e  a n d  
discontinues the patient from study drug therapy.  
Note: Patients who experience fo cal tremors, myoclonus, or seiz ures at any point during the study 
should be evaluated neurologically, placed on anticonvulsant th erapy (if not already instituted), 
and the dose of 
imipenem/cilastatin should be evaluated to determine whether it should be 
decreased or discontinued.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 43Day 1 is defined as the first day of study drug administration.  The subsequent study days are 
defined by the number of treatme nt days thereafte r. Treatment d ays should constitute 24 hours of 
treatment. For those patients wit h no dose adjustments, the dur ation of antibiotic treatment with 
study drug therapy will be 28 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses  of imipenem/cilastatin or 
14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses of imipenem/cilastatin (ie, treatment for 7 days for those without 
dose adjustments), with a prolongation of therapy up to 14 days  if clinically indicated. Refer to the 
Pharmacy Manual for specifics on dosing for all patients. 
The overall study design is shown in Figure 1. Figure 1. Study Design 
 
*Part B: Part B will be the open-label, supportive portion of t he study that will include patients known to have HABP, VABP, 
VP, and/or bacteremia infections associated with ABC organisms that are known to be r esistant to colistin or polymyxin B, thos e 
failing a colistin or polymyxin B regimen prior to study entry or are on acute renal replacement therapy, and patients with 
infections due to colistin- or polymyxin B-resistant ABC with sources of infection other than HABP, VABP, VP, and/or 
bacteremia. The total number of patients enrolled in Part B may be adjusted based on the number needed to be enrolled in Part A 
to achieve the number needed to be treated in the CRABC m-MITT Population. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; APACHE = Acute Physiologic Assessment and Chronic Hea lth 
Evaluation; CRABC = Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; cUTI = complicated urinary tract 
infection; ETX2514SUL = sulbact am-ETX2514; HABP = hospital-acqu ired bacterial pneumonia; IMI = imipenem/cilastatin; 
LFU = Late Follow-up; m-MITT = Microbiologically Modified Inten t-to-Treat; q6h = every 6 ho urs; q12h = every 12 hours; 
TOC = Test of Cure; VABP = ventila tor-associated bacterial pneu monia; VP = ventilated pneumonia.  
Patients who have early discontinuation of study drug dosing should perform all End of Treatment 
(EOT) Visit procedures and should be followed through the Late Follow-up (LFU) Visit for safety 
assessments, even if the reason for discontinuation is clinical  failure. 
In Part A, clinical outcome assessments will be performed by a blinded assessor, in addition to the 
unblinded Investigator. Whenever p ossible, the same blinded ass essor should complete all clinical 
outcome assessments for a study pa tient. If there is a discrepa ncy between the assessment of the 
blinded assessor and unblinded I nvestigator, the assessment fro m the blinded assessor will be used. 
If there is a missing assessment from either the blinded assess or or unblinded Investigator, the 

Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 44other available assessment will b e used. An adjudication commit tee may be organized for endpoint 
adjudication should it be deemed necessary as determined by the  Data Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB). In such a case, a chart er will be developed that descri bes their activities. 
Intense PK sampling will be performed on the first approximatel y 30 patients randomized in 
Part A. The purpose of the intense PK sampling is to ensure tha t exposures observed in this 
severely ill cohort are comparable to those observed thus far i n prior clinical studies. The PK 
samples will be collected for both treatment groups in Part A to keep the study data blinded. 
Pharmacokinetic assessment of the initial 15 patients on ETX251 4SUL in Part A will be performed 
by an independent PK assessor, prior to the opening of enrollment in Part B. To explore the PK profile of the ETX2514SUL combination in Chinese patients with severe infection, the intense PK 
sample will also be collected from the first approximately 20 p atients randomized in Part A at 
China Mainland sites. All other patients enrolled in the study (Parts A and B) will have samples 
collected for sparse PK analysi s, which will be used to better inform the population PK model.  
Patients will be enrolled in the study for approximately 28 day s, with a maximum duration of 
32 days. Screening laboratory analytes can be performed as stan dard of care up to 48 hours prior 
to randomization on Day 1, with the exception of local laborato ry serum creatinine determination, 
which must be obtained at the local laboratory within 24 hours of the first dose of study drug. The 
Treatment Period begins on Day 1, and study drug will be administered for 7 days (ie, 28 doses of 
ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses of imipenem/cilastatin or 14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses of 
imipenem/cilastatin for those without dose adjustments) with a prolongation of therapy of up to 
14 days if clinically indicated. Th e EOT Visit will be completed on the final dosing day or the 
following day. The Test of Cure (TOC) Visit will be completed 7  days (2 days) after the EOT 
Visit for all patients. The LFU  Visit will be completed 14 days  (2 days) after the EOT Visit for 
all patients. For patients with an LFU Visit occurring before D ay 28, a telephone call to assess 
survival will be made on Day 28 or anytime thereafter. Every at tempt must be made to record 
survival status at Day 28 or anytime thereafter for all randomi zed patients (including 
HABP/VABP/VP patients who are randomized to Part A based on a positive BPP rapid test, but who subsequently do not have growth of ABC in their respiratory sample culture), regardless of their status of treatment, as long as the patient has not withd rawn consent from participation in the 
study. 
3.2 Study Indication 
ETX2514SUL is indicated for the t reatment of serious infections caused by ABC. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 454 SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL OF PATIENTS  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria 
4.1.1 General Inclusion Criteria 
Patients who meet all of the following general inclusion criter ia, in addition to the specific 
inclusion criteria listed below for Parts A and B, will be elig ible to participate in the study: 
1. A signed informed consent form (ICF); 
Note: If a study patient is unable to provide informed consent due to their medical condition, 
the patient’s legally authorized representative may consent on behalf of the study patient, or 
the decision can be made according to the procedure permitted b y local law and institutional 
Standard Operating Procedures i n compliance wi th Section 6.1. 
2. Male or female 18 years of age; 
3. A confirmed diagnosis of a seri ous infection and the expectatio n, in the judgment of the 
Investigator, that the patient’s infection will require treatme nt with IV antibiotics; 
4. A known infection caused by ABC (bacteremia, HABP, VABP, VP, cU TI or AP, or surgical 
or post-traumatic woun d infections) as eith er a single pathogen  or member of a polymicrobial 
infection based on evidence from culture or, if available, rapi d diagnostic test from a sample 
collected within 72 hours prior to randomization (HABP/VABP/VP patients), AND 1 of the 
following: 
a. Has received no more than 48 ho urs of potentially effective (ie , Gram negative 
coverage) antimicrobial therapy prior to the first dose of stud y drug; OR 
b. Is clinically failing prior treatment regimens (ie, clinical de terioration or failure to 
improve after at least 48 hours  of antibiotic treatment); 
Note: Rapid testing of respiratory specimens utilizing BPP tech nology (see Section 7.7) should 
be used to enable early identification of ABC pneumonia. Patien ts can be randomized based 
on the results of the BPP rapid test while awaiting results of cultures from the local laboratory. 
However, if the respiratory sample does not grow ABC in the loc al microbiology laboratory 
culture, these patients will be withdrawn from the study drug t reatment. 
Note: Isolation of A BC from pleural effusi on (empyema) is allow ed, if concurrent pulmonary 
infiltrate is confirmed. 
5. APACHE II score between 10 and 30, inclusive, OR SOFA score bet ween 7 and 11, inclusive, 
at the time of diagnosis of infection. Patients who are not bei ng treated in an intensive care unit 
and cannot have an APACHE II or SOFA score performed should have a qSOFA score 2 for 
enrollment; 
6. Expectation, in the judgment of the Investigator, that the pati ent will benefit from effective 
antibiotic therapy and appropriate supportiv e care for the anti cipated duration of the study; and 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 467. Women of childbearing potential (ie, not post-menopausal or sur gically sterilized) must have 
a negative highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test befor e randomization. Participating 
women of childbearing potential must be willing to consistently  use one highly effective 
method of contraception (ie, condom, combined oral contraceptiv e, implant, injectable, 
indwelling intrauterine device, or a vasectomized partner) from  Screening until at least 30 days 
after administration of th e last dose of study drug. 
4.1.2 Part A-Specific Inclusion Criteria 
In addition to those general incl usion criteria listed in Section 4.1.1, patients may enroll in Part A 
if they meet the criteria below. All patients must be categoriz ed in 1 infection type that is judged 
to be the primary infec tion by the Investigator: 
1. Diagnosed with HABP, VABP, VP,  and/or bacteremia, defined as: 
HABP With ABC in Sputu m/Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Onset of symptoms >48 hours 
after admission or 7 days after 
discharge from an inpatient acute 
or chronic care facility 
(eg, LTAC, rehabilitation center, 
hospital, or skilled nursing home); OR  
 Admission from LTAC or rehabilitation center, or admission from home <7 days 
after discharge from an LTAC or 
rehabilitation center; AND  
 New or evolving infiltrate on 
chest X-ray, MRI , CT scan, or 
ultrasound obtained within 
48 hours prior to randomization. 
Note: If an ultrasound is 
performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT scan should be performed 
within 24 hours.  A new onset of cough (or 
worsening of baseline cough);  
 Auscultatory findings consistent 
with pneumonia/pulmonary 
consolidation (eg, rales, dullness on percussion, bronchial breath 
sounds, or egophony);  
 Dyspnea, tachypnea, or respiratory rate 
>25 breaths/minute; OR  
 Hypoxemia (oxygen saturation 
<90% or pO
2 <60 mmHg while 
breathing room ai r, or worsening 
of the oxygen saturation/ FiO 2); 
OR the following ALONE:  
 New onset need for mechanical 
ventilation.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR 
hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]);  
 Elevated total peripheral 
WBC count 
(>10,000/mm3); 
 >15% immature 
neutrophils (bands) 
regardless of total peripheral WBC count; 
OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC count <4500/mm
3). 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; CT = computed tomography; FiO 2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; 
HABP = hospital-acquired bacteria l pneumonia; LTAC = long-term acute care; MRI = magn etic resonance imaging; 
pO2 = partial pressure of ox ygen; WBC = white blood cell.
 
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 47VABP With ABC in Sputum /Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Onset of symptoms >48 hours 
after receiving ventilator support 
via an endotracheal (or nasotracheal) tube;  
 Requires ventilator support; AND  
 New or evolving infiltrate on chest X-ray, MRI , CT scan, or 
ultrasound obtained within 
48 hours prior to randomization. 
Note: If an ultrasound is performed, a confirmatory X-ray 
or CT scan should be performed 
within 24 hours.  Auscultatory findings consistent 
with pneumonia/pulmonary 
consolidation (eg, rales, dullness on percussion, bronchial breath 
sounds, or egophony);  
 An acute change in the ventilator support system to enhance 
oxygenation, as determined by a worsening oxygen saturation/FiO
2 
ratio;  
 Increased suctioning; OR  
 Tracheal aspirate change to 
purulence.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR 
hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]);  
 Elevated total peripheral 
WBC count 
(>10,000/mm3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils (bands) 
regardless of total peripheral WBC count; 
OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC 
<4500/mm
3). 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; CT = com puted tomography; FiO 2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; 
MRI = ma gnetic resonance ima ging; VABP = ventilato r-associated bacterial pneumonia; WBC = w hite blood cell. 
 
Ventilated Pneumonia With ABC in Respiratory Sample 
All of the following: AND signs or symptoms evidenced 
by at least 2 of the following: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Requires ventilator support; AND 
 New or evolving infiltrate on 
chest X-ray, MRI , CT scan, or 
ultrasound obtained within 
48 hours prior to randomization. 
Note: If an ultrasound is 
performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT scan should be performed 
within 24 hours.  Auscultatory findings consistent 
with pneumonia/pulmonary consolidation (eg, rales, dullness 
on percussion, bronchial breath 
sounds, or egophony); 
 An acute change in the ventilator 
support system to enhance 
oxygenation; 
 Increased suctioning; OR 
 Tracheal aspirate change to purulence.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR 
hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral 
WBC count 
(>10,000/mm3); 
 >15% immature 
neutrophils (bands) 
regardless of total peripheral WBC count; 
OR 
 Leukopenia (total WBC 
count <4500/mm
3).
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; CT = computed tomography;  MRI = magnetic resonance ima ging; 
WBC = white blood cell. 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 484.1.3 Part B-Specific Inclusion Criteria 
Part B will include patients with the following ABC infections:  HABP, VABP, VP, or bacteremia 
who do not qualify for Part A, and c UTI/AP or surgical or post- traumatic wound infections.  
1. Patients with HABP, VABP, VP , or bacteremia should be considere d for enrollment in Part B 
if they meet ANY of th e following criteria ( a, b, c, OR d), in addition to the general inclusion 
criteria listed in Section 4.1.1: 
a. Has an infection caused by ABC or ganisms known to be resistant to colistin or 
polymyxin B (defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method); 
For known colistin- or polymyxin B -resistant infections, the following must be 
satisfied: 
o Has a known resistant infection based on evidence from culture and susceptibility 
testing by a non-agar based method within 72 hours prior to ran domization, alone 
or as a single organism of a pol ymicrobial infection; AND has r eceived no more 
than 48 hours of an antimicrobial  agent to which the ABC is sus ceptible prior to 
the first dose of study drug; OR 
o Has documented clinical evidence of failure (ie, clinical deter ioration or failure to 
improve that is attributable to ABC infection) after at least 4 8 hours of treatment 
with colistin or polymyxin B; OR Bacteremia With ABC 
All of the following: AND at  least 1 of the following: 
 Isolation of ABC from at least 1 blood culture collected from a  
peripheral vein OR newly placed intravenous line.  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature 
<35°C [<95°F]); 
 Elevated total peripheral WBC count (>10,000/mm
3); 
 >15% immature neutrophils 
(bands) regardless of total 
peripheral WBC count; 
 Leukopenia (total WBC count 
<4500/mm3);  
 Tachycardia >100 bpm; 
 Tachypnea 
>25 breaths/minute; OR 
 Hypotension, systolic 
<90 mmH g. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; b pm=beats per minute; WBC = w hite blood cell. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 49b. Has known intoleran ce to colistin;  
Note: Patients whom the Investig ator feels may h ave a potential  intolerance to colistin 
can be enrolled in Part B on a case-by-case basis after discuss ion with the Medical 
Monitor; OR 
c. Has myasthenia gravis or another  neuromuscular syndrome(s) that contraindicates 
colistin and is not ventilated;  
Note: Ventilated patients with mya sthenia gravis or other neuro muscular syndromes 
where, in the opinion of the Inv estigator, colistin administrat ion is reasonable are 
permitted for considerat ion for the study; OR 
d. Has acute kidney injury and is re ceiving renal replacement therapy at study entry; 
2. Patients diagnosed with cUTI, AP, or surgical or post-traumatic  wound infections may enroll 
in Part B if they meet the general inclusion criteria listed in  Section 4.1.1 as well as either a, 
b, c, d, OR e in addition to the indication requirements for f: 
a. Has an infection caused by ABC or ganisms known to be resistant to colistin or 
polymyxin B (defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method); OR 
b. Has known intoleran ce to colistin;  
Note: Patients whom the Investig ator feels may h ave a potential  intolerance to colistin 
can be enrolled in Part B on a case-by-case basis after discuss ion with the Medical 
Monitor; OR 
c. Has myasthenia gravis or another  neuromuscular syndrome(s) that contraindicates 
colistin; OR 
d. Has acute kidney injury and is re ceiving renal replacement therapy at study entry; OR 
e. Has documented clinical evidence of failure (ie, clinical deter ioration or failure to 
improve) after at least 48 hours  of treatment with a polymyxin- based regimen; AND 
f. Is diagnosed with cUTI, AP, or surgical or post-traumatic wound  infection, defined as: 
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 50cUTI With ABC 
At least 1 of the following: AND at least 2 of the following signs 
and symptoms: AND at least 1 of 
the following: 
 Indwelling urinary catheter or intermittent 
bladder catheterization;  
 Neurogenic bladder with presence or history of urine residual volume of 
100 mL;  
 Obstructive uropathy (eg, nephrolithiasis, 
tumor, fibrosis) that is expected to be medically or surgically treated within 
48 hours post-randomization;  
 Azotemia due to intrinsic renal disease; OR 
 Urinary retention in men due to 
previously diagnosed benign 
h
ypertroph y.  Chills, rigors, or fe ver [1] (oral or 
tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or rectal/core 
temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]);  
 Elevated WBC count (>10,000/mm
3) or left shift 
(>15% immature PMNs);  
 Nausea or vomiting;  
 Dysuria, increased urinary 
frequency, or urinary urgency; OR  
 Lower abdominal pain or pelvic 
pain.   Positive LCE on urinalysis;  
 WBC count 
10 cells/mm
3 in 
unspun urine; 
OR 
 WBC count 
10 cells/hpf in 
urine sediment.  
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; cUTI = complicated urinary tract infection; hpf = high -power field; 
LCE = leukoc yte esterase; PMN = polymorphonuclear leukoc yte; WBC = whit e blood cell.
 
 
AP With ABC 
Presence of an ascending tract inf ection including at least 2 o f the following 
signs or symptoms: AND at least 1 of the 
following: 
 Chills, rigors, or fever [1] (o ral or tympanic temperature 38°C [100.4°F] 
or rectal/core temperature  38.3°C [100.9°F]); 
 Elevated WBC count (>10,000/mm3) or left shift (>15 % immature PMNs); 
 Nausea or vomiting; 
 Dysuria, increased urinary frequency, or urinary urgency;  
 Flank pain; OR 
 Costovertebral an gle tenderness on ph ysical examination. Positive LCE on 
urinalysis; 
 WBC count 
10 cells/mm3 in unspun 
urine; OR 
 WBC count 10 cells/hpf 
in urine sediment. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; AP = acute pyelonephriti s; hpf = high-power field; LCE  = leukocyte 
esterase; PMN = polymorphonuclear  leukocyte; WBC = white blood ce ll.
 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 51Surgical Wound Infection With ABC 
Superficial SSI meeting all of  the following criteria: AND at least 1 of the following 
regional or systemic signs of 
infection: 
 Follows clean surgery (elective, not emergency, nontraumatic, 
primarily closed, no acute inflammation; no break in technique;  
respiratory, gastrointestinal, biliary, and genitourinary tract s not 
entered); 
 Involves only the skin or subcutaneous tissue around the incisi on, 
does not involve fascia; 
 Occurs within 30 days after procedure; 
 Original surgical incision 3 cm; AND 
 Purulent drainage (spontaneous or therapeutic) that is positive  for 
ABC by culture with surrounding erythema, edema, and/or induration extending at least 5 cm  in the shortest distance fro m the 
peripheral margin of the wound an d with a minimum total lesion 
surface area of 75 cm
2.  Lymph node tenderness and increase in volume or palpable proximal to the primary ABSSSI; 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C [100.4°F] or 
rectal/core temperature 38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature <35°C 
[<95°F]); 
 WBC count 10,000/mm
3 or 
<4000/mm3; OR 
 >15% immature neutrophils. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; ABSSSI = acute bacterial skin and skin structure infec tion; 
SSI = sur gical site infection; W BC = white  blood cell.
 
Post-Traumatic Wound Infection With ABC 
Post-traumatic wound (including 
penetrating trauma) characterized by 
the following within 24 hours of 
Screening: AND at least 1 of the following r egional or systemic signs of 
infection: 
 Purulent drainage (spontaneous or 
therapeutic) that i s positive for ABC 
by culture with surrounding erythema, 
edema, and/or induration extending at 
least 5 cm in the shortest distance 
from the peripheral margin of the 
wound and with a minimum total 
lesion surface area of 75 cm2.  Lymph node tenderness and increase in volume or palpable 
proximal to the primary ABSSSI; 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C [100.4°F] or 
rectal/core temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]) OR hypothermia 
(rectal/core temperature <35°C [<95°F]); 
 WBC count 10,000/mm3 or <4000/mm3; OR 
 >15% immature neutrophils. 
1. Evidence of fever within 24 hours of the Screeni ng Visit is acc eptable if observed and documented by a healthcare 
provider. 
ABC  = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus complex; ABSSSI = acute bacterial skin and skin structure infec tion; 
WBC = white blood cell. 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria 
Patients who meet any of the following criteria will be exclude d from participation in the study: 
1. Presence of suspected or confirmed deep-seated infection (eg, l ung abscess in patients with 
pneumonia, skin abscess, or decubitus ulcer) that is not planne d on being drained or debrided 
within 24 hours after randomization; 
Note: Patients with an empyema who will have drainage within 24  hours of Screening and who 
are expected to be able to be t reated with 14 or fewer days of antibiotics are allowed. 
2. Evidence of active concurrent pneumonia requiring additional an timicrobial treatment caused 
by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae , Staphylococcus aureus, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae , Chlamydia pneumoniae , Legionella pneumophila , respiratory syncytial virus, 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 52influenza and parainfluenza viruses, Middle East respiratory sy ndrome coronavirus, 
mycobacteria, aspergill us, mucormycosis, etc; 
Note: If these organisms are identified but it is deemed by the  Investigator that no treatment is 
warranted and their presence does not significantly change the prognosis of the patient, then 
the patient may be considered for this study. 
3. Pulmonary disease that precludes e valuation of a therapeutic re sponse (such as lung cancer 
resulting in bronchial obstruction or on the same side as the p neumonia, active tuberculosis, 
cystic fibrosis, granulomatous disease, fungal pulmonary infect ion, lung abscess, pleural 
empyema, post obstructive pneumonia, or COVID-19 infection with out clinical improvement); 
Note: Patients with an empyema who will have drainage within 24  hours of Screening and who 
are expected to be able to be t reated with 14 or fewer days of antibiotics are allowed. 
4. Presence of suspected or confirmed deep seated bacterial infect ions such as bacterial Gram 
negative osteomyelitis, endocardi tis, or meningitis requiring p rolonged therapy, as determined 
by history and/or physical examination; 
5. Acute infective endocarditis due to Gram positive bacteria that  require urgent/emergent 
indication of surgery (ie, heart failure because of valvular in sufficiency or septic shock), or 
patients in whom surgery is cont raindicated due to prohibitive risk for surgery due to 
comorbidities; 
6. Irremovable implantable device or line thought to be the potent ial source of ABC infection; 
7. Sustained shock with persisti ng hypotension requiring vasopressors to maintain mean arterial 
pressure (MAP)  60 mmHg; 
Note: Patients who can maintain MAP 60 mmHg on a reasonable dose of pressors or are 
weaning off of pressors may be c onsidered. Patients who require  more than the maximal dose 
of 2 vasopressors to maintain MAP 60 mmHg are ineligible. If vasopressors are weaned to 
below these levels, patient en rollment can be reconsidered. 
8. For patients to be enrolled with the primary indication of HABP , VABP, or VP, any of the 
following conditions: 
a. Diagnosis of ventilator-associ ated tracheobronchitis; or 
b. Inability to provide proper respiratory specimens for culture. Respiratory samples from 
expectorated or induced sputum s hould show <10 squamous epithel ial cells and 
>25 polymorphonuclear neutrophils per 100  field; 
9. For patients to be enrolled with the primary indication of cUTI  or AP, any of the following 
urologic conditions: 
a. Likely to receive ongoing antibacterial drug prophylaxis after treatment of cUTI 
(eg, patients with vesico -uretal reflux); 
b. Suspected or confirmed prostatitis; 
c. Requirement for bladde r  irrigation with antibiotics or for anti biotics to be administered 
directly via urinary catheter; 
d. Previous or planned cystect omy or ileal loop surgery; 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 53e. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection (eg, female patients with  urinary frequency, 
urgency, or pain or discomfort with out systemic symptoms or signs of infection); 
f. Complete, permanent obstruc tion of the urinary tract; 
g. Suspected or confirmed perinephri c or renal corticomedullary ab scess; 
h. Polycystic kidney disease; or 
i. Any recent history of trauma to the pelvis or urinary tract; 
10. Pregnant or breastfeeding women; 
11. APACHE II score >30 and SOFA sc ore >11 at the time of diagnosis  of infection; 
Note: A qSOFA score must be calculated for all patients without  an APACHE II score. 
Glasgow coma score for APACHE II calculation should be the best  response prior to initiation 
of sedation/neuromuscular blockade, even if sedation has been in use for >24 hours. 
12. Receiving peritoneal dialysis;  
13. Requirement for temporary or acute onset treatment with antisei zure medication that, in the 
opinion of the Investigator, woul d prohibit the patient from co mplying with the protocol. 
Patients at risk of seizure or requiring prophylactic antiseizu re medications during the study 
can be considered for enrollment at the discretion of the Inves tigator. Patients with a history 
of epilepsy or who are on stable treatment (ie, no recurrent ep isodes in the past 30 days) and 
no history of imipenem-associated seizures may be considered fo r enrollment in the study; 
14. Requirement for continuing treatme nt with probenecid, methotrex ate, ganciclovir, valproic 
acid, or divalproex sodiu m during the study; 
15. Evidence of significant hepatic disease or dysf unction, includi ng known acute viral hepatitis, 
hepatic cirrhosis, hepatic failure, chronic ascites, or hepatic encephalopathy; 
16. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or ALT >3  upper limit of normal (ULN) AND total 
bilirubin >2  ULN at Screening; 
Note: Patients with AST or ALT up to 5  ULN are eligible if these elevations are acute and 
are documented as being directly r elated to the infectious process being treated. 
17. Requirement at the time of randomization for any reason, or lik ely to require during the 
patient’s participation in the study (from randomization throug h the LFU Visit), for additional 
systemic Gram negative antimicrobial therapy. See Section 5.6.3  for a list of antibiotics that 
are allowed to treat mixe d or concurrent infections; 
18. Requirement for inhaled antibiotics; 
19. Known history of human immunode ficiency virus infection and kno wn recent CD4 count 
<200/mm3 within the last year or presence of significant immunologic di sease or dysfunction, 
as determined by a current diagno sis of an Acquired Immune Defi ciency Syndrome-defining 
illness; 
20. Presence of neutropenia (absol ute neutrophil count <500/mm3) obtained from a local 
laboratory at Screening; 
21. A QT interval corrected using F ridericia’s formula (QTcF) 480 msec; 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 5422. History of significant hypersen sitivity or allergic reaction to  any BL, any contraindication to 
the use of cilastatin based on local approved prescribing infor mation (eg, Summary of 
Medicinal Product Characteristic s), any contraindication to the  excipients used in the 
respective formulations, or any contraindication to the use of BL antibiotics; 
23. Participation in a clinical study involving investigational med ication or an investigational 
device within the last 30 days or 5 half-lives, whichever is lo nger, prior to Day 1; 
24. Any condition that, in the opini on of the Investigator, would c ompromise the safety of the 
patient or the quality of the da ta or require greater than 14 d ays of treatment w ith antibiotics; 
25. Unable or unwilling, in the opinion of the Investigator, to com ply with the protocol;  
26. Has previously receive d ETX2514 in this study; or 
27. For Part A only, patients with an infection known to be resista nt to colistin or polymyxin B 
(defined as MIC  4 mg/L by a non-agar based method), with a known intolerance to  colistin, 
or taking any drug that prevents  them from rece iving colistin. 
4.3 Withdrawal and Discontinuation Criteria 
Participation of a patient in this clinical study may be withdr awn or study drug discontinued by 
the patient or Investigator for  any of the following reasons: 
 The patient withdraws consent or  requests discontinuation from the study for any reason; 
 Occurrence of any medical condition or circumstance that expose s the patient to substantial 
risk and/or does not allow the pa tient to adhere to the require ments of the protocol; 
 Any SAE, clinically significant adverse event, severe laborator y abnormality, intercurrent 
illness, or other medical condition which indicates to the Inve stigator that continued 
participation is not in the be st interest of the patient; 
 Patient develops severe liver-re lated abnormalitie s, as detaile d below: 
o ALT or AST >10   ULN; 
o ALT or AST >5   ULN for more than 2 weeks or progressively increasing transami nases 
despite clinical improveme nt of underlyi ng infection;  
o Confirmed values of ALT or AST >3  ULN and total bilirubin >2  ULN or international 
normalized ratio >1.5 (for patients who are not on coumadin) wi thout evidence of an 
alternative etiology; or 
o Confirmed values of ALT or AST >3  ULN along with signs or symptoms compatible 
with hepatitis or hypersensitivity (eg, fatigue, nausea, vomiti ng, right upper quadrant pain 
or tenderness, jaundice, fever , rash, or eosinophilia [>5%]); 
 Pregnancy; 
 Requirement of prohibited concom itant medications, including th e need for antibiotics that 
have an overlapping Gram negative  coverage other  than study drugs; 
Note: Patients who require antibiotic prophylaxis due to immuno suppression (eg, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazo le for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii  [P. carinii ] 
pneumonia) may partic ipate in the study. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 55 Patients randomized to Part A based on a positive screening of a respiratory sample for ABC 
by BPP rapid test, but subsequently do not have growth of ABC i n their respiratory sample 
culture processed by the local microbiology laboratory;  
 Patient failure to comply with protocol requirements or study-related procedures, including the 
need for treatment w ith study drug beyond 14 days; or  
 Termination of the study by the  Sponsor or the regulatory authority. 
If a patient withdraws prematurely from the study due to the ab ove criteria or any other reason 
other than withdrawal of consent to participate, study staff sh ould make every effort to complete 
the full panel of assessments scheduled for the EOT Visit. The reason for patient withdrawal must 
be documented in the electronic case report form (eCRF). Even i f a patient discontinues study drug 
and/or the patient is a clinical  failure, he/she should remain enrolled in the study, as long as all 
assessments for the EOT Visit and follow-up visits can be compl eted. Reasons for discontinuation 
of study drug must be recorded in the eCRF. Every attempt must be made to record survival status 
at Day 28 or anytime thereafter for all random ized patients (including HABP/VABP/VP patients 
who are randomized to Part A based on a positi ve BPP rapid test, but who subsequently do not 
have growth of ABC in their respiratory sample culture),  regardless of their status of treatment, 
as long as the patient has not withdraw n consent from participation in the study.   
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 565 STUDY TREATMENTS 
5.1 Treatment Groups 
In Part A, the following study drugs will be administered in a 1:1 randomized manner: 
 Group 1 (experimental group): 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h 
plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilasta tin IV infused over 1 hour q6h; or 
 Group 2 (control group): 2.5 mg/kg colistin IV infused over 30 minutes q12h (after an initial 
loading dose of colistin 2.5 to 5 mg/kg) plus 1.0 g imipenem/1. 0 g cilastatin IV infused over 
1 hour q6h. 
In Part B, the following study drugs will be administered: 
 Group 3 (experimental group): 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam IV infused over 3 hours q6h 
plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilasta tin IV infused over 1 hour q6h. 
5.2 Rationale for Dosing 
The doses of ETX2514 and sulbactam to be evaluated in this stud y have been selected based on 
Phase 1 and Phase 2 PK, safety,  and efficacy data and extensive PK/PD modeling and probability 
of target attainment against CRABC in the lung. Data from these  studies and details of the PK/PD 
modeling are provided in more deta il in the Investigator’s Broc hure. 
ETX2514 1.0 g was generally well tolerated in all of the clinic al studies to date. Sulbactam 1.0 g 
was generally well tolerated in  the Phase 2 study. The total daily dose of sulbactam being used in 
the current study is consistent with the US Product Circular fo r Unasyn, in which the maximum 
approved daily dose in patients w ith normal renal clearance for  sulbactam is 4 g, which is 
equivalent to 1.0 g sulbactam q6h. 
The ETX2514SUL regimen of 1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam should be infused over 3 hours q6h 
given for 7 days to 14 days ( 28 doses to 56 doses), depending o n the clinical response.  
Imipenem/cilastatin will be ad ministered as a 1.0 g/1.0 g dose infused over 1 hour q6h given for 
the same duration as ETX2514SUL or colistin. Colistin will be administered at a  daily dose of 5 mg/kg of col istin base activity (CBA) divided 
into 2 doses 12 hours apart. Doses will be adjusted to ideal body weight in obese patients. Patients 
who weigh <60 kg with normal rena l function will receive a flat  dose of 300 mg CBA or 
9 million international unit (MIU )/day. A single loading dose o f 2.5 to 5 mg/kg (total dose not 
exceeding 300 mg CBA or 9 MIU and fo llowing local standard of c are) given IV over 3 to 
6 minutes (or according to standard of care) will be administer ed on Day 1. Colistin infusions 
beyond the loading dose on Day 1 will begin 12 hours after the initial loading dose and will be 
infused over 30 minutes. Details on dosing for those patients who are on colistin prior to randomization into the study ca n be found in the Pharmacy Manual. 
Details of study drug preparation a nd administration can also b e found in the Pharmacy Manual. 
No dosing regimen changes, other  than those spec ified in the pr otocol for renal insufficiency (see 
Section 5.3) or for patients on imipenem who develop a seizure that is thought to be directly related 
to imipenem, can occur without  discussion with the Medical Moni tor. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 575.3 Dosing in Patients With Renal Insufficiency 
Estimated creatinine clearance will be determined daily while p atients are receiving IV study drug. 
Principal Investigators will be responsible for testing estimat ed creatinine clearance daily at the 
local laboratory per institutional Standard Operating Procedure s and must adjust doses of all 
medications as detailed in Table 1 in order to optimize efficac y and safety. Estimated creatinine 
clearance and dose adjustment data will be captured in source d ocuments and in the eCRFs. 
Table 1 summarizes the recommende d dosing regimens for patients with renal impairment.16,17 Of 
note, patients with estimated creatinine clearance <15 mL/min w ill only be dosed with 
imipenem/cilastatin as outlined in Table 1 if renal replacement  therapy of acute hemodialysis is 
planned to be instituted within 48 hours of dosing.   
Table 1. Study Drug Dose Adjustments by Renal Function 
Estimated Creatinine 
Clearance, mL/min 
(Cockcroft-Gault) ETX2514SUL Dosage 
Regimen Colistin Dosage 
Regimen Imipenem/Cilastatin 
Dosage Regimen [1] 
130-200 (augmented renal 
clearance)  1.5/1.5 g q6h 2.5 m g/kg q12h  1.0/1.0 g q6h 
90-129 (normal) 1.0/1.0 g q6h 2.5 m g/kg q12h 1.0/1.0 g q6h
60-89 (mild renal impairment) 1.0/1.0 
g q6h 1.25 to 1.9 m g/kg q12h 0.75/0.75 g q8h
30-59 (moderate renal impairment) 1.0/1.0 
g q6h1.25 mg/kg q12h or 
2.5 m g/kg once dail y 0.5/0.5 g q6h
15-29 (severe renal impairment) 1.0/1.0 
g q8h 1.5 m g/kg q36h 0.5/0.5 g q12h
0-14 (severe renal impairment) [2] 1.0/1.0 
g q12h 1.5 m g/kg q36h 0.5/0.5 g q12h
Intermittent hemodial ysis 1.0/1.0 g q12h [4]Non-dialysis day: CBA 
dose of 65 mg q12h. 
Dialysis day supplement: 
add 40 mg (for 3-hour 
IHD session) or 50 mg 
(for 4-hour IHD session) 
post-dialysis [3] 0.5/0.5 g q12h [4]
Continuous renal replacement therap
y 1.5/1.5 g q6h 220 m g q12h1.0/1.0 g q8h to q12h, 
depending on 
ultrafiltration rate
1. Administer doses 0.5 g by IV infusion over 20 to 30 minutes. Administer doses >0 .5 g by IV infusion over 40 to 
60 minutes. In patients who devel op nausea during the infusion,  the rate of infusion may be slowed. 
2. Patients with creatinine clearance 15 mL/min should not receive imipenem/cilastatin unless renal r eplacement therapy 
of acute hemodialysis is institu ted within 48 hours of dosing. 
3. The dialysis session should occur toward the end of a colistimethate dosing interval, and th e supplement to the baseline 
(non-dialysis) daily dose should be administered with the next regular dose, after the dia lysis session has ended. 
4. The dialysis session should occu r toward the end of a dosing interval, and the daily dose should be administered after the 
dialysis session has ended. 
CBA = colistin base activity; ETX2514SUL = sulbactam-ETX2514; I HD = intermittent hemodialysis; IV = intravenous; 
q6h = every 6 hours; q8h = ever y 8 hours; q12h = every 12 hours ; q36h = every 36 hours.
5.4 Randomization and Blinding 
Qualifying patients enrolling in Part A will be randomized in a  1:1 ratio to receive 1.0 g 
ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam q6h plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin q6h or 2.5 mg/kg colistin q12h plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cilastatin q6h via the Interactive Re sponse Technology (IRT) system. 
Patients enrolled in the study based on the positive BPP rapid test results but are found to not grow 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 58ABC in respiratory specimen cultures by the local microbiology laboratory will be withdrawn from 
the study drug treatment as detailed in Section 4.3. 
Randomization in Part A will be stratified by indication (HABP/ VABP/VP versus bacteremia), 
severity of illness (based on APACHE II [ 10 to 19 versus 20 to 30], SOFA [7 to 9 versus 10], or 
qSOFA [2 versus 3] score at Screening), and geography (China Ma inland versus Rest of World). 
In the situation where a patient has more than one score reported, the scores will be used in the 
following order: APACHE, SOFA, and qSOFA. A quick reference gui de will be provided that 
describes the IRT system and inc ludes user instructions. Enroll ment of HABP, VP, and bacteremia 
patients will be limited to a total of no more than 40% of patients in Part A, regard less of resistance. 
The study data will be collected and handled as if it were a bl inded study. The blinded assessor 
(see Section 5.4.2), the Sponsor, and the Sponsor’s designees involved in medical and safety monitoring, data management, and other aspects of the study (eg , interpretation of the results) will 
be blinded to treatment assignment. Given the complexity of the  regimens, the Principal 
Investigator, other care givers, the clinical research associate (CRA), and other site personnel (eg, study coordinators and pharmacy staff) will be unblinded ( see Section 5.4.1). Patients will not 
be informed of their t reatment assignment, and efforts will be made to keep patients naïve to their 
treatment throughout the c ourse of the study. 
Part B is open-label and not randomized; all patients enrolling  in Part B will receive 
1.0 g ETX2514/1.0 g sulbactam q6h  plus 1.0 g imipenem/1.0 g cil astatin q6h. 
5.4.1 Unblinded Investigator 
An unblinded Investigator at each site will evaluate criteria f or clinical outcomes, conduct 
causality assessment for adverse events, and assess clinical si gns and symptoms at study visits for 
patients in both Part A and Part B. For patients in Part A, a b linded assessor will also evaluate 
criteria for clinical  outcomes, conduct cau sality assessment fo r adverse events, and assess clinical 
signs and symptoms at study visits . The unblinded Investigator must be a qualified physician, able 
to perform medical evaluations, and determine medical diagnoses  (eg, Principal Investigator, 
sub-Investigator). For consistency, whenever possible, the same  unblinded Investigator should 
complete all unblinded assessments for a study patient. If there is a discrepancy between the assessment of the blinded assessor and unblinded Investigator, the assessment from the blinded 
assessor will be used. If there is a missing assessment from ei ther the blinded assessor or unblinded 
Investigator, the other available assessment will be used. An a djudication committee may be 
organized for endpoint adjudica tion should it be deemed necessa ry by the DSMB. In such a case, 
a charter will be developed that describes their activities. 
5.4.2 Blinded Assessor 
Study data will be collected and handled as if it were a blinde d study. 
For patients in Part A, each site will assign a blinded assesso r, in addition to the unblinded 
Investigator, to evaluate crit eria for clinical outcomes, condu ct causality assessment for adverse 
events, and assess clinical si gns and symptoms at study visits where an endpoint is evaluated (see 
Appendix A). A blinded assessor must be qualified to perform medical evaluations and determine medical diagnoses (eg, physicia n, physician’s assistant, or nur se practitioner [in the United 
States]). The blinded assessor may participate in the consentin g process and Screening procedures, 
but once a patient is randomized  the blinded 
 assessor should ha ve no other role in the study other 
than making blinded assessments. For consistency, whenever poss ible, the same blinded assessor 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 59should complete all blinded asse ssments for a study patient. Al l efforts will be made to keep the 
blinded assessor blinded during the course of the study. The bl inded assessor should not have 
access to sections in the patient’s medical record in which tre atment group or dosing frequency 
are documented, should have no ro le in patient care or treatment, and should be restricted to limited 
sections of the patient’s chart in order to assess clinical out comes. Data collection by the blinded 
assessor will be used for entry into the eCRF. 
5.5 Drug Supplies 
5.5.1 Formulation and Packaging 
ETX2514 sodium 500 mg is presented a s a sterile lyophilized cake in a sterile 10 mL amber glass 
vial with a stopper, overseal, a nd clinical label. Two ETX2514 500 mg vials will be combined to 
generate the 1.0 g ETX2514 dose. 
Sulbactam sodium 1.0 g is presented as a sterile powder in a st erile 30 mL clear glass vial with a 
stopper, overseal, and clinical label.  Commercially available imipenem/cilastatin and colistin will be  provided. Each commercial 
material will have  a clinical label. 
Imipenem/cilastatin is presented in fixed dose vials containing  0.5 g imipenem and 0.5 g cilastatin. 
Two vials will be combined to generate 1.0 g imipenem and 1.0 g  cilastatin. 
Colistin is presented in vials c ontaining colistimethate sodium  (CMS). 
For non-US sites, CMS vials containing 2 MIU/vial powder for solution (equivalent to 
approximately 68 mg of CBA/vial  based on microbiological standardization) will be used.  
For US sites, CMS equivalent to 150 mg of CBA/vial powder for s olution (equivalent to 
approximately 400 mg or 4.5 MIU of CMS based on microbiological standardization) will be used. To avoid errors in dosing and administration, CMS will be refer red to in terms of “international 
unit” (IU), “CBA”, or , simply, “colistin.” 
Table 2 provides a guide for conversion of IU values to mg of C BA. Greater details of dose 
calculations and conversion tab les can be found in the Pharmacy  Manual. 
Study drugs will be labeled according to the requirements of local law and legislation, as well as current Good Manufacturing Practice and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines. 
Table 2. Unit Conversion Guidance 
Colistin (IU) Colistin (mg of CBA) 
150,000 IU  5mg 
1 MIU 34 m g 
4.5 MIU 150 m g 
9 MIU 300 m g 
CBA = colistin base activity; IU = international unit; MIU = mi llion international unit. 
Source: Colistin summar y of product characterization 
5.5.2 Study Drug Preparation and Dispensing 
A pharmacist (or qualified designe e) will prepare the study dru g according to the requirements 
outlined in the Pharmacy Manual. The IV bags will be labeled with the date and time of study drug preparation and patient identification number and will be trans ferred to the study staff for 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 60administration to the patient. Reconstituted study drug should be administered according to the 
requirements outlined in the Pharmacy Manual. 
5.5.3 Study Drug Administration 
The pharmacist (or qualified designee) will be responsible for providing study personnel with 
study drug ready for IV infusion. Patients will receive treatme nt in accordance with the 
randomization schedule provided vi a the IRT system. Patients wi ll receive randomized treatment 
administered as described i n the Pharmacy Manual.  
Patients will receive all infusions by programmable infusion pu mp, or drip infusion in case of 
failure of the pump, while seated  or partially reclined in bed.  The times at which each infusion is 
started and stopped must be reco rded. If a dose is interrupted for more than 10 minutes, the 
interruption and reason for inte rruption should be noted in the  source documents. Any missed dose 
should also be noted in the source documents with the reason fo r the missed dose. For patients 
with normal renal function, study drug infusions will be admini stered q6h ( 15 minutes) for 
ETX2514SUL and imipenem/cilastatin and q12h ( 15 minutes) for colistin . Infusions that fall 
outside of the q6h ( 15 minutes) or q12h ( 15 minutes) dosing schedule will be considered 
protocol deviations. It is critic al that administration and inf usion time be captured in the eCRF 
based on actual time. Windows for administration and infusion s hould be used sparingly, and the 
patient should remain on schedul e based on the q6h administration requirement. 
Dosing time is relative to the start of infusion. For additiona l information on study drug product 
dilution, infusion volumes, and dispensing instructions, refer to the Pharmacy Manual. 
5.5.4 Treatment Compliance 
The infusion date and start and stop times will be recorded in the source documents and eCRFs. 
Treatment compliance will be calculated based on the number of doses received and expected as 
detailed in the Statisti cal Analysis Plan (SAP). 
5.5.5 Storage and Accountability 
The pharmacist or designated study personnel will ensure that a ll study drugs are stored in a locked, 
secure area with limited access. Study drugs will be stored und er recommended storage conditions 
per the label and in accordance with the Pharmacy Manual. 
The date and time of preparation of study drug will be recorded  on the IV bags. Refer to the 
Pharmacy Manual for a dditional information. 
The Investigator is responsible for maintaining a current recor d of inventory/drug accountability. 
Vials may not be discarded until inventory and drug accountabil ity are performed by the monitor. 
Study drugs must only be use d for this protocol.  
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Medications and/or Procedures 
5.6.1 Excluded Medications and/or Procedures 
Treatment with any of the followi ng concomitant medications or procedures is prohibited: 
 Probenecid; 
 Methotrexate; 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 61 Ganciclovir; 
 Valproic acid or divalproex sodium; 
 Any additional or adjunctive non- study-specific Gram negative a ntibiotic therapy administered 
with the intention of treating HABP, VABP, VP, bacteremia, cUTI, AP, or other infection; 
and/or 
Note: Patients who require antibiotic prophylaxis due to immuno suppression (eg, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazo le for prophylaxis against P. carinii  pneumonia) may participate 
in the study. 
 For patients with cUTI or AP, bladder irrigations with any anti septic or antibiotic. 
5.6.2 Restricted Medications and/or Procedures 
 For patients with surgical or post-traumatic wounds, topical an tibiotics are prohibited. For all 
other patients, topical anti biotics are permitted; and 
 For patients with all indications  being considered for Part A, curariform muscle relaxants (eg, 
tubocurarine) and other drugs, in cluding ether, succinylcholine , gallamine, decamethonium, 
and sodium citrate, that potentia te the neuromuscular blocking effect should be used with 
extreme caution in patients be ing treated with colistin. 
5.6.3 Allowed Medications and/or Procedures 
Unless specifically restricted pe r the protocol, medications an d procedures for the management of 
the patient are permitted per st andard of care. Patients who re quire antibiotic prophylaxis due to 
immunosuppression (eg, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for prophylaxis against P. carinii  
pneumonia) may participate in the study. Additionally, treatmen t with any of the following 
concomitant antibiotics is allo wed for treatment of Gram positi ve bacteria or Clostridium difficile  
(C. difficile) infections.  
Permitted medications include the following: 
 Agents with Gram positive only coverage, including the followin g: 
o Vancomycin; 
o Linezolid;  
o Daptomycin; 
o Oritavancin; 
o Tedizolid; and 
o Dalbavancin; 
 Agents for treatment of C. difficile  infections, including the following:  
o Metron
idazole;  
o Oral vancomycin;  
o Rifaximin; and 
o Fidaxomicin. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 625.6.4 Documentation of Prior and Concomitant Medication Use 
Reasonable effort will be made to determine all relevant treatm ents (including all antibiotics, 
prescription and non-prescription  medications, herbal medicatio ns, vitamin supplements, 
supportive therapies, and non-pharmacologic treatments) receive d within 14 days before the first 
dose of study drug and during th e study. The name, route of adm inistration, dose, frequency, 
indication, and duration of the treatment will be recorded in t he eCRF. The date and time of start 
and stop of any antibiotic thera py received within 14 days before the first dose of study drug and 
during the study will also be recorded. 
Patients cannot participate in any other investigational medica tion study while participating in this 
study or have taken any investigational product within 30 days or 5 half-lives, whichever is longer, 
prior to Day 1 in this study. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 636 STUDY PROCEDURES 
A detailed schedule of proce dures is provided in Appendix A. 
6.1 Informed Consent 
Informed consent must be obtai ned before any study procedures a re performed. An ICF of limited 
scope may be signed prior to Scr eening to perform only BPP rapi d testing of respiratory specimens. 
A comprehensive ICF, which will include all study procedures, w ill be signed at Screening. 
Patients will participate as much as possible in the informed c onsent procedure; however, as 
permitted by local law and institutional Standard Operating Procedures, in cases of a lack of 
decision-making capacity, informed consent on behalf of the pat ient may be provided by a legally 
authorized representative, independent physician, or consortium  of independent physicians. These 
patients, upon return of their capacity, will be consented and allowed to make their own informed 
medical decisions.  
6.2 Screening Visit (-48 Hours to Day 1) 
Screening can occur up to 48 hours before the first dose of stu dy drug. All Screening procedures 
must be performed prior to rando mization and the first dose of study drug (Day 1). All Screening 
laboratories will be performed at the local laboratory and may have been collected as standard of 
care within 48 hours prior to ra ndomization, with  the exception of serum creatinine determination, 
which must be obtained at the local laborat ory within 24 hours before the first dose of study drug. 
The following procedures will be  performed at Screening: 
 Obtain informed consent; 
 Review all inclusion an d exclusion criteria; 
 Only for patients suspected to have HABP/VABP/VP, perform rapid  testing of respiratory 
specimens using BPP to detect ABC infection as specified in Section 7.7.1 and the Laboratory 
Manual; 
o For patients who only signed the limited scope ICF (which only allows rapid testing on a 
respiratory sample):  If the BPP rapid test is negative or indeterminate for ABC, the  patient should be screen 
failed; 
 If the BPP is indeterminate, the Investigator may opt to wait a nd repeat the test within 
24 hours before screen failing the patient;  Note: The Investigator should revi ew the local culture result f rom the respiratory 
sample once available. If the local culture result is positive for ABC, the patient may 
be re-screened under a new patient number, beginning with the m ain ICF and ensuring 
all eligibility criteria are met. 
o For patients who signed the mai n ICF (including all study procedures): 
 If the BPP rapid test result is ne gative for ABC, the patient s hould not be screen failed 
immediately, instead the Invest igator should wait for the local  culture result. In case 
the local culture result is positive for ABC, the Investigator should proceed with the 
Screening procedures; 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 64o Patients with suspected HABP/VABP/VP with a positive BPP rapid test for ABC of their 
respiratory specimen must meet all other enrollment criteria in  order to be randomized. The 
respiratory specimen should be sent to the local laboratory for  culture and susceptibility. If 
culture of the respiratory speci men by the local microbiology laboratory subsequently does 
not show growth with ABC, this patient must be withdrawn from t he study treatment as 
they no longer meet eligibilit y criteria (see Section 4.3);  
 Obtain medical/surgical history; 
 Record prior and concomitant medications; 
 Obtain demographics, including s ex, age, race, and ethnicity; 
 Perform a complete physical ex amination, incl uding weight and height; 
 Calculate APACHE II, SOFA, or qSOFA score; 
Note: An APACHE II or SOFA score will be calculated prior to ra ndomization for patients in 
Part A only. For patients who are not being treated in an intensive care unit and cannot have 
an APACHE II or SOFA score performed, and for all patients in P art B, a qSOFA score should 
be calculated.  
Note: An APACHE II, SOFA, or qSOFA score that was calculated as  part of standard of care 
within 24 hours of Screening m ay be used and does not need to be repeated. 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and resp iratory settings including fra ction of inspired oxygen (FiO 2) 
and positive end-expirato ry pressure (PEEP); 
 Perform/review chest X-ray, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT) 
scan, or ultrasound within 72 hours of Screening (HABP, VABP, and VP patients only). For 
images obtained 48 hours prior to randomization, repeat imaging is required. Fi ndings should 
be consistent with the screening image and diagnosis of pneumon ia, in the Investigator’s 
judgment; otherwise, the pa tient is no longer eligible; 
Note: If an ultrasound is performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT  scan should be performed 
within 24 hours. 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Perform a highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test for wo men of childbearing potential 
only; 
 Collect blood samples for serum chemistry, serum creatinine, he matology, and baseline blood 
cultures; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis; 
 Collect infection site-specific culture specimens based on diag nosis. Cultures obtained within 
72 hours prior to randomization th at are positive for ABC are a cceptable for enrollment, but 
site-specific culture samples should be repeated within 24 hour s prior to randomization (see 
Section 7.7); 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 65 Perform 12-lead ECG and consult the study Medical Monitor and l ocal cardiologist in cases 
of clinically significant a bnormal findings (eg, a QTcF  480 msec); and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3 Treatment Period – Day 1 Through End of Treatment 
All patients will receive IV treatment for a minimum of 28 dose s of ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses 
of imipenem/cilastatin or 14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses of  imipenem/cilastatin (ie, 7 days of 
antibiotics for those without dose adjustments). Patients can r eceive up to 14 days of IV treatment 
if clinically indicated. Time of discontinuation of antibiotics will be determined on achievement 
of clinical cure (see Section 7.6). Additionally, at any time d uring the study, if a patient develops 
signs and symptoms of disease wo rsening, culture s from all appr opriate sites should be collected 
and sent to the central laboratory. 
6.3.1 Day 1 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 1: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Collect predose blood samples for: 
o Serum chemistry; 
o Serum creatinine;  
o Hematology; and 
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect predose urine sa mple for urinalysis; 
 Calculate APACHE II, SOFA, or q SOFA score prior to randomizatio n; 
Note: An APACHE II or SOFA score will be calculated prior to ra ndomization for patients in 
Part A only. For patients who are not being treated in an intensive care unit and cannot have 
an APACHE II or SOFA score performed, and for all patients in P art B, a qSOFA score should 
be calculated. 
 Randomize patient to study drug via IRT; 
 Administer study drug; 
 For intense PK sampling, collect PK samples after the second in fusion at the end of the infusion 
after the infusion pump is turned off (+15 minutes), 1.5 hours (15 minutes) after the end of 
the infusion, and immediately pri or to the start of the next in fusion;  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 66 For sparse PK sampling, collect PK samples after the second inf usion, immediately prior to 
the start of the next infusion. The patient should have receive d at least 2 infusions before this 
schedule is implemented; 
Note: When possible, PK samples should be collected after the second infusion on Day 1. If 
the second infusion happens during the night and it is not poss ible to collect the PK sample 
after the infusion, the same procedures could be done after the  third infusion on Day 1. The 
PK sample should be taken after the patient received at least 2  infusions on Day 1. 
 Perform 12-lead ECG at the end of the first infusion of study d rug for all patients, and consult 
the study Medical Monitor and local cardiologist in cases of clinically significant abnormal 
findings (eg, a QTcF 480 msec after the end of infusion and after the patient has been in a 
supine position for at le ast 10 minutes); and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3.2 Day 2 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 2: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a limited physical  examination, if needed; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Collect blood samples for:  
o Serum creatinine; and 
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Administer study drug; and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3.3 Day 3 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 3: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a complete physical ex amination, including weight; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Collect blood sample for: 
o Serum chemistry; 
o Serum creatinine;  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 67o Hematology; and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis; 
 Administer study drug;  
 For intense PK sampling, if PK samples will not be collected on  Day 4, collect PK samples at 
the end of any infusion after the infusion pump is turned off ( +15 minutes), and immediately 
prior to the start of  the next infusion;  
 For sparse PK sampling, if PK sam ples will not be collected on Day 4, collect PK samples 
after the end of inf usion, immediate ly prior to the start of th e next infusion; 
Note: When possible, PK samples should be collected on Day 4. I f collection on Day 4 is not 
possible, post-dose PK samples may be collected on Day 3 or Day  5 instead of Day 4, at the 
discretion of the Investigator. 
 If PK samples are collected, repeat 12-lead ECG as close as pos sible following the end of the 
infusion of study drug administra tion associated with the PK sa mples, if clinically indicated; 
and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3.4 Day 4 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 4: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a limited physical  examination, if needed; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Collect blood samples for:  
o Serum creatinine; and 
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Administer study drug;  
 For intense PK sampling, collect PK samples at the end of any i nfusion after the infusion pump 
is turned off (+15 minutes), and imm ediately prior to the start of the next i nfusion;  
 For sparse PK sampling, collect PK samples after the end of inf usion, immediately prior to the 
start of the next infusion;  Note: When possible, PK samples should be collected on Day 4. I f collection on Day 4 is not 
possible, post-dose PK samples may be collected on Day 3 or Day  5 instead of Day 4, at the 
discretion of the Investigator. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 68 If PK samples are collected, repeat 12-lead ECG as close as pos sible following the end of the 
infusion of study drug administra tion associated with the PK sa mples, if clinically indicated; 
and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3.5 Day 5 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 5: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a complete physical ex amination, including weight; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Assess clinical outcome. In Part A, clinical outcome will be as sessed by the blinded assessor, 
in addition to the unblinded Inve stigator (see Section 7.6); 
 Collect blood sample for:  
o Serum chemistry; 
o Serum creatinine;  
o Hematology; and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis; 
 Collect infection site-specific cultures based on diagnosis if clinically indicated (see 
Section 7.7); 
 Administer study drug;  
 For intense PK sampling, if PK samples were not collected on ei ther Day 3 or Day 4, collect 
PK samples at the end of any infu sion after the infusion pump i s turned off (+15 minutes), and 
immediately prior to the start of the next infusion; 
 For sparse PK sampling, if PK samples were not collected on eit her Day 3 or Day 4, collect 
PK samples after the end of infusion, immediately  prior to the start of the next infusion; 
Note: When possible, PK samples should be collected on Day 4. I f collection on Day 4 is not 
possible, post-dose PK samples may be collected on Day 3 or Day  5 instead of Day 4, at the 
discretion of the Investigator. 
 If PK samples are collected, repeat 12-lead ECG as close as pos sible following the end of the 
infusion of study drug administra tion associated with the PK sa mples, if clinically indicated; 
and 
 Assess adverse events. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 696.3.6 Day 6 
The following procedures will be performed at Day 6: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a limited physical  examination, if needed; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Collect blood sample for: 
o Serum creatinine; and 
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Administer study drug; and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.3.7 Day 7 to Day 14 and End of Treatment Visit 
Patients will be treated with 28 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 28 do ses of imipenem/cilastatin or 
14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses  of imipenem/cilastatin (ie, 7 days for those without dose 
adjustments), with a prolongation of therapy up to 14 days if c linically indicated.  
If EOT occurs on Day 7, Day 7 study procedures may be considere d the EOT Visit study 
procedures. If EOT occurs after Day 7, the EOT Visit activities  should be completed within 
24 hours after the last dose of study drug. Day 7 to Day 14 stu dy procedures are only required if 
the patient receives IV study drug treatment on Day 7 to Day 14. If EOT has already occurred, 
study procedures are not re quired to be performed.  
The following procedures will be performed at Day 7 to Day 14 and at the EOT Visit: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a complete physical exam ination, including weight (Day 7 and EOT Visit only); 
 Perform a limited physical examin ation, if needed (Day 8 to Day  14 only); 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Assess clinical outcome. In Part A, clinical outcome will be as sessed by the blinded assessor, 
in addition to the unblinded Invest igator (see Section 7.6) (Da y 7 and EOT Visit only); 
 Perform a highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test for wo men of childbearing potential 
only (EOT Visit only); 
 Collect blood sample for:  
o Serum chemistry (Day 7 and EOT Visit only);  
o Serum creatinine;  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 70o Hematology (Day 7 and EOT Visit only); and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urin alysis (Day 7 and EOT Visit only);   
 Perform 12-lead ECG and consult the study Medical Monitor and l ocal cardiologist in cases 
of clinically significant a bnormal findings (eg, a QTcF  480 msec) (EOT Visit only); 
 Collect infection site-specific cultures based on diagnosis if clinically indicated (see 
Section 7.7) (Day 7 and EOT Visit only); 
 Administer study drug; and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.4 Test of Cure Visit  
The TOC Visit will occur 7 days ( 2 days) after the EOT Visit. 
The following procedures will be pe rformed at the TOC Visit: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a limited physical  examination, if needed; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 For patients with HABP, VABP, or  VP, perform chest X-ray, MRI, or CT scan; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5);  
 Assess clinical outcome. In Part A, clinical outcome will be as sessed by the blinded assessor, 
in addition to the unblinded Inve stigator (see Section 7.6); 
Note: If a patient is a clinical failure at EOT, the patient is  automatically considered a failure 
at the TOC Visit and LFU Visit, and the assessment of clinical response by the Investigator 
should be listed as “failu re at EOT or TOC.” 
 Collect blood samples for:  
o Serum chemistry; 
o Serum creatinine;  
o Hematology; and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis;  
 Collect infection site-specific cultures based on diagnosis if clinically indicated (see 
Section 7.7); and 
 Assess adverse events. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 716.5 Late Follow-Up and Day 28 Visit 
The LFU Visit will occur 14 days ( 2 days) following the EOT Visit. The LFU Visit should be 
performed as an in-person visit; however, if the patient is una ble to attend the LFU Visit at the 
site, the patient may be contac ted by telephone call for follow-up assessment of concomitant 
medications, clinical signs and symptoms, and adverse events. All patients who are alive and have 
not withdrawn consent for participation in the st udy must be contacted at Day 28 or anytime 
thereafter to assess survival if th eir LFU Visit is prior to Day 28.  
The following procedures will be pe rformed at the LFU Visit: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a limited physical  examination, if needed; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Assess clinical outcome. In Part A, clinical outcome will be as sessed by the blinded assessor, 
in addition to the unblinded Inve stigator (see Section 7.6); 
Note: If a patient is a clinical failure at EOT, the patient is  automatically considered a failure 
at the TOC Visit and LFU Visit, and the assessment of clinical response by the Investigator 
should be listed as “failu re at EOT or TOC.” 
 Collect blood samples for: 
o Serum chemistry;  
o Serum creatinine;  
o Hematology; and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis;  
 Collect infection site-specific cultures based on diagnosis if clinically indicated (see 
Section 7.7); and 
 Assess adverse events. 
6.6 Early Termination Visit/Withdrawal Procedures 
For patients who are withdrawn from the study prior to completi on of study drug treatment or 
discontinue study drug prematurel y, an Early Termination (ET) V isit should be completed at the 
time of study withdrawal or study drug discontinuation. Patient s who discontinue study drug 
prematurely but are not withdraw n from the study should complet e TOC and LFU Visits. Patients 
who are randomized to Part A based on a positive screening of a  respiratory sample for ABC by 
BPP rapid test, but subsequently do not have growth of ABC in t heir respiratory sample culture 
processed by the local microbiology laboratory, will be conside red withdrawn from the study drug 
treatment. For patients who are withdrawn from the study after the EOT Visit but prior to 
completion of the study, the next scheduled visit (either the T OC Visit or LFU Visit) should be 
completed at the time of study withdrawal. An assessment of all -cause mortality at Day 28 or 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 72anytime thereafter must be made for all patients initially rand omized to the study (including 
HABP/VABP/VP patients who are randomized to Part A based on a positive BPP rapid test, but 
who subsequently do not have growth of ABC in their respiratory sample culture), regardless of the duration of study drug received, as long as there has been no withdrawal of consent. See 
Section 4.3 for complete details  on criteria for withdrawal and /or discontinuation. 
The following procedures will be  performed at the ET Visit: 
 Record concomitant medications; 
 Perform a complete physical ex amination, including weight; 
 Obtain vital signs, including bl ood pressure, heart rate, and r espiratory rate, and, for ventilated 
patients, oxygen therapy and respi ratory settings including FiO
2 and PEEP; 
 Assess clinical signs and symptoms (see Section 7.5); 
 Assess clinical outcome. In Part A, clinical outcome will be as sessed by the blinded assessor, 
in addition to the unblinded Inve stigator (see Section 7.6); 
 Perform a highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test for wo men of childbearing potential 
only; 
 Collect blood sample for:  
o Serum chemistry;  
o Serum creatinine;  
o Hematology; and  
o Blood cultures in patients wit h bacteremia, if applicable; 
 Collect urine sample for urinalysis;  
 Perform 12-lead ECG and consult the study Medical Monitor and l ocal cardiologist in cases 
of clinically significant a bnormal findings (eg, a QTcF  480 msec); 
 Collect infection site-specific cultures based on diagnosis if clinically indicated (see 
Section 7.7); and 
 Assess adverse events. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 737 EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS 
7.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint 
The primary efficacy endpoint for  the study is 28 -day all-cause mortality in the CRABC m-MITT 
Population in Part A. 
7.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 
The secondary efficacy endpoints for Part A and Part B include the following: 
 28-day all-cause mortality in the  Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Populat ion; 
 Clinical cure at TOC in the CRABC m-MITT Population; 
 Clinical cure at TOC in the m-MITT, Clinical Evaluable (CE), Mi crobiologic Evaluable (ME), 
and CRABC ME Populations; 
 Clinical cure at Day 5, Day 7, EOT, and LFU in the m-MITT, CRAB C m-MITT, CE, ME, and 
CRABC ME Populations; 
 Microbiological favorable assessment at Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC,  and LFU in the m-MITT, 
CRABC m-MITT, ME, and CRABC ME Populations; 
 14-day all-cause mortality in the CRABC m-MITT and m-MITT Popul ations;  
 28-day all-cause mortality in the  m-MITT and CRABC ME Populatio ns; and 
 PK exposure of ETX2514 and sulba ctam in the PK Population. 
7.3 Other Efficacy Endpoints 
The exploratory efficacy endpoints include the following: 
 Clinical cure based on PK exposure; 
 Clinical cure based on MIC distribution of ETX2514SUL;  
 Clinical cure based on baseline resistance to ETX2514SUL, carba penems, or colistin;  
 Number of days in the intensive care unit; 
 Number of patients transferre d to the intensive care unit; 
 For patients with VABP, VP, or ventilated HABP, number of days on ventilators;  
 Number of days in the hospital; and 
 Number of days on study drug treatment. 
7.4 Assessment of 28-Day Survival 
Every attempt must be made to record survival status at Day 28 or anytime thereafter for all 
randomized patients (including HAB P/VABP/VP patients who are ra ndomized to Part A based on 
a positive BPP rapid test, but who subsequently do not have gro wth of ABC in their respiratory 
sample culture), regardless of their status of treatment, as lo ng as the patient has not withdrawn 
consent from participation in the study. An in-person assessmen t is preferred; however, this 
assessment may also be performe d via a telephone call if an in- person visit is not possible.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 74For patients with an LFU Visit occurring before Day 28, a telep hone call to assess survival will be 
made on Day 28 or anytime thereafter. 
7.5 Assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms 
Clinical signs and symptoms of the presenting indication will b e assessed at Screening, daily 
during IV treatment beginning on Day 1, at the EOT Visit, at the TOC Visit, at the LFU Visit, and 
at the ET Visit, if applicable, by the blinded assessor and the  unblinded Investigator for Part A and 
by the unblinded Investigator for Part B. When possible, the sa me study personnel should complete 
the assessments at approximately  the same time each day. Maximu m daily temperature (defined 
as the maximum temperature reported on a single treatment day) will be recorded. Body 
temperature may be taken per the site’s preferred method, as specified in Table 3, and will be 
recorded in the appropriate eCRF. The same method of measuring a patient’s body temperature should be used throughout the study. 
Each sign and/or symptom of the presenting indication will be a ssigned a classification of absent, 
mild, moderate, or severe. Findings from the assessment of sign s and symptoms will be captured 
on the appropriate eCRF and should not be documented as adverse  events. The signs and symptoms 
by indication are presented in Table 3.   
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 75Table 3. Signs and Symptoms for Presenting Indications 
Presenting 
Indication Signs and Symptoms 
HABP/VABP/VP 
mechanically 
ventilated patients   Rales;  
 Dullness on percussion;  
 Bronchial breath sounds;  
 Egophony;  
 Purulent secretion; an d  Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]).  
 
HABP/VABP/VP 
non-mechanically ventilated patients  Cough; 
 Rales; 
 Dullness on percussion; 
 Bronchial breath sounds; 
 Egophony; 
 D
yspnea;  Respiratory rate >25 breaths/minute; and 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]). 
Bacteremia  Heart rate >100 bpm; 
 Respiratory rate 
>25 breaths/minute; 
 Systolic blood pressure 
<90 mmH g; and Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]). 
cUTI or AP  Urinary frequency; 
 Urinary urgency; 
 Dysuria; 
 Nausea; 
 Vomiting; 
 Abdominal pain; 
 Supra-pubic pain or discomfor
t;  Flank pain; 
 Costovertebral angle tenderness on examination; and 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]). 
Surgical and post-traumatic 
wound infections  Purulent drainage; 
 Erythema; 
 Warmth; 
 Exudation; 
 Odor; 
 Pain;  Leukocytosis; and 
 Fever [1] (oral or tympanic temperature 38°C 
[100.4°F] or recta l/core temperature  38.3°C 
[100.9°F]) OR hypothermia (rectal/core 
temperature <35°C [<95°F]). 
1. Maximum daily temperature on a s ingle treatment day will be rec orded. Note: Axial tempe rature is not allowed. 
AP = acute pyelonephritis; bpm = beats per minute; cUTI = compl icated urinary tract infecti on; HABP = hospital-acquired 
bacterial pneumonia; VABP = ventilato r-associate dbacterial pneumonia; VP = ventilate dpneumonia. 
7.6 Clinical Outcome 
Clinical outcome will be used to determine a response of clinic al success for all patients. Based on 
the assessment of signs and symptoms, the unblinded Investigato r will choose 1 of the following 
clinical outcomes at the Day 5, Day 7, EOT Visit, TOC Visit, LF U Visit, and ET Visit, if 
applicable. In Part A, in addition to the unblinded Investigato r, a blinded assessor will also 
determine clinical outcome. If t here is a discrepancy between t he assessment of the blinded 
assessor and unblinded Investigat or, the assessment from the bl inded assessor will be used. If there 
is a missing assessment from either the blinded assessor or unb linded Investigator, the other 
available assessment will be used (see Section 5.4.1). An adjud ication committee may be 
organized for endpoint adjudica tion should it be deemed necessa ry by the DSMB. In such a case, 
a charter will be developed that describes their activities. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 76Clinical cure: complete resolution or significant improvement o f signs and symptoms that were 
present at baseline and no new symptoms, such that no additiona l Gram negative antimicrobial 
therapy is warranted. 
Clinical failure: symptoms present at study entry have not significantly improved or completely 
resolved, or new symptoms have d eveloped and requi re the initia tion of a non-study Gram negative 
antibacterial drug therapy, death, or intolerance to study drug  leading to discontinuation from the 
study treatment. Clinical indeterminate: determination cannot be made because of  missing data or the patient is lost 
to follow-up. 
7.7 Microbiologic Assessments 
To assess the primary indication and follow-up of the primary i ndication, all specimens will be 
sent to the local laboratory for culture and susceptibility testing per institutional standards. Pure 
cultures of isolated pathogens will be shipped from the local l aboratory to the central laboratory 
for confirmation of species iden tification, susceptibility test ing, and possible molecular 
characterization, as detailed i n the Microbiology Laboratory Manual. Definitions of resistance for 
purposes of this protocol are  detailed in Section 9.1 and in the Microbiology Laboratory Manual. 
Rapid diagnosis of ABC HABP/VABP/VP will utilize the BPP to det ect ABC in respiratory 
specimens. Details of the test and its use will be included in the Laboratory Manual. The test results 
will be recorded in the eCRF. 
All patients must have a specimen sample from the site of infec tion (ie, respiratory secretion, 
blood, urine, or wound) and 2 sets of blood culture samples fro m 2 separate venipuncture sites 
collected at Screening. Screening respiratory specimens for pat ients with suspected 
HABP/VABP/VP should be subjected to BPP rapid diagnostic testing as detailed above, where 
available, and submitted to the l ocal microbiology laboratory for culture and susceptibility testing. 
In these cases, if the local microbiology laboratory culture do es not grow ABC, the patient will be 
withdrawn from the study drug treatment. 
If the screening sample for culture that is growing ABC is take n per standard of care before the 
patient or patient’s legally aut horized representative signs in formed consent, that isolate may be 
used for baseline eligibility and sent to the central laborator y once consent is obtained, as long as 
the sample was colle cted within 72 hours prio r to randomization . Additional samples for baseline 
culture should be collected again within 24 hours prior to rand omization, at the time points 
specified in the Schedule of Procedures ( Appendix A), and if cl inically indicated. Patients who are 
failing their current treatment as evidenced by worsening clini cal condition may enroll in the study, 
provided they meet all other re quisites. However, additional sa mples must be taken from the site 
of infection within 24 hours prio r to randomization and sent to  the local laborat ory for culture. 
The local laboratory will culture each sample for species ident ification, quantification (urine and 
BAL only), and susceptibility testing. Any organism isolated fr om the culture will be identified by 
genus and species by the local la boratory. Potential pathogen(s ) cultured at the local laboratory, 
including species isolated from mixed infections with other Gram positive or Gram negative organisms, will be sent to a designated central laboratory for confirmation of species identification, 
susceptibility testing results, a nd potential molecular charact erization. 
All organisms identified on culture at the local laboratory and  the local laboratory assessment of 
susceptibility testing for each organism will be captured in th e eCRF. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 77Enrollment in Part A can occur after ABC is identified in the b lood and/or other respiratory tract 
specimens but prior to establishing the resistance profile. If local laboratory susceptibility testing 
reveals colistin resistance after a patient has been randomized  to Part A, the patient must be 
transferred to Part B, regardless of the treatment group assign ment in Part A, once Part B is open 
for enrollment. If Part B is not  open for enrollment, patients will be withdrawn from the study drug 
treatment. 
Patients who are randomized to Part A based on a positive scree ning of a respiratory sample for 
ABC by BPP rapid test, but subseq uently do not have growth of A BC in their respiratory sample 
culture processed by the local mic robiology laboratory, will be  withdrawn from the study drug 
treatment. The need for continued standard of care treatment sh ould be assessed by the 
Investigator. When a patient’s culture grows Gram positive organisms but the patient is clinically improving, 
the patient may remain on study drug without additional Gram po sitive antibiotic coverage at the 
Investigator’s discretion. Patie nts who are not clinically impr oving or need adjustment in 
antimicrobial therapy th at is not allowed pe r the protocol shou ld be discontinued from study drug 
at the discretion of the Investigator, but should remain in the  study to complete all study 
assessments. Additional cultures and all EOT procedures should be performed at the time of 
discontinuation and every attempt must be made to collect survival data at Day 28 or anytime thereafter. 
7.7.1 Respiratory Tract Specimens 
For patients with HABP, VABP, or VP, the BPP rapid diagnostic t esting at Screening should be 
conducted using BAL-like specimens (BAL or mini-BAL) or endotra cheal aspirate by Protected 
Endotracheal Catheter specimens, a s applicable. See the Laboratory Manual for further details.  
For patients with HABP, VABP, or VP that were diagnosed with a positive BPP rapid test of their 
respiratory specimen at Screeni ng, respiratory specimens for cu lture and susceptibility testing must 
be collected again at Screeni ng. All HABP/VABP/VP patients shou ld have additional specimens 
collected on Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC, LFU, and ET Visits from th e respective sites as clinically 
indicated.  
Acceptable specimens for culture  and susceptibility testing sho uld include at least 1 positive 
pretreatment sample (ie, sampl e obtained prior to study drug do sing) obtained by Protected 
Specimen Brush with BAL or mini- BAL, by non-bronchoscopic BAL, by Protected Endotracheal 
Catheter suction, or from cultur e of lung tissue or pleural flu id obtained prior to randomization 
and treatment. Non-ventilated pat ients may have specimens obtai ned via deep expectoration or 
expectorated/induced sputum or c ulture of pleural fluid or lung  tissue.  
All respiratory specimens, even if positive by BPP rapid test f or ABC, should be sent to the local 
microbiology laboratory for Gram s tain (expectorated sputum onl y), culture and pathogen 
identification, susceptibility testing, and quantification (BAL  only). 
To be adequate, respiratory samp les from expectorated or induce d sputum should show 
<10 squamous epithelial cells and >25 polymorphonuclear neutrophils per 100  field. Specimens 
should be cultured regardless of determination of adequacy. How ever, if the specimen is deemed 
to be inadequate, another respira tory sample should be collected and cultured.  
Gram 
stains will be conducted per institutional standards, and Gram stain data should be captured 
in source documents. Colony count s are not expected to be performed on expectorated or induced 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 78sputum or endotracheal aspirate. I f the sputum is cultured, iso lates of all pathogens exhibiting 
significant growth identified by the site laboratory’s routine procedures should be sent to the 
central laboratory, even if the organisms are from a specimen t hat does not meet the specimen 
adequacy criteria described above. Culture-purified isolates of  pathogens from respiratory samples 
will be sent to the central lab oratory for confirmation of iden tification and suscep tibility testing. 
7.7.2 Blood Specimens 
Two sets of samples from 2 separate venipuncture sites are requ ired for blood cultures in all 
patients. Each set of blood culture samples will be collected f rom a separate venipuncture site and 
will consist of 1 aerobic and 1 anaerobic blood culture bottle (an additional aerobic bottle is 
allowed if an anaerobic culture is not standard practice at the  site). Each set of blood cultures 
should be collected by direct venipuncture from i ndependent sites approximately 15 minutes to 
30 minutes apart. A positive bl ood culture for ABC within 72 ho urs prior to randomization can be 
used for enrollment of a patient as long as the sample was draw n from a peripheral vein or through 
a newly inserted catheter; howev er, 2 sets of blood cultures, a s outlined above, must be repeated 
within 24 hours prior to randomization. For a patient to meet c riteria for catheter-related 
bloodstream infection, please see the necessary sampling proced ures described in Part A-Specific 
Inclusion Criterion 1 (Section 4.1.2). If Screening/baseline bl ood cultures are positive for ABC, 
repeat blood cultures should be obtained daily until negative o r the patient is a treatment failure. 
To avoid unnecessary blood draws,  the Investigator may wait unt il the result of the prior blood 
culture is known before perfor ming the next blood culture. 
Additional blood cultures, including blood cultures taken durin g fever spikes (oral or tympanic 
temperature 38°C [100.4°F] or rectal/core temperature 38.3°C [100.9°F]), may also be 
collected at the Investigator’s discretion. 
Isolates of pathogens (eg, not considered to be a contaminant a s outlined in the Microbiology 
Laboratory Manual) from each individual positive blood culture w i l l  b e  s e n t  t o  t h e  c e n t r a l  
laboratory. 
7.7.3 Urine Specimens 
For patients with cUTI or AP, urine samples will be collected a t Screening, Day 5, Day 7, EOT, 
TOC, LFU, and ET Visits by 1 of the following methods that mini mizes the risk of bacterial 
contamination: 
 Clean-catch mid-stream; 
 Newly inserted Foley catheter (b ag specimens are not permitted) ; 
 Bladder needle aspiration; 
 Suprapubic catheter; 
 Ureter aspiration; or 
 Nephrostomy tube. 
Urine cultures will be performed by the local laboratory. The l ocal laboratory will culture each 
sample for species identifica tion, quantifica tion, and susceptibility testing. Any organism isolated 
from the 
urine will be identified by genus and species by the l ocal laboratory. Culture-purified 
isolates of potential pathogens isolated at baseline and all post-baseline organism s culture-purified 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 79at the local laboratory and not  considered to be contaminants as outlined in the Microbiology 
Laboratory Manual will be sent to the central laboratory for co nfirmation of identification and 
susceptibility results. A urine sample taken to support diagnos is or to treat a medical condition 
within 48 hours prior to the first dose of study drug can be us ed for baseline microbiologic 
assessments if the organism(s) c ultured was obtained and stored  for shipment to the designated 
central laboratory. Otherwise, a repeat urine sample for baseli ne microbiologic assessments is 
required.  
Baseline urine cultures must grow  1 or 2 defined bacterial path ogens, each at 105 colony-forming 
units (CFU)/mL. If a patient grows 3 organisms in the urine, the ur ine culture will be considered 
contaminated unless 1 of the organisms also grows in a concurrently obtained blood culture. 
For post-baseline urine cultures, only those potential pathogen s that grow at 103 CFU/mL and 
deemed not to be contaminants a s outlined in the Microbiology L aboratory Manual will be 
culture-purified and sent to the central laboratory for confirm ation of identification and 
susceptibility testing. 
7.7.4 Surgical or Post-Traumatic Wound Specimens 
For patients with surgical or post-traumatic wound infections, an adequate clinical specimen for 
microbiologic evaluation will be  collected at Screening, Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC, LFU, and ET 
Visits as long as clinically indicated (ie, as long as there is  material to send for culture). Clinical 
specimens include pus from a wound or abscess a nd aspirate from  the leading edge of  cellulitis.  
All specimens should be sent to t he local laboratory for Gram stain, species identification, and 
susceptibility testing. 
Isolates of potential pathogen(s)  culture-purified at the local  laboratory will be sent to the central 
laboratory for confirmation of i dentification and susceptibilit y testing results. 
7.8 Microbiologic Outcome 
7.8.1 Microbiologic Outcome for Bacter emia, Complicated Urinary Tract  Infection, or 
Acute Pyelonephritis 
For patients with bacteremia, cUTI, or AP, per-patient microbio logical response will be 
determined programmatically as 1 of the following outcomes based on the results of blood and/or 
urine cultures at the Day 5, Day 7, EOT, TOC, and LFU Visits. A  microbiological favorable 
assessment will include eradicat ion and presumed eradications, as detailed below. 
Microbiologic eradication: 
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the baseline strain of ABC is red uced to <103 CFU/mL on urine 
culture and negative on repeat blood culture (if positive at ba seline); or 
 For patients with bacteremia: ab sence of the baseline strain of  ABC on culture. 
Microbiologic presumed eradicat ion: no culture was done, and th e patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical cure. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 80Microbiologic persistence: 
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the  demonstration that the urine culture grew 103 CFU/mL of 
the baseline strain of ABC identified at study entry and/or a b lood culture demonstrates the 
same baseline pathogen(s); or 
 For patients with bacteremia: pr esence of the baseline strain o f ABC on repeat culture. 
Patients who are a persistence at EOT will be considered a pers istence at TOC. 
Microbiologic presumed persist ence: no culture was done, and th e patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical failure. 
Microbiologic indeterminate: if clinically indicated (for cUTI and bacteremia only), no follow-up 
culture is available, the culture cannot be interpreted for any  reason, or the culture is considered 
contaminated.  Microbiologic recurrence:  
 For patients with cUTI or AP: the  demonstration that the urine culture grew 103 CFU/mL of 
the baseline strain of ABC identified at study entry at any tim e after documented eradication 
at the TOC Visit up to and including the LFU Visit; or  
 For patients with bacteremia: a positive blood culture for ABC at any time after documented 
eradication at the TOC Visit  up to and including the LFU Visit.  
7.8.2 Microbiologic Outcome for Hospit al-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia , 
Ventilator-Associated Bacterial Pneumonia, Ventilated Pneumonia , or Surgical or 
Post-Traumatic Wound Infections 
Microbiologic presumed eradicat ion: no culture was done, and th e patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical cure. For patients with HABP/VABP/VP or surgical o r post-traumatic wound 
infections, where repeat culture samples may not be indicated, presumed eradication based on 
clinical improvement  will be inferred. 
Microbiologic presumed persist ence: no culture was done, and th e patient meets clinical criteria 
for clinical failure. 
7.9 Pharmacokinetic Assessments 
7.9.1 Intense Pharmacokinetic Sampling 
The first approximately 30 patients randomized in Part A will h ave samples collected for intense 
PK analysis to ensure that exposur es observed in this severely ill cohort are comparable to those 
observed thus far in p rior clinical studies . Intense PK samplin g will also be performed on the first 
approximately 20 patients randomiz ed in Part A at sites in China Mainland.  
Samples for intense PK analysis will be collected on Day 1, pre ferably after the second infusion, 
as follows: 
 At the end of the infusion aft er the infusi on pump is turned of f (+15 minutes); 
 1.5 hours ( 15 minutes) after the end of infusion; and 
 Immediately prior to the start of the next infusion.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 81When possible, PK samples should be collected after the second infusion on Day 1. If the second 
infusion happens during the nigh t and it is not possible to collect the PK sample after the infusion, 
the same procedures could be done after the third infusion on D ay 1. The PK sample should be 
taken after the patient receive d at least 2 infusions on Day 1.   
Additional samples for intense PK  analysis will be collected on  Day 4 (1 day) as follows: 
 At the end of any infusion after  the infusion pump is turned of f (+15 minutes); and 
 Immediately prior to the start of the next infusion. 
Table 4 shows the sampling times for intense PK assessments. 
Table 4. Sampling Times for Inten se Pharmacokinetic Assessments  
PK Sampling Time Day 1 [1] Day 4 (1 Day) 
End of infusion (+15 minutes) [2] X X 
1.5 hours ( 15 minutes) after end of 
infusion  X  
Immediately prior to the start of the 
next infusion X X  
1. PK sample should be taken prefe rably after the second infusion on Day 1. 
2. PK sample should be taken at the end of the infusion after the infusion pump is turned off. 
PK = pharmacokinetic. 
7.9.2 Sparse Pharmacokinetic Sampling 
All other patients enrolled in the study (Parts A and B) will h ave samples collected for sparse PK 
analysis. Samples for sparse PK analysis will be collected on Day 1, preferably after the second 
infusion, and on Day 4 as follows: 
 On Day 1, immediately prior to the start of the next infusion; and 
 On Day 4 ( 1 day), immediately prior to the s tart of the next infusion. 
When possible, PK samples should be collected after the second infusion on Day 1. If the second 
infusion happens during the nigh t and it is not possible to collect the PK sample after the infusion, 
the same procedures could be done after the third infusion on D ay 1. The PK sample should be 
taken after the patient received at least 2 infusions on Day 1.  Table 5 shows the sampling times for 
sparse PK assessments. 
Table 5. Sampling Times for Sparse Pharmacokinetic Assessments 
PK Sampling Time Day 1 [1] Day 4 (1 Day) 
Immediately prior to the start of the 
next infusion X X 
1. PK sample should be taken prefe rably after the second infusion on Day 1. 
PK = pharmacokinetic. 
The PK samples will be collected  for both treatment groups in Part A to keep the study data 
blinded. The PK samples obtained from the ETX2514SUL group will  be analyzed for ETX2514 
and sulbactam concentrations using a validated assay by a centr al bioanalytical laboratory.  
The PK plasma samples will be used to estimate PK parameters us ing non-compartmental 
methods, such as area under the concentration-time curve, maxim um plasma concentration, time 
to maximum plasma concentrati on, drug clearance, half-life, min imum plasma concentration, and 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 82steady-state volume of distribution for ETX2514SUL. Population PK and PK/PD modeling will 
be performed and reported separately. The results will not be i ncluded in the clinical study report. 
Additional PK sampling may be performed as needed for patients with eGFR >130 mL/min/m2 
undergoing acute hemodialysis or renal replacement therapy util izing the trough sampling 
approach. 
The actual PK sampling times will be captured on the eCRF. Actu al dosing time will also be 
captured on the eCRF. Actual sampling time will be used for the  PK calculations. 
See the Laboratory Manual for more details about PK sampling.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 838 SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 
8.1 Adverse Events 
An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical investigation patient 
administered a pharmaceutical pro duct, which does not necessari ly have a causal relationship with 
this treatment. An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and/or unintended sign 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease  temporally associated with the 
use of an investigational medicinal product, whether or not rel ated to the investigational medicinal 
product. All adverse events, incl uding observed or volunteered problems, complaints, or 
symptoms, are to be recorded on the appropriate eCRF. 
Adverse events, which include clinical laboratory test variable s, will be monitored and 
documented from the time of the main informed consent (not the limited scope ICF) until study 
participation is complete. This is to be understood that Investigators should report any adverse 
event occurring from the time the  main ICF (including all study  procedures) was signed. 
Investigators are not required to report adverse events occurri ng for patients who only signed the 
limited scope ICF (which only al lows rapid testing on a respira tory sample). Patients should be 
instructed to report any adverse event that they experience to the Investigator. Beginning at 
enrollment, Investigators should make an assessment for adverse  events at each visit and record 
the event on the appropri ate adverse event eCRF. 
Wherever possible, a specific disease or syndrome rather than i ndividual associ a t e d  s i g n s  a n d  
symptoms should be identified by  the Investigator and recorded on the eCRF. However, if an 
observed or reported sign or symptom is not considered a compon ent of a specific disease or 
syndrome by the Investigator, it should be recorded as a separa te adv erse even t o n the eCRF. 
Additionally, the condition that l ed to a medical or surgical p rocedure (eg, surgery, endoscopy, 
tooth extraction, or transfusion)  should be recorded as an adverse event, not the procedure.  
Any medical condition already present at Screening should not b e reported as an adverse event 
unless the medical condition or signs or symptoms present at ba seline changes in severity or 
seriousness at any time during t he study. In this case, it should be reported as an adverse event. 
Clinically significant abnormal laboratory or other examination  (eg, ECG) findings that are 
detected during the study or are present at Screening and signi ficantly worsen during the study 
should be reported as adverse events. The Investigator will exe rcise his or her medical and 
scientific judgment in deciding whether an abnormal laboratory finding or other abnormal 
assessment is clinically signi ficant. Clinically significant abnormal laboratory values occurring 
during the clinical study will be followed until repeat tests r eturn to normal, stabilize, or are no 
longer clinically significant. A ny abnormal test that is determined to be an error does not require 
reporting as an adverse event. 
Newly emergent infections that appear after baseline will be re ported as adverse events and 
summarized separately. Clinical  failures should not be consider ed adverse events and should not 
be reported as such. 
8.1.1 Adverse Drug Reaction 
All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product rel ated to any dose should be 
considered an adverse drug react ion. “Response” to  a medicinal product means that a causal 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 84relationship between a m edicinal product and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, 
ie, the relationship cannot be ruled out. 
8.1.2 Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction 
An unexpected adverse drug reactio n is defined as an adverse re action, the nature or severity of 
which is not consistent with the  applicable product information . For ETX2514SUL, the reference 
safety information is included in the Investigator’s Brochure currently in force.  
8.1.3 Assessment of Adverse Ev ents by the Investigator 
The unblinded Investigator will assess the severity (intensity)  of each adverse event as mild, 
moderate, or severe. In Part A, in addition to the unblinded In vestigator, a blinded assessor will 
also be responsible for the causality assessment, and as detail ed below. 
Assessment of severity: 
Mild – An event that is easily t olerated and generally not interfering with normal  daily activities. 
Moderate – An event that is su fficiently discomforting to inter fere with normal daily activities. 
Severe – An event that is incap acitating with inability to work  or perform normal daily activities. 
Causality assessment: 
The relationship of an adverse ev ent to the administration of t he study drug is to be assessed by 
the blinded assessor and the unblinded Investigator for Part A and by the unblinded Investigator 
for Part B, according to the following definitions: 
No (unrelated, not related, no re lation) – The time course betw een the administration of study drug 
and the occurrence or worsening of  the adverse event rules out a causal relationship and another 
cause (concomitant drugs, thera pies, complications, etc) is suspected. 
Yes (related) – The time course between the administration of s tudy drug and the occurrence or 
worsening of the adverse event is consistent with a causal rela tionship and no other cause 
(concomitant drugs, therapies, com plications, etc) can be ident ified. 
The definition implies a reasonable possibility of a causal rel ationship between the event and the 
study drug. This means that there  are facts (evidence) or argum ents to suggest a causal relationship. 
The following factors should also be considered: 
 The temporal sequence from  study drug administration- 
o The event should occur after the study drug is given. The length of time from study drug 
exposure to event should be evaluated in the clin ical context o f the event. 
 Underlying, concomitant, intercurrent diseases- 
o Each report should be evaluated in the context of the natural h istory and course of the 
disease being treated and any othe r disease the patient may hav e. 
 Concomitant drug- o The other drugs the patient is taking or the treatment the pati ent receives should be 
examined to determine whether any of them might be recognized t o cause the event in 
question. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 85 Known response pattern for this class of study drug- 
o Clinical and/or preclinical data may indicate whether a particu lar response is likely to be a 
class effect. 
 Exposure to physical and/or mental stresses- 
o The exposure to stress might induc e adverse changes in the reci pient and provide a logical 
and better explanation for the event. 
 The pharmacology and PK of the study drug- 
o The known PK properties (absorp tion, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) of the study 
drug should be considered. 
8.1.4 Adverse Events of Special Interest 
Adverse events of special interest will be analyzed, summarized , and reported in the clinical study 
report. Statistical comparisons will be made between the invest igational and control groups in 
Part A.  Adverse events of special inter est and their definitions includ e the following: 
 Allergic and hypersensitivity rea ctions: Severe and serious adv erse drug reactions from the 
Medical Dictionary for Regulator y Activities (MedDRA) Standardized MedDRA Queries of 
allergy and hypersensitivity; 
 Nephrotoxicity: Using the RIFLE criteria for the duration of th e study (see Table 6);
18 and  
 Emergent infections and superinfections: All serious and severe  events in the MedDRA system 
organ class of infections and inf estations other than the indic ation infection (ie, ABC). 
Table 6. Definition of RIFLE Criteria 
Term Definition 
Risk (R)  Increased creatinine level 1.5  or GFR decrease 25% 
Injury (I) Increased creatinine level 2  or GFR decrease 50%
Failure (F)  Increased creatinine level 3 , GFR decrease 75%, or 
creatinine level 4 mg/dL 
Loss (L)  Persistent acute renal fa ilure or complete loss of 
function for 4 weeks 
ESKD (E)  ESKD for 3 months 
ESKD = end-stage kidney disease; GFR = glomerular filtration ra te; RIFLE = Risk–Injury–Fa ilure–Loss–End-stage renal 
disease. 
8.2 Serious Adverse Events 
An adverse event or adverse reaction is considered serious if, in the view of either the Investigator 
or Sponsor, it results in a ny of the following outcomes: 
 Death; 
 A life-threatening adverse event; 
Note: An adverse event or advers e reaction is considered “life- threatening” if, in view of either 
the Investigator or Sponsor, its occurrence places the patient at immediate risk of death. It does 
not include an event that, had it  occurred in a mo re severe for m, might have caused death. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 86 Requires hospitalization or pr olongation of existing hospitalizations; 
Note: Any hospital admission with at least 1 overnight stay wil l be considered an inpatient 
hospitalization. An emergency room visit without hospital admis sion will not be recorded as 
an SAE under this criterion, nor will hospitalization for a pro cedure scheduled or planned 
before signing of informed cons ent. However, unexpected complications and/or prolongation 
of hospitalization that occur during elective su rgery should be recorded as adverse events and 
assessed for seriousness. Admission to the hospital for social or situational reasons (ie, no place 
to stay, live too far away to come for hospital visits) will no t be considered inpatient 
hospitalizations. Adverse events recorded for a patient who is hospitalized for treatment of the 
underlying illness, do not necessarily meet serious criterion o f hospitalization.  
 A persistent or significant disability/incapacity or substantia l disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions; 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect; or 
 An important m edical event. 
Note: Important medical events that may not result in death, be  life-threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered  an SAE when, based upon appro priate medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surg ical intervention to prevent 
1 of the outcomes listed above. E xamples of such medical events  include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room  or at home, blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospi talizations, or the development of 
drug dependency. 
8.3 Serious Adverse Event Reporting − Procedures for Investigators 
Initial reports 
All SAEs occurring from the time of the main informed consent ( not the limited scope ICF) or 
randomization until 30 days following the last administration o f study drug must be reported to 
Medpace Clinical Safety within 24 hours of the knowledge of the occurrence (this refers to any 
adverse event that meets any of t he aforementioned serious criteria). This is to be understood that 
Investigators should report any SAE occurring from the time the  main ICF (including all study 
procedures) was signed. Investig ators are not required to report SAEs occurring for patients who 
only signed the limited scope ICF (which only allows rapid test ing on a respiratory sample). All 
SAEs that the Investigator considers related to study drug occu rring after the 30-day follow-up 
period must be reported to the Sponsor. All SAEs should be repo rted as if it were a blinded study 
and without evidence of treatment assignment on the report. 
To report the SAE, complete the SAE form electronically in the electronic data capture (EDC) 
system for the study. When the form is completed, Medpace Safet y personnel will be 
notified electronically and will retrieve the form. If the even t meets serious criteria 
and it is not possible to access the EDC system, send an email to Medpace Safety at 
medpace-safetynotification@medpa ce.com or call the Medpace SAE reporting line (telephone 
number listed below), and fax the completed paper SAE form to M edpace (fax number listed 
below) within 24 hours of awareness. When the EDC system becomes available, the SAE 
information must be entered with in 24 hours of the system becom ing available.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 87Safety Contact Information : Medpace Clinical Safety 
Medpace SAE reporting line – US: 
Telephone: +1-800-730-5779, dial  3 or +1-513-579-9911, dial 3 
Fax: +1-866-336-5320 or +1-513-579-0444 
E-mail: medpace-safetynotification@medpace.com 
Medpace SAE reporting line – Rest of World: 
Telephone: +49 89 89 55 718 44 
Fax: +49 89 89 55 718 104 
E-mail: medpace-safetynotification@medpace.com 
Follow-up reports 
The Investigator must continue to follow the patient until the SAE has subsided or until the 
condition becomes chronic in nat ure, stabilizes (in the case of  persistent impairment), or the patient 
dies. 
Within 24 hours of receipt of follow-up information, the Invest igator must update the SAE form 
electronically in the EDC system  for the study and submit any s upporting documentation 
(eg, patient discharge summary or autopsy reports) to Medpace C linical Safety via fax or e-mail. 
If it is not possible to access the EDC system, refer to the pr ocedures outlined above for initial 
reporting of SAEs.  
8.4 Pregnancy Reporting 
If the patient or partner of a patient participating in the stu dy becomes pregnant during the study 
or within 120 days of discontinuing study drug, the Investigato r should report the pregnancy to 
Medpace Clinical Safety within 24 hours of being notified. Medp ace Clinical Safety will then 
forward the Exposure In Utero form to the Investigator for comp letion.  
A patient becoming pregnant while on study drug will immediatel y be withdrawn from the study 
and early study termination procedures will be performed. 
The patient or partner should be followed by the Investigator u ntil completion of the pregnancy. 
If the pregnancy ends for any reason before the anticipated date, the Investigator should notify 
Medpace Clinical Safety. At the completion of the pregnancy, th e Investigator will document the 
outcome of the pregnancy. If the outcome of the pregnancy meets  the criteria for immediate 
classification as an SAE (ie, postpartum complication, spontane ous abortion, stillbirth, neonatal 
death, or congenital anomaly), th e Investigator should follow t he procedures for reporting an SAE. 
8.5 Expedited Reporting 
The Sponsor will report all relevant information about suspecte d unexpected serious adverse 
reactions that are fatal or lif e-threatening as soon as possible to the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), applicable competent autho rities in all the Member State s concerned, and to the Central 
Ethics Committee, and in any case no later than 7 days after knowledge by the Sponsor of such a case, and that relevant follow-up information will subsequently  be communicated within an 
additional 8 days.  
Given that all-cause mortality is the primary efficacy endpoint  in the study, all death cases will not 
be automatically unblinded by the case processing team. Death c ases, where there is a plausible 
cause of death that is related to study drug administration, wi ll be treated as potential suspected 
unexpected serious adverse reacti ons and processed as such and reported as needed. The DSMB 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 88will periodically monitor deaths in aggregate, analyzed by trea tment group, as detailed in the 
DSMB charter. 
All other suspected unexpected s erious adverse reactions will b e reported to the FDA, applicable 
competent authorities concerned, and to the Central Ethics Comm ittee concerned as soon as 
possible but within a maximum of 15 days of first knowledge by the Sponsor.  
The Sponsor will also inform all Investigators as required.  
8.6 Clinical Laboratory Evaluations 
Standard clinical laboratory prof iles for chemistry will be eva luated at Screening, Day 1, Day 3, 
Day 5, Day 7, the EOT Visit, the TOC Visit, the LFU Visit, and the ET Visit. Serum creatinine 
will be evaluated daily while the patient is receiving study dr ug and will be analyzed at the local 
laboratory to assess the need for dose adjustments. All Screeni ng laboratories will be performed 
at the local laboratory and may have been collected as standard  of care within 48 hours prior to 
randomization, with the exception of serum creatinine determina tion, which must be obtained at 
the local laboratory within 24 hours before the first dose of s tudy drug. All other samples are to be 
sent to the central laboratory. The Day 5 safety chemistry pane l will be performed at the local 
laboratory and sent to the  central laboratory. 
Standard clinical laboratory pr ofiles for hematology including complete blood c ount (with red 
blood cell count, total white bl ood cell count with differentia l counts, platelet count, hemoglobin, 
and hematocrit) will be performed at Screening, Day 1, Day 3, D ay 5, Day 7, the EOT Visit, the 
TOC Visit, the LFU Visit, and the ET Visit.  
A urinalysis including urine dipstick analysis for leukocytes, nitrites, or a catalase test of the urine 
specimen, microscopic evaluation, specific gravity, and pH will  be performed at Screening, Day 1, 
Day 3, Day 5, Day 7, the EOT Visit, the TOC Visit, the LFU Visi t, and the ET Visit. 
A highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test will be perfor med at Screening, the EOT Visit, 
and the ET Visit for women of  childbeari ng potential. 
See Appendix B for a list of cen tral clinical laboratory analyt es. 
Standard of care safety laboratory profiles should also be perf ormed by the local laboratory. 
Abnormal values of laboratory parameters must be followed up to  normalization or stabilization 
at the discretion of the Investigator. In China all sites will perform all laboratory tests at the loc al laboratory, following the timepoints 
outlined above. 
8.7 Vital Signs 
Vital signs (including systolic a nd diastolic blood pressure, h eart rate, respiratory rate, and, for 
ventilated patients, oxygen thera py and respiratory settings in cluding FiO
2 and PEEP) will be taken 
after at least 5 minutes in a se ated or supine position. Vital signs will be recorded at Screening, all 
days that the patient receives s tudy drug treatment, the EOT Vi sit, the TOC Visit, the LFU Visit, 
and the ET Visit. Vital signs should be collected at the same t ime as assessments of signs and 
symptoms. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 898.8 Medical/Surgical History Assessments 
Medical and surgical history will be obtained and evaluated at Screening to confirm the patient’s 
eligibility to enroll in the study.   
8.9 Electrocardiograms 
Twelve-lead ECGs will be performed for all patients at Screenin g, at the end of the first infusion 
of study drug on Day 1, at EOT, and at the ET Visit. If clinica lly indicated, the 12-lead ECGs will 
be repeated as close as possible following the end of the infusion of study drug on the day on which 
the post-dose PK samples are drawn (Day 4 [ 1 day]; day selected at the discretion of the 
Investigator). All 12-lead ECGs will be performed after the end of the infusion and after the patient 
has been in a supine position for at least 10 minutes. The valu e at Screening will be used for 
assessing the QTcF exclusion cr iterion. All 12-lead ECGs will b e performed and read locally. The 
following ECG parameters will be recorded: 
 Heart rate; 
 QRS interval; 
 PR interval; 
 RR interval; 
 QT interval; and  
 QTc interval. 
All ECGs will be evaluated for the presence of abnormalities by  a qualified local physician. The 
ECGs will be classified as 1 of the following: 
 Normal; 
 Having a not clinically significant abnormality; or 
 Having a clinically significant abnormality. 
An example of a clinically si gnificant abnormality may be a cor rected QTcF  480 msec. 
8.10 Physical Examinations 
A complete physical examination will be performed at Screening,  Day 3, Day 5, Day 7, at the 
EOT Visit, and at the ET Visit.  A limited physi cal examination will be performed, if needed, at 
Day 2, Day 4, Day 6, Day 8 to Day 14 (if EOT has not already oc curred), at the TOC Visit, and at 
the LFU Visit.  
A complete physical examination must include source documentati on of weight, skin, head and 
neck, heart, lung, abdomen, extrem ities, back/flank/costoverteb ral angle tenderness, and 
neuromuscular assessments. Height will only be collected at Scr eening. Limited physical 
examinations are symptom-based. When clinically indicated, a pr ostate exam can be performed, 
at the discretion of the Investigator. Physical examinations may be pe rformed at unscheduled time poin ts if deemed necessary by the 
Investigator. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 908.11 Chest X-Ray/Radiology/Ultrasound 
Chest X-rays, MRIs, or CT scans will be performed in patients w ith HABP, VABP, or VP at 
Screening and the TOC Visit, and as clinically indicated to eva luate for the presence of infiltrates. 
Ultrasounds may also be performed  for patients with HABP, VABP,  or VP at Screening. If an 
ultrasound is performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT scan should  be performed within 24 hours. 
Imaging should be conducted per institutional guidelines and re sults recorded in the source 
documents and the eCRF. 
8.12 Mechanical Ventilator Assessments 
Patients whose primary indication for enrollment into the study  is HABP, VABP, or VP and who 
require mechanical ventilation support will be managed by the s tudy Investigators per institutional 
guidelines. Data regarding mech anical ventilation settings will  be captured in the source 
documents and the eCRFs. 8.13 Safety Monitoring and Assessment of Abnormal Liver Function Tests 
Management and discontinuation criteria for abnormal liver func tion tests (LFTs) have been 
designed to ensure patient safety and evaluate liver event etiology.
19 Safety monitoring for LFTs 
will occur from randomization unt il 30 days following the last administration of study drug; 
however, any abnormal LFT will be monitored according to the Sa fety Monitoring Plan. 
Investigators should evaluate sta ndard of care laboratory repor ts in addition to study laboratory 
reports when monitoring for LFTs. 
Abnormal liver che mistry criteria: 
The Investigator or sub-Investigator must review patient labora tory reports to identify if they meet 
the following criteria: 
 Moderate abnormality that happened after study drug administrat ion: 
o AST or ALT >2 × baseline or evidence of progressively increasin g levels despite 
improvement of underlying infection; or 
o Total bilirubin >2 × baseline or evidence of progressively incr easing levels despite 
improvement of underlying infection. 
 Severe abnormality: 
o Confirmed values of AST or ALT >3 × ULN and total bilirubin >2 × ULN or evidence of 
acute hepatic insufficiency or failure, as evidenced by progres sion of Child-Pugh score to 
B or C; or 
o Persistently high values of AST or ALT > 5 × ULN for 14 days. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 91Action to be taken by Investigator: 
If any 1 of the abnormal liver chemistry criteria is met, the I nvestigator or sub-Investigator must 
do the following: 
 Obtain a detailed history of symptoms and prior or concurrent d iseases. The Investigator 
should ensure that the medical history form captures any preexi sting illness that may be 
relevant in assessing hepatic function; 
 Obtain a history of concomitant drug use (including over-the-co unter/herbal/dietary 
supplements); 
 Obtain a history of exposure to env ironmental chemical agents; 
 Following the initial observed elevation, every effort should b e made to have the patient 
reassessed within 24 hours to 48 hours. Repeat LFTs will be performed and sent to the central 
laboratory. Liver function tests may also be repeated via the l ocal laboratory at the discretion 
of the Investigator; 
 Patients who have an Investigat or-assessed, study drug-related elevation of their LFTs must be 
monitored 2 to 3 times per week  until liver function chemistrie s (ALT, AST, alkaline 
phosphatase, and total bilirubin)  completely return to normal r ange or return to the baseline 
level and associated clinical si gns and symptoms return to base line levels. If the elevation of 
LFTs is attributed to a non-st udy drug-related issue (eg, chron ic hepatitis, chronic cholestasis, 
concomitant treatments, cardiovascular causes, etc), the patien t should be monitored until the 
LFTs stabilize or return to the p atient’s baseline level and as s o c i a t e d  c l i n i c a l  s i g n s  a n d  
symptoms return to baseline levels. The Investigator should con tact the Medical Monitor to 
discuss additional management and follow-up of patients with elevation of LFTs; 
 The event must be reported to Medpace within 48 hours to 72 hou rs after its occurrence on a 
Liver Event Form; 
 Consider a consultation with a spe cialist such as a hepatologist; and 
 Consider performing liv er imaging (ie, MRI , CT, or ultrasound). 
Hy’s Law definition:  
The definition of Hy’s Law is as follows: 
1. AST or ALT >3 × ULN; 
2. Total bilirubin >2 × ULN;  
3. No evidence of intra- or extra-h epatic bilirubin obstruction (e levated alkaline phosphatase) or 
Gilbert’s Syndrome; and 
4. No evidence of any other reason for increase in transaminases as noted above.  
If the first 3 criteria of Hy’s Law are met in a concurrent blo od sample, the case must be 
reported as an SAE. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 92Criteria for study drug discontin uation (severe hepatic abnorma lities): 
In the absence of an explanation for increased liver enzymes, t he patient should be discontinued 
from the study drug. Discontinuation should be considered if: 
 ALT or AST >10 × ULN; 
 ALT or AST >5 × ULN for more than 2 weeks or progressively incr easing transaminases 
despite clinical improveme nt of underlyi ng infection; 
 AST or ALT >3 × ULN and total bilirubin >2  ULN or international normalized ratio >1.5 
(for patients who are not on coumadin);  
 AST or ALT >3 × ULN along with signs or symptoms compatible wit h hepatitis or 
hypersensitivity (eg, fatigue, na usea, vomiting, right upper qu adrant pain or tenderness, 
jaundice, fever, rash, or eosinophilia [>5%]); or 
 Close monitoring for a patient with moderate hepatic laboratory  test abnormality is not 
possible. 
Follow-up examination: 
If any abnormal liver chemistry criteria are met, the following  assessments should be obtained at 
the LFU Visit and documented in a Liver Event Form:  Clinical symptoms course; 
 Concomitant medications: over-th e-counter/herbal/dietary supple ments (start and stop dates); 
 Alcohol use; 
 Risk factors for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, such as diabete s, obesity, and 
hypertriglyceridemia; 
 Autoimmune hepatitis/cholangitis; 
 Wilson’s disease; and 
 Laboratory assessments. Based on the patient’s history, other t esting may be appropriate, 
including: 
o Acute viral hepatitis (A, B, C, D , E, or other infectious agent s); and 
o Other laboratory tes ts, including interna tional normalized ratio and direct bilirubin. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 939 STATISTICS 
9.1 Analysis Populations 
This study is designed to estim ate treatment efficacy of ABC infections, with a pivotal component 
in Part A.  
The ITT Population will include  all patients randomized to stud y drug treatment (ETX2514SUL 
plus imipenem/cilastatin or colistin plus imipenem/cilastatin) in Part A or enrolled in Part B, 
regardless of whether the patien t actually receives study drug.  
The Modified ITT (MITT) Population will include patients in Par ts A and B who meet ITT criteria 
and receive any amount of study  drug. The MITT Population will be considered the Safety 
Population. Patients with HABP/VA BP/VP who were randomized to P art A on the basis of a BPP 
rapid test result but were subsequently withdrawn due to a lack  of a culture gr owing ABC will be 
counted in the MITT and Safety Populations.  The m-MITT Population will include patients who meet MITT crite ria and have an ABC organism 
isolated as the qualifying culture specimen, as confirmed by th e central and/or local microbiology 
laboratory. If an isolate for tes ting at the central laboratory  is not available, the local laboratory 
data can be used to confirm the presence of ABC organism, as long as the local laboratory uses 
modern methods of diagnosis such as molecular-based tests, matr ix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-f light mass spectrometry, Vitek, Phoenix, etc (ie, not conventional 
biochemical or manual phenotypic methods). Patients with HABP/V ABP/VP who are enrolled 
based upon a positive BPP rapid test for ABC, but subsequently are found to have respiratory 
sample cultures that do not grow  ABC (by the local laboratory),  will be withdrawn from the study 
drug treatment as detailed in Section 4.3. These patients will not be included in the m-MITT 
Population but will remain in the MITT Population. 
The CRABC m-MITT Population will include patients who meet m-MI TT criteria and 
have a baseline ABC organism that is confirmed to be carbapenem -resistant (MIC to 
imipenem/meropenem 8 mg/L) by the central laboratory or by the local laboratory if  the central 
laboratory is not able to identif y the isolate for any reason. Patients will be excluded from the 
CRABC m-MITT Population if they have isolates that are deemed by the central laboratory to be 
resistant to ETX2514SUL (MIC >4 mg/L) or colistin (MIC 4 mg/L), if their blood culture or 
respiratory samples are collected  more than 72 hours prior to r andomization, if the y are transferred 
from Part A to Part B, or if they are enrolled with infections other than ABC pneumonia or 
bloodstream infection (ie, ABC infections other than HABP, VABP, VP, and bacteremia). A 
sensitivity analysis for the pri mary efficacy endpoint will be performed for patients whose eligible 
culture is >48 hours from the first dose of study drug, as well  as for all patients with and without 
evidence of non-susceptibilit y to colistin and ETX2514SUL at ba seline. 
The CE Population will include pa tients who meet m-MITT criteri a and meet evaluab ility criteria 
(meet key inclusion criteria, do not have key exclusion criteri a, received at least 72 hours of study 
drug [ie, 12 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 12 doses of imipenem/cila st
 atin or 6 doses of colistin plus 
12 doses of imipenem/cilastatin in patients without dose adjust ments] to be a clinical cure, received 
at least 48 hours of study drug [ie, 8 doses of ETX2514SUL plus  8 doses of imipenem/cilastatin 
or 4 doses of colistin plus 8 doses of imipenem/cilastatin in p atients without dose adjustments] to 
be a clinical failure, received 80% of anticipated doses, and did not have a clinical response of 
indeterminate at the TOC Visit). 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 94The ME Population will include pa tients who meet m-MITT criteri a and CE criteria and have an 
appropriately collected culture s pecimen and interpretable cult ure result when specimen collection 
is clinically indicated at the TOC Visit. 
The CRABC ME Population will incl ude patients who meet ME criteria and who have a baseline 
ABC organism that is confirmed to be carbapenem-resistant (and susceptible to ETX2514SUL for 
Parts A and B and susceptib le to colistin for Part A). 
The PK Population will include patients who receive any amount of study drug and have evaluable 
PK data. 
9.2 Statistical Methods 
Continuous variables will be summarized using the number of non -missing observations, 
arithmetic mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maxim um values as descriptive 
statistics. Categorical variables  will be summarized by using the frequency count and the 
percentage of patients in each c ategory as descriptive statisti cs.  
All comparisons in Part A will be for ETX2514SUL plus imipenem/ cilastatin versus colistin plus 
imipenem/cilastatin. The efficacy endpoints for Part B will be summarized descriptively only and 
will be used to supplement results in Part A. Listings of indiv idual patient data will be produced. 
A complete analysis of efficacy and safety data will be perform ed and detailed in the SAP.  
9.2.1 Patient Population and Characteristics 
The number of patients randomize d, treated, completed, and disc ontinued early from the study and 
the reasons for discontinuation will be summarized descriptively. In addition, reasons leading to 
study discontinuation will be su mmarized for each treatment gro up. The number and percentage 
of randomized patients included i n each analysis population will also be presented. 
Summary statistics will be provided by treatment group for demo graphics (eg, age, gender, race, 
and ethnicity) and for bas eline characteristics. 
9.2.2 Analysis of Efficacy 
9.2.2.1 Primary efficacy analysis 
The primary efficacy endpoint for  the study is 28 -day all-cause mortality in the CRABC m-MITT 
Population in Part A. Patients in the CRABC m-MITT Population who discontinue study drug 
prematurely in Part A for any reason will be included in the as sessment of 28-day all-cause 
mortality, provided consent  has not been withdrawn.  
A sensitivity analysis for th e primary efficacy endpoint will be performed for patients whose 
eligible culture is >48 hours fr om the first dose of study drug , as well as for all  patients with and 
without evidence of non-susceptibility to colistin and ETX2514S UL at baseline. Details of the 
sensitivity analysis will be described in the SAP. 
The non-inferiority assessment will be based on the 2-sided 95%  confidence intervals (CIs) for the 
difference ([ETX2514SUL + imipene m/cilastatin] – [colistin + im ipenem/cilastatin]) in 28-day 
all-cause mortality rates between the treatment groups. Non-inf eriority will be concluded if the 
upper limit of the 2-sided 95% CI is less than +20%. 
If non-inferiority is achieved, a test of superiority will be p erformed. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 95The analysis of the primary efficacy endpoint 28-day all-cause mortality will also be performed in 
the ITT Population. 
9.2.2.2 Secondary efficacy analysis 
The number and percentage of pa tients in each response category  for the secondary efficacy 
endpoints will be summarized by treatment group for the populat ions defined earlier. Two-sided 
9 5 %  C I s  f o r  t h e  d i f f e r e n c e  i n  o u t c o m e  r a t e s  b e t w e e n  t h e  t r e a t m e nt groups in Part A will be 
provided.  Part B data will be analyzed sep arately from Part A using descriptive statistics. 
Further subgroup analyses will be conducted, and details of the  analysis will be described in the 
SAP. 9.2.2.3 Exploratory efficacy analysis 
Exploratory endpoint analysis will  be described in the SAP. Exp loratory endpoints for health 
resource utilization difference between treatment groups (such as length of ventilation, intensive 
care unit stay, hospitalization, additional antibiotic use, etc ) will be reported separately. Efficacy 
analysis for patients with HABP/VABP/VP who are identified as positive for ABC by BPP 
molecular methodology will be explored. 
9.2.3 Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
Descriptive statistics will be provided for PK concentration da ta and PK parameters. All PK 
analyses will be performed using the PK Population. 
Intense pharmacokinetic group:  
Pharmacokinetic samples will be obtained from the first approxi mately 30 patients randomized in 
Part A on a schedule detailed in  Section 7.9. The PK samples will be collected for both treatment 
groups in Part A to keep the study data blinded. The PK samples  obtained from the ETX2514SUL 
group will be analyzed for ETX2514 and sulbactam concentrations  using a validated assay by a 
central bioanalytical laborator y. Pharmacokinetic assessment of  the initial 15 patients on 
ETX2514SUL in Part A will be performed by an independent PK ass essor, prior to the opening of 
enrollment in Part B. The independent PK assessor will conduct sequential PK analysis from 
patients as they are enrolled. An initial aggregate assessment of PK parameters will be done after 
enrollment of the first 8 HABP/VABP/VP patients randomized to E TX2514SUL. The independent 
PK assessor will report results to the DSMB, relative to concen trations projected in the population 
PK model, once data from all 15 patients on ETX2514SUL is avail able. However, if the 
preliminary analysis of the first 8 patients with HABP/VABP/VP on ETX2514SUL reveals 
evidence of inadequate exposure th is will be escalated to the D SMB. 
China Mainland intense pharmacokinetic group: 
The intense PK sampling will also be performed on the first app roximately 20 patients randomized 
in Part A from China Mainland sites. The PK samples obtained from patients who have received 
the ETX2514SUL treatment will be analyzed for ETX2514 and sulba ctam concentrations, which 
will be applied to build the populat ion PK model combined with data from the sparse PK group. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 96Sparse pharmacokinetic group: 
All other patients enrolled in the study (Parts A and B) will h ave a sparse PK sampling, which will 
be used to better inform the population PK model. 
Analysis of the PK data and i ncorporation into the population PK analysis and PK/PD model will 
be described in a separ ate PK Analysis Plan. 
9.2.4 Analysis of Safety 
All patients who receive any amount of study drug (MITT Population) will be included in the 
safety analyses. Patients who received the wrong study drug for their entire course of treatment will be analyzed in the gr oup based on the drug received. 
A primary analysis of safety will be performed for Part A to as sess the proportion of patients with 
nephrotoxicity, as measured by t he RIFLE criteria based on the Safety and CE Populations. 
Overall safety will be assessed for Part A and Part B in the Sa fety Population. The number and 
percentage of patients in each t reatment group reporting at lea st 1 occurrence of a TEAE for each 
unique system organ class and pref erred term will be tabulated.  A TEAE is defined as an adverse 
event occurring on or after the a dministration of the first dose of study drug. Treatment-emergent 
adverse events will also be tabulated by treatment group, sever ity, and the relationship to study 
drug as assessed by the Investigator. The number and percentage of patients in each treatment group reporting at lea st 1 occurrence of a t reatment-emergent S AE will be tabulated. The number 
and percentage of patients (in ea ch treatment group) prematurel y discontinuing study drug 
treatment due to a TEAE will be tabulated by system organ class and preferred term. Adverse events of special interest in P art A will be summarized for all  patients by treatment. 
Safety laboratory data will be pr esented by descriptive statist ics of the post-baseline value and the 
change from baseline, as well as the number and percentage of p atients with potentially clinically 
significant laboratory values. De scriptive statistics of vital signs and ECG parameters and the 
change from baseline will also be presented. An outlier analysis of the ECG parameters will be conducted. 
9.2.5 Sample Size Determination 
Patients will be enrolled until there are 120 patients in the C RABC m-MITT Population in Part A. 
The study will have 80% power to demonstrate non-inferiority be tween Group 1 and Group 2 
using a 20% non-inferiority margin and a 2-sided 95% CI. This assumes a mortality rate in the 
comparator group (Group 2) of 41% and in the ETX2514SUL group (Group 1) of 36%. To have 120 patients in the CRABC m-MITT Population, Part A will need t o enroll approximately 
200 patients, assuming 60% of ABC c linical isolates are carbape nem-resistant. Patient enrollment 
in Part B (Group 3) will continue  until Part A enrollment in th e CRABC m-MITT Population is 
complete. Rates of carbapenem resistance among isolates from Pa rt A patients will be monitored 
by the unblinded data manager/designee at the Clinical Research  Organization on an ongoing 
basis.  
Table 7 demonstrates the mortal ity rates in the ETX2514SUL plus  imipenem/cilastatin treatment 
group required to demonstrate non- inferiority or superiority with no less than 80% power in the 
CRABC m-MITT Population relative t o various 28-day all-cause mo rtality rates in the colistin 
plus imipenem/c ilastatin treat ment group, given 120 patients in  the CRABC m-MITT Population. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 97The sample size of 120 patients in the CRABC m-MITT Population was calculated based on a 
41% mortality rate in the colistin plus imipenem/cilastatin tre atment group. 
Table 7. 28-Day All-Cause Mortality Rates in the CRABC m-MITT P opulation Required 
to Demonstrate Non-Inferiority and Superiority 
ETX2514SUL+IMI Colistin+IMI 95% CI for Treatment 
Difference [1] Power Test 
39% 45% (-0.24, 0.12) 82% Demonstrate NI
21% 45% (-0.40, -0.08) 80% Demonstrate superiorit y
35% 40% (-0.22, 0.12) 80% Demonstrate NI
17% 40% (-0.39, -0.07) 80% Demonstrate superiorit y
30% 35% (-0.22, 0.12) 83% Demonstrate NI
13% 35% (-0.37, -0.07) 81% Demonstrate superiorit y
26% 30% (-0.20, 0.12) 83% Demonstrate NI
9% 30% (-0.35, -0.07) 83% Demonstrate superiorit y
1. 95% CIs for treatment differenc e ([ETX2514SUL + IMI] – [colistin + IMI]) were calculated using a normal 
approximation to the bi nomial distribution. 
CI = confidence interval; CRABC = Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; 
ETX2514SUL = sulbactam-ETX2514; IMI = imipenem/ci lastatin; m-MITT = Microbiologically M odified Intent-to-Treat; 
NI = non-inferiorit y. 
9.3 Data Safety Monitoring Board 
An independent DSMB will review the safety data periodically. T he DSMB will also review SAEs 
and deaths on an ongoing basis. They will make recommendations to the Sponsor based on the 
safety data. The PK assessment report of data from the initial cohort of patients in Part A from the 
independent PK assessor will be submitted to the DSMB for its a pproval of continued enrollment 
and initiation of Part B. Further  details regarding the DSMB gu idelines will be described in the 
DSMB Charter. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 9810 DATA MANAGEMENT AND RECORD KEEPING 
10.1 Data Management 
10.1.1 Data Handling 
Data will be recorded at the site on eCRFs and reviewed by the CRA during monitoring visits. The 
CRAs will verify data recorded in the EDC system with source do cuments. All corrections or 
changes made to any study data m ust be appropriately tracked in an audit trail in the EDC system. 
An eCRF will be considered complete when all missing, incorrect , and/or inconsistent data have 
been accounted for. 
10.1.2 Computer Systems 
Data will be processed using a validated computer system confor ming to regulatory requirements. 
10.1.3 Data Entry 
Data must be recorded using the EDC system as the study is in p rogress. All site personnel must 
log into the system using their secure user name and password i n order to enter, review, or correct 
study data. These procedures must comply with Title 21 of the U S Code of Federal Regulations 
(21 CFR Part 11) and other appr opriate international regulation s. All passwords will be strictly 
confidential. 10.1.4 Medical Information Coding 
For medical information, the following thesauri will be used: 
 MedDRA (latest) for medical h istory and adverse events; and 
 WHO Drug Dictionary for prior and concomitant medications. 
10.1.5 Data Validation 
Validation checks programmed within the EDC system, as well as supplemental validation 
performed via review of the downloaded data, will be applied to  t h e  d a t a  i n  o r d e r  t o  e n s u r e  
accurate, consistent, and reliable data. Data identified as err oneous, or data that are missing, will 
be referred to the investigativ e site for resolution through da ta queries. 
The eCRFs must be reviewed and e lectronically signed by the Inv estigator. 
10.2 Record Keeping 
Records of patients, source documents, monitoring visit logs, eCRFs, inventory of study product, regulatory documents, and other Sponsor correspondence pertaini ng to the study must be kept in 
the appropriate study files at the site. Source data is defined  as all information in original records 
and certified copies of original  records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a 
clinical study necessary for the  evaluation and reconstruction of the clinical study. Source data are 
contained in source documents (original records or certified co pies). These records will be retained 
in a secure file for the period as set forth in the Clinical St udy Agreement. Prior to transfer or 
destruction of these records, th e Sponsor must be  notified in w riting and be given the opportunity 
to further store such records.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 9911 INVESTIGATOR REQUIREMENT S AND QUALITY CONTROL  
11.1 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
Good Clinical Practice is an international ethical and scientif ic quality standard for designing, 
conducting, recording, and reporti ng studies that involve human  subjects. Compliance with this 
standard provides public assurance that the  rights, safety, and wellbeing of study patients are 
protected, consistent with the pri nciples that have their origi n in the Declaration of Helsinki, and 
that the clinical st udy data are credible. 
11.2 Institutional Review Board/I ndependent Ethics Committee 
It is the responsibil ity of the Sponsor or their designee (ie, Medpace) to obtain the approval of the 
responsible ethics committees a ccording to the national regulat ions.  
The study will only start in the respective sites once the resp ective committee’s written approval 
has been given. 
11.3 Informed Consent 
The ICF and any changes to the ICF made during the course of th e study must be agreed to by the 
Sponsor or designee and the Institutional Review Board (IRB) pr ior to its use an d must be in 
compliance with all International Council for Harmonisation (IC H) GCP, local regulatory 
requirements, and legal requirements.   
The Investigator must ensure that each study patient is fully informed about the nature and 
objectives of the study and possibl e risks associated with part icipation and must  ensure that the 
patient has been informed of his/her rights to privacy. An ICF of limited scope may be signed prior 
to Screening to perform only BPP rapid testing of respiratory s pecimens. A comprehensive ICF, 
which will include all study procedures, will be signed at Scre ening. The Investigator will obtain 
written informed consent from each patient before any study-spe cific activity is performed and 
should document in the source documentation that consent was ob tained prior to enrollment in the 
study. Patients will participate as much as possible in the inf ormed consent procedure; however, 
as permitted by local law and in stitutional Standard Operating Procedures, in cases of a lack of 
decision-making capacity, informed consent on behalf of the pat ient may be provided by a legally 
authorized representative, independent physician, or consortium  of independent physicians. These 
patients, upon return of their capacity, will be consented and allowed to make their own informed 
medical decisions.  
The original signed copy of the ICF must be maintained by the I nvestigator and is subject to 
inspection by a representative of the Sponsor, their representatives, auditors, the IRB, and/or 
regulatory agencies. A copy of the  signed ICF will be given to the patient. 
11.4 Patient Card  
On enrollment in the study, the patient will receive a patient card to be carried at all times. The 
patient card will state that the patient is participating in a clinical research study, type of treatment, 
and contact details in case of an SAE. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10011.5 Study Monitoring Requirements 
It is the responsibility of the Investigator to ensure that the  study is conducted in  accordance with 
the protocol, ICH GCP, Directive 2001/20/EC, applicable regulat ory requirements, and the 
Declaration of Helsinki, and tha t valid data are entered into t he eCRFs. 
To achieve this objective, the monitor’s duties are to aid the Investigator and, at  the same time, the 
Sponsor in the maintenance of complete, legible, well organized , and easily retrievable data. 
Before the enrollment of any patient in this study, the Sponsor  or their designee will review with 
the Investigator and site personnel the following documents: protocol, Investigator’s Brochure, 
eCRFs and procedures for their c ompletion, informed consent pro cess, and the procedure for 
reporting SAEs. 
The Investigator will permit the Sponsor or their designee to m onitor the study as frequently as 
deemed necessary to determine that data recording and protocol adherence are satisfactory. During 
the monitoring visits, information recorded on the eCRFs will b e verified against source 
documents and requests for clari fication or correction may be m ade. After the eCRF data are 
entered by the site, the CRA will review the data for safety in formation, completeness, accuracy, 
and logical consistency. Computer  programs that identify data i nconsistencies may be used to help 
monitor the clinical study. If necessary, requests for clarific ation or correction will be sent to 
Investigators. The Investigator and his/her staff will be expec ted to cooperate with the monitor and 
provide any missing informa tion, whenever possible. 
All monitoring activities will be reported and archived. In addition, monitoring visits will be 
documented at the investigati onal site by signature and date on  the study-specifi c monitoring log. 
11.6 Disclosure of Data 
Data generated by this study must be available for inspection b y the FDA, the Sponsor or their 
designee, applicable foreign health authorities, and the IRB as  appropriate. Patients or their legal 
representatives may request their medical information be given to their personal physician or other 
appropriate medical personnel resp onsible for th eir welfare. 
Patient medical information obt ained during the study is confid ential and disclosure to third parties 
other than those noted above is prohibited. 
11.7 Retention of Records 
To enable evaluations and/or audits from regulatory authorities or the Sponsor, the Investigator 
will keep records, including the identity of all participating patients (sufficient information to link records, eg, eCRFs and hospital re cords), all original signed I CFs, copies of all eCRFs, SAE forms, 
source documents, and detailed records of treatment disposition . The records should be retained 
by the Investigator according to  specifications in the ICH guidelines, local regulations, or as 
specified in the Clinical Study Agreement, whichever is longer.  The Investigator must obtain 
written permission from the Sponsor  before disposing of any rec ords, even if retention 
requirements have been met. 
If the Investigator relocates, re tires, or for any reason withd raws from the study, the Sponsor should 
be prospectively notified. The study records must be transferre d to an acceptable designee, such 
as another Investigator, anothe r institution, or to the Sponsor .   
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10111.8 Publication Policy 
Following completion of the study, the data may be considered f or publication in a scientific 
journal or for reporting at a scientific meeting. Each Investig ator is obligated to keep data 
pertaining to the study confiden tial. The Investigator must con sult with the Sponsor before any 
study data are submitted for publication. The Sponsor reserves the right to deny publication rights 
until mutual agreement on the content, format, interpretation o f data in the manuscript, and journal 
selected for publication are achieved. 
11.9 Financial Disclosure 
Investigators are required to provide finan cial disclosure info rmation to the Sponsor to permit the 
Sponsor to fulfill its obligations under 21 CFR Part 54. In add ition, Investigators must commit to 
promptly updating this information if any relevant changes occu r during the study and for a period 
of 1 year after the completion of the study. 11.10 Insurance and Indemnity 
In accordance with the relevant national regulations, the Spons or has taken out patient liability 
insurance for all patients who gi ve their consent to the clinic al study. This cover is designed for 
the event that a fatality, physi cal injury, or damage to health  occurs during the clinical study’s 
execution. 11.11 Legal Aspects 
The clinical study will be submitted to the relevant national c ompetent authorities in all 
participating countries to achieve  a clinical trial authorization (CTA). 
The study will commence (ie, initiation of study centers) when the CTA and favorable Ethics 
opinion have been received.  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10212 STUDY ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 
12.1 Protocol Amendments 
Any amendments to the study protocol will be communicated to th e Investigators by Medpace or 
the Sponsor. All protocol amendments will undergo the same revi ew and approval process as the 
original protocol. A protocol amendment may be implemented afte r it has been approved by the 
IRB, unless immediate implement ation of the change is necessary  for patient safety. In this case, 
the situation must be documented  and reported to the IRB within  5 working days. 
12.2 End of Study 
End of Study in this study is defined as the last visit or last study-related contact (whichever comes 
last) of the last  patient worldwide. 
12.3 Address List 
12.3.1 Sponsor 
Entasis Therapeutics Gatehouse Park BioHub 35 Gatehouse Drive Waltham, MA 02451 United States Telephone: +1-781-810-0120 Fax: +1-781-810-0122 
12.3.2 Contract Research Organization 
Medpace, Inc.  
5375 Medpace Way 
Cincinnati, OH 45227 
United States Telephone: +1-513-579-9911 
Fax: +1-513-579-0444 
12.3.3 Serious Adverse Event Reporting 
Medpace Clinical Safety – US and Latin America 
5375 Medpace Way 
Cincinnati, OH 45227 United States 
Telephone: +1-800-730-5779, ext. 12999 or +1-513-579-9911, ext. 12999 
Fax: +1-866-336-5320 or +1-513-579-0444 E-mail: medpace-safetynotification@medpace.com  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 103Medpace Clinical Safety – Rest of World 
Wallace House 17-21 Maxwell Place Stirling FK8 1JU United Kingdom Telephone: +49 89 89 55 718 44 Fax: +49 89 89 55 718 104 E-mail: medpace-safetynotification@medpace.com 
12.3.4 Biological Specimens 
Medpace Reference Laboratories, LLC 
5365 Medpace Way Cincinnati, OH 45227 United States Telephone: +1-513-366-3270 Fax: +1-513-366-3273  International Health Management Associates, Inc. 2122 Palmer Drive Schaumburg, IL 60173 United States Telephone: +1-847-303-5003 Fax: +1-847-303-5601 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10413 REFERENCES 
1.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antibiotic Resi stance Threats in the United 
States, 2013. 2013. 
2.  World Health Organization. Globa l priority lis t of antibiotic-resistant bacteria to guide 
research, discovery, and devel opment of new antibiotics. 2017. 
3. Sievert DM, Ricks P, Edwards J R, et al. Antimicrobial-resistant pathogens associated 
with healthcare-associated infec tions: summary of data reported  to the National 
Healthcare Safety Network at the Centers for Disease Control an d Prevention, 
2009-2010. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol . 2013;34(1):1-14. 
4. Stewart T, Dorfman K. Hospita l-treated Gram-negative infecti ons. Decision Resources 
Group. 2015. 
5. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Summary of the latest data on 
antibiotic resistance in the European Union. 2016. 
6. Spellberg B, Bonomo RA. Combina tion therapy for extreme drug -resistant (XDR) 
Acinetobacter  baumannii : ready for prime-time? Crit Care Med . 2015;43(6):1332-1334. 
7. Cheng A, Chuang YC, Sun HY, et al. Excess mortality associat ed with 
colistin-tigecycline compared with colistin-carbapenem combinat ion therapy for 
extensively drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii  bacteremia: a multicenter prospective 
observational study. Crit Care Med . 2015;43(6):1194-1204. 
8. Peleg AY, Seifert H, Paterson DL. Acinetobacter baumannii: emergence of a successful 
pathogen. Clin Microbiol Rev . 2008;21(3):538-582. 
9. Doi Y, Murray GL, Peleg AY. Acinetobacter baumannii: evolution of antimicrobial 
resistance – treatment options. Semin Respir Crit Care Med . 2015;36(1):85-98. 
10. Gonzalez-Villoria AM, Valv erde-Garduno V. Antibiotic-resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii  increasing success remains a ch allenge as a nosocomial pathoge n. J Pathog . 
2016:7318075. 
11. Magiorakos AP, Srinivasan A, Carey RB, et al. Multidrug-res istant, extensively 
drug-resistant and pandrug-resistan t bacteria: an international  expert proposal for interim 
standard definitions for  acquired resistance. Clin Microbiol Infect . 2012;18(3):268-281. 
12. Penwell WF, Shapiro AB, Giac obbe RA, et al. Molecular mechanisms of sulbactam 
antibacterial activity and resistance determinants in Acinetobacter baumannii . Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother . 2015;59(3):1680-1689. 
13. Zusman O, Avni T, Leibovici L, e t al. Systematic review and  meta-analysis of in vitro 
synergy of polymyxins and carbapenems. Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 
2013;57(10):5104-5111. 
14. 
Paul M, Daikos GL, Durante-M angoni E, et al. Colistin alone  versus colistin plus 
meropenem for treatment of severe infections caused by carbapen em-resistant 
Gram-negative bacteria: an open-label, randomised controlled tr ial. Lancet Infect Dis . 
2018;18(4):391-400. 
15. UNASYN® ampicillin sodium and s ulbactam sodium injection, powder, for solution 
[package insert]. New York, NY . Pfizer, Inc. Revised June 2018.  
http://labeling.pfizer.com /ShowLabeling.aspx?id=617. 
16. Nation RL, Garonzik SM, Tha mlikitkul V, et al. Dosing guida nce for intravenous colistin 
in critically-ill patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(5):565-571.  
17. Trotman RL, Williamson JC, S hoemaker DM, et al. Antibiotic dosing in critically ill 
adult patients receiving continuous  renal replacement therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 
2005;41(8):1159-1166. 
  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 105 
18. Hartzell JD, Neff R, Ake J, et al. Nephrotoxicity associated with intravenous colistin 
(colistimethate sodium) treatment at a tertiary care medical ce nter. Clin Infect Dis . 
2009;48(12):1724-1728. 
19.  Food and Drug Administration. G uidance for industry drug-i nduced liver injury: 
premarketing clini cal evaluation. 2009. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 106APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF P ROCEDURES (PARTS A & B) 
Procedure [1] Screening Treatment Period TOC LFU 
ET [6] -48 Hours 
to Day 1 
[2] Day 1 Day 
2 Day 
3 Day 
4 Day 
5 Day 
6 Day 
7 [3] Days 8 
to 14 
[3] EOT 
(+1 day) 
[3,4] EOT 
+7 (2) 
Days [5] EOT +14 
(2) 
Days and 
Day 28 
[5] 
Informed consen t [7] X  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria X  
Medical/sur gical histor y X  
P r i o r / c o n c o m i t a n t  m e d i c a t i o n s  X  [ 8] X XXXXXX  X X X X X
Demo graphics [9] X  
Complete physical examination 
[10] X X X X X X
Limited ph ysical examination [10] X X X  X X X
Vital si gn s  [ 1 1 ]  X X XXXXXX  X X X X X
Chest X-ray, MRI, CT scan, or ultrasound [12] X  X 
Assess clinical si gns/sym p t o m s  X X XXXXXX  X X X X X
Assess clinical outcome [13,14] X X X X [13] X [13] X
Rapid dia gnostic test [15] X  
APACHE II, SOFA, or qSOFA score [16] X [17] X   
Randomization [18] X  
Pregnanc y test [19] X  X X
Serum chemistr y [20] X X [ 25] XX 
[ 22 ] X  XX XX
S e r u m  c r e a t i n i n e  [2 1 ]   X X [ 2 5 ] XXXXXX  X X X X X
Hematolo gy [20,23] X X [25] X X X X X X X
Urinal ysis [20,24 ] X X [25] X X X X X X X
12-lead ECG [26] X X [27] X [27]  X X
Blood cultures [28] X X [25] XXXXXX  X X X X X
Infection site-specific cultures [29] X [30] X X X X X X
Administer stud y drug [3 1 ]  X XXXXXX  X X
A s s e s s m e n t  o f  a d v e r s e  e v e n t s  [3 2 ]  X X XXXXXX  X X X X X
PK samples [33] X X  
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 1071. All the procedures for Part B will be the same as Part A, unles s otherwise specified. 
2. Screening can occur up to 48 hour s before the first dose of stu dy drug. All Screening procedures  must be performed prior to ra ndomization and the first dose of study drug 
(Day 1). All Screening laborator ies will be performed at the lo cal laboratory and may have been collected as standard of care within 48 hours prior to randomization, with 
the exception of serum creatinine determination, which must be obtained at the local laboratory within 24 hours before the fir st dose of study drug. 
3. Day 7 to Day 14 study procedures  are only required if the patient receives IV study drug treatme nt on Day 7 to Day 14. If EOT has already occurred, s tudy procedures are 
not required to be performed. 
4. Patients will be treated for 28 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses of imipenem/cilastatin or 14 doses of colistin plus 28 doses  of imipenem/cilastatin (ie, 7 days for those 
without dose adjustments), with a  prolongation of therapy up to  14 days if clinically  indicated. If EOT occurs on Day 7, Day 7  study procedures may be considered the 
EOT Visit study procedures. If EOT occurs after Day 7, the EOT Visit activities should be complet ed within 24 hours after the last dose of study drug.  
5. The TOC Visit must occur 7 days ( 2 days) after the EOT for all patients. The LFU Visit must occu r 14 days ( 2 days) after the EOT for all patients. The LFU Visit 
should be performed as an in-pers on visit; however, if the pati ent is unable to attend the LFU Visit at the site, the patient may be contacted by telephone call for 
follow-up assessment of concomit ant medications, clinical signs  and symptoms, and adverse events.  All patients who are alive and have not withdrawn consent 
for participation in the study must be contacted at Day 28 or a nytime thereafter to assess survi val if their LFU Visit is prio r to Day 28. 
6. For patients who are w ithdrawn from the study prior to completi on of study drug or discontinue study drug prematurely, complet e an ET Visit at the time of study 
withdrawal or study drug disconti nuation. Patients who disconti nue study drug prematurely but a re not withdrawn from the study  should complete TOC  and LFU Visits. 
For patients who are withdrawn from the study after the EOT Vis it but prior to completion of the  study, complete the next sche duled visit (either the TOC Visit or LFU 
Visit) at the time of study withdrawal. 
7. Informed consent must be obtaine d before any study procedures a re performed. An ICF of limited s cope may be signed prior to Sc reening to perform only BPP rapid 
testing of respiratory specimens . A comprehensive ICF, which wi ll include all study procedures , will be signed at Screening. 
8. Reas onable effort will b e made to determine all relevant treatm ents (including all antibiotics, prescription and non-prescript ion medications, herbal  medications, vitamin 
supplements, supportive therapie s, and non-pharmacologic treatm ents) received within 14 days bef ore the first dose of study drug and during the study. 
9. Demographic data will be collected, includi ng sex, age, race, and ethnicity. 
10. The Screening complete physical  examination includes weight and  height. A limited, s ymptom-based physical  examination will be performed at the indicated visits. If a 
patient does not display sympt oms, no limited physical examinat ion needs to be performed. 
11. Vital signs include blood pressu re, heart rate, and respiratory  rate, and, for vent ilated patients, oxygen therapy and respira tory settings including FiO 2 and PEEP. 
12. For patients with HABP, VABP, or VP only. A chest X-ray, MRI, C T scan, or ultrasound done within 72 hours of Screening is acce ptable. For images obtained 48 hours 
prior to randomization, repeat im aging is required. Note: If an  ultrasound is performed, a confirmatory X-ray or CT scan must be performed within 24 hours. Findings 
should be consistent w ith the screening imag e and diagnosis of pneumonia, in the Investigator’s  judgment; otherwise, the patie nt is no longer eligible. 
13. If a patient is a clinical failure at EOT, the patient is autom atically considered a failure a t the TOC and LFU Visits, and the assessment of clin ical response by the 
Investigator should be listed as “failure at EOT or TOC.”  
14. In Part A, all clinical outcome assessments will be performed b y a blinded assessor, in addition to the unblinded Investigator . 
15. A respiratory specimen for BPP rapid diagnostic testing should only be collected for patients suspected to have HABP, VABP, or  VP. 
16. An APACHE II or SOFA score will be calculated at Screening and prior to randomization for patien ts in Part A only. For patient s who are not being treated in an intensive 
care unit and cannot have an APACHE II or SOFA score performed,  and for all patients in Part B,  a qSOFA score should be calcul ated. 
17. An APACHE II, SOFA, or qSOFA score that was calculated as stand ard of care within 24 hours of Screening may be used and does n ot need to be repeated at Screening.   
18. Via IRT. 
19. A highly sensitive urine or serum  pregnancy test will be perfor med at Screening, EOT Visit, and ET Visit for women of childbea ring potential. 
20. Screening laboratories will be performed by the local laborator y within 48 hours of randomization. Subsequent laboratory samples will be collected, processed, and sent to 
the central laboratory for analysis. 
21. While the patient is receiving study drug, serum creatinine wil l be collected daily and analyzed at the local laboratory to as sess the need for dose adjustments. Screening 
serum creatinine will be collected at the local laboratory with in 24 hours before the fir st dose of study drug. 
22. The Day 5 safety chemistry panel will be performed at the local  laboratory and sent to the central laboratory. 
23. Hematology includes complete bl ood count (with red blood cell count, total white blood cell coun t with differential counts, pl atelet count, hemoglobin, and hematocrit).  
24. Urinalysis includes urine dipsti ck analysis for leukocytes, nit rites, or a catalase test of the urine specimen, microscopic ev aluation, specific gravity, and pH. 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 10825. Predose. 
26. The 12-lead ECGs will be performed after the end of infusion, e xcept for at Screening, and all 12-lead ECGs will be performed after the patient has been in a supine 
position for at least 10 minutes. Consult th e Medical Monitor a nd local cardiologist  in cases of clinically significant abnorm al findings (eg, a QTcF  480 msec). 
27. The 12-lead ECG will be performed for all patients at the end o f the first infusion of study d rug on Day 1. If clinically indi cated, the 12-lead ECGs will be repeated as 
close as possible following the end of the infusion of study dr ug administration on the day on which post-dose PK samples are drawn (Day 3, Day 4, or Day 5). The day on 
which the post-dose PK samples are drawn is at the discretion o f the Investigator.  
28. Two sets of samples from 2 separate venipuncture sites are requ ired for blood cultur es in all pati ents. Each set  of blood cult ure samples will be collected from a separate 
venipuncture site and will consis t of 1 aerobic and 1 anaerobic  blood culture bottle (an additional aerobic bottle is allowed if an anaerobic culture is not standard practice at 
the site). If Screening/baselin e blood cultures are positive fo r ABC, repeat blood cultures s hould be obtained daily until neg ative or the patient is a treatment failure. To 
avoid unnecessary blood draws, the Investigator may wait until the result of the prior blood c ulture is known be fore performing the next blood culture. 
29. After screening, collect samples only as clinically indicated. To assess the primary indication and follow-up of the presentin g indication, all specimens will be sent to the 
local laboratory for culture and susceptibility testing per institutional standards. Pure cultu res of isolated pathogens will be shipped from the local laboratory to the central 
laboratory for confirmation of s pecies identification, suscepti bility testing, and possible mo lecular characterization.  
30. If the screening sample for cultu re that is growing ABC is take n per standard of care before the patient or patient’s legally authorized representative signs informed 
consent, that isolate may be used for baseline eligibility and sent to the central laboratory on ce consent is obtained, as lon g as the sample was co llected within 72 hours 
prior to randomization. Additional samples for baseline culture  should be collected again within 24 hours prior to randomizati on, at the specified time points and if 
clinically indicated.  
31. All patients will receive IV tr eatment for a minimum of 28 doses of ETX2514SUL plus 28 doses of imipenem/cilastatin or 14 dose s of colistin plus 28 doses of 
imipenem/cilastatin (ie, 7 days fo r those without dose adjustme nts), as described in the protoco l. For patients with normal re nal function, study drug infusions will be 
administered q6h ( 15 minutes) for ETX2514SUL and imipenem/cilastatin and q12h ( 15 minu tes) for colistin. 
32. Adverse events should be captured as describ ed in the protocol.  
33. Intense PK samples will be collected for the first approximatel y 30 patients randomized in Part  A, after the patient received at least 2 infusions on Da y 1, at the end of the 
infusion after the infusion pump is turned off (+15 minutes), 1 .5 hours ( 15 minutes) after the end of the  infusion, and immediately prio r to the start of the next infusion, 
and on Day 4 ( 1 day) at the end of the infusi on after the infusion pump is tu rned off (+15 minutes), and immediately prior to the start of t he next infusion. Sparse PK 
samples will be collected for all other patients enrolled in th e study (Parts A and B) immediate ly prior to the start of the n ext infusion on Day 1 and Day 4 ( 1 day). The 
patient should have received at  least 2 infusions before this s chedule is implemented. In addition, the intense PK sampling wi ll also be performed on the first 
approximately 20 patients randomized from China Mainland sites in Part A, following the same  procedure as described above. 
ABC = Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus  complex; APACHE = Acute Physiol ogic Assessment a nd Chronic Hea lth Evaluation; BPP = Biofire FilmArray 2.0 
Pneumonia Panel; CT = computed t omography; ECG = electrocardiog ram; EOT = End of Tre atment; ET = Early Te rmination; ETX2514SUL  = sulbactam-ETX2514; 
FiO 2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; HABP = hospital-acquired bacter ial pneumonia; ICF = informed c onsent form; IRT = interactive r esponse technology; IV = intravenous; 
LFU = Late Follow-up; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PEEP = positive end-expiratory pressure ; PK = pharmacoki netic; q6h = e very 6 hours; q12h = every 12 hours; 
qSOFA = quick Sequent ial Organ Failure Assessment; QTcF = QT in terval corrected using Friderici a’s formula; SOFA = Sequential Organ Failure Assessment; TOC = Test of 
Cure; VABP = ventilato r-associated bacterial pneumonia; VP = ventilated pneumonia. 
 
Entasis Therapeutics 
Clinical Study Protocol CS2514-2017-0004 
Confidential & Proprietary  
Version 4.0, 17 December 2020 109APPENDIX B: CENTRA L CLINICAL LABOR ATORY ANALYTES 
Standard Safety Chemistry Panel 
Alanine aminotransferase Albumi n
Alkaline phosphatase Amylase
Aspartate aminotra nsferase Bicarbonate
Blood urea/Blood urea nitro gen Calcium
Chloride Creatine kinase
Creatinine Estimated glomerular filtration rate 
Gamma- glutam yl transferase Glucose
Inorganic phosphorus Lactate deh ydrogenase
Lipase Potassium
Sodium Total bilirubin
Total protein Uric aci d
 
Hematology  
Basophils EosinophilsHematocrit Hemo
globin
Lymphoc ytes Mean corpuscular hemo globin 
Mean corpuscular hemo globin concentratio n Mean corpuscular volume 
Monoc ytes Neutrophils
Platelet count Red blood cell count
White blood cell count and differential [1]
1. Manual microscopic review is pe rformed only if white blood cell  count 
and/or differential values  are out of reference ran ge.
 
Urinalysis  
Bilirubi n B lood
Catalase Glucose
Ketones Leukoc yte esterase
Microscopic evaluation [1] Nitrite
pH Protei n
Specific gravity Urobilino gen
1. Microscopic evaluation is perfo rmed only as needed based on pos itive 
dipstick test results. 
A highly sensitive urine or serum (beta human chorionic gonadot ropin) pregnancy test will be 
performed for female patients of  childbearing potential only. 
 
Screening Only All Screening laboratories will be performed at the local labor atory and may have been collected 
as standard of care w ithin 48 hours prior to  randomization, with the exception of serum creatinine 
determination, which must be obtained at the local laboratory w ithin 24 hours before the first dose 
of study drug. All other samples are to be sent to the central laboratory. The Day 5 safety chemistry 
panel will be performed at the local laboratory and sent to the  central laboratory. 