 
 
Date:  November 16, 2012 
 
 
Re:  Administrative Change for Protocol, Version Date 11/08/2011 
 
To: S
ites participating in the Medical Arm of the Interagency Registry for Mechanically 
Assisted Circulatory Support (MedaMACS) 
 
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
From:  Mary Lynne Clark 
 Regulatory Director 
 INTERMACS 
            mlclark@uab.edu 
 
The following administrative change impacts the MedaMACS Protocol, Version Date 11/8/2011. 
This letter must be submitted with your initial IRB submission. In the event you have already 
submitted the
 initial IRB application, please forward this letter to your Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) as soon as possible. IRB acknowledgment must be forwarded to the MedaMACS Data 
Coordinating Center.   
 
Please file this letter with all copies of the protocol.  Please file this letter and any  
IRB
 correspondence in your regulatory file and other pertinent files.   
 
List of Changes to the MedaMACS Protocol, Version Date 11/8/2011: 
 
 The following text, Section 2, Specific Aims, Aim 4 has been removed from 
the protocol: 
 
“To develop and advance a team of emerging clinical investigators who will increase 
awareness of mechanical circulatory support and serve as role models for other young 
investigators.    
 
Hypothesis: Focused mentorship of early career investigators will foster the next 
generation of leaders in the clinical care of patients with advanced heart disease. 
 
4.1.1 Junior investigators will take the lead in designing and analyzing research questions 
of their own with the mentorship of a more senior investigator at each clinical site.  
Prese
ntation of MedaMACS data at national meetings and manuscript development 
will be the responsibility of junior investigators.  A centralized publications 
committee with ensure equitable distribution of topics of interest so there is synergy 
across centers and appropriate extramural mentorship is available.   
 
4.1.2 Survey will be made among the young investigators for VAD-related publications, 
progression to independent research status, and affiliation to clinical VAD programs 
at 5 years after initiation of MedaMACS enrollment.” 
 

MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 2 MedaMACS continues to develop and advance a team of emerging clinical investigators to increase 
awareness of mechanical circulatory support and serve as role models for young investigators.  
However, we feel that this can best be addressed in a separate format and should not be included in 
the study protocol.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medical Arm of the Interagency 
Registry for Mechanically  
Assisted Circulatory Support 
(Medamacs) Study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 11/8/2011 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 3 1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Despite widespread use of evidence-based medical therapies, including neurohormonal 
blockers and biventricular pacing, mortality and morbidity from systolic heart failure remain high.1  
Breakthroughs in mechanical circulatory support technology have extended survival and improved 
quality in advanced heart failure patients awaiting cardiac transplantation and in inotrope-dependent 
patients who are ineligible for transplant.2-4  The INTERMACS Registry (Interagency Registry of 
Mecha
nical Assist Circulatory Support) has facilitated the refinement of patient selection for thi s 
therapy by analysis of those patients who have received devices5, 6   
Integral to the original intent of INTERMACS was comparison to ambulatory patients living 
with advance
d heart failure who were not currently receiving mechanical circulatory support 
devices. As the first years of INTERMACS were dominated by INTERMACS profiles 1-2 with 
medical survival of hours to weeks, comparison to outcomes for ambulatory patients without 
devices was initially of limited relevance. However, the lack of information on outcomes with 
continued medical therapy has limited the ability to define and advance indications in the “less 
sick” despite INTERMACS-documented progress that should attract ambulatory patients, who 
curre
ntly make up fewer than 20% of all patients receiving mechanical support.6  (Figure 1) 
The deve
lopment of a contemporary parallel population of ambulatory patients with heart 
failure is necessary in order to meet the commitment defined for INTERMACS at its inception in 
2005 and re-emphasized for the renewal beginning 2010, for INTERMACS to 1). Facilitate the 
refinement of
 patient selection to maximize outcomes with current devices within approved 
indications, and to 2). Guide and expedite clinical trials for new indications and/or new devices.   
This is true both for survival outcomes and for outcomes beyond survival, measured in terms of 
quality of life, functional capacity, and satisfaction with the chosen strategy of care.  
The future impact of mechanical circulatory support on public health will be experienced by 
ambulatory heart failure patients in whom support can be employed electively for long-term benefit 
with diminishing operative risk.  At present, the si ze and clinical characteristics of the population 
with a
dvanced ambulatory heart failure despite optimal contemporary medical therapy remain 
unknown since few suc
h patients have been enrolled in clinical trials.  Patients with less severe 
heart f
ailure can clearly identify thresholds for consideration of a ventric ular assist device, or 
VAD.7 A better understanding of this population and their unique priorities is vital in order to 
antic
ipate the optimal expansion of mechanical circulatory support in to the less critically ill 
population. 
These
 needs will be addressed in the Medical Arm for Mechanically Assisted Circulator y 
Support (MedaMACS) Pilot Study.  MedaMACS will characterize the types of patients who are not 
rece
iving an LVAD currently due to the intersection of relative contra-indications, to their own 
preferences, or to their characterization as “less sick” either by perception or by absolute criteria as 
currently defined for lifetime VAD support.  The nature of contemporary “optimal” medical therapy 
will be reported, and the major risk scores for heart failure will be calculated and challenged.  
MedaMACS will incorporate specific consideration of frailty as measured by gait speed, the 
proposed new “geriatric vital sign”.  In relation to the characteristics at baseline and over time, 
MedaMACS will provide information on medical outcomes in terms of timed endpoints of VAD, 
transpla
nt, or death.  There will also be determination of adverse events of stroke and 
hospitaliza
tions for comparison to those experienced after VAD.  Of equal weight will be the 
determi
nation of functional capacity, quality of life, and satisfaction with therapy.  For many 
ambulatory patients with chronic heart failure, the magnitude and predictability of expected 
improvement
 in functional status with a VAD will li kely influence their VAD decisions more than 
the margin of survival benefit. These are pivotal components of decision-making for advanced heart 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 4 failure in order to progress toward the 21st century goal of patient-centered care.  The MedaMACS 
program wil
l provide landmark data from which to refine selection for mechanical circulatory 
support from t
he ambulatory heart failure population within which the greatest benefit of 
mechanical support is anticipated.    
Since INTERMACS was originally conceived, penetration of this technology has advanced 
steadily but increasingly requires expanded expertise and commitment beyond the original 
investiga
tors.  The presence and influence of a vital young academic cardiology cadre will be 
crucial to maintain skill and focus on clinical application during rapid evolution of mechanical 
support technology.  MedaMACS has been designed to meet the scientific goals required for 
progress whil
e fostering the development of a core group of emerging heart failure cardiology 
investigators at key sites.  This group will provide leadership in the identification and follow-up of 
the cascading sequence of changing populations for mechanical support.   
 
 
2.  S
PECIFIC AIMS 
  
Aim 1: To identify prospectively a population of ambulatory patients followed on optimal 
medical therapy for whom chronic heart failure limits both function and survival to a range 
where elective implantation of left ventricular assist devices should offer meaningful benefit.   
Hypothesis:  It will be possible to define baseline characteristics that predict a one year mortality 
of ≥35±5% for patients on medical therapy and ≤25±5% in patients who have had VAD.   
 
1.1 Characterize ambulatory patients with advanced heart failure by baseline variables and 
interva
l change, including functional capacity, frailty, and interest in technical 
interve
ntion. There will be two baseline measurements one month a part (used to predict 
earl
y stability) and a repeated set at 1 year (used to predict outcome between 1 and 2 
yea
rs). These outcomes will includ e: a). All clinical parameters required for current risk 
score models a
nd prediction, b). Follow-up values and changes from baseline to 1 month 
and base
line to 1 year as additional variables from which to predict outcomes on medical 
therapy, c) . Functional capacity, quality of life, and patient preferences at baseline and 
after tim
e. 
 
1.2 Distinguish between risk factors that predict mortality whether therapy is medical or 
mechanical, and those risk factors that predict outcomes with different impact depending 
on whether therapy is medical or VAD. This will be stratified by whether patient is 
elig
ible for transplant or not.  
 
1.3  Record outcomes for ambulatory patients with advanced heart failure for comparison to 
VAD, to inc
lude a). Hospitalizations, VAD, transplant, survival without VAD or 
transplant, b). Major adverse events leading to hospitalization, including infection, 
neurologi
c or bleeding, c ). Functional capacity and quality of life, d). Eligibility for 
transpla
nt, e). Changes in resuscitation status and enrollment in hospice. 
 
Aim 2:  To design an integrated endpoint of survival and objective functional assessment that 
provides more discrimination between chronic ambulatory heart failure and current device 
outcomes than survival alone.  
Hypothesis: It will be possible to identify a composite endpoint of survival and function that will 
show a 30% difference between outcomes on medical therapy and outcome with initial VAD.  
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 5  
2.1 Compare survival and functional outcomes for MedaMACS patients and recipients of 
single 
LVAD.   Within each Profile 4-7, comparisons will be made for a). Clinical 
chara
cteristics, b). Outcomes, and c) . Outcomes for populations from INTERMACS and 
MedaMACS
 defined by other baseline variables and risk scores.   
 
2.2 De
fine changes in 6 minute walk between baselines and 12 and 24 months after 
enrollme
nt, to determine timing, frequency and degree of improvement for Profiles 4-7 
after 
entry for medical therapy, and compare to INTERMACS results.  
 
2.3 Define changes in quality of life as assessed by Euroqol-5D and Kansas City 
Cardiom
yopathy Questionnaire.  
 
2.4 Analyze distribution of integrated functional survival endpoints to a). Inform individual 
patie
nt decisions between VAD and medical therapy, b). Provide basis of evidence Level 
B for 
VAD guidelines, and c). Estimate sample sizes for pivotal randomized trials.  
 
Aim 3:  To evaluate patient perceptions about their cardiac condition, ventricular assist 
device technology, preferences for their care, and thresholds for considering device implant.  
Hypothesis: The likelihood of patients expressing preference for a VAD will increase with their 
functional limitation and with their predicted risk of 1 year mortality. 
 
3.1 Patient functional capacity by questionnaire and 6 minute walk will be assessed twice at 
base
line and again at 1 year and 2 years. These will be compared to their expressed 
willingne
ss to consider VAD at their own level of function and from a series of 
hypothetic
ally worse states. 
 
3.2 Available relevant mortality prediction models will be used to estimate 1 year survival 
from base
line and from the one-year re-evaluation.  These will be compared to patients’ 
expressed willingness to consider VAD at their own anticipated level of survival and from 
a serie
s of hypothetically worse states.  
 
Aim 4:  To develop and advance a team of emerging clinical investigators who will increase 
awareness of mechanical circulatory support and serve as role models for other young 
investigators.    
Hypothesis: Focused mentorship of early career investigators will foster the next generation of 
leaders in the clinical care of patients with advanced heart disease. 
 
4.2 Junior investigators will take the lead in designing and analyzing research questions of 
their own w
ith the mentorship of a more senior investigator at each clinical site.  
Presentation of MedaMACS data at national meetings and manuscript development will be 
the responsibility of junior investigators.  A centralized publications committee with 
ensure equitable distribution of topics of interest so there is synergy across centers and 
appropriate extramural mentorship is available.   
 
4.3 Survey will be made among the young investigators for VAD-re lated publications, 
progression to independent research status, and affiliation to clinical VAD programs at 5 
years after initiation of MedaMACS enrollment.  
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 6  
 
3.  BACKGROUND - Gaps in Current Medical Trial Data 
 
Survival Prediction 
The available information from the randomized trials of REMATCH, INTREPID, and the 
combined experiences of other inotrope-dependent patients provides a boundary of approximately 
75% one-year mortality on medical therapies.2,8  On the other side are the experiences in 
ambulatory outpatients with advanced heart failure, in which one-year mortality is no more than 
20% in trial of beta blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and cardiac resynchronization. These medical 
trial populations thus cannot be aligned with experiences with approved VADs, in whom the one-
year mortality was in the range of 30% as reported specifically in the HeartMate II device trial.4  
The one-year mortality in the broader experience of approved devices for destination therapy is 
decli
ning toward 20% in INTERMACS when outcomes are isolated for LVAD without right 
ventricular
 support.6  These sets of medical data thus leave unaddressed the wide chasm of one year 
medical m
ortality between 25 and 75%, within which falls the largest anticipated target population 
of ambulatory patients for current implantable VADs.  
This chasm cannot be crossed by community registry populations which describe overall 
one-year mortality of 30-50%, but an average age is 75.9,10  with prevalence of co-morbidities such 
as chr
onic pulmonary disease and peripheral vascular disease in the range of 30%, with dementia, 
stroke, cancer each in the range of 10-20%.10  Multiple risk scores exist from these populations for 
the identific
ation of patients at high risk for death from heart failure,11-13 but they do not fully 
address t
he challenge of identifying ambulatory patients both sick enough and well enough to 
benefit from VADs.  On the other end, scores developed from low-ejection fraction HF outpatient 
trials depict a young population with one-year survival rates in the range of 80-90%. In the pyramid 
of risk for de
ath during heart failure, the largest level is the bed of risk at the base, in which the 
patient remains regardless of therapy received, with such risks as intrinsic liver and lung disease, 
and the intermediate levels where malnutrition and renal dysfunction compromise peri-operative 
outcomes and offer uncertain potential for improvement. (Figure 2)  Potential for benefit is reflected 
best at the top of the pyramid with risk factors such as hemodynamics and biomarkers that are 
addressed directly by VAD (or transplant).  The robust Seattle Heart Failure Score versions, derived 
from dispa
rate trial populations, have been used to identify very low risk patients and patients with 
heart failure severity unlikely to benefit from ICD therapy.11  This score will provide the central 
scree
n for the ongoing REVIVE-IT trial in ambulatory heart failure.  The MedaMACS population is 
designe
d to surround the 50 patients on medical therapy in the REVIVE it trial, by including 
patients deemed sicker by recent hospitalization, but also less sick patients who have a Seattle score 
below the 1.5 threshold.  The accuracy of current criteria to select this spectrum of patients has been 
shown in analysis of the first140 patients of the MedaMACS screening pilot. (Figure 3) 
 
Fun
ctional Capacity Prediction  
 As we look toward the “less sick” populations, it has been shown that patient interest in 
VAD is heavily influenced by the degree of functional limitation. The increasing focus on shared 
decision-making in advanced heart failure requires that patients be given adequate information to 
choose among available options.  This requires better understanding of the expected functional 
outcome on medical therapy as well as with VADs.  Current reports of those patients providing 
serial i
nformation on quality of life through Kansas City questionnaires indicate improvement in the 
rang
e of 40 points after VAD,  which exceeds that demonstrated with any other therapy thus far. 
However, these are from baseline levels substantially worse than anticipated for most ambulatory 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 7 heart failure.14  Similarly, 6 minute walk distances show major improvement but the majority of 
patients were unable to perform them at baseline.14  Contemporary information about the trajectory 
of quali
ty of life and functional capacity over 12-24 months for patients ambulatory at baseline will 
be crucial to understanding and communicating expected benefits from VAD.  
 
Benefit Emphasized Over Risk  
MedaMACS outcomes will accelerate the progress of mechanical circulatory support into 
the ambulatory population.  Outcomes will include the rate of progression to transplant or VAD 
after enrollment for 2 years.  For those patients remaining alive on medical therapy, information 
will include key adverse events and functional capacity in detail for one year and general life 
satisfaction at one and 2 years.  Taken in conjunction with INTERMACS data, the MedaMACS 
baseli
ne and outcome data will facilitate the important evolution from risk scores to “ Benefit 
Scores”, which reflect both the anticipated risk without MCS and the likelihood of good outcomes 
with MCS. This will be used both for overall survival, survival without major events, and adjusted 
scores that i
nclude quality of life and functional capacity in survivors. 
   
 
4.  PRELIMINARY DATA 
 
INTERMACS Provides the Framework  
 INTERMACS has established the key questions in the potential VAD populations along 
with the data field framework upon which to answer them for ambulatory patients on medical 
therap
y.  INTERMACS has validated clinical patient profiles and has established new branch points 
for dec
isions regarding transplant.15  Outcome fields for specific adverse events, re-hospitalization, 
cardia
c function, systemic markers of disease, and functional capacity are designed to capture not 
only endpoints but the crucial midpoints that allow an integration of function and survival over 
time.  The architecture for INTERMACS has been designed from its inception to favor entry of 
parallel information for patients receiving contemporary medical therapies.   The experience from 
INTERMAC
S will illuminate the establishment of MedaMACS. 
 
Med
aMACS Screening Pilot Confirms Feasibility 
 A MedaMACS Screening Pilot study has completed enrollment at 10 JCAHO-certified 
mechanic
al circulatory support programs across the United States.  Using similar entry criteria as 
outlined below, 168 patients with advanced ambulatory systolic heart failure and recurrent 
hospita
lizations were enrolled over 7 months.  Comprehensive baseline data of usual care practices 
was rec
orded along with a 14 item patient questionnaire and the Euroqol-5D instrument.  Rapid 
enrollment confirmed that a population of advanced ambulatory heart failure patients could be 
readil
y identified and enrolled in an observational study.  Data from the screening pilot suggests 
that there ma
y be a cohort of patients who may benefit from LVAD therapy who are not yet being 
considered for mechanical support.16 (Figure 4)  In addition, the patient survey instrument 
succe
ssfully provided information on patient perception of VAD technology, thresholds for implant, 
and g
oals of therapy.17 The screening pilot is also being used to field test telephone administered 
outcome measures at 6 and 12 months after enrollment.  Baseline entry criteria, data elements and 
survey items have been refined based on collaborative feedback from the screening pilot effort.  The 
successful design and implementation of the screening pilot over a short time-line demonstrates that 
such an e
ffort can be led by junior investigators committed to clinical research in advanced heart 
disease.   
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 8  
5.  STUDY DESIGN AND POPULATION 
 
Scr
eening and Determination of Eligibility  
 The MedaMACS Pilot Study is a prospective, observational study of ambulatory patients 
with advanced heart failure.  The study will enroll patients who have not yet received an LVAD but 
who receive their care at a hospital with a JCAHO-certified mechanical circulatory support 
program.  
 Participants will be screened for this study if they are between 18 and 80 years old with low 
ejection fraction history and hospitalization for heart failure within the past year.   All subjects who 
have been admitted to the heart failure service will be screened and recruited for study participation, 
either as an inpatient or during their first outpatient follow-up appointment by the investigator and 
research staff caring for patients in the advanced heart failure program of the enrolling center.  
Eligibility for enrollment will be based only upon information that is clinically available at the time 
of screening.  The history of prior hospitalizations will be available from clinical records.  Routine 
evaluation and triage of ambulatory patients with advanced heart disease includes echocardiography 
and functional assessment with peak oxygen consumption and frequently 6 minute walk distance, 
The elements of information required for estimation of the Seattle Heart Failure Risk score will be 
gleaned from laboratory data, or imputed as described in the Seattle score literature. The research 
coordinator will enter this data onto a currently available website for calculation of the Seattle 
score.  
 Eligibility will be determined by the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed below. The 
inclusion crite
ria will be checked individually for “all that apply, with numeric values where 
indicated.  The exclusion criteria will be verified by individual checkboxes. After determination of 
elig
ibility, a member of the study research team will approach individual subjects who are potential 
candidates for participation and for whom the subject’s primary physician has given permission to 
approach.  No group of persons will be excluded without a good scientific or ethical reason to do so.  
Incarcerated prisoners have been excluded by this protocol.  For patients who meet inclusion 
criteria but who have an exclusion criteria related to non-cardiac conditions (Exclusion Criterion #2, 
#3, or #9) and for eligible patients not providing informed consent, a screening log will be kept that 
includes their age, ejection fraction, race and gender.  This basic information is necessary to assess 
comple
teness of patient capture and possible bias in the screening process and in the process to 
obtain informed consent.  No further information will be collected on patients who do not meet the 
inclusion criteria.  This screening log will help determine the total number of advanced ambulatory 
heart failure patients eligible for MedaMACS participation at each study center. 
 We anticipate a total of 350 patients enrolled from 12 centers in the United States over a 12 
month period.  The screening pilot enrolled 168 patients at 10 sites during a 7 month period.  Once 
all sit
es are activated with enrollment of approximately 3 patients per month per site, enrollment 
should be complete by 12 months.  
 
Inclusion Criteria 
1. Age 18-80 years 
2. NYHA class III-IV heart failure for 45 of the last 60 days 
3. L
eft ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 35% 
4. He
art failure diagnosis or typical symptoms for 12 months 
5. Use of evidence based oral medications (beta-blockers, ACE-inhibitors/ARBs, 
aldosterone antagonist) for at least 3 months prior to enrollment or documented 
medicati
on contraindication or intolerance. 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 9 6. Hospitalization for heart failure within the previous 12 months (other than for elective 
proc
edure) 
7. Informed consent given 
 
In 
addition, they must have at least one of the following:  
 
A. An addit
ional unplanned hospitalization during the previous 12 months for a total of at 
least 2 inpatient hospitalizations lasting >24 hours with heart failure as the primary or 
seconda
ry diagnosis within the previous 12 months  
 
OR  
 
B.  
1) Peak oxygen uptake (VO2) <55% of age- and sex-predicted (using Wasserman equation) 
OR a pea
k VO2 ≤16 ml/kg/min for men and ≤14 ml/kg/min for women in a test with an 
RER >1.08 on cardiopulmonary exercise testing. 
2) 6-minute walk distance <300 meters without non-cardiac limitation.  
3) Serum BNP > 1000  (NT-proBNP > 4000 pg/ml) as outpatient or at hospital discharge.  
 
OR 
 
C. Seattle Heart Failure Model Score > 1.5.   
 
Available information will be obtained on all of these inclusion criteria for comparison 
regardless of which meets eligibility.  
 
Exclusion Criteria 
1. Age >80 years or <18 years 
2. Non-c
ardiac diagnosis anticipated to limit 2-year survival (≥30-50% mortality within 2 years 
from non-cardiac diagnosis)   
3.  Primary functional limitation from non-cardiac diagnosis even if not likely to limit survival 
4. QRS > 120msec and planned biventricular pacemaker implant or biventricular pacemaker 
implantati
on within past 90 days 
5. Current home intravenous inotrope therapy 
6. Chronic hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis 
7. Scheduled for non-ventricular assist device cardiac surgery on current hospital admission 
8. Obvious anatomical or other major contra-indication to any cardiac surgery in the future (e.g. 
previous pneumonectomy, advanced connective tissue disease) 
9. Actively listed for heart transplant as UNOS Status 1 or 2 
10. History of cardiac amyloidosis 
11. Dominant lesion of at le
ast moderate aortic or mitral stenosis or congenital structural heart 
defect.  
 
Informed Consent  
Informed consent is mandatory and will be obtained from all subjects prior to participation 
in this clinica
l study. Informed consent will be obtained in accordance with IRB policies and 
procedures.  Prior to inclusion in the study, it will be the responsibility of the Investigator to give 
each subject full and adequate verbal and written information about the objectives and the 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 10 procedures of the study and the possible risks involved. Each subject will be informed of their right 
to withdraw f
rom the study at any time and for any reason without sanction, penalty, or loss of 
benefits to which they are otherwise entitled and that withdrawal from the study will not jeopardize 
their future medical care.   When a potential subject is the investigator’s own patie nt, it will be 
made clear to the potential subject that participation in the study is entirely voluntary and that their 
decision will not affect their care now or in the future. 
Furthermore, it will be the responsibility of the Investigator to obtain a signed Informed 
Consent form from each subject prior to administering any questionnaires, recording data into the 
Reg
istry, or performing a 6 minute walk at a time other than when customarily performed in their 
routine clinical care.  Informed consent documents will be written in language understandable to the 
subject or subject’s legally authorized representative.  One copy of the signed Informed Consent 
form will be given to the subject and another retained by the Investigator.  
 
 
6.   PROCEDURES AND ASSESSMENTS 
 
Clinical, Dem
ographic and Laboratory Data  
 It has b
een verified that the requested data is normally acquired in the routine care of these 
types of patients at the referral centers for the primary investigators.  Laboratory data will be 
obtained fr
om routine blood draws as clinically indicated.  Peak VO2 and echocardiographic 
paramete
rs will be measured once during the baseline period and once at the one-year visit as 
clinically indicated.  In those centers selected for MedaMACS, as in most centers with high volume 
advanced heart disease evaluation, peak VO2 and echocardiographic assessment are routine 
components of regular and serial evaluation.   Medications, cardiac imaging, and exercise testing 
will occ
ur at the discretion of the physicians caring for each study participant.  Patient therapies and 
testing will conform to standards of care and published clinical guidelines for heart failure 
management.18, 19  Subjects will have additional functional assessment of both endurance (6 minute 
walk) and frailty (gait speed) one month after consent to measure early stability.  Registry data will 
be obtaine
d by chart review from both the electronic medical record and paper charts.  Note all 
dates for ba
seline data will be b y intervals rather than calendar dates. There will be a total of six 
data coll
ection time points, four with face to face clinical encounters and another two by telephone: 
(Fig
ure 5).   
 Baseline A – at consent (face to face encounter) 
 B
aseline B – 3 -6 weeks after consent (face to face encounter) 
 6 month telephone call by study site personnel 
 12 month follow-up – 10-14 months after consent (face to face encounter) 
 18 mont
h telephone call by study site personnel 
 24 month follow-up – 22-26 months after consent (face to face encounter; study close) 
 
Patie
nt Survey  
The patient survey instrument patient will assess quality of life, health-related stress, along 
with impressi
on of and thresholds for consideration of VAD therapy .  All survey responses are for 
resea
rch only and as such will be kept confidential and not be shared with members of the medical 
team.  This written survey will be administe red at Baseline A, Baseline B, the 12 month visit and 
again at the 24 month study clo se-out visit.  Patients will receive the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy 
Questionna
ire to determine disease specific quality of life and with the Euroqol-5D questionnaire 
including the thermome
ter.  There will also be a brief instrument on health-related stress identical to 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 11 the tool being used in INTERMACS.  The quality of life instruments will be completed 
independently by the patients in a single session.   
After quality of life instruments have been completed, study coordinators will read a 
description of a V AD and provide a simple picture.  The description of a VAD will include 
information on impl
antation, anticipated benefits and potential risks.  The surveys will only be 
administered at face- to-face visits to allow a study nurse to assist with the VAD portion of the 
instrument.  Patients will complete the VAD portion of the survey after receiving this standard 
information a
nd a study nurse will be present to answer any queries about the VAD items.  Similar 
VAD surve
y items were administered in the screening pilot with excellent response rates.17 Any 
patie
nt who fails to complete a survey will have a missing data form filled outlining why the self-
reported inst
ruments were not completed.  In all, there are 40 questions for the patients to answer in 
a written format, which should take approximately 35-40 minutes for most subjects.  Original 
copies of the w
ritten survey instruments will be kept on site by study investigators and the data will 
be entered electronically by the coordinators or their data assistants on site (Appendix A).  
  
Follow-
up Telephone Contact at 6 and 18 Months  
 A telephone call will be made by local site investigators or their study staff to patients at 6 
and 18 months after study enrollment, but can be replaced by face- to-fac e visits if occurring as part 
of their routine care.  The major purpose of this telephone call is to assess patient vital status and 
important i
nterval events such as transplantation, placement of VAD, or other major procedures.  
The se
cond purpose is to estimate the number of hospitalizations after study enrollment and the 
frequency of other major adverse events as recalled by patients.  Any major endpoint or adverse 
event will be confirmed or amended by review of the interim medical record by site investigators. 
At the time of e
ach study follow-up visit, the records will be reviewed for evidence of any major 
events leading to hospitalization that might have been missed in the intervening phone interviews.   
Patients will be asked the questions determining functional class and profile.  They will be 
asked a
 small subset of questions from the baseline questionnaire related to preferences for 
resuscitation and for VAD.  They will be asked to bring their medications to the telephone to list 
them with doses.   
 
Clinical Assessm
ent at 12 months   
 It i
s anticipated that patients will be seen at some time between 10 and 14 months after the 
baseline study.  Clinical information including routine laboratory values, physical examination, and 
sympt
oms will be reported.  An echocardiogram and peak oxygen consumption will be recorded if 
obtained for clinical indications, as is routine practice for patients with this severity of illness 
followed at major centers. The six minute walk functional test will be repeated along with 5 meter 
gait
 speed to assess frailty .  Patients will be re-administered the questionnaires regarding functional 
status, quality of life, and preferences for VAD as at baseline.  
 
End of study at 24 months 
A final face to face encounter at 24 months (between 22-26 months) will be completed and 
the study will end at that point.  Routine clinical assessment components and other study data 
elements will be recorded as available from the clinical record, including results of imaging and 
exercise testing for measurement of peak oxygen consumption, if performed at or after the 18 
month time point. The six minute walk functional test will be repeated along with 5 meter gait 
speed to asse
ss frailty.  Patients will be re-administered the questionnaires regarding functional 
status, quality of life, and preferences for VAD as at baseline. Finally, at 24 months each patient 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 12 will receive the VAD survey and questionnaire to assess quality of life and perception of VAD 
technology
.  After the two year face to face visit, study participation will end. 
 
Data Ele
ments 
 A full list of data elements to be collected along with collection times may be found in 
Appendix B.  All data will be recorded in a web based data entry system.   
 
 
7. DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING 
 
Data S
afety and Coordination 
Data and safety monitoring, including guarding the rights, safety and welfare of subjects, 
will be the responsibility of the individual site investigators.  The data coordinating center for the 
study will be the University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB). All information collected in this 
regist
ry will be held confidential to the extent permitted by law. No published or unpublished repor t 
or visual or speaking presentation about this study will include any material that will identify the 
subject as a participant in this study.  No specimens will be collected.  Subjects may withdraw 
consent fr
om the study at any time.  Data will not be used by collaborators for any purposes other 
than those described in this protocol. 
 Data will be transferred to the coordinating center electronically for all data.  Datasets 
containing d
e-identified individual data and summary data will be available to the INTERMACS 
and Me
daMACS investigators and industry partners. All of the data systems feature multiple levels 
of securit
y, which protect patient data by the most stringent requirements. All are fully compliant 
with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) and are certified by the 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).  Any plans for data to be shared with 
outside e
ntities as part of contractual arrangements will be within the conditions specified in the 
patient consent form and detailed in contracts to be reviewed separately.  
 
Study Monitoring  
The Principal Investigator and UAB study staff will regularly monitor the data from the 
regist
ry, review and assess the performance of its operation, and make recommendations, as 
appropriate, to participating institutions with respect to: 
 
 Enrollment and data timeliness and completeness from individual enrolling sites  
 I
ssues related to participant safety and informed consents  
 Adequacy of study progress in terms of recruitment, quality control, and 
          
data analysis 
 Issues pertaining to participant burden 
 Achievement on the main study goals 
 Possible modifications in the study protocol  
 Overall scientific direction of the registry 
 
 
8. AN
ALYSIS PLAN 
 
Plann
ed Analysis  
 The prospective data analysis is planned to be descriptive and correlative, with primary 
hypothesis outlined in the specific aims. Data collected are designed to generate future hypotheses.  
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 13 Actuarial survival curves will be generated and compared to known risk models, such as the Seattle 
Heart Failure Score and the Heart Failure Survival Score, for both heart failure populations and 
VAD populations from INTERMACS.19, 20  In addition, new models will be developed to allow 
comparison of anticipated outcomes after VADs using INTERMACS data.  It is fully recognized 
that these comparisons will be inevitably limited through confounding by indication.  The intent is 
to identify a range of baseline profiles for which anticipated outcome with medical survival can be 
projected.  From this information, hypotheses can be generated for target populations in whom 
VAD therapy might be expected to yield better outcomes.  
 
 “Primary” Endpoint and Power 
As this is a registry designed to determine outcomes for particular groups of patients, there 
will be more
 than one “primary” endpoint depending on the level of severity of illness.  Knowing 
that survival in isolated VAD patients dominated by Profile I and II has reached 70% at one year,  it 
is reasonable to assume that survival will be at least as good or better with VAD in less sick 
patients.  We hypothesize that it will be possible to define baseline characteristics that predict a one 
yea
r mortality of > 35 + 5% for patients on medical therapy and < 25 + 5% in patients who have 
had VAD.  Seeking a confidence interval of approximately + 5%, this could be accomplished 
initially with approximately 350 patients if they have similar risk.  We anticipate that some patients 
will have
 better survival and some may have worse survival than this, such that there will be 
overlapping groups, and a small proportion of patients will have other events ending their medical 
history, such as transplant and deterioration to worse INTERMACS profiles for which they receive 
VADs.   
For groups within which survival is > 60% at 1 year on medical therapy, a composite of 
survival and function will be the most important for comparison to VAD therapy.  We hypothesize 
that it will be possible to identify a composite endpoint of survival and function that will show a 
30% difference between outcomes on medical therapy and outcome with initial VAD.  The nature 
of these survival-function endpoints will be explored during the first year of MEDAMACS data.  
The two simplest will be done with the endpoints of days alive out of hospital, and quality-adjusted 
life 
years according to the Euroqol.  However, more complex endpoints will be tested for survival 
and func
tional scores at specific intervals.  (Figure 5) 
Information will be collected regarding the major adverse events that lead to hospitalization 
both with and without mechanical circulatory support, as listed in the data appendix: neurologic 
event, non-CNS bleeding, sepsis, ventricular tachyarrhythmia or ICD firing. The hospitalizations, 
adverse events and deaths will be attributed on site by the investigators in drop-down menus.  There 
will be no independent adjudication of causes of hospitalizations or deaths.  The general categories 
of causality are broad and not the focus of the primary hypotheses. Thus, the lack of formal 
adjudication should not compromise the data for the endpoints of death, transplant, and VAD, 
which are
 objectively determined.  The secondary endpoints that relate to functional capacity and to 
quality of life will also be specifically determined.  
 
Statistical M
ethods 
Baseline data between different patient groups will be compared using student’s t-test for 
normally distributed continuous variables and Wilcoxon Rank Sum for non-normally continuous 
variables.  Kaplan-Meier curves will be constructed for time to death, VAD or transplant for the 
two-y
ear study period.  Event rates including cause-specific hospitalizations will be generated for 
differe
nt groups of patients and analyzed.  Analysis plans for specific research questions will be 
developed unde
r guidance of the DCC after approval by the Research and Publication Committee. 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 14 All summary statistics and subsequent analysis will be performed using SAS statistical software 
(Cary, NC).  
 
Publications 
 
Publications will be authored by the primary investigators at the participating sites.  The senior site 
investiga
tors will be offered inclusion as authors for the manuscripts on which they supervise the 
efforts of
 the investigator from their own site as first author.  Op tions may become available for 
rese
arch coordinators to author manuscripts on secondary analyses of topics of their special interest.  
 
 
9. MATURATION OF MEDAMACS 
 
 The launc
hing of MedaMACS will focus on the ambulatory population closely proximal to 
the common thre
shold for implementation of mechanical circulatory support.  The foundation of the 
10 site
s entering patients for the MedaMACS screening pilot will allow rapid initiation of the new 
protocol, with t
he additional 2 sites.  The fastidious definition of entry criteria offers a fine- tuning 
knob to dia
l up or down disease acuity of patients enrolled, as this becomes necessary.   However, 
the gener
al approach to baseline data collection, risk profiling, assessment of adverse events and 
outcomes, is planned for cascading applications to progressi vely “more well” populations to keep 
pace with those enrolling into INTERMACS.   The next promising target population will be the 
population of patients waiting at home after listing for transplant.  As the improving outcomes of 
implantable V
ADs are demonstrated by INTERMACS to advance beyond a bridge to transplant, 
past e
ven the current focus on the transplant-ineligible population, MedaMACS will prepare the 
field on whic
h mechanical circulatory support will finally compete with cardiac transplantation as 
primary therapy to improve quality life for a substantial proportion of the patients currently 
sufferin
g from advanced heart failure.  
 
 
10. PARTICIPATING CENTERS  
 
 Stud
y protocol and informed consent forms will be approved by local institutional review 
board prior to study enrollment.  Participating centers will include: 
 
 Brigham and Women’s Hospital (Boston, MA) 
 Cleveland Clinic (Cleveland, OH) 
 Cedars Sinai Hospital (Los Angeles, CA) 
 Duke University Hospital (Durham, NC) 
 Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania (Philadelphia, PA) 
 University of Alabama, Birmingham (Birmingham, AL) 
 University of Colorado (Denver, CO) 
 Unive
rsity of Iowa Hospitals (Iowa City, IA) 
 University of Michigan Hospital (Ann Arbor, MI)  
 University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Pittsburgh, PA) 
 University of South Florida,  (Tampa FL) 
 University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (Dallas, TX) 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 15 It is anticipated that sites will begin to be activated early in 2012 such that several will have 
some initial experience prior to the first investigators’ meeting.  (Figure 6)  This meeting is planned 
for March 2012 to include both investigators and a research nurse, with one plenary session for 
general trial structure and goals, followed by split sessions for the investigators and the research 
nurses.  The focus of the investigator sessions will be review of the hypotheses, primary and 
secondary endpoints, initial timetable for publications of baseline data, and primary endpoint data 
after completion of one year of follow-up for all patients enrolled within year 1.  The research 
nurses will receive orientation and instruction regarding the informed consent procedures and 
documentation, conduct of the study, and electronic data entry.   
 
 
REFERENC
ES 
 
1. Lloyd-Jones D, Adams RJ, Brown TM, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2010 update: a 
report from the 
American Heart Association.  Circulation  2010;121(7):e46-e215. 
2. Rose EA
, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Long-term mechanical left ventricular assistance for 
end-stage heart failure. The New England journal of medicine. 2001;345(20):1435-1443. 
3. Mille
r LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, et al. Use of a continuous-flow device in patients awaiting 
heart tra
nsplantation. The New England journal of medicine. 2007;357(9):885-896. 
4. Slaughter
 MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, et al. Advanced heart failure treated with continuous-flow 
left ventricula
r assist device. The New England journal of medicine. 2009;361(23):2241-
2251. 
5. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC. Mechanical circulatory support: registering a therapy in evolution. Circ 
Heart Fail. 2008;1(3):200-205. 
6. Kirklin J
K, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, et al. Third INTERMACS Annual Report: the evolution of 
destina
tion therapy in the United States. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011;30:115-123. 
7. Stewa
rt GC, Brooks K, Pratibhu PP, et al. Thresholds of physical activity and life expectancy for 
patie
nts considering destination ventricular assist devices. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2009;28(9):863-869. 
8. Rogers, J.G., et al., Chronic mechanical circulatory support for inotrope-dependent heart failure 
patie
nts who are not transplant candidates: results of the INTrEPID Trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol, 2007. 50(8): p. 741-7. 
9. Yancy, C.W., et al., Clinical presentation, management, and in-hospital outcomes of patients 
admitt
ed with acute decompensated heart failure with preserved systolic function: a report 
from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE) Database. J Am 
Coll Cardiol , 2006. 47(1): p. 76-84. 
10. Se
toguchi S, Stevenson LW, Schneeweiss S. Repeated hospitalizations predict mortality in the 
community population with heart failure. American heart journal. 2007;154(2):260-266. 
11.  Levy, W.C., et al., The Seattle Heart Failure Model: prediction of survival in heart failure. 
Circulation,  2006. 113(11): p. 1424-33. 
12.  O'C
onnor, C.M., et al., The ESCAPE Discharge Risk Score: Don't  Go Home Without It 
(abstract). J  Cardiac Failure,  2006 12(6): p. S117. 
13.  Aaronson, K.D., et al., Development and prospective validation of a clinical index to predict 
survival in ambulatory patients referred for cardiac transplant evaluation. Circulation , 1997. 
95(12): p. 2660-7. 
14.  Rog
ers JG, Aaronson KD, Boyle AJ, Russell SD, Milano CA, Pagani FD, Edwards BS, Park S, 
John R, Conte JV, Farrar DJ, Slaughter MS. Continuous flow left ventricular assist device 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 16 improves functional capacity and quality of life of advanced heart failure patients. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55(17):1826-1834. 
15. Steve
nson LW, Pagani FD, Young JB, et al.  INTERMACS profiles of advanced heart failure: 
the curre
nt picture. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009;28(6):535-541. 
16. Cowger JA, Kittleson M, Patel C, et al. End stage heart failure: Are we missing patients who 
may b
enefit from left ventricular assist device support?  American Heart Associated 
Scientific Sessions 2011 (abstract) 
17. Stewart GC, Kittleson M, Cowger JA, et al. Who wants an LVAD for ambulatory heart failure?  
Heart Failure Society of American Annual Scientific Meeting 2011 (abstract)  
18. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of heart failure in adults.  Circulation  
2009;119(14):e391 -e479. 
19. Lindenfeld J, Albert NM, Boehmer JP, et al.  HFSA 2010 Comprehensive Heart Fail ure Practice 
Guideline.  J Cardiac  Failure  2010;16(6):e1 -e194. 
20. Lietz K, Long JW, Kfoury AG, et al.  Outcomes of left ventricular assist device implantation as 
destination therapy in the post-REMATCH era: implications for patient selection. 
Circulation. 2007;116(5):497-505. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 17  
      
FIGURE 1: 
 
IIIBIIIB-IVIVIV IVIVIVNYHA Official Shorthand PROFILE-LEVEL
“Housebound”,
Comfortable at rest, 
symptoms with 
minimum activity ADLINTERMACS
LEVEL 5
(FF, A)Resting symptoms 
on oral therapy at 
homeINTERMACS
LEVEL 4
(FF, A)Stable but Ino-
DependentINTERMACS
LEVEL 3“Sliding fast” on ino INTERMACS
LEVEL 2
Advanced Class III INTERMACS
LEVEL 7“Walking wounded”-
ADL possible but 
meaningful activity 
limitedINTERMACS
LEVEL 6
(FF, A)“Crash and burn” INTERMACS
LEVEL 1MED and VAD both poor
Need temporary bridge
To successful VAD
MEDAMACS
TargetsVAD better than
MEDCurrent StatusOf Information
INTREPID
REMATCHHMII DT
Medical 
HF
Outpt TrialsOnly
EnteredIn
Hospital
 
 
         
 
         
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 18  
FIGURE 2: 
      
Pyramid of Risk Factors for HF DeathBNP
Na  
Malnutrition InflammationRisk removed with
Transplant or VAD
Peri-op risk
may diminish 
laterDe-conditioningSBP
Renal functionAgeRV dysfunction 
For VADLiver dysfunctionNon-compliance
Limited social support
BED of RISKCardiac-related
Functional impairment
6 MW, Peak VO2Hemodynamic
Compromise
(echo,cath,etc)
?Figure 3  
FIGURE 3: 
 
SHFM < 1.5 SHFM 1.5- 2.5SHFM > 2.5
Total N =140 N=90 N=39 N=11
EF 0.18 0.16 0.18
NYHA IV
IIIB
IIIA6%
43%
51%18%
41%
41%55%
36%
9%
INTERMACS
4 (resting symptoms)
5
6
717%
33%
34%
16%31%
23%
39%
8%46%
46%
9%
Mod-Sev RV Dysfn 34% 56% 64%
Cardiac Index
(72% pts)2.2 2.0 2.0
No Eval Yet for either 
Tranplant or VAD57% 44% 27%Profiles in Ongoing MEDAMACS Screening PilotProfiles in Ongoing MEDAMACS Screening Pilot
EF, ejection fraction; SHFM, Seattle Heart Failure Model Score; 
RV, right ventricle; VAD, ventricular assist device  
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 19  
 FIGURE 4: 
Level of Illness in MEDAMACS 
Screening Pilot
--- --- 13.1 (4.1) Peak VO2, ml/kg/min
182 (140) --- 253 (134) 6 minute walk test, m
15 (6) 17 (5) 17 (6) LV ejection fraction, %MEDAMACS
N=140REMATCH2HMII-DT3
Inotrope use 20%
(within 6 mo)71%
(at implant)79%
(at implant)
Systolic blood pressure, 
mmHg112 (18) 101 (15) 104 (14)
RA pressure, mmHg 13 (7) ---- 13 (6)
Wedge pressure, mmHg 22 (9) 25 (10) 24 (8)
Cardiac index, L/min*m2 2.1 (0.5) 1.9 (1.0) 2.0 (0.6)
Continuous variables, mean (SD)Adapted from Cowger et al.16
 
 
 
    
 
      
 
          
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 20 FIGURE 5: 
 
6MW
Gait speed
Euroqol+KCCQ
VAD Survey
Events
Risk Scores
TreatmentsBaseline
BMedaMACS Study Timeline
Inptor
outpt1 Month
Re-Look 
Baseline
6 mos
Phone
Interview1 Yr
Face-to-face18m        2 Yrs
Phone
InterviewoutptA B
CTime
ZeroDTelephone Contact
6MW
Gait speed
Euroqol+KCCQ
VAD Survey
Risk Scores6MW
Gait speed
Euroqol+KCCQ
VAD Survey
Events
TreatmentsBaseline
A
6MW
Gait speed
Euroqol+KCCQ
VAD Survey
Events
Risk Scores
TreatmentsStudy Site Phone Calls 6 and 18 mos
Events (hosp, stroke, transplant, vad , inotropes, death)
Meds, Euroqol, NYHA/INTERMACS profile
One
month
Consent 1mo. 12mos 24mosFace-to-face 
encountersEnd
1-Yr Visit
C2-Yr Visit
D
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 21 FIGURE 6: 
 
MedaMACS Pilot2012 2013 2014 2015First Site Activation
(2/1/2012)Enrollment
N=350 x 12sites
Design MedaMACS II2016OSMB Review &
DCC IRB
(11-12/2011)6M Telephone18M Telephone1 Year Visit2 Year Visit & 
CloseoutWBDE Programming
Double Baselines
Completed
DATABASE
CLOSED1 Yr Data 
CompleteIRBSTUDY SITE STUDY SITE DCC + STEERINGDCC + STEERINGMedaMACS Registry TimelinePilot Complete
Late-Breaking
SubmissionBaseline Data 
ISHLT/ACCFinal Pilot
AnalysisTraining
3/11/12
Annual Mtg
@ISHLTAnnual Mtg
@ISHLTAnnual Mtg
@ISHLT
Late-Breaking
Submission6M Data Complete
Estimated 
# Active Pts0        90 160        250        270        260         250          235  210       180      150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 22 APPENDIX A:   SURVEY INSTRUMENTS 
 
 
Part I: Physician Questionnaire: 
 
Baseline A only 
 
1.  How long has patient been under care of your heart failure program? 
 
 A. < 3 months                
 B.  3-12 months               
 C.  1-2 years          
 D.  > 2 years 
 
2. If  <3 months, which best describes the route of presentation: (as a drop-down from A in 
previous
) 
 
A.   New onset event or diagnosis within your institution 
B.   Unspecified evaluation of severe heart failure 
 C.   Cardiac transplant and/or VAD evaluation 
 
3.  If a referral (B or C above), who referred the patient?   (as a drop-down from B/C in previous) 
  
A. Local internist 
B. Local cardiologist 
C. Cardiac Surgeon 
D. Self-referral 
E. Unsure 
F. Othe
r 
 
 
Baseline A, B, 12 months and 24 months : (face  to face encounters) 
 
4.  What is your best estimate of the likelihood of becoming sick enough to warrant urgent Stage D 
intervention within one year?  This includes home inotropes, hospice, VAD, and urgent transplant. 
A. Highly LIKELY 
B. Moderately LIKELY 
C. Uncertain 
D. Moderately UNLIKELY 
E. Highly UNLIKELY 
 
5.  If it became medically indicated, what is likelihood that this patient would be eligible for 
transplant?  
A. Highly LIKELY 
B. Moderately LIKELY 
C. Uncertain 
D. Moderately UNLIKELY 
E. Highly UNLIKELY 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 23  
6.  If a VAD became medically indicated, what is the likelihood that they would require 
biventricular mechanical support rather than LVAD alone? 
(answer only if C, D, E in question 5) 
A. Definitely need Biventricular support 
B. Probably need Biventricular support 
C. Uncertain 
D. Probably LVAD only 
E. Definitely LVAD only 
 
7.  If not likely to be a transplant candidate and mechanical support became medically indicated, 
what is li
kelihood the patient would be eligible for destination LVAD alone as lifetime support? 
 (answer only if C, D, E above) 
A.  Highl
y LIKELY 
B. Moderately LIKELY 
C. Uncertain 
D. Moderately UNLIKELY 
E. Highly
 UNLIKELY 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 24  Part II: Patient Quality of Life Questionnaires 
 
 
Baseline A,  B,  12 months, and 24 months 
 
1. Which of the following best describes your main activity?  
          
   Actively working   Full Time ⁯ Part Time ⁯  
   Student    Full Time ⁯ Part Time ⁯  
   Seeking work    Full Time ⁯ Part Time ⁯  
   Too sick to work (disabled)        ⁯  
   
Retired           ⁯  
   
Keeping house          ⁯  
   
Other (please specify)          _________ 
 
2.  How man
y of your close friends or relatives do you see in person, speak to on the telephone,  
     or contact via the internet at least once a month?  __________  (please count each person 1 time) 
 
3.  How much stress do you feel you’ve been under during the past 1 month, related to your health 
issues?  
 1             2            3             4              5            6             7            8           9            10  
       No stress                                                                                                   Very much stress   
 
4. How well do you feel you’ve been coping with or handling your stress during the past 1 month, 
related to your health issues? 
  1            2            3           4           5          6          7          8            9           10 
        Coping
 very poorly                              Coping very well 
 
5. How confident are you that you can do the tasks and activities needed to manage your heart 
failure so as to reduce how much having heart failure affects your everyday life? 
                    1            2            3           4           5      6           7              8              9              10 
       Not at all conf
ident                                                        Totally confident 
 
6. How satisfied are you with the results of your therapy for heart failure during the past 6 months?  
Please circle a number from 1 to 10, with 1 meaning that you’re not satisfied at all, and 10 meaning 
that you’re very satisfied.   
 1          2           3          4           5          6             7              8              9              10  
 Not sati
sfied                 Very satisfied 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 25  
 
 
EUROQOL – 5D + Thremometer 
 
 
By 
placing a checkmark in one box in each group below, please indicate which statements best describe your own health state today. 
 
Mobility 
I have no problems in walking about   
I have some problems in walking about   
I am confined to bed   
 
Self-Care  
I have no problems with self-care   
I have some problems washing or dressing myself   
I am unable to wash or dress myself   
 
Usual Activities (e.g. work, study, housework, family or 
leisure activities)  
I have no problems with performing my usual activities   
I have some problems with performing my usual activities   
I am unable to perform my usual activities   
 
Pain/Discomfort 
I have no pain or discomort   
I have moderate pain or discomfort   
I have extreme pain or discomfort   
 
Anxiety/Depression 
I am not anxious or depressed   
I am moderately anxious or depressed   
I am extremely anxious or depressed   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDAMACS Pilot Protocol 
11/08/2011 
   
 
 
 
 26  
    
 
       
 
 
 
 
To help people say how good or bad a health state is, we have 
drawn a scale (rather like a thermometer) on which the best state you can imagine is marked 100 and the worst state you can imagine is marked 0.      We would like you to indicate on this scale how good or bad your 
own health is today, in your opinion. Please do this by drawing a 
line from the box below to whichever point on the scale indicates how good or bad your health state is today.    
  
9 0 
8 0 
7 0 
6 0 
5 0 
4 0 
3 0 
2 0 
1 0 
100 
Worst 
imaginable 
health state 
0 
Best  
imaginable 
health state 
Your own 
health state 
today 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 27  
THE KANSAS CITY CARDIOMYOPATHY QUESTIONNAIRE: 
 
The following questions refer to your heart failure  and how it may affect your life.  Please read and complete 
the following questions.  There are no right or wrong answers. Please mark the answer that best applies to you.  
Heart Failure  affects different people in different ways.  Some feel shortness of breath while others feel 
    fatigue.  Please indicate how much you are limited by heart failure  (shortness of breath or fatigue) in 
    your ability to do the following activities over the past 2 weeks. 
 
              Place an X in one box on each line 
Activity      Extremely Quite a bit     Moderately   Slightly          Not at all     Limited for other reasons 
       limited  limited           limited    limited              limited  or did not do the activity  
Dressing yourself          ⁯        ⁯  ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯  
Showering/Bathing             ⁯        ⁯  ⁯         ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯  
Walking 1 block on  
    level ground          ⁯                    ⁯                 ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯ 
Doing yard work, 
    housework or 
    carrying groceries           ⁯        ⁯                 ⁯       ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯ 
Climbing a flight of 
     stairs without 
     stopping ⁯                   ⁯                 ⁯       ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯ 
Hurrying or jogging 
     (as if to catch a bus)       ⁯                   ⁯                 ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                                    ⁯ 
 
1. Compared with 2 weeks ago, have your symptoms of heart failure  (shortness of breath, fatigue or ankle 
swelling)   
      changed?  My symptoms of heart failure  have become… 
 
     Much worse  Slightly worse  Not changed  Slightly better   Much better           I’ve had no symptoms 
              over the last 2 weeks 
      ⁯ 
        ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                          ⁯   ⁯ 
 
2. Over the past 2 weeks, how many times did you have swelling in your feet, ankles or legs when you woke 
up in the morning? 
 
      Every          3 or more times       1-2 times a           Less than once         Never over the 
       mo
rning        a week, but not            week                     a week                   past 2 weeks 
                                every day 
 
         ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                        ⁯                         ⁯   
 
3. Over the past 2 weeks, how much has swelling in your feet, ankles or legs bothered you? 
     It has been…  
      
    Extremely Quite a bit Moderately  Slightly  Not at all  I’ve had no swelling 
     bothersome bothersome bothersome bothersome          bothersome 
  
         ⁯         ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                           ⁯           ⁯ 
 
4. Over the past 2 weeks, on average, how many times has fatigue limited your ability to do what you want?  
  
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 28 All of the time       Several times          At least once a         3 or more times 1-2 times per Less than once a Never over 
   
                               per day                         day                  per week but not            week                          week                 the past 2                                                                 
                                                                                                    every day                                                                                 weeks  
      ⁯                     ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                          ⁯            ⁯                  ⁯  
 
5. Over the past 2 weeks, how much has your fatigue bothered you? 
     It has been… 
 
 Extremely Quite a bit Moderately Slightly  Not at all I’ve had no fatigue  
    bothersome bothersome bothersome bothersome bothersome 
           ⁯         ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                        ⁯                        ⁯ 
 
6. Over the past 2 weeks, on average, how many times has shortness of breath  limited your ability to do what you wanted? 
 
All of the time       Several times          At least once a         3 or more times 1-2 times per Less than once a      Never over 
                                  per day                         day                  per week but not            week                          week                 the past 2                                                                 
                                                                                                    every day                                                                                 weeks  
       ⁯                     ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                        ⁯            ⁯                  ⁯  
 
7. Over the past 2 weeks, how much has your shortness of breath bothered you? 
 
  Extremely Quite a bit Moderately  Slightly  Not at all                I’ve had no shortness  
     bothersome bothersome bothersome bothersome          bothersome                     of breath  
  
          ⁯         ⁯        ⁯                        ⁯                        ⁯                        ⁯ 
 
8. Over the past 2 weeks, on average, how many times have you been forced to sleep sitting up in a chair or with at 
least 3 pillows to prop you up because of shortness of breath? 
 
     Every night 3 or more times 1-2 times a Less than once Never over the  
                               a week, but not     week       a week   past 2 weeks 
   every day 
 
          ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                      ⁯ 
 
9. Heart Failure  symptoms can worsen for a number of reasons.  How sure are you that you know what to do, or 
whom to call, if your heart failure  gets worse? 
 
      Not at all   Not very sure Somewhat sure Mostly sure Completely sure 
          sure 
          ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                     ⁯ 
 
10. How well do you understand what things you are able to do to keep your heart failure  symptoms from getting 
worse? (for example, weighing  yourself, eating a low salt diet, etc.) 
 
        Do not    Do not  Somewhat    Mos tly  Completely 
      understand understand            understand understand understand 
      at all very well 
         ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                     ⁯                      ⁯ 
 
 
11. Over the past 2 weeks, how much has your heart failure  limited your enjoyment of life? 
 
 It has extremely  It has limited     It has  It has slightly It has not limited  my 
    limited my my enjoyment moderately    limited my enjoyment of life 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 29   enjoyment of   of life quite  lim ited my enjoyment of         at all 
       life                      a bit  enjoyment of life         life 
 
       ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                     ⁯                      ⁯ 
 
 
 
12. If you had to spend the rest of your life with your heart failure  the way it is right n ow, how would you feel about 
this? 
 
     Not at all     Mostly Somewhat          Mostly satisfied Completely 
      satisfied dissatisfied   satisfied        satisfied         
         ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                     ⁯                      ⁯ 
 
13. Over the past 2 weeks, how often have you felt discouraged or down in the dumps because of your heart failure ? 
 
     I felt that way I felt that  way I occasionally  I rarely felt that I never felt that  
     all of  the most of the  felt that way          way         way   
         time     time          
 
          ⁯         ⁯          ⁯                     ⁯                      ⁯ 
 
14. How much does your heart failure  affect your lifestyle?  Please indicate how your heart failure  may have 
limited your participation in the following activities over the past 2 weeks? 
 
     Please place an X in one box on each line 
 
Activity      Severely  Limited         Moderately    Slightly                Did no t              Does not apply 
or did 
       limited             quite a bit         limited    limited              limit at all            not do for other 
reasons 
Hobbies, recreational 
       activities          ⁯        ⁯  ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                               ⁯  
Working or doing  
    household chores          ⁯                    ⁯                 ⁯          ⁯                       ⁯                               ⁯ 
Visiting family or friends 
    out of your home            ⁯        ⁯                 ⁯       ⁯                       ⁯                               ⁯ 
Intimate relationships 
   with loved ones ⁯                   ⁯                 ⁯       ⁯                       ⁯                               ⁯ 
 
 
Developed by John Spertus et al.,  Mid America Heart Institute, Saint Luke’s Hospital, Kansas City, MO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 30  
 
 
Part III: MedaMACS VAD Survey 
 
Thank you for taking the time to fill out this short survey.  We will be asking you several 
questions about your heart failure and a new therapy for heart failure.  This survey 
should take no more than 15 minutes of your time.  Your responses will remain 
confidential.   
1. Based on how you feel today and what you know about your heart failure, what is your 
best estimate
 of how much longer you have to live?  (choose one) 
A. Less than 6 months 
B. Between 6 months to 2 year  
C. Between 2 to 5 years 
D. More than 5 years 
 
Ventricular Assist Device 
 
There are many effective medical therapies available to treat congestive heart 
failure
.  Sometimes the heart can become too weak to pump enough blood to the body.  
At that stag
e, drugs may not be enough to treat heart failure.   
Mechanical heart pumps called ventricular assist devices, or VADs, are a way to 
improve the c
irculation of blood throughout the body.  These pumps do not replace the 
heart.  They only assist the heart in pumping blood to the body.  Once blood flow is 
improve
d, many patients have more energy and breathe easier.  Clinical studies show that 
select 
patients with severe heart failure live longer with an assist device than with drug 
treatm
ents alone.  
Placement of a VAD requires major open heart surgery.  The pump is placed 
inside the c
hest and abdomen and is connected to the heart.  The VAD also has a power 
line that lea
ves the body through the skin in the front of the abdomen and is attached to a 
power supply outside the body.  On average patients will remain in the hospital for about 
one month after surgery.   Once discharged from the hospital, most patients are able to 
return home and live independently.   
 
2. Based on how you feel right now and knowing only the above information above, 
which statement best describes how you would feel about having an assist device placed? 
 
A. I would DEFINITELY want it 
B. I would PROBABLY want it 
C. I don’t know if I would want it or not 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 31 D. I would PROBABLY NOT want it. 
E. I would DEFINITELY NOT want it 
 
3.  Suppose that your doctor told you with certainty that you only had a limited about of 
time to live.  The next series of questions will ask you to imagine different scenarios 
where you only have a certain amount of time left to live.      
(Check one box) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Would you want a ventricular assist device 
if you had:  
 Probably 
YES  Unsure  Probably  
NOT  
A. Less than 1 month to live?  
  
O  
O  
O 
B.  Less than 6 months to live?  
  
O  
O  
O 
C.  Less than 2 years to live?   
O  
O 
  
O 
D.  Less than 5 years to live?   
O  
O 
  
O 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 32  
 
 
 
 
 
4.  The next series of questions asks to imagine that you are experiencing various degrees 
of illness related to your heart failure.  Please consider each scenario in terms of how 
limited 
you might feel and whether or not you would want an assist device to feel better.  
(Check one
 box) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Would you want an assist device if:  
 Probably 
YES  Unsure  Probably  
NOT  
1.  In the intensive care unit with hours or days to 
live. 
  
O  
O  
O 
2.  In the hospital on intravenous  medicines to 
keep you alive, with only days or weeks to live.  
  
O  
O  
O 
3.  At home requiring continuous medicine 
through an intravenous  24 hours a day with 
weeks to months to live.   
O  
O  
O 
4.  At home and always breathless at rest and with 
light activities such as dressing or bathing.   
O  
O  
O 
5.  At home, comfortable at rest but breathless 
when walking around the house.   
O  
O  
O 
6.   At home but breathless after walking more 
than one block or more than one flight of stairs   
O  
O  
O 
7.   Not breathless during daily activities at home 
or after walking several blocks, but breathless 
with all other activities   
O  
O  
O 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 33  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Prior to this survey, have you heard about a ventricular assist device (VAD)? 
 A. Ye
s 
 B. No 
 C. Don’t know 
 
 
6.  If you have heard about an assist device before, how did you first hear about a VAD?  
 A.  Televisi
on/Radio 
 B.  Newspaper/Magazine 
 C.  Your health care provider  
 D.  Family members or friends 
 E.  The 
Internet 
 
7. Knowing what you know now about different treatments for severe heart failure, which 
of these ther
apies would you rather have? 
 A. Ventricular Assist Device 
 B. Heart Transplant 
 C. Don’t know 
 
8. Do you have a designated health care proxy or durable power of attorney for health 
care
? 
 A. Don’t know 
B. Yes
 
 C. No
 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 34  
The next series of questions focuses on treatment choices near the end of life.  Once 
again, all responses are confidential and will not be shared with your medical team.  
Please let us k
now if you wish to discuss any of these matters with your physicians. 
 
9. Many life-sustaining therapies are available near the end of the life.  These include 
dialysis
, breathing machines, tubes for feeing, and whether or not you would wish to be 
resuscitated if your breathing or heart stops beating.  Has your physician talked about 
your 
wishes regarding such life-sustaining therapies? 
A. Yes 
B.  No 
C. Don’t know 
 
10. At this time, if there are any life-sustaining therapies you do not w ant, please circle 
them below: 
  
 A. Chest compressions 
 B. B
eing placed on a breathing machine 
 C. Kidney dialysis 
 D. Transfer to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 
 E.  Feeding tube if unable to eat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part IV: Missing Data Form 
 
 
      
Check one response regarding WHY “self-report instruments” were not completed by the 
PATI
ENT: 
 
_____   too sick  
______ too tired  
_____   too stressed, anxious, and / or depressed 
_____   can’t concentrate 
_____   no time / too busy 
_____   too much trouble / don’t want to be bothered / not interested 
_____   unwilling to complete instruments, no reason given 
______ unable to read English and / or illiterate 
______ administrative (check specific reason below) 
_____No time, coordinator too busy to administer self-report instruments 
_____Coordinator forgot to administer self-report instruments 
_____Unable to contact patient face- to-face or per telephone  
_____Patient did not return mailed self-report instruments within the 
window for instrument completion 
  ______ other reason    
 (describe)_____________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 36  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part V: Supplemental Questions: 
 
 
1. In general, how comfortable would you be if your life depended on interacting with 
technology
 every day?  Please draw an “X” on the line below that best describes how you 
feel. 
 
  
 
 
Highly Uncomfortable                       Very Comfortable  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Trea
tments for heart disease can range from pills to pacemakers and even major heart 
surgeries.  Some patients are willing to undergo more aggressive treatment to survive, 
while others are reluctant to consider more aggressive therapies and wish to focus on 
comfort alone.  Based on how you feel today, please draw an “X” on the line below to 
indicate how you feel about medical treatments for your heart failure.   
 
 
 
Focus on Comfort Only                         Do Anything to Survive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 37  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: DATA ELEMENTS 
 
DEMOGRAPHICS  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Name  X       
Social security number  X       
Date of birth  X       
Gender  X       
Ethnicity  X       
Race  X       
Marital status  X   X    
Highest education level  X       
Working for income  X   X    
Height  X X      
Weight  X X X X X X 
Blood type  X       
Inpatient/Outpatient status  X X      
Context of referral*  X       
          
CLINICAL  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Time since first cardiac diagnosis  X   X  X 
Heart failure  hospitalizations in last 
12mos  X   X  X 
Primary cardiac diagnosis  X       
  Cancer  X       
  Congenital heart disease  X       
  Coronary artery disease  X       
  Dilated cardiomyopathy  X       
    Adriamycin  X       
    Toxic/Alcoholic  X       
    Familial  X       
    Idiopathic  X       
    Ischemic  X       
    Myocarditis  X       
    Other  X       
    Post-partum  X       
    Viral X       
  Hypertrophic  X       
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 38   Sarcoidosis  X       
  Other  X       
Previous cardiac operations  X   X  X 
  None  X   X  X 
  CABG  X   X  X 
  Aortic valve repair/replacement  X   X  X 
  Mitral valve repair/replacement  X   X  X 
  Congenital card surg  X   X  X 
  Aneurysmectomy  X   X  X 
  Other  X   X  X 
INTERMACS patient profile  X X X X X X 
  Modifiers: A, FF, none  X X X X X X 
Current NYHA class  X X X X X X 
Prior heart transplant evaluation  X X  X  X 
  Eval outcome: accept, reject, defer  X X  X  X 
Prior DT VAD evaluation  X X  X  X 
  Eval outcome: accept, reject, defer  X X  X  X 
Diabetes  X X  X  X 
Home oxygen  X X  X  X 
Previous renal replacement  X X  X  X 
  Any dialysis  X X  X  X 
  Any ultrafiltration  X X  X  X 
Recent intubation  X X  X  X 
Recent intraaortic counterpulsation  
(within 6m)  X X  X  X 
Inotrope Use in last 6 months  X X  X  X 
  Timing; which drugs  X X  X  X 
Length of time followed by program  X      
Referral source  X      
   Reason for referral  X       
COMORBID CONCERNS  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Advanced age  X   X  X 
Patient refuses transplant  X   X  X 
Frailty  X   X  X 
Contraindication to immunotherapy  X   X  X 
Malnutrition/cachexia  X   X  X 
Large body mass index  X   X  X 
Musculoskeletal limitations  X   X  X 
History of solid organ cancer  X   X  X 
History lymphoma, leukemia  X   X  X 
Major stroke  X   X  X 
Other cerebrovascular disease  X   X  X 
Renal dysfunction  X   X  X 
Pulmonary disease  X   X  X 
Severe diabetes  X   X  X 
Peripheral vascular disease  X   X  X 
Risk of recurrent infection  X   X  X 
Pulmonary hypertension  X   X  X 
Recent pulmonary embolus  X   X  X 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 39 Allosensitization  X   X  X 
Heparin -induced thrombocytopenia  X   X  X 
Current infection  X   X  X 
Limited cognition/understanding  X   X  X 
Limited social support  X   X  X 
History of illicit drug use  X   X  X 
History of alcohol abuse  X   X  X 
History of smoking  X   X  X 
Currently smoking  X   X  X 
Severe depression  X   X  X 
Other major psychiatric disorder  X   X  X 
Repeated non-compliance  X   X  X 
More than one prior sternotomy  X   X  X 
Mediastinal radiation  X   X  X 
Thoracic aortic disease  X   X  X 
History of hepatitis  X   X  X 
Chronic coagulopathy  X   X  X 
History of human immunodeficiency 
virus or AIDS  X   X  X 
History of GI ulcers  X   X  X 
History of atrial arrhythmias  X   X  X 
History of symptomatic ventricular 
tachycardia or defibrillator  shocks  X   X  X 
Other co -morbidity (specify)  X   X  X 
          
PHYSICAL  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Heart rate X X  X  X 
Blood pressure  X X  X  X 
Jugular venous pressure  X X  X  X 
S3 gallop  X X  X  X 
S4 gallop  X X  X  X 
Peripheral edema  X X  X  X 
Ascites  X X  X  X 
Hepatomegaly  X X  X  X 
          
EKG Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Rate  X X  X  X 
Rhythm: atria, ventricles , pacing  type X X  X  X 
QRS duration  X X  X  X 
          
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Date  X  X  (X) 
Left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction  X  X  (X) 
LV end -diastolic dimension  X  X  (X) 
Right ventricular  (RV) Indices  X  X  (X) 
  Qualitative RV Function  X  X  (X) 
  Qualitative RV Size  X  X  (X) 
  Maximum mid RV dimension  X  X  (X) 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 40   Tricuspid annular plane excursion  X  X  (X) 
  Tricuspid regurgitant  velocity  X  X  (X) 
Tricuspid regurgitation  (none, mild, mod, 
sev) X  X  (X) 
Mitral regurgitation  (none, mild, mod, 
sev) X  X  (X) 
Aortic stenosis  (none, mild, mod, sev)  X  X  (X) 
Aortic insufficiency  (none, mild, mod, 
sev) X  X  (X) 
Inferior vena cava size  X  X  (X) 
Inferior vena cava respiration  variation: 
yes, blunted, none  X  X  (X) 
Ancillary indices of RV function  X  X  (X) 
          
RIGHT HEART CATHETERIZATION  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m* 
If 
avail 18m 24m 
Date  X   X   
Therapies at cath: no iv, iv, iabp  X   X   
Systolic blood pressure  X   X   
Diastolic blood pressure  X   X   
heart rate  X   X   
Right atrial  pressure  X   X   
Pulmonary artery  systolic  pressure  X   X   
Pulmonary artery  diastolic  pressure  X   X   
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure  X   X   
PA saturation  X   X   
Cardiac output  X   X   
Cardiac index  X   X   
          
EXERCISE TESTING  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
6 minute walk distance  X X  X  X 
15 ft walk time (gait speed/frailty)  X X  X  X 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing  X  X    
  Resting heart rate  X  X    
  Peak heart rate  X  X    
  Peak oxygen uptake  X  X    
  Peak oxygen uptake  % predicted  X  X    
  Ventilatory efficiency (Ve/VCO2)  X  X    
  Peak respiratory exchange ratio  X  X    
          
MEDICAL AND DEVICE THERAPIES  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Meds: Current/Previous/No/Unknown          
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor  X X X X X X 
Angiotensin receptor blocker  X X X X X X 
Beta adrenergic blocker  X X X X X X 
Aldosterone antagonist  X X X X X X 
Potassium supplement  X X X X X X 
Long acting nitrate  X X X X X X 
Hydralazine  X X X X X X 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 41 Phosphodiesterase inhibitor  X X X X X X 
Digoxin  X X X X X X 
Loop diuretic + daily dose  X X X X X X 
Metolazone/thiazide  and frequency  X X X X X X 
Aspirin  X X X X X X 
Clopidogrel  X X X X X X 
Coumadin  X X X X X X 
Other anticoagulant  X X X X X X 
Statin  X X X X X X 
Allopurinol  X X X X X X 
Amiodarone  X X X X X X 
Other antiarrhythmic  X X X X X X 
ICD X X X X X X 
  If yes, dates of any ICD shocks  X X X X X X 
Cardiac resynchronization  X X X X X X 
  If < 6 months, implant date  X X X X X X 
Home oxygen  X X X X X X 
          
BLOOD LABORATORIES  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Chemistry          
  Sodium  X X  X  X 
  Potassium  X X  X  X 
  Creatinine  X X  X  X 
  Blood urea nitrogen  X X  X  X 
  Total bilirubin  X   X  X 
  Direct bilirubin  X   X  X 
  Aspartate aminotransferase/S GOT  X   X  X 
  Alanine aminotransferase/SGPT  X   X  X 
  B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)  X X  X  X 
  NT-pro-BNP X X  X  X 
Metabolism          
  Total cholesterol  X   X  X 
  Low density lipoprotein  X   X  X 
  High density lipoprotein  X   X  X 
  Triglycerides  X   X  X 
  Uric acid  X   X  X 
  C-reactive protein  X   X  X 
  Pre-albumin  X   X  X 
  Albumin  X   X  X 
Hematologic  X   X  X 
  White blood cell  X   X  X 
  % lymphocytes  X   X  X 
  Hemoglobin  X   X  X 
  Hematocrit  X   X  X 
  Platelet  X   X  X 
  International normalized ratio  X   X  X 
  Lupus anticoagulant  if available  X   X  X 
          
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 42 QOL/PREFERENCES  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
EuroQoL  X X X X X X 
  Thermometer  X X X X X X 
  5 functional domains  X X X X X X 
Kansas City Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire  X X  X  X 
Patient VAD survey instrument  X X  X  X 
Missing data survey   X X  X  X 
EVENTS/OUTCOMES  Baseline 
A Baseline 
B 6m 12m 18m 24m 
Death    X X X X X 
Primary cause of death (assigned by PI)    X X X X X 
  Sudden death    X X X X X 
Transplant    X X X X X 
Listed for Transplant    X X X X X 
  Listing status    X X X X X 
VAD, if yes then    X X X X X 
  Type of circulatory support    X X X X X 
  Device name    X X X X X 
  Intended Support Strategy    X  X  X 
Other Cardiac Procedure/Surgery 
(name)    X  X  X 
Chronic inotrope infusion    X  X  X 
Resuscitation (Code) Status   X  X  X 
Hospice   X  X  X 
Recovery of EF to ≥40%   X  X  X 
Current NYHA Functional Class    X  X  X 
Current INTERMACS Profile    X  X  X 
Hospitalization, reason for admission   X  X  X 
  Heart failure with iv diuresis or inotrope   X  X  X 
  Neurologic event   X  X  X 
  Major bleeding (non CNS)   X  X  X 
     Transfusion   X  X  X 
  Psychiatric episode   X  X  X 
  Major infection   X  X  X 
     Localized infection   X  X  X 
     Sepsis   X  X  X 
     Type of Infection   X  X  X 
         Bacterial   X  X  X 
         Fungal   X  X  X 
         Viral  X  X  X 
         Protozoan   X  X  X 
         Unknown   X  X  X 
      Intervention (IV, PO, surgery, other)   X  X  X 
  Cardiac tachyarrhythmia   X  X  X 
  Syncope cause unknown   X  X  X 
  Fever treated with antibiotics cause    
unknown   X  X  X 
  Arterial non -CNS thromboembolism   X  X  X 
  Venous thromboembolic event   X  X  X 
MedaMACS Pilot Protocol  
11/08/2011 
  
  
  Page 43   Myocardial infarction   X  X  X 
  Other cardiac cause (specify)   X  X  X 
  Non-cardiac cause (specify)   X  X  X 
  Elective procedure - cardiac   X  X  X 
  Elective procedure – noncardiac   X  X  X 
  Abnormal lab values   X  X  X 
 
 
 