IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 1 of 7   
             
TOPSS: TOlerability of transcranial direct current stimulation in Pediatric Stroke 
Survivors  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
Version Date: 07/20/2023  
                         
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 2 of 7  Protocol  Title:  TOPSS: TOlerability of transcranial direct current stimulation in Pediatric 
Stroke  Survivors  
Principal  Investigator: Stuart Fraser, MD  
 
Co-Investigators:  Nuray Yozbatiran, PhD,  PT. 
 
Study  Coordinator:  Melika Abrahams, RN, BSN. Research  Nurse  
 
Population: Patients who have arm weakness from a childhood  stroke 
Sample size –  5 
Gender – male and female 
Age – 5 to 19 years of age  
Geographic location – near UTHealth Houston  
 
Number  of Sites:  Single site – UT Health Houston 
Study  Duration:  Expected Duration 1 year 
Subject  Duration:  3 months  
 
 
General  Information  
- Stroke is defined as an abnormal blockage of a blood vessel or bleeding in the brain that leads to 
death of brain cells. Childhood stroke affects about 1 in 25,000 children every year and is a top 10 
cause of disability in pediatrics. The purpose of this study will be to assess the tolerability of a rehabilitation technique referred to as Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) in childhood 
stroke  survivors.  
Background Information 
− Hypothesis:  tDCS will be well tolerated in childhood stroke  survivors.  
− Background and Epidemiology: Pediatric Stroke is a major neurologic problem that is among the top 
ten causes of death in pediatrics.
1 Up to 75% of children suffer long- term neurologic impairment 
after stroke, with greater than one third suffering moderate to severe deficits years after their 
stroke.2–10 The 5 year direct medical costs of a single childhood stroke are over $130,000 per 
patient.11 Given the large number of disability -years caused by a single childhood stroke, 
development of adjunctive treatments to traditional rehabilitation therapy for children with stroke is imperative. Transcranial direct current stimulation is an important neuromodulatory technique 
that holds promise in improving the outcome of patients with childhood  stroke.  
− Notably, pediatric stroke, defined as stroke occurring before the 18th birthday, is divided into two 
types; perinatal stroke and childhood stroke. Perinatal stroke includes intracerebral hemorrhage or 
arterial ischemic stroke occurring between 28 weeks gestation and 28 postnatal days of life, and  
‘childhood stroke’ includes spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage and arterial ischemic stroke 
occurring between 28 days of life and 18 years of age .3 Childhood stroke o ccurs in approximately 1 
in 25,000 children  per year.3,6 This study  will be of childhood  stroke  survivors  with  arm impairment.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 3 of 7  − Summary of prior safety data: Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non -invasive 
neuromodulatory technique that has been studied extensively  in adult stroke and has been subject 
of early efficacy trials in childhood cerebral palsy. 12,13 This technique involves application of a small 
electrical current to the scalp during therapy sessions targeted at a specific impairment.14 The 
application of this small amount of current is thought to enhance neuroplasticity temporarily, and 
has shown benefit in motor learning in children and adults.15,16 A review safety paper in 2016 found 
that tDCS has been safe in adult and pediatric trials in the past. Mod eling data from that paper 
suggested that the current used in human studies of tDCS was likely 2 orders of magnitude lower 
than the amount needed to induce damage to brain tissue.12 In cerebral palsy, a study analyzing 
adverse events in 119 children over 1 2 years found no serious adverse events. 58% had prior brain 
injury and/or epilepsy and 43 of the patients were perinatal stroke survivors. There were no seizures 
or major adverse events. Mild tingling/itching was reported in 37% of patients.17 Another stu dy 
enrolled 13 patients with perinatal stroke, and also found no major adverse events, with similar rates of mild side  effects.
18 
− Summary of prior efficacy data: Importantly, 2 separate 2016 meta -analyses found treatment 
benefit in upper arm function for adult stroke patients receiving repeated sessions of tDCS vs 
sham.19,20 Due to these promising results in adult stroke, treatment- effect is currently under 
investi gation in the NINDS -funded TRANSPORT 2 trial; a multicenter, Phase II, randomized, sham - 
controlled trial evaluating the effect of bihemispheric tDCS in adults with arm impairment after stroke.  Efficacy  in perinatal  stroke  is being investigated  in the SPOR T trial,  with  results  likely  to be 
published in the next 2  years.
21 
Objectives  
− Primary objective: To evaluate the tolerability of tDCS in childhood stroke  survivors.  
o Tolerability will be evaluated  by 
 The percent of patients who are able to complete the study  
 The percent of patients that endorse mild side effects as documented on the 
‘Stimulation Monitoring Sheet’ (included  separately)  
 Monitoring of Peg -Board test results pre stimulation, post stimulation, and at the 
end therapy  session  
 Monitoring of Vital Signs (pulse and blood pressure) pre stimulation,  post 
stimulation, and at the end of the therapy  session.  
− Secondary Objectives: To assess for improvement in arm function in patients receiving tDCS and  
occupational therapy, 3 functional assessment visits will take  place.  
o At each visit, the patient will complete the following:  
 Fugl-Meyer Upper Extremity  Assessment  
 Canadian Occupational Performance  Measure  
 Box and Blocks  Test 
 Pediatric Stroke Outcome Measure  
 Melbourne Assessment of the Upper  Extremity  
Outcome Measures:  
o Tolerability Primary outcome  measure:  
 Percent of patients who complete the study, as defined by patients who complete 
the 1 -week post therapy assessment visit. P atients who voluntarily withdraw for any 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 4 of 7  reason or who stop due to an adverse event will be defined as not completing the 
study.  
o Tolerability Secondary outcome  measures  
 Percent of patients that endorse mild side effects as documented on the stimulation 
monitoring sheet. The stimulation monitoring sheet is filled out during each 
stimulation session pre and post  stimulation.  
 Percent of patients with hypotension or hypertension on blood pressure monitoring 
post stimulation and post therapy session. Time points for data collection will be 
pre-stimulation, post -stimulation, and post -therapy  session.  
 Percent of patients with worsening of the Peg- board test (decreased score by 5 or 
greater) on the Peg -Board Test post stimulation and at the end of therapy session 
compared to baseline score. Time point will be the end of each therapy  session.  
o Improvement in Arm Function Primary outcom e measure  
 Increase of 5 points or more on the Fugl -Meyer score of Upper extremity 
function at the 1 week post therapy  assessment.  
o Improvement in Arm Function Secondary Outcome  Measure  
 Increase  of 5 points  or more  on the Fugl-Meyer  score  of upper  extremity  function  at 
the 3 month post therapy  assessment.  
 
Study Design  
− This study is an unblinded interventional  trial.  
− Subjects will be childhood stroke survivors with chronic arm impairment, defined below in the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. 5 patients total will be  enrolled.  
The Primary Objective is to assess tolerability of tDCS. Tolerability will be evaluated by  
 The percent of patients who are able to complete the study  
• If any patients drop out due to tDCS related side effects, this would  be 
considered poorly  tolerated.  
 The percent of patients that endorse mild side effects as documented on the 
‘Stimulation Monitoring Sheet’ (included  separately)  
• We expect 40% of patients to endorse mild side effects per session that will 
be non -treatment  limiting.  
 Monitoring of Peg -Board  test results pre stimulation, post stimulation, and at the 
end therapy session to ensure no decrease (worsening) in score post stimulation.  
 Monitoring of Vital Signs (pulse and blood pressure) pre stimulation,  post 
stimulation, and at the end of the thera py session.  
− Study description and sample  timeline:  
o On enrollment, patients will have a study visit where they will have a Pediatric Stroke 
Outcome Measure completed by the PI as well as a medical history with the enrollment 
form. The study therapist will t hen complete the following assessments –  Fugl-Meyer  Score, 
Canadian Occupational Performance Measure, Box and Blocks test,  Melbourne.  
o The patient will then come for 5 sequential days of 2 hour long occupational therapy 
sessions augmented by tDCS for the first 20 minutes of the session. At arrival, the 
“stimulation safety sheet” will be completed by the occupational therapist (form attach ed). 
The saline soaked electrodes will be placed on the study subjects head and connected to  the 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 5 of 7  Soterix 1x1 LTE enabled tDCS device. Prior to beginning stimulation, the “Investigator 
Screening Form” checklist will be completed for each patie nt during each stimulation. 
Current output through the device will be sham stimulation on day 1, followed by steady 
increases to a maximum of 1mA in patients aged 5 -12 years old, and 1.5mA in patients aged 
13-19 years old, per the study design flow sheet a t the end of this protocol. The child and 
parents will be blinded to the sham stimulation. The investigators will not be, since all 
patients receive the same age based current protocol. Consequently, investigators will be 
aware it is sham stimulation on day 1. We have chosen to have sham stimulation on the first 
day to acquire baseline data for tolerability and reported side effects without current being passed through the electrodes, which we will report with descriptive statistics. Blood pressure, pulse r ate, and peg- board scores will be recorded as indicated on the stimulation 
safety sheet during each session.  
o A repeat assessment will be done by the occupational therapist one week post therapy 
completion.  
o There will be a repeat assessment visit 3 months p ost intervention.  
 
 
Study Population 
Patients to be enrolled will be childhood stroke survivors aged 5 -19 yrs. 'Childhood' stroke is defined by 
the American Heart Association as stroke occurring from 29 days of life to 18 years of life.  
− Inclusion  Criteria:  
1) Childhood stroke survivor -  either arterial ischemic stroke or intracerebral hemorrhage.  
2) Stroke  must  be childhood  onset,  defined  as occurring  day 29 of life to 18 years  of age (per the 
American Heart Association's definition of childhood  stroke)  
3) 3 months or greater from stroke  onset  
4) Arm impairment, defined as pediatric stroke outcome measure of 1 or greater of affected  arm.  
5) Affected arm Fugl- Meyer score of 60 or  lower.  
6) Able to partic ipate in occupational therapy  sessions.  
− Exclusion  Criteria:  
1) Uncontrolled epilepsy, defined as seizure within the past 6  months.  
2) Craniectomy without replacement of bone flap. Patients who underwent craniectomy will need 
the bone flap reattached prior to  participation.  
3) Presence of cranial metal implants or implant device that could be affected by tDCS: cochlear 
implant, implanted brain stimulator, or programmable ventriculoperitoneal shunt.  
 
Patients will be identified in the UTHealth Pediatric Stroke clinic by the PI, Dr. Stuart Fraser. Flyers for the study will also be available on the UTHealth website. The flyer is included in the study documents.  
 
Study Procedures  
− There will be 3 assessment visits and 5 therapy  visits.  
− Baseline  assessment  visit:  This visit will take  approximately  2 hours.  A study  physician  will fill out the 
‘medical history’ form and complete the Pediatric Stroke Outcome  Measure  
o The Pediatric  Stroke Outcome  Measure  is a standardized  neurologic  exam  used  for 
childhood stroke  survivors.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 6 of 7  o The therapist will complete 4  tests:  
 1) Fugl -Meyer test, a 30 minute therapy evaluation tool to assess arm  function  
 2) The Canadian Occupational Performance Measure, a structured interview to 
assess activities of daily  living  
 3) The Box and Blocks test – a two minute test of hand dexterity in which the subject 
moves blocks from one area to another while remaining  seated.  
 4) Melbourne Assessment of the Upper Extremity, a 30 minute unilateral 
assessment of the affected  arm.  
− 5 occupational therapy sessions. These will take approximately 2 hours  each.  
− The 2 follow up assessments are done at 1 week and 3 months post intervention. Each which will 
take  1-2 hours.  A study  physician  will perform  the Pediatric  Stroke  Outcome  Measure,  and the study 
therapist will perform the Fugl- Meyer test, the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure, 
Melbourne Assessment of the Upper Extremity and the Box and Blocks  test.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
− No major adverse events are expected. We will monitor for hypotension, tachycardia, and mild side 
effects like headache. We expect about 40% of patients will endorse the expected mild side effects: 
headache, numbness or tingling. We expect no patients will develop hypotension or  tachycardia.  
− If any patient does have a major adverse event, the intervention will be stopped, the event will be 
logged on the case report form and the patient will be given all usual emergency medical care. The event will be sent to the Data Safety Monitoring Board who will independently review the event and decide whether the event was caused by the intervention. If it is, the study will be discontinued and the protocol  revised.  
− There is a two person Data Safety Monitoring Board. Case Report Forms for all participants will be 
sent to the DSMB electronically after completion of the 1
st follow up assessment visit (1 week post 
intervention) for review. The DSMB will need to approve that the study can continue prior to beginning the intervention for the next patient.  
 
Statisti cs 
− As this is a 5 patient tolerability study, only descriptive statistics will be  used.  
− 5 patients total will be enrolled, and results will be reported with descriptive  statistics.  
− The trial will be terminated if there is a major safety event deemed to be due to the intervention by 
the DSMB.  
− All subjects will be included in the descriptive  analysis.  
 
Ethics  
− In-clinic. Potential participants will be informed about the study by the PI.  If given permission, the 
research  nurse  will approach  the patient  with  the consent  form  to enroll  them  in the study.  Subjects 
and parents will be able to voluntarily withdraw consent at any time and will continue to receive all 
standard of care medical treatment and evaluation as before enrollment in the  study.  
− A flyer for the study will be available on the UTHealth Stro ke Institute Website with information on 
how to reach the research nurse, Melika Abrahams, for information on the  study.  
 
Data handling and record keeping  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 7 of 7  − Source  documents  will be kept  in a double -locked  cabinet  in the Center  for Treatment  of Pediatric 
Neurodegenerative Disease, UTPB suite 1535.  
− CRF data will be entered into a password protected redcaps database after completion by  study 
staff. A linking log with patient identifiers (name, DOB) will be kept in a folder in the redcaps 
database.  
− Only  the PI, Co-PI, DSMB,  research  nurse,  OT, and research  coordinator will have  access  to patient 
information via the redcaps  database.  
− Human subjects will be not be identifiable through case report  forms.  
− Special Note: The Canadian Occupational Performance Measure is completed through a web -based 
application available at  https://app.thecopm.ca . Once completed, the COPM printout will be 
downloaded and stored in the redcaps  database.  
 
Quality control and assurance  
− The DSMB will monitor data for safety as  above  
− All investigators will have completed biomed ical researcher citi training as required. Data will be 
reviewed for accuracy by the PI and research  nurse.  
 
Publication Plan  
− The results are intended to be published in the American Heart Association Stroke Journal after 
study  completion.  
 
ATTACHMENTS 
 
1. Schematic of Study  Design  
2. Study  Schedule  
3. Consent  Documents  
o Parental, English and  spanish  
o Patient, English and  spanish  
o 7-17 year old Assent Forms, English and  spanish  
4. Case Report  Form  
o Medical  History  
o PSOM  
o Pre-intervention OT assessment forms  
 Fugl Meyer - Upper  Extremity  
 Box and Blocks  CRF 
 COPM to be performed through web based application –  https://app.thecopm.ca  
 Melbourne Assessment of the Upper Extremity  CRF 
o Day of tDCS screening  sheet  
o Day of tDCS safety  sheet  
o Post -intervention OT assessments 
 Fugl Meyer - Upper  Extremity  
 Box and Blocks  CRF 
 COPM to be performed through web based application –  https://app.thecopm.ca  
 Melb ourne Assessment of the Upper Extremity  CRF 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-23-0092 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/20/2023  Page 8 of 7  o 3 month post -intervention OT  assessments  
 Fugl Meyer - Upper  Extremity  
 Box and Blocks  CRF 
 COPM to be performed through web based application –  https://app.thecopm.ca  
 Melbourne Assessment of the Upper Extremity  CRF 
5. Linking Log 
6. Flyer  