TITLE PAGE
Immediate and Extended Wear Impact of Color 
Correcting Lenses on Color Vision Deficiency  
Protocol with statistical analysis and approved informed 
consent.
No NCT Number Assigned Yet.
July 13, 2022
Purpose  
The long -term objectives of this study is to extend upon our initial research  (Rabin, J., Silva, F., 
Trevino, N. et al. Performance enhancement in color deficiency with color -correcting lenses. Eye 36, 
1502 –1503 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433 -021-01924 -0) in which we showed improvements 
in CVDs with CCLs and after wearing CCLs. But the spectacles varied significantly between CVDs 
(some outdoor, some indoor), control measures were minimal, there were limitations on the full 
impact of brainwave measu res and new and improved CCLs have just been introduced which apply 
to both green and red color deficiency. Moreover, we found that potential changes in the brain can 
occur from wearing theses lenses in as little as 1 week or even less vs. what we reported  thus far in 
the seminal research of Werner and colleagues (Werner JS, Marsh -Armstrong B, Knoblauch K. 
Adaptive Changes in Color Vision  from Long -Term Filter Usage in Anomalous but Not Normal 
Trichromacy, Current Biology, 2020, 3011 -3015. https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.cub.2020.05.054) which 
only reported 12 day results. Finally, we wish to conduct our comprehensive vision research to 
correct limitations stated above AND within the proper parameters of a randomized clinical trial in 
which proper controls  will be  implemented for ALL CVD subjects to reach more definitive 
conclusions. Hence we wish to evaluate a larger sample of CVD subjects with a design which 
minimizes sources of variability, includes controls, and tests that better account for real -world 
performa nce. Moreover, we are recording both brainwaves and eye -waves to assess the retina, 
optic nerve and brain to localize  where changes may be occurring in the visual system in 
responses to wearing CCLs. Finally, we believe these lenses have potential occupati onal 
applications for CVDs excluded from certain jobs as well as in acquired CVD from eye and other 
diseases.  
Location  of Research  
All data collection and research analyses will take place in an air -conditioned research lab (Rm. 
268) fully equipped with all systems necessary to obtain color vision performance data (UIW
Rosenberg School of Optometry, 9725 Datapoint Drive, SA, TX 78229) .  Informed  consent  may 
occasionally  be administered  in and adjacent  study  room.  
Title of Study  
Immediate  and Extended  Wear  Impact  of Color  Correcting  Lenses  on Color  Vision  Deficiency  
 
Equipment  to Be Used  
 
 
1. Precision  Vision,  Inc. "Super  Vision  Test"  to measure  high contrast  visual  acuity  (VA) and Small  Letter  Contrast  
Sensitivity  (CS).  
2. Oculus  HMC  red-green  anomaloscope  to diagnosis  color  vision  normal  (CVN)  and color  vision  deficiency  (CVD)  
individuals.  
3. Ishihara  15-plate  color  vision  book  tests  to diagnose  CVN  vs. CVD  subjects.  
4. Cone  Specific  Contrast  Sensitivity  Test (CCT,  Innova  Systems,  Inc.) administered  on a calibrated  Microsoft  Surface  
Display.  
5. Cone  Contrast  Naming  Test administered  on a calibrated  Microsoft  Surface  Display.  
6. Cone  specific  VA, small  letter  CS, and large  letter  CS administered  on a calibrated  Microsoft  Surface  Display.  
7. Cone  Specific  Supra -threshold  Color  Matching  Test administered  on a calibrated  Microsoft  Surface  Display.  
8. "Cockpit"  color  identification  test displayed  on a 17" calibrated  LCD monitor.  
9. Cone specific visual brainwaves (visual -evoked potentials VEPs) and flash and pattern eye waves (electroretinograms, 
ERGs) recorded from a large LCD monitor (Diagnosys, LLC). Ear clip, surface and ERG electrodes D TL fiber electrodes 
(Diagnosys, LLC) will be used for recordings after appropriate cleansing of surface skin areas and application of 
conductive electrode paste as specified in detail in the methodology section.  
10. All CVD subjects will be tested with and without the newest indoor version of the EnChroma color vision correcting 
lenses (www.enchroma.com) as well as placebo neutral gray lenses which transmit the same amout of visible light but do 
not alter color) in a registered randomized clinical trial with crossover (to be explained in methodology and design 
sections). Five CVN control subjects  will also be tested  with the EC lenses  on the same  battery  of tests  to determine  if 
they alter color  vision  for CVNs,  and 15 CVNs  will be tested without CCLs or placebo lenses on the computer -based 
letter charts and electro -diagnostic tests to establish normative values for these tests . 
 
Duration  
We are requesting a total of 2 years for subject recruitment, comprehensive testing, data analyses and 
preparation of multiple abstracts for research presentation and multiple papers to sub mit for peer -reviewed 
publication.  
Funding  
 
The research and majority of researchers are being funded internally. Two student researchers (Kiana Hall and 
William Price) are being funded for by our  NIH/NEI  T35 Research  Grant  #1T35EY032441 -01A1.  EnChroma  
(www.enchroma.com)  is donat ing CCLs  and placebo  lenses  to each  CVD subject and two pair to use in -house for 
color measurements but is providing no funding or is involved in the design, data collection or data analyses.  
 
 
Financial  Conflict  of Interest  
 
Does  any member  of the project  team  hold financial  interest  in the funding  organization  or any similar  organization  (stocks,  board 
membership,  etc)? 
 
 
Yes 
No 
 
 
 
 

 
Hypothesis  
 
Null Hypothesis:  CCLs have no significant impact on color vision performance in  
CVDs.  
 
Experimental Hypo thesis:  CCLs can promote immediate improvement in color vision  
performance in CVDs and performance after one -week of daily wear. As reported  
previously, performance enhancement after one week of wear may persist if when not  
wearing the lenses indicating po ssible neuro -adaptive change . 
 
Statistical Design and Analysis  
 
A double blind randomized clinical crossover trial will be used to assess  the immediate and long -term 
effects on color vision of CCLs in CVDs.  Parametric within and between subjects ANOVA with post -hoc 
t-tests  corrected  for multiple comparisons will be utilized with primary focus on  within -subject 
comparisons including normal vs. defective cone  responses. Although subjects who wear the CCL 
lenses during week  one may show carry -over of this exposure to week two when weari ng the placebo 
lenses, we believe this may offer additional insight into the  time course and longevity of any effects 
from presumed neuro -adaptive  changes.  
 
Background and Review of Literature  
 
Normal color vision (CVN) depends on normal red, green, and blue sensitive cone photoreceptors. 8% 
of males and 0.5% (1/200)  females are color vision deficient (CVD), a no n progressive hereditary 
condition in which the red or green cone is missing, or more  commonly shifted in peak color sensitivity 
making it more difficult to tell colors apart and correctly identify colors (1,2). In addition to  hereditary 
CVD, color vision can be decreased at a clinical or subclinical level as an early sign of ocular, systemic 
and/or neurological  disease. (3 -7). CVN is required for aviation, military specialties, transportation, and 
law enforcement wherein color identification and  discrimina tion may be the only cue for critical 
decisions (3,4). A novel approach using notch filter spectacles (selective wavelength  blocking filters to 
increase differences in stimulation to red and green cones) was implemented by EnChroma®. 
Extended use by  CVDs f or two weeks demonstrated improvements in red -green color perception even  
without wearing the glasses at the 2 -week  testing point indicating possible neuro -adaptive/brain 
changes (8). We extended this evaluation by including both threshold (just  visible) a nd supra -threshold 
testing (readily visible) and found similar results (11). However, a major difference was that our testing  
was cone specific allowing us to more specifically compare findings from the defective and normal 
cones in red and green cone CVDs . Limitations of our initial pilot study included a large variability in the 
type of CCL glasses used (outdoor vs. indoor, red vs. green  specific). In addition, since we previously 
demonstrated enhanced binocular VEP responses in CVDs suggesting neural com pensation  
without CCLs (10), we will be conducting monocular VEP and ERG cone specific tests on all subjects  
to better identify CCL induced  immediate and long term changes on retinal, optic nerve and cortical 
objective responses. Finally, no study thus far  using these CCLs  has adhered to the tenets of a 
registered randomized clinical control cross -over design which we are conducting to definitively  
address the findings presented in prior studies.  
 
Significance  
 
This research has potential significant impact on occupational uses of CCLs, use of CCLs in 
acquir ed CVD, and to significantly  expand our knowledge of how neural plasticity can occur in 
adulthood, a common theme in multiple diseases including glaucoma,  Alzheimer and 
Parkinson disease.  
  
 
 
Subject Criteria  
 
We wish to test 20 CVDs and 15 CVNs. Based on high signifi cance achieved with 8 CVD 
subjects (Werner et al., 8) and 13 (Rabin et al., 11) we believe this will be sufficient to reveal 
significant within and between subject differences, particularly when conducted as a  
double -blind clinical trial with cross -over. F ive of the 15 CVN control subjects will be tested  
with and without the CCLs to investigate  any impact of these lenses on normal color vision, 
and 15 will be tested without CCLs on the computer -based letter charts, cockpit  display test, 
and electrodiagnosti c tests to establish initial normal values.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  Age 18 or older, no exclusion based on gender or ethnicity. Subjects must 
have no evidence of active eye,  neurological or uncontrolled systemic disease (e.g.,  
uncontrolled diabetes) and VA of at least 20/30 in each eye. Only (1) hereditary  CVDs will be 
included in this study verified by the failing scores on the red -green anomaloscope (outside 
system normal range) and  Ishihara testing (3 or more errors on 14 testable plates). CVNs 
must pass the  two tests using the same criteria.  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent:  Subjects will be recruited from CVD patients seen at 
RSO, subjects in the community with self -reported CVD with focus on UIW and  
RSO, relatives/friends of our Team and those who participated in prior studies (but not t hose 
involving the CCL lenses). Additionally, a  flyer will be circulated via email, the Word newsletter 
and UIWRSO social media to recruit subjects as needed . After initial recruitment based on 
email/telephone subjects will be scheduled for three visits at RSO (CVDs) and one visit for 
CVNs.  Upon arrival, each subject will be thoroughly briefed on the nature of the study, minimal 
risks, time per session (~2.5 hrs. per session  but not likely to exceed 2 hours), and  
compensation (CVDs keep their CCL glasses; CVNs will receive $10 HEB gift cards).  All 
research team members will collect deidentified data, enter these data into our cloud -based 
PW protected dat abase, participate in  analysis and preparation of deidentified results for 
presentation and submission for publication. Only the PI will have access to  identified PHI.  
 
Poten tial Benefit to Subjects  
CVD subjects will learn very specific information about the type and  severity of their color  
deficiency and may benefit from  the color vision correcting lenses.  
 
Privacy and Confidentiality . Security Measures for Data Storage and Collection  
A PW protected cloud -based drive will be used for deidentified data to be accessible ONLY to 
the research team. T he list of  participants with identifiable PHI will be stored by the PI on a 
single PW protected encrypted computer and in a locked filing cabinet only accessible to the PI 
or designees when needed.  
 
Methods  
 
After study briefing and subject provision of written informed consent, the following sequence 
of tests will be conducted. Half of the 20  CVD subjects will be randomized to initial treatment 
(CCLs) and half to initial or cont rol groups (placebo neutral lenses). Baseline  testing will be 
conducted with and without the lenses, then be requested to wear the lenses for a minimum of 
three hours per day,  followed by retesting with/without lenses 7 days later. On the next 1 -3 
days the  subject will then : cross -over to the lens not yet worn,  undergo testing, and be tested 
again 7 days later. Neither subjects or Interns administrating the tests will be aware of which 
lenses the  subject is wearing (double -blind clinical trial). On all test s the order of testing with  
with and without lenses will be randomized across  subjects to control for potential order 
effects. Those tests marked by an asterisk will be retested on CVD subjects during each  
session. Additional controls for order effects are  specified below.  
  
 
 
1. Precision Vision, Inc. "Super Vision Test" to measure high contrast visual acuity (VA) 
and Small Letter Contrast Sensitivity (CS) in   right and left eyes at 4m in a darkened 
room; only at baseline.  
2. Oculus HMC anomaloscope to diagnosi s CVN and CVD subjects; only at baseline.  
3. Ishihara 15 -plate (14 testable plates, one demo) color vision book test to diagnose CVN 
vs. CVD; only at baseline.  
4. *Cone Specific Contrast Sensitivity Test (CCT, Innova Systems, Inc.) administered 
binocularly in a darkened room on a calibrated  Microsoft Surface Display at 3 ft. (91.44 
cm). A cone specific letter appears in the center of the display and the subject u ses a 
mouse  to choose the letter seen from an adjacent matching display. A response driven 
staircase  determines the lowest red, green and blue  cone contrast seen (cone CS; 100 - 
point scale) with  testing conducted with and without CCLs and placebo lenses.  
5. *Cone Contrast Naming Test (CCNT) administered binocularly at 3 ft. in a darkened 
room on a calibrated Microsoft Surface  Display. Red, green and blue cone specific 
letters and black/white luminance letters of varying contrast appear in the display center  
6. and the subject identifies the letters seen and their color names with the lowest contrast 
seen (cone CS) and number and type of  color names correct scored on a 100 -point 
scale. Letter sequence and testing with and without CCLs and placebo lenses.  
7. *Cone  specific VA, small letter CS, and large letter CS administered on a calibrated  
Microsoft Surface Display using computer  generated letter charts at 3 ft. (91.44 cm) in a 
darkened room. CVD subjects will be tested with/without CCLs and placebo in separate  
session with VA and CS scored as the number of letters read correctly in log MAR units 
for VA and log CS for cone CS.  
8. *Cone Specific Supra -threshold Color Matching Test administered on a calibrated 
Microsoft Surface Display binocularly in a  darkened room  at 60 cm for each session. 
Red Cone Test for red CVDs: a red letter “E” will be displayed on the left half of the 
screen  and three green Letter E's on displayed vertically on the right half of the screen 
with contrasts of 16 – 8% in 0.15 log steps with  contrast order randomized and 
numbered letters numbered 1 - 3. On each of three trials the subject will match the 
perceived visibility and brightness of the red letter (displayed individually in randomized 
contrasts ranging from 16 – 8% in 0.15 log steps) to  the number  of the green letter it 
matches. The subject will then conduct the same task matching each green letter 
shown individually on the left to  a series of three green letters on the right. The Green 
Cone Test for green cone CVDs will require the subj ect to match a single green  cone 
letter to a series of red cone letters on the right using the same contrasts specified 
above, followed a match between red to red.  As in prior studies, it is anticipated that 
CVDs will match higher contrasts of their defect ive cone type to lower contrasts of their 
normal  cone type. Testing will be conducted with/without CCLs.  
9. *The "Cockpit" color identification test displays 35 small colored airplane symbols with 
five of each of seven colors (red, green,  blue, purple, yel low, orange, grey) on a 17" 
calibrated  LCD display. On each trial the subject will be told to eliminate one of the four  
colors, and then immediately uses the mouse to click on the five airplane symbols of the 
specified color as fast as possible. On each  of the seven trials the 35 symbols appear in 
randomized placement on a black background and the program tabulates the time 
taken  to complete all five symbols, total time and errors made. All subjects will be tested 
binocularly at 50 -60 cm with and without th e CCLs.  
10. *Cone specific visual brainwaves (visual -evoked potentials, VEPs, 10,11) and flash and  
pattern eye waves (electroretinograms,  ERGs) will be recorded monocularly from the 
subject’s stated preferred eye with the fellow eye occluded by an eye patch . For VEPs,  
ear clip electrodes will be applied to each earlobe with conductive electrode paste after 
cleaning each earlobe with an electrode skin  cleanser (Nu -Prep, Diagnosys, LLC) and 
an alcohol pad. The  back of the head will be cleaned with the same agents 1cm above 
the inion and a gold cup electrode will be taped to this active site with conductive paste 
and secured by a headband.  The active elec trode  will be at the back of the head with 
reference electrode on the ipsilateral  earlobe and ground on the opposite earlobe. 
VEPs will be  recorded to red, green and  blue cone checkerboard patterns presented at  
 
 
57 cm in a darkened room in pattern onset  mode (10,11).  Pattern onset ERGs will be 
recorded at 57 cm from the same display with check sizes  of 3 degrees for red and 
green cones and a 5  degree check size for blue cones in pattern onset mode. Flash 
ERGs will recorded at a distance of 30 cm from the dis play to fill the  atient's field with 
an onset red, green and blue cone flash ERG with the subject supported by  a chin and 
headrest. For ERGs the ear  clip electrodes will again serve as reference and  ground, 
and the active electrode will be an FDA approved  disposable DTL micro -fiber electrode 
(Diagnosys, LLC; FDA Approved Class II https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts ) which 
is attached to adhesive discs on  each end which are affixed to the corners (inner and  
outer canthi) of each eye. Prior to electrode a pplication, 1 drop of the ocular  anesthetic 
(Proparacaine Hydrochloride Ophthalmic Solution  www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/ob/results_product.cfm?Appl Type=A&ApplNo=040277#22240)  will be 
instilled after ensuring that the subject has no allergy to this  medication. The adhesive 
discs  will then be attached to the canthi of each eye and the filament will be draped 
over the white of the eye below the limbus (lower border  of colored part of eye). If the 
subject does not wish to use this electrode an infraorb ital skin electrode (gold cup with 
electrode paste)  will be taped on the lower lid directly below the center of the eye. 
During testing, electrode impedance (resistance) will be maintained  at no more than 5 
kiloohms in accord with international standards ( www.iscev.org). ERG and VEP order of  
testing will be randomized  across subjects and this testing will be conducted at each of 
the three sessions in CVD.  
 
References  
 
1. Krill AE: Clinical characteristics. In: Krill AR, Archer DB, eds. Krill’s Hereditary Retinal 
and Choroidal Diseases. vol. 2. New York:  Harper and Ro w; 1977 :335–390. 
2. Pokorny J, Smith VC, Verriest G, eds. Congenital  and Acquired Color Defects. New 
York: Grun e and Stratton; 1979.  
3. Cole BL, Maddocks JD. Color vision testing by Farnsworth lantern and ability to identify 
approach -path signal colors. Aviat  Space Environ Med. 2008 ;79:585 –590. 
4. Spaulding JAB, Cole BL, M ir FA. Advice for medical students and practitioners with 
colour vision deficiency: a website resource.  Clin Exp Optom.  2010;93:40 –41. 
5. Rabin J. Cone specific measures of human color vision. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 
1996;37:27 71–2774.  
6. Rabin J. Quant ification of color vision with cone contrast sensitivity. Vis Neurosci. 
2004;21:48 3–485. 
7. Rabin J, Gooch J, Ivan D. Rapid quantification of color vision: the cone contrast test. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Feb  
8. 9;52(2): 816-20. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10 -6283. 
9. Werner JS, Marsh -Armstrong B, Knoblauch K. Adaptive Changes in Color Vision from 
Long -Term Filter Usage in Anomalous  but Not Normal Trichromacy, Current Biology, 
2020, 3011 -3015.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.054.  
10. Rabin JC, Kryder AC, Lam D. Diagnosis of Normal and Abnormal Color Vision with 
Cone -Specific VEPs. Trans. Vis. Sci. Tech.  2016;5(3) :8. doi.org/10.1167/tvst.5.3.8.  
11. Rabin, J., Kryder, A. and Lam, D. (2018), Binocular facilitation of cone -specific visual 
evoked potentials in colo ur deficiency. Clin  Exp Optom, 101: 69 -72. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cxo.12567  
12. Rabin, J., Silva, F., Trevino, N. et al. Performance enhancement in color deficiency with 
color -correcting lenses. Eye 36, 1502 –1503 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433 -021-
01924 -0 
IRB# 2022 -1191-EXP       Approved 6/30/22  UIW Informed Consent Document  
Protocol Title : Immediate and Extended Wear Impact of Color Correcting Lenses on Color Vision Deficiency  
 
Principal Investigator:  Jeff Rabin , OD, MS, PhD, Professor  (rabin@uiwtx.edu ) 
Assistant  Dean for Graduate Studies , Research  and Assessment  
UIW Rosenberg School of Optometry  
9725 Datapoint Drive, San Antonio, TX  78229 , 210-883-1197  
 
Co-Investigator   Poole, Erica L.   elpoole@student.uiwtx.edu   
Co-Investigator   Silva, Frances M.   fmsilva@student.uiwtx.edu   
Intern -Investigator  Hall, Kiana   kdhall@student.uiwtx.edu   
Intern -Inves tigator  Price, William A.    waprice@student.uiwtx.edu   
Intern -Investigator  Somphruek, Rathanart  somphrue@student.uiwtx.edu   
Intern -Investigator  Sailors, Venessa M.  vsailors@student.uiwtx.edu   
Intern -Investigator  Andrews, Brazil K.  bfulp@student.uiwtx.ed u  
Intern -Investigator  Kaur, Gurjiv   gukaur@student.uiwtx.edu   
   
1. Key Information:  
a. Research Statement. You have been asked to volunteer as one of 35 subjects in the research project 
named above.  
b. Background and Purpose of the Research:  Color blindness, or color vision def iciency, affects 8% of 
males and only 1 in 200 females . It is not true “color blindness” but a decrease  or deficiency  in the 
ability to tell colors apart and name color s correctly. In the past , colored filters have been used to  try to 
correct color deficiency  but with very little  success. In this research study our purpose is to determine if 
newer color  vision  correcting glasses can improve color vision in individuals with mild to moderate 
color  deficiency . 
c. What you are being asked to do :  If you have color deficiency, y ou will be asked to participate in one 
baseline  testing session  and 2 additional  session s each 1 -week later for a total  of two week s. Each 
session will last no more than 2.5 hours.  In session one , you will take a battery of color vision tests both 
with and without the lenses we give you  which will either wrap around your glasses or can be worn 
without glasses. Following this baseline tes t session, we will ask you to wea r the glasses you tested 
with, at home/school/work 3 hours per day mainly during indoor tasks but you may w ear them outdoors 
as well and we will give you a n electronic or hard copy log to record the number of hours you wore the 
lenses each day. You will then return to our research area 7 days later and be retested on the same tests 
with and without the lenses we gave you.  We will then ask you to return on the next day or within 3 
days to ag ain be tested with and without lenses we give you , and again you to wear these lenses for a 
minimum of 3 hours/day for 7 days and then return for the final test session in which the same tests will 
be repeated with and without the lenses.  At this point , we will ask you to answer a brief questionnaire 
and will then be given the lenses you felt most beneficial in improving you r color vision.  Color vision 
normal subjects will be tested  within a single 1.5  - 2.5-hour session and be give n a $10 HEB  card for 
participation. During each session you will be asked to participate in the following tests:  
i. Visual acuity  (smallest letters you can see ) and contrast sensitivity (dimmest letters you can 
see; session  1 only ). 
ii. Ability to match a mixture of red and green to an adjacent yellow (session 1 only.)  
iii. Ability to identify colored  numbers in a color book test  (session 1 only) . 
iv. Ability to  identify smallest and dimmest (low contrast)  red, green , and bluish  letters  using 
several c omputer tests , and in one test you will be asked to name the color your see . 
v. Ability to  identify color ed aircraft symbols  using a mouse on a computer display  and your 
ability to match the brightness and visibility of red and green colored letter “E’s”.  
vi. Visual brainwaves  (visual evoked poten tials)  and eye  waves  (electroretinograms)  in response 
to red, green , and blue color patterns  which flash on a nd off on a  computer screen.  We will 
tape an electrode to the back of your head  to record brain waves  and ear -clip electrode s to 
each earlobe with conductive paste . We will also instill one drop of anesthetic  to your 
preferred eye and apply an FDA -approved  very thin filament electrode just above your lower 
lid to record eye  waves . Both tests are clinically very common , painless, involves  no risk and  
your earlobes and back of your head will be cleaned with  an alco hol pad after testing.  
vii. You will be asked to complete a brief written questionnaire after completion of the study.     
 
IRB# 2022 -1191-EXP       Approved 6/30/22  2. What are the possible risks of being in this  study?   There is no expected discomfort associated with this study. 
There are no risks involved beyond those experienced during a standard eye exam  which includes reading letters 
from charts and displays . The brainwaves  and eye waves  are standard FDA -approved  procedure s with no greater 
risk than a standard eye exam.  
 
3. Precautions for Female Subjects:  There are no precautions  required for female subjects.  
 
4. Benefits:   If you have color deficiency, y ou may retain the color correcting glasses after complet ion of the study  
to hopefully enhance your color vision.  
 
5. Compensation: If do not you have color vision deficiency you may keep the color ed glasses you were wearing 
during the two -week period  and if color vision normal be given a $10 HEB gift card.  
 
6. Confidentiality:  Everything we learn about you in the study will be confidential. If we publish results of the study, 
you will not be identified in any way.  
 
7. Clinical Findings:   After completion of  your participation, we will share any results we find with  you at your 
request, including clinical findings on all tests.  If any finding is unusual or deemed abnormal, we will notify you 
and assist you in scheduling an appropriate eye appointment.  
 
8. What are the alternatives to being in this research study?  Instead of being in this research study , you can 
choose not to participate.  
 
9. Stop the Study: Your decision to take part in the study is voluntary.  You are free to choose not to take p art in 
the study or to stop taking part at any time. If you choose not to take part or to stop at any time, it will not affect 
your c urrent or future status at UIW , RSO, or any job , school , or company you are affiliated with . 
 
10. Consent for Future Use of Data (please initial one of the following):  
_____I give permission for my deidentified data to be used in the future for additional analysis or other relevant 
research studies. I understand that no additional informed consent for this use will be sought. I  understand that 
my deidentified data can be stored indefinitely.  
_____I give my permission for my data to be used for this research study only. I do not give permission for any 
future use beyond the scope of this research study. I understand that my data will be destroyed within 5 years 
after completion of this study.  
 
11. COVID -19 Precautions : COVID -19 preventive measures will be enforced to ensure optimal health and 
safety for all participants and study personnel to minimize spread of infection as specified by our UIW 
Approved Clinic Safety Plan:  
a. All research will be conducted in accord with the current UIW -approved  Clinic Safety Plan.  
b. All equipment will be thoroughly cleaned prior to subject testing . 
c. Participants will be given the option to wear a protective  mask (provided) during testing.  
d. All research personnel will wear a protective mask when in close proximity to you.  
 
12. Questions, Clarification or Concerns:  If you have any questions now, feel free to ask us. If you have 
additional questions later or wish to report a problem that may be related to the study, please contact the 
UIW Human Subjects Institutional Review Board: Phone (210) 805 -3565, email : koaustin@uiwtx.edu    
    
If you agree to participate, will be given a signed copy of this consent form  after study completion . Your signature 
indicates that you (1) consent to take part in this research study, (2) that you have read and understand the 
information given above, and (3) that the information above was explained to you.  You will be given a signed copy 
of this consent form.  
 
___________________________ ________     _____________________________  
Signature of Participant       Date  
 
 
___________________________ ________     _____________________________  
Signature of Principal Investigator or D esignee    Date   