1 
  
 
 
 
Yeast -derived beta-glucan supplementation on antibody response following  influenza 
vaccination: A randomized, placebo -controlled study (M -Unity).  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date: 11 -21-2023  
  
2 
 Title : Yeast-derived  beta-glucan  supplementation  on antibody response following  influenza 
vaccination : A randomized, placebo -controlled study  (M-Unity) . 
 
Princip al Investigator  
Wendy Dahl RD PhD  
Associate Professor  
Food Science and Human Nutrition Department  UF/IFAS and Center for Nutritional Sciences  
359 FSHN Building Newell Drive  
Gainesville, FL 32611  USA  
e-mail: wdahl@ufl.edu  
Tel: 352 -294-3707   
 
Research Site s  
FSHN Clinical Lab , Food Science and Human Nutrition Department  
Food Science and Human Nutrition Department UF/IFAS and Center for Nutritional Sciences  
359 FSHN Building Newell Drive  
Gainesville, FL 32611 USA  
 
Oak Hammock Retirement Community  
5100 SW 25th Blvd,  
Gainesville, FL 32608  
 
Village at Gainesville  
8000 NW 27th Boulevard  
Gainesville, FL 32606  
 
Clinical Research Center  
Clinical Translational Science Institute  
2004 Mowry Road, Gainesville, FL 32610  
 
Study Sponsor  
 
Danstar Ferment AG  
Poststrasse 30  
6300 Zug  
Switzerland  
 
Sponsor Contact:  
Thomas A. Tompkins, Ph.D.  
Health Ingredients Research & Innovation Director  
Lallemand Bio Ingredients  
6100 ave Royalmount  
Montreal, QC  
Canada H4P 2R2  
Tel: 514 944 3942  
Email:  ttompkins@lallemand.com  
3 
 Background  
Functional differences in the aging immune system has been studied in animal models and humans 
(Nikolich -Žugich 2014; Scholz et al. 2013) . It has been proposed that these differences are due to 
immunosenescence, a term used to describe the decline in immune system function with older age . 
With aging , there is not only an increase in the severity of viral and bacterial infections but also a 
decrease in vaccine immunological responses, which often leads to a failure to induce long -term 
protective immunity (Crooke et al. 2019) . Hence, there is a need of adjuvant  nutritional therapies  
to improve the immunological response  to vaccination . Beta -glucans have been shown to enhance 
the innate and adaptive immune responses in cell cultures, animal models, and humans  (Harnack 
et al. 2009; Hetland and Sandven 2002; Lehne et al. 2006; Sandvik et al. 2007; Tsukada et al. 
2003; Yu et al. 2015) . Thus, adults  over the age of 50 years  receiving the influenza vaccination 
may benefit in terms of their immunological response from supplementation with beta -glucans.  
Study Aims and Outcomes  
 
The primary aim of the study is to determine the effects of beta-glucan , a dietary fiber supplement  
isolated from baker’s yeast , on immune response to the influenza vaccine .  
 
Primary outcome  
 
• Change in immune response to the influenza vaccine after beta-glucan  supplementation 
[Time  Frame:  28 days ( Baseline (d ay 1), pre-vaccine visit ( ~day 1), and study end (~day 
28)]; Influenza -specific antibodies (IgM, IgG influenza A and B) . 
Secondary outcomes  
 
• Inflammatory cytokine profile ( TNF -α, IL -1β, IL -6, IL -8, and IFN -γ) [Time  Frame:  28 
days ( Pre-vaccine visit,  post-vaccine visit ( ~day 2-3) and study end )] 
• Self-reported i ncidence of influenza  and COVID -19 (Note: Data of subjects reporting 
incidence of influenza or COVID -19 during the study will be excluded from the final 
analysis)  [Time  Frame:  28 days]  
• Number of subjects with fever during the study [Time  Frame:  28 days] Body temperature 
(ºC) 
• Number of subjects with cold and flu symptoms  [Time  Frame:  28 days] Modified 
Jackson Criteria  
• Fatigue [Time Frame: 28 days (Days 1  – 28) 
Additional information  collected  
 
• Demographic data  
• Adverse events   
• Vaccinations  (including COVID -19 booster)  received during the month prior to the study 
start and during the study period  
• Compliance  
4 
 o Reported intake of the supplement.  
o Number of u nconsumed supplement s (returned ) 
 
Study Participants  
 
This is a 2 -arm placebo, controlled study. A total of 120 volunteers ( 60 in each arm) will be 
recruited for the study. Subjects who do not meet the inclusion criteria or who meet any of the 
exclusion criteria will not be eligible to participate.  
 
Sample Size Calculation  
 
This is a pilot study, and thus sample size is based on similar published studies.  
 
Inclusion criteria   
1. Adult volunteers  ≥40 years of age.  
2. Planning to be vaccinated for influenza  
3. Have been i mmunized for COVID -19 (self-disclosure)  
4. Willing and able to provide written informed consent  in English.  
5. Willing and able to comply with all the study -related procedures , including attending to 
study visits for blood draw, taking the influenza vaccine, intake of the study supplement , 
and completing study questionnaires.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Demonstrate an inability to comply with the study -related procedures.  
2. Have a h istory of a severe reaction or hypersensitivity following vaccination with 
influenza  vaccine , vaccination with any other vaccine  containing the same substances , or 
intake of the study product.  
3. Be on  immune -suppressing treatment (e.g., steroid s (last 30 days) ; cytotoxic drugs,  
medical surgery, or radiation therapy  during  the 6 months , previous to enrollment ). 
4. Be concurrently participating in a clinical trial that, in the judgement of the investigator, 
would interfere with the evaluation of the study outcomes.  
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Both men and women and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
Recruitment  
Potential participants will be recruited through flyers and word of mouth  at the University of 
Florida , Oak Hammock Retirement Community , the Village at Gainesville, and the Gainesville 
Senior Center . We may also  distribute the flyer through the Food Science and Human Nutrition 
(FSHN) department's website and Facebook page  and through FSHN department faculty and staff 
listservs and Oak Hammock listserv.  In addition, we will recruit through flyers and word of mouth 
at Gainesville and area churches, senior centers, senior communities, and local gyms as well as 
place an ad in the Gainesville Sun newspaper. Individuals interested in participating will be given 
the option  to attend informational meetings  in which the study will be explained in more detail. 
5 
 Pre-screening will occur via an in-person interview or telephone contact script. The study will be 
described to the potential study participant using the approved script and the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria will be read. Potential study participants will be directed to listen to the criteria, without 
directly answering (stating “yes” or “no”) after each criterion is read, and then decide whether they 
would like to continue with study procedures. If the potential participant is still interested in 
participat ing and still believes they may qualify, an appointment will be scheduled for consenting.   
Investigational Product (IP)  
 
Manufacturing and Storage  
The Investigational Product s (beta-glucan  and placebo ) will be manufactured by Biotec 
Betaglucans (Lallemand inc., Tromsø, Norway)  and provided to the study site , FSHN Clinical Lab, 
Food Science and Human Nutrition Department . The IP will be carefully stored at the study site 
in a lockable, limited access area, accessible only by study team personnel in compliance with 
pertinent regulations. Only authorized persons will have access to the IP. The IP should be stored 
3–10 °C . 
 
Beta-Glucan  
The product under study is beta-glucan  at 500 mg /day (2 capsules per day) . The group randomized 
to the beta-glucan intervention  will receive sufficient IP to cover the entire length of the 
intervention period  (28 days) . 
Placebo  
The placebo product is cellulose , an inert dietary fiber , 500 mg /day (2 capsules per day) . The 
product has a very similar appearance, texture and taste as the beta-glucan  product  and will have 
identical packaging. The group randomized to the placebo intervention  will receive  sufficient IP 
to cover the entire length of the intervention period  (28 days) . 
Direction of Use  
Participants will be instructed to consume the supplement (500 mg/d) for 28 days following  the 
influenza vaccination.  
Study design  
This is a 6-week randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, 2 -arm parallel study designed to 
evaluate  the adjuvant effect of beta-glucan dietary supplement ation  during influenza vaccination. 
This study will have a  28-day intervention period .  
During the pre -screening  by telephone or in -person , the study and inclusion and exclusion criteria 
will be explained. Any restrictions linked to the study will also be explained. Sufficient time will 
be allowed for the potential participants to decide whether or not they wish to participate in the 
clinica l study.  If the potential participant decides to participate, a screening appointment will be  
scheduled to sign the informed consent and to perform the first study activities .   
6 
 During the screening  appointment  (by Zoom  or in person ), the inclusion and exclusion criteria will 
be reviewed  without responses to the individual items , and if the participant believes they are 
qualified, the informed consent will be signed via RedCap  or in person . Following informed 
consent, the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed again, this time  with responses to 
each item  and recorded.  Each study participant will receive a unique identifier . Within 24 -hr prior 
to Visit 1, links to the Qualtrics d emographic form (age, sex, race,  and ethnicity ) will be sent to 
participants for completion . Alternativel y, the participant will be given the option of completing 
the questionnaire in person during Visit 1. At Visit 1, a baseline blood draw will be performed , 
and the participants will be randomized to either the beta -glucan or placebo group and  will be 
instructed about the daily consumption of the IP for 28 days. Participants will then receive an 
influenza vaccine.  Take-away breakfast s will be offered  following blood draws . Participant s will 
be requested  to complete  an online  Qualtrics or paper -based daily questionnaire  of compliance , 
and cold , and flu and fatigue symptoms  throughout  the 28-day study . 
A second  blood draw within 24 -48 hours following their influenza vaccination (Visit 2) will be 
taken . A final blood draw will be completed  on day 28 (Visit 3 - study end) . Adverse events, 
including any illnesses, will be queried.  
 
Randomization  
Participants will be randomized to either the beta-glucan  or the placebo group in a 1:1 fashion. 
Randomization will be used in this study to avoid bias in the assignment of participants to 
intervention, to increase the likelihood that known and unknown participant attributes (e.g., 
demographics and baseline char acteristics) are balanced across intervention groups, and to ensure 
the validity of statistical comparisons across intervention groups.  
Randomization will be done by a computer -generated  code, sealed envelope method and 
completed by an individual not involved in the study. Each random allocation will be arranged to 
fit on a single sheet of white paper that indicated the study sequence, and which also had blank 
spaces for the participant’s stud y number, date, the number of IP provided to the participant, and 
the number of IP returned by the participant. These sheets will be placed in envelopes and sealed. 
Each envelope will have an envelope number printed on it. The study staff will unseal the 
envelopes and assign the participant to a study sequence.  
Blinding  
Prior to delivery to the study site, the beta-glucan  and placebo will be coded by an unblinded 
personnel at Lallemand inc. who will have no direct contact with participants, and no involvement 
with study procedures.  Blinding to intervention will be used to reduce bias during data collection 
and evaluation of outcomes.  
 
 
 
7 
 Unblinding  
Unblinding should not occur except in the case of an emergency. In the event that a serious adverse 
event (SAE) occurs, for which the identity of the study supplement administered is necessary to 
manage the participant’s condition, the randomization code f or that participant may be broken and 
the study supplements identified.  
All emergency code breaks must be reported to Lallemand inc. project manager within 24 hours. 
The time, date, reason and who broke the blind, must be documented in the source documents. 
Details of participants who are unblinded during the study will be included in the final report.  
The probiotic and placebo will be double coded, so in the event of a n SAE and unblinding of one 
code, information about 75% of the subjects will remain blinded.  
Compliance  
Compliance and adverse events will be monitored  in the daily questionnaire throughout the 
intervention phase. Compliance also will be assessed  by counting the number of study supplement s 
returned by the participant at the end of the intervention. Compliance is calculated by determining 
the number of study supplements consumed from start of study IP (V1) to end of study IP (V 3) 
divided by the number expected to have been taken multiplied by 100 to obtain the percentage 
consumed. Participants found to have a compliance of <80% will be considered noncompliant.  
 
Data Analysis Plan  
 
Statistical consultation will be utilized for data analyses. Statistical methods will be consistent with 
the CONSORT 2010 Statement (including statistical methods used to compare groups for primary 
and secondary outcomes and methods for additional analyses , such as subgroup analyses and 
adjusted analyses).  
 
Data Management Plan  
 
Data about the intervention effects will be collected from the participants electronically and on 
paper. Data and files will be secured in locked filling cabinets and office space.  Paper 
questionnaires will only include date and research study assigned participant number.  Data that is 
originally captured as hardcopy/paper (e.g., demographics and vital signs ) will be transcribed to 
encrypted electronic files.  
 
Following the completion of the study , identifiers will be removed from data to meet HIPAA de -
identification standards ( According to the October 2002 Privacy Rule § 164.514.(b).2.  the 
indicated information/will be removed from all study records).  
 
All software applications used in the collection of data will be properly validated following 
standard computer system validation that is compliant with all regulatory requirements.  
 
 
8 
 Potential Discomforts and Risks  
 
Beta-glucan, a dietary fiber, poses no known risks. Beta-glucan, a fiber, poses no known risks. 
However, there are some potential discomforts and risks related to the study . Drawing blood from a 
vein may result in discomfort at the site of puncture; possible bruising and swelling around the 
puncture site; rarely an infection; and, uncommonly, faintness from the procedure. Some people may 
feel uncomfortable answering questions about incidence of influen za, cold and flu symptoms, mood 
and feelings, and fatigue symptoms. Some people may feel uncomfortable or have difficulties 
swallowing capsules. You can open the capsule and add to a food such as apple sauce if you prefer.  
There is a risk of possible loss of confidentiality.   
 
Informed consent forms given to all participants specify Dr. Dahl  as the contact in the case of 
issues or questions arising during the study. In the case that a professional intervention is necessary 
due to an adverse effect on the study subjects, Dr. Dahl will contact the appropriate authority or 
organization pertinent to the circumstance of the event. Serious adverse events will be reported to 
the sponsor within 24 h of the PI being notified. In the event of a data safety breach, Dr. Dahl and 
the appropri ate University of Florida personnel will contact participants to inform them of this 
breach, as well as notify the Institutional Review Board of the University of Florida.  
 
Potential Benefits  
 
It is possible that those participants randomized to the beta -glucan may respond with a greater 
antibody tit er to the influenza vaccine.  
 
Conflict of Interest  
The investigator declare s no conflict of interest.  
Compensation  
 
For participating and completing the study, participants will receive $25 per blood draw and $ 25 
per week for daily questionnaire completion  for a total of $ 175. If a participant drops out during 
the study, compensation will be prorated at $25 per week  and $ 25 per blood draw . Should a 
participant not complete the entirety of the study due to a withdrawal, disqualification , or any other 
reason , compensation will be based upon completing pre -determined benchmarks. In all cases, 
compensation will be provided at the end of the study.   
 
  
9 
 References  
Crooke, Stephen N., Inna G. Ovsyannikova, Gregory A. Poland, and Richard B. Kennedy. 2019. 
“Immunosenescence and Human Vaccine Immune Responses.” Immunity & Ageing  16 (1): 25. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12979 -019-0164 -9. 
Harnack, Ulf, Klaus Eckert, Iduna Fichtner, and Gabriele Pecher. 2009. “Oral Administration of a Soluble 
1–3, 1–6 β-Glucan during Prophylactic Survivin Peptide Vaccination Diminishes Growth of a B 
Cell Lymphoma in Mice.” International Immunopharmacology  9 (11): 1298 –1303.  
Hetland, Geir, and Per Sandven. 2002. “β -1, 3-Glucan Reduces Growth of Mycobacterium Tuberculosis 
in Macrophage Cultures.” FEMS Immunology & Medical Microbiology  33 (1): 41 –45. 
Lehne, G., B. Haneberg, P. Gaustad, P. W. Johansen, H. Preus, and T. G. Abrahamsen. 2006. “Oral 
Administration of a New Soluble Branched Β‐1, 3‐D‐glucan Is Well Tolerated and Can Lead to 
Increased Salivary Concentrations of Immunoglobulin A in Healthy Volu nteers.” Clinical & 
Experimental Immunology  143 (1): 65 –69. 
Nikolich -Žugich, Janko. 2014. “Aging of the T Cell Compartment in Mice and Humans: From No Naive 
Expectations to Foggy Memories.” The Journal of Immunology  193 (6): 2622. 
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1401174.  
Sandvik, A., Y. Y. Wang, H. C. Morton, A. O. Aasen, J. E. Wang, and F. -E. Johansen. 2007. “Oral and 
Systemic Administration of Β‐glucan Protects against Lipopolysaccharide‐induced Shock and 
Organ Injury in Rats.” Clinical & Experimental Immunology  148 (1): 168 –77. 
Scholz, Jean L, Alain Diaz, Richard L Riley, Michael P Cancro, and Daniela Frasca. 2013. “A 
Comparative Review of Aging and B Cell Function in Mice and Humans.” Host Pathogens / 
Immune Senescence  25 (4): 504 –10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2013.07.006.  
Tsukada, Chika, Hisashi Yokoyama, Chikako Miyaji, Yuiko Ishimoto, Hiroki Kawamura, and Toru Abo. 
2003. “Immunopotentiation of Intraepithelial Lymphocytes in the Intestine by Oral 
Administrations of β -Glucan.” Cellular Immunology  221 (1): 1 –5. 
Yu, Xiaoyu, Dandan Zhang, Bisheng Shi, Guangxu Ren, Xiuhua Peng, Zhong Fang, Maya Kozlowski, et 
al. 2015. “Oral Administered Particulate Yeast -Derived Glucan Promotes Hepatitis B Virus 
Clearance in a Hydrodynamic Injection Mouse Model.” PLOS ONE  10 (4): 1 –12. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123559.  
 
 