Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09   
  
 
 
Evaluation of Thermal Spread into the Interstitial Portion of the Fallopian Tubes Using 
the Ligasure Device at Time of H ysterectomy  
 
MSKCC THERAP EUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC PRO TOCOL  
 
Principal Investigator/Departme nt: Nadeem  Abu-Rustu m, M.D.  Surgery:  Gynecology  
 
Co-Princi pal 
Investigato r(s)/Department:  Kay Park, M.D.  Pathology  
 
 
Investig ator(s)/Department:  Richard R. Barakat, M.D.  
Siobhan M. Kehoe, M.D. 
Dennis Chi, M.D.  
Carol Brown, M.D. 
Yukio Sonoda, M.D. 
Douglas A. Levine, M.D. 
Mario Leitao, M.D. 
Ginger Gardner, M.D. 
Sharyn Lewin, M.D.  
John Diaz,  M.D. 
Robert Soslow, M.D. 
Alexia Iasonos, Ph.D.  Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Pathology  
Epide miology and Biostatistics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
1275  York  Ave. N ew 
York, NY 10021  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09   
  
 
 
Consenting  
Professional(s)/Department:  Richard R. Barakat, MD 
Nadeem  R.Abu -Rustum,  MD 
Dennis Chi, M.D.  
Carol Brown, M.D. 
Yukio Sonoda, M.D. 
Douglas A. Levine, M.D. 
Mario Leitao, M.D. 
Ginger Gardner, M.D. 
Siobhan M. Kehoe, MD 
Sharyn Lewin, M.D.  
John Diaz,  M.D.  
Lisa Dos Santos M.D.  
Fady Khoury -Collado M.D. 
Karin  Shih M.D.  Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecology 
Surgery: Gynecolo gy 
Surgery: Gynecology  
 
Please Note: A Consenting Professional must have completed the ma ndatory H uman  
Subjects Education and Certification Program.  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:08 -092A(1)  
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
MSKCC THERAPEUT IC/DIAGNOSTIC PROTOCOL ..............................................................  1 
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEM A................................................................  1 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIM S........................................................ ..................  2 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONA LE...............................................................................  2 
4.0 OVERVIEW OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ....................................................  4 
4.2 INTERVENTION  ...................................................................................................  5 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  .......................................................................  6 
6.0 CRITERIA FOR SUB JECT ELIG IBILITY  ......... ..............................................................  6 
6.1 SUBJECT INCLUSION CRITERI A......................................................................  6 
6.2 SUBJECT EXCLUSION CRITERIA.....................................................................  6 
7.0 RECRUITMENT PLA N.....................................................................................................  7 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION  ..................................................................................  7 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  ..........................................................................  7 
10.0 EVALUAT ION DURING TRE ATMENT/INTERVENTION  ..........................................  9 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  .........................................................................................  11 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCO ME ASSESSMENT...............  11 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY  ................................................................  11 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ........................................................................................................... .. 12 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGIST RATION AND RANDOMIZATION 
PROCEDURES................................................................................................................... ..........  13 
15.1   RESEARCH PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  ..................................................  13 
15.2   RANDOMIZAT ION...............................................................................................  14 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEM ENT ISSUES  ..................................................................................  14 
16.1 QUALI TY ASSURA NCE  ....................................................................................  15 
16.2 DATA  AND  SAFETY  MONITOR ING ...............................................................  15 
17.0 PROTECT ION OF HUMAN SUB JECTS  .......................................................................  16 
17.1 PRIVACY  .............................................................................................................  16 
17.2 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVE NT (SAE)  REPORTIN G..............................................  16 
18.0 INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  .......................................................................  17 
18.1 RESEARCH AUTHORIZATIO N........................................................................  17 
19.0 REFERENCE(S )...............................................................................................................  18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended:  4/28/09  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 1 -  
  
 
 
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHE MA 
 
Title:   Evaluation of t hermal spread into the interstiti al portion of the fallopian tubes 
using the LigaSure device.  
 
Background :  Women who are hi gh risk for o varian cancer  will often u ndergo a salpingo - 
oophorectomy defined as re moval of the ovaries and  fallopian tubes in order to decrease their 
risk developing ovarian cancer.  These wo men also may have  an increased risk of developing 
fallopian tube and pri mary peri toneal cancer.  Therefore, re moval of the both the right and left 
fallopian tube along with the r ight and left ovary (ter med bilateral salpingo -oophorecto my) is 
necessary.  Anato mically, a port ion of the fallopian tube extend s into the myo metrium of the 
uterus, which is ter med the intersitial or intra mural portion.  Wo men undergoing a risk 
reducing bilateral salpi ngo-oophorecto my (BSO)  will often have this procedure perfor med 
without removal of the uterus.  There is a the oretical concern that this  remaining intersitial 
portion of the fallopian tube may be a site for future develop ment of neoplasia.  These 
remaining tubal cells may be at risk of malign ant transfor mation and t herefore, it is critical  
that o ur surgical tech nique ensures that a ll the fallopian tube  tissue is excised or 
electros urgically  coagulated.  
 
Objec tive: This study is designed to evaluate t he ther mal spread of the vessel sealing 
electroca utery device, t he LigaSure (Valley Lab),  into t he interstitial portion during a 
salpingectomy (re moval of fallopian tubes).  The  objective of this study is to deter mine if the 
LigaSure device, which we routinely use for removal of tubes and ovar ies,  is effecti ve at 
destro ying all tubal cells comprising the fallopian tube inc luding those cells within the cornu 
of the uterus.  
 
Patient Po pulation:  The population  to be stu died will i nclude wo men who are under going a 
total hyst erectomy with re moval of the ovaries and fallopian  tubes for either benign or 
malignant conditions that do not  involve the fallopian tube.  Those being treated by either by 
laparoto my or laparoscopy can  be enrolled into the study since the sa me technique with the 
same instru ments is applied.  
 
Study Design:  We will intend to e nroll a tot al of 60 patie nts planned to u ndergo a t otal 
hysterecto my and bilateral salpingo -oophorect omy. The first 30 patients will be enrolled into 
group A.  In this group, the surgeon will be instructed to perform  a right salpingectomy in the 
following manner:  the LigaSure will be us ed with  a single application on  the fallopian tube at 
the cl osest point to the cornua and t he fallopian  tube will be sealed and divided.  The next 30 
patie nts will be enrolled into group B.  In this  group, the sur geon will be instructed to perform 
a right salpingecto my in the followi ng manner:  the first ap plication of  the LigaSure will be 
the sa me as in group A.  The surgeon  will p lace the LigaSure on the porti on of the fallopian 
tube cl osest to the c ornua to se al and divide the tube.  Then the LigaSure will be ap plied using 
the coagulation mode only a second ti me to t he remaining medial portion of the tubal stu mp 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 2 -  
  
 
 
on the uteri ne cornua.  The surgeon will use this  second application to coagulate the ti ssue at 
the cornua without dividing it. The purpose of this extra step is to evaluate if further proxi mal 
coagul ation is needed to ensure all the tubal ti ssue is destroyed.  The tissue speci men with be 
sent to pathology where it will be evaluated histologically in a standard fa shion.  The 
patholo gists will have t he ability to evaluate  the hyster ectomy speci men for viable fallopian 
tube c ells.  The cornua will be serially sectioned by the pat hologist as d escribed in s ection  
10.0.  
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIF IC AIMS  
 
The objecti ve of this st udy is to d etermine if  the LigaSure device, which we routinely used for 
removal of tubes and ovaries, is e ffective at de stroying all tu bal cells co mprosing t he fallopian 
tube including those cells within  the cornua of the uterus.  
 
• Histologically eval uate whether vi able fallopian tube c ells remain in the uterus a fter 
electroca utery exci sion with the Li gaSure.  Deter mine if the additional cautery step 
compared to the one step standard destroys  all fallopian tube cells pre sent in the 
intersitial portion of the uterus.  
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
Women who are known to have an increased risk of both ovarian and fallopian  tube cancer 
are offered surgical intervention to remove the  ovaries  and fallopian  tubes since screening for 
ovarian cancer even in high -risk women has a  low predictive value.  These wo men undergo a 
bilateral salpingo -oophorecto my (BSO) to re move both ovari es and fallopian tubes.  This 
procedure has been shown to decrease risk of  ovarian  cancer  and fallopian tube cancer by  
approxi mately 95 %1. 
 
Occult ovarian cancers and fallopian tube cancers are found at the ti me of bilateral salpingo - 
oophorectomy (BSO) at  varying rates.  In one l arge series of 98 mutation carries, three (3%) 
occult cancers were found at the ti me of the prophylactic s urgery (two ovarian and one 
fallopian  tube)2. There is also a risk of developing  primary peritoneal cancer (PPC) after 
undergoing a bilateral salpingo -oophorecto my.  PPC  is morphologically si milar to ovarian 
cancer and the prognosis and long term outco mes are also si milar to ovarian cancer.  The rate 
of developing PPC after undergoing a prophylactic BSO has been reported t o be 2 -11% in the 
literature3. The exact area of origin  of this cancer is not kno wn.  However, one needs to 
consider  the relations hip between  the increased risk of fallopian tube cancers with the 
increased risk of PPC.  If we speculate that fallopian tube epithelial c ells may be the point of 
origin for peritoneal cancer, t hen it is crucial that the risk re ducing surg ery completely 
removes the entire ovary as well as the entire fallopian tube.  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
- 3 -  
 
 
 
 
Anato mically, the fallo pian tubes are adjace nt to the ovary a nd end in the posterosu perior 
aspect if the uterus ter med the cornua of the uterus (Figure 1).  The total length of the 
fallopian tube is approxi mately 9-11cm.  A small portion of the tube, 1cm, extends into the 
myometrium of the uterus and t hen opens i nto the endo metrial cavity (Figure 2).  On 
histologic evaluation. epithelial c ells continue to line this inter stitial or intra mural portion of  
the fallopian tube5. 
 
Uterus  Fallopian Tube  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ovary  
 
 
Figure 1:  Relationship of ovary,  fallopian tube and uterus.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Histology of  the fallopian tube  
The tube extends into the cornua of the uterus and is li ned with  ciliated  
Amended: 4/28/09  fallopian tube cells.  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 4 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustrations from Pathology of the Female Re productive Tract5 
 
Currently, the standard method for prophylactic  BSO is to ligate the tube and uteroovarian 
ligament at their inse rtion into t he uterus with o ne single cut.  It is not the standard  of care to 
perform  a hysterecto my in those wo men undergoing a prophylactic BSO.  Therefore, the 
anato my of the fallopian tube needs to be considered when perfor ming a prophylactic surgery 
so that there are no viable fallopian tube epit helial c ells re maining at the end of the procedure 
since part of  the fallopian tube re mains in situ after prophylactic BS O6. In one study that 
examined hysterecto my speci mens from  standard hysterectomy procedures, the mean length 
of intra mural portion of fallopian t ube re maining in the uterus was 11.3m m6. 
 
It is known that in those wo men who are mutation carriers or those  with a strong  family 
history, meticulous gross inspection and microscopic exa mination is enco uraged.  Protocols 
have been created to address the type of h istologic evaluation perfor med on the sur gical 
speci men.  Currently, detailed serial sectioning  of the speci men is per formed to attempt to 
detect microscopic cancers4. However, there is no defined  standard operative  protocol  and 
currently varying techniques as well as a nu mber of different instru ments are used to excise 
the fallopian tube.  The opti mal type of prophylactic surgery has not been deter mined.  
 
Our goal is to test the a bility of electrocaut ery using the Liga Sure device  to ther mally destroy 
the fallopian tube epithelial cells wit hin the myometriu m.  The  destructi ve effect of cautery on 
residual fallopian tube cells within the uterus to re move the tubes has not been studied.  The 
results of this study may lead us to alter  our surgical approach and perhaps change the 
recom mendations for what procedure is perfor med for high risk wo men undergoing 
prophylactic surgery.  
 
 
 
 
4.0 OVERVIEW OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.1 Design  
 
 
 
All fe male patients who are already scheduled to  undergo a tot al hysterecto my with 
bilateral salpingo -ooph orecto my (BS O) will be asked to participate in t his trial.  Patie nts 
will be eli gible if they are undergoi ng a total ab dominal hysterecto my (TAH) with a BSO 
perfor med through an open incision.  Patients  who are having either a total laparoscopic 
hysterecto my (TLH) or a lap aroscopically assisted vaginal hysterecto my (LAVH) along 
with a BSO will also be eli gible.  Patients  will be eli gible w hether they are undergoi ng 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 5 -  
  
 
 
surgery for benign or malignant disease.  These patie nts will consent to allow th eir 
surgeon to re move the fallopian tubes from  the uterus first and then  proceed with removal 
of the uterus.  Those very rare cases who are suspected to have fal lopian  tube cancer  prior 
to their surgery will not be eligible.  
 
 
 
The skin incisions will be perfor med as t he surgeon has planned for the procedure and 
will not be altered by the study.  As standard protocol for gynecologic surger y, the entire 
pelvis will be inspected.  The anatomy of the fallopian tubes and uterine fundus will be 
viewed in detail.  If there are no anato mic abnor malities in the proxi mal fallopian tu be, 
the surgeon will pr oceed to remove the fallopian  tube from  the cornua of the uterus with 
the specified procedure to which the patient has been assig ned.  This det ailed surgi cal 
procedu re will be expl ained in detail in se ction 9 .0. 
 
 
 
4.2 Interventi on 
 
The patie nts will already  be undergoing a total  hysterecto my with removal of the tubes 
and ovaries for a specific indic ation diagnosed or defined by their surgeon.  If the patient 
is suitable to  proceed by the surgeon,  then he/she will perform a rig ht salpingo- 
oophorectomy with the LigaSure device.  The 1 0mm LigaSure is  a standard instru ment 
used in our gynecologic surgery and other surgi cal specialties for a variety of procedures 
on a daily basis ( Figure 3).  The LigaSure is  a vessel sealing device t hat causes vessels to 
seal using pressure and energy, a high current, l ow voltage output.  It uses this energy to 
allow tissue to be ligated with only a the rmal spread of approxi mately 2mm.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  LigaSure vessel sealing system; Valley Lab  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 6 -  
  
 
 
There will be two tech niques co mpared in t his protocol.  Gr oup A will h ave the right tube 
removed with one appli cation of  the LigaSure.  The LigaSure will be placed and the most 
proxi mal portion of  the right fallopian tube adja cent to the uterine cornua  and will be  
used to coa gulate and cut the tube.  Group B will have the tu be ligated in the sa me 
fashion as group A how ever an additional step will be added once the fallopian tube has 
been re moved.  The LigaSure will be used to cauterize the remaining medial ti ssue on the 
cornua region of the uterus.  This procedure is described in detail in Section 9.0.  
 
 
 
The fallopi an tube as w ell as the ute rus will be l abeled for the  patholo gist. The 
patholo gist will t hen perfo rm a thorough evaluation  of the uterus with serial section of  the 
right cornua to deter mine the a mount of  remaining viable fallopian tube cells.  Please  
refer to Section 10.0 for detailed ex planation of the hist ologic review of the sub mitted 
tissue.  
 
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS  
 
All interventions and instru ments are standar dly used for this surgical technique therefore 
all sup plies will be o btained through the r egular supply source at Me morial Sloa n- 
Kettering.  The LigaSure is a vessel sealing device that causes vessels to seal using 
pressure and energy, a high current, low voltage  output.  It uses t his energy to allow  
tissue to be ligated with only a thermal spread of approxi mately 2mm.  There will not be 
any experimental instru ments or agents used in this protocol.  
 
6.0 CRITERIA FOR SUB JECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.1 Subject Inclusion Criteria  
 
• Women undergoing a non -emergent total hy sterecto my with removal of the tubes 
and ovaries by the gynecologic service for benign or malignant conditions - 
uterine, cer vical or early ovarian  cancer.  
• Patients will undergo either a laparoto my, total lapar oscopy or laparoscopically 
assisted vaginal hysterecto my 
• Patients will be 21 years and older  
 
6.2 Subject Exclusion Criteria  
 
• Patients with abnor mal fallopian tubes seen  preoperatively by radiologic exam  or 
intraoperatively by visual inspection  
• Patients who are suspected to have fallop ian tu be cancer prior to t heir surgery  
• Patients who have had any type of prior tubal surgery  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 7 -  
  
 
 
• Patients who have had prior radiation therapy  
• Patients who are undergoing a Rob otically Assisted procedure  
 
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT PLAN  
 
Potential research su bjects will be identified by a  member of the patient’s  treatment team, the 
protocol investigator, or  research team at Me morial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC). 
If the inve stigator is a me mber of  the tre atment team, s/he will scr een th eir patient’s medic al 
records for suitable research study participants  and discuss the study and their potential for 
enrolling in the re search study.  Potential subjects contacted  by their treating physician will be 
referred to  the investigator/research staff of the study.  
 
Surgeons within the depart ment of gynecolog ic oncology will participate in this trial and 
ultimately decide if  the patie nt is a candidate  for the pr otocol.  They will assess which patie nts 
are eligible for the  trial in the outp atient s etting while seeing routine visits  and scheduling 
surgeries.  The pri mary surgeon will then discuss the study with the  potential subject and 
facilitate the enroll ment in the re search study.  The consents will be obtai ned in the o utpatie nt 
setting when the patient is sign ing consent for the medically ind icated surgical procedure. 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUAT ION 
 
Patients will be seen and evaluated by a gynecologic oncology surgeon at MSKCC.  The 
standard pretreat ment evaluation for any  surgi cal patient  will be performed including the 
following:  
• Thorough history including all past operative procedures perfor med 
• Physical  examination  
• Radiologic tests as ordered by the pri mary surgeon (there will be no speci fic tests or 
radiologic exa ms needed for entry into the study  
There are no  specific ad ditional pretreat ment tests necessary to enroll into  the study.  
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN  
 
If the surge on assesses during t he time of surgery that the p atient is a ca ndidate to 
continue in the protoc ol, then he/she will pr oceed with the r emoval of the tube.  The 
standard open total abdo minal hysterecto my is usually perfor med with the surgeon 
initially pla cing a Kelly cla mp on the right and left cornua to  manipulate the uterus.  This 
clamp on the cornua causes trauma to the tissue and will alter our an alysis.  The only 
alteration the surgeon will have to make is to place an atraumatic cla mp in the middle 
fundus to avoid destruction of the ti ssue at t he cornua.  The surgeon will use the fa miliar 
instru ments, either a Collin or Buxton ute rine clamp, which are av ailable routi nely in our  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 8 -  
 
 
 
 
operating r ooms, to gra sp the middle of the uter us for manipulation as he proceeds with 
the hysterecto my (see Figure 4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4a:   Collin Ut erine Cla mp 4b:  Buxton Uterine Clamp  
 
 
 
The surgeon  will t hen proceed with  removal of the rig ht fallopian tube with the Li gaSure. 
The first 30 patie nts (group A) will have t he right salpin gectomy per formed with only  
one application of  the LigaSure.  The  LigaS ure will be appli ed onto the fallopian tube 
adjace nt to the cornua a nd the fallo pian tube  will be cauteri zed and ligated.  The next 30 
patie nts (group B) will have a right salpingectomy perfor med as those in group A 
(LigaSure  cauterizing  and ligating the right tube at the cor nua inse rtion) and then t he 
LigaSure will be applied an additional ti me to the portion re maining on the  cornua.  The 
surgeon will use this second application to c oagulate (without cutting)  the tissue  at the 
cornua.  The labeled fallopian tube speci men with be sent to  pathology where it will be 
evaluated histologically in a described standard fashion.  
 
 
GROUP A:  
 
 
 
1  
 
LigaSure applied at line 1 to 
coagulate and cut right FT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5a  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 9 -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
GROUP B:  
 
 
 
2  1  
LigaSure applied at line 1 to coag ulate and cut right  
FT and th en applied to line 2 to coagulate only.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5b  
 
 
 
If there is a dditional ble eding noted at the c ornua in either group A or B, then additio nal 
coagul ation of  the area will be p erformed to achieve he mostasis.  This p atient will be 
removed from the study and not be i ncorporated in the data analysis.  
 
The s urgeon  will co ntinue with the r est of the su rgery in cluding the hyst erecto my and 
further sur gical pr ocedures as nee ded in the fashion that the surgeon chooses.  The 
labeled ut erus will be sent to t he pathologists who will ev aluate the hyst erecto my 
speci men for viable fallopian tube cells.  The cor nua will be s erially sectioned by the 
pathologist as described later in  this section.  
 
 
 
The fallopi an tube as w ell as the ute rus will be l abeled for the  patholo gist. The 
patholo gist will t hen perfo rm a thorough evaluation  of the uterus with serial section of  the 
right cornua to deter mine the a mount of r emaining viable fallopian tube cells.  Please  
refer to Section 10.0 for detailed ex planation of the hist ologic review of the sub mitted 
tissue.  
 
 
 
10.0  EVALUATION DUR ING T REATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
Histologic Protocol for sec tioning the intramural portion of the fallopian tube  
The fallopian tube (FT) is div ided into 4 anato mic seg ments: intra mural, isth mus, ampulla and 
infundibulum. Each FT is app roximate 11 -12 cm in length, but  can vary from  patient to  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 10 -  
  
 
 
patie nt. The intra mural portion begins at t he funnel -like uppermost recess  of the uteri ne cornu 
and ends where the tube e merges from the ute rine wall. The course of this approxi mately 0.8 
cm long seg ment can vary from  straight to highly convoluted and tortuous. The following 
protoc ol delineates the method by which t his intramural porti on of the FT will be e xamined in 
pathology.  
 
The uterus is received fresh from  the operating r oom with the protocol n umber and directed to 
the attention of Dr. Kay Park or Dr. Robert Soslow.  
 
The exter nal appeara nce of  the uterus  will be e xamined for any gross abn ormalities, i ncluding 
tumor, he morrhage, disruption of the surface i ntegrity, etc. a nd noted in t he gross de scription 
with all measurements recorded. Any gross  abnor malities that distort t he anato my of the 
uterus, especially at the cornual end s, will dis qualify the speci men from the study. T his will  
be at the discretion of the  surgeon and pathologist.  
 
The inse rtion of the fallopian tube will be ide ntified on the side where the adnexa have been 
previously re moved (right side). Starting at the point of fallopian tube insertion, the cornual 
myometrium will be s erially sectioned vertic ally at 2-3 mm  intervals in the sagitt al plane, up 
to 1.0 cm  or until the en dometrial ca vity is reached (in ca ses where 1.0 cm is insufficient to  
reach the e ndometrial cavity). E ach section will be grossly e xamined to identify the intra mural 
portion of  the fallopian tube, if  possible, and any gross findings will be r ecorded. All of  these 
sections will be sub mitted for histol ogic re view with a de signation of  “IFT” for “int ramural 
fallopian  tube.”  
 
The uterus will t hen be bivalved in the coron al plane to examine the endometrial ca vity and to 
assure that portions of  the intra mural FT are not missed. Additio nal sections of  the cornu will 
be sub mitted as dee med necess ary by the exa miner. 
 
All hist ologic sections from the cor nu will be e xamined by the patholo gist and t he presence or 
absence of  tubal epithelium  will be recorded.  The patholo gist will n ot be blinded to which 
patie nt has received the second application of  the LigaSure a nd therefore additio nal cautery. 
Any pathol ogic findings rele vant to clinical manage ment will be inclu ded in the final 
pathology  report.  
 
 
 
There will be no specific follow -up for these patients.  The follow -up will be as the surgeon 
plans for p ostoperati ve assess ment and evaluation.  The protocol  does not require any other 
patient data or involv ement once the procedure has been co mpleted.  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 11 -  
  
 
 
11.0 TOXICIT IES/SIDE EFFECTS  
 
The risks t hat are associated with  this int erventi on are t he same risks described to the  patient 
regar ding surgical i ntervention.  There are no a dditional ris ks expected based on the surgical 
procedure described as the LigaSure is an instru ment used routinely and this procedure is 
perfor med by our gynecologic oncologists.  For the patients in group B, there are no expected 
additional risk with a second application of the LigaSure.  There are no expected side effects.  
 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUT IC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESSMENT  
 
This study will co mpare hist ologic speci mens for via ble fallopian tube cells.  T his study is 
designed to provide baseline data  to an unanswered question at  this time.  This question is 
whether one application or si mply one ligation on the tube is a dequate to destroy all fallopian 
tube c ells in the ut erus. This eval uation will be done by the patholo gist and will not have any 
impact on the patient time or recovery.  The p rimary outco me of this dis covery t rial is to 
allow us to histologically identify how many patients will have viable fallopian tubes cells in  
the uterus a fter two different s urgical methods of re moving the f allopian tubes.  Once we have 
this baseline data, we can then decide what type  or if an additional study needs to be created.  
 
This study will pro vide baseline in formation.  We have no previous data looking at the 
standard method co mpared to a minimally altered method.  Therefore there is no specific 
number of  positi ve or n egative cases needed.  T he results will eith er allow us to feel c onfident 
in our current method of prophylactic surgery or will help us define a more appropriate 
technique to achieve our goal for this surgery.  If there ar e fallopian  tube cells found in the 
uterus in both ar ms, then we have data to support defining a different surgical approach for 
those undergoing this surgery to decrease the risk  of ovarian and fallopian tube cancers.  We 
would then need to address the re commendation of hysterecto my for these wo men at the ti me 
of surgery.  If there are no via ble fallopian tube cells found in  either group, then we can report 
that our current surgical technique is adequate and provide  an answer to those who are 
concerned about the possibility of re maining fallopian cells b ased on the anato my.  If group B 
is shown to have no fallopian tube cells,  then this provides  evidence to surgical oncologists as 
well as be nign gynecol ogists to slig htly alter the current prophylactic technique to address the 
issue of  viable cells within the re maining uterus.  
 
 
 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR RE MOVAL FROM STUDY  
 
If there are visible abn ormalities of the fallop ian tubes or uterine corn ua/fundus, the surgeon 
will pr oceed with an ap propriate procedure and the patient will no longer be a participant in 
our study.  The surgeon has the right to choose not to proceed with the study if he/she feels 
that it would not be appropriate for the patient g iven the findings at the ti me of laparoto my or 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 12 -  
  
 
 
laparoscopy.  We do not expect this event to  be com mon (1 in 20 pati ents).  These patients 
will be replaced and the descri ption of the abnor mality will be reported.  
 
If at anyti me the patient develops u nacceptable  toxicity he/ she will be  removed from study. 
If at anyti me the patient is found  to be ineligible for the protocol as designated in the section  
on Criteria for Patient/ Subject Eligibility (i.e., a  change in diagnosis), the patient will be 
removed from the study.  
 
 
 
14.0 BIOSTAT ISTICS  
 
The goal of this study is to obtain histo logic data from  pathology speci mens and to 
compare two techniques to a nswer a yes/no question.  The q uestion is whether there are 
viable fallopian tubes cells in t he uterine corn ua after the fallopian tube is re moved from 
the uterus.  
 
We aim  to evaluate if the technique of bilat eral salping o-oophorecto my using a two -step 
cautery procedure with the LigaSure device is  feasible.  The outco me is binary; whether 
there are a ny viable fallopian tube cells in t he uterine cornua after  the fallopian tube is 
removed from the uterus based on the patholo gist’s review t hat is described in se ction 
10.0.  We will n ot be perfo rming any statistic al comparison of these hi stologic findin gs as 
this is a study to provide us with baseline surgery data.  The data we will collect is 
whether each technique re moves all viable fallopian tube cells within the uterus.  The 
surgery is effective (successful) if the pathologist can not i dentify any via ble fallopian 
tube cells in the uterus.  We plan to accrue  two groups of 30 patie nts: group A will 
undergo the single step procedure whereas group B will undergo the two -step procedure. 
Assu ming bino mial proportions, 30 patients in each group can provide an esti mate of the 
success probability +/ - 18%. If at any p oint, we observe at least five  patients in Group A 
with any viable fallo pian tube cells in  the uterus we will con sider this method a failure  
and we will close accrual for Group A. At  this point, accrual for Group B will be 
initiated.  In the rare event w here all patients in Group A have no residual  fallopian  tube 
cells, then we will n ot proceed with Group B, since the ob served rate of 0/30 will provide 
sufficient e vidence that the two -step procedure is  not required.  
 
The probability of cl osing accrual for Group A (i.e. stopping early) given the true 
probability of  finding any viable fallopian tube  cells (FTC)  within t he uterus is given in 
the ta ble below: 
 
True 
probability  of 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 13 -  
  
 
 
finding any  
viable FTC       
Probability  of 
early stopping  0.18 0.48 0.74 0.90 0.97 
 
 
 
We expect to enroll 15 patients per month, so  the study is expected to complete within 
four months.  
 
 
 
15.0 RESE ARCH PART ICIPANT  REGISTRA TION AND  RANDOMIZATION 
PROCEDURES  
 
15.1   Research Participant Registration  
The following person(s) can obtain info rmed consent: 
Richard R. Barakat, M.D.  
Nadeem  R. Abu-Rustum,  M.D.  
Dennis Chi, M.D. 
Carol Brown, M.D. 
Yukio Sonoda, M.D.  
Douglas A. Levine, M.D. 
Mario Leitao, M.D. 
Siobhan M. Kehoe, M.D. 
Sharyn  Lewin, M.D.  
John Diaz,  M.D  
 
Lisa Dos Santos M.D.  
Fady Khoury -Collado M.D. 
Karin  Shih M.D.  
 
Confi rm in the electro nic medical record t hat the patie nt has rec eived the Notice of 
Privacy Practice.  This must be obtained be fore the eligibility confir mation and obtaining 
of the research infor med consent.  
 
Confirm eligibility as defined in the  section entitled Crite ria for Patient/ Subject  
Eligi bility. 
 
Obtain written in formed consent, by follow ing procedures defined in section entitled  
Infor med Consent  Procedures.  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 14 -  
  
 
 
All particpants must be registered through  the Protocol Participant Registration (PPR) 
Office at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center.  PPR is available Monday through 
Friday from  8:30am  - 5:30pm  at (646)  735-8000. The PPR fa x numbers are (646) 735 - 
0008 and  (646) 735 -0003.  Registrations can  be phoned in or faxed.  The co mpleted 
signature page of the infor med consent for m, the co mpleted signature page of the 
Research Authorization and a co mpleted Eli gibility Checklist must be faxed to  PPR.  
 
During the registration process r egistering individuals will be  required to answer specific 
eligibility questions and  provide the following i nformation:  
 
Registering Individual  [Last, First N ame] 
Notice of Privacy Status  [Yes, No, N /A] 
Research Authorization  [Date] 
MSKCC IRB Protocol#  
Attending of  Record  (if applica ble)              [Last, First Na me] 
Consenting Professional                                 [Last, First Na me] 
Infor med Consent  Date  
Participant 's Full Na me [Last, First Na me] 
Participa nt MRN  
 
 
 
15.2   Randomi zation  
 
There will be no randomization in this pro tocol.  The first 15 patients enrolled will be 
assigned to group A and the next 15 to group  B.  We will co ntinue to enr oll patie nts 
until we ha ve completed the sur gical procedu re successfully for 15 patients in each of 
the groups.  
 
 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
 
 
A Research Study Assistant (RSA) will be assigned to the st udy.  The re sponsibilities  of 
the RSA include project co mpliance, data  collection, abstraction and entry, data 
reporting, regulatory monitoring, problem  resolution and prioritiz ation, and coordinate 
the activities of the protocol study team.  
 
The data collected for this study will be entered into a secure database.  Source 
docu mentation will be availa ble to support t he computerized  patie nt record. 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 15 -  
  
 
 
16.1 Quality Assurance  
 
Weekly registration reports will be g enerated to monitor patient accruals and  
completeness of  registration data.  R outine d ata quality rep orts will be generated to a ssess 
missing data and incon sistencies.  Accrual r ates and extent a nd accuracy of evaluatio ns 
and follow -up will be monitored periodically  throughout the study period  and potential 
proble ms will be brought to the atte ntion of  the study team  for discus sion and action  
 
Rando m-sample data quality and p rotocol co mplian ce audits  will be co nducted by t he 
study tea m, at a minimum of  two ti mes per year, more frequently if indicated.  
 
 
 
16.2 Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
 
 
The Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans at Me morial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center 
were approved by the National Cancer Instit ute in Septe mber 2001.  The plans address the 
new policies set forth by the NCI in the docu ment entitled “ Policy of  the National C ancer 
Institute for Data and Safety Monit oring of  Clinical Trials” which can be found at: 
http://cancertrials.nci.ni h.gov/researchers/ds m/index.ht ml.   The DSM Plans at MS KCC were 
established and are monitored by the Office of Clinical Research.  The MSKCC Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plans can be found on the M SKCC Intranet at: 
http://mskweb2.mskcc.org/irb/index .htm 
 
There are several different mechanis ms by which clinical trials are monitored for data, sa fety 
and quality.  There are i nstitutional process es in place for quality assurance (e.g., prot ocol 
monitoring, co mpliance and data verification au dits, therapeutic response, and staff education 
on clinical researc h QA) and dep artmental procedures for quality control,  plus there are two 
institutional com mittees that are responsible for monitoring the activities of  our clini cal trials 
progra ms.  The com mittees: Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)  for Phase I  and 
II clinical t rials, and the  Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  for Phase III clinical 
trials,  report to the Center’s Research Council and Institutional Review Board.  
 
During the protoc ol develop ment and review pr ocess, each protocol will be asse ssed for it’s 
level of risk and degree of monitoring required.  Every type of proto col (e.g., NIH sponsored, 
in-house sp onsored, ind ustrial spons ored, NCI cooperative group, etc.) Will be addre ssed and 
the monitoring procedu res will be established at the ti me of protoc ol acti vation  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 16 -  
  
 
 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
The deci sion to treat a patient’s diagnosis with surgery will be made independently by the 
surgeon.  Only after the deci sion for sur gery is made will the patie nts be offered 
enroll ment in the study.  The treat ment options  will n ot be c hanged or altered by t his 
study.  The patients will be exp lained the risk of surgery by  their surgeon at the ti me of 
signing consent for surgery.  There are no expec ted additional risks from  participating in 
the study.  
 
Patie nts will not be paid to pa rticipate in t his stu dy.  Patie nts will not be billed for the 
expenditures for this study.  The costs for this study include pathology fees for the 
additional cut sections for evaluation which  will be  paid for by  philanthropic research 
grant money within the depar tment of gynecologic oncology.  
 
The decision to enroll in this study is co mpletely voluntary and pat ients can decide to 
withdraw from  the study at anytime before the surgery.  
 
Inclusion of Chi ldren in Research  
 
This protocol/project does not include children because the n umber of  children is li mited 
and because the majority are already access ed by a nationwide pedia tric cancer research 
network.  This state ment is based on exclu sion 4b of the NIH Policy and Guidelines on 
the In clusion of Childr en as Partici pants in Research Involving Hu man Subjects.  
 
17.1 Privacy  
 
It is the res ponsibility of  the Rese arch Sta ff to ensure that protocol subjects received the 
Center’s Notice of Privacy Practices.  If the subject has not received one, MSK personnel 
must provi de a Notice of Privacy Practices and obtain acknowledg ment before the subject 
participates in the study.  
 
 
MSKCC’s Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health 
infor mation pursuant to a co mpleted and signed Research Authorization fo rm. The use 
and dis closure of prote cted health in formation will be li mited to the  individuals des cribed 
in the Research Authorization for m.  A Re search Authorization fo rm must be co mpleted 
by the Principal Inve stigator and approved by the IRB and Privacy Board.  
 
 
17.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting  
 
 
Any SAE must be reported to the IRB as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar 
days. The IRB requires a Clinical Research Database (CRDB)  AE report to be delivered  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 17 -  
  
 
to the Instit utional SAE Manager (307 East 63rd Street,  1st Floor) containing the following 
information:  
Fields populated from  the CRD B: 
• Subject’s na me (generate t he report with only initials if it will be sent outside of  
MSKCC)  
• Medical record nu mber 
• Disease/histology (if applicable)  
• Protocol number and title  
 
Data needing to be entered:  
• The date t he adverse event occurred  
• The adverse event  
• Relationship of the adverse event to the  treatment (drug, device, or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity of the AE  
• The int ervention 
• Detailed te xt that includes the following in formatio n: 
o A explanation of how the AE was handled  
o A description of the subject 's condition  
o Indication if the subject  remains on the study  
o If an amendment will need to be made to the protocol an d/or consent form 
 
The PI’s si gnature and the date it was s igned are required on the co mpleted report.  
 
 
 
18.0 INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  
 
Attending surgeons of  the Gynecol ogy Service will  be qu alified to cons ent patients for this 
protoc ol.  The patients who are co nsidered eligible for this study will be offered this protoc ol 
at the ti me they are being counseled  for surgery.  Those patients that agree to pa rticipate in  our 
study will sign three co pies of the c onsent.  One copy will be given to the patie nt, one copy  
will be placed in the p atient’s medical record and  the third co py will be placed in t he research 
file.  The in formed consent proced ure will be  conducted in a ccordance with our in stitutional 
policy and National guidelines.  
 
 
 
 
18.1 Research Authori zation  
 
Procedures for obtaining Research Authorization: Before any protocol -specific 
procedu res are carried o ut, inve stigators and/ or design ated sta ff will fully explain the  
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  08-092A(1)  
Amended: 4/28/09  
- 18 -  
  
 
 
details of the protocol, study procedures, and  the aspects of patient privacy concerning 
research specific information.  In a ddition  to signing the IRB Info rmed Consent, all 
patients must sign the Research Authorization  compone nt of the infor med consent form. 
The Research Authorization req uires a separate set of signatures from  the patient.  The 
original signed docu ments will become part of  the patient ’s medical re cord, and ea ch 
patie nt will receive a co py of the sig ned docu ments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.0 REFERENCE(S)  
 
 
 
References  
 
1.   Guillem  JG, Wood WC, Moley JF et al.  ASC O/SSO review of current role of risk - 
reducing surgery in co mmon hereditary ca ncer syndro mes.  2006 J Clin Oncol 24: 4642 - 
60. 
2.   Kauff et al.  Risk -reducing salpingo -oophorectomy in wo men with BRCA1 or BRCA2 
mutations.  2002 N Engl J Med 346: 1616 -1622.  
3.   Agoff et al.  Unexpected Gynecologic Neoplas ms in Patie nts with Proven or Suspected 
BRCA -1 or -2 Mutations:  I mplications for Gross Exa mination, Cytology a nd Clinical 
Follow -up.  2002 The A merican Journal  of Surgical Pathology 26: 171 -178. 
4.   Powell CB et al.  Risk -reducing salpingo -oophorecto my in BRCA Mutation Carriers: Role 
of Serial Sectioning in t he Detection of Occult Malignancy.  2005 J Clin Oncol 23 :127- 
132. 
5.   Robboy SJ, Anderson MC, and Russel P (ed).  Pathology of the Fe male Reproductive  
Tract.  Churchill Livingstone, 2002.  
6.   Gerritzen LHM, Grefte JMM, Hoogerbrugge N, et al.  A su bstantial part of the fallo pian 
tube is left after standard pr ophyla ctic bilateral salpingo -oophorecto my.  2006  
International Journal of Gy necologic Cancer 16: 1940 -1944.  