 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB APPROVED PROTOCOL  
 
Study Title:  Strategies to Improve Pain and Enjoy Life (STRIPE)  
 
NCT:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date  of final Document : 4/7/2021  
 
 
Date  submitted to IRB : 4/8/2021  
 
Date  IRB Approved : 6/7/2021  
 
Date  IRB Made Effective as of : 5/6/2021  
  
  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 1 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  INSTRUCTIONS:  
• Complete this Protocol Template only when there is no existing authored protocol provided for 
this study.  
• I f you are doing a data- only study with no prospective or interventional components, use the 
Data Only Protocol Template instead . 
• This Protocol Template is to be used in conjunction with the SMART  KP IRB Core Data Form.  
• Enter your responses to each question directly below the BLUE text in the fillable field.  
• When completing this Protocol Template, if a section does not apply to your study then enter 
“N/A.”  
1. Protocol  
Protocol Title 
Pain Self -Management Training for Opioid Taper  
 
 
Principal Investigator  
Denise Boudreau, PhD 
 
 
Version Date  
 April 7, 2021  
 
Form Author  
Rachel Hays  
 
 
2. Objectives  
Describe in plain language the purpose, specific aims, or objectives and indicate the primary 
goal(s) of the study (e.g.  safety, tolerability, effectiveness, feasibility, pilot study, etc.).  State the 
hypotheses to be tested. State primary and any secondary study endpoints.  
This study will adapt and test a University of Washington (UW) developed/piloted pain self -
management training for prescription opioid taper intervention at Kaiser Permanente 
Washington (KPW). To address patients’ fears of opioid taper that limited recruitment into our pilot study, we will begin with randomization to pain self -management training and then offer the 
option of self -paced opioid taper: Pain Self -Management Training for Opioid Taper (PSMOT).  
The optional taper will occur through recommendations from the research interventionist the 
patient’s primary care provider (PCP). This study aims to enroll 250 participants and rando mize 
them into either 1) a nurse or physician assistant research interventionist  guided PSMOT or  2) 
regular care (no intervention). Specifically, we will test the effectiveness of this interve ntion, 
compared with control group on opioid dose and pain outcomes among patients on high dose (≥ 
40 mg morphine equivalent dose) long- term opioid therapy (LtOT)  for chronic non- cancer pain 
(CNCP)  in a pr agmatic randomized trial.  
 
The objectives of this study are:  
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 2 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • To adapt our previously developed prescription opioid taper support intervention by a 
physician assistant  into a telephone- delivered pain self - management training that 
provides the option for supported opi oid taper (PSMOT)  through the patient’s PCP. We 
will recruit participants who receive care from  multiple primary care clinics . The 
intervention will be adm inistered by a KPWA research interventionist  (a physician 
assistant  or registered nurse)  who will be trained and supervised by a UW pain 
psych iatrist  and UW research clinician and will include guidance in opioid and non- opioid 
medication prescribing.  This training and guidance will be consistent with KPWA 
guidelines.  
 
• To t est in a randomized trial the effects of this PSMOT intervention on: a) opioid 
outcomes : daily opioid dose (primary outcome) , percent dose reduction from baseline, 
problem opioid use (interview, questionnaire, and electronic health record text 
indicators), and patient -reported opioid problems; and b) pain- related outcomes : PEG 
(self-report of Pain intensity, Enjoyment of life interference, General activity interference 
-  primary outcome ), pain self -efficacy, and depression symptoms  
 
W
e will test the effectiveness of this intervention, compared with  control group, on opioid dose 
and pain outcomes among patients on high dose (≥ 40 mg morphine equivalent dose) LtOT  for 
CNCP  in a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. This intervention will have two components:  
 
• telephone- delivered evidence- based pain self -management training with supplemental 
materials including:   
o A participant workbook  
o The P ain Survival Guide book  
o Audio files of relaxation techniques (these will be available both as in a CD 
format and we are working with Eagles to create a study website that will host these files. : www.stripestudy.org   
o A web-based video of successfully tapered patients with motivational interviewing  
debriefing: www.stripestudy.org      
• Voluntary, self -paced opioid taper  through recommendations to the PCP  
o Including opioid and non -opioid prescribing guidance from the research 
interventionist to the  patient’s PCP. 
 
Hypotheses pertaining to opioid use: Patients receiving LtOT for chronic non- c ancer pain 
(CNCP ) randomized to the PSMOT intervention, as compared with those randomized to a 
control group, will have lower opioid doses, greater percent reduction of opioid dose, lower 
proportions with problem opioid use, and lower levels  of patient -reported opioid- related 
problems at 6 and 12 months after randomization.  
 
Hypotheses pertaining to pain outcomes: Patients receiving LtOT for CNCP randomized to the 
PSMOT intervent ion, as compared with those randomized to the control arm , will have lower 
PEG scores, higher levels of pain self -efficacy, and lower levels of depressive symptoms at 6 
and 12 months after randomization. The proposed trial will determine whether pain self -
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 3 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  management training can promote prescription opioid taper in higher -dose long- term opioid 
therapy patients without increasing pain levels or activity interference. If this trial is successful, 
then prescribers and patients may be able to pursue supported opioid taper without fear of 
escalating pain. 
 
 
 
3. Background 
a. S cientific Background  
Provide the scientific or scholarly background for, rationale for, and significance of the research 
based on the existing literature and how will it add to existing knowledge. A list of references or 
bibliography must be included as part of this document or uploaded separately.  
The evidence that LtOT improves chronic pain and function in patients with CNCP  is weak , but 
there is strong evidence of dose -dependent risk for serious harms such as opioid abuse, 
Opioid Use Disorder (OUD), overdose, and death. LtOT patients are a high -risk group with high 
rates of substance use, mental disorders, problem opioid use, and adverse effects of opioids, 
including OUD, overdose, and death. Rapid opioid detoxification of these LtOT patients may lead to illicit opioid use, but gradual, supported opioid taper may reduce risks of opioid adverse events. While many LtOT patients are interested in opioid taper or discontinuation, they also fear increased pain. In a previous, NIDA -funded R34 pilot study of prescription opioid taper 
support, this study PI demonstrated that over 18 weeks opioids can be tapered more effectively 
than in contro l arm  (43% vs 19% dose reduction) with no increase in pain intensity and 
significantly reduced activity interference for those receiving taper support. We have been funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)  to study this intervention in the KPW A 
delivery system.  See grant proposal for bibliography.  
 
 
 
b. P
reliminary Data  
Describe any relevant preliminary data.  
In a previous, NIDA -funded R34 pilot study of prescription opioid taper support, this study PI  
(Sullivan)  demonstrated that over 18 weeks opioids can be tapered more effectively than in 
control arm (i.e., only usual care) (43% vs 19% dose reduction) with no increase in pain 
intensity and significantly reduced activity interference scores at 22 and 34 weeks (p<0.05 and 
p=0.05, respectively)  for those receiving taper support compared to controls . Those in the taper 
support group had significantly higher self- efficacy for managing pain and significantly lower 
levels of perceived opioid- related psychosocial problems (e.g., loss of interest in usual activities, 
trouble concentrating, feeling down or sluggish) at 22 weeks.  This pilot  also adds to growing 
literature that cognitive behavioral therapies (CBT)  for pain can be provided successfully by 
health professionals  other than psychologists.  
 
The primary barrier to feasibility of this intervention is recruiting and enrolling patients in the trial. 
We surveyed 31 current KP LtOT patients concerning their willingness to participate in such a 
trial: 74% said they would participate in “a study that offered training in skills for chronic pain 
management done over the phone”, 71% said they would be willing to “try tapering your daily dose of opioid pain medication if you were promised that the dose reduction would only cont inue 
if your pain level did not get a lot worse.” This “pledge of non- abandonment” by PCPs to 
patients undergoing opioid taper is a crucial component of our intervention. It has proven to be a 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 4 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  powerful tool to promote opioid taper in other integrated care  settings that have tried it.  Few of 
the previous pilot study participants experienced significant pain exacerbation with opioid taper.  
 
Our proposed strategy of recruitment and treatment through phone contact will minimize costs 
and inconvenience to patients. Drs. Sullivan and Turner  successfully administered the pain self -
management training over the phone to patients in the pilot study (44% of pilot study 
participants had at least one phone session). Among participants randomized to taper support who com pleted the 22 -week assessment, 81%  rated the intervention as very or ext remely 
helpful. Among the participants who completed this rating at the 34 -week assessment, 73%  
rated the intervention as very or extremely helpful  
 
Additionally, using KPWHRI’s JIFFI  tool, the study programmer identified that the clinics with the 
largest number of LtOT users  on high dose opioids  are Olympia, Everett and Capitol Hill 
Medical Centers. Therefore, we will target the  intervention in those clinics first but may need to 
expand to other clinics to meet our targeted enrolment. 
 
 
 
4. Study Design  
Describe the overall approach of the study (e.g.  prospective, interventional, observational, 
retrospective, etc.).  If your study includes more than one group, arm, or subject population, 
describe that here (for example, a study of both subjects and their caregivers, or a study with 
both a prospective interventional arm and a retrospective chart review arm).  
This study is a pragmatic randomized trial  that includes data collected from electronic health 
records (EHR  – KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse), patient self -report , and data on the training 
sessions . There are  two arms  in the trial : a research interventionist guided Pain Self -
Management Opioid Taper ( PSMOT ) or control group (no intervention, usual care).  In addition, 
the education intervention has a sub- arm which involves an opportunity to taper opioid 
medication dosing. The  goal of the tapering is to gradually decrease opioid dosing by ~ 10% per 
month.  
  
Pre-in tervention Clinic Visit  
Preliminary data suggests that the KP Washington Clinics with the most LtOT users are: 
Olympia, Everett and Capitol Hill Medical Centers. Prior to rolling out the intervention at these or 
other clinics  (clinics to be decided upon with KPWA Drs. Levy and Mehta), Drs. Sullivan and 
Boudreau along with the research interventionist  will 1) present the intervention to the Primary 
Care Providers and care teams at those clinics  and 2) attend at least two morning team huddles 
at the clinics . The purpose of this presentation and attendance at morning huddles  is not only to 
be awareness of the intervention taking place at the clinic, but also to get buy -in from the care 
teams and answer any questions they may have.  It is important for providers to be supportive of this intervention because the study team may be communicating to them  prescribing 
recommendations for their patients  and the implementation of those recommendations 
(tapering) is an important outcome of this study.  The study team will also send letters to PCPs 
informing them when one of their patients is randomized to the intervention arm of the study (see letter to PCP ).  Dr. Boudreau is working  closely  with the delivery system on the trial. She 
meets and corresponds regularly with Dr. Khushboo Mehta (Family Medicine provider and 
Program Chief of Family Medicine), Dr. Sarah Levy (Medical Director, Continuum of Care), Dr. Angela Sparks (Family Medicine Physician and Medical Director, Clinical Knowledge 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 5 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Development and Support), and Melissa Sturgis, PharmD, BCACP ( Clinical Pharmacy 
Operations  Coordinator , Quality and Clinical Operations ). They will all be  clinical champions of 
the trial.  
 
Screening, Randomization, and Follow- up  
 
Potentially eligible participants will be identified by t he study programmer using KPWA EHR 
data that located in the KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse. Potentially eligible patients will then 
be screened by phone twice for additional eligibility requirements  before being consented and 
enrolled into the study . Eligible participants will be randomized based on their primary care clinic 
and baseline opioid dose into one of the trial arms. Both groups will be surveyed on physical 
health, pain, medication use, and  mental health  at baseline ( prior to randomization) , 6 months 
and 12 months.  The total length of enrollment /follow -up in the trial for both groups is one year. 
See Figure 1 for the study process.  
 
Control  A rm  (i.e., usual care only)  
The  control  arm subje cts will not participant in any additional study activities other than the 
screenings, baseline, and follow -up data collection (6 and 12 months post randomization) as  
described above.  Usual care is the standard of care at KPWA.  
 
Intervention Arm  
The intervention arm subjects will talk with the clinical research interventionist up to 18 times 
over a year  on the phone .  The research interventionist  will: 
• Train participants on methods to self -manage their pain  
• Introduce and offer an optional opioid taper  support  
• Work with the  participant’s PCP to suggest medication dosage recommendations  
o Difficult cases may need to be reviewed with Dr. Sullivan, the research physician, 
who may need to review pieces of the participant’s medical record, specifically 
medication list and active diagnosis list to ensure the recommended medication 
dosing changes  are appropriate.  The research physician will not be abstracting 
information from the chart. Dr. S ullivan  has Epic read only access until  12/2021, 
when all participants will have completed the intervention.  
• Monitor, track and respond to adverse events (AE’s) and Critical Incidents (CI s). CI’s are 
a type of adverse event where a participant spontaneous reports risk behavior such as 
intent to harm oneself or others.  
 
While teaching participants how to manage their pain is not part of usual  care at KPWA, 
gradually tapering and/or discontinuing opioids are  considered standard of care at KPWA and 
included in KPWA’s “Patients on Chronic Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non -Cancer Pain Safety 
guidelines (September 2016) . However, PCP’s often do not initiate tapering due to numerous 
barriers such as lack of support, lack of expertise, the need to educate patients, and time 
constraints. As such, our trial is endorsed by the KPWA delivery system and is viewed as a 
mode to improve uptake of KPWA’s standard of care around opioid tapering.  
 
 
 
  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 6 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Figure 1. Study process  
 
 
 
5. Study Population  
 
a. N umber of Subjects  
State the number (or approximate number, if appropriate) of subjects you plan to include at the 
KP region to which this study is being submitted. If applicable, distinguish between the number 

 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 7 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  of subjects who are expected to be enrolled/screened and the number of subjects needed to 
complete the research procedures ( e.g. numbers of subjects excluding screen failures).  
 As appropriate, consider different populations of subjects within the same study (e.g. 
subject/caregiver, parent/child, patient/physician). If this is a multicenter study, indicate the total 
number of subjects to be accrued across all sites.   
This study is an educational intervention with two arms: a research interventionist  guided 
PSMOT (with a sub -arm of patients who decide to taper their medications) or control group (no 
intervention , usual care ).  We plan on enrolling 250 participants. 125 participants in each arm. 
Eligible participants will be randomized based on their  KPW  primary care clinic and baseline 
opioid dose into either  arm.  
 
 Invited (contacted)  Enrolled  
KP Washington  825 250 
Other sites  - - 
Total  825 250 
  
 
b. I
nclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
• Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in your final study 
sample.  
• Describe how individuals will be screened for eligibility.  
• Describe the plan for disposition of data collected during recruitment/screening in the event of a screen failure or when a potential subject is contacted but declines participation (e.g. destroyed immediately, destroyed at end of study, retained for 
separate analysis or so that subjects are not contacted repeatedly about participation 
after they have declined, etc.) . 
Inclusion Criteria:  
KPW enrollees:  
• age 18- 80 years  (from KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW) ) 
• receiving care at a KPWA primary care clinic  (from VDW ) 
• with chronic non- cancer pain (CNCP), defined as patient -reported pain on more than 
half the days in the past 6 months  (from eligibility screening)  
• currently on higher -dose LtOT, defined as >90 days’ supply in the past 180 days with 
a mean daily dose of 40 mg morphine equivalent dosing ( MED ) or greater in the past 
90 days, as first identified via KPW ’s pharmacy dispensing data and opioid use 
subsequently validated by patient self -report during screening for the trial (from 
VDW ) 
• who can consent to participate in the study arm to which they are randomly assigned (from eligibility screening)  
• who are able to read, speak, and write English adequate for outcome measures  
(from eligibility screening)  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 8 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • enrolled in KPW for at least 6 months  prior and no plans  to disenroll over the next  
year (from eligibility screening)  
 
Exclusion criteria  
We will exclude participants who:  
• are receiving treatment for cancer  (from VDW  and eligibility screening)  
• are enrolled in palliative or hospice care  (from VDW  and eligibility screening)  
• have use in past month of parenteral, transdermal, or transmucosal opioids  (from VDW ) 
• are residing in nursing home or assisted living (from VDW  and eligibility screening)  
• are using any implanted device for pain control  (from VDW  and eligibility screening)  
• are taking buprenorphine  formulations (Suboxone) used to treat OUD, (from VDW, self -
report  and eligibility screening)  
• have psychotic symptoms, psychiatric hospitalization or suicide attempts in the past year  
(from VDW and pre -randomization screening)  
• have current suicidal ideation with plan or intent (from VDW  and pre- randomization 
screening)  
• psychiatric hospitalization or suicide attempt in the past year ( from pre-randomization 
screening) 
• have cognitive impairment (from VDW ) 
• do not have regular access to a phone (from eligibility screen)  
• are pregnant ( from VDW  or self -report ) 
• KPWA employees and members who are on the “do not contact” list  
• are enrolled in the KPWA COMET initiative; a pharmacy based initiatve to lower opioid 
dosing  
 
 
Secondary data sources used to identify potentially eligible subjects are listed in the table below.  This 
data will be collected  from the VDW  on potential subjects  at each sample pull (every 2 weeks).  
Sources (specify)  
 
(I.e., from KPWA, from an approved or previous 
study, from another site, etc.)   
List any electronic data that 
will be used to identify 
potential subjects   
Date Range  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Demographics  such as 
age, sex, race, ethnicity, 
marital status, education  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Enrollment  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Primary care clinic location: 
e.g., Everett, Capital Hill, 
Olympia)  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Diagnoses (ICD  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Medications  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Health care utilization 
including:  outpatient, inpatient, hospice care, palliative care, emergency 
department  2017 -2021  
KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW)  Procedures  2017 -2021  
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 9 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
 After potential subjects are identified using the electronic data  in the VDW  listed above, t here are two 
steps for screening participants into the study: 
1. Recruitment screening where the Survey Research Program interviewers  call to recruit 
participants and screen them into the study with simple screening questions . 
2. Pre-randomization screening where a research specialist will screen for sensitive ineligibility 
criteria such as psychiatric hospitalization and recent suicidal ideation.  
 
Both screening scripts and screening questions are included in this packet.  
 All participant contact information (name, address, telephone number) and their study disposition 
(non- responder , refuser,  or ineligibility reason) remains in the study recruitment database for the 
duration of the study to ensure that the participant isn’t contacted for recruitment again.  
 
The aggregate t able below will be populated each time a potentially eligible sample is pulled from the 
VDW (twice per month)  and prior  to attempting any contact (i.e., mailing of letters and phone calls) 
with subjects. This table will be used for sample monitoring and a future non- reponder bias analysis.  
The table will be updated  twice a month with  potential ly eligible  subjects  moving into  columns of 
enrolled, non- responder, active refuser, or ineligible.     
 
Table 1 . Characteristics to  be summarized and updated every two weeks when new potentially eligible 
subjects are identified from the KPWHRI Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW).  
 
 
 
Potential 
eligible  
(VDW data 
only) Enrolled  Not 
enrolled 
(active and 
passive 
refusers)*  
(  
n= n= n=  
 % 
Mean age (SD), years     
% Male      
Race     
White     
Black     
Asian     
Other     
Missing     
Hispanic     
Prior health plan enrollment, 
years     
1-2    
3-9    
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 10 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  10+    
Mean number (SD) of visits with 
a pain diagnoses, past year     
Multifocal pain (pain arising 
from >1 location)     
Mean daily opioid dose, past 90 
days (MEQ - morphine 
equivalent dose)     
<40 MEQ     
40-49 MEQ      
50-89 MEQ     
90-119 MEQ     
120+ MEQ     
Primary Care Clinic     
Clinic 1     
Clinic 2     
Clinic 3     
Etc.    
Charlson co -morbidity index, 
past year     
0    
1    
2+    
Depression diagnosis, past year     
Anxiety diagnosis, past year    
Substance use disorder, past 
year    
Smoking status, past year     
Current     
Past    
Non-smoker     
 
 
 
c. V ulnerable Populations  
Indicate whether you will include or exclude each of the following special populations.  This 
refers to subjects who are known members of these populations upon enrollment or at any time 
during the study. Justify the inclusion of any of these populations. Describe additional 
safeguards to protect the rights and welfare of these subjects.   
• Children  
• Pregnant Women 
• Neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable neonates (up to 28 days post birth)  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 11 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • Prisoners (NOTE: The KP IRB does not have the appropriate membership to review 
research involving prisoners. Consultation with KFRI will be required.) 
We are not including children, pregnant women, neonates or prisoners.  
 
 
Pregnancy is an exclusion criteria (VDW and screening),  and a reason for withdr awal from the 
entire study  for participants in both arms of the trial  (data source: VDW for both arms and EMR 
or patient report for the intervention arm) . Data collection and the intervention will stop if the PA 
learns a participant is pregnant (EMR or patient reports). VDW data on diagnosis codes for 
pregnancy will be ascertained on all participants (intervention and control arm) at the end of the 
study and prior to analyses. Pregnant women will be excluded from the analyses.  
 Pregnancy will be rare in this population. The average age of patients on COT at KPWA is 57 years. Opioid use during pregnancy issues are complex and need special consideration beyond 
the limits of this study. It also introduces considerable heterogeneity into the study.  
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: Consider whether subjects will be in a vulnerable category at the time of 
data collection or during analysis.  For instance, if you collect data about children who were 
ages 12 – 15 from years 2000 – 2002, you know that now those individuals are no l onger 
children.  
d. I
dentification of Subjects  
Describe how you will identify subjects. If you plan to use private records (EHR , Dept . of 
Licensing) complete 5.e, 5.f., and 5.g below as relevant.   
A KPWHRI research programmer will identify eligible subjects from the KPWH RI Virtual Data 
Warehouse (VDW) using the variables described in Item 5b. At the time of identification (every 2 
weeks), Table 1 will be generated/updated with all potentially eligible subjects.  
 
e. W aiver of Informed Consent for Identification  from EH R or O ther Private Records  
Provide rationale and justification for the Waiver of Informed Consent for identification of 
subjects, including:  
• Does the proposed research present no more than minimal risk to the study 
participants?  
• How the waiver of informed consent will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants.  
• Why this research cannot practically be carried out without a waiver of informed consent.  
• Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.  
We believe that the proposed research presents no more than minimal risk to the study 
participants  for the following reasons . Only persons directly involved in the study will have 
access to data. Each KP Washington enrollee will be assigned a unique study identification 
number linked to his or her medical record number at KP Washington. The crosswalk between 
the study identification number and each subject’s medical record number is maintained in 
electronic form, but separate from the analysis files. To create project analytic files the 
crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be re- established by the KP Washington research project programmer. We will use 
existing procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate from analysis 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 12 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  files. All data necessary to complete this research will be created and stored in secure 
computers to which only project team participants will have access. No participant will be 
identified from any published manuscripts , tables, or reports generated from the proposed 
study.  
 
The waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects.  Neither care nor 
benefits will be impacted. Furthermore, safeguards are in place to protect the confidentiality of 
all potential research subjects.  
 
We could not practicably identify all potential subjects without identifying them through KP 
Washington Virtual Data Warehouses. We could not practicably approach all participants for 
their consent prior to that data pull.  
 
Subjects will not be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.  
 
 
f. W aiver of HIPAA Privacy Rule Authorization for Identification  from EHR  
If you will not obtain a signed HIPAA Privacy Rule Authorization or if you want to eliminate any 
required language from the authorization, provide the following rationale and justification.  
• Why the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver.  
• Why access to and use of t he PHI is necessary for the research.  
• Why the use or disclosure of PHI for the research poses no more than minimal risk to the subjects' privacy (must have an adequate plan to protect the PHI from improper use 
or disclosure, a plan to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with the 
purpose of the research, and when applicable, written assurances from collaborators that PHI will not be reused or re -disclosed to any other entity).  
We are requesting a waiver  of HIPAA authorization of Identification from EHR because we could 
not practicably identify and approach all potential subjects without identifying them through KP 
Washington Data Warehouses.  
 
Access to and the use of PHI for this research is necessary because we need participant 
contact information to approach participants by mail and telephone. We also need dates 
(medication and enrollments) to correctly identify the sample. Finally, once on the phone, we 
need information such as name and birth date to confirm we have the correct person on the 
phone.  
 
The use and disclosures of PHI poses no more than minim al risk to the subject’s privacy  
because of the following protections: Only persons directly involved in the study will have 
access to data. Each KPW enrollee will be assigned a unique study identification number linked 
to his or her medical record number.  The crosswalk between the study identification number 
and each subject’s medical record number is maintained in electronic form at each site, but 
separate from the analysis files. To create project analytic files the crosswalk between the study 
identifica tion number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be re- established by 
the project programmer. We will use existing procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate from analysis files. All data necessary to complet e this research will 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 13 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  be created and stored in secure computers to which only project team participants will have 
access. When these files are created, the crosswalk will be erased from all files and kept only 
by the programmer. No participant will be identified from any published manuscripts or reports 
generated from the proposed study.    
 Once all data has been collected for this study, the crosswalk between the study identification 
number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be erased from  all analysis files 
and stored in a file kept by each site’s project programmer. The project manager maintains a calendar that tracks destruction date information and will notify the programmer prior to the 
scheduled date for destruction.  
 All linkages will be destroyed as early as is consistent with the research and no later than 
December 31, 2026  
 
 
 
g. R
CW 70.02 Requirements to Access HIPAA Covered Data without Consent for 
Identification from EHR (WA State  Law)   
If you will not obtain written HIPAA Authorization provide the following rationale and justification. 
Explain how the research:  
• Is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of the patient that would result from the disclosure;  
• Is impracticable without the use or disclosure of the health care information in 
individually identifiable form;  
• Contains reasonable safeguards to protect the information from redisclosure;  
• Contains reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any patient in any report of the research project; and  
• Contains procedures to remove or destroy at the earliest opportunity, consistent with the purposes of the project, information that would enable the patient to be identified, unless 
an institutional review board authorizes retention of identifying information for purposes 
of another research project.  
 
 This research is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of the 
participant that would result from the disclosure because although some study participants may 
not benefit directly from this study, their participation may eventually be of help in understanding whether pain self -management training and optional taper support helps patients reduce their 
prescribed opioid medications, which is currently an important public health priority.  
 
We could not practicably identify potentially eligible patients or approach participants for their 
written authorizati on prior to the automated data (i.e., VDW) pull.  
 
Access to and the use of PHI for this research is necessary because we need participant 
contact information to approach participants by mail and telephone. We also need dates (medication and enrollments) to correctly identify the sample. Finally, once on the phone, we 
need information such as name and birth date to confirm we have the correct  person on the 
phone.  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 14 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
The use and disclosures of PHI poses no more than minimal risk to the subject’s privacy. Only 
persons directly involved in the study will have access to data. Each KPW A enrollee will be 
assigned a unique study identification number linked to his or her medical record number. The 
crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s medical record number is 
maintained in electronic form at each site, but separate from the analysis files. To create project analytic files  the crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s unique 
medical record number will be re- established by the project programmer. We will use existing 
procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate from analysis files. All 
data necessary to complete this research will be created and stored in secure computers to 
which only project team participants will have access. When these files are created, the crosswalk will be erased from all files and kept only by the programmer. No participant will be 
identified from any published manuscripts or reports generated from the proposed study.   
 Once all data has been collected for this study, the crosswalk between the study identification 
number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be erased from all analysis files 
and stored in a file kept by each site’s project programmer. The project manager maintains a 
calendar that tracks  destruction date information and will notify the programmer prior to the 
scheduled date for destruction.  All linkages will be destroyed as early as is consistent with the 
research and no later than December 31, 2026  
  
  
h. 
 Decision ally Impaired Adults   
State whether d ecision ally impaired adults will be included and explain the extent of cognitive 
impairment (complete, fluctuating, progressive, or temporary).  Justify their inclusion, and explain any protections to mitigate risk (such as the involvement of a caregiver or authorized represent ative).  Describe consent/assent procedures.  
N/A we will not include decisionally impaired adults .   
 
 
i. O
ther Populations Targeted for Recruitment 
If you are targeting a population that may be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence based on the specific circumstances of the study, describe how you will ensure that participation is 
voluntar y and minimize any added risk. (Common examples include employees, students, 
people of low socioeconomic status, etc.)  
N/A we will not be targeting  or including vulnerable populations . We will not actively be 
excluding KPWA employees , but we will exclude patients  including KPWA employees,  who 
have pro -actively requested to not be included in research . 
 
 
j. S
etting  
Describe the sites or locations where your research team will conduct the research.  
 We will sample participants from KPWA clinics that  have  high the highest proportion of high 
dose LtOT users.  Preliminary data exploration suggests that Olympia, Capit ol Hill and Everett 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 15 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Medical Centers  have the highest counts of LtOT users but we are working with leaders in the 
delivery system (Sarah Levy and Melissa Sturgis)  to determine the best clinics to target.   
 
We will recruit participants by mail and telephone. All  study visits will be conducted on the 
telephone.  
  
k. R
ecruitment Methods  
Describe how study participants will be recruited and enrolled. Indicate whether you will openly 
recruit using advertisements, websites, or brochures . Indicate if  you plan to do targeted 
recruitment using existing records or referral. (Upload all recruitment materials to your submission to the IRB.)  
 Describe, by position/title, who will be recruiting and enrolling participants (providing the specific 
names of research team members is not necessary).  
 
Describe any plans for the participants in the currently proposed study to be re -contacted  or 
recruited  for future follow- up studies . (Note that participants should be informed of this potential 
for re -recruitment during the current study’s consent process.)  
 
Potential participants will be identified using the KPWHRI VDW  (see inclusion/exclusion 
criteria) . Survey Research Program  staff will then mail potential participants an advance 
invitation letter describing the study along with an information sheet , study insert  and $2 pre-
incentive.   
 
Approximately 5 business days after sending the invitation packet, the Survey Research 
Program phone room  staff will call participant to conduct the first round of  eligibility  screening 
and, for subjects who remain eligible,  schedule the pre-randomization screening with the study 
research specialist.  After the call, we will send these potentially eligible participants a cover 
letter  and a copy of the consent form for the next round of sc reening.  
 
At the pre- randomization , second round of  screening, the study research specialist with further 
screen potential participants with  two more screening questions. If eligible, the participant will 
then be consented, e nrolled, and asked to take the baseline survey by phone or web.   
 
Once the baseline survey is complete  (by phone or web), the participant will receive a thank you  
letter  (including $20 incentive)  with their randomization status  (PSMOT intervention arm or 
control  arm) and next steps . Participants in the intervention arm will also receive a welcome 
cover letter with the materials needed for the training sessions. Their provider will also receive a 
letter informing them of their patient’s enrollment into the intervention arm of the trial (see letter 
to PCP  that informs them of their patient’s participation in the intervention arm of the trial ). 
 
Participants may be recruited for future supplements to this study . Drs. Sullivan  and Boudreau 
are exploring the feasibility of conducting a supplement to this project where participants 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 16 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  enrolled in the intervention arm would be offered the opportunity to participate in two (one at 
baseline and one at 12 month) 2 hour, in- person, neuropsychology tests to examine the 
cognitive and social aspects of patients as they taper down their opioid dosage. While all intervention arm participants would/could take the baseline assessment, only those who chose to taper would be approached to do a 12 month assessment. At this time, Dr. Sullivan is merely 
exploring the feasibility of doing this type of supplement and no definitive plans are in place for 
moving this research forward. We would like to request permission at this time to contact the intervention arm partici pants for this potential,  future research if it comes to fruition.  
 
 D
escription of Recruitment Methods, Randomization and Mailings  
 
When  Task  Who  Description  
Day 0  Send Invitation Packet  Survey Research Program  Mail hardcopy invitation letter, study 
insert, informa tion sheet and $2 bill  
Day 5  Call to recruit  and first 
eligibility screen  Survey Research Program  Eligibility screen  
Day 5  Mail Consent Packet  Survey Research Program  Mail cover letter and copy of consent 
form  
Day 10  Pre-randomization screen 
and consent  Study Research Specialist  2nd eligibility screen, obtain oral 
consent, confirm  PCP information, 
obtain web survey mode preference  
Day ~10-
28 Baseline survey  Participant/ Survey 
Research Program  Participant takes baseline survey by 
web or phone  
Day ~10-
28 Randomization  Study Programmer  Study team randomizes  participants 
who complete their survey to either the intervention arm or the control 
arm 
Day ~14-
32 Thank you letter  Survey Research Program  Mail thank you letter with randomization status and $20 
incentive  
Day ~14-
32 Letter to PCP  Study Team  Mail letter to intervention participant’s 
PCP informing them of enrollment into 
intervention arm of STRIPE study  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 17 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Day ~14-
32 Intervention Welcome  Study Team  Mail intervention packet containing 
cover letter, participant workbook with appendices, audio files on CD and "The 
Pain Survival Guide."  
 
l. I nformed Consent Process  
 
Describe how you will obtain and document consent, including:  
• Where, when and how the consent process will take place. 
• A process to ensure ongoing consent.  
• Steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Any steps that will be taken to ensure the subjects’ understanding.  
• If you will conduct screening or any other research procedures before obtaining full 
informed consent, describe this.  
For this study we will be collecting data and requesting different forms of consent and a waiver of 
HIPAA authorization for the following data collection acti vities . 
 
 
OVERVIEW OF CONSENT PROCESS:  
 
Please see the table below for an overview of the proposed consent and waiver of informed 
consent for this study.  
Data collection 
timepoint  Informed Consent  HIPAA Authorization  
 Informed 
Consent  Waiver of 
documentation of 
informed consent  Waiver of 
informed 
consent  HIPAA 
authorization  Waiver of 
HIPAA 
authorization  
Sample 
identification via 
VDW    X  X 
Recruitment 
screening   X   No EMR data if 
ineligible  
Pre-randomization 
screening   X   No EMR data if 
ineligible  
Study  enrollment   X   X 
 
All project activities are conducted through the mail, on the telephone or using a web- link for 
survey data collection. There are no in- person study activities, therefor e this project is  
requesting a waiver of documentation of informed consent to: 
• Screen potential participants  in two rounds  for eligibility during recruitment. VDW data 
will be used to identify the potentially eligible sample.   
• Enroll participants into our study by sending  a copy of the consent form and obtaining 
verbal consent (instead of signed consent) 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 18 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
For the screening steps (both for eligibility during recruitment calling and pre- randomization 
screening) the consent process will be as follows:  
• The study team will send potential  participant s a single  invitation letter and an 
information sheet  that describes both  screening activities   
• For each screening telephone call, the study team will confirm  the participant’s 
identity , provide an opportunity to answer any questions  and obtain oral consent  
 
    For study enrollment the consent process will be as follows:  
• Consent will occur during the pre -randomized second screening telephone call  
o Prior to the call, the study team will send the participant a paper copy of 
the consent form and a cover letter  
o After and if the participant has screened eligible, the study research 
specialist will go over the consent form with the participant (using a script 
which will highlight all the key points) and obtain:  
 Oral consent to participate in the study  
 Approval/disapproval to allow the use of email for study communication 
 Approval/disapproval to allow the study team to audio record telephone sessions (if the participant is chosen to be in the 
intervention arm)  
o The study team will  track the consent outcomes (consented yes/no, use 
of email yes/no, and audio recording yes/no) in the project tracking database  
 
m. W
aiver of Informed Consent   
Provide rationale and justification for the Waiver of Informed Consent for this study , including:   
• Does the proposed research present no more than minimal risk to the study 
participants?   
• How the waiver of informed consent will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
participants . 
• Why this research cannot practically be carried out without a waiver of informed consent. 
• W henever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information 
after participation. 
 
We are requesting a waiver of documention of informed consent to screen and enroll subjects 
into the study. See below.   
 
 
 
 
n. W aiver of Documentation of Informed Consent   
Provide rationale and justification for the Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent by identifying which of these two conditions applies and how .  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 19 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  1) The research involves no more than minimal risk to participants AND involves no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context.    
2) The signed consent document would be the only record linking the participants to the research, and the principal risk to participants would be potential harm resulting from a 
breach of confidentiality.  
We are requesting a waiver of documentation of informed consent to : 
 
• Screen potential participants for two rounds of eligibility during recruitment  by sending an 
information sheet and obtaining verbal consent  
• Enroll participants into our study by sending a copy of the consent form prior to the pre -
randomization screening call and obtaining verbal consent (instead of signed consent) 
during that pre-r andomization screening call after the participant has screened eligible.  
  
We believe that the proposed research presents no more than minimal risk to the study 
participants. Only persons directly involved in the study will have access to data. Each KP WA 
enrollee will be assigned a unique study identification number linked to his or her medical record number at KPWA. The crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s 
medical record number is maintained in electronic form, but separate from the analysis files. To 
create project analytic files the crosswalk between the study identification number and each 
subject’s unique medical record number will be re -established by the KP Washington research 
project programmer. We will use existing procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate from analysis files. All data necessary to complete this research will be 
created and stored in secure computers to which only project team participants will have 
access. No particip ant will be identified from any published manuscripts or reports generated 
from the proposed study.  
 Additionally, all study activities are being conducted on the telephone and written consent 
cannot be obtained , we will do the following:   For eligibility screenings, we will send an 
information sheet and obtain verbal consent.  For enrollment into the study, we will send a copy 
of the consent form for participant’s review, obtain oral consent and track documentation of consent in our project tracking database.  
 
 
  
o. A
lteration of Informed Consent   
Identify the required elements of informed consent that you wish to remove or alter. Provide 
justification for their removal or alteration. 
N/A 
 
p. No n -English -Speaking Subjects   
If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe how the consent discussion will take place and indicate if translated consent forms or short forms will be used.  Confirm that an 
interpreter will assist with the initial consent process and subsequent study visits. N/A 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 20 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
 
 
q. A ssent of Children and Parent Permission 
IMPORTANT NOTE:  Consent may be obtained in certain situations.  For example, conducting 
family planning or sexually transmitted disease (STD) research.  In addition, for older children 
ages 16 and up who participate in an adult study, the consent document can be used in place of 
the assent document.   
 Describe how you will obtain and document assent/parental permission, including:  
• Describe your plan for obtaining parent permission.  The permission of one parent is 
generally sufficient for minimal risk research, or for greater than minimal risk research if there is the potential for direct benefit to the child.  
• Note that for studies involving greater than minimal risk with no prospect of direct benefit to the child, permission of both parents is required unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.  
• Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if 
so, who will be allowed to provide permission.  
• Indicate whether assent will be obtained and documented from all, some, or none of the children. If assent will only be obtained from some children (because of very young age, severe cognitive impairment, etc.), indicate which children will be required to assent and 
which will not.  
• When assent of children is obtained, describe whether and how it will be documented.  
• When subjects might reach the age of majority during the study, describe the plan to 
obtain consent from these subjects at that time using an adult consent form.  
N/A 
 
 
r. A
dults Unable to Consent/Decisionally Impaired  
Describe the consent/assent process for Adults Unable to Consent/Decisionally Impaired, 
including:  
• Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent.  
• List the individuals from whom permission will be obtained in order of priority. (E.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for health care 
decisions, spouse, and adult child.   
• Describe the process for assent of the subject s. Address the following:  
o Whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If assent 
will be obtained from some subjects, indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not.  
o If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, an explanation of why not. 
o When assent is obtained, describe how it will be documented.  
• Describe the plan to obtain consent if subjects might regain capacity to consent during the study.  
N/A 
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 21 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
s. H IPAA Privacy Rule Authorization – if stu dy will use or disclose Protected Health Information 
(PHI)  
Describe the plan to obtain a signed Privacy Rule Authorization from each subject.  
All participant contact will occur by mail, telephone or web (for those who elect to take their 
surveys on the internet) and we will not have the opportunity to obtain a signed HIPAA 
authorization form from each subject.  We are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization.      
 
t. W aiver of HIPAA Privacy Rule Authorization  
If you will not obtain a signed HIPAA Priva cy Rule Authorization, or include HIPAA authorization 
in the consent form,  or if you want to eliminate any required language from the authorization, 
provide the following rationale and justification.  
• Why the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver.  
• Why access to and use of the PHI is necessary for the research.  
• Why the use or disclosure of PHI for the research poses no more than minimal risk to the subjects' privacy (must have an adequate plan to protect the PHI from improper use or disclosure, a plan to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with the purpose of the research, and when applicable, written assurances from collaborators 
that PHI will not be reused or re -disclosed to any other entity).  
All study activities will take place over the telephone, mail or internet  and we will not be able to 
obtain signed HIPAA authorization.  
 
For the following activities we are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization to:  
• Enrolling participants into the study  by sending a copy of the consent form which contains 
the required HIPAA authorization language  
  
For the above activities, research could not practicably be conducted without a waiver because there are no plans for contacting participants in person.  Additionally, we cannot practicably 
identify the sam ple without a waiver.  
 Access to and the use of PHI for this research is necessary because we need participant 
contact information to approach participants by mail and telephone. We also need dates 
(medication and enrollments) to correctly identify the sample. Finally, once on the phone, we 
need information such as name and birth date to confirm we have the correct person on the 
phone.  
 
The use and disclosures of PHI poses no more than minimal risk to the subject’s privacy. Only 
persons directly involved in the study will have access to data. Each KPW  enrollee will be 
assigned a unique study identification number linked to his or her medical record number. The 
crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s medical record number is maintained in electronic form at each site, but separate from the analysis files. To create project 
analytic files the crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s unique 
medical record number will be re- established by the project programmer. We will use existing 
procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate from analysis files. All data necessary to complete this research will be created and stored in secure computers to which only project team participants will have access. When these files are created, the 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 22 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  crosswalk will be erased from all files and kept only by the programmer. No participant will be 
identified from any published manuscripts or reports generated from the proposed study.   
 Once all data has been collected for this study, the crosswalk between the study identification 
number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be erased from all analysis files and stored in a file kept by each site’s project programmer. The project manager maintains a calendar that tracks destruction date information and will notify the programmer prior to the 
scheduled date for destruction.  
 
All linkages will be destroyed as early as is consistent with the research and no later than 
December 31, 2026  
 
 
  
 
 
u. R
CW 70.02 -Requirments to Access HIPAA Covered Data without Consent  
If you will not obtain HIPAA Authorization or Consent provide the following rationale and 
justification. Explain how the research:  
 
• Is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of the patient that 
would result from the disclosure;  
• Is impracticable without the use or disclosure of the health care information in individually identifiable form;  
• Contains reasonable safeguards to protect the information from redisclosur e; 
• Contains reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any patient in any report of the research project; and  
• Contains procedures to remove or destroy at the earliest opportunity, consistent with the purposes of the project, information that would enable the patient to be identified, unless an institutional review board authorizes retention of identifying information for purposes of another research project.  
  
This research is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of the 
participant that would result from the disclosure because although some study participants may 
not benefit directly from this study, their participation may eventually be of help in understanding whether taper support helps patients taper their prescribed opioid medications, which is 
currently an important public health priority.  
 
We will have the following safeguards in place to protect the information from re- disclo sure:  
 
Physical Controls: KPWA policies and procedures ensure controlled access to computers and 
physical space for secure storage of data and confidentiality information. Access to the 
KPWHRI building is restricted by locked doors and requires a key card to enter KPWHIR facility 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 23 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  always.  Any paper files with identifiers are required to be kept in locked filing cabinets. Keys are 
only provided to study staff once they are approved by the facilities and project managers.  
Technical Controls: Administrative, physical, and technical safeguards are employed to ensure 
the confidentiality, integrity, and security of electronic health information (45 CFR Part 160 and 
Subparts A and C of Part 164; 44 U.S.C. § 3541, et seq). At KPWA data will be stored on 
password protected computers in a network folder where only authorized study personnel are 
granted access. All access by staff person, date and time is logged. All computers are loaded with anti -virus software and security patches are deployed to staff computers autom atically. 
Data will never be transferred to laptops, memory sticks or other mobile devices; our policy does not permit the storage of PHI on these devices.  
Administrative Controls: At KPWA, files are backed up on an hourly basis to a disk system and 
are not encrypted. Backup media are stored within KPWA data centers in Tukwila, Quincy and 
Liberty Lake (all within Washington State) to which only authorized staff have access. Data will 
be accessed via KPWA desktop computers which require staff to log on using their password. 
Data will be stored on KPWA’s SAN system, secured using NTFS file permissions.  members. 
The data will be kept in a dedicated secure folder, separate from administrative datasets/records and will only be accessed by study team members . Collected data will be used 
only for this IRB approved study and will not be combined with any non -study administrative 
datasets/recor ds. At project completion, the data will be archived with an automated, mandatory 
deletion date the sooner of 5 years from receipt of the data or December 31, 2026. Published 
data will not contain any individual identifiers.  
 
We could not practicably approach all participants for their written authorization because we are 
not conducting any study visits in- person.   
 
While aggregate data can be appropriate for certain study questions, collecting individual level 
data is necessary to conduct analyses that look at the relationship among variables.  
 
The use and disclosures of PHI poses no more than minimal risk to the subject’s privacy. Only 
persons directly involved in the study will have access to data. Each KPW  enrollee will be 
assigned a unique study identification number linked to his or her medical record number. The 
crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s medical record number is maintained in electronic form at each site, but separate from the analysis files. To create project analyt ic files the crosswalk between the study identification number and each subject’s unique 
medical record number will be re- established by the project programmer. We will use existing 
procedures to ensure that individual patient identifiers are kept separate  from analysis files. All 
data necessary to complete this research will be created and stored in secure computers to which only project team participants will have access. When these files are created, the 
crosswalk will be erased from all files and kept only by the programmer. No participant will be 
identified from any published manuscripts or reports generated from the proposed study.   
 
Once all data has been collected for this study, the crosswalk between the study identification 
number and each subject’s unique medical record number will be erased from all analysis files and stored in a file kept by each site’s project programmer. The project manager maintains a 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 24 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  calendar that tracks  destruction date information and will notify the programmer prior to the 
scheduled date for destruction.   
All linkages will be destroyed as early as is consistent with the research and no later than 
December 31, 2026  
  
 
6. Study Procedures  
Descri be and explain the study design, including:  
• Procedures to monitor subjects for safety, including who will review the data and at what 
frequency for safety issues.  
• Procedures performed to lessen the probability or magnitude of risks.  
• All drugs and devices used in the  research and the purpose of their use, and their 
regulatory approval status.  
• The source records that will be used to collect data about subjects. (Attach all surveys, scripts, and data collection forms.)  
• What data will be collected including long- term fol low-up. 
• The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study. 
• The duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects. 
• The estimated date for the investigators to complete this study (complete primary analyses)  
NOTE:  It should be clear exactly which procedures will be conducted for the research as opposed to procedures the subjects would undergo (in the exact manner described in the 
protocol) even if they were not participating in the study.  
 
Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the research, including 
withdrawal from intervention but continued data collection.  
 
Describe any anticipated circumstances under which subjects could be withdrawn from the 
research without their consent.   
 
Describe any procedures for orderly termination.  
If the study involves genetic testing or collection of genetic information, describe this. 
 
 
 
Study Procedures – I
 ntervention Arm and  Control  Arm 
Sequential description  
 
 
As described in the recruitment section of this application, potential research participants are identified 
via the KPWHRI VDW by the KPWA programmer and sent a letter of invitation, a study infor mation 
sheet , study insert,  and a $2 incentive.  Five days after the invite letter is sent,  the KPWA survey team 
calls subjects for the first screening.  Participants will be screened twice. First , they will be screened on 
basic eligibility criteria when the survey research program calls them to recruit.  (See STRIPE screening 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 25 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  script for screening questions.)   If the participant passes  the first round of screening and is still 
interested, they will be scheduled for a second round of screening with a study research specialist.  
 
Prior to the call, the study team will mail the participant a copy of the consent form  and a cover letter . 
During the second screening call, the research specialist will ask sensitive eligibility questions regarding 
recent intent  to harm and recent psychiatric  hospit alization . (see ”Pre-randomization script”  for 
sensitive eligibility screening script and questions).  If the participant passes this round of screening, the 
research specialist will administer and obtain oral consent. The participant will then be offered the baseline survey via phone or web. If phone is chosen, the participant will be asked if they would like to 
do the baseline survey now or schedule a time to complete it. If web is chosen, the research specialist 
will confirm the participants email address and email them a link to the survey. Reminder emails and/or  
phone follow -up will occur if subjects d o not complete the baseline survey.   
 Once the baseline survey is complete, we will randomize the participant into the intervention arm or the 
control  arm. The study team wants participants to be randomized after the baseline survey  out of 
concern that knowledge of status could affect a subject’s responses to questions and participation in the baseline assessment. We will send participants a thank you letter with their incentive upon 
completion of the baseline assessment that details which arm they were assigned to and next steps.  
  We anticipate the time from the letter being mailed to time of enrollment to be between 2-4 weeks. All 
invitation materials, consent forms, HIPAA authorization forms and scripts are attached in this package.  
 
 
 
 
After the baseline assessment and randomization, all participants will be asked to take two more  
surveys; 6 months after enrollment and 12 months after enrollment. The survey can be taken either in 
web form or on the telephone, administered by a survey research program telephone interviewer.  With 
the 12 month phone or web survey reminder letter, all participants wil receive a $2 pre -incentive.  The 
survey will ask questions about physical health (including any experience with pain), mental health 
(depression and anxiety), and medication use .  All baseline, 6- month, and 12- month surveys including 
script are included in this packet.  See Master Survey document for a list of the surveys to be 
administered at the three -time points.  
 
Additionally, all subjects enrolled in the intervention who choose to taper their opioids  arm will be 
asked to complete the two item Graded Chronic Pain Scale ( GCPS ) and the fourteen item Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale ( HADS ) before each intervention telephone session. (See Measures for 
Intervention Arm only doc.). Surveys are attached in this package. The pre -visit GCPS and HADS will 
be completed   on paper (mailed with intervention packet materials) prior to the visit and read their score 
to the research interventionist at the beginning of the session.  
  
Activity  Time Commitment  

 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 26 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Read invitation packet   5 minutes  
1st screening call  10 minutes  
Read consent packet  and 
answer any questions  10 minutes  
2nd screening call including 
consent and randomization  20 minutes  
Baseline survey  30 minutes  
Pre-visit GCPS and HADS  for 
particpants who choose to 
taper  5 minutes each visit 5-18 
Intervention arm study visit 1 -
18 30-60 minutes each  visit 
6 month  survey  20 minutes  
12 month survey  20 minutes  
 
We anticipate it will take 18 months to enroll all 250 study participants. Each participant will be followed 
for 12- months post randomization.  
 Device/drug information N/A 
 Secondary data: data, sources, and date range  
 In addition to the primary data described above, secondary data to be collected on participants enrolled 
in both arms of the study are  listed in the table below.  
 
Data from KP Washington  
 
Source (specify)  
(i.e., from KPWA, or from an 
existing or previous study)  Key Information/Description of 
Variables  Date Range  
   
   
KPWA data sources (VDW)  Diagnoses via ICD codes and dates  of 
code : Comorbidities  (comorbidity indices 
and the individual constituent diseases), 
mental health disorders  (e.g. depression, 
anxiety ), substance use disorder s (e.g. 
opioid use disorder , alcohol use 
disorder , tobacco use disorder, cannabis 
use disorder, stimulant use disorder ), 2016- 2022  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 27 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
  
 
DIRECT IDENTIFERS  
 Names  
 Dates  
 Postal address  
 Geocode  
 Phone numbers  
 Fax numbers  
 Email address   Social Security Num bers  
 Medical record numbers  
 Health plan numbers  
 Account numbers  
 License/C ertificate numbers  
 Vehicle ID numbers  
 Device identifiers/Serial numbers   Web URLs  
 IP address numbers  
 Biometric  identifiers (e.g., 
finger prints, voice prints, 
retina scans)  
 Facial Photos/Images  
 CHS ID  
 Other unique identifier(s):  
 
Alternative treatment(s) and/or denied treatment  
N/A 
Deception/incomplete disclosure  
N/A 
Incidental findings  
N/A 
 Procedures to monitor, lessen or mitigate risk  
There are several study design features that lessen or mitigate risk: cancer, suicidal ideation , and pain  
including site of pain 
KPWA data sources (VDW)  Social history table variables for alcohol 
use and tobacco use  2016- 2022  
KPWA data sources  (VDW)  Health plan enrollment information  (start and stop dates)  2016- 2022  
KPWA data sources (VDW)  Health care utilization including:  
outpatient, inpatient,, emergency 
department  2016- 2022  
KPWA data sources (VDW)  Medication orders and pharmacy dispensings including dates  2016- 2022  
KPWA data sources (VDW)  Laboratory tests and results  2016- 2022  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 28 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • Participants assigned to the control group  may be disappointed with their assignment. 
We are providing incentives for completing 6 and 12 months surveys  for both groups to 
improve retention in the trial.  
• Participants may be embarrassed or psychologically distressed at the survey questions, 
they are told that they can skip any questions they do not want to answer 
• Breach of confidentiality is a potential risk. See section 5u for a description of the various controls set in place to safeguard data security.  Additionally, staff are trained on best practice privacy and confidentiality measures.  
• The study will have a plan in place to handle Critical Incidents, when a pa rticipant 
endorses intent to harm themselves  or others . Although, we anticipate this to be rare, we 
would like to be prepared in the event that a participant spontaneously endorses intent to harm.  The research specialist and research interventionist  will administer the 
Columbia Suicidality Severity Rating Scale. A fter determining the score, the research 
interventionist will take the appropriate steps to triage the participant per the study 
protocol.  (see CI procedures for Columbia Suicidality Severity Rating Scale and general 
CI procedures).  Additionally, the research specialist and research interventionist will be 
supervised by a KPW licensed clinical psychologist.  Dr. Ben Balderson is KPWA mental 
health provider.  All critical incide nts will be reviewed by the study psychologist.  
• A data use agreement will be in place to share study data with investigators at the University of Washington  
 
 
Subject drop out or withdrawal procedures  
If a subject drops out or we withdraw them from the study, the study team will:  
• Update the tracking database to indicate that no further patient -self report data collection 
or participant contact will occur.  They will not be asked to complete any more surveys.  If 
we withdraw the participant from the study, we  will send them a letter notifying them that 
they are no longer enrolled in the study.  
• We will continue to use the data they have already contributed/agreed to allow us to use 
per their consent for analyses  
•  All participants using buprenorphine for treatm ent of OUD will be withdrawn from the 
entire study. We may learn about buprenorphine use from the screening survey or as indicated in VDW medication dispensing data ascertained prior to the analyses.  Primary 
data collection will cease and they will not be included in analyses. This is an exclusion criteria.  
• All pregnant women will be withdrawn from the study entirely. Primary data collection will cease and they will not be included in analyses. Pregnancy status will be determined via 
a screening question and diagnosis codes from the VDW for subjects in both study arm 
prior to analyses. We expect very few young women to be in the study due to the 
average age of chronic high dose opioid users at KP.  
   
Anticipated study end date  
The anticipated study end date for the completion of primary analyses will be on or before December 31, 2021  
 
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 29 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Study Procedures – Intervention Arm  
 
Sequential description  
  
 After subjects are randomized into the intervention arm , they will receive a letter with their 
randomization status, intervention packet,  and then begin having telephone visits with the study 
research interventionist . The study team will send a letter to the participants  PCP noting their 
participation in the pain self -management training arm of the trial . Prior to their first telephone call we 
will send participants a packet containing,  “The Pain Survival Guide” https://www.amazon.com/Pain -
Survival -Guide- Reclaim -LifeTools -ebook/dp/B0029KHTK8 , a CD containing audio files of relaxation  
techniques  and participant workbook that includes the various exercises for each visit along with  
GCPS an d HADS  questionnaires to administer before each telephone visit.  Participants can opt to 
receive and take the GCPS and HADS  questionnaires on the web if they choose.  The workbook , CD 
and questionnaires are included in this package.  Additionally, we are working on creating a study 
website that will host the audio files.  
 A
 description of each telephone visit, the timing of the visit and the duration of the visit is described in 
the following table. See the “Clinician Manual” for details on the content for each session.  
 
Session 
number  Week 
(from 
random-
ization)  Session content  Duration  
1 1 Overview of intervention and sessions, education regarding benefits of pain coping skills 
training and collaborative nature of treatment.  
Identification of treatment goals. Instruction and practice in diaphragmatic breathing.  
Personal action plan introdu ction.  
Review of study team contacts   
Review pre-visit GCPS and HADS assessments to be done prior to each subsequent 
session  60 mi  
2 2  Diaphragmatic breathing review and practice. Education regarding rationale for and 
benefits of relaxation techniques,  introduction to 7- muscle group tense-release 
progressive muscle relaxation.  30 min  
3 3 Pain neuroscience education and rationale for cognitive and behavioral techniques for 
managing pain.  Education about and discussion of harm and fear -avoidance belief s. 
Home assignment: watch two videos and read article about patient opioid taper 
experiences.  30 min  
4 4 Motivational interviewing: elicit history of opioid use and views about tapering, provide 
education about long-term opioid therapy risks and scientific evidence for benefits, 
discuss and problem -solve barriers to tapering. Education about withdrawal symptoms.  
--debriefing of subject after viewing videos at home of patient experiences tapering off 
opioids.  
--If interested in taper, subject instr ucted to make appointment with primary care provider 
at the time of their next opioid refill to discuss taper and subject informed interventionist  
will communicate with PCP about this, as well as with the study PI, a psychiatrist with expertise in pain, who will review their medications and may make suggestions about their medications.  To be asked at subsequent sessions if patient is not interested in tapering 
starting at session 4.   
-- If pt interested in taper, interventionist  provides  to Study PI information on EHR 
diagnoses, pain rating ( graded chronic pain scale - GCPS), anxiety and depression score 45 min  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 30 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  (HADS). After consultation with Study PI  Dr. Sullivan , interventionist  provides guidance to 
primary care provider about taper discussion, opioid taper plan, and initiation or 
adjustment of non-opioid medications to relieve pain, anxiety, depression, insomnia. See 
Taper Guidelines for details.  
--If not interested, interventionist  will ask about interest at subsequent sessions  as 
deemed ap propriate . 
5 5 Education about relationship between sleep and pain, sleep hygiene, and cognitive and 
behavioral strategies for improving sleep.  30 min  
6 6 Review of cognitive and behavioral skills taught to date, and application to daily life to 
manage pain and stress. Concept that hurt ≠ harm.  30 min  
7 8 Education about benefits of activity pacing. Development of individual activity pacing plan 
for the participant.  30 min  
8 10 Coping with pain flare -ups: development of personal pain coping plan.  30 min  
9 12 Instruction and practice in 4 -muscle group te nse-release progressive muscle relaxation  30 min  
10 14 Instruction in and practice of 4 -muscle group progressive muscle relaxation without 
tensing.  30 min  
11 18 Education about coping self -statements and identification of helpful coping self -
statements for the individual participant.   30 min  
12 22  Distraction as a pain coping skill.  30 min  
13 26 Instruction and practice in body scan technique.  30 min  
14 30 Instruction and practice in mini -relaxations.  30 min  
15 34 Review and practice of mini -relaxation, and application to daily situations of increased 
pain or stress.   30 min  
16 38 Education about importance of pleasurable activities, identification of pleasurable and 
meaningful activities for the individual participant, education about goal setting, pleasurable activity goal- setting. Review of daily plan and pain coping flare-ups plan; 
refinement and revision as necessary. Pain coping skills review.  30 min  
17 42 Review of pain coping skills learned in this progra m. Education about maintenance of 
gains and relapse prevention.  30 min  
18 46 Skills summary, final plan for maintaining gains and managing setbacks and pain flare -
ups. Discussion of participant’s thoughts about this being the last session, and reminders 
of next steps in the research.  30 min  
 
Note: The first 6 sessions are weekly. The next 4 sessions are biweekly. The remaining sessions are 
monthly. For participants who are tapering their opioid dose, each session will include discussion of how that is going and how the pain coping skills might be used to manage pain and any other 
symptoms experienced. Each session includes home activity assignments for reading (The Pain Survival Guide and participant workbook) and coping skills practice (personal action plan) and review of 
experiences with the previous week’s assignments. Each session also includes identification of 
obstacles or challenges to completing the home activity assignments and problem -solving ways to 
overcome these. Intervention participants will be provided a workbook, The Pain Survival Guide, 
access to audio files of relaxation exercises, and access to two videos of patient interviews.  
 
Primary D
ata C ollected on the Intervention  
During each telephone session, the research interventionist will track the phone sessions  into the 
project REDCap tracking data base hosted at KPWA. The information captured at the visits includes:  
• Date of the phone visit 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 31 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • Whether or not the participant attended their scheduled appointment  
• Check boxes for session content that was covered during the visit  
• Any critical incidents (intent to harm oneself or other) 
• Any adverse events  
• Detailed notes on the visit  
• Amount of time spent on each visit  
• HADS and GCPS score ( score  read to interventionist and entered into REDCap at the 
beginning of each session for participants who choose to taper ) 
At the fourth study visit, the research interventionist  will ask participants if they want to taper their opioid 
dosing.  If the partici pant declines to taper, they will proceed with the rest of their pain self -management 
sessions and follow- up surveys. If a participant  expresses interest in tapering, the interventionist will 
recommend medication taper suggestion to the participant’s PCP  using Epic Telephone Encounters . 
We will provide taper support at a later date if they prefer to delay the taper  or resume paused tapers . 
Patients will be allowed to pause tapers  (i.e., put the taper on hold) for any reason including the need to 
escalate opioid dose (e.g., surgery requiring additional pain management) . Patients delaying or pausing 
tapers will still continue to receive the pain self -management training.  Participants will be informed of 
the risk of stock -piling opiates during the taper process. The research interventionist may need to 
consult with  Dr. Sullivan , the study research physician on complicated tapering scenarios. Dr. Sullivan 
will have Epic read only access to review the medical records of any difficult tapering sessions t o 
provide guidance to the research interventionist . The guideline for tapering was developed by Dr. 
Sullivan (UW psychiatrist and Principal Investigator),and is attached . The guidelines  were  reviewed by  
Dr. Sarah Levy (KP Medical Director, Continuum  of Care), Dr. Angela Sparks (Family Medicine 
Physician and Medical Director, Clinical Knowledge Development and Support), Dr. Khushboo Mehta 
(Family Medicine provider, Program Chief of Family Medicine,  study Co-Investigator) and Melissa 
Sturgis, PharmD, BCACP  (Pharmacy Clinical Coordinator, Quality and Clinical Operations).  This taper 
guideline is consistent  with KPWA guidelines for COT tapering.   
Prior to opioid tapering, the research interventionist  will follow the Communication Plan for points to 
cover with both the patient and provider.  
A random sample of the intervention visits will be chosen for quality assurance activities. We will send 
audio files of the visit to Dr. Turner at the University of Washington using the KPW secure file transfer 
site. The purpose of the QA is to ensure the research interventionist  is conducting the telephone visits 
correctly according to protocol.  During the telephone visit, the research interventionist will inform the 
participant that they will not use the participant’s full name in session and the recordings will be labeled 
with a study id and date; not their name.  
Primary D ata C ollected on Opioid Tapering for  a Subgroup of Patients Electing to Taper  
During the opioid taper , Dr. Sullivan will be responsible for managing the tapering plan.  
The research interventionist  will meet with Dr. Sullivan weekly and   together they will  track specifics 
about the taper  into the project REDCap tracking data base  hosted at KPW A. This data will come from 
the patient and provider interactions and the electronic medical record. The information c aptured in 
REDCap  at the visits  that are specific to tapering includes:  
• Details on the taper  each week  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 32 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  o Taper start date  
o Current opioid medication(s) name and dose  per day  in morphine equivalents  
o Taper recommendations: opioid taper plan, specific opioid taper recommendations  (see 
Taper Guidelines)   
o Other medication recommendations:  drug name  and dose (see Taper Guidelines and 
KPWA guideli nes) 
o Provider implemented  recommendations  for taper: yes, no, no response  
o Provider implemented recommendations for supportive medications for the taper: yes, 
no, no response  
o Taper paused  (i.e., put on hold) (yes, no ) 
 Reason for pause (dose escalation, patient preference, provider preference, pain, other symptoms, etc.)  
o Taper resumed (yes, no, date ) 
Device/drug information 
N/A 
 Secondary data: data, sources, and date range  
 
Additional secondary data other than what is described in the “Study Procedures – Intervention Arm 
and Control  Arm” will be collected  and entered into REDCap on participants enrolled in the intervention 
arm as outlined in the table below.  
 
Data from KP Washington  
 
 
 
DIRECT IDENTIFERS  Source (spec ify) 
(i.e., from KPWA, or from an 
existing or previous study)  Key Information/Description of 
Variables  Date Range  
KPWA data sources (Epic)  Current problem list   2018- 2021  
KPWA data sources (Epic)  Current medication list  2018- 2021  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 33 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   Names  
 Dates  
 Postal address  
 Geocode  
 Phone numbers  
 Fax numbers  
 Email address   Social Security Numbers  
 Medical record  numbers  
 Health plan numbers  
 Account numbers  
 License/Certificate numbers  
 Vehicle ID numbers  
 Device identifiers/Serial numbers   Web URLs  
 IP address numbers  
 Biometric identifiers (e.g., 
finger prints, voice prints, 
retina scans)  
 Facial Photos/Images  
 CHS ID  
 Other unique identifier(s):  
 
 
 
Alternative treatment(s) and/or denied treatment  
N/A 
Deception/incomplete disclosure  
N/A 
Incidental findings  
N/A 
 
Procedures to monitor, lessen or mitigate risk  
There are several study design features that lessen or mitigate risk: 
• Participants may be embarrassed or psychologically distressed at some of the s urvey 
questions, they are told that they can skip any questions they do not want to answer  
• Breach of confidentiality is a potential risk. See section 5u for a description of the various 
controls set in place to safeguard data security.  Additionally, staff  are trained on best 
practice privacy and confidentiality measures.  
• Participants may feel increased pain while they are tapering.  If the participant 
experiences increased pain due to the condition for which they are on COT, t he research 
interventionist may consult  with Dr. Sullivan  and the participant’s PCP to evaluate and 
provide assistance.   
• While very unlikely with the planned gradual taper, participants may experience opioid withdrawal and can call the research interventionist  to discuss these sympt oms.  The 
research interventionist  will consult with Dr. Sullivan (PI) and work  closely with  the 
participant’s PCP to recommend medications to provide comfort from withdrawal 
symptoms.  
• The study will have a plan in place to handle Critical Incidents, when a participant endorses intent to harm themselves.  The research interventionist (PA) will administer 
the Columbia Suicidality Severity Rating Scale.   After determining the score, the 
research interventionist will take the appropriate steps to triage the participant per the 
study protocol  and KPWA guidelines .  Additionally, the research interventionist  will be 
supervised by a KPW licensed clinical psychologist.  All critical incidents will be reviewed 
by the study psychologist.  The protocol for handling critical incidents is including in this 
package.  
• A data use agreement will be in place to share study data with investigators at the University of Washington  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 34 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
 
Subject drop out or withdrawal procedures  
If a subject drops out or we withdraw them from the study, the study team will:  
• Update the tracking database to indicate that no further patient -self report data collection 
or participant contact will occur.   
• We will continue to use the data  they have already contributed/agreed to allow us to use 
per their consent for analyses  
• We will not ask them to complete any additional surveys or attend study visits (if 
applicable)  
 
In rare instances, the study PI’s may decide to withdraw a participant f rom the study and analyses . The 
reasons for removing participants from the study and analyses  would be :  
• Concern about data validity. Examples of the types of scenarios are  when a participant’s 
behavior indicates that they may not be answering questions truthfully either due to 
deceit, they are high on drugs during their scheduled visit or there is a medical condition 
like narcolepsy that makes it difficult for them stay awake during their scheduled appointment.  
o The research interventionist  would  bring concerns about data validity to the 
study team and the PI would make the determination on whether to withdraw or not. The study team will send them a letter informing them of their withdrawal.  
 
•  All participants using buprenorphine for treatment of OUD will be withdrawn from the 
entire study . Primary data collection will cease and they will not be included in analyses. 
While buprenorphine is a partial opioid, it is indicated for the treatment of opioid use 
disorder and rarely if ever used to treat pain at KPWA. Patients treated with buprenorphine for OUD are complicated and are either no longer on other opioids or 
being tapered off other opioids by the provider treating their OUD. They are not part of 
our study population of interest and thus buprenorphine use is both an exclusion criteria 
and reason for being withdrawn from the study.   
o If the research interventionist  learns that the participant is taking buprenorphine 
for OUD , they would bring that information to the study team and the PI would 
withdraw the participant from the study. The study team will send them a letter 
informing them of their withdrawal.   
o Similarly, patients in both the intervention and control arm will be removed from 
the entire study and analyses if they are using buprenorphine as indicated in 
VDW medication dispensing data ascertained prior to the analyses. 
• All pregnant women will be withdrawn from the study entirely. Primary data collection will cease and they will not be included in analyses. Pregnancy status will be  determined vi a 
diagnosis codes from the VDW for subjects in both study arm  prior to analyses .  The  
research interventioni st  may also learn of pregnancy  through the EMR, PCP, or self -
report from the participant . We expect very few young women to be in the study due to 
the average age of chronic high dose opioid users at KP . 
 
 
 
Anticipated study end date  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 35 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  The anticipated study  end date for the completion of primary analyses will be on or before December 
31, 2021  
 
Study Procedures – C ontrol  Arm 
 
Sequential description  
Participants randomized to the control arm (i.e. usual care only)  will not receive any intervention visits. 
They will only complete the three surveys described above in the “Study Procedures – Intervention Arm 
and Control  Arm” section.  
 Device/drug information N/A 
 Secondary data: data, sources, and date range  
N/A – no additional data other than what is described in the “Study Procedures – Intervention Arm and 
Control  Arm” will be collected.  
 Alternative treatment(s) and/or denied treatment  
N/A 
Deception/incomplete disclosure  
N/A 
Incidental findings  
N/A 
Procedures to monitor, lessen or mitigate risk  
N/A 
Subject drop out or withdrawal procedures  
If a subject drops out or we withdraw them from the study, the study team will:  
• Update the tracking database to indicate that no further patient -self report data c ollection 
or participant contact will occur.  
 
Anticipated study end date  
The anticipated study end date for the completion of primary analyses will be on or before December 31, 2021  
 
a. D
ata Analysis  
Describe the data analysis plan, including: 
• Statistical procedures.  
• When applicable, the power analysis.   
• Any procedures that will be used for quality control of collected data.  
We will use descriptive statistics to characterize the sample at baseline. To address the trial’s 
effectiveness aims, we will use an intent -to-treat approach (i.e., individuals will be analyzed 
according to randomized group regardless of participation in any opioid taper support sessions). 
We will also use a complete case analysis (i.e., that includes those participants who have observed follow- up outcome data) since we expect at least 85% follow- up at 12 months (primary 
time-point).  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 36 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
To com
pare each of the primary outcome measures (opioid dose and PEG score) between 
intervention groups the following linear regression model will be constructed: 𝐸𝐸�𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖�=𝛽𝛽0+
𝛽𝛽1𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+𝛽𝛽2𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+𝛽𝛽3𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖𝑥𝑥𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+𝛼𝛼𝑧𝑧𝒁𝒁𝑖𝑖, where 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the outcome for person i  at time j (j=6 or 
12 months), 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 is the dichotomous intervention effect of interest (with control arm as the 
referent group), 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 is the dichotomous variable indicating the 6- or 12- month time point, 
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖𝑥𝑥𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 is the interaction between the treatment and time point indicators and 𝒁𝒁𝑖𝑖 is a vector 
of baseline covariates that we a priori plan to adjust for including age, gender, baseline opioid 
dose group, whether they were referred to COMET, and KPWA clinic. We will include both 6- 
and 12- month time- points in a single model to improve statistical efficiency, but the12- month 
time point is considered primary.  We will fit the  linear regression model using GEE with robust 
standard errors to account for the multiple time points in a single model. We will use two -sided 
tests at the 0.05 level.  Arguments against adjusting for multiple comparisons for two co -primary 
outcomes have been made by Rothman and others.( Rothman KJ. No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons. Epidemiology. 1990;1:43– 46) For each outcome, we will report the 
adjusted mean difference between treatment groups and its 95% confidence interval.  
 
A s
et of comparable linear regression models will be fit for  continuous secondary outcomes . For 
dichotomous secondary outcomes , similar models will be built using a modified Poisson 
regression framework with a robust sandwich estimator to estimate adjusted relative risk s and 
95% confidence intervals. In addition, for each outcome, we will conduct a sensitivity analysis 
that further adjusts for baseline factors that are predictive of the outcomes, predictive of the probability of being missing at follow -up, or found to be significantly different between treatment 
groups. If more data are missing than expected (i.e., <85% with follow -up), we will also conduct 
a sensitivity analysis using an imputation method for non -ignorable non- response to evaluate 
whether our results are robust to different missing data assumptions. Selection bias analyses will compare demographic and clinical data of non -responders (potentially eligible per VDW and 
unreachable for recruitment) with responders (enrolled) using chi square and t- tests. This will 
allow us to identify factors associated with non- response. Secondary analyses will be conducted 
to assess for subgroup heterogeneity of treatment effects across levels of these pre -specified 
baseline variables: SUD+ vs SUD -, MH+ vs MH -, <90mg. vs >90mg MED, opioids with 
sedatives vs without, and focal pain vs multifocal pain. Heterogeneity will be indicated by a 
significant test of the interaction between treatment and each baseline variable, and subgroup -
specific treatment effects with confidence intervals will be reported. In light of multiplicity and reduced power, these results of these analyses will be interpreted cautiously.  
 S
ample Size:  
Our sample size is designed to ensure that we are highly powered to detect a clinically 
meaningful difference in the co -primary outcomes of opioid dose and pain (PEG) at 12 months. 
With 172 participants (86 per intervention arm) we will have >90% power to detect a 20mg 
mean difference in opioid dose between intervention groups assuming a 34 mg SD (based on 
data from KPWHRI  participants meeting entry criteria) and a two- sided, two- sample equal-
variance t -test.  Assuming the mean baseline dose in our study population to be 67mg MED, 
this 20mg difference represents a clinically meaningful 30% reduction.  Further, given our 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 37 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  sample size of 172 participants we will have approximately 90% power to detect a 1.2 point 
difference in the PEG between intervention groups, assuming a standard deviation of 2.5.  To 
ensure adequate power given potential loss to follow -up we inflated our final sample size by 
25% yielding a target randomization of 215 participants. This will also allow some pre -specified 
sub-group analyses to look for heterogeneity of treatment effect, as described below. Sample 
and power calculations were conducted using PASS software Version 14.  
 
 
 
b. S haring of Results with Subjects  
Describe whether results (study results or individual subject results, such as results of standard 
or research lab tests and genetic tests) will be shared with subjects or their providers.  
 
If the study carries a risk of incidental findings, describe your plan for evaluating these and determining whether and how subjects or their providers will be given this information.    
 If laboratory results will be shared with subjects or their healthcare providers, verify that the 
laboratory conducting the test is Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments ( CLIA ) certified.  
We will not be sharing study results with participants  
 We will be communicating some study information with providers, however we will not be 
sharing study results with the provider  
• If a participant is enrolled in the intervention arm, the provider will be notified of their 
participation by the study team  
• The research interventionist  will pass provide a medication recommendation to the PCP  
using Epic Telephone Encounters . Additionally, any study information that is collected as 
part of the telephone visit which the research interventionist feels may be important to either support the taper or supplements clinical care may be shared with the provider.  
This will continue through the course of the taper  for patients electing to try the taper 
support.  
 
 
c. D at
a and/or Specimen Banking 
Indicate if specimens may be used for future research and whether that may include genetic 
research.  
 
State if data or specimens will be sent to a separate repository. If data or specimens will be 
banked in a repository for future use as part of this prot ocol submission address the following 
questions:  
• What will be banked and what identifiers will be associated with the data or specimens?  
• Where and how will the data or specimens be stored?  
• For what purpose will the data or specimens be used? 
• How will the d ata or specimens be accessed, and who will have access?  
• Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including the process to request 
a release, approvals required for release, who can obtain data or specimens, and the 
data to be provided with specimens.  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 38 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  N/A we will be not banking data or specimens for this project  
 
 
 
7. Privacy, Confidentiality  and Data Security  
Describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects’ privacy during recruitment, consent and study procedures.  
Rec
ruitment, Screening  and Consent  
During all recruitment, screening and consent telephone calls, the study team will confirm the 
identity of the participant by asking for their full name and DOB.  All recruitment and screening 
calls will take place in the Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute (KPWHRI) offices; this ensures that work computers are secure and assumes that surrounding colleagues 
are trained in standard research privacy and confidentiality procedures.  We will use REDCap 
hosted at KPWA to collect patient reported data and  intervention visit data; it is  21 CFR Part 11, 
FISMA, and HIPAA- compliant.  
 
Intervention  
All intervention telephone visit calls will be made at KPWHRI offices (see above). Intervention 
study visit information will be collected using REDCap which is  21 CFR Part 11, FISMA, and 
HIPAA- compliant.  
 
 
a. D escribe the plan for storage of data and/or specimens . 
• Who will have access and how.  
• Where the data/materials will be stored and for how long.  
• What identifiers will be included.  
• Any other steps that will be taken to ensure security (e.g., training of staff, authorization 
of access, password protection, encryption, physical security, and separation of identifiers from data and specimens, certificates of confidentiality). 
• Describe the plan to deidentify data, destroy  data, or retain/archive data at the end of the 
study.  
Analytic study data will be stored at KPWA indefinitely. The linking file and files with PII  needed 
for recruitment and participant contact (names, DOB, address, telephone number, email)  will be 
stored at KPWA  on the project G: drive  and then destroyed by 12/31/2026. Analytic data files 
will be stored on the project G: drive. REDcap will be stored on KPWA servers while data collection is ongoing.  When REDCap data collection has been completed, QA’ed and cleaned, 
that data will be exported to the project G: drive and merged with other data sources to create the analytic dataset. Data will be accessible to the study team whose access is controlled by the study project manager and Dr. Boudreau.  
 Additional steps to ensure data security include:  
• All KPWA staff are requ ired to have current Human Subjects Research Training  
• All KPWA staff are required to have privacy and confidentiality training when they onboard employment  
• All KPWA c omputers are password protected in secure office building where workspace 
is accessible by  key cards 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 39 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  • REDCap access requires a study specific URL to access it and requires a user 
login/password to authenticate and login 
o REDCap is  21 CFR Part 11, FISMA, and HIPAA -compliant.  
• The project has a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health  
 
 
b. C ollection of data from subjects electronically  
If you will collect any data from participants electronically (including email, website, etc.), 
explain:  
• How the data will be collected.  
• How the information will be secured (encryption, password protection, etc.; may require consultation with IT department).  
• Any risks to the participants’ privacy posed by using these methods (describe in consent, as applicable).  
• How you will verify th e participant’s identity.  
Participants who elect to take their surveys  (at baseline, 6 and 12 months) on the internet 
will complete their survey in REDCap.  
 
When the participant’s survey is due (at baseline, 6 and 12 months) the system will trigger 
an email that sends a link that is specific to the individual recipient.   
 Similarly, in the intervention arm, participants who elect to take their pre -visit GCPS and 
HADS survey s on the internet will be emailed a link to take the surveys online.  (See “ Master 
Survey Doc ”) 
 
There will be no further authentication steps to verify the participant’s identity.  
 As stated in above sections, there are many technical, physical and administrative 
safeguards in place for both REDCap and the servers that REDCap is stored at KPW.  
 
The consent form adequately explains the risks of using email for study research and asks 
participants to opt -in or out of receiving study emails for web survey administration.  
   
c. D
oes this study involve the disclosure of PHI to a collaborator?  
If any data will be sent outside of this site, list each recipient (may list by role or category if the information is the same for several different entities).  For each recipient, describe: 
• What will be sent.  
• Whether the information will be fully identifiable (PHI, if health information), a Limited Data Set, de -identified, or aggregate.  
• How the data/materials will be transferred securely (for instance, Secure File Transfer).  
This study will disclose PHI to the University of Washington; Drs. Sullivan and  
Turner.  
 We will send audio files of intervention sessions to Dr. Turner and these files may contain PHI.  
  
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 40 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Additionally, Drs. Sullivan and Turner will receive dates, such as medi cation dispensing dates, 
intervention visit dates, and diagnosis dates.  
 
The information sent to Drs. Sullivan and Turner will be in the form of 1) a limited data set during 
analyses and 2) the participant tracking database in REDCap, where Dr. Sullivan will be able to 
view the intervention visit information for each participant and PII will not be displayed/made 
visible to him.  He can view the data in REDCap, but cannot export it.  
 Dr. Sullivan will have  EPIC read only access.  He will access EPIC from the KPWHRI hotel 
stations, inside the KP firewall.  
 With regard to data transfer security, analytic datasets  and audio files  will be transferred to Drs. 
Sullivan and Turner using the KPWA secure file transfer site (SFTS). This SFTS is housed on KPWA servers.  Main analyses will occur at KPWHRI. 
 When the audio files are transferred to Dr. Tuner at UW, she will store the files on a UW network drive on her UW office computer. This resides inside the UW firewall.  Physically, this 
computer resides at Dr. Turner’s personal office which is kept locked when she is not present. 
The computer is password protected and meets all UW Medicine and UW regulations and 
policies.  The UW has security controls in place to prevent the unauthorized access and 
monitors for unauthorized access.  
 With regard to the participant tracking database, REDCap is also housed on KPWA servers.  
 
 
8. Provisions to Monitor Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
This is required when research involves more than Minimal Risk to subjects.  
 
The plan might include establishing a data monitoring committee and a plan for reporting data 
monitoring committee findings to the IRB and the sponsor. 
Describe:  
• Who will monitor the study data for saf ety? 
• The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe. 
• What data are reviewed, including safety data, untoward events, and efficacy data.  
• How the safety information will be col lected (e.g., with case report forms, at study visits, 
by telephone calls with participants).  
• The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
• The frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
• Criteria for taking action on monitoring findings (for instance, stopping rules, immediate suspension, reporting, protocol changes, changes to monitoring frequency or plan).  
• For studies monitored by a DSMB/C, describe the committee membership and structure, meeting format, and quorum requirements.  Upload the board/committee charter, if one exists. 
 
To monitor risks of the interventions and any need to stop the trial early, we have will create a 
Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).  This committee will be composed of Dr. Davi d 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 41 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Tauben (general internist and Head of the Pain Division of the Department of Anesthesiology 
and Pain Medicine at the University of Washington), Dr. Jane Ballantyne (anesthesiologist and 
pain medicine expert practicing at Harborview Medical Center in Seattle) and Dr. Joan Russo, a 
biostatistician and Associate Professor, Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of 
Washington, with experience in data analysis and design of RCTs.  Dr. Tauben will serve as the 
chair of the committee while Drs. Ballantyne and Russo will be members. This committee will 
meet during the pre- intervention phase and annually to review the protocol, data collection and 
data completeness.   A quorum is defined as all three members of the committee being present.  
 
The research specialist and research interventionist and project manager will monitor AEs and 
severe adverse events ( SAEs ) as they interact with study participants.  They will be documented 
in the study tracking database.  These will be reviewed with Drs. Sullivan and Boudreau during 
monthly  study meetings. AEs and SAEs will be reported to the KPW IRB according to the timing 
summarized above. AEs will be forwarded monthly and SAEs will be forwarded weekly to the 
DSMC.  
 
Progress in enrollment and data collection will be reviewed on a bi -weekly basis using study 
status reports and status report meetings with study personnel.  Any difficulties in enrollment or data collection will be discussed by the research team in order to resolve any problems and 
ensure complete data.  
 The KPWHRI biostatisticians, will review all study data, including AE and CI data, once per year 
to determine if there are substantially more adverse events in one intervention group compared 
to another or if one group demonstrates a markedly superior or more negative effect on the 
outcome variables than the other groups.   The biostatistician will provide a summary report of 
this review to the DSMC. If the DSMC agrees that there is a markedly superior or negative 
effect in one group vs. another or if there are substantially more adverse events in one group vs. 
another, Dr. Sullivan will notify the NIDA Project Officer and the KPW  IRB and follow their 
advice about how to proceed.  If the DSMC agrees that such effects are not present, no further 
action will be taken.   
 
The KPW IRB will review the study protocol. The IRB will maintain ongoing oversight of the risks 
and benefits of the study and ensure compliance with institutional and NIH guidelines. Drs. 
Sullivan and Boudreau will be responsible for notifying the KPW IRB  of all adv erse events. The 
IRB will work with the Drs. Sullivan and Boudreau  to ensure additional agencies (e.g., NIDA) are 
notified as required. Temporary or permanent suspension of an NIH funded protocol will be 
reported to the NIH grant program director directly responsible for the grant.  
 
The following events will be reported to the KPW IRB within 10 business days: unanticipated 
medical problem, serious non- compliance, continuing non- compliance, emergency deviation 
from IRB approved procedures, continuation of research after IRB approval has lapsed, complaint of a subject that cannot be resolved by the study team, audit or inspection or safety -
related inquiry by a federal agency, new information that indicates a new or increased risk or 
safety is sue. 
 If it becomes necessary to change the proposed study protocol, amendments w ill be filed with 
the IRB  at KPW  seeking approval for these. These changes will be made only after receiving 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 42 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  approval from the IRBs. Following approval and implementation of t hese changes, the DSMC 
and NIDA program officer will be notified.  
 
The trial may be stopped because the intervention poses unacceptable risk to participants. We 
will not perform interim efficacy analyses or develop related stopping rules because: 1] it is 
highly unlikely that the intervention will have such dramatic positive effects on both opioid dose and pain primary outcomes, 2] the comparison group receives usual care and cannot thus be 
harmed relative to usual care, 3] stopping early may preclude analyses of secondary outcomes 
and subgroup effects.  The DSMC (Drs. Tauben, Ballantyne, and Russo) will be kept informed of 
AEs and SAEs encountered in the conduct of the study. They will review these yearly to determine if the intervention is posing unacceptable risks to participants. Review may occur more frequently if there are unexpectedly frequent or severe AEs. If they believe stopping the 
trial is appropriate, they will notify Drs. Sullivan and Boudreau and the NIDA program officer. 
Decisions about stopping the trial will be made in consultation with the NIDA program officer.  
   
9. Risks and Benefits  
a. R
isks to Subjects  
List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the research. Describe the probability, magnitude, duration, 
and reversibility of the risks. Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  
• If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to the subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
• If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to an embryo or fetus should the subject be or become pregnant.  
• If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects and risks to Kaiser Permanente  
 For
 both intervention arms potential risks to subjects include breach of confidentiality  
and embarrassment from some of the study questions .               
 For the intervention arm, subjects electing to taper may experience withdrawal 
symptoms . These symptoms can include: increase in pain, insomnia, anxiety, restlessness, 
agitation, sweating, diarrhea nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain. However, our study of 
voluntary, self -paced and supported opioid taper will use a very gradual withdrawal schedule 
over a period of 46 weeks . This gradual withdrawal will minimize, if not eliminate, these 
withdrawal symptoms. These symptoms will be closely monitored during and after taper by the research interventionist . Subjects will be cautioned not to abruptly discontinue their opioids. 
However, it is still possible that subjects will become impatient with the taper process and abruptly stop their opioids on their own. If participants have an AE’s the research interventionist  may recommend  medications  to the participant’s PCP to help alleviate the 
abstinence syndrome symptoms.  During the taper, participants may hoard any non -used 
opioids. The study consent form reminds participants that all non- used opioids should be 
disposed of properly. Participants will be informed of the risk of stock -piling opiates during the 
taper process. All medical care treatment and decisions are the responsibility of the primary care provider.   
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 43 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  For the control  arm, participants may be disappointed with the intervention condit ion to which 
they are assigned when they are randomized to the control  arm. An incentive is being provided 
to both groups to improve retention in the trial.    
 
b. P otential Benefits to Subjects  
Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may experience from taking part in the 
research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, the probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits.  Indicate if there is no direct benefit. You may  include benefits 
to society or others.  
In the intervention arm, s ome individ uals may benefit from reduced dependency on prescription 
opioids and/or decreased pain and improve quality of life .            
 
10. Economic Burden to Subjects  
Describe any costs that subjects may be responsible for because of participation in the research study (for example, co -pays; paying for treatment, therapies, or other interventions, or the 
delivery of these) and how you will inform participants of these costs prior to their enrollment in 
this study.  
Subjects will be financially responsible for the treatment of physical injuries resulting from study procedures.  Recommended (not required) in- person v isits with the PCP  and medication costs 
will result in standard co -pays , co-insurance and deduct ibles. This is outlined in the informed 
consent for m.  
 
11. Compensation to Participants  
Describe any compensation provided to participants, for example, for time inconvenience, 
discomfort, travel, or in the event of research related injury. If applicable, describe how you will 
inform participants of this  prior to their enrollment in the study, including if payment will be 
prorated if the subject withdraws early from the study.  
 NOTE : payment may not be withheld as an incentive for participants to complete the study.  
Both intervention and control  arm will receive : $20 for completion of baseline assessment, $4 0 
for completion of the 6 month assessment, $5 0 for completion of the 12 month assessment  
 
 
 
 
12. Resources Available  
Describe any special resources or expertise required to conduct the study. 
Dr. Boudreau, Senior Scientific Investigator at KPWHRI,  will spend .20 FTE conducting and 
completing this research . She will oversee all aspects of the study at KPW.  
 The project will use REDCap to collect data from participants and to track participant progress 
through the study.  
 
Additionally, Dr. Boudreau is working closely with Dr. Kushboo Mehta . Dr. Mehta  is a Family 
Medicine provider and Program Chief  of Family Medicine at KPW who assisted with developing 
and rolling out KPW’s newest guidelines on chronic opioid therapy. She will serve as the liaison 
between the study team the KPW delivery system and KPW leadership.  She will be the Study 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 44 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  Clinic Champion directly involved with educating providers, promoting the study, recruitment 
and retention.  
 Dr. Boudreau meets and touches based regularly with others in the KPWA delivery system 
including Dr. Sarah Levy ( Medical  Director, Continuum of Care),  Dr. Angela Sparks (Family 
Medicine Physician and Medical Director, Clinical Knowledge Development and Support), and 
Melissa Sturgis, PharmD, BCACP  (Pharmacy Clinical Coordinator , Quality and Clinical 
Operations ). Dr. Boudreau keeps them  apprised of the trial aims, design, and methods while 
they provide feedback on trial and keep her up to date on of KPW initiatives around safe opioid 
prescribing and tapering.  
 
Finally, the taper portion of the study  functions by working in conjunction with the participant’s 
primary care provider. The research interventionist  use Epic Telephone Encounters  to pass on 
medication dosing recommendations to the primary care provider  and any other research 
information that may be pertinent for the provision of health care . 
 
 
 
13. Prior Approvals  
Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the research. (e.g., school, external site. funding agency, laboratory, radiation safety, or biosafety approval.)  
See attached:  
o Systems Engagement Review 
o KPW Delivery System letters of support  
 
14. Drugs or Devices  
NOTE:  see the ICH -GCP guidance for a summary of investigator and sponsor responsibilities in 
clinical trials.  
 
a. D
rug Studies  
If the research involves drugs and is investigator -initiated, indicate whether there is any 
possibility that the results will be reported to FDA (e.g. as part of a new drug application [NDA]).  
 
• If the drug is investigational (has an IND), confirm that you will comply with all applicable FDA requirements for investigators.   
• Confirm that you will follow applicable KP pharmacy policies and procedures.  
• Describe your plan for drug storage, handling, and accountability, including distribution, return, and destruction of the drug(s).  
N/A we are not studying any drugs or devices  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 45 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018   
 
b. D evice Studies:  
If this is a device study and you think the device is Non- Significant Risk, include justification 
here or upload it as a separate document along with any available device information 
(instructions for use, etc.).  
 
If the research involves devices and is investigator -initiated, indicate whether there is any 
possibility that the results will be reported to FDA (e.g. as part of a premarket approval application [PMA]).  
 
• If the device has an IDE or a claim of abbreviated IDE (Non- Significant Risk device), 
confirm that you will comply with all applicable FDA requirements for investigators.   
• Describe the device, the manufacturing process, and the device labeling, including 
safety instructions or warnings.  If available, this may be addressed in separately uploaded device information (such as instructions for use). 
• Describe device storage, handling, and accountability, including how access to the device will be limited to app ropriate personnel and how you will ensure the device will be 
used only for appropriate study subjects.  
N/A we are not studying any drugs or devices  
  
15. Multi -Site Research   
a. If this is a multi- site study and you are the lead investigator or this site will be the 
coordinating center for any activity, describe the processes to ensure communication 
among sites, such as:  
• All sites have the most current version of the protocol, consent document, 
and HIPAA authorization.  
• All required approvals have been obtained at each site (including approval by 
the site’s IRB of record).  
• All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved (including approval by the site’s IRB of record) before the modification is implemented.  
• All engaged participating sites will safeguard data as required by local information security policies.  
• All local site investigators conduct the study appropriately.  
b. Describe the method for communicating to engaged participating sites the following:  
• Problems.  
• Interim results.  
• The closure of a study.  
 
c. Describe any special resources or expertise required to conduct the study.  
This study is a multi -site study consisting of two sites: KPW and the University of Washington . 
All recruitment, participant interaction and data analysis will occur at KPWA.  
 
 
Protocol Template  
(Use with Core Data Form) Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP -202, Version 1.0  
     KP WA Implementation Date: 07/23/2018 
Page 46 of 46 
 
Revised 6/21/2018  KPW will be the IRB of record for this project. We have already received confirming from the 
University of Washington that authority of their submission has been granted to KPW’s IRB.  
(see attached letters from UW IRB)  
 
The KPW project  manager will communicate to sites, all modifications before the modification is 
implemented.  
 All data for this study will be stored at KPW. Data safeguards have been explained in detail in 
previous sections.  Data will be transferred to UW  and all engaged participating sites (KPWA and 
UW) will safeguard data as required by local information security policies.  
 Dr. Boudreau will be responsible for ensuring that all site investigators and project staff conduct 
the study appropriately.   
 
Problems on this study will be communicated to all sites by email or telephone from any of the 
study investigators or the project manager.  
 
Interim results will be discussed during monthly project team meetings, as results are made 
available.  The KPW/UW study leads meet bi- monthly and can discuss interim results at those 
meetings when results are made available.  
 
When it is time to close the study, the project manager will inform the UW investigators that the 
project is coming to an end and ask them to complete the administrative paperwork/processes on their end to close the study.  
 
 
16. Community- Based Participatory Research  
Describe involvement of the community in the design and conduct of the research.  
 
Describe your plan for ensuring that community research partners are appropriately trained in 
human subjects’ protection.  
 NOTE : “Community -based Participatory Research” is a collaborative approach to research that 
equitably involves all partners in the research process and recognizes the unique strengths that 
each brings. Community -based Participatory Research begins with a research topic of 
importance to the community, has the aim of combining knowledge with action and achieving social change to improve health outcomes and eliminate health disparities.  
N/A this is not community -based participatory research  
  