IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  1 of 12 Study:  Integrating Community Health Workers to Improve Diabetes Prevention  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date:  March 21, 2019  
Research Protocol  
 
Purpose of the Study and Background  
 
Purpose of the Study  
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is a preventable chronic disease that affects 9.3% o f US adults and children. It is 
estimated that 86 million American adults are prediabetic (37%), and thus a t risk of DM and cardiovascular 
disease. DM is a leading cause of death, one of the major causes of hear t disease and stroke, and severely 
threatens quality of life. DM more than doubles the health care costs compared to the general population.  
Safety -net institutions like Bellevue Hospital Center (BH) and the VA NY Har bor Healthcare System (VA) care 
for populations with a disproportionate burden of DM  and DM risk. Nearly 25%  of the 8.7 million US veterans 
have DM and the rate among Bellevue’s 30,000 primary care adult patients is more than 15%.  
 
Despite the potential for reduced morbidity and cost -savings, primary care systems must overcome several  
barriers to systematically deliver these proven, preventive strategies to patients at highest risk of DM.  
Employing community health worker (CHW) coaches to conduct behavioral co unseling, follow -up referral to 
programs, and education is a promising approach t hat could extend the capac ity of health systems to better 
prevent and manage chronic conditions. Despite the potential for peer -led intervention to enhance DM 
prevention efforts within the patient -centered medical home (PCMH) model, there is need for high quality, 
randomized trials to asses specific models for CHW support; to aid with implementation of such model, 
including identification of effective strategies for recruitment, training, monitoring and retention of lay 
personnel; and to successfully integr ate these personnel within the PCMH.  
 
The goal of this proposal study is to develop and test a model of CHW health co aching, designed to prevent the 
onset of Type 2 DM in a large population of underserved patients at risk. CHWs will be recruited from the 
target populations and trained in core competencies to serve as peer health coaches. Our central premise is that  
CHWs are uniquely suited to engage fellow patients by encouraging lifestyle change through shared 
experiences and social support to extend the reach of primary care (PC) beyond th e clinic visit. This study will 
test a scalable model of peer health coaching to address the millions of patients at risk for DM, using low cost, 
culturally congruent personnel to promote prevention of DM in PCMH practic e. 
 
Background  
Type 2 DM is a preventable chronic disease that affects 11% of US adults. An addition al 35% (79 million) have 
pre-DM and thus at risk of developing DM and cardiovascular disease.  DM is a leading cause of death in the  
US and a major cause of heart disease and stroke. It is essential that the US le verage prevention strategies to 
mitigate the health and economic impact of DM in the population. Up to 20% of adult PC patients at BH and 
25% of veterans at NY Harbor have DM, 2x and 3x the rate in th e general population, respectively, and this rate 
has been steadily increasing.  There is also a substantial population with undiagnosed pre -DM, half of who are 
expected to develop DM in the next decade. Our preliminary analysis of VA NY Harbor data from 20 10-2012 
showed that 9,610 (62%) of 15,500 veterans <75 years old, without DM, had a glycosylated hemoglobin 
(HbA1c) test, and 1,730 (18%) of them had pre -DM.  
 
Study  Design  
We will conduct a cluster -randomized trial to test the impact of peer health coaches  on prediabetic patients 
cared for by PCMH teams at BHC and VA to:  
1. Reduce the incidence of type 2 DM in pre -diabetic, PCMH patients;  
2. Promote weight loss among pre -diabetic patients;  
3. Increase patient activation levels, a measureable construct of en gagement, efficacy, skills, and confidence in 
managing one’s health, among pre -DM patients, resulting in:  
a. Improved secondary clinical outcomes: better glycemic and blood pressure control, and lower  
Framingham risk scores;  
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  2 of 12 b. Increased utilization of pre ventive services (e.g. MOVE!, TeleMOVE!, Healthy Lifestyles, etc .); 
c. Improved health behaviors (e.g. making dietary and exercise changes); and  
4. Develop, implement and assess strategies to recruit, train, and integrate peer CHW health coaches  within the  
PCMH model.  
 
The 36-month intervention will be conducted using a staggered entry design across four, overlapping , 12-
month waves to account for CHW caseload limits. This study will test a scalable model of peer health coaching 
to address the millions of patients at risk for DM,  using low cost, culturally congruent personnel to promote 
prevention of DM i n PCMH practice. If successful, our study team will work with VA’s Central Office and NY 
City’s Health and Ho spital Corporation to translate the model for larger scale implementation.  
 
Characteristics of the Research Population  
 
Number of Subjects  
All 12 PC teams at VA NY Harbor and all 4 PCMH teams at BH will be eligible to participate. In our VA PROVE 
study, 51/52 PCPs participated in the intervention, and  we expect similar rates in  this project. Eligible patients 
will be identified through the study’s pre -DM registry, which will be based on the EMR and Corporate Data 
Warehouse (CDW) at each site. This meth odology builds on our ongoing national, retrospecti ve cohort study of  
predictors of DM among veterans with pre -DM back to 200 8. Based on preliminary analysis of VA NYHHS 
data from 2010 -2012, 62% of veterans enrolled in PC without  DM, have had an HbA1c test in the previous two 
years.  
 
In the intervention group , we anticipate contacting 2,100 randomly selected patients (1,050 at the VA* and 
1,050 at BH) to ultimately enroll about 1,100 patients (550 at the VA and 550 at BH).  This outreach sample 
reflects our assumption that 20% of patients will be unreachab le and that 60% of those reached will enroll in 
the study.  Another 1,100 patients  attributed to control group providers  will be randomly selected  as the control 
group , in accordance with the waiver of HIPAA authorization. As detailed below, the control gro up will not 
participate in the CHW  intervention . The total sample, including the intervention and control groups, will be 
about 2,200  patients.  This amounts to approximately 265 patients (across intervention and control groups) per 
wave and per clinical si te. 
 
*We will work closely with the staff of another research study being conducted at the VA that  has 
similar eligibility criteria, result ing in dual -eligible patients. In order to avoid patients being enrolled in 
both studies, which could result in patient burden, both studies will w ork with a statistician to identify  
these  dual -eligible patients and randomly assig n them to one study  only  prio r to patient outreach  and 
recruitment. 75% of  these  dual -eligible patients will be allocated to our study and 25% will be allocated 
to the other study in accordance with both programs’ statistical  power  needs. Since both studies are 
similar in scope  (e.g.,  weight loss, increasing  exercise) , we do not anticipate patients enrolled in one 
study will receive greater health benefits than patients enrolled in the other study.  
 
Gender of Subjects  
Subjects of both genders are included in the study . 
 
Age of Subjects  
The minimum age of the subjects  is 18  and the maximum age is 75 .  
 
Racial and Ethnic Origin  
There are no  enrollment restrictions ba sed upon race or ethnic origin.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
Inclusion criterion : Having at least one HbA1c result in the prediabetic  range (5.7 -6.5%) in the 2 years prior  to 
the start date of the study wave . In order to communicate with CHWs, patients must also speak either English 
or Spanish.  
 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  3 of 12 Excl usion Criteria  
A diagnosis of DM, based on ICD -9 and ICD -10 codes applied during  ambulatory encounters in the 2 years 
prior to the study wave ; treatment with DM medication other than metformin (e.g. insulin or oral agents);  age 
greater than 75 years; or exclusion by patient’s PCP due to contraindication for lifestyle intervention or  CHW 
outreach.  
 
Vulnerable Subjects  
The protocol includes collecting data from BH and VA clinical providers who se participation is vital to the 
success of the study. There is no coercion to enroll these clinic staff subjects . All such subjects can opt out by  
notifying the study staff that they would no longer like to participate in the study.  Alternatively, subjects can 
decide not to complete surveys.  
 
As we will be surveying a large random sample of pre -diabetic patients, it is possible that some of the sur vey 
respondents will be pregnant, mentally disabled, economically or educationally disadvantaged. Their exclusion 
from possible participation would prevent us from accurately sampling the population at random.  
 
Such vulnerable patient populations may be ex cluded from CHW outreach as instructed by primary care  
physicians. (i.e. patient will not receive a letter about services or CHW coaching intervention ). 
 
Methods & Procedures  
 
Control Group  
The control group  will not have access to CHWs.  They will experie nce usual care in their primary care clinics.  
PCPs in the control group will receive reminders from the study team to order A1C tests for their patients in 
their study, as this pragmatically collected data is necessary to evaluate the study’s main outcome.  
 
Intervention Group: (CHW Health Coaching Integrated into Team)  
CHWs will provide the diabetes prevention intervention, described below, to a randomly selected subset of 
eligible patients  per wave  in the intervention teams at each hospital. CHWs and the researchers will provide 
regular updates to the primary care providers in the intervention group  on these activities.  As with PCPs in the 
control group, intervention group providers will receive reminders to order follow -up A1C tests for their  
patients enrolled in the study.  
 
Choice of intervention strategies for each patient: We will have patient s across the entire spectrum of 
motivation. Since we target the full population at risk, it will include highly motivated patients, highly resistant  
patients and a large group in between with varying degrees of motivation and activation. Our toolkit  driven  
approach, which includes a wide range of strategies aligned with patient a ctivation levels, will be based on the 
same framework used when Dr. Sherman  helped revise the VA -DOD smoking cessation guidelines  from a 
referral -based approach to a population -based one. In the revised guidelines, the underlying principle  guiding 
all treatment decisions – which applies equally well in this proposed study – was all patients should be  offered 
treatment in the most intensive setting they are willing to attend . Similarly, all patients with pre -DM will be 
encouraged to use the most intensive DM prevention intervention that they are willing to attend.  
CHW Reach :  We a nticipate that up to 40% of pre -DM subjects  will participate in hospital -based programs  
(MOVE! at VA and Healthy Lifestyles at BH) and another 10 -20% will participate in the community based 
Diabetes Prevention Program (e.g. at local YMCAs) . 
 
Community Heal th Worker (CHW) Coaches - Recruitment and Training  
CHW Recruitment : We will hire and train 6 CHWs (3@VA, 3@BH), from local patient support organizations  
(Veteran Service Organizations and BH volunteer office , as we have done in prior CHW studies) to implement 
the toolkit strategies. CHW employment opportunities announcements will be created. Requirements  will 
include: 1) evidence of a leadership role in the patient community through social support or ad vocacy 
organizations; 2) strong communication and interpersonal skills; and 3) a high school education or GED. CHW 
candidates will not be required to have a background in health. Personal experience with DM will not be 
required.  
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  4 of 12  
CHW Training : We will train the CHWs in key DM concepts, mo tivational inter viewing, brief action planning, 
and stages of behavior change. CHWs will participate in a 105 - hour core competency training developed 
collaboratively developed by Dr. Islam and her team and the  Community Health Worker Network of New York.  
CHWs will conduct mock telephone counseling calls with trained standardized patients to enhance skills, gain 
feedback , and develop confidence in these techniques.  In addition to these training experiences, CHWs will 
have letter templates, motivational inte rviewing scri pts, and protocols available fo r patient outreach to 
standardize and guide patient outreach  
 
CHW Intervention  
 
At each wave’s outset, ~ 250 patients at each study site will be randomly selected for outreach and paired with 
one of five CHWs (2 at BH, 2 at VA, 1 at both clinics). Researchers will provide each intervention group PC 
provider  their selected list of  pred iabetic patients. PCPs will be asked to review the list to identify anyone they 
think should be excluded from the intervention. Patients are matched to a CHW according to the patient’s 
language and neighborhood of residence, as the study aims to cluster CH Ws’ patients to facilitate CHW travel 
and expertise in local resources. We mail s elected patients a letter on behalf of their PCP alerting them of their 
DM risk status, available prevention resources, and introducing them to their assigned CHW. CHWs will t hen 
call patients to describe the program and seek verbal informed consent  to enroll in the study . Patients who 
decline participation will be asked if they are willing to be invited again in subsequent waves of the study. 
CHWs will continue outreach until they have met their caseload for the wave.  
 
We developed a toolkit of strategies for pre -DM coaching outreach to standardize the intervention across  
CHWs and to focus on evidence -based strategies for preventing DM. The toolkit was adapted from the version  
we developed and used in the PROVE study aiming to improve outcomes in HTN and smoking.  The toolkit 
interventions reflect standards of care and can be selected and tailored for  the broad population of pre -DM 
patients. We will enhance uptake and effectivene ss of services by emplo ying CHWs to regularly contact, 
counsel, remind, and follow -up with patients. Outreach strategies will be tailored  to patients’ health care needs 
and their stage of activation.  CHWs will deliver outreach based on patient preferences and activation level, as 
there is evidence that the fit between an intervention and a patient’s motivations, beliefs and percepti ons 
encourages activation, goal setting and ultimately behavior change.  During their first contact with patients, 
CHWs will use  a standardized, 6 -item questionnaire (PAM -6) to quickly assess patients’ activation level.  Thus, 
CHWs will offer toolkit strategies that best fit the patients’ level of activation, matching patients with the most  
intensive intervention they are ready to a ccept. Standardized protocols will also be used to ensure that CHWs 
dedicate sufficient time to engaging patients with lower levels of activation .  
 
Within the 3-year  intervention period, each patient’s 12-month  CHW intervention will consist of a 6-month 
intensive phase followed by a 6 -month maintenance phase, as described below.  
 
 Phone  Call: CHWs will call eligible pre -DM patients  and ask to obtain informed  consent (in accordance 
with our waiver of documentation of consent) to participate in th e study, ful ly describing the study and 
reviewing all elements of consent. If the patient consents, CHWs will conduct the intake process, which 
includes a survey, the PAM, and a conversation about health goals . CHWs encourage  the patient  to engage 
in the most intensive strategy that is matched to their activation  level and health goals  (Health Action 
Plan) .  
 
 Telephone -Based Coaching : CHWs will offer a minimum of 6 monthly, 30 -minute phone counseling 
sessions to all  patients using motivational interviewing  (MINT) and bri ef action planning (BAP).  However, 
patients will be offered more frequent coaching, up to once per week. BAP is a counseling  approach 
emphasizing goal setting and MINT principles that can be completed in short telephone  counseling  
sessions.   
Telephone coaching will be timed to occur just before or after PC visits to optimize the value of the visit for DM 
prevention. For patients with lower activation scores (Stages 1 and 2), who are  less engaged in their own care, 
CHWs will prepare patients for PC visits, empowering them to  ask questions, seek information and participate 
in decision -making. This approach can increase  PAM scores and help patients to have more effective 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  5 of 12 encounters with their health care teams  and to improve health outcomes such  as HbA1c among patients with 
chronic illnesses.  
o CHWs will re -call patients, who are not yet ready to engage in behavior change during the initial  
phone call, every 6 months unless they ask to be taken off the re -call list.  
 Referral to VA’s MOVE! Program o r BH’s Healthy Lifestyles Program : These programs offer a series of  
weekly workshops (BH 8 weeks, VA 12 weeks) focused on healthy eating and exercise. Patients  “graduate” 
after 6 months but then continue with maintenance activities and ongoing peer support.  CHWs will also 
encourage VA patients to participate in Tele -MOVE!, which provides daily interaction  with in -home 
messaging technologies, and clinician contact as needed.  
 Referral to the DM Prevention Program (DPP ): The DPP is a 16 -session, weekly lifestyle intervention with 
certified DPP coaches, which is effective in preventing DM onset in pre -diabetics. The intensive program is 
then followed by monthly maintenance phone workshops with the DPP coach. This program will be 
provided by the study to a ll patients who wish to participate.  These programs are offered by the NYC YMCA 
and by other community -based  organizations.  
 Metformin : Although not commonly used for DM prevention, metformin has been shown to prevent  DM 
among patients with pre -DM, particu larly those struggling with making lifestyle changes or with a  BMI>30.  
CHWs will suggest that such patients with normal renal function (GFR>50%) discuss this  option with their 
PCP and will provide a list of these patients to the team.  
 Maintenance : After 6 months of intensive coaching, CHWs  will transition to making  monthly phone check -
ins with patients for another 6 months to reinforce the knowledge and behaviors taught earlier.  
 
Data Collection  
 
Patient Data 
 
As a pragmatic, population -based trial, we aim  to understand the impact of  our interventions on panels of 
patients in a real clinic environment and therefore will not collect any clinical data directly from patients.  
Instead we will rely on measurements taken during regular clinic visits a nd recorded in the EMR. We will 
access this clinical and administrative data for VA patients through the VA Informatics and Co mputing 
Infrastructure (VINCI), a secure, high performance interface with VA’s Corporate Data Warehouse ( CDW ), and 
for BH patients from the NYC Health and Hospitals  CDW . Relying on routinely collected clinical data does 
have its challenges. Patients in our cohor t at baseline may not return to the clinic at appropriate intervals, and 
there may be incorrect information with in the EMR limiting ou r ability to assess the impact of the 
interventions on all patients. Learning from our previous work, we will mitigate these challenges by updating 
the study registry regularly , and validating our data  during Phase I of the study as we construct the pre -DM 
registries.  
 
We will have t he CHWs administer a  survey (in person or by phone) of all intervention  patients to assess 
patient activation and  self-reported behaviors  (diet and exercise habits) . We will survey each wave’s cohort of 
intervention patients  twice: at baseline and at the end of the ir 1-year intervention  phase. Surveys will include 
an MTA MetroCard worth $11 to incentivize response. Non -responders will be mailed up  to two reminders. A 
statement will be included with the survey outlining the number of times the survey will be conducted (two), 
the timeframe for the surveys (now, and one year  from now).  
 
Implementation Research  
 
Survey of providers : We will conduct a survey of primary c are providers to assess the impact of the 
intervention on staff with measures described below to understand implementation issues. The survey will be 
conducted at baseline and following the 3 -year intervention, using a mixed approach, including hard copies , in 
person or in office mailboxes, and email. In our previous study, we had a 65% response rate from providers and 
nurses, and we anticipate a similar response rate in the proposed study. A statement will be included with the 
survey outlining the number o f times the survey will be conducted (2) and the timeframe for the surveys.  
 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  6 of 12 Semi -structured interviews : To further understand the clinic staff’s lived experience of the CHW intervention, 
we will conduct brief, semi -structured  interviews of the providers at baseline and semi -annually, for a total of 6 
times (baseline, and after years 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 3) with a subset of participating PCPs identified as key 
informants based on their experience and institutional knowledge . To understand any changes in how teams 
collectively integrate CHWs into their practices, we will also conduct brief, semi -structured interviews with 
primary care team members other than providers at the same intervals. Through these surveys and interviews, 
we will assess key aspects of the implementation of the CHW intervention as experienced and perceived by 
clinic staff . To additionally understand factors that impede or facilitate the implementation of the intervention, 
we will conduct semi -structured interv iews annually (after years 1, 2, and 3) with practice administrators at 
each health care organization ; key informants knowledgeable about population health and health policy at city 
level as relevant to DM prevention; and staff at the nutrition and exercis e programs, whose involvement in the 
program can enable implementation success. Interviews will continue until emerging themes are saturated, 
anticipating up to 25 subjects at each site  (approximately 20 involved in primary care delivery, 2 in managerial 
or administrative roles, and up to 3 staff at nutrition and exercise programs) and up to 5 informants outside the 
two sites who can speak to macro -level factors. These interviews will be audio -recorded and transcribed for 
analysis.  
 
Process indicators : In this pragmatic trial, we will systematically track and examine the process of 
implementation and the contextual factors that influence implementation of the CHW intervention. To do so, 
we will draw on available study data in REDCap, the secu re program  used to record CHW -patient encounters 
for the study. At the end of the study we expect to have data on approximately 1,000 enrolled intervention 
patients, with each patient followed for one year, with CHW -patient contacts limited to the intensity that 
patients are willing to attend . From REDCap, we will collect data semi -annually on four indicators of 
implementation fidelity, namely  (1) the content  of CHW activities . (2) the coverage (number of patients 
reached), (3) duration (how long each patient is followed up), and (4) frequency (how often patients are 
contacted) of CHW -patient contacts. Content of CHW activities will be assessed through assessi ng CHW case 
notes on a random selection of 15 enrolled patients and interviews with CHWs. Case notes will be assessed to 
examine how CHWs handle patients’ behavioral barriers and social needs, including the referrals they make to 
various services (e.g., me ntal health, social work, exercise programs). To understand barriers that CHWs 
confront in the course of implementation, we will conduct semi -structured interviews with the CHWs and 
identify major themes (questions, concerns) related to behavioral counseli ng and referrals that may be 
discussed during the study team’s meetings and case conferences. Similar to the semi -structured interviews 
with providers and other primary care team members, interviews will be conducted at end of year 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 
and 3. Findings resulting from analysis of patient case notes and other CHW materials will be reported 
anonymously.  
 
Influence of neighborhood factors : To examine the influence of contextual factors on implementation and 
intervention effectiveness, we will conduc t population -level analysis of variation in implementation and health 
outcomes across NYC neighborhoods. We will conduct this analysis with patient data available at the start of 
the study and data on enrolled patients post -intervention. To obtain informat ion on neighborhood -level 
factors, we will use publically available data on social and environmental aspects of NYC neighborhoods in the 
FACETS database  (data accessible at https://github.com/mcantor2/FACETS ). We will map patient addresses 
to census tracts , aggregate census tracts to neighborhoods, and statistically examine the association of 
neighborhood -level contextual factors on prediabetes prevalence across NYC. Patients’ location information 
will be used at an aggregate neighborhood level, and it will  not be possible to identify their precise location in 
the city. Individual patients and their PHI will not be identifiable.  
 
 
Data Analysis and Data Monitoring  
 
The analytic methods described below are designed to test the primary hypot heses that prediabetic patients 
cared for by PCMH teams randomly allocated to the CHW Coaching group, will have lower  annual hazard rate 
of incident cases of DM overtime  more weight loss, and higher PAM scores by the end of the i ntervention 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  7 of 12 period than sim ilar patients cared for by PCMH teams allocated to the Control group, adjusting for baseline 
rates. The unit of analysis is patients, aggregated to the provider level . 
 
Analysis: Patient Clinical Outcomes and Health Behaviors  
 
Descriptive analysis techniqu es (measures of central tendency and variabilit y, frequencies and proportions) 
will be used to present baseline characteristics of participants (patients and t heir PC staff) in the control and 
intervention arms. Chi -square tests and t -tests will be used to  check if these baseline characteristics are  
balanced between the two study groups. For continuous outcomes, normal a ssumptions will be checked, and 
non-parametric alternatives and transformations will be considered as needed.  
 
To assess the overall effect iveness of the CHW intervention we will compare cumulative DM incidence rates 
and time to DM incidence (in addition to other outcomes: weight loss, obesity rate, and health care utilization) 
between the two study groups, using intention -to-treat and per pr otocol analyses.  Time to DM incidence at 12 -
month follow -up of the intervention and control arms, aggregated across the 4 study waves, will be compared 
using Cox proportional hazard regression models . Chi-square  analyses will be conducted to compare outcom es 
between the two groups for  categorical variables  (e.g. obesity rate, PAM stage) and t -tests will be conducted for 
continuous outcomes (e.g. weight change, P AM score). We will then conduct (generalized) linear mixed -effects 
modeling,  which will (1) take into accou nt the intra -cluster correlation coefficient (I CC) of patients within 
providers and teams, (2) analyze repeated measures at  several time -points (baseline, midpoint, and post -
intervention) simultaneously, (3) include team or pa tient level baseline  covariates easily, if they are found to be 
unbalanced between two arms, and (4) deal w ith attrition problem s and other missing data automatically. For 
categorical outcomes, such analyses will be implemented using SAS Proc  GLIMMIX, while using SAS Proc 
MIX ED for continuous outcomes.  
 
We will use multilevel survival analysis to determine the effect of the intervention on time to DM, as patients 
are enrolled in waves and the time to DM incidence may be censored by the end of study. Specifically, we will 
fit Cox proportional hazard regression models with mixed effects to examine the hazard ratio between two 
groups, adjusting for important covariates and taking into account the correlation among patients within 
teams.  
 
We will use a similar generalized linear m ixed -effects modeling for the sec ondary outcomes, to explore the 
relationship of the intervention’s effectiveness to specific patient and provider o r team characteristics. We will 
investigate interactions between the intervention and the patients’ level of  activation, co -morbidities (HTN, 
depression, and smoking), and health care utilization . We will also test the correlation (Pearson’s r) of provider 
self-efficacy and team collectiv e-efficacy on patient outcomes. We will conduct secondary analyses to better 
understand the impacts o f the individual components of this complex set of interventions. While designed to 
test the effectiveness of an ov erall strategy, we will seek to determine which of the intervention elements and 
dose of intervention (e.g. nu mber of phone contacts, number  of mailings, successful referral to MOVE !, 
Healthy Lifestyles, DPP or other programs) were most strongly  associated with any improved outcomes. We 
will also conduct subgroup analyses to see which subgroups may  benefit more fr om the intervention than the 
others. Such group analyses are data dredging; they should be  considered as exploratory analyses and any 
resulting findings should be confirmed by independent studies.  
 
Because control patients are not surveyed, follow -up surve y data for a given wave will serve will serve as the 
control group for the following wave’s baseline survey data. For example, wave 1 follow -up data will be 
compared against wave 2 baseline data.  The data collected in the survey are secondary outcomes.  
 
Attrition/missing data: Although the retention of patients with specific provider  panels is relatively stable at 
the VA and BH, there are a number of reasons for changes including moving, e ntering a nursing home or rehab 
facility, not being seen in PC for >2  years, or requiring specialty -based P C. Patients seldom switch among 
teams or providers within teams, limiting the potential for contamination between study groups. In our VA 
study of panel management (PROVE), only 7% of 9,841 hypertensive patient s switch ed teams over 12 months 
of follow -up. In the event that a provider changes teams and moves from one study arm to the other, patients of 
theirs already enrolled in the study will remain in the study arm in which they were enrolled. In waves after a 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  8 of 12 provider  has switched teams, newly enrolled patients  attributed to this provider will enter the study in their 
provider’s current study arm.  For the interv ention group, CHWs will contact patients when they are due for PC 
visits to ensure that they  complete regular  screenings as one of the toolkit strategies. Loss to follow -up of 
patients assigned to control  teams is a concern, however we will address it through data reports provided t o the 
control teams, which will include patients due for an HbA1c screening.  
 
To limit bias due to contamination and missing values, we will assess the basel ine characteristics of patients 
who switch teams or are removed from the panel or have incomplete repe ated outcomes, and compare them 
with that of the other participants. The (gener alized) linear mixed -effect models discussed earlier can deal with 
attribution problem and other missing data automatically, under the missing -at-random assumption.  This 
model assumes that the missing information only depends on the observed information, w hich allows us to 
utilize all the observed information. To better understand the nature of our missing data and its mechanism; 
we will summarize the outcome variables by discontinuation status/reason in e ach arm. If the trajectories of 
the primary outcome variables from those with incomplete data are similar to t hose with complete information, 
the data may be missing at random; otherwise, it may be missing not at random. We will then conduct 
sensitivity analysis to assess the impact of missing not at random  data on our analysis. The sens itivity analysis 
will test whether our primary statistical analysis remains credible if we investi gate cases where those patients 
with incomplete data have outcomes that are unfavorable to the intervention arm of the study (e g. those with  
incomplete outcome data in the control arm are less likely to develop DM, lose weight or have improved  
glycemic control or that those with incomplete outcome data in the interventio n group are less likely to have 
lost weight or improved glyce mic control but more likely to have developed DM) . The sensitivity analysis will 
be conducted via multiple imputation using sequential modeling, applying a SAS macro.  
 
 
Analysis: Intervention Implementation  
 
Staff survey data will be used to assess the self-efficacy and collective -efficacy as a team in preventing  
DM and in working with a CHW coach. We will compare baseline and post -intervention scores on each of the 
measures. To test the hypothesis that staff assigned to the intervention te ams who work c losely with a CHW 
will improve their self and collective efficacy  of DM prevention and CHW  coaching, we will compare pos t-
intervention scores for these measures across the study arms using linear regression and controlling for 
baseline scores and adjusting  for staff roles, length of time in their role and site.  Survey data will also be used to 
assess PCPs’ readiness to work with CHWs for DM prevention. Baseline and post -intervention scores will be 
compared using Wilcoxon signed -rank tests.  
 
All interviews transcripts (from PCMH and other staff , practice administrators, CHWs, and key informants ) 
and observations of study team meetings and case conferences will be analyzed for common themes by two 
independent researchers for qualitative analysis.  First, two r esearchers will read the transcripts to identify key 
domains. Second, the researchers will independently code two of each  set of transcripts. They will then meet to 
develop initial codebooks with code names and meanings. Third, each coder will apply the co debook to the 
remaining transcripts. Fourth, coders will meet to compare codes and identify patterns and common themes 
throughout the transcripts. Baseline interviews will be used to guide toolkit refinement and to explore 
anticipated facilitators and barr iers to incorporating CHWs into the PCMH workflow. Mid- and post -
intervention interview data will help us to determine key barriers, facilitators and lessons learned from staff, 
CHWs, and key informants regarding the implementation of CHWs in PC practice.  
 
To assess implementation fidelity, baseline and 6 -monthly scores on the coverage, duration, and frequency of 
CHW -patient contact for BH and VA patients will be compared using ANCOVA. Content of delivery will also be 
assessed qualitatively based on a sample of CHW -patient contacts. Implementation fidelity will be compared 
across BH and the VA to examine if differences in organizational setting shape the implementation process.  
 
Data from the FACETS neighborhood database of social determinants will be conjoined with study data to 
describe whether contextual factors pertaining to NYC neighborhoods are associated with prediabetes 
prevalence across neighborhoods. We will use a multilevel statistical model, with patients  nested within 
neighborhoods, to conduct this analysis.   
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  9 of 12  
Process Evaluation: To ensure that the intervention was delivered completely and standardized across the sites,  
CHWs and clinical t eams , there will be continuous monitoring of process outcomes and fidelity to the protocol 
during  the CHW intervention . We will maintain standardized protocols for each toolkit strategy and 
documentation of peer coaching.  The CHW Coordinator will conduct quarte rly assessments of the 
interventions, proportion of patients reached  and engaged by site and CHW, fidelity to counseling protocols, 
and the preferred toolkit and contact strategies.   
 
Statistical Power and Sample Size  
The primary study  outcome  for power calculations is the annual hazard rate of incident DM.  
 
To determine sample size, we begin with the total accessible population of about 46,000 primary care patients 
served at the two sites (BH and VA) . Of these we exclude patients with diagnos ed DM  (25% at VA and 15% at 
BH) and those over 75 years of age (who are ineligible for this intervention). Of these eligible subjects, w e 
estimated that about 70% will have had the HbA1c test in the last 2 years and that about 40% of these will have 
had a test result in the prediabetes range.  
 
While the above inclusion and exclusion criteria return about 9,300 eligible patients, 8,200 at BH and 1,100 at 
the VA, CHW caseload limitations preclude us from reaching all these eligible patients during the 3 -year 
intervention. Assuming a caseload of 72 patients per fulltime CHW per wave (with 3.5 fulltime equivalent 
CHWs across both sites  and 4 waves ), the intervention is projected to enroll  a minimum of  1,008 subjects into 
the intervention group. An equivalent num ber of subjects will be randomly selected from the Control teams for 
a total of at least 2,016 study subjects overall. The intervention and control subjects will be split across the two 
study sites. After assuming that we will not be able to reach about 20% (due to missing or incorrect contact 
information) unreachable rate, and that about  60% will consent to enroll in the intervention, we will randomly 
select about double the 1,008 subjects (about 2,100) for potential enrollment into the intervention in ord er to 
enroll the  minimum of  1008 intervention subjects  needed to have  adequate statistical power.   
 
Power: In the pre -DM population we estimate the 3 -year DM incidence to be 15% (based on preliminary 
analysis of a similar VA cohort from 2010 -2012). Based on our analyses , with 1,008 patients allocated to each 
of the intervention and control groups, we anticipate having 80%  power  (alpha = 0.05) to detect a difference in 
time -to-event ( DM incidence)  between the intervention and control group . 
 
To assess measures of implementation fidelity, specifically coverage, duration, and frequency of CHW -patient 
contact, we will base calculations on all patients enrolled. Since we will use all available study data  from the 
electronic medical records , power and sample  size considerations do not apply. We will assess content of CHW -
patient contact using qualitative methods, hence power and sample size considerations do not apply.  
 
To examine the variation in prediabetes prevalence across NYC neighborhoods, we will use a vailable data from 
BH at the start of the study, in approximately 19,000 patients . These patients meet the study’s previously 
stated eligibility criteria, with two modifications: patients must have (1) any HbA1c result in the past 5 years 
and (2) an addres s available in the EHR.  Data on all enrolled BH patients at the end of the study, an estimated 
1,000 patients , will also be used . Since we will use all available study data, power and sample size 
considerations do not apply.  
 
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
Many steps will be taken to ensure the security and integrity of all study  data.  Information obtained for this 
study will be stored on  password -protected research drives . Data obtained from surveys , the BH and VA CDW,  
and the local EMR will  be coded and stored separate ly from their code key files  on a secured, password -
protected, HIPAA compliant network drive . Only the Research Director, Project Manager and Evaluator will 
have access to the subjects’ codes. Once coded, the de-identified data  will be securely transferred to a 
password -protected, shared research drive for analysis . Hard copies of surveys returned from patients will be 
locked in a secure cabinet or drawer located in the team’s research space.  A waiver of authorization for both 
recruitment/identification purposes and for study procedures has been sought.  
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  10 of 12  
Audio recordings of the in -person interviews with an anticipated 60 subjects  will be taped using approved 
recording devices, which will be stored in a  locked cabinet or drawer. Interview recordings will  be transcribed 
without identifiers. We will present informed consent forms and audio/visual consent forms (VA form 3203 
“Consent for Use of Picture and/or Audio” and NYU Research Subject Audio/Video/Photo Use Consent Form) 
to all staff participants involved in qualitative research interviews who verbally consent to participate in the 
protocol.   
 
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 
Risk  
The main risk to patients , primary care and other staff , practice administrators, CHWs, and key informants , 
though unlikely, is a loss of confidentiality.  
 
Protection Against Risks  
Provider /staff participants will be asked to participate in the different parts  of the study ( CHW  intervention, 
surveys) but not required to do so. Patient survey respondents will be  offered a modest incentive  
($11 MetroCard ) to compensate them for their time. Questionnaires and interviews will be d elivered by a 
neutral party not in the employee’s supervisory chain. Participation is completely voluntary and p articipants 
may drop out o f the study at any time.  
 
For the neighborhood effects analysis, patients’ location information will be maintained at the level of the 
neighborhood, which is an aggregate of census tracts. NYC has over 2,100 census tracts. The NYC Department 
of City Planning constructs approximately 210 Neighborhood Tabulation Areas  (NTA)  out of the 2,100+ census 
tracts by aggregating whole census tracts. Although individual patient data is initially mapped to census tract 
level, it is used and analyzed only at the NTA level . Each NTA includes an average of about 50,000 residents. 
Patients’ precise geographic location therefore will not be identifiable. Seeking consent from patients for their 
data to be used for this study would increase the likelihood of loss of confi dentiality.  
 
Potential Benefits to the Subjects  
Staff subjects may improve their clinical practice if they are randomized to the intervention, which provides a  
CHW  to the PC provider  that assists in accessing and interpreting the large VA and Bellevue  electronic datasets 
in attempt to enhance patient care. Patients may receive improved care as a result of their  providers receiving 
the information in an organized, usable fashion and having support to encourage patients  to enroll in and 
complete programs that reduce the risk of developing type 2 DM. Potential risks are minimal  and primarily 
include loss of confidentiality, while the potential benefit to individual and scientific knowledge  is sizeable. 
CHWs  will not be making any management decisions for pa tients’ care but rather will be acting  under the 
direction of each patient’s primary care physician.  CHWs who participate in interviews will gain opportunities 
to reflect upon the challenges  and successes  of their work  and subsequently incorporate this und erstanding 
into their work, thus providing improved counseling and support to patients.  
 
Investigator’s Qualifications & Experience  
 
See attached biosketches for qualifications and experience.  
 
Subject Identification, Recruitment and Consent/Assent  
 
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment , and Consent  
All primary care staff will be given information about the proposed research during regular staff meetings,  
email announcements and a study flyer and then asked to participate. Staff providing v erbal consent  to 
participate will be  randomized (as part of their PACT team) to either work with a CHW  or serve as controls. 
Staff who opt -out will  not be randomized, although might still work on a team that is included in the study. For 
example, if one  primary care provider in a team declines participation, the other providers and team members 
consent, the  team will be randomized to a study arm. If that team is randomized to an intervention arm, the 
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  11 of 12 CHW  would  only work with the patients of the consenting  providers. We anticipate that we will be able to 
obtain sufficient  numbers of staff consenting to participate, as in our previous panel management study only 
one PCP out of  fifty -one declined, and a majority of staff reported that the interventions and CHW support 
were helpful.  Lastly, as CHW s will be extending services and interventions that are a part of regular, evidence -
based practice  on behalf of patients’ primary care physician, patients will not individually consent to receiving 
phone calls,  mailing s, or any other contact with the CHW . For surveys, which are research procedures specific 
to this study, consenting elements will be presented at the top of the survey . Primary care teams will pre -
approve all lists of patients receiving  interventions as we ll as approving the content of the CHW ’s intervention. 
Patients will have the right to opt out  of receiving outreach at any time. All mail materials will include 
instructions on how to stop receiving mail  from the CHW . 
 
A waiver of authorization for both r ecruitment/identification purposes and for study procedures has been 
sought. We use the electronic medical record to generate a list of eligible participants, in order to approach 
them to screen for eligibility. Without the requested Waiver, screening coul d not be practically carried out and 
would adversely affect the scientific rigor of the study.  
 
A waiver of consent has been requested. Informed consent is given when a provider chooses to participate in 
the intervention. He or she can opt out of the study at any point. With regard to surveys, completion of the 
survey will serve as implied consent. The survey  cover sheet includes all elements of consent.  Informed consent 
is implied by patients completing and returning a mail -based survey. Similar to th e staff survey, all patient 
surveys will state that the survey is voluntary, all data will be reported in the aggregate, and completion of the 
survey serves as consent for participation. The survey will also specify that completion of the survey will not 
impact their health care in any way and that their individual responses will not be shared with members of 
their health care team.  
 
Further, patients will be considered to have given informed consent by choosing to continue to interact with 
CHWs. Patients can request to not be contacted by a team’s CHW at any point. This will be clearly stated on all 
materials given to staff and patients. Interventions will consist of educating patients of existing services at the 
institution or outside of the institution t hat they can access to improve their health, ensuring coordination and 
follow -up on referrals already made by their health care team. Patients interested in attending a institution -
provided service (such as MOVE, smoking cessation classes, or Telehealth) w ill be referred as a part of usual 
care from their team. Programs such as YMCA DPP are available to anyone that meets pre -diabetes criteria, not 
just our subjects. Anyone is able to join these programs without the referral of a physician. The study team wi ll 
only offer existing evidence -based  services already available to pre -diabetics. Patients interested in attending 
the community based  DPP will be provided contact information or a warm transfer by telephone, but will need 
to register themselves and conse nt to the outside program. PHI will not be sent to either organization by the 
study team. Patients will be making an informed decision to join such groups and will be explicitly explained 
this via phone or letter. This same implied consent applies to patie nts who register for VA’s Telehealth or 
MOVE services and BH’s Healthy Lifestyle services .   
 
CHWs will be interviewed in groups and/or individually, as they prefer. Their participation in interviews is 
voluntary. Identifying information on CHWs or on our study team members will not be collected or recorded in 
these interviews and observations.  
 
Costs to the Subject  
Subjects or their health insurance may be billed for the costs of medical care during this study if these expenses 
would have happened even if  they were not in the study, or if your insurance agrees in advance to pay .   
 
Payment for Participation  
Patient survey respondents will be offered a modest incentive ($ 11 MetroCard ) to compensate them for their 
time.  
 
Documentation of Consent  
IRB Protocol 2019 -03-21| email  irb-info@nyumc.org | phone  212.263.4110 | page  12 of 12 We will pres ent informed consent forms and audio/visual consent forms  (VA form 3203 “Consent for Use of 
Picture and/or Audio”  and NYU Research Subject Audio/Video/Photo Use Consent Form)  to all staff 
participants involved in qualitative research interviews who verball y consent to participate in the protocol. We 
will not be obtaining informed consent from those who will not be audiotaped. The consent will be obtained 
immediately prior to starting the interview . 