   
 
1 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  STUDY TITLE:   
 
 
Relaxing Environment to Lower Anxiety  
during Onabotulinum Toxin Chemodenervation  
of the Bladder: RELAX Trial  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 05/01/2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
2 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  STUDY TITLE:   
Relaxing Environment to Lower Anxiety during Onabotulinum Toxin Chemodenervation of the Bladder: 
RELAX Trial  
 
Principal Investigator : 
Megan Tarr, MD  
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Megan.tarr@atriumhealth.org  
 
Co-investigator(s) :   
Erin Franks, MD  
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Erin.franks @atriumhealth.org  
 
Michael Kennelly, M D 
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Michael.kennelly @atriumhealth.org  
 
Erinn Myers, MD  
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Erinn.myers @atriumhealth.org  
 
Zahra Bahrani -Mostafavi, PhD  
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Zahra.bahranimostafavi @atriumhealth.org  
 
Joseph Rigdon, PhD  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Jrigdon@wakehealth.edu  
 
Kelley Kaczmarski, RN , BSN  
Atrium Health  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Kelley.kaczemarski @atriumhealth.org  
 
Sponsor or funding source: Departmental  
 
BACKGROUND  
Chemodenervation of the bladder with onabotulinum toxin A is an effective treatment option for patients 
with refractory overactive bladder (OAB) or urgency urinary incontinence  (UUI)1.  It is often performed 
as an office -based procedure under local anesth esia.  Alternatively, it can be performed in the operating 
room under general anesthesia.  The ability to receive intra -detrusor chemodenervation in the office 
allows patients to avoid the risks associated with  general anesthe sia and is significantly more c ost 
effective2.  The procedure , however,  is painful and  can be anxiety provoking  for patient s; especially given 
that patients typically return every six to nine months for repeat injections1,2.   
   
 
3 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24   
Relaxation and distraction techniques are  one way to ease patients’ anxiety before an office -based 
procedure.  Aromatherapy and music have been shown to reduce anxiety and pain during procedures such 
as intravenous line  placement, bone marrow biopsy, and cystoscopy3-7.  In the urogynecologic population, 
both lavender aromatherapy and listening to music during  multi -channel urodynamics decreased patient 
anxiety and improved satisfaction8-9.  There have not, however, been any studies evaluating  the use of 
aromatherapy or music during intra -detrusor chemodenervation procedures.   
 
While we do not know exactly how anxiety provoking office bladder chemodenervation  is for patients, 
we do know that anxiety disorder s are highly prevalent in women with overactive bladder a s a 
population10.  One study of 274 women with OAB found that 62.4% had moderate to severe anxiety10.  
Addressing pre -procedural anxiety is important so patients will continue to pursue treatment of their 
OAB /UUI  in the outpatient e nvironment .  Achieving a relaxing office environment with simple 
adjustments to aroma, music, and lighting may b e one way to help patients feel less anxious, reduce the 
perception of procedural  pain, and increase  satisfaction with their procedural experience .    
 
STUDY PURPOSE  
This study aims to investigate whether women  with OAB/ UUI who receive office intra-detrusor 
chemodenervation injections performed in a relaxing environment of lavender aromatherapy, calming 
music, dim lighting , and modest positioning  (Relaxing Environment Package)  will have decreased 
anxiety and pain as well as increased post -procedure satisfaction compared to patients who receive 
chemodenervation in a typical office environment.  We will also investigate whether exposure to the 
relaxing environment impacts the well-being  of staff  involved in these procedures.   
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objective   
Determine if  women with OAB/ UUI exposed to a Relaxing Environment Package  during  office 
administration of intra -detrusor onabotulinum toxin A injections  have decreased pre -procedur e anxiety  
based on a visual analog scale  compared to women receiving  intra-detrusor onabotulinum toxin A  
injections performed in a typical office setting . 
 
Secondary Objectives  
1. Determine if the Relaxing Environment Package  reduces a patient’s pain during office 
administration of intra -detrusor onabotulinum toxin A injections based on a visual analog scale.  
2. Determine if the Relaxing Environment Package  increases patient satisfaction  with their 
procedure  experience based on a visual analog scale.  
3. Determine if the Relaxing Environment Package  decreases procedure staff burnout based on a 
visual analog scale.  
 
HYPOTHESIS  
We hypothesize that patients who experience a relax ing environment of lavender aromatherapy, calming 
music, dim lighting , and modest positioning  during office intra-detrusor  chemodenervation procedures 
will have less pre-procedure anxiety , less pain during the procedure, and greater procedure satisfaction  
compared to patients who experience a typical office setting.   We additionally hypothesize that staff who 
are exposed to the relaxing environment will experience less burnout.  
 
METHODS  and MEASURES  
Design  and Setting  
   
 
4 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  This is a single center  prospective randomized control led trial of women with overactive bladder 
undergoing  their first or repeat  office  intra-detrusor  chemodenervation with onabotulinum toxin A .  The 
trial will be performed in an academic medical center  outpatient Urogynecology clinic (Women’s Center 
for Pelvic Health (Mercy), Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC) .  Approval by the Atrium Health Institutional 
Review Board w ill be obtained before data collection.  
 
Subject Selection Criteria  
Women scheduled for office intra-detrusor chemodenervation with onabotulinum toxin A for a diagnosis 
of overactive bladder  (OAB) , urinary urgency  (UU) , or urgency  urinary  incontinence  (UUI) based on 
subjective or objective data  will be identified and screened against inclusion and exclusion criteria.   If 
potential subjects meet the requirements for the study, they will be  eligible to be invited for participat ion.  
Subjects will be consented for study enrollment by physicians, fellow physicians, and/or  a delegated 
study team member  on the day of their procedure . 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Non-pregnant females  
• Age 18 years and older  
• English as a primary language  
• Scheduled for office  intra-detrusor chemodenervation  for diagnosis of OAB/U U/UUI 
• Baseline visual analog scale for anxiety ≥12mm  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Allergy to lavender oil  
• Contraindication to intra -detrusor chemodenervation  procedure  as determined by the physician  
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Women of all races and ethnicity who meet the above -described eligibility criteria are eligible for this 
study.  All participants will be women.  
 
Study Withdrawal  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any point in time.  Documentation of the reason for withdrawal 
will be captured in the data collection forms.  There will be no risk to subjects that choose to withdraw.  
 
Sample Size  
Our sample size calculation was based on a prior study within the urogynecologic population which 
showed a statistically significant re duction in VAS -anxiety when aromatherapy was used during 
multichannel urodynamics, a common urogynecologic office procedure8.  With a sample size of n=80 we 
would have 80% power to detect a mean clinically important difference of 12mm out of 100mm on the 
anxiety visual analog scale  assuming a standard deviation of 18.8  and p -value 0.05 . As the intervention is 
delivered  at the week level, if we reach n=80 early in the week, we will plan to finish out the week and 
thus may reach a total sample size slightly greater than 80, increasing statistical power.  
 
Intervention s and Interactions  
Patients scheduled for office intra -detrusor  chemodenervation will be contact ed by study staff via phone 
to introduce the study and gauge interest  in participating.  Interested and eligible patients will be asked to 
arrive thirty  minutes before their scheduled procedure time to complete the consent process.  Upon 
arrival, patients will be e scorted to a research office where informed consent will be obtained.   After 
obtaining informed consent, all participants  will fill out a pre -procedure visual analog scale (VAS) for 
   
 
5 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  anxiety11 (Figure 1)  and a VAS for pain12 (Figure 2) .  If all inclusion criteria  are met, including VAS -
anxiety ≥12mm  on 100mm scale , participants  will be enrolled and  then escorted to the procedure room.  
 
Intervention:  
Group 1:  Intervention  
• Lavender aromatherapy sticker on patient, procedure staff , MD lapel  
• Calming music from Sirius XM station 68 (Spa) playing via overhead speakers  
• Overhead lights off, two lanterns lit to provide dim lighting  
• Avoid stirrup use  
 
Group 2: Control  
• Non-aromatic (placebo) sticker on patient, procedure staff , MD lapel  
• No music playing  
• Overhead lights on  
• Stirrups used   
  
In order to  create the least disruption to our clinical workflow, we propose randomizing the weeks of the 
study rather than randomizing participants.  Permuted block randomization will be used such that a 
random sequence of blocks of 4 or 6 weeks (total ing to the number of weeks planned for the study) will 
be chosen .  Within each block  of 4 or 6 weeks , the weeks will be equally randomized to treatment or 
control.  For example, within a four -week block, two of four weeks will be randomized treatment and two 
to control.   Permuted block randomization wil l ensure that (i) prognostic factors (e.g., first -time vs. repeat 
patient) are balanced over the course of the study and (ii) seasona lity is addressed (e.g., within summer, 
half of the weeks are control and half treatment).   Each week of the study will be randomized to either 
Relaxing Environment Package or Typical Office Environment (control ), rather than randomizing 
individual patients.  On Monday of every week , an envelope will be opened to determine if it is a 
Relaxing Environment Package week or Control week.  Randomization will be discussed in more detail 
below.  
 
If the week is randomized to a  Relaxing Environment Package , the patient , procedure staff , and MD will 
enter the procedure room and receive  a lavender aromatherapy sticker to be worn on their lapel s. The 
lavender aromatherapy sticker will be ordered from Aroma Stickers store website  (https://aroma -
stickers.com) .  Calming music from Sirius XM station 68 (Spa) will be playing softly in the background 
via overhead speaker s.  If the patient had planned to listen to their own music during the procedure, this 
will be permitted  and documented .  Procedure consent and preprocedural preparation (see below) will 
take place.  The overhead lights will then be turned  off, and two battery powered lanterns will be lit to 
provide dim lighting .  Stirrups will be avoided , if possible,  during the preparation and procedure.   
 
If the week is randomized to  Typical Office Environment , the patient , procedure staff , and MD  will enter 
the procedure room and receive a non -aromatic (placebo) sticker to be worn on their lapel s.  The non-
aromatic sticker will be obtained from an office supply store.  No music will be playing,  and all of the 
lights will be  on as is typical in our practice.  Procedure consent and preprocedural preparation (see 
below) will take place.   The lights may then be adjusted during cystoscopy per provider preference for 
adequate visualization.  
 
   
 
6 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  To minimize lavender cross contamination and unintended topical or environmental exposure in those not 
participating in the study or with lavender allergy , we opted to use a lavender aromatherapy sticker rather 
than a diffuser.  Unlike a diffuser, t he aromatic sticker does not leave a scent in the air once the sticker is 
removed from the room.  When the aromatic sticker is worn on a shirt lapel it can only be smelled at close 
distances, typically only by the individual wearing the sticker.  Aromatic sticker s will be maintained 
outside the procedure room in a sealed bag.  If a patient is randomized to the Relaxing Environment 
Package, the stickers will be brought into the procedure room and distributed to patient s and staff.  The 
sticker will be placed on the subjects’ shirt lapel.  Once the procedure is completed the stickers will be 
recollected, placed back in the sealed bag, an d disposed of  by study staff .  This will limit any 
environmental exposure to lavender for the next patient.   Routine hand washing or sanitization by MD 
and procedure staff and routine cleaning of procedure room between patient encounters  will limit any 
cross contamination  or unintended topical exposure.   For patients or staff not participating, we believe 
that lavender levels will not be above those expected in everyday life.   Additionally , our office has a 
second procedure room that can be used for any patients with a lavender allerg y.   
All patients will receive routine preprocedural  antibiotic prophylaxis, sterile urethral preparation with 
betadine or chlorhexidine, and 60cc viscous intravesica l 1% lidocaine  will be instilled into the bladder 
with sterile technique .  After staying in the environment in the supine position with a sheet covering the 
lower half of their body and legs for at least 10 minutes while the local anesthetic takes effect, 
participants will then fill out a 2nd VAS for anxiety.   The procedure will be performed, and any patient 
requested modifications to the protocol will be recorded.  After the procedure and once participants are 
dressed, they will fill out a 2nd VAS for pain and a VAS for  procedure satisfaction (Figure 3).   
 
The procedure staff and MD will fill out the Burnout Battery visual analog scale13 (Figure 4)  at the start of 
the day prior to seeing any patients.  They will again complete the Burnout Battery visual analog scale at 
the day’s conclusion, after seeing their last patient .  They will also record how many chemodenervation 
procedures they participated in that day.  
 
The electronic medical record, with participant permission, will be reviewed to establish patient 
demographics, indication for procedure, whether primary or repeat procedure, and medical history .  Years 
of experience and demographic information of the procedure staff and MD will also be recorded . 
 
 
 
 Baseline  Procedure  Post-
procedure  
Informed Consent  x   
Medical History  x   
Medication review   x    
*Other Demographics  x   
VAS Anxiety #1  x   
VAS Pain #1  x   
Randomization  
 x   
VAS Anxiety #2   x  
**Procedure   x  
   
 
7 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  VAS Pain #2    x 
VAS Patient Satisfaction    x 
 
Table 1. Patient Data Collection Schedule  
*Other demographic data includes: Age  (years) , Race, Body Mass Index (BMI  in kg/m 2 ), smoking status 
(current/former/never ), insurance type (private/Medicare/Medicaid/None), use of aromatherapy at home  
in the last six months (yes/no)  
**Procedure data includes: first time  injection (yes/no),  repeat  procedure (yes/no) , time of patient 
entering room, time  of VAS anxiety #2, protocol modifications ( stirrups used, support person present, 
listening to personal music , other relaxation techniques used, etc)  
 
 Baseline  Start of 
clinic day  End of 
clinic day  
Informed Consent  x   
*Demographics  x   
Burnout Battery   x x 
 
 
Table 2. MD and Procedure Staff Data Collection Schedule  
*MD gender, MD years of experience performing office bladder chemodenervation, procedure staff 
gender, procedure staff years of experience supporting office procedures, MD  and procedure staff use of 
aromatherapy at home in the last 6 months (yes/no)  
 
RANDOMIZATION    
A permuted block randomization scheme will be used to assign weeks in a 1:1 ratio to intervention or 
control.  The permutated blocks will prevent clinic staff from being able to predict which weeks will be 
Relaxing Environment Package or control.   However, it will  not be possible to blind subjects, staff, or 
investigators.  Our statistician will be blinded.  Randomization of weeks rather than patients was selected 
to minimize impact to clinic flow and help prevent protocol deviation among our busy clinic st aff who 
often have back -to-back procedures.  It will also allo w assessment of procedure team burnout .  Patients 
will only participate in the study once . 
 
OUTCOME MEASURES  
Primary Outcome  Measure:  
The primary outcome is to compare the mean change in patients’ anxiety level  from  when they arrive for 
their procedure  to their anxiety level after at least 10 minutes of exposure to the relaxing or typical office 
environment  (while the lidocaine anesthetic is given time to work in the bladder) .  The mean change in 
anxiety levels will be compared between the intervention and control groups.   Anxiety will be assessed 
using a visual analog scale  (VAS)  (Figure 1).  The VAS for anxiety is a validated scale that ranges from 
0-100mm14.  0mm is equivalent to “no anxiety” and is located on the left.  100mm is equivalent to 
“extremely anxious” and is located on the right.  Subjects are asked to draw a vertical line on the scale 
that corresponds to their level of anxiety.   The first VAS anxiety  score  (baseline)  will be collected the day 
of the procedure in the research office after obtaining consent.  The second VAS anxiety score (after 
exposure) will be collected just prior to starting the procedure after at least 10 minutes  of exposure to the 
procedure room environment.  The minimum clinically important difference for VAS  anxiety is a change 
of 12mm on a 100mm  scale .  
 
   
 
8 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  Secondary Outcome  Measures  
Procedure pain: Pain during the chemodenervation procedure will be assessed  using a visual analog 
scale for pain  (Figure 2).  The VAS  for pain  is a validated scale that ranges from 0 -100mm15. 0mm is 
equivalent to “no pain” and is located on the left. 100mm is equivalent to “worst possible pain” and is 
located on the right.    Subjects are asked to draw a vertical line  on the scale that corresponds to their level 
of pain  during the procedure .  Baseline scores will be collected on the day of the procedure in the research 
office after obtaining consent .  Patients will then be asked to circle the p ain scores that corresponded to 
the pain experienced during the procedure. This will be collected  by study staff after the procedure once 
the patient is dressed .  
 
Satisfaction with experience: Patient satisfaction with their procedure experience will be assessed using 
a visual analog scale for patient satisfaction (Figure 3).  The VAS for patient satisfaction is a validated 
scale ranging from 0 -100mm16.  0mm is equivalent to “no satisfaction” and 100mm is equivalent to 
“extreme satisfaction”.   Subjects are asked to draw a vertical line  that corresponds to their level of 
satisfaction with their procedure experienc e.  
 
Procedure team burnout: Procedure team burnout will be assessed  using a Burnout Battery visual 
analog scale for healthcare worker burnout (Figure 4).  This tool was created to assess the working energy 
states of healthcare providers and is correlated with the Maslach Burnout Inventory which is a  validated  
22 question survey regarding workplace burnout13.  The RN(s) assigned to chemodenervation procedures 
as well as the physician performing the procedure will fill out the Burnout Battery VAS at the beginning 
and end of the  clinic  day.  Providers are asked to circle the battery that represents their current energy 
level .   
 
ANALYTICAL PLAN  
Descriptive  statistics  will be used to summarize baseline characteristics of treatment and control groups .  
Means and standard deviations (or medians and interquartile ranges) will be used to summarize 
continuous variables such as age, and frequencies and percentages will be used to summarize categorical 
variables such as first -time vs. repeat patient .  Regression analyses  will be performed to test the 
hypotheses about treatment effects on primary and secon dary outcomes.  Planned regression models can 
flexibly address missing data and include covariate adjustment for important prognostic variables (such as 
first-time vs. repeat patient ), as necessary.  Exploratory subgroup analyses will be performed to 
characteri ze treatment effects within groups of interest, such as first -time or repeat patients.  
 
SUBJECT RECRUITMENT METHODS  
All patients who plan to undergo intra -detrusor chemodenervation will be identified on the clinic schedule 
prior to their procedure, screened, and approached for participation in the study.  Informed consent will be 
obtained in a separate room prior to entering the procedure room.  Subjects who do not meet the inclusion 
or exclusion criteria will be considered screen failures.  Screen failures will be captured, and the cause for 
screen failure will be documented.   
 
If a patient agrees to participate in study, baseline demographic information and medical history will be 
collected from Encompass (EPIC) electronic medical record.    
 
All MD and procedure staff  assisting with bladder chemodenervation procedures at our facility  will be  
invited to participate.  Informed consent will be obtained from interested MD and procedure staff 
privately , before participating in any study procedures, so they have time to read the consent and ask 
questions.  They will be provided with  a printed copy of the informed consent .  After informed consent is 
obtained baseline data  will be collected.  
 
   
 
9 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  All study data will be recorded by research staff and securely maintained at the Mercy study site.  The 
data flow will consist of paper data collection for eligibility assessment, baseline data, randomization, 
intervention group, primary and secondary outcomes, adverse events, and protocol deviations.  
 
Data will be entered by study staff into  the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) database that 
will be stored on a secure server at Atrium Health.  REDCap is a secure, web -based application designed 
to support data capture for research studies, providing: 1) an intuitive interface for validated data entry; 2) 
audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export proced ures for 
seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for importing data from 
external sources.  Data will be entered into REDCap within 30 business days of collection.  
 
Each subject  will have a unique identification number to which only the principal and sub -investigators 
will have access.  The data collection spreadsheet will not contain any patient identifiers and will be 
password protected.  The master list  that links the patients and their study identification number will be 
stored separately from the database.  All collected information will be stored separately on a password 
protected hard drive.  A back up copy of the file will be stored on a password protected hospital network 
drive.  All hard copies of study data will be stored in a locked cabinet in the office of the research nurse, 
which will also be locked.  
 
Electronic data will be stored to safe -guard confidentiality using a password protected computer.  
Principal investigator, co -investigators, research Coordinator nurse, and statisticians will have access to 
harvested patient data.  Harvested patient data and identifiers will be destroyed upon completion of data 
analysis, manuscript acceptance and publication in accordance with Atrium Research policy and 
guidelines.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
Signed informed consent will be obtained from each patient subject  by a delegated study team member in -
person on the day of the schedule procedure.  
 
Signed informed consent will be obtained from MD and procedur e staff subjects by a delegated study 
team member prior to participation in any study procedures . 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY  
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess study outcomes, 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify 
subjects, and maintaining  all study information in a secure manner .  To help ensure subject privacy and 
confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected 
patient identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier will be maintained on a 
linkage file, store separately from the data .  The linkage file  will be kept secure, with access limited to 
designated study personnel.  Following data collection subject identifying information will be destroyed  
upon completion of data analysis, manuscript acceptance and publication in accordance with Atrium 
Research policy and guidelines  consistent with data validation and study design , producing an anonymous 
analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  Data and records will be kept locked and 
secure d, with any computer data password protected .  No reference to any individual participant will 
appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  
 
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
The principal investigator will be responsible for monitoring the data and safety of study participants.   
The principal investigator will be assisted by oth er members of the study staff.  
 
   
 
10 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  REPORTING OF UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS, ADVERSE EVENTS OR DEVIATIONS  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations  or protocol changes will 
be promptly reported  by the principal investigator or designated member of the research team  to the IRB 
or appropriate g overnment agency if appropriate.  
 
 
 
FIGURES 
Figure 1   
 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3  

   
 
11 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24   
Figure 4 
 
     
 
REFERENCES  
1. Bradley, M. & Amundsen, C. (2022). Refractory Overactive Bladder. Walters, M. & Karram, M. 
(Eds.), Urogynecology and Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery Fifth Edition (Pp. 524 -526). Elsevier.  
2. Faure Walker N, Macpherson F, Tasleem A, Rampal T. Interventions to improve tolerability of local 
anesthetic intradetrusor Botulinum toxin injections: A systematic review. Neurourol Urodyn. 2023 
Jan;42(1):23 -32. doi: 10.1002/nau.25061. Epub 2022 Oct 23.  PMID: 36378811; PMCID: PMC10092540.  
3. Karaman T, Karaman S, Dogru S, Tapar H, Sahin A, Suren M, Arici S, Kaya Z. Evaluating the efficacy 
of lavender aromatherapy on peripheral venous cannulation pain and anxiety: A prospective, randomized 
study. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2016 May;23:64 -8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2016.03.008. Epub 2016 Mar 
25. PMID: 27157961.  
4. Abbaszadeh R, Tabari F, Asadpour A. The Effect of Lavender Aroma on Anxiety of Patients Having 
Bone Marrow Biopsy. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2020 Mar 1;21(3):771 -775. doi: 
10.31557/APJCP.2020.21.3.771. PMID: 32212806; PMCID: PMC7437323.  

   
 
12 
Protocol version: 1. 2 
Protocol Date: 5/1/24  5. Mumm JN, Eismann L, Rodler S, Vilsmaier T, Zehni AZ, Apfelbeck M, Pfitzinger PL, Volz Y, 
Chaloupka M, Bauer RM, Stief CG, Staehler M. Listening to Music during Outpatient Cystoscopy 
Reduces Pain and Anxiety and Increases Satisfaction: Results from a Prospective Randomized Study. 
Urol Int. 2021;105(9 -10):792 -798. doi: 10.1159/000517275. Epub 2021 Jul 19. PMID: 34280934.  
6. Gupta S, Das SK, Jana D, Pal DK. Distraction during cystoscopy to reduce pain and increase 
satisfaction: Randomized control study between real -time visualization versus listening to music versus 
combined music and real -time visualization. Urol Ann. 2019  Jan-Mar;11(1):33 -38. doi: 
10.4103/UA.UA_191_17. PMID: 30787568; PMCID: PMC6362792.  
7. Gauba A, Ramachandra MN, Saraogi M, Geraghty R, Hameed BMZ, Abumarzouk O, Somani BK. 
Music reduces patient -reported pain and anxiety and should be routinely offered during flexible 
cystoscopy: Outcomes of a systematic review. Arab J Urol. 2021 Mar 3;19( 4):480 -487. doi: 
10.1080/2090598X.2021.1894814. PMID: 34881066; PMCID: PMC864802  
8. Özel BZ, Quevedo A, Jung C, Shirazi F, Dancz CE. Lavender Aromatherapy for Anxiety and Pain 
During Multichannel Urodynamics: A Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr 
Surg. 2021 Nov 1;27(11):654 -658. doi: 10.1097/SPV.00000000000010 32. PMID: 33626029.  
9. Diri MA, Çetinkaya F, Gül M. The Effects of Listening to Music on Anxiety, Pain, and Satisfaction 
during Urodynamic Study: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Urol Int. 2019;103(4):444 -449. doi: 
10.1159/000502298. Epub 2019 Aug 13. PMID: 31408870.  
10. Melotti IGR, Juliato CRT, Tanaka M, Riccetto CLZ. Severe depression and anxiety in women with 
overactive bladder. Neurourology and Urodynamics. 2018; 37: 223 –228 
11.  Kumar, Kushee -Nidhi & Alam, Ambreen & Ng, Anna & Yellapu, Vikas. (2021). Open Access 
Journal of Clinical Anesthesiology: Aromatherapies can Reduce Incidence of Anxiety in Ambulatory 
Surgery Patients: A Pilot Study. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia.   
12. Petrikovets A, Sheyn D, Sun HH, Chapman GC, Mahajan ST, Pollard RR, El -Nashar SA, Hijaz AK, 
Mangel J. Multimodal opioid -sparing postoperative pain regimen compared with the standard 
postoperative pain regimen in vaginal pelvic reconstructive surgery: a m ulticenter randomized controlled 
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2019 Nov;221(5):511.e1 -511.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2019.06.002.   
13. Deng YT, Liu J, Zhang J, Huang BY, Yi TW, Wang YQ, Zheng B, Luo D, Du PX, Jiang Y. A 
multicenter study on the validation of the Burnout Battery: a new visual analog scale to screen job 
burnout in oncology professionals. Psychooncology. 2017 Aug;26(8):1 120-1125. doi: 10.1002/pon.4291. 
Epub 2016 Oct 17. PMID: 2770973  
14. Williams VS, Morlock RJ, Feltner D. Psychometric evaluation of a visual analog scale for the 
assessment of anxiety. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2010 Jun 8;8:57. doi: 10.1186/1477 -7525 -8-57. 
PMID: 20529361; PMCID: PMC2904728.  
15. Jensen MP, Chen C, Brugger AM (2003) Interpretation of visual analog scale ratings and change 
scores: a reanalysis of two clinical trials of postoperative pain. J Pain 4(7):407 –414 
16. Brokelman RB, Haverkamp D, van Loon C, Hol A, van Kampen A, Veth R. The validation of the 
visual analogue scale for patient satisfaction after total hip arthroplasty. Eur Orthop Traumatol. 2012 
Jun;3(2):101 -105. doi: 10.1007/s12570 -012-0100 -3. Epub 2012 Apr 12. PMID: 22798966; PMCID: 
PMC3389603.  
 