UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER MEDICAL CENTER  
 
WILMOT CANCER INSTITUTE  
 
A patient -centered communication tool (UR -GOAL) for older patients with acute myeloid 
leukemia, their caregivers, and their oncologists  
 
December 17, 2021  
 
 
Study Principal Investigator:  Kah Poh (Melissa)  Loh, MBBCh BAO  
Division of Hematology/Oncology  
University of Rochester Medical Center  
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Email: Kahpoh_loh@URMC.Rochester.edu  
 
Study Co-Investigator:   Supriya G. Mohile, MD, MS  
Division of Hematology/Oncology  
University of Rochester Medical Center  
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Email: Supriya_Mohile@URMC.rochester.edu  
 
Study Personnel :   Terri Lloyd   
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Phone: (585) 276 -5652/ Fax: (585) 273 -1042  
  Email: Terri1_Lloyd@URMC.Rochester.edu  
 
  Chandrika Sanapala  
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Phone: (585) 27 5-4391 / Fax: (585) 273 -1042  
  Email: Chandrika_Sanapala @URMC.Rochester.edu  
 
  Jessica Bauer  
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Phone: (585) 27 6-6562 / Fax: (585) 273 -1042  
  Email: Jessica_Bauer@URMC.Rochester.edu  
 
Biostatistician s:  Eva Culakova, PhD  
Department of Surgery  
University of Rochester Medical Center  
  James P Wilmot Cancer Center  
  601 Elmwood Ave, Box 704  
  Rochester, NY 14642  
  Email: Eva_Culakova@URMC.rochester.edu  
  
 
Contents  
1.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  4 
2.0 Aim and Hypothesis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  6 
3.0. Study D esign and Population  ................................ ................................ ................................  7 
4.0 Recruitment and Consent ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 10 
5.0 Registration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  14 
6.0. UR -GOAL Int ervention Tool ................................ ................................ ..............................  16 
7.0. Treatment Protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  19 
8.0 Data Handling and Statistical Considerations  ................................ ................................ ... 25 
9.0. Data Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  27 
10.0 Risks/B enefits  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  32 
11.0 Data Safety and Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ...............................  33 
12.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  35 
 
  
1.0 Background  
 
1.1. Acute myeloid leukemia  is a disease of the aging  
 
Nearly 60% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) diagnoses are in adults aged ≥  60 years .1 For fit 
older patients with AML (i.e., without significant comorbidities or disabilities), the standard 
first-line treatment consists of intensive inpatient chemotherapy. Intensive chemotherapy 
provides the best chance for durable remission, but it is associated wi th a high treatment -related 
mortality (60 -day mortality: 15 -20%).2,3 Intensive therapy is utilized in <1% of older patients 
with AML seen in the community oncology setting, due to various reasons such as distance to 
tertiary centers and need for hospitalizations.6 In the last decade, low -intensity o utpatient 
treatments (e.g., azacitidine, decitabine, venetoclax, ivosidenib, enasidenib) with reduced 
treatment -related mortality rates have become available.4-9 These treatments have permitted more 
older patients with AML, including those with comorbidities and disabilities, to receive 
leukemia -directed therapy.10 Despite these treatment options, 40-50% of diagnosed individuals 
do not undergo leukemia -directed therapies.11 
 
1.2. There is substantial heterogeneity in the health status of older patients, making treatment 
selection challenging  
 
In a prospective study of 74 older patients with AML receiving intensive induction therapy, up to 
69% had physical impairments, 42% had significant comorbidities, 29% had impaired cognition, 
and 40% were depressed .12 The effect these fitness -related factors have on disease progression, 
treatment tolerance, and response is not well und erstood, in part due to an underrepresentation of 
older patients in clinical trials . This is especially true regarding older patients with comorbidities 
and poor performance status.1 It is often challenging for oncologists to identify older patients 
with AML who are fit enough for intensive treatment, or fit enough to receive treatment at all. 
Practice patterns therefore vary.  
 
1.3. Older patients with AML often do not feel informed of their disease and treatment options.   
 
We have previously conducted a qualitative study of 15 older patients with AML and 15 
oncologists to better understand their experience during the initial AML diagnosis and treatment 
decision -making.13 Many  older patients did not feel that they were adequately informed of their 
treatment options (Patient quote: “The only option I had was going through this. It’s do or 
die.” )14 Patients and oncologists perceived fitness -related factors such as physical function, 
comorbidities, psychological health, and cognition as important for initial treatment decision -
making.13 Therefore, i ncorporating patient preferences and fitness -related factors into AML 
treatment decisions may facilitate communication and shared decision -making, leading to 
increased patient sa tisfaction.15-18 
 
1.4. Best worst scaling  to elicit patient preferences  
 
Best-worst scaling (BWS) is a technique that assesses the relative importance that patients place 
on different aspects or attributes of care. BWS consists of choice tasks, with a minimum of three 
attributes (e.g., daily activities, quality of life, location of treatment, survival), in which a patient  
is asked to indicate the best and worst options. The overall aim is to obtain a ranking of the 
attributes. This methodology is a reliable and valid technique that can help patients to consider 
the risks and benefits of treatment as well as to clarify and reveal their values to their 
oncologists, ultimately improving shared decision making.19,20 
 
1.5. Information preferences vary among patients, and accurate prognostic awareness is an 
important component of shared decision -making.  
 
In a multicenter prospective cohort study, we have found that older patients were less likely to 
prefer treatment success rates presented  in percentages. We also found that over half of patients 
with hematologic malignancies overestimate their prognosis compare d to their oncologists.21 
Among older adults with AML, >90% thought that they could be cured, compared to 30% of 
oncologists.22 Patients with poor prognostic awareness are more likely to opt for aggressive 
chemothera py23,24 and less likely to utilize palliative and hospice services at the end -of-life.25,26 
Older patients have lower awareness of their prognosis than younger adults.27-29 Therefore,  
prognostic discussion with oncologists can facilitate accurate prognostic awareness among older 
patients with AML (who are often incurable). We have shown that among older adults with 
cancer referred to geriatric oncology clinics at our center, almost 60%  stated that a frank 
conversation about their prognosis would be helpful to them.  
 
1.5. Caregivers play an essential role in decision -making  
 
Caregivers (generally family members or friends) play an integral role in the care of older 
adults,30, and many assist patients with treatment decision -making and participate in prognostic 
discussions and.31,32 Effective communicatio n between older patients and caregivers is associated 
with patient and caregiver satisfaction with care, treatment adherence, and improved health 
outcomes.33,34 In addition, clear communication between patients and caregivers can ensure that 
the needs of both are met .35 Studies have shown that dis agreements between patients and 
caregivers in the reporting of symptoms, description of treatment side effects and benefits, and 
estimates of prognosis are common.36-39 Disagreement between patient and c aregiver is 
associated with negative outcomes such as increased patient depression36 as well increased 
caregiver anxiety, distress, depression, and burden (i.e., the latter refers to stress experienced by 
caregivers from providing care for patients).39-42 
 
1.6. Overall goal  
 
Older adults with AML may benefit from help and support  in understanding their treatment 
options. This pilot study seeks to develop and adapt a patient -centered communication tool 
(University of Rochester -Geriatric Oncology Assessment for acute myeloid Leukemia or UR -
GOAL)  and then evaluate the usability and feasibility of this tool. The UR -GOAL tool will 
incorporate BWS  to elicit patient preferences as well as assessments of fitness and prognostic 
awareness. We hypothesize that this tool will be usable and feasible in this population. Once we 
have shown usability and feasibility, we will assess whether the UR -GOAL tool improves shared 
decision -making, communication , and prognostic awa reness.  Given that caregivers are closely 
involved in the care of older adults with cancer, we also seek to obtain feedback from caregivers. 
In addition, we will also obtain feedback from oncologists.  
2.0 Aim and Hypothesis  
 
2.1 Primary Aim  
 
Develop and ad apt a communication tool (UR -GOAL) for 10 older patients with AML.  
 
2.2 Secondary Aim  
 
Evaluate the usability and feasibility of the UR -GOAL communication tool among 15 older 
patients with AML , their caregivers, and oncologists.  
 
2.3 Exploratory Aim  
 
To assess change in priorities longitudinally among 15 older patients with AML.  
 
2.4 Overall Hypothesis  
 
The UR -GOAL will be usable and feasible.  
 
2.5 Usability  and feasibility  metrics  
  
The usability and feasibility of the UR -GOAL communication tool will be evaluated based on 
the following:  
 
a) Recruitment rates (percentage of patients who are approached and agree to enroll)  
b) System Usability Scale (score on 10 -item scale, ranging 0 -100; hig her score corresponds 
to greater usability)  
c) Semi -structured interviews  (audio -recorded/transcribed interviews exploring perceived 
usefulness, barriers, and facilitators)  
 
  
3.0. Study Design and Population  
 
3.1. Study Settings  
Wilmot Cancer Institute (WCI ), University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC)  and its 
affiliated centers  
 
3.2. Study Type  
Aim 1: Qualitative study  
 
Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim : Single -arm pilot study  
 
3.3. Study Population  
Aim 1: We will gather feedback from 20 older patients with AML. We anticipate thematic 
saturation will be reached with this number of participants based on past similar research .43,44 We 
will consent up to 30 patients to account for screen fail or withdrawal.  
 
Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim : We will recruit 15 older patients with AML (and their caregivers if 
available) to evaluat e the usability and feasibility. We will consent up to 20 pati ents to account 
for screen fail or withdrawal. We will also interview their oncologists.  
 
3.4. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  for Patients  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
Aim 1  
 Age ≥60 years (conventional definition of old er age in AML)   
 Established AML diagnosis  (within 1 year)  
 Able to provide informed consent  
 English -speaking  
 
Aim 2  
 Age ≥60 years (conventional definition of old er age in AML)   
 Newly diagnosed AML  
 Able to provide informed consent  
 English -speaking  
 
Exclusion criteria  
 None  
 
3.5. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  for Caregivers (Aim 2 only)  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 Selected by the patient when asked if there is a “ family member, partner, friend or 
caregiver [age 21 or older] with whom you discuss or who can be helpful in health -
related matters;” patients who cannot identify such a person (“caregiver”) can be eligible 
for the study. A caregiver need not be someone who lives with the patient or provides 
direct hands -on care. A caregiver can be any person who provides support (in any way) to 
the pati ent. 
 Able to provide informed consent  
 English -speaking  
 
3.6. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  for Oncologists (Aim 2 only)  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 A practicing oncologist  
 At least one of their patients are recruited to the study  
 English -speaking  
 
Exclusion cr iteria  
 None  
 
3.7. Number of Subjects  
 
Aim 1: We plan to enroll 20 patients in 6 months. Two previous qualitative studies conducted in 
this population showed a recruitment of 75 %-100%. Annually, from 2012 -2018, WCI saw 60 -70 
patients aged ≥60 years  with AML .  
 
Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim : We plan to enroll 15 patients (and their caregivers if available) in 
12 months. We will be recruiting patients from WCI and WCI -affiliated sites . The WCI inpatient 
malignant hematology service will also be screened. We plan recruit at least 3 oncologists and up 
to 15 oncologists (assuming 1 patient per oncologist is enrolled).  
 
3.8. Gender of Subjects  
 
The gender ratio of enrolled patients will be similar to that of the gender ratio of AML in older 
adults (approximate ly 1.2:1  male to female ratio).45 
 
3.9. Age of Subjects  
 
We will recruit patients with AML  aged 60 and above  (from date of consent, confirmed on 
electronic medical record) .  
 
3.10. Racial and Ethnic  Origin  
 
The Caucasian to Non -Caucasian ratio of individuals with AML is 5:1. In Rochester, New York, 
Whites, African Americans, and Hispanics make up approximately 65%, 30%, and 5% of the 
population (Race and Ethnicity in Rochester, NY statistical atlas).  As enrollment is limited to 
English -speaking patients, we predict a higher percentage of whites. The study does not restrict 
enrollment based on race or ethnicity.  
 
3.11. Vulnerable Subjects  
 
Recruitment will exclude vulnerable populations such as fetuse s, neonates, children, pregnant 
woman, prisoners, and institutionalized individuals. We will also exclude adults who are deemed 
to not have decisional capacity and those who lost their consent capacity during the study period, 
as per their treating oncolog ist.  
 
 
  
4.0 Recruitment and Consent  
 
Subjects will be enrolled at the URMC WCI . 
 
To ensure appropriate safety precautions when conducting in -person study procedures, the 
process for conducting in -person visits outlined in the Guidance for Human Subject Research 
will be followed.  
 
4.1 Identification of Study Subjects, Recruitment, and Consent Procedures  
 
Patients  will be identified by treating physicians at WCI and WCI -affiliated sites, nurses of these 
physicians, and the study coordinator. The study coor dinator will work closely with physicians 
and nurses to identify patients who have an established AML diagnosis (Aim 1) or have been 
newly diagnosed with AML (Aim 2). Given permission from the oncologist, the study team  will 
screen clinic schedules of thes e oncology providers. The study coordinator will contact the 
physician (or designee) and inform them of patient eligibility  and ask permission to approach the 
patient .  The principal investigator will address any eligibility questions that may arise.   
 
For in-person consent  with patients , below are the possible scenarios for obtaining consent.  
 
1. Physician/Study  Investigator  makes  the initial  contact  and provides  
consent  form , and patient signs consent with the physician on the same 
day: After confirming with  the physician (or  their  designee)  that a patient 
is a potential  candidate  for the study, the study staff will provide a 
consent form to the treating physician/study investigator  so he/she  can 
provide  it to the patient  during  an in-person  clinic  visit. The 
physician/study investigator will go over every detail of the study during 
the clinic visit with patient. If agrees , the patient will sign the consent 
form with the physician/study investigator during the same in -person  
visit.  
 
2. Study staff makes the initial contact and provides consent form , and 
patient signs consent with the study staff on the same day:  After 
confirming with  the physician (or  their designee)  that a patient is  a 
potential  candidate  for the study , the patient  will be provided  with an 
informed  consent  form  by the study staff when they come in for an in -
person clinic visit. The study staff will introduce the study to the patients 
and go over every detail of the study. If agrees , the patient will sign the 
consent form with the study staff during the same in- person visit with 
the study  staff.  
 
For verbal consent  with patients , below are the possible scenarios for obtaining consent.  
 
1. Physician/Study  Investigator  makes  the initial  contact,  study  staff follows  
up with the patient on the phone, and patient provides verbal consent on 
the phone:  After confirming with the physician (or their designee) that a 
patient is a potential candidate  for the study,  the physician/study  
investigator  confirms  with the patient that  he/she is willing  to speak  with 
the study  staff about  the study.  The study  staff will then call the patient 
via phone. The study coordinator will use the verbal consent script as a 
written aid and will go over every detail of the study with the patient to 
recruit them for the study. Study staff will sign and date it to confirm 
that he /she followed the script and the patient agrees to participate in the 
study. An information sheet summarizing the study and patient ' s 
involvem ent will be mailed /emailed to the patient for their  records.  
 
2. Physician/Study Investigator makes the initial contact and provides 
consent form, study staff follows up with the patient on the phone, and 
patient provides verbal consent on the phone:  After confirming with the 
physician (or their designee) that a patient is a potential candidate for the 
study, the study staff will provide a consent form to the treating 
physician/study investigator so he/she can provide it to the patient during 
an in -person clinic visit. If the patient is interested but does not want to 
consent on the same day, the patient will bring the consent form home. 
The study staff will then call the patient via phone. The study 
coordinator will use the verbal consent script as a written aid and will go 
over every detail of the study with the patient to recruit them for the 
study. Study staff will sign and date it to confirm that he /she followed 
the script and the patient agrees to participate in the study. An 
information sheet sum marizing the study and patient's involvement will 
be mailed /emailed to the patient for their  records.  
 
3. Study staff makes the initial contact and provides consent form, study 
staff follows up with the patient on the phone , and patient provides 
verbal consen t on the phone:  After confirming with the physician (or 
their designee) that a patient is willing to speak with the study 
coordinator about the study, the patient will be provided with an 
informed consent form by the study staff when they come in for an  in-
person  clinic  visit.  If the patient  is interested  but does not want  to consent 
on the same day, the patient will bring the consent form home. The study 
staff will then call the patient via phone. The study coordinator will use 
the verbal consent script as  a written aid and will go over every detail of 
the study with the patient to recruit them for the study. Study staff will 
sign and date it to confirm that he /she followed the script and the patient 
agrees to participate in the study. An information sheet summarizing the 
study and patient's involvement will be mailed /emailed to the patient for 
their records.  
 
For caregivers , we will obtain verbal consent. They will be provided with an information sheet.  
The patient will identify a caregiver and makes the in itial contact. After confirming with the 
patient that a caregiver is willing to speak with the study coordinator about the study, the study 
staff then call the caregiver  via phone. The study coordinator will use the verbal consent script as 
a written aid a nd will go over every detail of the study with the caregiver  to recruit them for the 
study. Study staff will sign and date it to confirm that he/she followed the script and the patient 
agrees to participate in the study. An information sheet summarizing the study and caregiver ’s 
involvement will be provided/ mailed/ emailed to the caregiver  for their records.  
 
For oncologists, we will obtain verbal consent and they will be provided with an information 
sheet.  
 
4.1.1. Informed Consent  
 
Informed consent will be obtained from the patient by the study investigators or 
coordinators. Consent documents will be signed by the patient and maintained in the 
patient record with copies provided to the patient. For verbal consent, documents will be 
maintained in the patient record with copies provided to the patient.  Verbal consent 
documents with caregivers and oncologists will also be maintained in separate r ecords with 
copies provided to caregivers and  oncologists.  
 
Waiver of documentation of consent:  
We are requesting for waiver of documentation of  consent as the research involves no more 
than minimal risk to the subjects and involves procedures for which written consent is 
normally not required outside the research context. The only record linking the subject and 
the research would be the consent d ocument and the principal risk would be potential harm 
resulting from a breach of confidentiality.  
 
Alteration of HIPAA Authorization:  
We are requesting an alter ation  of HIPAA authorization. We will provide an information 
sheet to patients who provided ver bal consent. Verbal consent will allow for reduction of 
in-person visits, thus maximizing the safety of both patients and study staff. Nonetheless, 
when possible and if we are able to coordinate study and clinic visits, we will obtain 
written informed cons ent. 
 
The study cannot be conducted  without the use of protected health information (PHI) as we 
have to link patient reported data with medical history collected on electronic medical 
record. W e have adequate plans to protect the PHI from improper use and disclosure. We 
will destroy identifiers after completion of the study for 7 years . We will not reuse or 
disclose the PHI to another person or entity other than the study investigators. The waiver 
will not adversely affect the privacy rights of the individu al and the research cannot be 
practicably done without access to the use of the PHI.  
 
We are requesting an alter ation  of HIPAA authorization for enrollment of caregivers and 
oncologists. We will provide an information sheet to these participants  who provided 
verbal consent. Verbal consent will allow for reduction of in -person visits, thus maximizing 
the safety of both patients and study staff.   We are not collecting protected health 
information (PHI) from Oncologists or Caregivers.  
  
4.1.2 . Human  Subject Protection  
 
The University of Rochester Research Subject Review Board Investigator Guidance policy 
will be used to ensure that ethical standards for human subjects are upheld.  
 
4.1.3. Participation  
 
Regulations at the state, federal, and institut ional level will be adhered to in regards to 
informed consent. Study participation is completely voluntary. After consenting, 
participants may withdraw from the study at any time for any reason, and they may do so 
without any repercussions. Participants ma y also be withdrawn by study personnel if it is 
determined that it is not favorable for the patient. All information regarding consent and 
withdrawal will be kept confidential.  
 
 4.1.4. Duration  
 
Aim 1: The qualitative section of this study involves inter viewing consented patients  for 
30-60 minutes. They will watch a n education video and use the UR -GOAL tool and 
feedback can be provided during the interview. Study participants will be interviewed by 
the study team  either in -person  (in a private space)  or via phone/ zoom . Interviews will be 
audio -recorded, uploaded to Box, and subsequently deleted from the audio -recorder.   
 
Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim : After completing  baseline measures , watching an education 
video,  and completing the UR-GOAL tool, study participants will participate in a semi -
structured interview with the stud y team  for 30 -60 minutes either in -person or via 
phone/zoom . The post -intervention measures will be completed within 1-2 week s of the 
patient’s encounter with the primary oncologist  either in -person or via phone/ zoom . 
Caregivers will complete baseline measures and watch an education video. They will 
participate in a separate semi -structured interview with the study team for 30 -60 minutes 
either in -person or via phone/zoom. The post -intervention measures will be completed 
within 1 -2 weeks of the patient’s encounter with the primary oncologist either in -person 
or via phone/zoom. After the study is completed, participant data will be maintained for 7 
years at URMC and will be kept in a pa ssword -protected database.  
 
Oncologist will also complete the post -intervention assessments (surveys) within 1 -2 
weeks of the patients encounter. Oncologists will participate in a semi -structured 
interview with the study team for 30 -60 minutes either in -person or via phone/zoom ., 
after at least one of their patients have completed the tool. The semi -structured interviews 
with oncologists will be conducted at any time during the study.  After the study is 
completed, participant data will be maintained for 7 years at URMC and will be kept in a 
password -protected database.   
5.0 Registration  
 
If patient s, caregivers , and oncologists  meet  eligibility criteria and ha ve provided informed 
conse nt, the study personnel will enter the following information in to the  OnCore Database:  
 
5.1. Registration Information  for Patients  
5.1.1 Site 
5.1.2 Most recent IRB approval date  
5.1.3 Name of person registering study participant  
5.1.4 Eligibility verification  
5.1.5 Verification that consent form has been signed and who signed by (patient and/or 
health care proxy) and date signed  
5.1.6 Treatment facility ( WCI vs. Other ) 
5.1.7 Participant’s identification  
 5.1.7.a First and last names  
 5.1.7.b Birth date (MM/DD/ YEAR ) 
 5.1.7.c  Gender  
 5.1.7.d  Race  
 5.1.7.e  Five-digit zip code  
 5.1.7.f  Medical Record Number  
 5.1.7.g   Ethnicity  
 5.1.7.h  Patient’s preferred and alternate phone numbers  (and email address if 
patients consent to be contacted via email)  
 5.1.7.i Date of baseline v isit 
 
5.2. Registration Information  for Caregivers  
 
5.2.1 Participant’s identification  
 5.2.1.a First and last names  
 5.2.1.b Birth date (MM/DD/ YEAR ) 
 5.2.1.c Gender  
 5.2.1.d Race  
 5.2.1.e Five-digit zip code  
 5.2.1.f   Ethnicity  
 5.2.1.g Caregiver ’s preferred and alternate phone numbers (and email address if 
patients consent to be contacted via email)  
 
5.3. Registration Information for Oncologists  
 
5.3.1 Participant’s identification  
  5.3.1.a First and last names  
  5.3.1.b    Birth date (MM/DD/YEAR)  
  5.3.1.c    Gender  
  5.3.1.d    Race  
  5.3.1.e    Five -digit zip code  
  5.3.1.f    Ethnicity  
5.4. Initial Assessment  
 
In Aim 1, s tudy patients  will complete demographics and a 30-60 minute s interview in 
which they will watch a n education video and complete the UR -GOAL tool and provide 
feedback. Patients in Aim 2 will complete baseline assessm ents with the stu dy 
coordinator, watch an education video, and complete the UR -GOAL tool. Caregivers in 
Aim 2 will complete baseline assessm ents with the study coordinator and watch an 
education video.  
 
  
6.0. UR -GOAL Intervention Tool  
 
The proposed tool consists of three components: BWS  to elicit patient preferences,  fitness 
assessment, and prognostic awareness assessment (Figure 1). In addition, an education video will 
also be included. The education tool provides information on the diagnosis, epidemiology, 
symptoms, risk factors, and prognosis of AML, as well as goals of AML treatment and treatment 
approaches.  
 
Figure 1: Components of the UR -GOAL communication tool  
 
 
 
6.1.Best-worst scaling  
 
BWS consists of 10 choice tasks, with 4 attributes per task. Patients will be presented with 4 
attributes at a time, in which a  patient is asked to rank the most and least important attribute 
when choosing a treatment ( Figure 2 ). This process then repeats 10 times until all attributes are 
evaluated. Based on our qualitative study of older patients with AML and oncologists,43 we 
selected eight attributes that are important in treatment decision making. At completion, a 
summary containing the ranking of the attributes will be provided to the patient and oncologist. 
The patient summar y also includes a question prompt list (based on their top four attributes).  
 
Figure 2: Best-Worst  Scaling showing 4 options  
 

 
 
 
6.2. F itness Assessment:   
 
We will include assessments  (e.g., physical function, nutritional status ; Table 1)  that evaluate 
fitness and are important in decision -making for both patient and oncologist.13 At completion, a 
summary containing the patient’s fitness level will  be provided to the oncologists.  
 
Table 1: Questionnaires that will be included in the tool  
Fitness domain  Assessments  
Physical function  Activities of daily living, instrumental 
activities of daily living, number of falls, 
Short Physical Performance Battery  
Nutritional status  Weight loss in the prior 6 months  
 
Comorbidity  Hearing and eyesight  
Psychological health  Geriatric Depre ssion s cale 
Social support  Patient’s social support  
Living situation  
Medications  Number of medications  
Cognition  Mini -Cog 
 
 
6.3. P rognostic Awareness Assessment:   
 

We will incorporate assessment of prognostic awareness (i.e., chance of cure and survival 
estimates, their information preference (i.e., do they prefer treatment success rate presented in 
percentages, words, fractions, or they wanted to hear about a previous patient that the physician 
treated), and whether conversation about prognosis would be helpful to them. At completion, a 
summary contacting this information will be provided to the oncologists.  
 
As described above, the generated summaries are tailored and intended to improve 
communication between the patient and oncologist  during the decision -making process.  
 
 
6.4. Education Video  
 
As the overall goal of the study is to improve patient -physician comm unication, we created an 
education video for patients. The video contains basic information about the diagnosis, 
epidemiology, symptoms, risk factors, and prognosis of AML, as well as goals of AML 
treatment and treatment approaches. We created this video b ecause of two main reasons: 1) Our 
preliminary data suggest that many older patients may not understand the AML diagnosis and 
treatment approaches given the acuity, 2) The video provides an overview of AML which will 
help patients complete the tool subsequ ently  (e.g., the tool will ask patients if they are willing 
trade quality of life for higher remission, and the education video provides information on what 
remission means in the context of the different treatments). The video is not part of standard of 
care. We developed this video based on feedback from the leukemia and bone marrow transplant 
and geriatric oncology groups at WCI.  
The video is available for view using this link: 
https://rochester.box.com/s/m25aidirevgzaeumgvnpxmd3mck1lxhy    
7.0. Treatment Protocol  
 
7.1. Study Outline  
 
We will screen and consent eligible patients of treating physicians at WCI and WCI -affiliated 
centers.   
 
For Aim 1, the study team will conduct an i n-person or zoom/phone interview for 30 -60 minutes. 
First, we will explain the rationale of the study. Second, patients will use the communication 
tool. Third, we will conduct an interview to elicit feedback about the communication tool. This 
feedback will  be used to adapt the tool for Aim 2.  
 
For Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim (Figure 3) , the study subject will complete  baseline measures  
and utilize the UR -GOAL communication tool  either in-person or via zoom/phone. Following 
this, patients  will complete the usability testing form . The patient (and caregiver if available) will 
have a visit with their primary oncologist and the clinical encounter will be audio -recorded. The 
study staff will provide an audio recorder to the physician for in -person o r phone visits, and the 
zoom recording feature will be used for zoom visits. All parties present for recorded visits, 
including: enrolled patients, any accompanying caregivers, family or friends, the oncologist, and 
any other physicians or health care prov iders not participating in the study will be fully aware 
that the conversation is being audio -recorded before any recording begins, in addition to the prior 
written consent of enrolled patients. Patients, caregivers and oncology physicians may receive 
copies of these recordings at their request.  
 
The post -intervention measures , including the qualitative interviews,  for patients and caregivers 
will be completed within 1 -2 weeks of the patient’s encounter with the primary oncologist either 
in-person or via ph one/zoom. The interviews will be conducted separately. Patients will 
participate  in a semi -structured interview for 30 -60 minutes during which feedback will be 
elicited. Enrolled caregivers will also participate in a separate semi -structured interview for 30-
60 minutes during which feedback will be elicited.  Oncologist will also complete the post -
intervention asse ssments (surveys) within 1 -2 weeks of the patients encounter.  The semi -
structured interviews with oncologists will be conducted at any time during the study, after at 
least one of their patients have completed the study procedures.  
 
To assess priorities longitudinally, patients will complete the BWS on the tool at 1 , 2, 3, and 6 
months.   
Figure 3: Study Procedures  (Aim 2  and Exploratory Aim ) 
 
 
7.2. Assessments of the Participants  
 
Demographic, clinical,  and cancer characteristics will be collected .  
 
7.2.1. Demographics – Patient , Caregiver , and Oncologist  
 
Patient  and caregiver ’s age, date of birth, race, ethnicity, gender, highest level of education 
achieved, employment status, and marital status. This will only be collected at baseline.  
 
Oncologist’s name,  date of birth,  race, five-digit zip code, ethnicity, and gender will be collected.  
 
7.2.2. Clinical and Cancer Characteristics  - Patient  
 
ECOG performance status, d iagnosis , prior hematologic malignancies, cytogenetic risk group 
and treatment regimen will be abstracted from the medical records . This information  will only be 
collected at baseline.  
 
7.2.3 . Measures   
 
Measures will be collected via the UR -GOAL tool, done in person,  or mailed to the participants.  
 
 7.2.2.1. Physical Function  and Functional Status  (Baseline Only  - Patient ) 
 
Short Physical Performance Battery (S PPB; baseline only) : The SPPB is an objective 
physical assessment evaluating lower extremity physical function. It is comprised of a 
four-meter walk, repeated chair stands and a balance test. Impairment on SPPB testing 
has been shown to be predictive of short -term mortality and nursing home admission in 
community -dwelling older adults.46 If in-person SPPB cannot be performed, we will 

perform the virtual SPPB via the phone/zoom, which evaluates the parti cipants’ 
perceived ability to perform above tests (walking, repeated chair stands, and balance).47  
 
Activities of daily living (ADL):  ADLs are measures of self -care. ADL independence will 
be assessed using the Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living, 
commonly referred to as the Katz ADL. The Katz ADL is the most appropriate 
instrument to assess functional status as a me asurement of the client’s ability to perform 
activities of daily living independently. Clinicians typically use the tool to detect  
problems in performing activities of daily living and to plan care accordingly. The Index 
ranks adequacy of performance in the six functions of bathing, dressing, toileting, 
transferring, continence, and feeding. Clients are scored yes/no for independence  in each 
of the six functions. A score of 6 indicates full function, 4 indicates moderate 
impairment, and 2 or less indicates severe functional impairment.48 
 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL): Self-reported functional status will be 
assessed using the IADL subscale of the Multidimensional  Functional Assessment 
Questionnaire: Older American Resources and Services (OARS). The IADL subscale 
consists of seven questions rated on a three -point Likert scale. It measures the degree to 
which an activity can be performed independently.49 
 
Fall History:  A self -reported h istory of falls in the past three months will be recorded. A 
history of a recent fall has been demonstrated to be independently predictive of increased 
risk for chemotherapy toxicity in older cancer patients .50 
 
 7.2.2.2 . Nutritional Status  (Baseline Only  - Patient ) 
 
Screening s for nutritional deficit will be performed with body mass index (BMI) 
evaluation and self -reported weight loss .  
 
7.2.2.3 . Comorbidity  (Baseline Only  - Patient and Caregiver ) 
 
OARS Comorbidity: Patients  and caregivers  report coexisting illnesses and indicate the 
degree to which these comorbidities interfere with their daily activities.51 
  
Patients  and caregivers  also self-report their perceived levels of eyesight and hearing.  
 
7.2.2.4 . Psychological Health  (Baseline and Post -Intervention  – Patient and Caregiver ) 
 
General Anxiety Disorder -7: A 7-item screening tool for anxiety.52  
 
Geriatric Depression Scale -15: A 15-item valid and reliable screening tool for depression 
in older adults.53 This will be used for patients.  
 
Patient Health Questionnaire -2 (PHQ -2): A 2 -item valid and reliable screening tool 
depression in the general populati on.54 This will be used for caregivers.  
 
7.2.2.5 . Social Support  (Baseline Only  - Patient ) 
 
OARS Medical Social Support: A 13 -item questionnaire for patients regarding persons 
involved in medical social support as well as perception of overall support.51,55  
 
Patients  also self-report th eir living situation and their main social support.  
 
7.2.2.6 . Medications  (Baseline Only  - Patient ) 
 
Medication s: We will record all prescription and non -prescription medications, dosage 
and frequencies from the medical records. Polypharmacy is defined as  the use of 5 or 
more medications.  
 
7.2.2.7. Cognition  (Baseline Only  - Patient ) 
 
Mini -Cog (baseline only): A 3-item screening tool for cognitive impairment in older 
adults.56  
 
7.2.2. 8. Communication Self -Efficacy  (Baseline and Po st-intervention  – Patient and 
Caregiver ) 
 
Perceived Efficacy in Patient -Physician Interactions (PEPPI): A valid and reliable 
assessment of perceived self -efficacy of older patients interacting with physicians.57 
 
Perceived Efficacy in Caregiver -Physician Interactions (PECPI): A valid and reliable 
assessment of perceived self -efficacy of caregivers interacting with physicians.58  
 
7.2.2. 9. Patient -Centered Communication  (Post -Intervention Only  – Patient and 
Caregiver ) 
 
Patient -Centered Communication in Cancer Care (PCC -Ca-36): A questionnaire 
assessing patient -centered communication in six domains: exchanging information, 
making decisions, fostering healing relationships, enabling patient self -management, 
managing uncertainty, and responding to emotions.59We will adapt the PCC -Ca-6 for 
caregivers.  
 
7.2.2. 10. Shared Decision -Making  (Post -Intervention Only  – Patient , Caregiver,  and 
Physician ) 
 
Shared Decision -Making Questionnaire (SDM -Q-9): A 9-item reliable questionnaire 
assessing patient satisfaction with the medical decision -making process.60 
 
Shared Decision -Making Questionnaire (SDM -Q-Doc): A 9-item reliable questionnaire 
assessing physician satisfaction with the medical decision -making process.61  
 
CollaboRATE Measure:  A 3-item questionnaire assessing patient, caregiver, and 
physi cian shared decision -making .62 
  
Preparation for Decision Making Scale:  A 10 -item questionnaire assessing patients’ and 
caregivers’ perception of how useful the communication tool is in preparing them to 
communicate with their physician at a consultation focused on making a health 
decision.63 
 
7.2.2.11 . Disease Knowledge (Baseline and Post -intervention  – Patient and Caregiver ) 
 
Disease  Knowledge : A 14 -item questionnaire assessing patients  and caregivers ’ 
understanding of AML.  
 
7.2.2.12. Information and Decision -Making Preferences ( Baseline  Only  – Patient and 
Caregiver ) 
 
Information Preferences : A questionnaire assessing patient  and caregiver  preferences 
regarding treatme nt information.  
 
Decision -Making Preferences:  The Control Preference Scale assess patient and 
caregivers’ preferred roles in treatment decisions.64 
 
7.2.2.13. Disease Understanding (Patient, Caregiver, and Physician)  
 
Disease Understanding – Patient (baseline and post -intervention): A questionnaire 
assessing patient’s prognostic understanding of illness and preferences regarding life 
expectancy discussions.  
 
Disease Understanding – Caregiver (baseline and post -interven tion): A questionnaire 
assessing caregiver’s prognostic understanding of illness and preferences regarding life 
expectancy discussions.  
 
Disease Understanding – Physician (post -intervention only): A physician -facing 
questionnaire assessing patient prognos is.  
 
7.2.2.14 Decisional conflict and regret (post -intervention for decisional conflict and 1, 2, 
3, and 6 month for decisional regret at)  
 
Decisional conflict scale  – A questionnaires that measures personal perceptions of 
uncertainty in choosing options,  modifiable factors contributing to uncertainty, and 
effective decision making .65 
 
Decisional regret  scale – A questionnaire that measures  distress or remorse after a 
healthcar e decision.66 
 
Was it worth it questionnaire – A questionnaires that assesses satisfaction with decision 
made.67 
 
7.2.2.15 Health -related quality of l ife (Post -Intervention and 1, 2, 3, and 6 month)  
 
EQ-5D-5L: A health -related quality of life questionnaire that consists of five dimensions: 
mobility, se lf-care, usual activities, pain/ discomfort, and anxiety/depression. Each 
dimension has 5 levels: no problems, slight problems, moderate problems, severe 
problems and extreme problems. The patient is asked to indicate his/her health state by 
ticking the box next to the most appropriate statement in each of the five dimensions. 
This decision results in a 1 -digit number that expresses the level selected for that 
dimension. The digits for the five dimensions can be combined into a 5 -digit number that 
describes the patient’s health state.68 
 
7.2.2. 16. Usability  (Post -Intervention Only)  
 
Usability questions – Patient and Oncologist : Questions to assess usability of the tool 
and/or summary.  
  
7.2.2. 17. Environmental Mastery (Baseline and Post -Intervention - Caregiver)  
 
Ryff’s Environmental Mastery: A 7-item questionnaire measuring whether the respondent 
makes effective use of opportunities and has a sense of mastery in managing 
environmental factors and activities, including managing everyday affairs and creating 
situations to benefit personal needs.70  
  
8.0 Data Handling and Statistical Considerations  
 
8.1. Data Handling  
 
8.1.1.  The same protocols and procedures for data quality and control that are readily 
used for the NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP) Research Base 
protocols currently being overseen by our office (which have accrued over 1,000 patients 
in the prev ious year) will be used for this study. Patients will fill out forms generated 
from RedCap and this information will be entered into RedCap (Section 9.5). Study 
personnel will perform SPPB and the scores will be entered into RedCap.    
 
8.1.2.  It is antici pated that allowing for the appropriate number of evaluable participants 
and by checking self -report measures for completeness, we will have a full complement 
of data. Every effort will be made to encourage and facilitate participants’ completion of 
all qu estionnaires and all items on the questionnaires for each study assessment.  In the 
event that missing data occur, every effort will be made to contact participants via phone 
and obtain the data or to find out why the questionnaires or items are missing.  The 
reasons for missing data will be documented. Missing questionnaire items will be treated 
in accordance with the documented scoring procedures. Although it is very unlikely that 
missing values will not occur randomly, we will confirm their randomness.  Multiple 
imputation71 will be applied to (1) give more accurate statistical tests and standard errors 
for key treatment effect parameters and to (2) give some indication of the sensitivity of 
the analyses to missing data.  The causes and pattern of the missing data will be 
examined and taken into consideration in the design of future studies.  
 
8.1.3. Data collected via the UR -GOAL communication tool will only be accessed by the 
following: 1) The research team and 2) The treating physician and their designee .  
 
 
8.2. Data Analys is and Sample Size:  
 
8.2.1. Analysis Plan for Aim 1  
 
We anticipate thematic saturation will be reached with this number of participants (N= 20) 
based on past similar research.43,44 We will conduct and audio -record all interviews, 
which will be transcribed by a professi onal transcription service. We will analyze  the 
qualitative data using grounded theory and constant comparative methods, with coding to 
structure data into categories and create groups according to the broader issues or 
themes.72 An audit trail of the coding activity will be kept. We will critically examine the 
data collection and analysis process and reach consensus on key themes from patient 
feedback to be used to adapt the intervention in preparation for Aim 2.  
 
8.2.2.  Analysis Plan for Aim 2  
 
We anticipate that our proposed sample size will be sufficient based on prior research73 
and also published g uidance on usability study.74,75 The feasibility of the UR -GOAL tool 
will be evaluated based on the percentage of patients consented to th e study ultimately 
completing all study components.  
 
Recruitment rate (percentage of patients who are approached and agree to enroll) will 
also be described.  Other feasibility metrics include retention rate (percentage of patients 
who were enrolled and com pleted the intervention and assessments).  The usability of the 
UR-GOAL tool will be evaluated using the SUS score.  
 
We will consider the UR -GOAL study feasible if >50% of consented patients ultimately 
complete all study components. We chose 50% based on our prior behavioral 
intervention study in this population and published studies that utilize similar tools (e.g., 
value elicitation tool) .73,76,77 We will use descriptive stati stics to describe the measures. If 
we do not meet our usability and feasibility goals , we will further adapt the study and 
tool. 
 
For other measures, these are being collected in preparation for a larger clinical trial in 
the future. As exploratory analyses, paired t -tests or McNemar’s test will be used to 
evaluate change in measures from baseline to post -intervention. Linear mixed models 
will be used to assess change in measures over several time points.  
  
Qualitative data from the semi -structured  interviews will be analyzed as per Aim 1. 
Interviews will be conducted, audio -recorded, and transcribed. We will analyze  the 
qualitative data using grounded theory and constant comparative methods, with coding to 
structure data into categories and create groups according to the broader issues or 
themes.72 An audit trail of the coding activity will be kept.  We will critically examine the 
data collection and analysis process and reach consensus on key themes from patient 
feedback to be used to further adapt the tool.  
 
For audio -recorded clinic encounters, we will use published shared decision -making 
coding schemes  to assess quality of shared decision making .78,79 Coders  will undergo 
extensive training and supervision by study investigators.    
9.0. Data Management   
 
9.1. Data Collection Table   
 
9.1.1. Aim 1  
  Eligibility 
and Consent 
Form  Assessment  
Informed Consent  X   
Demographics   X 
Clinical and Cancer Characteristics   X 
Qualitative Interview   X 
Short Physical Performance 
Battery/Virtual Short Physical 
Performance Battery, Activities of Daily 
Living, Instrumental Activities of Daily 
Living, Fall History  
 
   X 
Nutritional Status  
  X 
Comorbidity   X 
Geriatric Depression Scale -15 (GDS -15), 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7 (GAD -7)   X 
Social Support   X 
Medications   X 
Mini -Cog  X 
Information and Decision -Making 
Preferences   X 
Disease Understanding - Patient   X 
 
  
9.1.2. Aim 2 
a) Patients  
  SCHEDULE OF DATA COLLECTION  
  Eligibility and 
Consent Form  Baseline 
Assessment 
(week 0)  Post-intervention 
Assessment (week 1 -
2) Month 1, 2, 3, and 
6 
Informed Consent  X    
Demographics  X   
Clinical and Cancer Characteristics   X   
Qualitative Interview    X  
Short Physical Performance 
Battery/Virtual Short Physical 
Performance Battery, Activities of 
Daily Living, Instrumental 
Activities of Daily Living, Fall 
History  
 
  X   
Nutritional Status  
  X   
Comorbidity   X   
Geriatric Depression Scale -15 
(GDS -15), 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7 
(GAD -7)  X X  
Social Support   X   
Medications   X   
Mini -Cog  X   
Perceived Efficacy in Patient -
Physician Interactions (PEPPI)   X X  
Patient -Centered Communication 
in Cancer Care ( PCC -Ca-36)   X  
Shared Decision -Making (SDM -Q-
9)a   X  
CollaboRATE Measure    X  
Preparation for Decision Making 
Scale    X  
Patient Disease Knowledge   X X  
Information and Decision -Making 
Preferences - Patient   X   
Disease Understanding - Patient   X X  
Decisional  Conflict  Scale    X  
Decisional Regret  Scale and Was it 
Worth It Questionnaire     X 
BWS component only of the tool     X 
EQ-5D-5L   X X 
Usability (Usability questions)    X  
 
b) Caregivers  
  SCHEDULE OF DATA COLLECTION  
  Eligibility 
and Consent 
Form  Baseline 
Assessment 
(week 0)  Post-
intervention 
Assessment 
(week 1-2) 
Informed Consent  X     
Demographics   X   
Qualitative Interview    X 
Comorbidity   X  
Patient Health Questionnaire -2 (PHQ -2), 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7 (GAD -7)   X X 
Perceived Efficacy in Caregiver -Physician 
Interactions (PECPI)     X X 
Patient -Centered Commun ication in 
Cancer Care (PCC -Ca-6) – adapted 
caregiver version    X 
Ryff’s Environmental Mastery   X X 
CollaboRATE Measure    X 
Preparation for Decision Making Scale    X 
Caregiver Disease Knowledge   X X 
Information  and Decision -Making  
Preferences – Caregiver    X  
Disease Understanding – Caregiver   X X 
 
c) Oncologists  
  SCHEDULE OF DATA COLLECTION  
  Eligibility 
and Consent 
Form  Baseline 
Assessment 
(week 0)  Post-intervention 
Assessment (week 
1-2) 
Informed Consent  X     
Demographics   X  
Shared Decision -Making (SQM -Q-Doc, 
physician version)    X 
Disease Understanding – Physician    X 
Usability questions    X 
Qualitative Interview    After at least 1 
patient per 
oncologist 
completed study 
procedures, can be 
done at any point 
during the study  
 
9.2. All hardcopy research records will be stored onsite in the URMC, in locked research files at 
the WCI .  The Cancer Center is secured with electronic key cards. Offices within the Cancer 
Center are again secured by key and data is kept in locked file cabinets. Electronic research 
records are stored on the URMC’s password secured and firewall protected networks. These are 
the same  methods of security used for patient medical records.  For audio -recordings, these will 
be uploaded to Box within a week of the interview and deleted from the audio -recorded. All 
study data will be kept for a period of 7 years after the study and all repor ts and publications are 
complete.  
 
9.3. All data collected for the current study will be used in post hoc analyses as appropriate. Data 
will not be used for future studies without prior consent of the patient.  The patient’s individual 
research record wil l not be shared with their treating physician, unless they provide consent or 
the patient’s treating physician is a study physician, in which case they will have access to study 
data as a study co -investigator. Overall study results will be presented to pa rticipants, faculty and 
staff at the URMC after completion of the study. Study results will be presented at professional 
meetings and published.  
 
9.4. The study coordinator will assign a numerical study ID to each participant once they have 
signed the cons ent form  (chronologically based on the data they signed consent i.e., 001, 002, 
003…) . All study forms and questionnaires will use this number and the participant’s first, 
middle, and last initials as identifiers, to ensure data integrity.  Other identifyi ng information will 
not exist on these forms. A complete list of study participants with study ID, name, and contact 
information will be maintained separately. This linkage information will only be accessible to the 
study coordinator, study investigators, and the individuals responsible for maintaining the 
database.   
 
9.5. Additionally, data on the socio -demographics, clinical, and cancer and treatment 
characteristics will be collected and managed by the research teams at URMC using REDCap 
electronic data capture tools hosted at URMC.80 We will also evaluate the medical records for 
clinical characteristics and outcomes, and utilize REDCap to collect and manage this 
information.  
 
9.5a. URMC provides the following information on the REDCap program: “ Vanderbilt 
University, in collaboration with a consortium of institutional partners, has developed a 
software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of 
research and clinical trial data, called REDCap (Res earch Electronic Data Capture). The 
REDCap system is a secure, web -based application that is flexible enough to be used for a 
variety of types of research. It provides an intuitive interface for users to enter data and real 
time validation rules (with auto mated data type and range checks) at the time of data entry. 
REDCap offers easy data manipulation with audit trails and functionality for reporting, 
monitoring and querying patient records, as well as an automated export mechanism to 
common statistical pac kages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). Through the REDCap 
Consortium, Vanderbilt has disseminated REDCap for use around the world. Currently, 
over 240 academic and non -profit consortium partners on six continents with over 26,000 
research end -users use REDCap .81  
 
9.5b. According to the Clinical and Translational Science Institute (CTSI), REDCap is 
supported with the following means. “ The CTSI Informatics Core , a unit of the SMD 
Academic Information Technology (AIT) Group, will serve as a central facilitator for data 
processing and management.   REDCap data collection projects rely on a thorough study -
specific data dictionary defined in an i terative self -documenting process by all members of 
the research team, with planning assistance from the AIT-CTSI Informatics Core . The 
iterative development and testing process results in a well -planned data collection strategy 
for individual studies.”72  
 
9.5c. The CTSI states that regarding security, “ REDCap servers are housed in a local 
data center at the University of Rochester and all web -based information transmission is 
encrypted. REDCap was developed in a manne r consistent with HIPAA security 
requirements and is recommended to University of Rochester researchers by the URMC 
Research Privacy Officer and Office for Human Subject Protection.81  
 
  
10.0 Risks/Benefits   
 
10.1. Risks  
 
There is potential loss of confidentially  associated with parti cipation in the proposed study.  In 
terms of loss of confidentiality, quantitative data from participants will need to be stored. Though 
rigorous and well -tested data safety and security guidelines will be observed, there is still a 
chance that confidentiality could be breached and sensitive medical information could become 
known to persons outsid e the research team.  
 
10.2. Benefits  
 
There are no anticipated benefits to the partic ipants.  
 
10.3 Payments and Costs  
Patients  participating  in the first aim  will be paid $30 and those participating in the second aim 
will be paid $50 for their participatio n in the form of gift cards. For Aim 1, participants  will 
receive the gift cards immediately following the interviews. For Aim 2, participants  will be paid 
for completion of the post -intervention assessment.  Oncologists will not be reimbursed for their 
participation.  
 
  
11.0 Data Safety  and Monitoring   
 
Only adverse events (AEs) related to the study intervention or procedures will be reported. In 
other words, AEs related to cancer treatment will not be reported.  
 
11.1. Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
 
11.1.1.  Adverse events will be reported using the URCC Adverse Event form and/or as 
required by the Cancer Center Clinical Trials Office.   
 
 
11.1.2.  Adverse events will be reported in accordance with the following guidelines:  
 
11.1.3.  Adverse event repor ts will be submitted in one of the following ways:  
(1) By email: (pdf)   
(2) By mail:   
(3) By fax:   
 
11.1.4.  An unexpected adverse event is defined as any adverse experience, the specificity 
or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information. This is a minimal risk 
study as both exercise and mobile app -driven interventions have been shown to improv e 
outcomes in community -dwelling older adults.   
11.1.5.  A serious event refers to any event in which the outcome results in any of the 
following: death, a life -threatening adverse experience, inpatient hospitalization or 
prolongation of existing hospitali zation, a persistent or significant disability, incapacity, 
or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in 
death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse 
drug experience whe n, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize 
the participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition. We anticipate that any serious events will be related to 
standard of care cancer treatments and not due to the intervention. We will not collect 
adverse events related to cancer treatments.  

11.1.6.  Adverse events will be reported in accordance with institutional policies 
(University of Rochester, Research Subject Review Boa rd, local IRB, URCC CCOP, 
CTO, and DSMB) as per their requirements.  
11.2. Data Safety Monitoring  
11.2.1.  All adverse events requiring reporting will be submitted to the current Project 
Coordinator as described in Section 11.1. Serious adverse event report s will be forwarded 
to the study chair and the Data Safety and Monitoring Committee (DSMC). Adverse 
events are entered into a protocol -specific spreadsheet.   
11.2.2.  Adverse event rates are monitored utilizing the spreadsheet. If a serious adverse 
event i s reported frequently, the study chair will conduct a detailed review. The DSMC 
Committee Chair will be notified and will determine if further action is required.  
11.2.3.  The Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will review study progress and 
cumulative  reports of adverse events every year and as needed. An overall assessment of 
accrual and adverse events will enable the committee members to assess whether 
significant benefits or risks are occurring that would warrant study closure.   
 
 
  
 
12.0 Reference s 
 
1. Ludmir EB, Mainwaring W, Lin TA, et al. Factors Associated With Age Disparities Among 
Cancer Clinical Trial Participants. JAMA Oncol . Jun 3 2019;doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2055  
2. Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hills RK, et al. A comparison of clofarabine with ara -C, each in 
combination with daunorubicin as induction treatment in older patients with acute myeloid 
leukaemia. Leukemia . 2017//02/02 2017;31(2):310 -317. doi:10.1038/leu.2016.225  
3. Lancet JE, Uy GL, Cortes JE, et al. Final results of a phase III randomized trial of CPX -351 
versus 7+3 in older patients with newly diagnosed high risk (secondary) AML. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology . 2016//05/05 -20 2016;34(15_suppl):7000 -7000. 
doi:10.1 200/JCO.2016.34.15_suppl.7000  
4. Kantarjian HM, Thomas XG, Dmoszynska A, et al. Multicenter, randomized, open -label, 
phase III trial of decitabine versus patient choice, with physician advice, of either supportive 
care or low -dose cytarabine for the treatm ent of older patients with newly diagnosed acute 
myeloid leukemia. Journal of Clinical Oncology: Official Journal of the American Society of 
Clinical Oncology . 2012//07/07 -20 2012;30(21):2670 -2677. doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.38.9429  
5. Juliusson G, Lazarevic V, Hörstedt A -S, Hagberg O, Höglund M. Acute myeloid leukemia 
in the real world: why population -based registries are needed. Blood . 2012//04/04 -26 
2012;119(17):3890 -3899. doi:10.1182/blood -2011 -12-379008  
6. Khan C, Pathe N, Fazal S, Lister J, Rossetti JM. Aza citidine in the management of patients 
with myelodysplastic syndromes. Ther Adv Hematol . Dec 2012;3(6):355 -73. 
doi:10.1177/2040620712464882  
7. DiNardo CD, Pratz K, Pullarkat V, et al. Venetoclax combined with decitabine or 
azacitidine in treatment -naive, e lderly patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood . Jan 3 
2019;133(1):7 -17. doi:10.1182/blood -2018 -08-868752  
8. Stein EM, DiNardo CD, Pollyea DA, et al. Enasidenib in mutant IDH2 relapsed or 
refractory acute myeloid leukemia. Blood . Aug 10 2017;130(6):722 -731. doi:10.1182/blood -
2017 -04-779405  
9. DiNardo CD, Pratz KW, Letai A, et al. Safety and preliminary efficacy of venetoclax with 
decitabine or azacitidine in elderly patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukaemia: 
a non -randomi sed, open -label, phase 1b study. Lancet Oncol . Feb 2018;19(2):216 -228. 
doi:10.1016/s1470 -2045(18)30010 -x 
10. Shahrokni A, Loh KP, Wood WA. Toward Modernization of Geriatric Oncology by Digital 
Health Technologies. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book . Mar 2020;40:1 -7. doi:10.1200/edbk_279505  
11. Medeiros BC, Satram -Hoang S, Momin F, Parisi M. Real -World Treatment Patterns and 
Comparative Effectiveness Among a Population of Elderly Patients with Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia (AML). Blood . 2018;132(Supplement 1):835 -835. doi :10.1182/blood -2018 -99-111267  
12. Klepin HD, Geiger AM, Tooze JA, et al. Geriatric assessment predicts survival for older 
adults receiving induction chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood . 2013//05/05 -
23 2013;121(21):4287 -4294. doi:10.1182/bloo d-2012 -12-471680  
13. Fallahzadeh R, Rokni SA, Ghasemzadeh H, Soto -Perez -de-Celis E, Shahrokni A. Digital 
Health for Geriatric Oncology. JCO Clin Cancer Inform . Dec 2018;2:1 -12. 
doi:10.1200/cci.17.00133  
14. Hoogland AI, Mansfield J, Lafranchise EA, Bulls HW , Johnstone PA, Jim HSL. eHealth 
literacy in older adults with cancer. J Geriatr Oncol . Jan 6 2020;doi:10.1016/j.jgo.2019.12.015  
15. Poleshuck E, Wittink M, Crean H, et al. Using patient engagement in the design and 
rationale of a trial for women with depr ession in obstetrics and gynecology practices. 
Contemporary clinical trials . Apr 30 2015;43:83 -92. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2015.04.010  
16. Wittink MN, Cary M, Tenhave T, Baron J, Gallo JJ. Towards patient -centered care for 
depression: Conjoint methods to tailor treatment based on preferences. Patient . 2010;3(3):145 -
157. doi:10.2165/11530660  
17. Eraker SA, Sox HC, Jr. Assessment of patients' preferences for therapeutic outcomes. 
Medical decision making : an international journal of the Society for Medical Decision  Making . 
1981;1(1):29 -39.  
18. O'Connor AM, Boyd NF, Tritchler DL, Kriukov Y, Sutherland H, Till JE. Eliciting preferences 
for alternative cancer drug treatments. The influence of framing, medium, and rater variables. 
Medical decision making : an internati onal journal of the Society for Medical Decision Making . 
Winter 1985;5(4):453 -63.  
19. Hauber AB, Gonzalez JM, Groothuis -Oudshoorn CG, et al. Statistical Methods for the 
Analysis of Discrete Choice Experiments: A Report of the ISPOR Conjoint Analysis Good 
Research Practices Task Force. Value Health . Jun 2016;19(4):300 -15. 
doi:10.1016/j.jval.2016.04.004  
20. Wilson L, Loucks A, Bui C, et al. Patient centered decision making: use of conjoint 
analysis to determine risk -benefit trade -offs for preference sensitiv e treatment choices. Journal 
of the neurological sciences . Sep 15 2014;344(1 -2):80 -7. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2014.06.030  
21. Loh KP, Xu H, Back A, et al. Patient -hematologist discordance in perceived chance of 
cure in hematologic malignancies: A multicenter stu dy. Cancer . Dec 6 
2019;doi:10.1002/cncr.32656  
22. El-Jawahri A, Nelson -Lowe M, VanDusen H, et al. Patient -Clinician Discordance in 
Perceptions of Treatment Risks and Benefits in Older Patients with Acute Myeloid Leukemia. 
Oncologist . Feb 2019;24(2):247 -254. doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2018 -0317  
23. Weeks JC, Cook EF, O'Day SJ, et al. Relationship between cancer patients' predictions of 
prognosis and their treatment preferences. Jama . Jun 3 1998;279(21):1709 -14. 
doi:10.1001/jama.279.21.1709  
24. Mack JW, Weeks JC, Wright AA, Block SD, Prigerson HG. End -of-life discussions, goal 
attainment, and distress at the end of life: predictors and outcomes of receipt of care 
consistent with preferences. J Clin Oncol . Mar 1 2010;28(7):1203 -8. 
doi:10.1200/jco.2009.25.4672  
25. Mack JW, Walling A, Dy S, et al. Patient beliefs that chemotherapy may be curative and 
care received at the end of life among patients with metastatic lung and colorectal cancer. 
Cancer . Jun 1 2015;121(11):1891 -7. doi:10.1002/cncr.29250  
26. Yennurajaling am S, Lu Z, Prado B, Williams JL, Lim KH, Bruera E. Association between 
Advanced Cancer Patients' Perception of Curability and Patients' Characteristics, Decisional 
Control Preferences, Symptoms, and End -of-Life Quality Care Outcomes. J Palliat Med . Jul 26  
2018;doi:10.1089/jpm.2018.0186  
27. Numico G, Anfossi M, Bertelli G, et al. The process of truth disclosure: an assessment of 
the results of information during the diagnostic phase in patients with cancer. Annals of 
oncology : official journal of the Europ ean Society for Medical Oncology . May 2009;20(5):941 -5. 
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdn709  
28. Brokalaki EI, Sotiropoulos GC, Tsaras K, Brokalaki H. Awareness of diagnosis, and 
information -seeking behavior of hospitalized cancer patients in Greece. Support Care Can cer. 
Nov 2005;13(11):938 -42. doi:10.1007/s00520 -005-0794 -7 
29. Caruso A, Di Francesco B, Pugliese P, Cinanni V, Corlito A. Information and awareness of 
diagnosis and progression of cancer in adult and elderly cancer patients. Tumori . May -Jun 
2000;86(3):199 -203.  
30. Pinquart M, Sorensen S. Spouses, adult children, and children -in-law as caregivers of 
older adults: a meta -analytic comparison. Psychol Aging . Mar 2011;26(1):1 -14. 
doi:10.1037/a0021863  
31. Glajchen M. The emerging role and needs of family caregi vers in cancer care. J Support 
Oncol . Mar -Apr 2004;2(2):145 -55.  
32. Dionne -Odom JN, Ejem D, Wells R, et al. How family caregivers of persons with 
advanced cancer assist with upstream healthcare decision -making: A qualitative study. PLOS 
ONE . 2019;14(3):e0 212967. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0212967  
33. Wittenberg E, Borneman T, Koczywas M, Del Ferraro C, Ferrell B. Cancer Communication 
and Family Caregiver Quality of Life. Behavioral sciences (Basel, Switzerland) . Mar 2 
2017;7(1)doi:10.3390/bs7010012  
34. Waldr on EA, Janke EA, Bechtel CF, Ramirez M, Cohen A. A systematic review of 
psychosocial interventions to improve cancer caregiver quality of life. Psychooncology . Jun 
2013;22(6):1200 -7. doi:10.1002/pon.3118  
35. Wittenberg E, Buller H, Ferrell B, Koczywas M, B orneman T. Understanding Family 
Caregiver Communication to Provide Family -Centered Cancer Care. Semin Oncol Nurs . Dec 
2017;33(5):507 -516. doi:10.1016/j.soncn.2017.09.001  
36. Zhang AY, Zyzanski SJ, Siminoff LA. Differential patient -caregiver opinions of tre atment 
and care for advanced lung cancer patients. Soc Sci Med . Apr 2010;70(8):1155 -8. 
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.12.023  
37. Trevino KM, Prigerson HG, Shen MJ, et al. Association between advanced cancer 
patient -caregiver agreement regarding prognosis and hospice enrollment. Cancer . May 30 
2019;doi:10.1002/cncr.32188  
38. McPherson CJ, Wilson KG, Lobchuk MM, Brajtman S. Family car egivers' assessment of 
symptoms in patients with advanced cancer: concordance with patients and factors affecting 
accuracy. J Pain Symptom Manage . Jan 2008;35(1):70 -82. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2007.02.038  
39. Hsu T, Loscalzo M, Ramani R, et al. Are Disag reements in Caregiver and Patient 
Assessment of Patient Health Associated with Increased Caregiver Burden in Caregivers of Older 
Adults with Cancer? Oncologist . Nov 2017;22(11):1383 -1391. doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2017 -
0085  
40. Rodenbach RA, Norton SA, Wit tink MN, et al. When chemotherapy fails: Emotionally 
charged experiences faced by family caregivers of patients with advanced cancer. Patient Educ 
Couns . May 2019;102(5):909 -915. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2018.12.014  
41. Sonnenblick M, Friedlander Y, Steinberg A. Dissociation between the wishes of 
terminally ill parents and decisions by their offspring. J Am Geriatr Soc . Jun 1993;41(6):599 -604. 
doi:10.1111/j.1532 -5415.1993.tb06729.x  
42. Higginson IJ, Gao W. Caregiver assessment of patients with advanced cancer: 
concordance with patients, effect of burden and positivity. Health Qual Life Outcomes . Jun 2 
2008;6:42. doi:10.1186/1477 -7525 -6-42 
43. Loh KP, Abdallah M, Kadambi S, et al. Treatme nt decision -making in acute myeloid 
leukemia: a qualitative study of older adults and community oncologists. Leuk Lymphoma . Oct 
11 2020:1 -12. doi:10.1080/10428194.2020.1832662  
44. Loh KP, Sanapala C, Digiovanni G, Mustian K, Klepin H, Janelsins M, Schnall R, Culakova 
E, Vertino P, Susiarjo M, Mendler J, Liesveld J, Mohile S. Qualitative study of a mobile health 
exercise intervention for older patients with myeloid neoplasms. Oral presentation at: 
University of Rochester Department Medicine Unmasked Conferen ce; 27 -29 May 2020, 
Rochester, New York, United States.  
45. Acharya UH, Halpern AB, Wu QV, et al. Impact of region of diagnosis, ethnicity, age, and 
gender on survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). J Drug Assess . 2018;7(1):51 -53. 
doi:10.1080/21556660.2 018.1492925  
46. Ostir GV, Volpato S, Fried LP, Chaves P, Guralnik JM. Reliability and sensitivity to change 
assessed for a summary measure of lower body function: results from the Women's Health and 
Aging Study. J Clin Epidemiol . Sep 2002;55(9):916 -21. doi :10.1016/s0895 -4356(02)00436 -5 
47. Marsh AP, Wrights AP, Haakonssen EH, et al. The Virtual Short Physical Performance 
Battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2015;70(10):1233 -1241. doi:10.1093/gerona/glv029  
48. Shelkey M, Wallace M. Katz Index of Independe nce in Activities of Daily Living. Home 
Healthcare Now . 2001;19(5)  
49. Graf C. The Lawton instrumental activities of daily living scale. The American journal of 
nursing . Apr 2008;108(4):52 -62; quiz 62 -3. doi:10.1097/01.Naj.0000314810.46029.74  
50. Hurria A,  Togawa K, Mohile SG, et al. Predicting chemotherapy toxicity in older adults 
with cancer: a prospective multicenter study. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology . 2011;29(25):3457 -3465. doi:10.1200/JCO .2011.34.7625  
51. Fillenbaum GG, Smyer MA. The development, validity, and reliability of the OARS 
multidimensional functional assessment questionnaire. J Gerontol . Jul 1981;36(4):428 -34. 
doi:10.1093/geronj/36.4.428  
52. Löwe B, Decker O, Müller S, et al. Va lidation and standardization of the Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder Screener (GAD -7) in the general population. Medical care . Mar 
2008;46(3):266 -74. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e318160d093  
53. Durmaz B, Soysal P, Ellidokuz H, Isik AT. Validity and reliability of ger iatric depression 
scale -15 (short form) in Turkish older adults. North Clin Istanb . 2018;5(3):216 -220. 
doi:10.14744/nci.2017.85047  
54. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: validity of a two -
item depression screener. Med C are. Nov 2003;41(11):1284 -92. 
doi:10.1097/01.Mlr.0000093487.78664.3c  
55. Fillenbaum GG. Multidimensional functional assessment of older adults : the Duke Older 
Americans Resources and Services procedures / Gerda G. Fillenbaum . L. Erlbaum Associates; 
1988.  
56. Borson S, Scanlan J, Brush M, Vitaliano P, Dokmak A. The mini -cog: a cognitive 'vital 
signs' measure for dementia screening in multi -lingual elderly. International journal of geriatric 
psychiatry . Nov 2000;15(11):1021 -7. doi:10.1002/1099 -1166(200011)15 :11<1021::aid -
gps234>3.0.co;2 -6 
57. Maly RC, Frank JC, Marshall GN, DiMatteo MR, Reuben DB. Perceived efficacy in patient -
physician interactions (PEPPI): validation of an instrument in older persons. Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society . Jul 1998;46( 7):889 -94. doi:10.1111/j.1532 -5415.1998.tb02725.x  
58. Moore CD, Cook KM. Promoting and measuring family caregiver self -efficacy in 
caregiver -physician interactions. Soc Work Health Care . 2011;50(10):801 -14. 
doi:10.1080/00981389.2011.580835  
59. Reeve BB, Th issen DM, Bann CM, et al. Psychometric evaluation and design of patient -
centered communication measures for cancer care settings. Patient Educ Couns . Jul 
2017;100(7):1322 -1328. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2017.02.011  
60. Kriston L, Scholl I, Hölzel L, Simon D, Loh A , Härter M. The 9 -item Shared Decision 
Making Questionnaire (SDM -Q-9). Development and psychometric properties in a primary care 
sample. Patient Education and Counseling . 2010/07/01/ 2010;80(1):94 -99. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2009.09.034  
61. Calderon C, Ferrando PJ, Carmona -Bayonas A, et al. Validation of SDM -Q-Doc 
Questionnaire to measure shared decision -making physician's perspective in oncology practice. 
Clin Transl Oncol . Nov 2017;19(11) :1312 -1319. doi:10.1007/s12094 -017-1671 -9 
62. Forcino RC, Barr PJ, O'Malley AJ, et al. Using CollaboRATE, a brief patient -reported 
measure of shared decision making: Results from three clinical settings in the United States. 
Health Expect . Feb 2018;21(1):8 2-89. doi:10.1111/hex.12588  
63. Bennett C, Graham ID, Kristjansson E, Kearing SA, Clay KF, O'Connor AM. Validation of a 
preparation for decision making scale. Patient Educ Couns . Jan 2010;78(1):130 -3. 
doi:10.1016/j.pec.2009.05.012  
64. Degner LF, Sloan JA, Venkatesh P. The Control Preferences Scale. Can J Nurs Res . Fall 
1997;29(3):21 -43.  
65. O'Connor AM. Validation of a decisional conflict scale. Med Decis Making . Jan -Mar 
1995;15(1):25 -30. doi:10.1177/0272989x9501500105  
66. Brehaut JC, O'Connor AM, Wood TJ, et al. Validation of a decision regret scale. Med 
Decis Making . Jul-Aug 2003;23(4):281 -92. doi:10.1177/0272989x03256005  
67. Rost L, Chen Y, Fain RS, 3rd, et al. "Was It Worth It?": A Pilot Study in Patient 
Perspectives on the Worthwhileness of Radiation Therapy. Am J Clin Oncol . Aug 2020;43(8):598 -
601. doi:10.1097/coc.0000000000000711  
68. Grochtdreis T, Dams J, König HH, Konnopka A. Health -related quality of life measured 
with the EQ -5D-5L: estimation of normative index val ues based on a representative German 
population sample and value set. Eur J Health Econ . Aug 2019;20(6):933 -944. 
doi:10.1007/s10198 -019-01054 -1 
69. Peres S, Pham T, Phillips R. Validation of the System Usability Scale (SUS). Proceedings of 
the Human Factor s and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting . 09/30 2013;57:192 -196. 
doi:10.1177/1541931213571043  
70. Ryff CD. Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of psychological 
well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . 1989;57(6):1 069-1081. 
doi:10.1037/0022 -3514.57.6.1069  
71. Little R, Yau L. Intent -to-treat analysis for longitudinal studies with drop -outs. 
Biometrics . Dec 1996;52(4):1324 -33.  
72. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health 
Res. Nov 2005;15(9):1277 -88. doi:10.1177/1049732305276687  
73. Loh KP, Ramsdale E, Culakova E, et al. Novel mHealth App to Deliver Geriatric 
Assessment -Driven Interventions for Older Adults With Cancer: Pilot Feasibility and Usability 
Study. JMIR Cancer . Oct 29 2018;4(2):e10296. doi:10.2196/10296  
74. Nielsen J, Landauer TK. A mathematical model of the finding of usability problems. CHI 
’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 1993; Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
1993. Pp. 206 –213.  
75. Virzi RA. Refi ning the Test Phase of Usability Evaluation: How Many Subjects Is Enough? 
Human Factors . 1992/08/01 1992;34(4):457 -468. doi:10.1177/001872089203400407  
76. Fraenkel L. Feasibility of Using Modified Adaptive Conjoint Analysis Importance 
Questions. Patient . 2010;3(4):209 -215. doi:10.2165/11318820 -000000000 -00000  
77. Dwight -Johnson M, Lagomasino IT, Aisenberg E, Hay J. Using conjoint analysis to assess 
depression treatment preferences among low -income Latinos. Psychiatr Serv . Aug 
2004;55(8):934 -6. doi:10.1176/a ppi.ps.55.8.934  
78. Clayman ML, Makoul G, Harper MM, Koby DG, Williams AR. Development of a shared 
decision making coding system for analysis of patient -healthcare provider encounters. Patient 
Educ Couns . Sep 2012;88(3):367 -72. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2012.06.01 1 
79. Elwyn G, Edwards A, Wensing M, Hood K, Atwell C, Grol R. Shared decision making: 
developing the OPTION scale for measuring patient involvement. Qual Saf Health Care . Apr 
2003;12(2):93 -9. doi:10.1136/qhc.12.2.93  
80. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Pay ne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing 
translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform . Apr 2009;42(2):377 -81. 
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010  
81. Clinical & Translational Science Institute. REDCap. REDCap at the University of 
Rochester. Available at: Https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/ctsi/research -help/REDCap.cfm .  
 