Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Document Date: May 4, 2018 
  ID: NPSASA -14-321959  
NCT: 02864069      Impact of Combined Behavioral Interventions on Cognitive 
Outcomes in MCI  
SPECIFIC AIMS/HYPOTHESES:   Primary Aim: Compare the efficacy of participating in 
singular [ (walking or  computer training (CT )] vs. combined (walking and CT) behavioral 
interventions in maintaining/ improving cognitive functioni ng, quality of life (QOL), and daily  
functioning, in 60 adults  with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)  or cognitive complaints, ages 
55-80. Primary h ypotheses: 1: The combined group will show greater cognitive benefits 
(objective neuropsychological and ecological measure s of cognition) 0-  and 3 -months post -
intervention than either singular intervention group. 2: The combined group will have greater 
QOL benefits (patient and informant self -report) and maintenance of independent functioning 
(Independent Living Scales ; ILS, CDR) 0 - and 3- months post -interv ention than either singular 
intervention group.  Secondary Aim:  Compare any differential cognitive benefits of physical vs. cognitive interventions.  Secondary hypothesis:  Walking will result in greatest benefits to executive functioning while CT will re sult in greatest benefits to memory.     
 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND METHODS :  Participants. We will recruit 60 largely 
sedentary  (< 1 hour/ week of purposeful aerobic exe rcise for the past 6 months) , though otherwise 
medically healthy, participants with MCI  or cognitive complaints, ages 55- 80.  Participant s will 
be randomized to the walking intervention (n=20), a CT  program (n=20), or a combined walking 
and CT  intervention (n=20).  Participants will be recruited from the Memory and Aging 
Resilience Center (MAR C), the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC) and  multiple 
existing studies of aging at the University o f California, San Diego (UCSD)  who  consented to be 
contacted about other studies . We will o ver-recruit  by 10% to account for subject attrition and to 
ensure  a final sample size of 60.  These sources  should allow for realistic attainme nt of the 
desired sample size and r ecruiting from these extant sources is optimal given that many have 
already been screened for general health and gross  cognitive statu s.  Should these recruitment 
avenues be insufficient, however, additional community participants will be recruited . All 
participants will be screened and excluded if they have a history of significant head trauma, other 
neurologic or major psychia tric diso rders, known dementia , current substance dependence, or 
any contraindication to increased physical activity.  Participants must also be fluent in English, 
willing to commit to the time requirements of their assigned intervention, and be free of sensory 
or mobility deficits that would interfere with the interventions. Participants not showing 
sufficient adherence to their intervention protocol will b e discontinued from the study. If not 
administered by the recruitment source in the last 6 -weeks, the M ontreal Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA) and the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR) will be included in the screening; 
MoCA must be 18- 30 and CDR of 0 or 0.5 at entry into the study . Participants cannot be 
engaged in another cognitive training or exerci se trial during participation during  this 
investigation.  Individuals over age 80 will not be included due to increased risk of mobility 
difficulties and safet y concerns in the oldest -old with the walking protocol.  
Procedures:  Appropriate individuals who agree to participate will provide informed consent.  
Although participants will be screened for inclusion/exclusion criteria prior to study entry, if 
during the course of any of the following assessments exclusionary information becomes available, that particip ant’s data will not be analyzed .  Dementia is exclusionary at baseline, 
however, if future assessments reveal that a participant has transitioned to dementia, their data will be utilized.  We will reduce participant burden  and practice effects and maximize use of  data 
already available from  our recruitment avenues ; if p articipants have undergone 
neuropsychological testing within six weeks of their scheduled baseline assessment, we will request  their prior test results to us e as part of their baseline evaluation and only administer tests 
not previously given. All participants will obtain medical clearance by a physician to participate 
in the protocol and provide basic medical information (including medical history, basic heal th 
and fitness variables, stroke risk factors, blood pressure, height, weight , and body mass index).  
All participants will undergo neuropsychological assessment on three occasions:  a baseline 
assessment, immediately post- intervention ( 0-month post ), and extended follow -up at 3- months 
post-intervention (3- month post) .  Based on prior research, the assessment measures were chosen 
to cover executive functioning and memory, daily functioning, and informant report of functioning, in particular.  Ecological mea sures of cognition are also included to be able to 
determine generalizability and impact on everyday functional skills. The baseline assessment will entail a comprehensive neuropsychological exam consisting of measures of global cognitive functioning and e stimated premorbid intellectual functioning ( American National Adult Reading 
Test; ANART ) the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI), language (the Boston 
Naming Test (BNT),  memory (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT), executive functioning [selected subtests from the Delis Kaplan Executive Functioning System (DKEFS) ], 
attention/working memory from WAIS -IV: Symbol Search, and Digit Span, Symbol -Digit 
Modalities Test ( SDMT ), the CDR, and an ecologically valid assessment of cognitive 
functioning ( Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test ; RBMT)  that will test some skills specifically 
trained in the CT condition (e.g., name learning, and story learning) but also additional untrained skills such as prospective memory. We will also administer the ILS, a p ractical measures of 
functional living skills ( Loeb, 1996) , the Everyday Cognition Scale (ECog),  an informant -based 
questionnaire of everyday cognitive skills  with multiple scales covering memory, language, 
visuospatial abilities, executive functioning, and divided attention ( Farias et al., 2008) , a self -
report measure of mood (the Geriatric Depre ssion Scale) , a measure of QOL, the Quality of Life 
Interview -Brief Version [QOLI -Brief ( Lehman, Kernan, & Postrado, 1994) ], and a self -report 
assessment  of current and past physical activity including the Community Health Activities 
Monitori ng Program for Seniors ( Stewart et al., 2001 ).   
The walking intervention will begin following baseline assessments and will be continued for 
12 weeks .  The walking  group will be given a pedometer (a small, unobtrusive  device, clipped to 
a waistband or put in a pocket  that saves step data for one week , and should not impede normal 
daily activitie s) to use daily and log their daily steps, with an identified goal of increasing step 
counts by 3000 steps a day over the course of the intervention.  After obtaining a weeklong baseline step count, i ndividuals in the intervention group will be placed on a  program to 
progressively increase their step counts by 100 steps daily each week for the first three weeks, by 200 steps daily for weeks four through six, by 300 steps daily for weeks seven through nine, and by 400 steps daily for weeks ten through twelve .  These are cumulative step increases so that 
participants will increase average daily step counts by 3000 steps over the course of the intervention. Mean  baseline step counts for sedentary older adults in our pilot work were 4150 
per day; therefore, most  participants will almost double their daily activity by the end of the 
intervention.  To guide participants and maintain adherence to the study protocol, the study coordinator will contact the participants weekly to discuss activity logs and adjust step g oals.  
The study coordinator will also be available via phone throughout the study to answer  questions 
that may arise.   
In the CT condition, participants will use Brain HQ, a computer cognitive training program 
(Posit Science Corporation,San Francisco, CA), shown to be well tolerated by older adults with positive short and long -term cognitive outcomes (
Rebok et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2009) .   
Participants will complete 6 Brain HQ modules:  ‘To Do List Training,’ dedicated to verbal 
memory, ‘Syllable Stacks,’ a working memory module, ‘Divided Attention,’ ‘Mixed Signals,’ 
targeting inh ibition, ‘In the Know,’ for  story learning, and ‘Face Facts,’  for name learning.  
Participants will use the program 60 minutes/day, 5 days/week for 12 weeks.  They will receive a brief introduction to the  program on site at the MARC  (log-in, which modules to complete, and 
how long to spend each day on CT ).  These instructions will then be repeated via phone once the 
participant is on their home computer and can be supplemented by an in- home visit if significant 
technological  difficulties exist.  If particip ants do not have a home computer/internet access, they 
can complete the modules at another location such as a public library, senior center, or at the MARC, but training will still be self -directed.  Brain HQ offers a secure clinician portal that 
allows fo r monitoring of usage and progress of participants but the study coordinator will still be 
in weekly phone contact with participants to discuss activity logs and answer any questions.   
The combined condition will concurrently follow both the walking and t he CT programs as 
described above.    
STATISTICAL ANALYSES:   Assuming a one tailed test, a medium effect size with power of .7 
can be obtained with the sample size of 20 per group .  The groups will  be compared on baseline 
characteristics , including program  adherence, using t -tests and χ2 and analyses will be adjusted to 
account for any observed group differences. Lifestyle covariates  such as health, prior physical 
activity, mood, and education will also be explored and used as appropriate.  W e will employ 
reliable change analyses  to take into account change in neuropsychological test scores over the 
course of the intervention while also accounting for predicted practice effects.  To address the 
primary hypothesis, group comparisons of changes in neuropsychol ogical test scores  and 
measures of daily functioning between the groups will be determined via ANCOVA and 
repeated measures analyses.   For the CT condition in particular, we will examine whether any 
cognitive benefits generalize beyond the trained task .  To address the secondary hypothesis, we 
will use logistic regression to determine the degree to which intervention group predicts differential cognitive outcomes. Correlations between neuropsychological test scores and health 
and fitness variables will also  be explored.  
 