Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720171Ibuprofen plus metaxolone, tizandine, or baclofen for  low back pain. A randomized trial
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720172Specific Aims
Up to ½ of  emergency department (ED)  patients with acute, new onset low back pain (LBP) report  
persistent moderate or  severe pain one  week after the  ED visit.(1, 2) Skeletal muscle relaxants (SMR) 
are commonly used to treat LBP  though evidence supporting efficacy  is generally lower quality. We 
have demonstrated  previously that two commonly used SMRs, cyclobenzaprine(1) and diazepam(2), 
when combined with  an NSAID, do not improve LBP  outcomes  more than NSAIDs  used alone. This 
proposal seeks to determine whether there  is any benefit from other commonly used SMRs.
The first SMR to be included in this study  is baclofen. The precise  mechanism  of action  of baclofen  is 
unknown. Baclofen inhibits monosynaptic  and polysynaptic reflexes at  the spinal level, although 
actions at supraspinal sites may contribute  to its clinical effect. Baclofen is an analog of the 
neurotransmitter GABA, but it is uncertain  whether  GABA is involved in its clinical effects.  In a 
randomized, placebo controlled  study, 200 patients with acute LBP were randomized to baclofen  or 
placebo.(3) Patients randomized to baclofen  reported modestly better outcomes four and ten days later.
The second  investigational SMR is tizanidine.  Tizanidine is a  centrally acting alpha-2-adrenergic  
agonist. It  reduces muscle spasticity by increasing presynaptic inhibition  of motor neurons. In  a 
randomized, placebo controlled  trial, 112 patients with acute  LBP  were randomized to tizanidine. In 
this study, patients randomized to tizanidine tended to  use less aspirin.(4)  In an  RCT  of tizanidine + 
ibuprofen versus ibuprofen alone, the combination of  medications  outperformed  ibuprofen  
monotherapy on some pain outcomes.(5)
The third investigational SMR is metaxalone,  a CNS depressant whose mechanism of action is not  yet 
understood. In a  randomized study of 228 patients with acute  symptoms, patients randomized to 
metaxolone reported improved performance of daily  activities than patients who received placebo. (6) 
Results were similar  in two other RCTS of metaxolone versus placebo, each of which enrolled 100 
patients.(7)
Given the poor pain and functional  outcomes that persist beyond an  ED visit  for acute LBP, we 
propose a clinical trial to determine whether combining  a muscle relaxant with an NSAID is more 
effective than NSAID monotherapy  for the treatment of acute, non-traumatic, non-radicular  low back 
pain. NSAIDs are provided to all patients  because  these medications are considered standard-of-care 
therapy for LBP.  We will test the following  three  hypotheses:
1)A daily regimen of ibuprofen + metaxolone will provide  greater relief  of LBP than ibuprofen + 
placebo one week after an ED visit, as measured by the Roland Morris  Disability Questionnaire
2)A daily regimen of ibuprofen + tizanidine will provide greater relief of LBP than ibuprofen +  
placebo one week after an ED visit, as measured by the Roland Morris  Disability Questionnaire
3)A daily regimen of ibuprofen + baclofen  will provide greater relief of LBP than ibuprofen + 
placebo one week after an ED visit, as measured by the Roland Morris  Disability Questionnaire
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720173Overview.
This will be a double-blind, comparative effectiveness  study, in which we enroll  patients  during  an ED 
visit for musculoskeletal  LBP and follow them by telephone two and seven days and  three months  
later. Every  patient  will receive standard-of-care  therapy, consisting of ibuprofen and a low back pain 
education session.  Patients will be randomized to metaxolone, tizanidine, baclofen, or placebo.
Subject selection. 
Our goal is  to include in this  study  a broad representation of patients  with musculoskeletal back pain 
who are likely to respond to the investigational  medications and  who  would not be considered 
candidates for spinal surgery or targeted  epidural intervention. We  hope  for a widely generalizable  
study and therefore will  not require diagnoses to be contingent on advanced imaging studies. The 
presence or  absence of palpable spasm of the paraspinal muscles will be recorded but not  used as an 
entry criterion because the clinical  significance and reliability of this finding is uncertain. (8)
Inclusion criteria:
-Present to ED primary for management  of LBP, defined as pain originating between the lower border 
of the scapulae and the  upper gluteal folds. Flank pain, that  is pain originating from tissues lateral  to 
the paraspinal muscles, will not be included.
- Musculoskeletal etiology of low back.  Patients with non-musculoskeletal etiologies such as urinary  
tract infection, ovarian cysts, or influenza like  illness will be  excluded.  The primary clinical diagnosis,  
at the conclusion of the ED visit, must be a  diagnosis consistent with non-traumatic,  non-radicular, 
musculoskeletal LBP.
-Patient is  to be discharged home. Patients admitted to  the hospital  are more likely to  be treated with  
parenteral medication and  therefore are not appropriate for this  study.
- Age 18-64 Enrollment will be limited to adults younger than  65 years  because  of the increased  risk of  
adverse medication effects in the  elderly.
-Non-radicular pain. Patients will be excluded if the pain radiates  below  the gluteal folds in  a radicular  
pattern. 
-Pain duration <2 weeks (336  hours).  Patients with more than two weeks of pain are at increased risk 
of poor pain and functional  outcomes. (9)
-Prior to the acute attack of LBP, back pain cannot occur more  frequently than once per month. 
Patients with more frequent back  pain are at increased risk of poor pain and functional outcomes. (9) 
-Non-traumatic LBP:  no substantial  and direct  trauma  to the back within the previous month
-Functionally impairing  back pain: A baseline score of > 5 on the Roland-Morris Disability 
Questionnaire (Appendix)
Exclusion criteria:
-Not available for follow-up
-Pregnant or  breast-feeding
-Chronic pain  syndrome defined as use of any analgesic medication on a  daily or near-daily basis
-Allergic to or intolerant of investigational  medications
-Contra-indications to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: 1) history of hypersensitivity to  NSAIDs  
or aspirin 2) active  or history  of peptic ulcer disease, chronic dyspepsia, or active  or history  of 
gastrointestinal bleed 3) Severe heart failure  (NYHA  2 or worse) 4) uncontrolled blood  pressure  
(>160/100) 5)  GFR <60ml/min 6) Current  use of anti-coagulants 7) cirrhosis or liver  enzymes 2xULN 
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
0327201748) Alcoholism 9)  MI/ stroke/ unstable angina within the previous 3 months 10) high dose diuretics or 
ace inhibitors
-Contra-indications to muscle relaxants:  1) Concurrent use of centrally acting opioids; 2) GFR <60 
ml.min; 3) Abnormal LFTs 4) Use  of any of the following medications: fluvoxamine, 
flouroquinolones, amiodarone, mexiletine,  propafenone, verapamil, cimetidine, famotidine,  acyclovir, 
ticlopidine, oral contraceptive pills
Study arms.
A.The metaxolone arm: Ibuprofen 600mg+ metaxolone 400-800mg, orally,  every  8 hours
B.The tizanidine arm: Ibuprofen 600mg+ tizanidine 2-4mg,  orally,  every  8 hours
C.The baclofen arm:  Ibuprofen 600mg+ baclofen 10- 20mg, orally, every 8 hours
D.The control  arm: Ibuprofen 600mg + placebo, orally, every 8 hours
In an effort to maximize effectiveness while minimizing side effects, patients will be instructed to take  
one ibuprofen plus  one or two muscle relaxant  pills every 8 hours.  If one tablet of the muscle relaxant 
affords sufficient relief then there will be no need for the patient to  take the second muscle relaxant 
tablet. However, if  the patient has not experienced sufficient relief  within 60 minutes  of taking one 
investigational medication tablet, they will be instructed to  take the second tablet. All  study patients 
will be given a  seven day  supply of ibuprofen and the muscle  relaxant.  
Outcome measures
1. Roland Morris LBP Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ)--Reproduced in  the Appendix. This  24-item  
LBP functional  scale is recommended for  use in LBP research.(10) Its yes/ no format is amenable  to 
telephone follow-up. We have used it successfully  to obtain  post-ED  follow-up  in five previous  LBP 
studies involving more than 1500 patients.
2. Ordinal pain  scale  (“severe”, “moderate”, “mild”,  or “none”).  Study  participants  will be  asked to 
describe their worst back pain in the  previous 24 hours.
3. Medication requirements: “What medications did you  use to  treat your  low back pain in  the previous  
24 hours?” 
4. Low  back pain frequency: “Over the last 24 hours, how often were you in  pain?  Not at all,  Rarely, 
Sometimes, Usually, Always”.  Low back pain  symptomatology is quite  variable. Some patients may 
experience no pain unless they move  a certain way.  Others  may  experience  a constant low level of 
pain. This question  will help determine the burdensomeness of the  LBP  in the patient’s daily life.
5. Satisfaction, as measured by response to this question: The next time you go to the  ER with  low 
back pain, do you want to get the same  combination of medications?
Baseline measures
1. Roland Morris LBP disability questionnaire
2. Patient Health  Questionnaire depression module will be  assessed at the baseline visit.
3. Perceived risk of not recovering. Pain outcomes may be influenced by expectations. After providing an educational  intervention, we  will ask study participants to estimate how  long they  believe  they  will 
continue to suffer from  pain.
4. StarT Back LBP  questionnaire
Primary outcome
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720175The change  in Roland Morris  scale  between  the baseline ED visit and  the one week follow-up (Roland-
Morris baseline  - Roland-Morris 1week ). The  baseline  questions will refer to the time  period immediately 
prior to ED presentation (Before you came to the ER today, were you able to…..)..
Secondary outcomes
   The following outcomes will be assessed 48 hours and one week after ED discharge
1. Day post  ED discharge  able to return to all usual activities
2. Satisfaction with treatment
3. Number of visits to any  healthcare provider.
4. Worst LBP over the  previous 24 hours, using a four point ordinal scale: severe, moderate, mild, or 
none and a 0 – 10 verbal integer scale
5. Use of any analgesic or LBP medication  within the previous 24 hours.
6. Frequency of low back pain using  the five point Likert scale:  Not at all,  Rarely, Sometimes, Usually,  
Always
7.Absolute RMDQ score
8. Frequency of adverse events including  
-CNS side effects (drowsiness  and dizziness)
-GI side effects (dyspepsia, nausea, and bleeding)
-CV side effects (chest pain, shortness of breath, edema)
-renal side effects (fluid retention, development of hypertension as defined  by JNC-7 or 
worsening of blood pressure)
-All other side effects
The following will be  assessed 3 months after ED discharge
9. Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire
10. Worst LBP over the  previous week,  using a  four point ordinal scale: severe, moderate, mild,  or 
none and a 0 – 10 verbal integer scale
11.  Frequency  of low back  pain  over the previous week using the five point Likert scale:  Not at all, 
Rarely, Sometimes, Usually,  Always
12. Number of days with LBP since  ED discharge
13. Use  of any analgesic or LBP medication  within the previous 7 days.
14. Number of visits to any healthcare provider.
15. Satisfaction with medication and with the  current state of the LBP
Randomization and blinding
The pharmacist will perform randomization  in blocks of 8 based  on a sequence generated  at 
http://randomization.com.  Ibuprofen will not be masked. Metaxolone, tizanidine, baclofen, and  
placebo will be masked by placing  tablets into identical capsules,  which  will be packed with scant 
amounts of  lactose and sealed. This masking will take place  in a secure  location inaccessible to  ED 
personnel. Patients will be presented with two bottles of medication  tablets.  The bottle containing the 
ibuprofen will be  labeled  in a typical  manner. The second vial, containing the muscle  relaxant  or 
placebo will be labeled  as investigational medication. Patients will be  instructed to take the 
investigational medication only as needed  for moderate or severe LBP.
Details of protocol
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720176Prior to discharge from  the ED and after the  patient’s  pain has been controlled, the attending 
emergency physician will refer appropriate patients to  study personnel for screening. Eligible patients 
would have already received different and various medications  in the ED for their pain 
(potentially  including  NSAIDs)  prior to being approached for  study participation.  Patients will be  
screened and consented.  Research associates will  ascertain baseline socio-demographic information, 
low back pain history,  and baseline variables  discussed above.  A urine pregnancy test will be 
performed. Research personnel  will provide each patient with a 15-minute educational intervention. 
This will be based on NIAMS’s Handout  on Health: Back Pain  information  webpage (available at  
http://www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Back_Pain/default.asp) Research personnel  will review each 
section of the  information sheet  with the patient and  elicit questions. Patients will be discharged with 
two medication  vials,  one containing  ibuprofen  and one containing metaxolone, tizanidine, baclofen,  or 
placebo. Patients will be cautioned not to take off  protocol LBP medications without first consulting  
with a healthcare provider. Patients will be cautioned not  to drink  alcohol  or use other centrally-acting 
substances while  using study medications. Patients will be cautioned not  to drive after taking the study 
medications. Patients will be instructed  to dispose of unused medication by mixing with  an unpalatable 
substance such as  coffee grounds and  sealing in a plastic bag.  Patients  will be encouraged  to follow-up 
with their  primary care  physician.  Follow-up  phone  calls will be conducted 48 hours,  one week, and 
three months after  ED discharge. Follow-up will be attempted daily until successful. For patients 
difficult to contact, express  courier or home visit will be  used to obtain  follow-up information.
Analysis. An intention-to-treat  analysis will be performed among all patients for whom primary 
outcome data is available. The primary outcome  will be a comparison  of the  change in RMDQ  
between baseline and one  week. Results will be reported as means with 95%CI. A t-test for 
independent samples will be used to determine  statistically significant differences between placebo and 
each of the active medications. Secondary outcomes will  be reported as rates  with  95%CI. A  per 
protocol efficacy analysis  will be  conducted  among  those patients who  use the investigational 
medication at least once.
Sample size calculation
We based assumptions on a recently completed RCT of LBP treatment.(1) The mean improvement in  
RMDQ among those who receive an NSAID alone  was 10.2. The standard deviation was 8.9. A widely 
accepted minimum  clinically important  improvement  of 5 points on the RMDQ  would require those  
randomized to  active medication to demonstrate  a mean improvement of 15.2 on the  RMDQ. Using a 
standard alpha of 0.05 and  a beta of 0.20, we  determined the need for  50 subjects in  each arm. To 
account for protocol  violations and  patients lost-to-follow-up (typical lost-to-follow-up  rate is 5%) and 
to ensure sufficient power for the per  protocol analysis (in  our previous ED-based LBP studies, up to 
1/3 of enrolled patients have  not used the medication more than once), we  intend  to enroll  80 patients  
in each arm (total n= 320)
Data Safety Monitoring Committee. This committee will be  headed  by Dr.  Polly  Bijur, PhD,  an 
epidemiologist and  include Dr. Esses, MD, the director of the Moses ED. The committee  will meet 
every month with the PI  to 1) monitor adverse events  and develop strategies to  minimize these; and,  2) 
monitor recruitment and enrollment.  There  will not be an interim  analysis.
Registration. The study will be registered at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov.
Consent. Study  personnel will obtain informed consent once the  patient’s pain has been controlled and 
the patient is ready for discharge from the ED. The  attending physician will assess the patient’s 
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720177capacity to consent to participate  in this study. Because pain may compromise cognition and judgment, 
the principal investigator  or his designee will assess the capacity  of the  patient  to provide ethically and  
legally adequate informed consent and will document this in  the research record.
Risks/Benefits
Non-steroidals are used  in 50% of  more than 2.5 million annual US ED visits for LBP. Skeletal muscle 
relaxants are used in 43% of these visits. Regardless of results, this study will have a national impact. All study  subjects receive  ibuprofen and  thus  are likely to benefit. In addition, those who  receive active 
drug may have greater benefit as they will receive a medication that will possibly improve their  acute  
LBP. In  addition to breach of confidentiality, which is unlikely,  and inconvenience  to the subject, 
which will undoubtedly occur, some subjects will possibly experience adverse medication effects. For the most part, these are minor events.  Skeletal muscle relaxants such as tizanidine, metaxalone  and 
baclofen are  generally  well tolerated but can  cause substantial drowsiness and when combined with 
alcohol or other centrally  acting substances may be  lethal. Non-steroidals can cause life-threating 
gastro-intestinal bleeding, but this is unlikely in patients screened for gastro-intestinal illness who  will 
take the medication for  one week  only. Non-steroidals increase cardiovascular and  and  risk of renal 
injury and may worsen blood pressure control
Data Storage & Confidentiality
Data will be stored and  maintained in REDCap. Data  analysis will occur  on password-protected 
computers. Consent documents will be maintained in locked research cabinets. Only study personnel will have access to  the data and  consent documents.
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720178References
1. Friedman BW, Dym  AA, Davitt M, Holden  L, Solorzano C, Esses D, et al. Naproxen With 
Cyclobenzaprine, Oxycodone/Acetaminophen, or Placebo for Treating  Acute  Low  Back  
Pain: A Randomized  Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2015;314(15):1572-80.
2. Friedman BW, Irizarry  E, C. S, Khankel N, Zapata J, Zias E, et al. Diazepam is no better than  
placebo when added to naproxen for acute  low back  pain. Annals of emergency medicine. 
2017.
3. Dapas F, Hartman SF, Martinez L, Northrup BE, Nussdorf RT, Silberman HM,  et al. Baclofen 
for the treatment of acute low-back syndrome. A double-blind comparison with  placebo.  
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1985;10(4):345-9.
4. Berry H, Hutchinson DR. A multicentre placebo-controlled study  in general practice to 
evaluate the efficacy and safety of tizanidine in acute  low-back pain.  J Int Med Res. 
1988;16(2):75-82.
5. Berry H, Hutchinson DR. Tizanidine and ibuprofen in acute  low-back pain:  results of a 
double-blind multicentre study in general practice. The Journal of international medical 
research. 1988;16(2):83-91.
6. Dent  RW, Jr., Ervin  DK. A study of metaxalone (Skelaxin)  vs. placebo  in acute  
musculoskeletal disorders: a cooperative study. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp.  1975;18(3):433-
40.
7. Fathie K. A Second  Look at a Skeletal  Muscle Relaxant: A Double-Blind  Study of 
Metaxalone. Curr Ther  Res Clin Exp.  1964;6:677-83.
8. Simons DG, Mense S. Understanding and measurement of muscle  tone as related to 
clinical muscle  pain.  Pain. 1998;75(1):1-17.
9. Friedman BW, O'Mahony S, Mulvey  L, Davitt M, Choi H, Xia S, et al. One-week and 3-month 
outcomes after  an emergency department  visit for undifferentiated musculoskeletal low 
back pain. Annals of emergency medicine.  2012;59(2):128-33  e3.
10. Deyo RA, Battie M, Beurskens AJ, Bombardier C, Croft  P, Koes B, et al. Outcome  measures 
for low back  pain research. A proposal for standardized use.  Spine.  1998;23(18):2003-13.
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017
Ibuprofen plus  metaxolone,  tizanidine, or baclofen for LBP. A randomized trial Version 
032720179Appendix 1. Roland  Morris low back  pain disability questionnaire
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.Over the  last 24 hours, I have stayed  home most of the time because of  my back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I changed position frequently to try  to get my  back comfortable:
Over the  last 24 hours, I walked more  slowly than usual because of my back:
Over the  last 24 hours, I have not been doing any jobs that I usually do around  the house 
because of my back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I used a handrail to get upstairs because of my  back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I lay down to rest more  often because of my  back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I have had  to hold on to something to get out  of an easy  chair 
because of my back pain
Over the  last 24 hours, I have tried  to get other people to do things for  me because of my  
back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I got dressed  more  slowly than usual  because  of my  back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I only stood up for short periods of time because  of my  back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I tried not to bend  or kneel down  because of my back  pain:     
Over the  last 24 hours, I found it difficult  to get  out of a chair  because  of my back pain:    
Over the  last 24 hours, my back  was painful  almost all of the time:    
Over the  last 24 hours, I found it difficult  to turn  over  in bed because of my  back  pain:     
Over the  last 24 hours, my appetite  was not very good because of my  back  pain:     
Over the  last 24 hours, I have had  trouble putting on my socks  ( or stockings) because of 
the pain in my back or leg:
Over the  last 24 hours,  I could only walk short distances because of my  back pain:
Over the  last 24 hours, I slept less well because  of my back:    
Over the  last 24 hours, I got dressed  with the  help of someone else because of my back 
pain:   
Over the  last 24 hours, I sat down for most of the  day because  of my  back:   
Over the  last 24 hours, I avoided  heavy jobs around  the house because of my back pain:     
Over the  last 24 hours, I was more irritable and bad  tempered with people than usual  
because of my back pain,
Over the  last 24 hours, I went upstairs more  slowly than  usual  because of my  back pain
Over the  last 24 hours, I stayed in bed  most  of the time because of my back pain:    No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
No0     Yes1
IRB NUMBER: 2017-7566
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/29/2017