Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Study Title: Long Duration Activity and Metabolic Control After Spinal Cord Injury  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Version: 11/3/2022 
 
  
Study Objectives  
Skeletal muscle is the largest endocrine organ in the body, playing an indispensable role in glucose 
homeostasis.  Spinal cord injury (SCI) prevents  skeletal muscle from carrying out this important function. 
Dysregulation of  glucose metabolism precipitates high rates of metabolic syndrome, diabetes,  and other 
secon dary health conditions (SHCs) of SCI.  These SHCs exert a  negative influence on health -related 
quality of life (HRQOL).  New discoveries  support that a low level of activity throughout the day offers a 
more effective metabolic stimulus than brief, episodic  exercise bouts.  
The purpose  of this study is to translate this emerging concept to the population of individuals with SCI 
by using low -force, long -duration electrical muscle stimulation to subsidize daily activity levels .  The 
long -term goal  of this research is to develop  a rehabilitation strategy to protect the musculoskeletal 
health, metabolic function, and health- related quality of life of people living with complete SCI.  
 
Specific Aim 1:  To compare acute changes in skeletal muscle gene regulation in individuals who receive 
a single session of low frequency (LF) or high frequency (HF) exercise.  
Hypothesis 1: The expression of genes regulating skeletal muscle metabolism will support that HF 
and LF both initiate  a shift toward an oxidative muscle phenotype.  
Specific Aim 2:  To compare changes in skeletal muscle gene regulation and systemic biomarkers of 
metabolic health  in individuals with SCI who receive LF or HF  for 6 months .  
Hypothesis 2: LF and HF will both yield gene expression changes indicating a s hift toward a slow -
oxidative muscle phenotype.  
Hypothesis 3: LF training will yield systemic biomarker changes indicating improved glucose homeostasis and reduced systemic inflammation.  
Specific Aim 3 : To measure subject -reported HRQOL using the PROMIS  survey metric.   
Hypothesis 4: LF training will yield  improved self -reported QOL  via PROMIS physical and mental 
health scales .  
  
Design  
Population:  Individuals with motor -complete spinal cord injury (SCI)  (AIS A – B), 21 to 60 years of age.  
Exclusion Criteria : Pressure ulcers, c hronic infection, l ower extremity muscle contractures, deep vein 
thrombosis, b leeding disorder, r ecent limb fractures, a ny comorbid disease known to affect bone 
metabolism (such as parathyroid dysfunction), p regnancy, anti-osteoporosis medications, Vitamin D 
supplements, Metformin or other medications for diabetes  
Enrollment:  N on-rando m assignment  
Study Arm 1: Acute g ene regulation in response to a single  session of low frequency electrically induced 
exercise 
Study Arm 2: A cute gene regulation in response to a single session of high frequency electrically induced 
exercise Study Arm 3:  A
 daptations in gene regulation, systemic metabolic markers, and patient -report metrics in 
response to  training with low frequency electrically induced exercise  
Study Arm 4:  A daptations in gene regulation in response to training with high frequency electrically 
induced exercise  
Study Arm 5:  C omparator participants will undergo selected outcome measures to provide comparison 
values for Experimental arms.  
 
 
Methods  
Baseline Characteristics : Participants will provide information on age, sex, race, ethnicity, and level of 
SCI (quadriplegia, paraplegia)  
Study Arm s 1 an d 2:  Participants will undergo unilateral vastus lateralis skeletal muscle biopsy: they  will 
be positioned in supine, the skin over the biopsy site will be sterilized, up to 3 mL of 1% lidocaine will be 
injected locally, and a 1/8th inch incision will be made with a scalpel.  The biopsy needle will then be 
inserted and four cores of muscle (~ 20 mg) will be obtained from four passes of the needle through the same puncture site. The incision site will be closed with steri -strips or a butterfly bandage  and the 
subject will be told not to perform electrical muscle stimulation or wet the area for 48 hours. M uscle 
specimens will be imme diately processed for microarray analysis.  P articipants will then undergo a single 
session of electrically -induced low frequency (Arm 1) or high frequency (Arm 2) exercise to the 
quadriceps and hamstrings muscles of the non- biopsied limb .  Stimulating ele ctrodes will be placed over 
the quadriceps and hamstrings muscles, and electrical stimulation will be given to induce an isometric closed kinetic chain knee extension moment.  Participants will rest for 3 hours and then the vastus 
lateralis biopsy procedur e will be repeated on the limb that performed electrically -induced exercise.  
Study Arm 3: P
 articipants will complete a baseline assessment including the biopsy procedure described 
above, completion of the PROMIS  self-reported quality of life survey, and ve nipuncture.  Venous blood 
will be collected into vacutainer tubes with anticoagulant for glucose, kept on ice in dark conditions. The 
blood will be centrifuged and analyzed with a blood auto -analyzer.  After two weeks, participants will 
begin low frequency  electrically induced exercise training.  They will perform electrically induced 
exercise as described above for 6 months . At the conclusion of training, participants will undergo repeat 
biopsy, PROMIS  survey, and venipuncture.  
Study Arm 4 : Participants will complete a baseline muscle biopsy assessment using the procedure 
described above.  After two weeks, participants will begin high frequency electrically induced exercise 
training.  They will perform electrically induced exercise as described above for 6 months.  At the 
conclusion of training, participants will undergo repeat biopsy.  
Study Arm 5: Comparator participants will complete the PROMIS self -r eported quality of life survey.  
Outcome Measures:  Microarray will be used to measure mRNA tr anscription levels for genes that 
regulate cellular adaptation to exercise (peroxisome proliferator -activated receptor gamma coactivator 
alpha – PGC1 -alpha), muscle oxidative metabolism (pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase – PDK4, actin 
binding Rho activating pr otein – ABRA, and nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 3 – NR4A3 ), 
and muscle fiber type (myosin heavy chain 6 – MYH6, myosin light chain 3 – MYL3, myosin heavy chain 7 
– MYH7, actin 3 – ACTN3) .   
Standard clinical assays will be used to measure lev els of serum biomarkers for metaboli c control  
(fasting insulin, fasting glucose, fasting glucose -insulin ratio, fasting hemoglobin A1c ) and systemic 
inflammation (c -reactive protein – CRP).  
For the PROMIS participant- report  metric of health -related quality of life, raw scores will be used to 
calculate the physical health t -scale and the mental health t -scale . 
 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Gene mRNA transcript levels will be expressed as Log 2 intensity (arbitrary units).  Each blood biomarker 
will be expressed as its commonly -used clinical unit of measure (eg. mg/dL).  PROMIS physical and 
mental health scores will be expressed as t -scores, which are anchored to the U.S. population mean (50) 
and standard deviation (10). 
Change over time for each gene- related outcome measure will be assessed via one- way ANOVA.  For 
study Arm s 1 and 2, gene expression levels from the baseline biopsy will be contrasted to the 3 hour 
post -exercise biopsy.  For study Arms 3 and 4, gene expression levels from the pre -training biopsy w ill be 
contrasted to the post- training biopsy.  
For study Arm 3, change over time in pre -training and post -training values for systemic biomarkers and 
for PROMIS scores will be assessed via 2 -sided t -tests.  
Pre-training values for PROMIS scores in study Arm  3 will be contrasted with the comparator cohort 
(study Arm 5) via 2- sided t -tests.  