 1 IRB DETAILED PROTOCOL  
Title: Cardiovascular effects of intra -dialytic hypotension - Randomized trial of 
dialysate sodium in chronic hospitalized hemodialysis patients  
PI: Finnian Mc Causland , MB BCh , MMSc  
Date : 08/01/2017  
Version: 7  
Sponsor: NIH -NIDDK  
 
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL  
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Hemodialysis (HD) is a life -sustaining treatment for patients with end stage renal 
disease, but carries with it a high associated morbidity and mortality. Appr oximately 
50% of patients on HD die within three years after starting treatment.  This mortality 
rate is comparable to, or exceeds that of, many types of cancer.1 Around 41% of 
deaths in prevalent patients and 38% of deaths in incident patients are attributable to 
cardiovascular causes, of which over 50% are ascribed to arrhythmia or sudden 
cardiac death.2  
 
Hemodialysis and intra -dialytic hypotension      
Intra-dialytic hypotensive (IDH) events can be defined as an abrupt decline in blood 
pressure that causes symptoms and/or requires an intervention.3, 4 They are common, 
affecting up t o one third of maintenance HD sessions.5-7  Detrimental associations of 
greater magnitude of systolic blood pressure (SBP) decline during HD include: 
development of myocardial stunning,8 regional wall motion abnormalities,9, 10 
elevations in troponin,11 cerebral hypo -perfusion,12 vascular access thrombosis13 and 
greater mortality.14, 15 Even without documented symptoms, a decline of >30mmHg in 
SBP from pre - to post -HD has been independently associated with greater 
cardiovascular and all -cause mortality.16 Thus,  the magnitude of intra -dialytic SBP 
decline is an important and modifiable r isk factor for adverse outcomes.   
 
Intra -dialytic SBP decline, cardiac arrhythmi a & cerebral ischemia  
The rate of sudden cardiac death in HD patients was approximately 50 per 1000 
patient years in 2010, accounting for 26.5% of deaths in prevalent patients.2 It is 
possible that many of these are related to cardiac arrhythmias.  The p revalence of 
arrhythmia in chronic HD patients is estimated to range between 21 -34%, using 24 -48 
hour Holter monitoring.17, 18       
 HD patients have high rates of stroke and transient ischemic attacks (205 per 
1000 patient years in 2010), with stroke accounting for 2.3% o f the mortality among 
incident patients.2  Brain infarcts have been reported in close temporal proximity to 
the dialysis procedure,19 with decreased intra -dialytic cerebral blood flow correlating 
with intra -dialytic decline in SBP.12  Silent cerebral infarction is estimated to affect up 
to 50% of chronic HD patients, and is independently associated with greater risk of 
subsequent adverse cardiovascular events.20  
 
Intra -dialytic SBP decline and hospitalized HD patients     
HD patients had an average of 1.9 hospitalizations per year (12 inpatient days) during 
2010, 30% of which were cardiovascular -related, with a re -hospitalization rate of 
 2 37%.2 Our preliminary data suggests a high event rate for intra -dialytic hemodynamic 
instability in chronic HD patients admitted to hospital, with over 28% having a 
decline of ≥30 mmHg.  Rapid solute removal by HD generates temporary osmotic 
gradients between the intra -vascular and intra -cellular compartments, promotin g 
trans -cellular fluid movement and resultant hypotension.21, 22 Manipulation of osmotic 
gradients, e.g. using higher dialysate sodium, may ameliorate excess SBP decline 
during HD.  However, associations with thirst, inter -dialytic weight gain and 
hypertension have tempered the use of higher dialysate sod ium in outpatients.23-25 
There have been few wel l-designed interventional studies in the hospital setting, 
where chronic HD patients are more likely to benefit from interventions to promote 
hemodynamic stability.   
 
The optimal dialysate sodium is unknown     
Some clinicians have proposed to lower the d ialysate sodium (less or equal to the 
serum sodium) so as to minimize diffusive sodium gain during HD.26 We and others 
reported that higher dialysate sodium in certain circumst ances may associate with 
lower  rates of hospitalization and mortality.27, 28 This may relate to less marked 
decline in SBP.  The variability of dialysate sodium use across the United States and 
internationally speaks to the lack of evidence from well conducted studies.27, 28 
 
The current methods of treating IDH available for use in the Brigham  (other than 
manipulating the dialysate sodium concentration) , depending on treating physician 
preference, include the following:  
- Cooled dialysate - by lowering the temperature to ~3 5-36 degrees Celsius, it 
has been shown that th e frequency of IDH is lower ed.  H owever , many 
patients do not tolerate these lower temperatures.  
-  Isolated ultrafiltration or reduced ultrafiltration rate - these procedures require 
lengthening of the procedure or additional treatments, which greatly reduces 
patient compliance.  Furthermore, they do not prevent IDH in those with 
impaired baroreceptor activation.  
 
This proposal aims to assess the effects of higher  (142 mmol/L)  versus lower  (138 
mmol/L) dialysate sodium (DNa) use in adult chronic hemodialysis patients a dmitted 
to hospital  on intra -dialyt ic blood pressure and biomarkers of cardiac ischemia.    
 
We will randomly assign subjects to higher versus lower  DNa during their hospital 
stay, up to a maximum of six HD sessions.   
 
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
For adult patients  with end -stage kidney disease requiring hemodialysis  who are 
admitted to hospital , we will  test the following aims:  
 
Aim 1  
Test if higher (142 mmol/L) versus lower  (138 mmol/L) dialysate sodium reduces the 
magnitude of intra -dialytic SBP  decline during hospitalized HD sessions.  
 
Hypothesis: Higher dialysate sodium use wil l results in less decline in in tra-dialytic 
SBP during hosp italized hemodialysis sessions.  
 3  
Aim 2  
Test if higher (142 mmol/L) versus lower  (138 mmol/L) dialysate sodium results in 
less cardiac injury as measured by change in high sensitivity Troponin I (hsTnI) one 
day post -dialysis.  
 
Hypothesis: Higher dialysate sodium use will result in less elevation of hsTnI 
measured one day post dialysis.  
 
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
Inclusion criteria      
Chronic HD (>90 days); age ≥18y; informed consent; firs t admission during study 
period; Inpatients ; Informed consent or surrogate consent with assent of adult subject.   
 
 
Exclusion criteria  
Use of pressors; pre-dialysis serum sodium <=128mmol/L or > 145 mmol/L; pre -
dialysis SBP >180 mmHg; intensive care stay earlier in admission ; expected length of 
stay <24 hours (e.g. admission for HD access procedure); acute coronary syndrome 
within seven days; acute stroke  (as defined by an attending neurologist based on 
symptoms and cerebral imaging; all potential strokes are reviewed by the neurology 
service in BWH); instituti onalized individuals; pregnancy; Outpatients.  
 
Pregnant individuals will be excluded because of t he unknown effects of  higher 
dialysate sodium on teratogenicity.  All women of childbearing age will be screened 
before their first dialysis session for pregnancy using serum beta hCG measurements  
within 72 hours of study initiation.  Subjects with a posit ive pregnancy test cannot 
take part in the study.   
 
RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Eligible patients will be identified by reviewing the inpatient patient lists and by 
discussion with the attending physicians covering the said services and from the 
subject’s attendi ng of record.   
 
In all cases we will approach the attending physician of prospective subjects to 
describe the study and obtain verbal consent to approach patients for recruitment; the 
attending physician or medical staff caring for the patient will be the first to make 
contact with patients to describe the study briefly and ask permission for us to enter 
the room and explain the study in more detail.  
   
It is possible that some eligible patients may be specific patients of the investigating 
study doctors.  In these cases, in order to avoid these patients feeling an obligation to 
participate, we will ask a colleague to make the first contact with them, to determine 
if they are interested in participating in the study.   
 
We will emphasize to all potential subjects that their  participation is entirely 
voluntary and will in no way affect their care.  
 
 4 It is possible that some eligible patients may be specific patients of the investigating 
study doctors.  In these cases, in order to avoid these patients feeling an obligation to 
participate, we will ask a physician colleague or research assistant to make the first 
contact with them, to determine if they are interested in participating in the study.  
   
We do not plan on any specific outreach or recruitment of women or minorities; 
BWH cares for a large number of under -served minorities and women, so we 
anticipate diverse enrollment.  
 
The PHRC policy on Obtaining and Documenting Informed Consent of Subjects who 
do not Speak English will be followed where appropriate 
(http://healthcare .partners.org/phsirb/nonengco.htm).   
 
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
a. Methods of enrollment, including procedures for patient registration and/or 
randomization  
b. Procedures for obtaining informed consent (including timing of consent process)  
c. Treatment assignment, and randomization (if applicable)  
 
Where possible, subjects will be approached for informed consent at least 24 hours 
before potential study initiation.  However, due to the acuity of renal replacement in 
many circumstances, there may  be occasions where subjects have less than 12 hours 
to give informed consent.   
 
Study MDs  (licensed physician investigators) will obtain consent from participants.  
Study MDs, such as the Principal Investigator and Co -Investigator, will be available 
to discuss the study in detail with potential subjects who have specific questions.   
 
Some patients may be unable to provide informed consent due to altered mental 
status.  For patients who are unable to consent (with a Folstein mini -mental score of 
23 or les s) we will contact the next of kin in person to discuss the study in detail.  For 
subjects enrolled by surrogate consent, we will re -assess their ability to provide 
consent at each subsequent dialysis visit.  Surrogate consent will be sought in the 
followi ng hierarchy: (1) a court -appointed guardian with authority to consent to 
participation in the research or authority to make health care decisions for a class of 
diagnostic and therapeutic decisions that are inclusive of the proposed research; (2) a 
health  care proxy or person with durable powers of attorney, whose authority includes 
making health care decisions inclusive of the proposed research; or (3) a spouse, an 
adult child, or other close family member. Study staff will direct surrogates to 
exercise s ubstituted judgment on behalf of the potential study subject (i.e. "how 
would the subject have felt about participating") rather than their own wishes with 
respect to research.   The relationship of the surrogate to the subject will be recorded 
in the resea rch record.  Assent of subjects will be a requirement for participation in 
the research unless the subject is incapable of giving assent due  to his/her medical 
condition. In some cases, the patient will be unable to provide a legible signature, 
time and da te on the consent form. For those instances, a witness will also sign, date 
and time the consent form.  
 
 5 Randomization will be performed by means of a permuted block design, with blocks 
consisting of four subjects with a 1:1 allocation ratio to higher versus lower  DNa.   A 
random coded list will be generated before study initiation and kept in a locked 
drawer  in the Dialysis Director’s locked office.  The random list be generated 
utilizing the program software available on www.randomization.com.  Study staff 
involved in recruitment, data procurement and analysis will not have access to this 
list. Study staff, after enrolling the next subject, will contact the Dialysis Director  to 
obtain the next random treatment assignment, which he will provide to the dialysis 
charge nurse, thereby maintaining blinding of the study staff.  By necessity, the 
treating dialysis n urse and dialysis charge nurse will be aware of the treatment 
assignment, but will be advised not to disclose this to the patient or other staff.   
 
Otherwise, subjects will be dialyzed according to the treating physician’s routine care, 
who will also be b linded to the treatment assignment.  However, unblinding of the 
treating physician will be allowed by specific request in relation to a need to know the 
treatment assignment for clinical care.   
 
We plan to recruit 200 patients in total, for 140 to complet e the study.   
   
 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Study visits and parameters to be measured (e.g., laboratory tests, x -rays, and 
other testing)  
b. Drugs to be used (dose, method, schedule of administration, dose modifications, 
toxicities), include Toxicity Grading Scale (if applicable)  
c. Devices to be used  
d. Procedures/surgical interventions, etc.  
e. Data to be collected and when the data is to be collected  
 
Study visits and parameters to be measured  
 
We will obtain data, hemodynamic parameters and blood samples in the following 
manner:  
 
Hemodynamic parameters  
All subjects will be weighed before and after their dialysis session.  Blood pressure 
and heart rate will be measured before, after and every 15 minutes during the dialysis 
proce dure by a calibrated standard ambulatory blood pressure cuff.  These 
measurements are performed and recorded by the dialysis nursing staff as per 
standard nursing protocols.    
 
Symptom questionnaire  
Dialysis related symptoms will be recorded at the end of  each study session via the 
use of a symptom questionnaire and the dialysis thirst inventory.   
 
Blood collection  
Blood will be collected at the start  and end  of the first and second hemodialysis 
procedures (15 -20mL each dialysis session; 40mL maximum tota l).   
Blood tests will be collected in an EDTA tube and a serum gel tube immediately after 
insertion of access needles or connection to dialysis catheters (after withdrawing 
 6 10mLs initially as per standard care in the dialysis unit).  Blood samples will be  
centrifuged, and p lasma will be aliquoted into 0.5 cc tubes and placed in the -80 
freezer for storage until ready to analyze.  A single post -dialysis EDTA tube will be 
collected after the first and second dialysis sessions.   
 
All biological samples will be stored with unique study IDs that are not labeled with 
any unique indentifying information, such as name, MRN or birthdates.   
 
Data collection and management  
We will perform chart review and enter demographic information, clinical and 
laboratory data into a secure electronic database.  Data for collection , when available,  
will include:  
1. Demographics - age, race, and sex.  
2. Comorbid illness - diabetes, cerebral vascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, 
malignancy, coronary artery disease and heart failure.  
3. Laboratory data – in addition to the samples outlined above, complete blood count 
and electrolytes will be availab le as part of routine clinical care for subjects.  Online 
Kt/V, a measure of dialysis adequacy will be available for all subjects on 
hemodialysis.   
4. Medications/fluids - list of all active medications, type and volume of intravenous 
fluids administered during dialysis; dialysis prescription details.  
5. Treatment parameters – access, blood pressures, heart rates, weights, duration of 
session, blood flow, dialysate flow, and dialysate prescription.  
 
Data will also be collected regarding length of stay and readmissions.   
 
Primary end -point defini tion 
The primary end -point will be the magnitude of systolic blood pressure decline, 
defined as the pre -dialysis SBP minus the nadir intra-dialytic SBP.   
 
Interventions  
The higher dialysate sodium concentration will be 142 mmol/L; the lower  dialysate 
sodium concentration will be 138 mmol/L.   These concentrations will be used for the 
duration of the study period, up to a maximum of six sessions.  Afterwards the 
dialysate sodium concentration will be determined by the treating in -house dialysis 
doctor.  All other treatment parameters will be det ermined by the treating physicians.   
 
 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
Analytic approach     
Intra-dialytic SBP decline:   The primary outcome will be the average magnitude of 
pre-hemodialysis SBP – nadir SBP during dialysis for the primary analyses, using a 
repeated measures analysis design. This will be assessed at each of the first six HD 
sessions during the hospital admission.  In secondary analyses we will examine 
alternative definitions of intra -dialytic hemodynamic instability, as outlined in Aim 1. 
SBP’ s will be measured at 15 minute intervals throughout the HD procedure.   
Cardiac Biomarkers:   hsTnI will measured from samples prior to and 20 hours after 
the first HD study sessions using the Architect (Abbott) platform; the limit of 
detection of the assa y is 1.2 ng/L; the 99th percentile among healthy subjects is 16 
 7 ng/L; and the 10% coefficient of variation (CV)  concentration is 3.9 ng/L.29  
Tolerability and Safety P arameters (Pre -dialysis SBP, thirst scores and inter -dialytic 
weight gain)    During each study session patients will be asked to complete a 
symptom questionnaire, including the dialysis thirst inventory.30 BP’s will be 
measured with an appropriately sized cuff after having the patient resting quietly for 5 
minutes, the arm supported at heart level and before the dialysis access is needled. An 
average of two readings will be taken on each occa sion.  BP’s between HD sessions 
will also be collected from each patients’ end -of-bed chart to assess effects of the 
intervention on inter -dialytic blood pressure control.  Inter -dialytic weight gain will 
be recorded pre - and post -dialysis in the inpatient  HD unit.  For bed -bound patients, 
pre-dialysis weights will be ascertained from weights recorded on the hospital floor, 
or from calibrated bed weights.   
 
Power   
We will aim to recruit 70 subjects to each arm.  We will report two -way comparisons 
with an a lpha=0.05.  We will inspect and plot all BP measurements over time and 
assess trends descriptively.  Assuming a mean SBP decline of 24 mmHg, with 
standard deviation of 12 mmHg,31  we will have 90% power to detect a difference of 
6.6 mmHg and 80% power to detect a difference of 5.7 mmHg between groups.  If 
recruitment is slower than anticipated, even with n=55 in each arm, we will have 80% 
power to detect a dif ference of 6.5 mmHg for the primary outcome.  If the SD was as 
high as 24 mmHg, we would still have 80% power to detect a difference of 11.7 
mmHg.   
 The mean difference in hsTnI according to higher vs. lower  DNa will be 
assessed with standard t -tests or non -parametric tests, according to the observed 
distribution.  Assuming 70% of patients will have at least two inpatient HD sessions, 
a total of 49 patients per arm will have complete data for determining the difference in 
hsTnI measurements before and after the HD study session.  We will have 80% 
power, at alpha=0.05, to detect mean differences of 0.82 log pg/mL in hsTnI for 
higher vs. lower  DNa, assuming mean change of 3.27 ±1.43 log pg/mL (preliminary 
data).   For the analyses of pre -dialysis SBP, we will have 80% power to detect a 
difference in means of 12.4 mmHg for higher vs. lower  DNa, assuming mean 152 ±26 
mmHg.32  For the analyses of thirst scores, we will have 80% power to detect a 
difference in means of 3.5 units, ass uming mean score of 20.3 ±7.3 units.30 For the 
analyses of inter -dialytic weight gain, we will have 80% power to detect a difference 
in means of 0.7 kg, assuming mean 2.7 ±1.5 kg.33 
 
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS (Stratify by common and uncommon)  
a. Complications of surgical and non -surgical procedures, etc.  
b. Drug side effects and toxicities  
c. Device complications/malfunctions  
d. Psychosocial (non -medical) risks  
 
Complications of surgical and non -surgical procedures  
Where possible, collection of blood will occur at the same time that samples are being 
collected as part of routine clinical care.  The risks of collection from an arteriovenous 
fistula, arteriovenous g raft or peripheral vein relate to bruising at the site of draw and 
transient dizziness. The risks of blood draw from a central line include a small risk of 
introducing infection.  Blood drawing can contribute to the development of anemia, 
 8 which can cause s ymptoms related to inadequate oxygen delivery in patients with 
severe anemia (Hematocrit <21%) and myocardial ischemia (Hct <30%). Repeated 
blood draws can also increase the need for blood transfusions, particularly in those 
with inadequate bone marrow res ponses.   We will therefore withhold blood draws 
from patients under the following circumstances:  
a) Active myocardial ischemia and hematocrit < 30%  
b) Severe anemia (hematocrit <21%)  
c) Active bleeding  
When the patient’s physician feels that blood drawing would be  unsafe or poorly 
tolerated.  
 
 
Potential intervention  side effects  
Risks from higher dialysate sodium use include greater thirst, inter -dialytic weight 
gain and hypertension.   
Risks from lower  DNa use include more frequent low blood pressure events.   
 
Psychosocial and non -medical risks  
The risk of loss of privacy is small.  We will use study IDs rather than medical record 
numbers to label and track specimens and results. Medical Record Numbers will be 
linked to study IDs in a file that is located on a p assword -protected secure computer 
and in a study notebook kept in the principal investigator’s locked office.  Subjects 
will have the option to opt out of the study at any time.   
 
 
VIII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Subjects may benefit from taking part in this stu dy by the possibility of their blood 
pressure during dialysis remaining closer to the normal range and may have less 
adverse symptoms during dialysis.  
 
We hope the findings of this study will shed light on the role of changes in osmolality 
in relation to the development of intra -dialytic hypotension and symptoms.  By 
building upon these findings we hope to further our research in order to facilitate 
improv ed outcomes in these patients in the longer term.   
 
 
IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
As our trial is a small physiological study, involving relatively small numbers of 
subjects, short term interventions and endpoints which are not serious or irreversible, 
the principal investigator will have primary responsibility for monitoring the trial 
from a scientific integrity and participant safety standpoint.  Safety data will be 
reviewed when 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100% of the target enrolment has bee n 
achieved.  
We will report any adverse events to the IRB per PHRC reporting guidelines.   
Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others including adverse events 
will be reported to the PHRC in accordance with PHRC unanticipated problems 
repor ting guidelines.   
 
 
 9 X. REFERENCES  
1. USRDS: US Renal Data System 2011 Annual Data Report: Atlas of Chronic 
Kidney Disease and End -Stage Renal Disease in the United States, 
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and  Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD. 2011  
2. USRDS: US Renal Data System 2012 Annual Data Report: Atlas of Chronic 
Kidney Disease and End -Stage Renal Disease in the United States, 
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and D igestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD. 2012  
3. Dheenan S, Henrich WL: Preventing dialysis hypotension: a comparison of 
usual protective maneuvers. Kidney Int,  59: 1175 -1181, 2001  
4. KDOQI: K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for cardiovascular disease  in 
dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis,  45: S1 -153, 2005  
5. Bos WJ, Bruin S, van Olden RW, Keur I, Wesseling KH, Westerhof N, Krediet RT, 
Arisz LA: Cardiac and hemodynamic effects of hemodialysis and 
ultrafiltration. Am J Kidney Dis,  35: 819 -826, 2000  
6. Boon D, van Montfrans GA, Koopman MG, Krediet RT, Bos WJ: Blood pressure 
response to uncomplicated hemodialysis: the importance of changes in 
stroke volume. Nephron Clin Pract,  96: c82 -87, 2004  
7. Palmer BF, Henrich WL: Recent advances in the prevention and  management 
of intradialytic hypotension. J Am Soc Nephrol,  19: 8 -11, 2008  
8. Burton JO, Jefferies HJ, Selby NM, McIntyre CW: Hemodialysis -induced cardiac 
injury: determinants and associated outcomes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol,  4: 
914 -920, 2009  
9. McIntyre CW: Haemodialysis -induced myocardial stunning in chronic kidney 
disease - a new aspect of cardiovascular disease. Blood Purif,  29: 105 -110, 
2010  
10. McIntyre CW, Burton JO, Selby NM, Leccisotti L, Korsheed S, Baker CS, Camici 
PG: Hemodialysis -induced cardiac dysfunction is associated with an acute 
reduction in global and segmental myocardial blood flow. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol,  3: 19 -26, 2008  
11. Hung SY, Hung YM, Fang HC, Yeh JH, Hung GC, Wu CJ, Chou KJ, Chung HM: 
Cardiac tropon in I and creatine kinase isoenzyme MB in patients with 
intradialytic hypotension. Blood Purif,  22: 338 -343, 2004  
12. Ishida I, Hirakata H, Sugimori H, Omae T, Hirakata E, Ibayashi S, Kubo M, 
Fujishima M: Hemodialysis causes severe orthostatic reduction in 
cerebral blood flow velocity in diabetic patients. Am J Kidney Dis,  34: 
1096 -1104, 1999  
13. Chang TI, Paik J, Greene T, Desai M, Bech F, Cheung AK, Chertow GM: 
Intradialytic hypotension and vascular access thrombosis. J Am Soc 
Nephrol,  22: 1526 -1533, 2011  
14. Shoji T, Tsubakihara Y, Fujii M, Imai E: Hemodialysis -associated hypotension 
as an independent risk factor for two -year mortality in hemodialysis 
patients. Kidney Int,  66: 1212 -1220, 2004  
15. Tisler A, Akocsi K, Borbas B, Fazakas L, Ferenczi S, Gorogh S, Kulcsar I, Nagy 
L, Samik J, Szegedi J, Toth E, Wagner G, Kiss I: The effect of frequent or 
occasional dialysis -associated hypotension on survival of patients on 
maintenance haemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant,  18: 2601 -2605, 
2003  
 10 16. Park J, Rhee CM,  Sim JJ, Kim YL, Ricks J, Streja E, Vashistha T, Tolouian R, 
Kovesdy CP, Kalantar -Zadeh K: A comparative effectiveness research 
study of the change in blood pressure during hemodialysis treatment and 
survival. Kidney Int,  2013: 237, 2013  
17. Gruppo EePC: M ulticentre, cross -sectional study of ventricular arrhythmias 
in chronically haemodialysed patients. . Lancet,  2: 305 -309, 1988  
18. de Lima JJ, Vieira ML, Lopes HF, Gruppi CJ, Medeiros CJ, Ianhez LE, Krieger 
EM: Blood pressure and the risk of complex arrhyt hmia in renal 
insufficiency, hemodialysis, and renal transplant patients. Am J Hypertens,  
12: 204 -208, 1999  
19. Toyoda K, Fujii K, Fujimi S, Kumai Y, Tsuchimochi H, Ibayashi S, Iida M: 
Stroke in patients on maintenance hemodialysis: a 22 -year single -center  
study. Am J Kidney Dis,  45: 1058 -1066, 2005  
20. Naganuma T, Uchida J, Tsuchida K, Takemoto Y, Tatsumi S, Sugimura K, 
Nakatani T: Silent cerebral infarction predicts vascular events in 
hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int,  67: 2434 -2439, 2005  
21. Rodrigo F, S hideman J, McHugh R, Buselmeier T, Kjellstrand C: Osmolality 
changes during hemodialysis. Natural history, clinical correlations, and 
influence of dialysate glucose and intravenous mannitol. Ann Intern Med,  
86: 554 -561, 1977  
22. Mann H, Stiller S: Urea, sodium, and water changes in profiling dialysis. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant,  11 Suppl 8: 10 -15, 1996  
23. Sang GL, Kovithavongs C, Ulan R, Kjellstrand CM: Sodium ramping in 
hemodialysis: a study of beneficial and adverse effects. Am J Kidney Dis,  
29: 669 -677, 1997  
24. Song JH, Lee SW, Suh CK, Kim MJ: Time -averaged concentration of dialysate 
sodium relates with sodium load and interdialytic weight gain during 
sodium -profiling hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis,  40: 291 -301, 2002  
25. Song JH, Park GH, Lee SY, Lee SW, Kim MJ: Effect of sodium balance and the 
combination of ultrafiltration profile during sodium profiling 
hemodialysis on the maintenance of the quality of dialysis and sodium 
and fluid balances. J Am Soc Nephrol,  16: 237 -246, 20 05 
26. Marshall MR, Dunlop JL: Are dialysate sodium levels too high? Semin Dial,  25: 
277 -283, 2012  
27. Mc Causland FR, Brunelli SM, Waikar SS: Dialysate sodium, serum sodium 
and mortality in maintenance hemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant,  27: 
1613 -1618,  2011  
28. Hecking M, Karaboyas A, Saran R, Sen A, Horl WH, Pisoni RL, Robinson BM, 
Sunder -Plassmann G, Port FK: Predialysis serum sodium level, dialysate 
sodium, and mortality in maintenance hemodialysis patients: the Dialysis 
Outcomes and Practice Pattern s Study (DOPPS). Am J Kidney Dis,  59: 238 -
248, 2012  
29. Koerbin G, Tate J, Potter JM, Cavanaugh J, Glasgow N, Hickman PE: 
Characterisation of a highly sensitive troponin I assay and its application 
to a cardio -healthy population. Clin Chem Lab Med,  50: 871 -878, 2012  
30. Bots CP, Brand HS, Veerman EC, Valentijn -Benz M, Van Amerongen BM, 
Valentijn RM, Vos PF, Bijlsma JA, Bezemer PD, Ter Wee PM, Amerongen 
AV: Interdialytic weight gain in patients on hemodialysis is associated 
with dry mouth and thirst. Kidney Int, 66: 1662 -1668, 2004  
 11 31. Inrig JK, Patel UD, Toto RD, Szczech LA: Association of blood pressure 
increases during hemodialysis with 2 -year mortality in incident 
hemodialysis patients: a secondary analysis of the Dialysis Morbidity and 
Mortality Wave 2 S tudy. Am J Kidney Dis,  54: 881 -890, 2009  
32. Eknoyan G, Beck GJ, Cheung AK, Daugirdas JT, Greene T, Kusek JW, Allon M, 
Bailey J, Delmez JA, Depner TA, Dwyer JT, Levey AS, Levin NW, Milford E, 
Ornt DB, Rocco MV, Schulman G, Schwab SJ, Teehan BP, Toto R: Eff ect of 
dialysis dose and membrane flux in maintenance hemodialysis. N Engl J 
Med,  347: 2010 -2019, 2002  
33. Usvyat LA, Kooman JP, van der Sande FM, Wang Y, Maddux FW, Levin NW, 
Kotanko P: Dynamics of hospitalizations in hemodialysis patients: results 
from a  large US provider. Nephrol Dial Transplant,  2013: 11, 2013  
 
 
 
 