Comparison of Local Anesthetic Infusion Pump Versus Depofoam Bupivacaine for Pain 
Managemen  
 
Date 12/12/2015  
ID: 15 -1535  
  
 
 
Purpose  
 
We propose  a randomized controlled study to compare the effectiveness of a local -
anesthetic continuous infusion pump system versus locally injectable FDA approved 
DepoFoam bupivacaine  (Experal)  for post surgical analgesia in patients undergoing 
unilateral DIEP free flap reconstruction.  
 
Specific Aims  
 
1) Compare the amount of postoperative narcotic use in patients with a local-
anesthetic continuous infusion pump system, locally injectable liposomal 
bupivaca ine, and  a control cohort  by recording the type and amount of narcotic 
use from a patient’s medication records.  
2) Examine the incidence  of narcotic -related side effects  in the experimental groups  
as compared to the control cohort by documenting incidents of nausea and 
vomiting, time to first ambulation, and time to first liquid and solid oral intake.   
3) Survey patient satisfaction  with pain management using a visual analog scale 
during their hospital stay.  
 
Rationale for the Project  
 
Effective post- surgical pain con trol in patient s undergoing unilateral  deep inferior 
epigastric perforator ( DIEP ) free flap reconstruction.  is critical to patient  recovery , and 
can contribute to faster patient mobilization, shorter hosital stays and reduced health 
care c osts.  The admisitration of local anesthetics via wound infiltration is standard  of 
care and an effective practice for postsurgical pain management.  However , this method 
only  provides relative ly brief analgesia, usually lasting only 12 hours.  Other FDA 
approved delivery sys tems using an indwelling fusion pump catherter (On –Q pump)  are 
currently being used in our practice  and may be used to extend the duration of action of 
locally adminisisted analgesia by continously infusing anesthetic into t he wound.  
Alternativley , a depot form of bupivicaine has been FDA approved and currently used  to 
deliver  a single -dose admistered via wound infil tration for prolonged analgesia by 
allowing for the diffusion of the drug over an extended period of time.   Both of these 
products are used as standard practice during DIEP free flap reconstructions.  However, 
no s tudies compa re the efficacy of these two methods  patients undergoing unilateral 
DIEP  flap reconstructions has been done in a prospective, randomiz ed control manner.    
 
 
Significance  
 
We would like to compare Clevleland Clinic Foundation’s  experience with unilateral DIEP  
flap breast reconstruction to determine if postoperive pain management is improved 
with either Depobupivicaine, a local infusion anesthetic pump as comapred to  patients 
given sta ndaad analgesic . We would like to conduct this study to better serve DIEP 
surgery patients  
 
In a IRB approved pilot study performed by Dr Amir Ghaznavi, at Henry Ford Medical 
Center in Detroit,MI in 2014 ,  depoFoam Bupivicaine was compared to Bupivicane alone 
in patient undergoing breast reconstrcution with transverse rectus abdonius muscle 
(TRA M) or abdominoplasty procedures.   
 
The primary endpoints were postoperative pain as measured by total postoperative 
morphine or hydromorphone utilization in a patient controlled analgesia (PCA) and pain 
scores on visual analog scale (VAS). The VAS was measured while the patients were at 
rest (VAS -R) and after the patient was asked to cough (VAS -C). Morphine usage was 
tracked by amount dispensed by the PCA pump. Using the medication chart any rescue 
medications beyond the PCA usage was also recorded. Patien ts were also interviewed 
and asked to rate their postoperative pain on a 10 -point scale with 0 being no pain and 
10 being the most pain. Other variables recorded were incidents of nausea or vomiting, 
time to first ambulation, and time to first liquid and s olid oral intake. All variable 
measurements were obtained at 30 minutes, 6 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours, 48 hours, and 
72 hours postoperatively  
 
A total of twenty patients were randomized into Depofoam bupivacaine group (Exparel, 
n=15), and continuous infusio n pump system (On- Q, n=5) after undergoing 
abdominoplasty  or TRAM flaps. The Exparel group demonstrated higher morphine usage 
at the 30 minute time point compared to the On- Q group (5.2 mg vs 1.2mg), but a 
significantly lower volume at all other time point s when compared to the On- Q group 
(6.2 mg vs 16.42 mg at 6 hrs; 5.5 mg vs 14.8 mg at 12 hrs; 5.98 mg vs 14.9 mg at 24 hrs; 
5.23 mg vs 11.63 mg at 48 hrs; 2.7 mg vs  12.65 mg at 72 hrs). The VAS scores for the On -
Q group were higher at the earlier time point s (up to 6 hours) when compared to 
Exparel group and relatively the same during the remainder of the study (Figure 1 and 
Figure 2). The remaining variables that were examined revealed that the Exparel group 
had more nausea and vomiting at earlier time poin ts but that the same group was 
ambulating, drinking and eating solid food at earlier time points than the On- Q group.   
 
From this pilot study we concluded that with the use of a depot form of bupivicaine 
(Exparel ), more effective postsurgical pain control was achieved in patients undergoing 
abdominoplasty or TRAM flap reconstruction than those that used an indwelling fusion 
pump catherters (On– Q pump). Further studies are necessary to enroll more 
participants unde rgoing these specific procedures in which this type of post surgical pain 
control may be most effective.  
 
Our goal in this study is to expand the finding based from our pilot study by observing 
only those that undergo breast reconstruction with a DIEP flap.    
 
Figure 1  
 
 
Figure 2  
 
 
 
 
 

Subjects in the project  
Study participants will include non -pregnant women aged 18 years or older scheduled 
to have unilateral DIEP flap breast reconstruction .  Patients will be required to have an 
ASA physical status classification of 1, 2, or 3.  Patients will be excluded if they have a 
concurrent or recent medical condition that could interfere with study participation, 
including history of hepatitis, alcohol/substance abuse, uncontrolled psychiatric 
disorders, known allergy, or contraindication to amide -type local anesthetics, opioids, or 
propofol. Patients will also be excluded if they have a body weight of less than 50 kg, 
have participated in another study involving an investigational medication within the 
prior 30  days, or are taking analgesics (ie, nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs, 
acetaminophen, or opioids), antidepressants, or glucocorticoids within the 3 days before 
surgery.   
 
Describe the control population  
Group 3 of our study will compromise t he control group for our study.  Patients in this 
arm will receive .25% bupivacaine without epinephrine injected using ultrasound 
guidance in between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles as well as 
along incisional lines.  This form of local wound infiltration  is the current standard of 
care for post -operative pain management for DIEP reconstructions of the breast.   
 
Support the likeli hood of rec ruiting the number of subjects required 
Evidence from our Breast Reconstrcution database using  data transferred from 
Epic/Clarity, in 2014 show fifty four unilateral DIEP breast reconstructions were 
performed and in 2013 sixty six unilateral DIEP breast reconstructions were performed.   
 
Projec t Design  and Protocol  
 
All patient s meeting the inclusion criteria will be randomized using  a blocked 
randomization technique, stratifying patients by the timing of the procedure, and it will 
be employed to allocate patients in equal numbers to each group.   The randomization 
will be created using the plan procedure within SAS software (version 9.3 or higher; 
Cary, NC). .  Patients will be assigned to one of three groups: Group 1 - DepoBupivicaine 
Injection; Group 2 - OnQ catheter placement, and the control Gro up 3 - 0.25 % 
Bupivicaine injection.  
 
Bupivacaine is a commonly utilized medicaiton for post -operative pain control with a 
favorable side -effect profile.  The dosages of medications given in the study are within 
safe limits.    
 
The maximum safety dosage of bupivicaine is 2mg/kg with a half life of 3.5 hours.  This 
means a 70kg adult could receive 150mg  (.15g) .  This calculation does not account for 
the slow release profile of D epoBupivicaine  which would increase the maximum safe 
dose.  
 
The DepoBupivicaine  patients  (Group 1)  will receive an in jection of 166mg of 
DepoBupivicaine  diluted in 60mL, the On Q  patients  (Group 2)  will receive an infiltration  
via an OnQ soaker catheter of 0 .25% bupivicaine at 4mL/hour (ie. .01 gram/hour)  and 
0.25 % Bupivicaine patients (Group 3)  will receive 2mg/kg of 0 .25% of bupivicaine.  
 
 Consent  
All patients will sign an informed consent that will be presented to them during a pre -
operative visit with their attending surgeon.   
 
Pre-operative  Protocol  
No preemptive morphine was given to patients.  Patients at high r isk for p ost-operative 
nausea and v omiting will be given Dexamethasone 4mg and Reglan 10 mg.  Anesthesia 
will be given according to Table 1 . 
 
 
Table 1:  
 
 
Induction  Propofol  
Intubation (muscle relaxation)  Succinylcholine  
Maintenacnce  Sevoflourane  
Muscle relaxation  Rocuronium  
Analgesia  Fentanyl 2 -7 mcg/Kg  
Prophylactic Analgesia  Toradol 30 - 60 mg  
Reversal  Glycopirolate + Neostigmine  
Anti-emetic  Zofran 4 mg  
 
Operative Technique  
Surgeons for patients randomized to Group 1( DepoBupivicaine ) will be given a 
schematic for injection of DepoBupivicaine. O ne 20 cc vial of EXPERAL (266 mg) will be 
diluted with 60 cc preservative -free normal sterile saline for a total volume of 80 cc. Th e 
infiltration technique for the DepoBupivicaine (See Baxter et al , and Hivelin et al) will be 
20 cc of injected with a 25 -gauge needle on either side of the suture line, (Figure 2  and 
Figure 3 ) injected directly into the fascia.  The injections will be do ne in between the 
internal oblique  and transversus abdominus  muscles as determined via ultrasound.  
Another 20 cc of will be injected on the outside edge of the surgical site where the 
sensory nerves branch up  from  the fascia to the skin flap. ()  The final 20 cc will be 
injected along the length of the incision where the skin will be anchored down with care 
to inject the  product near the ileoinguinal nerve to ensure appropriate analgesic 
coverage .  Once again, the D epoBupivicaine will be injected directly into the fascia 
above the muscle layer.  All patients will have two closed -suction drains placed at the 
inferior aspect of the donor site, oriented horizontally and remote from the any infusion 
catheter..  
 
For patients assigned to the Group 2 (O nQ) the surgeons will be given an instruction 
sheet with specific placement of catheter (See Bulter et al) .  All patients in the group will 
have two ON -Q soaker catheters installed into the abdominal donor site before donor -
site closure. The catheters will be inserted through 3 -mm stab incisions in the 
suprapubic area and 3 cm caudal to the donor -site incision. One catheter will be placed 
directly in  the plane between the internal oblique and the transversus abdominus (see 
Hebba rd et al) , and the second catheter will be placed subcutaneously, superficial to 
the anterior rectus sheath along the superior aspect of the donor site (Fig ure 1).  At the 
conclusion of surgery, a 4 -ml/hour infusion 0. 25% Bupivicaine  % solution will be 
delivered continuously by the continuous infusion 
pump system (2 ml/hour through each catheter) . All patients will have two closed -
suction drains placed at the inferior aspect of the donor site , oriented horizontally and  
remote from the  any infusion catheters.  
 
Patients assigned to the control Group 3  (0.25  % Bupivicaine)  will be given 0.25% 
bupivacaine without epinephrine.  A dose of 2mg/kg will be given. Thus, a  80 kg patient 
will be given 80 cc of 0.25% Bupivacaine .   The infiltratio n technique for the Maracine 
will be identical to the EXPERAL injection whereby 20 cc of will injected with a 25 -gauge 
needle on either side of the suture line (Figure 2  and Figure 3 ) directly into the fascia 
above the muscle layer.  The injections will be done  in between internal oblique  and 
transvers us abdominus  muscles as determined via ultrasound . Another 20 cc of will be 
injected on the outside edge of the surgical site where the sensory nerves branch up 
from the fascia to the skin fl ap (Figure 3).  The final 20 cc will be injected along the length 
of the incision where skin will be anchored down; care will be taken to inject the  
product near the ileoinguinal nerve to ensure appropriate analgesic coverage (Figure 4).  
Once again, the 0.25% Bupivacaine  will be injected directly into the fascia above the 
muscle layer.   All patients will have two closed -suction drains placed at the inferior 
aspect of the donor site remote from the any infusion catheters and oriented 
horizontally.  
 
 
 
  
Figure 1 .  A. OnQ catheter in  vivo prior to closure  of open abdomen (See Haller et al) B. 
Schematic of OnQ catheter place in a plane above the Tranversus Abdominus (TA) (see 
Hebbard et al)  
 
 
A.      B.    C. 
Figure  2.  Injecting bupivacaine into fascia and along incisional lines (C) prior to 
closure (Baxter et al) .   
 
 
 
 
Caudal  
Cephalad  
Umbilicus  
 OnQ 
catheter  
Injecting fasci a 
 Injecting abdominal incisional line  
 Injecting fascia  
   
 
Figure 3 A. Open abdomen prior to closure marking site of injection of either 
DepoBupivicaine or 0.25 % Bupivicaine (White Arrow) B. Using ultrasound probe in vivo 
C. Schematic of plane between the Internal Oblique and Transversus Abdominus  
 
Post -operativ e Protocol  
 
No short -acting analgesics, such as Fentanyl, will be given post -operatively.  All patients 
will receive a narcotic intravenously through a patient -controlled analgesia pump 
programmed for demand -only mode (no basal rate). The patient -controlle d anesthesia 
will be filled wit h morphine or hydromorphone (if  patient sensitivity to morphine). Oral 
narcotics will be offered when the patien t’s diet is advanced as tolerated , typically post -
operative day 1.  Patients will be encouraged to ambulate on post- operative day 1. The 
continuous infusion pump catheters will be removed by the surgeon when the pump is  
empty.  Drains will be removed when output is less than 30mL in a consecutive 24 hour 
period.   
 
Our primary endpoints will be postoperative pain as measured by total postoperative 
morphine or hydromorphone utilization from  a patient controlled anesthesia pump 
(PCA) and pain scores on visual analog scale (VAS).  The VAS will be measured while the 
patient is at rest (VAS -R) and after the patient is asked to cough (VAS -C).  For each 
patient, the area  under the curve (AUC) of the VAS -R will be calculated.  Morphine 
usage will be  tracked by patient controlled analgesia (PCA) dispensed.  Using the 
medication chart , any rescue medications beyon d the PCA will also be recorded.  
Patients will be interviewed and asked to rate their postoperative pain on a 10 -point 
scale with 0 being no pain and 10 being the most pain. Another variables recorded will 
include incidents of nausea or vomiting, time to first ambulation, and time to first liquid 
and solid oral intake .   All measurements for variables were obtained at 6 hrs, 12 hrs, 24 
hrs, 48 hrs, 72 hrs .  Nursing staff on our designated breast reconstruction floor  will be 
instructed on how to interview patients and collect data for the 6 and 12 hour 
timepoints.   This information will be stored on Epic  EMR in a stardard note  and nurses 
will be given a smart text to use in order to appropriately ascertain all information.  The 
24, 48, and 72 hour time points will be collected by the co -investigators.  Any pain 
medications given by PCA, IV or PO will recorded and converted to morphine as 
diagramed below:  

 
 
Discuss limitations and difficulties  
 
The limitations of our study include potential confounding pain from the mastectomy 
site, the subjectivity in patient perception of pain, and differences in patient threshold 
to request patient-  controlled anesthesia and oral narcotics  
 
Provide the tentative schedule for completion  
 
Our schedule for the study will be 6 months  continuous enrollment and 
experimentation from September to February , or until our groups are filled.     .   
 
Data collection  
The data fields will be: Birth date, sex, type of surgery,  utilization of mesh, number of 
mg on PCA, VAS at rest and VAS with cough, number of rescue pain medications given, 
number of incidents of nausea/vomiting, time to first ambulation, time to first liquid and 
solid intake post surgery.   
 
Planned Data Analys is 
 
 The data will be examined with an analysis of variance (ANOVA) procedure with 
repeated measures.  The design will have one between factor, (group (3), and one 
within factor, time (6).  The analysis will test for a group effect, a time effect and a gro up 
by time interaction.  We anticipate that the three groups will be comparable at the start.  
This implies the likelihood of a significant interaction term.  If this happens, our primary 
analysis will focus on the ANOVA for the 72 -hour time point.  This will show us if a 
differential effect has occurred.  All assumptions of the test will be examined and data 
transformations or nonparametric methods used if indicated.  
 
We will not be utilizing QHS, rather, one of the plastic surgery residents, Steven Rueda,  
will serve as our statistician.  

 
Sample Size Justification  
 
 We propose to randomly assign  individuals recruited during the recruitment 
period into 3 equal groups.  With three groups this translates to a difference between 
groups of 5 for total morphine used on day 3 and 0.7 for the VAS.  This assumes 
standard deviations of 4.9 for morphine and 0.7 for VAS.  Effects of these sizes represent 
clinically important differences in the range that we believe will happen.   
 
  
References : 
 
1. Gorfine SR, Onel E, Patou G, Krivokapic Z V. Bupivacaine extended -release 
liposome injection for prolonged postsurgical a nalgesia in patients undergoing 
hemorrhoidectomy: a multicenter, randomized, double -blind , placebo -controlled 
trial. Dis Colon  Rectum. 2011 Dec;54(12):1552 -9.  
2. Haas E, Onel E, Miller H, Ragupathi M, White PF. A double -blind, randomized, 
active -controlled study for post -hemorrhoidectomy pain management with 
liposome bupivacaine, a novel local analgesic formulation. Am Surg. 2012 
May;78(5):574- 81.  
3. Dasta J, Ramamoorthy S, Patou G, Sinatra R. Bupivacaine liposome injectable 
suspension compared with bupivacaine HCl for the reduction of opioid burden in 
the postsurgical setting. Curr Med Res Opin. 2012 Oct;28(10):1609 -15.  Epub 
2012 Sep 3.   
4. Chavez -Abraham V, Barr JS, Zwiebel PC. The efficacy of a lidocaine -infused pain 
pump for postoperative analgesia following elective augmentation 
mammaplasty or abdominoplasty. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2011 Aug;35(4):463- 9. 
Epub  2010 Dec 7.   
5. Feng LJ. Painless abdominoplasty: the efficacy of combined intercostal and 
pararectus blocks in reducing postoperative pain and recovery time. Plast 
Reconstr  Surg. 2010 Nov;126(5):1723 -32.  
6. Morales, R., Mentz, H., Newall, G., Patronella, C., & Masters, O. (2013). Use of 
Abdominal Field Block Injections With Liposomal Bupivicaine to Control 
Postoperative Pain After Abdominoplasty. Aesthetic Sur gery Journal . 
7. Heller, L., Kowalski, A. M., Wei, C., & Butler, C. E. (2008). Prospective, 
randomized, double -blind trial of local anesthetic infusion and intravenous 
narcotic patient -controlled anesthesia pump for pain management after free 
TRAM flap breast  reconstruction. Plastic and reconstructive surgery , 122(4), 
1010 -1018.  
8. Sherwinter, D. A., Ghaznavi, A. M., Spinner, D., Savel, R. H., Macura, J. M., & 
Adler, H. (2008). Continuous infusion of intraperitoneal bupivacaine after 
laparoscopic surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Obesity surgery , 18(12), 
1581 -1586.  
9. Masters, O. (2013, April). Use of Regional Abdominal Block Injections of 
Liposomal Bupivicaine to Control Postoperative Pain After Abdominoplasty. In 
The Aesthetic Meeting 2013. ASAPS.  
10. Hebbard, Peter D., Michael J. Barrington, and Carolyn Vasey. "Ultrasoun d-guided 
continuous oblique subcostal transversus abdominis plane blockade: description 
of anatomy and clinical technique." Regional anesthesia and pain medicine  35.5 
(2010): 436 -441.  
11. Wheble, George AC, et al. "Surgeon -administered, intra- operative transve rsus 
abdominis plane block in autologous breast reconstruction: A UK hospital 
experience." Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery  66.12 (2013): 
1665 -1670.  
12. Zhong, Toni, et al. "Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) catheters inserted under 
direc t vision in the donor site following free DIEP and MS -TRAM breast 
reconstruction: a prospective cohort study of 45 patients." Journal of Plastic, 
Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery  66.3 (2013): 329- 336.  
13. Hivelin, Mikaël, et al. "Ultrasound -guided bilateral transversus abdominis plane 
block for postoperative analgesia after breast reconstruction by DIEP flap." 
Plastic and reconstructive surgery  128.1 (2011): 44- 55. 
  
 