Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14   
  
 
 
 
 
A Pilot stu dy of Topical  Imiquimod Therapy for the Tre atment of Recur rent Ext ramammary 
Paget’s Di sease 
 
MSKCC THERAP EUTIC/DIAG NOSTIC PR OTOCOL  
 
 
 
Princi pal Investigator/Depart ment: Dennis Chi, MD  Depart ment of  Surgery, Division of  
Gynecologic  Oncology  
 
Co-Princi pal 
Inves tigator(s)/Depa rtment: 
 
Inves tigator(s)/Depa rtment: Robert Sos low, MD  
 
 
 
Kay Park, MD  Depart ment of  Pathology  
 
 
 
Depart ment of  Pathology  
 
Consenting  
Professiona l(s)/Dep artment: Nadeem  Abu-Rustu m, MD 
Richard Ba rakat, MD  
Carol Brown, MD 
Dennis Chi, MD 
Douglas Levine, MD 
Yukio Sonoda, MD 
Mario L eitao, MD 
Elizab eth Jewell, MD 
Ginger Gar dner, MD  Depart ment of  Surgery, Division of  
Gynecologic  Oncology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please Not e: A Consenting Pro fessional must have co mpleted the mandatory H uman Subjec ts 
Education and Certi fication Progra m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial S loan-Kettering Cancer C enter 
1275 York Ave. New 
York,  NY 10021  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14   
  
 
 
 
 
Collaborating Institutions:  
 
Ohio State  University Co llege of Med icine PI: David O’ Malley, MD  
Ohio State  University  College  of M edicine  
M210 Starli ng-Loving 
320 We st  10th Ave.  
Colu mbus, OH 43210 
Phone: 614-293-7642 
Email:david.o'malley@ osumc.edu 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:07 -029A(6)   
 
 
MSKCC THERAP EUTIC/DIAG NOSTIC PR OTOCOL ..............................................................  1 
1.0 PRO TOCOL SUMM ARY AND/OR SC HEMA................................................................  1 
2.0 OBJECTI VES A ND SCIENTIFIC AIM S..........................................................................  2 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIO NALE...............................................................................  2 
4.0 OVE RVIEW OF STUDY D ESIGN/INTER VENTION  ....................................................  3 
4.1 DESIGN  ..................................................................................................................  3 
4.2 INTERV ENTION  ...................................................................................................  4 
5.0 THE RAPEUTIC/DIA GNOSTIC  AGENTS  .......................................................................  4 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT ELIG IBILITY  .......................................................................  5 
6.1 SUBJE CT INCL USION  CRITERI A......................................................................  5 
6.2 SUBJE CT EXCL USION  CRITERI A................................................. ....................  6 
7.0 REC RUITMENT PL AN (WITH L IMITED  WAIVER OF  AUTH ORIZATION)  ............  6 
8.0 PRET REATMENT E VALU ATION ..................................................................................  7 
9.0 TREATM ENT/INTE RVENTI ON PLAN  ..........................................................................  7 
10.0 EVA LUAT ION DURING TR EATMENT/INT ERVE NTION  ..........................................  7 
11.0 TOXICITI ES/SIDE EF FECTS  ...........................................................................................  8 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR THERAPEUTIC  RESP ONSE/OUTCO ME ASSE SSMEN T...............  11 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY  ................................................................  12 
14.0 BIOSTATISTI CS .............................................................................................................  12 
15.0 RESE ARCH PA RTICIPANT  REGISTRATI ON AND RANDOMIZ ATION  
PRO CEDURES.............................................................................................................................  12 
16.0 DATA MANAGEM ENT RE QUIREMENTS FOR P ARTICIPATING  SITES  ..............  14 
17.0 PROT ECTION OF HUMAN S UBJECTS  .......................................................................  19 
18.0 INFORM ED CONSENT PR OCEDURES  .......................................................................  21 
18.1 FOR PARTICIP ATING C ENTERS.....................................................................................  22 
20.0 APPE NDICES…………………………………………………………………………...19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended:  3/5/14  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 1 -  
  
1.0 PRO TOCOL SUMM ARY AND/OR SC HEMA  
 
Study Population  Patie nts with Recurre nt Extra mammary Page t’s Disease  
(EMPD)  
Study Desi gn Pilot, pr ospective  cohort  study  
Therapy  Imiquimod 5% Cream  applied T.I .W. 
Duration of  Therapy  12 weeks  
Assess ment of  Response  a. Clini cal assess ment of be fore and  after photo graphs by an  
independe nt review er 
b. Non -blinded hist ologic assess ment of  baseli ne biopsies  and 
post th erapy excisional biopsies 4 w eeks a fter end  of treatment 
Number of  evaluab le 
subje cts required  20 
Target sample size Assuming a 15% dropo ut rate, target sample size  is 17 
 
 
This is a pilot study of the  use of a topical immunomodulatory agent, i miquimod, for the 
treatment of recurrent Extramammary Paget’s  disease  (EMPD). In this  protoc ol we will assess 
the c linical and histol ogic effects of  topical  imiquimod on recurrent EM PD. 
 
Imiquimod 5% cream (Aldara,  3M Phar maceuticals,  St Paul, Minnes ota) is an FDA  approved 
safe and effective treatment of anogenit al warts, super ficial basal cell carcinoma, and actinic 
kerato sis.i 
 
Imiquimod has been demonstrated to induce cy tokines that pro mote a TH1 immune response 
following  both systemic and top ical administration .ii The induced  cytokines inclu de alpha 
interferon,  gamma interferon,  and interleu kin 12.  The speci fic mechanism of action  by which 
imiquimod eliminates w arts, ba sal cell carcinoma, and ac tinic skin can cers is unknown.  
 
Several  published  case reports  suggest the potential efficacy  of topic al 5% imiquimod cream 
in the treatment of EMPD after median treatment duration of 7.5 weeks  (range  6-16). iii, iv, v,vi 
In  addition,  a  recent  abstra ct  presented  at  the  annual  Society  of  Gynecolog ic  Oncology 
meeting  reported co mplete respon se of rec urrent EMPD  in five of six (83%) patients t reated 
with imiquimod for a median  duration  of 12 weeks  (range 6-48).xxi    In this study we will 
recruit  individuals  with  biopsy -proven  recu rrent  EMPD.    Imiquimod  5%  cream  will  be 
applied  by the patient 3 times per week  for 12 weeks.  The patient will be seen in clinic every 
six weeks  during  treatment for examination,  teaching,  and to assess  complianc e.   Punch 
biopsy  and photography will  be performed at the baseline and 12 week  time points.  Biopsies 
will be performed using the  3mm punch bi opsy ins trument.  The location w ill be  at the 
periph ery of the  lesion as determined by the physic ian with an attempt made to incorpor ate 
some normal tissue.  Biopsy or biopsies  will be obtai ned of the most suspicious  area.  If the 
lesion  is  still  present  after  12  weeks  of  therapy,  the  treating  physician  will  recommend 
excision of  the lesion four weeks a fter co mpletion of therapy (week 16).  The patie nt will have  
a follow -up exam  6 weeks after excision and then every  3 months  for at least 2 years. If no 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 2 -  
  
lesion is p resent or the patient refuses surgic al excision at week 16, the patie nt will return for 
follow -up exa ms every  3 months for at le ast 2 years. The treating phy sician w ill continue to 
offer surgic al exc ision at any la ter po int during follow-up if the lesion is still present. 
 
We will evaluate  the clinical and histolog ic response of recurrent  EMPD  to treatment. Clinic al 
response  will be assessed by a pathologist  (non-blinded) and an independent  reviewer who 
will compare clinical photographs  obtained  at study completion  to those obtained  at baseline. 
Lesions  will be evalu ated based on size as having unde rgone  complete respo nse, part ial 
response,  no change,  or progres sion.  Histologic evalu ation will entail quanti fying the number 
of residual Paget  cells following  treatment.  Side effects and toxicities of therapy  will be 
monitored and recor ded. 
 
Presented below is the  treatment sche ma for this  prospec tive cohort.  
 
 
Baseline 
assessme nt with 
exam, biopsy, and 
photography 
 
 
 
 
Imiquimod 5% 3x week for 12 
weeks. Repeat assessme nt with 
exam, biopsy, and photography 
 
 
 
NED DISEASE 
 
 
 
No exc ision  
Surgical excision 
at 16 weeks  
 
 
Clinic visits: 
Q3-4 months 
x 2 years  
 
NED  
 
Clinic visit: 6 
weeks post 
excision 
 
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTI VES A ND SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
 
To assess t he clinical and histolo gic effects of  topical  imiquimod therapy  on recu rrent 
extra mammary Page t’s disease  (EMPD). 
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIO NALE 
 
3.1   Topical  chemotherapy for the treatment of  recur rent E MPD 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 3 -  
  
 
EMPD  represents  1%  to  5%  of  all  vulvar  neopla sia.  The  diagno sis  is  confirmed  by  the 
histolo gical identi fication of unique  intraepithelial neoplastic cells showing  glandul ar 
differenti ation.vii   Surgery  is accepted  to be the standard  modality  of treatment; howev er, this is 
associ ated with  signi ficant disfigurement and high local recur rence rate  with many patients 
requi ring multiple excisions.   In  a review  of 100 patie nts treated  surgically for vulvar Page t’s 
disease, t here was a recurren ce rate of 34%  after a median  follow -up of 3  years (range,  0.6-15 
years) .viii    Topical che mothera peutic agents  including  5-fluoroura cil (5-FU), bleomycin and 
imiquimod have been used to tre at EMPD.  Unfortunat ely, 5-FU and Bleo mycin were associated 
with poor response  rates and toxic side effects.ix  x  Case  reports  of imiquimod therapy  in 5 
patie nts with EMPD d emonstrate a co mplete  clinical resp onse after a median  follow -up of 6 
months  (range, 0.5-14 months).iii,iv,v,vi There  are no prosp ective  clinical trials evaluating  EMPD 
and imiquimod therapy.   Although  the incidence  of EMPD  is small, MSKCC  treats 
approxi mately  5 patients a year and there fore has a unique  opportun ity to perform a  pilot study 
evalu ating the effects of  imiquimod on recu rrent EMPD.  
 
3.2       The thera peutic a gent 
 
Imiquimod is an immune response modifier that has been demonstrated to  induce  cytokines th at 
promote a TH1 response  followi ng both systemic and topical  administration. The  cytoki nes 
induced  include alpha  and gamma interferon and interleukin 12.   In humans, imiquimod 5% 
cream (Aldara,  3M Pharmaceutic als, St Paul, MN)  is an FDA  approved  safe and effective 
treatment of anogen ital warts,  actinic keratosis, and  super ficial basal cell carcinoma. As noted 
above,  isolated cases  have been reported of the eradication of EMPD  with topic al 5% imiquimod 
therapy.  
 
 
4.0       OVE RVIEW OF STUDY D ESIGN/INTER VENTION  
 
4.1       Design  
 
This is a pilot study  of the use of a topic al immunomodulatory agent, imiquimod, for the 
treatment of recurrent Extra mammary Paget’s  disease  (EMPD).  In this protoc ol, we will assess 
the c linical and histol ogic effects of  topical  imiquimod on recurrent EM PD. 
 
Imiquimod 5% cream is  an FDA  approved  safe and effective treatment of anog enital warts, 
super ficial basal cell carcinoma, and acti nic keratosis.xi 
 
Imiquimod has been demonstrated to  induce cytokines  that promote a TH1 immune respon se 
following  both systemic and topi cal administration .xii The induced  cytokines inc lude alpha 
interferon,  gamma interferon,  and interleukin  12.  The speci fic mechanism  of action by which 
imiquimod eliminates w arts, ba sal cell carcinoma, and ac tinic skin can cers is unknown.  
 
Several  case  repor ts  suggest  the  poten tial  efficacy  of  topical  5%  imiquimod  cream  in  the 
treatment of EMPD  after median  treatment duration of 7.5 weeks (range 6-16). xiii, xiv, xv, xvi   In this 
study,  we will recruit a total of 20 individu als with biops y-proven  recurrent EMPD.  Imiquimod 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 4 -  
  
5% cream will be applied by the patient 3 times per week  for 12 weeks.  The patie nt will be seen 
in clinic every six wee ks during t reatment for examination, teac hing, and to assess co mpliance. 
Compliance with  therapy will be monitor ed with a patient diary (see Appendix)  with 
quanti fication of residu al medication  at study  completion.  Punch biopsy  and photo graphy  will 
be performed at the baseline and 12 week ti me points.  If the  lesion is  still present  after 12 weeks 
of therapy, the  treating physic ian will  recommend excision  of the  lesion  four weeks  after 
completion of  therapy (week  16).  The patient will have a follow-up exam 6 weeks  after excision 
and then ev ery 3 months  for at least 2 years. If no  lesion is  present  or the patie nt refuses surgical 
excision at week 16, the  patie nt will return for follow -up exa ms every  3 months  for at least 2 
years.  The treating physician will  continue to  offer surgic al excision at any later point during 
follow -up if the lesion is still present.  
 
 
 
4.2       Inter vention 
 
The patie nt will be seen in  clinic every six weeks during  treatment for examination.  Imiquimod 
cream is  to be applied 3 times per week  for 12 weeks.  Seve ral case reports sugge st the poten tial 
efficacy  of topic al 5% imiquimod cream in  the treatment of EMPD after median  treatment 
duration of 7.5 weeks  (range  6-16).   The technique  for proper dose administration should  be 
demonstrat ed by the prescri ber to maximize the benefit of imiquimod therapy. It  should be 
applied p rior to nor mal sleeping hours, and l eft on the skin for 6-10 hours.  Following the 
treatment period  cream  should  be removed  by washing  the treated  area with mild soap and water. 
Examples of 3 ti mes per week a pplication schedules  are: Monday, Wednesday, Friday;  or 
Tuesday,  Thursday,  Saturday application prior to slee ping hours.  The technique  for proper  dose 
administra tion should  be demonstrated  by the  prescriber to maximize the benefit of imiquimod 
therapy. H andwashing is reco mmended be fore and after app lying i miquimod 5% cr eam. 
 
Punch  biopsy  and photography  will be  performed at the baseline and 12 week  time points.  If the 
lesion  is still prese nt after 12 weeks  of therapy,  the treating physic ian will recommend excisi on 
of the lesion  four weeks  after completion  of therapy (week  16).  The patient will have a follow - 
up exam  6 weeks  after excision  and then every 3 months  for at least 2 years.  If no lesion  is 
present  or the patient refuses surgical excision at  week  16, the  patient will return for follow -up 
exams every  3 months  for at lea st 2 years.  The treating physician will continue to  offer surgical 
excision at any lat er point during follow-up if the lesion  is still prese nt. 
 
 
5.0       THE RAPEUTIC/DIA GNOSTIC  AGENTS  
 
Aldara™  ( imiquimod)  Crea m,  5%  is  the  br and  n ame  for  imiquimod  which  is   an  immune 
response  modifier.xvii   Each  gram of the 5% cream contains  50 mg of imiquimod in an off-white 
oil-in-water vanis hing cream  base consi sting of isosteric acid,  cetyl alcohol,  stearyl alcoh ol, 
white  petrolatum, poly sorbate  60, sorbitan monostea rate, g lycerin, xa nthan g um, purified water, 
benzyl  alcohol,  methylpara ben, and  propylpara ben. Ch emically, imiquimod is 1-(2- 
methylpropyl) -1H-imidazo [4,5-c]quinolin -4-amine. Imiquimod has a molecular formula of 
C14H16N4  and a molecular weig ht of 240.3 .xviii 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 5 -  
  
Pharmacodynamics 
The mechanism of action of imiquimod in treating genital/peria nal warts, super ficial basal cell 
carcinoma, and actinic kerato sis is unknown.  Imiquimod has no direct antiviral activity in ce ll 
culture. Mouse skin studies sugge st that  imiquimod induces  cytokin es inclu ding interferon-α. 
However, the cli nical relevance of  these findings  is unknown.xviii 
 
Pharmacokineti cs 
Percuta neous  absor ption  of  [14C]  imiquimod  was  minimal  in  a  study  invol ving  6  healthy 
subje cts treated with a single topic al appli cation  (5 mg) of [14C] imiquimod cream formulatio n. 
No radioac tivity was detected  in the serum (lower  limit of quant itation: 1 ng/mL) and <0.9%  of 
the ra diolabelled d ose was exc reted in the u rine and feces following topi cal app lication.xviii 
 
Administr ation of  topical  imiquimod 
Imiquimod cream  is to be applied 3 times per week,  prior to normal sleeping hours,  and left on 
the skin for 6-10 hours. Following  the treatment period  cream should  be removed  by washing  the 
treated area with mild soap and water.  Examples of 3 times per week  applic ation schedules  are: 
Monday,  Wednesday,  Frida y;  or  Tuesday,  Thursday,  Saturday  application  prior  to  sleep ing 
hours.  Local skin  reactions (eryt hema) at the treatment site are common.  Local  anesthetic cream 
or non-occlusive  dressings such as cotton  gauze or cotton underwe ar may be used in the 
management  of  skin  reactio ns.      Treat ment  may  resume  once  the  reaction  subsides.  The 
techniq ue for proper  dose administr ation should be  demonstrated  by the presc riber to maximize 
the benefit of imiquimod thera py. Handwashing  before and after cream applic ation is 
recommended. Imiquimod 5% cream is packaged  in singl e-use packets which  contain sufficient 
cream to  cover an area of up to 20 cm2; use of excessi ve amounts  of cream should  be avoided. A 
thin lay er is applied to t he skin and rubbed in until the c ream is no longer visib le. The appli cation 
site is not  to be occluded.  
 
Aldara  (imiquimod) cream, 5%, is supplied in  singl e-use packets  which contain  250 mg of the 
cream. Available  as: box of 12  packets NDC  0089-0610 -12. Store  below 25°C  (77°F).  Avoid 
freezing.  13 
 
 
6.0       CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT ELIG IBILITY  
 
6.1       Subject  Inclusion Cri teria 
 
All pa tients presen ting to the Gyne cology outp atient service at a p articipating  institution who 
meet eligib ility requirements may be included  in this c linical trial. The e ligibility requirements 
are as follows: 
 
1.  Age ≥18.  
2.  Ability  to give in formed consent.  
3.  Patie nts must have b iopsy proven  recurrent extramammary Paget’s disease con firmed at t he 
participating site. 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 6 -  
  
6.2       Subject Ex clusion Cri teria 
 
1. Patie nts with known hypersen sitivity to  imiquimod. 
2. Pregnant  and nursing  women are not e ligible 
3. Patie nts with unde rlying adenoc arcino ma on biopsy of  lesion con firmed at t he participating 
site. 
 
7.0       REC RUITMENT PL AN (WITH L IMITED  WAIVER OF  AUTH ORIZATION)  
 
As a multi-center trial, participants will be recruited  from MSKCC  as well as the participating 
site  OSUMC.  Potenti al  rese arch  subjec ts  will  be  identified  by  a  member  of  the  patient’s 
treatment team, the protocol investigator,  or the research team at each respe ctive institution. If 
the investigator is a member of the treatment team, s/he will screen their patient’s medical 
records for suita ble re search study par ticipants and discuss the study and  their poten tial for 
enrolling in the research study.  Potential subjects contacted by their treating  physician will be 
referred  to the inve stigator/research staff of the study.  
 
The principal inves tigator may also screen the medical  records of patients with whom they do 
not have  a treatment relations hip for the limited purpose  of iden tifying patie nts who would  be 
eligible to enroll in the study  and to record  appropriate contact information  in order to  approach 
these p atients regar ding the possib ility of enrolli ng in the study. 
 
During  the initial conversation  between the investigator/research staff and  the patient; the patient 
may be asked to provide certain health in formation  that is necess ary to the recruitment and 
enrollment process.  The investigator/research sta ff may also review portions  of their medical 
records  in order to further assess eligibility.   They  will use the information  provided  by the 
patie nt and/or medical  record  to confirm that  the patient is eligible and to contact the patient 
regar ding study enrollment.  If the patie nt turns out to be ineligible for the research study,  the 
research staff will  destr oy all information  collected on the patient during the  initial conversa tion 
and medical  records  review, except  for any information  that must be maint ained for scree ning 
log purpos es.  If the woman agrees  to study  participation, a consen ting individu al (listed below 
in section 15.1) will obtain informed consent  from the  patient until a goal of 20 eligible patients 
are e ntered  into the study. 
 
In most cases,  the initial contact with the prospecti ve subject will be conducted  either by the 
treatment team, investi gator or the research staff working  in consultation with the treatment 
team.  The recru itment process  outlined presen ts no more than minimal risk to the privacy  of the 
patie nts who are screened and minimal PHI will be mainta ined as part of a screen ing log.  For 
these  re asons,  we  seek  a  (partial)  limited  waiver  of  au thoriz ation  for  the  purposes  of  (1) 
reviewing medical records to identify poten tial research subjects and  obtain information  relevant 
to  the  enrollment  process;  (2)  conversing  with  patients  regar ding  possible  enrollment;  (3) 
handling  of PHI contained within those records and  provided by the potential subjects; and (4) 
maintaining  information in a sc reening log of  patients appr oached (if  applicable). 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
during follow-up if the lesion is  still present.  
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 7 -  
  
8.0       PRET REATMENT E VALU ATION 
 
The pre -therapy evalu ation will i nclude: 
• Histolog ic confirmation of  recurre nt EMPD  
• A history a nd physic al examination as per standard c linical work -up for a vulvar  lesion at 
the pa rticipating s ite 
• Photography  of lesion  
 
 
 
9.0       TREATM ENT/INTE RVENTI ON PLAN  
 
The patie nt will be seen in clinic every six weeks during  treatment for examination,  teaching, 
and to assess compliance.  Imiquimod cream is  to be applied 3 times per week  for 12 weeks.  It 
should  be applied  prior to normal sleeping  hours, and left on the skin for 6-10 hours.  Following 
the treatment period cr eam should  be removed  by washing the  treated area with mild soap and 
water.  Examples of 3 times per week applic ation schedules are:  Monday, Wednesday,  Friday;  or 
Tuesday,  Thursday,  Saturday application prior to slee ping hours.  The technique  for proper  dose 
administra tion should  be demonstrated  by the  prescriber to maximize the benefit of imiquimod 
therapy. H andwashing is reco mmended be fore and after app lying i miquimod 5% cr eam. 
 
Punch  biopsy  and photography  will be  performed at the baseline and 12 week  time points.  If the 
lesion  is still prese nt after 12 weeks  of therapy,  the treating physic ian will recommend excisi on 
of the lesion four weeks  after completion of therapy(we ek 16). If no lesion is present  or the 
patie nt refuses surgi cal excision  at week  16, the patie nt will return  for follow -up exams every  3 
months for at le ast 2 y ears. The t reating phys ician will co ntinue to o ffer surgic al excision at any 
later point during follow-up if the lesion is still present.  
 
 
 
10.0     EVA LUAT ION DURING TR EATMENT/INT ERVE NTION  
The patient will  be seen in clinic at approx imately  six week  intervals during  treatment for 
examination  (e.g. week  6 visit will be completed  between  35-49 days,  week 12 visit between  77- 
91 days,  and week  16 visit between  105-119 days a fter baseline). Punch  biopsy  and photograp hy 
will be performed at the baseline and 12 week  visit.  The lesion will be assessed  after the initial 
12 weeks  of therapy  by visual  inspection  by the treating physician.  Photodocu mentation of the 
area will also be performed at this time.  If the lesion  is still present, repeat  punch  biopsy  with 
histolo gic assessment will be performed (week  12).  If the lesion  is still present  after the initial 
12 weeks  of therapy, the treating physic ian will recommend excision of the lesion four weeks 
following  completion of therapy  (week  16) to permit resolu tion of treat ment associa ted 
inflammation.  During this four week ti me peri od, the pa tient will not use imiquimod 5% cream. 
Any lesion  progres sing to  a clinical appeara nce suspicio us for evolving adenoca rcinoma will be 
excised  prior to study completion.   The patient will have a follow -up exam  6 weeks  after 
excision and then  every 3  months  for at least 2 years.  If no lesion is present or the patient refuses 
surgic al excision at  week 16, the patie nt will return for follow -up ex ams every 3  months for at 
least 2 years. The treating physici an will continue to offer surgic al excision  at any later point 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Soreness  
 
Amended:  3/5/14  3% 0% 0% 1% 
- 8 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Base line Week  
6 Week 12 Week 16 Week 22 
(if lesion 
was 
excised) Every 3 months 
for 2 years 
Clinical 
Assessment     
Photography       
Biopsy Punch 
biopsy of 
lesion  Repeat 
Punch 
biopsy of 
lesion Excision of 
lesion if still 
present 
(recommended)   
11.0     TOXICITI ES/SIDE EF FECTS  
Topical  imiquimod therapy  has been generally well  tolerated although  both local and syste mic 
side e ffects have been observ ed. Local  skin rea ctions such as erythe ma, erosion, 
excor iation/flaking, and ede ma are common. Should severe local skin r eaction occu r, the cream 
should  be removed by washing  the treatment area with mild soap and water.   Tre atment with 
imiquimod cream  can be resumed after the skin reaction has subsi ded. Overall,  in reported 
studies of patients treated with i miquimod™  three ti mes weekly,  1.2% (4/327)  of the  patients 
discon tinued  due to local skin/application  site reactio ns.xix  The incidence and severity of local 
skin re actions during c ontrolled clinical trials are shown in the following  table.  xix 
 
3X/WEEK APPLIC ATION  
FEMALES   MALES   
Imiquimod Vehicle  Imiquimod Vehicle  
(n=117)  (n=10 3) (n=156)  (n=158)  
 
 
 
APPLIC ATION SITE REACTI ONS  
Itching 32% 20% 22% 10% 
Burning  26% 12% 9% 5% 
Pain 8% 2% 2% 1% 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 9 -  
  
FUNGAL INFECTI ON* 11% 3% 2% 1% 
SYSTEMIC  REA CTIONS:     
Headache  4% 3% 5% 2% 
Influenza -like symptoms 3% 2% 1% 0% 
Myalg ia 1% 0% 1% 1% 
 
*Incide nces repor ted wi thout reg ard to causa lity with i miquimod 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remote site skin  reactions were  also repor ted in  patie nts tre ated three times weekly  with 
imiquimod 5% cream. The severe remote site skin reactions reported for females were  erythema 
(3%),  ulceration (2%), and edema (1%); and  for males, erosion (2%), and  erythema, edema, 
indur ation, and excor iation/flaking (each 1 %). 
 
Adverse  events judged to be possibly or probably related to imiquimod and reported by more 
than 1% of patie nts inc lude: Appl ication  Site Disord ers: Burning,  hypopigmentati on, irritation, 
itching, pain, rash,  sensitivity, soren ess, stinging, tender ness); Remote Site Reactions (blee ding, 
burning,  itching,  pain, tenderness, tinea cruris); Body  as a Whole:  fatigue, fever,  influenza -like 
symptoms;  Central  and  Peripher al  Nervous  System  Disorder s:  headache;  Gastro-Intestinal 
System  Disorders: diarrhea; Musc ulo-Skeletal System Disorders: myalgi a. 
 
Carcinoge nicity, M utagenesis, and  Impairment of  Ferti lity 
In a 52 week dermal photo -carcinogenic ity study, the median  time to onset  of skin  tumor 
formation  was decreased in hairless mice following chron ic topic al dosing (3X/week;  40 weeks 
of treat ment followed  by 12 weeks  of observat ion) with concurre nt exposure  to UV radia tion (5 
days  per  week)  with  imiquimod  Cream  vehicle  alone.     No  additional  effect  on  tumor 
develop ment beyond t he vehicle effect was noted with the  addition of the active ingre dient, 
imiquimod, to the ve hicle crea m. 
 
Imiquimod was without  effect in a series of eight different  mutagen icity assays  including Ames, 
mouse l ymphoma, CHO chromosome aberra tion, h uman lymphocyte chro mosome aberr ation, 
SHE cell transformation,  rat and hamster bone  marrow  cytogenetics, and mouse dominant lethal 
test. Daily oral administration of imiquimod to rats, at doses up to 8 times the recommended 
human dose on a mg/m2 basis throughout mating, gestation, p arturition a nd lac tation, 
demonstrat ed no i mpairment of  reproduction.  
 
While there is no data to suggest  the carcinogeni city of topical imiquimod in the setting in which 
it is being  employed  in this study, t he possib ility of progress ion of EM PD to invasi ve carcinoma 
cannot be  ruled out.  
 
Pregnancy  
Pregnancy Category  C: There  are no  adequate and  well-contro lled studies  in pregnant  women. 
Imiquimod should  only be used during  pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 10 -  
  
poten tial risk to the fetus.   Syste mic embryofetal development studies were  conducted on rats 
and rabbits.   Oral doses of 1, 5 and 20 mg/kg/day  imiquimod were  administer ed during  the 
period  of organogenesis  (gestational  days 6 – 15) to pregnant female rats.   In  the presen ce of 
maternal  toxicity, fetal effects noted  at 20 mg/kg/day  [8X Maxi mum reco mmended  human dose] 
included i ncreased resorptions, de creased fetal body weights, delay in skeletal ossification, bent 
limb  bones,  and  two  fetuses  in  one  litter  (2  of  1567  fetuses  demonstr ated  exencephaly, 
protru ding tongues  and low -set ears.  No treatment related effects on embryofetal toxicity or 
teratogen icity were not ed at 5 mg/kg/day.  
 
Nursing M others  
It is n ot known whether topic ally applied  imiquimod is excr eted in breast milk. 
Postmarket ing exper ience 
Individ uals who used I miquimod Cream  after it was appro ved by the F ood and Drug 
Administr ation have re ported  the following adv erse reactions.  It is n ot possible  to reliably 
estimate th eir frequency  or to e stablish a caus al relationship  to drug expo sure.  These events 
include  the following:  
• Angioede ma - swelling, similar to hi ves, but t he swelling  is beneath t he skin rath er than 
on the sur face 
• Capill ary leak syndro me - is a rare medical condition wh ere the nu mber and size of  the 
pores in  the capillaries are increased which leads  to a l eakage  of fluid from them  
• Cardiac F ailure - the inability of the heart  to fill with or eject blood due to any stru ctural 
or function al cardiac co nditions.  
• Cardio myopathy - serious disea se in which the h eart muscle becomes inflamed and 
doesn 't work as well as  it should.  
• Arrhyth mias - disor der of the heart  rate (pulse) or heart  rhythm, such as beating  too fast 
(tach ycardia), too slow (bradyc ardia), or irregularly. 
• Chest pain  - disco mfort or pain  in the  chest  that may be a key  warning s ymptom of a 
heart  attack 
• Ische mia - a condi tion in  which the blood flow (and thus ox ygen) is  restricted to  a part of 
the body  
• Myocard ial infarction - commonly known as a heart  attack, is the i nterruption of  blood 
supply to a  part of  the heart 
• Syncope - temporary lo ss of consci ousness and posture, d escribed as " fainting" or 
"passing o ut." 
• Thyroid itis - inflammation of  the th yroid g land 
• Decrease  in white blood  count  
• Decrease  in red blood c ount 
• Decrease  in platelet count 
• Abno rmal liver function  
• Agita tion - Emotional s tate of  excitement or rest lessness  
• Cerebrova scular accide nt – this is also known as a “stro ke,” which is t he loss of  brain  
function(s)  due to di sturbance in  the blood supp ly to the brain 
• Convulsions  - when a p erson's body shakes ra pidly and unc ontrollably  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 11 -  
  
• Depression  - mental dis order c haracterized by an  low mood acco mpanied by low sel f- 
estee m, and by loss of  interest or pleasure in n ormally enjoyable activities 
• Insomnia – when a per son is unab le to fall asleep or remain asleep for an  adequate  length 
of time 
• Multi ple Sclerosis  aggravation – worsening of  the symptoms of Multip le Sclero sis 
• Paresis  - partial loss of  movement, or i mpaired  movement 
• Suicide  - the act of  a human being inten tionally causing his or her own death 
• Dyspnea - difficulty in b reathing  
• Protein uria - the pre sence of an exc ess of protei ns in the urine 
• Exfoliative  dermatitis  - widespread  scaling of  the skin, o ften with i tching, skin redn ess, 
and hair  loss 
 
12.0     CRITERIA  FOR THERAPEUTIC  RESP ONSE/OUTCO ME ASSE SSMENT  
 
The biopsied lesion will be the focus of the  histologic ass essment.  All biopsies wi ll be routinely 
sectioned  and stained (H&E).   Photographs will  be obtained  by the treating physic ian. 
Standar dized 1:1 fixed distance photography  will be performed with a contact camera with a 
built in light source  to ensure  standardized images.  Millimeter scales will be included  in each 
image to ensure spa cial standar dization. 
 
 
 
Clinical response will be assessed by comparison of pairs of clinical photographs obtained at study 
completion and baseline. Pairs of photographs will be graded as: 
 
Complete response = reversion to clinically normal appearing skin. 
Partial response = 50% or greater reduction in diameter of affected skin. 
Progression = 50% or greater increase in diameter of affected skin. 
 
Primary histologic evaluation will entail quantification of the number of involved areas /mm2 that 
have Paget’s cells. Histologic response will be graded as: 
 
Complete response = No evidence of Paget’s cells 
Partial response = ratio of involved areas/mm2 in post-treatment biopsy specimen/ pre- 
treatment biopsy specimen < 50% 
Progression = ratio of involved areas/mm2 in post-treatment biopsy specimen/ pre- 
treatment biopsy specimen >150% 
 
 
We recognize the subjective nature of determining “significant” changes in appearance of the skin 
lesion.  This problem, common to many dermatology studies, has defied a standardized technologic 
solution to date.  We will use the method that is similar to that employed by a recently published 
study evaluating the effects of imiquimod on dysplastic nevi.xx    In this study, Junctional lesional 
cells were counted in multiple high power fields and reported as lesional cells/mm2 and lesional cell 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 12 -  
  
counts were compared between treated and untreated nevi. Complete response was defined as 
reversion to clinically normal appearing skin. Partia l response was defined as a 50% or greater 
reduction in diameter and progression was defined as a 50% or greater increase in diameter. 
 
 
13.0     CRITERIA  FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY  
 
In the event that the treated lesion changes  in a clinically worriso me fashion  with corr elating 
histology  demonstra ting invasi ve carcinoma during  the study,  the patie nt will  be removed  from 
the study.     Patie nts who  have unaccep table toxicities will  be removed  from the  study. 
Unaccepta ble toxi cities consist of  headache, in fluenza-like s ymptoms, and  myalgia,  
 
If, at any t ime, the patient withdraws consent to participate in the stud y, he/she will be re moved 
from the  study.  In such event  the investi gator will carefully consi der whether  the patie nt’s 
withdrawal  of consent  is due to an adverse  event, and if so, record  the adverse  event  as the 
reason for withd rawal.  
 
 
14.0     BIOSTATISTI CS 
 
The purpo se of this p ilot study is to  assess the clinical and  histologic effects of a  topical 
immunomodulatory  agent,  imiquimod,  on  extramammary  Paget’s  disease  (EMPD).   This  is 
a multicent er study  in which  the patie nt and the patholo gist will not be blinded  to treatment 
status.  Photographs  obtained  before and after treatment will be evaluated by an independent 
review er.   The ins titutions involved  in this study include:  Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer 
Center  in  New  York  City, NY  (MSKCC),  and  Ohio  State  Univer sity  College  of  Medicine 
(OSUMC) in Col umbus, Ohio.  
 
Twenty  patients will be accrued  onto this study. It  is unkn own how patients  will respond  to this 
topic al treatment and 20 patie nts is the maximum number of patients  that can be accrued  in a 
reasona ble time period.  Assuming a drop out rate of 15%  our target sample size is 17. At the end 
of this study, we hope  to estimate a response  rate with a 95% confidence  interval ± 24 % based 
on  17  patients.   Approxi mately  7  patie nts  are  diagnosed  a  year with  EMPD  at MSKCCand 
approxi mately  1-2 patients a year from OSU.  From this we expect  to accrue 5 -8 patients per year 
until  20  patients  are  accrued  on  study  (approximately 3  years).   At  the  end  of  the  study, 
descri ptive sta tistics will be performed to evaluate  the effectiveness  of imiquimod therapy on 
extra mammary Page t’s disease patients. 
 
 
15.0 RESE ARCH PA RTICIPANT  REGISTRATI ON AND RANDOMIZ ATION 
PRO CEDURES 
 
15.1     Research Parti cipant  Registra tion 
Confirm eligibi lity as defined in the  section en titled Cr iteria for Pat ient/Subject  
Eligi bility. 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 13 -  
  
Obtain in formed consent, by following procedu res defined in  section en titled In formed 
Consent Pr ocedures.  
 
During the registration process  registering  indiv iduals wi ll be requi red to  complete a 
protoc ol specific Eli gibility Check list. 
 
All pa rticipants must be regi stered through the P rotocol P articipant Registration (PPR) 
Office at M emorial Slo an-Kettering Cancer Cen ter. PPR is available Monday throu gh 
Friday from 8:30am  – 5:30pm at 646 -735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers a re (646) 735 - 
0008 and ( 646) 735 -0003. Regist rations can be phoned in or  faxed. The c ompleted 
signat ure page of  the wr itten co nsent/verbal script and a co mpleted Eligibility Chec klist 
must be faxed to PPR.  
15.2 For Parti cipating Site s: 
 
Central  registration for this study w ill take place at Me morial Sloan Kett ering Canc er 
Center.  
 
To co mplete regi stration and enro ll a participa nt from another inst itution, the study s taff 
at that site must conta ct the de signated res earch staff at MSKCC to noti fy him/her of  the 
participa nt registration. The site  staff then needs  to fax regi stration/eligibility docu ments 
to the Department of Surgery, G ynecology S ervice at MSKCC at 212.557.2434 . 
 
The following docu ments must be sent for each  enrollment within 24 hours of the 
informed consent form being sig ned: 
• The co mpleted MSKCC  eligibility checklist 
• The signed informed consent and signed HIPAA  Authoriz ation form (Research  
Authoriz ation) 
• Supporting source doc umentation for eligibility questions  (pathology  reports, MD  
notes, phys ical exam  sheets, medical hist ory, prior treatment record s). 
 
Upon recei pt, the research staff at Memorial Slo an Kette ring Cancer Cen ter wi ll con duct 
an int erim review to con firm all doc uments are r eceived  to complete re gistration. 
 
If the pa rticipant meets all criteria, all source d ocumentation  is rec eived, the par ticipating 
site local IRB has grant ed approval for the pr otocol, and the  site is in good  standing w ith 
MSKCC, t he MSK RSA  will send  the completed regi stration docu ments to the MSKCC 
Protocol P articipant Re gistration (P PR) Of fice to  be enro lled as stated in  section 15.1. 
The par ticipant wi ll be registered.  
 
15.3 Protocol P articipant N umber at Pa rticipating sites 
 
Once eli gibility has been  established  and the p articipant  is registered, t he participant will 
be assigned  an MSKCC  clinical research d atabase (CRDB) number (pro tocol pa rticipant 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 14 -  
  
number).  This nu mber is unique to  the par ticipant and must be wri tten on all d ata and 
correspon dence for the participa nt. This prot ocol participant  number will  be re layed back 
to study staff at the registering site via e -mail and will s erve as the  enrollment 
confirmation.  
 
 
16.0     DATA M ANAGEM ENT REQUIREME NTS FOR PA RTICIPAT ING SITES  
 
A Research Study Assis tant (RSA) will be as signed to the st udy.  The responsibi lities of the RSA 
include pro ject compliance, data collection, abstra ction and entry, data repo rting, regulatory 
monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization, and coordinate  the activities of the protoc ol 
study tea m.  The data collected for this study will  be entered into a  secure  database.  Source 
docu mentation will be availa ble to support t he computerized  patie nt record. 
 
 
16.1.0  Data and Source Docu mentation 
 
Data  
Standar dized Case Report For ms (CRFs), dire ctions for use and sign o ff require ments have 
been generated for this study. Blank case rep ort forms will be sent to  the study sta ff at each 
participating site for use.  The par ticipating S ite PI  is respo nsible for ensu ring these forms are 
completed accur ately, legibly and  in a timely manner.  
 
Source Documentation  
 
Source doc umentation r efers to ori ginal records  of observat ions, cli nical findings and 
evalu ations  that a re sub sequently  recorded as d ata into CRFs. Relevant s ource docu mentation 
to be sub mitted t hrough out the study includ es: 
o MD o ffice visit n otes 
o Pathology reports  
o Photographs  
o Clinic al assessment forms 
o Grade 3 -5 toxicities/adverse eve nts not pre viously sub mitted with SAE Reports  
 
16.1.1  Data and Source Docu mentation Su bmission  
Participating sites should  fax the CRFs to MSKCC to the co ntact provid ed below. 
Submissions  should in clude a cover  page l isting  all CRFs e nclosed p er participant. 
 
FAX: 212.557.2434 to the at tention  of Protocol  07-029 RSA 
 
16.1.2   Data and Source Doc umentation Su bmission Timelines  
 
• CRFs and source docu mentation to support d ata in the CRFs should be s ubmitted 
accor ding to  chart below. 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 15 -  
  
• Participating sites should  respond to  data qu eries within 14 d ays of  recei pt. 
 
 
 
16.2     Data and S afety Monit oring 
 
The Data  and Safety Monitoring (DSM)  plans  at Me morial Sloan -Kettering Cancer  Center  were 
approved  by the National Cancer  Institute in Septe mber 2001.   The plans  address the new 
policies set forth by the NCI  in the docu ment entitled “Policy of  the National  Cancer  Institute for 
Data and S afety Monit oring of  Clini cal Tr ials” which can be  found at:  
 
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/res earchers/ds m/index.ht ml. 
 
The DSM  Plans  at MSKCC  were  estab lished and  are monito red by the Office of Clinic al 
Research.  The MSKCC  Data  and Sa fety Monito ring Plans  can be found on the  MSK CC Intran et 
at: http://mskweb2 .mskcc.org /irb/index.htm  
 
There are s everal  different mechani sms by which clini cal trials are monitored for data, safety and 
quality.     There  are  institutional  process es  in  place  for  quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protoc ol 
monitoring, co mpliance  and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and  staff education  on 
clinical re search QA) and departmental proc edures  for quality control,   plus t here are two 
institutional co mmittees  that are re sponsible for monitoring  the activities of our  clinical trials 
progra ms.  The committees: Data  and Safety Monito ring Committee (DSMC)  for Phase  I and II 
clinical tr ials, and the  Data  and Sa fety Monit oring Board (DSMB)  for Phase  III clinical  trials, 
report  to the Center’s R esearch Cou ncil and  Institution al Rev iew Board.  
 
During  the protoc ol development and review  process, each protocol  will be asses sed for its lev el 
of risk and degree  of monito ring required.  Every type of protocol  (e.g., NIH  sponsored,  in-house 
sponsored, indust rial sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group, etc.) Will be addre ssed and the 
monitoring  procedu res will be established  at the time of protocol a ctivation. 
 
 
16.3     Regulatory  Documentation  
 
Prior to  implementing th is protoc ol at MSKCC, t he protoc ol, informed consent form, HIPAA 
autho rization and any o ther in formation pe rtaining to pa rticipants must be  approved by the 
MSKCC I RB/PB. Prior to i mplementing t his protocol at  the participating centers, app roval 
must be obt ained from the par ticipating cent er’s Local IRB of  Record.  
The following docu ments must be provided  to MSKCC b efore the participating s ite can be 
initiated and  begin enr olling pa rticipants: 
• Participating site IRB of approva l(s) for the prot ocol, appen dices, in formed consent form 
and HIPAA  autho rization 
• Participating site IRB approved con sent form 
• Participating site IRB’s membership list  
• Participating site IRB’s of  Record’s Feder al Wide Assurance number and OHRP 
Regist ration  number 
• Curric ulum vitae  and medical license for each in vestigator and consen ting profession al 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 16 -  
  
• Documentation of  Human Subject R esearch C ertification and  HIPAA training for 
inves tigators and key sta ff members 
 
16.3.1  Amendments  
 
Each change  to the protocol must be organi zed and docu mented by MSKCC and first 
approved by  the MSKCC IRB/PB.  After appr oval at  the lead inst itution, MSKCC  will 
distribute the non -expe dited a mendments to the par ticipating cent ers, for approv al by the ir 
local IRBs.  
 
Participating sites must obtain ap proval for all non-exped ited amendments from their local 
IRB of  record within 90  calend ar days of recei pt from the M SKCC. If the amendment is the 
result of a safety issue or makes eli gibility criteria more restr ictive,  sites will not be permitted 
to con tinuing enro lling new part icipants unt il local IRB app roval has b een granted.  
 
The following docu ments must be provided  to MSKCC  for each a mendment within the s tated 
timelines:  
• Participating site IRB approval  
• Participating site IRB approved, re vised docu ments in cluding the pr otocol, in formed 
consent form and HIP AA  authori zation 
 
16.3.2  Additional  IRB Correspondence  
 
 
Annual re -approval or Continuing Review  Approval  
Annual re -approval from the par ticipating center’s Loc al IRB of Record  and the most cur rent 
approved v ersion of  the consent form should be sub mitted to MSKCC  within 7 da ys of 
expir ation. Failure to su bmit the re -approval w ill result in sus pension of  accrual privileges. 
 
Deviations  and Violat ions 
A protocol deviation on this study  is defined as a  request  to treat a research par ticipant who 
does not meet a ll the eligibility criteria, p retreatment evaluation, or who  requi res alteration in 
their study plan. If  a dev iation from the protoc ol is proposed for a pote ntial or e xisting 
participa nt at a pa rticipating si te, ap proval from the MSKCC  IRB/PB is r equired p rior to the 
action. P articipating sites should co ntact the M SKCC PI w ho will in  turn seek appr oval from 
the MSKCC  IRB/PB  
 
A protocol violation is anything t hat occurs with  a par ticipant, which dev iated from the 
protoc ol without pri or approval from the MSKCC IRB/PB . For protoc ol violations that a re 
repor ted after they o ccur, the pa rticipating site should repo rt to MSKCC as soon as p ossible. 
The MSK CC PI will in  turn rep ort the viol ation to the MS KCC IRB/PB.  
 
Participating sites should  report deviations and violations to  the Local I RB of Record  as soon  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 17 -  
  
as possi ble per local gui delines. Approvals /ackn owledg ments from the Local IRB of  Record 
for protocol  devia tions and viol ations should be  submitted to  MSKCC as  received. 
 
Other c orrespondence  
Participating sites should  submit other cor respon dence to  their local IRB of  Record ac cording 
to loc al guidelines, and submit copi es of that co rrespondence  to MSKCC.  
 
16.3.3  Document maintenan ce 
 
The MKS CC PI and the  Participating Site PI w ill maintain adequate and  accur ate records to 
enable  the implementation of  the protocol  to be  fully docu mented and  the data  to be 
subsequen tly veri fied. 
 
The par ticipating sites will  ensure  that all local IRB corresp ondence (IRB approval  letters 
referencing protoc ol version da te and amendment nu mber, IRB approved protoc ol, 
appendic es, consent forms, deviations, viol ations, and appr oval of  annual reviews) is  sent to 
MSKCC a nd maintain ed in the  regulatory bind er on si te. 
 
A regulat ory binder for each s ite wi ll also be maintained  at MSKCC; this b inder may be paper 
or electronic. 
 
After study  closure,  the inves tigator will mainta in all so urce docu ments, study r elated 
docu ments and CRFs for 3 years . 
 
 
 
16.4   Quality As surance  
 
Study pers onnel will generate monthly re gistration repo rts to monitor  patie nt accru al and 
completeness  of  regist ration  data.  Routine  data  quality  reports  will  be  gener ated  to  assess 
missing  data and incon sistencies. Accrual  rates, extent  and accuracy  of evalua tions and follow - 
up will be monitored  periodically throughout the study  period and p otential problems will be 
brought to  the at tention  of the study  team  for discussion and  action.  
 
Data  quality and proto col compliance  audits  will be condu cted by the study team on a regular 
basis t hroughout the study period.  
 
 
16.4.1 Qua lity Assura nce for Pa rticipating sites 
 
Each  site participating in the accrual of parti cipants to this protoc ol will be  audited  by the staff of 
the MSKCC study te am for protocol  and re gulatory co mplian ce, da ta verification and sour ce 
docu mentation.   Audits  may be accomplished  in one of two ways:  (1) selected participa nt 
records  can be  audited on -site at par ticipating sites  or (2) source  documents for selec ted 
participa nts will be sent to MSKCC  for audit.  Audits  will usually  be determined by participant 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 18 -  
  
accru al numbers and rate of accrual,  but can also be prompted by repor ted SAEs  or request  of 
MSKCC PI.  
 
Audits  will be condu cted at least o nce shortly a fter in itiation of par ticipant recruitment at a site, 
during  the study (if the t rial las ts 3 or more years) and  at the  end or closeout of the  trial at a site. 
At a minimum, audits  will be conducted  once a year or more frequently, if indicated.  The 
number of participants audited  will be determined by available time and the complexity  of the 
protoc ol. 
 
The audit w ill include a  review of  source docu mentation to e valuate compliance for: 
 
• Informed Consent doc uments and procedu res 
• Adherence to eligibility criteria 
• Protocol defined treatment 
• Required  baseline, on s tudy and follow-up prot ocol testing  
• IRB doc uments (sub mitted amendments, annu al continuing  review repo rts, SAEs)  
• Required s pecimen sub mission  
• Pharmacy review, if  applicable 
• Case Report  Form  submissions to  MSKCC: t iming and accu racy 
 
A wrap -up session wi ll be conducted  at the o utside site and p reliminary findings wi ll be 
discussed w ith the o utside site PI and  research team. The prel iminary resu lts will be sent to t he 
MSKCC PI.  
 
 
 
Each audit  will be su mmarized and a final rep ort wi ll be sent to t he PI at the au dited participating 
institution within 30 days of the aud it. The rep ort will i nclude  a summary of findings, par ticipant 
by par ticipant case  review, speci fic recommenda tions on any  performance and/or sh ortcomings 
and reque st for corre ctive action, when neces sary. When cor rective action is req uired, the 
participating institution must reply  within 45 d ays of  recei pt of audit re port with  their corrective 
action plan. 
 
A copy of  the audit  report and co rrective a ction p lan (if  applicable) sub mitted by the outside site 
must be sent  to the MS KCC IRB,  CRQA and  maintained  in the depa rtment’s pr otocol regul atory 
binder.  
 
 
 
16.4.2 Response Revi ew 
 
Since th erapeutic  efficacy is a s tated primary objecti ve, all sites par ticipant’s respons es are 
subje ct to review by MSKCC’s Therapeut ic Response Revi ew Committee (TRRC).  Radiology, 
additional  lab repor ts and possibly bone marrow  biopsies  and/or as pirates will need  to be 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
MSKCC)  
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 19 -  
  
obtained from the outsi de sites for MSKCC  TRRC review a nd confirmation of  response 
assess ment. These materials must be  sent to MS KCC within s ixty days of  request  to the  site. 
 
16.5   Noncompl iance  
 
If a par ticipating s ite is nonco mpliant with the d ata and reg ulatory req uirements set forth in 
protoc ol document, accrual p rivileges may be su spended and /or cont ract payments maybe 
withheld  (if appli cable), until the ou tstanding  issues have be en resolved.  
 
17.0 PROT ECTION OF HUMAN S UBJECTS  
 
Risks:  It is unlik ely that signi ficant risks wi ll be associ ated with the limited topic al use of 
imiquimod planned in  this study.  
 
Bene fits:  P atients with a  good cli nical respo nse to imiquimod may bene fit from future broad er 
appli cation  of this th erapy. 
 
Possible T oxicities and Side E ffects:  Local ap plication s ite reactions can  be ant icipated. 
Previously  reported  toxicities/side e ffects of  topical imiquimod are elaborated  in section 11.0 of 
this pr otocol. While the re is no d ata to suggest t he car cinoge nicity of topical imiquimod in this 
setting, the  possib ility of progressi on of a lesion  to canc er cannot be r uled out.  
 
Consent Pr ocess:  P articipation  in this protoc ol is volunt ary. All pa tients will be  required to sign 
a statement of  informed consent, wh ich must con form to MSKCC I RB guidelines. 
 
Costs:  Pa tients will not be charged  for protoc ol related cos ts. 
 
Altern atives:  There are no proven nonsurgic al treatments for EMPD. All study pa tients will be 
offered surgical  treatment for EMPD.  
 
17.1 Privacy  
 
MSKCC’s Privacy O ffice may allow the use and  disclos ure of protected health  information 
pursuant  to a completed and signed  Research Author ization form.  The use and dis closure of 
prote cted h ealth information wi ll be limited to the  individ uals descri bed in  the Rese arch 
Authoriz ation form.  A Research Au thoriz ation form must be co mpleted by the Pri ncipal 
Inves tigator and approv ed by the I RB and Priv acy Board.  
 
 
 
17.2 Serious  Adverse Event (SAE) Repor ting 
 
Any SAE  must be rep orted to the  IRB/PB as soon as possi ble but no l ater than 5 c alendar 
days. The IRB/PB requires a Clinical Rese arch Database  (CRDB) S AE report be 
submitted e lectro nically to the SAE Of fice at sae@mskcc.org .  The repo rt should con tain 
the followi ng information: Fields populated from the CRDB : 
• Subjec t’s name (genera te the report  with only initials if it will be se nt outside of  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Responsib ility of MSK CC 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 20 -  
  
• Medic al record nu mber 
• Disease/ histology (if  applica ble) 
• Protocol n umber and t itle 
 
Data needi ng to be en tered: 
• The date t he adverse  event occu rred 
• The adverse  event  
• Relatio nship of the adve rse event  to the treatment (drug, dev ice, or i ntervention)  
• If the AE was expe cted 
• The seve rity of the AE  
• The int ervention 
• Detai led te xt that includes the following in formation: 
o A explana tion of  how t he AE was handled  
o A descrip tion of the sub ject's condi tion 
o Indic ation if the sub ject remains on the study  
o If an amendment will need to be made to the protocol an d/or consent form 
 
The PI’s si gnature  and the date  it was signed are requi red on the completed report.  
 
17.2.1 Seri ous Adverse Event (SA E) Reporting  for Par ticipating Sites  
 
Responsib ility of participating sites: 
 
• Participating sites are responsible for repor ting all SAEs to the MSKCC PI  via fax or e -mail 
within 3 calendar days of learning of  the eve nt. 
• Participating sites should  notify the  MSKCC PI  of any grade  5 events  immediately.  
• Participating sites should  use the SAE Report T emplate (appendix #2 ) to report SA Es to 
MSKCC.  
 
SAE contact info rmation for the  Coordinat ing Center is listed bel ow: 
 
Dennis Chi, M.D., Princ ipal Inve stigator 
Depart ment of  Surgery, Division of  Gynecologic  Oncology  
Memorial S loan-Kettering Cancer C enter 
New York,  NY 10021 
(212) 639 -5016 
 
Gina Gualt iere, RSA  
Depart ment of  Surgery, Division of  Gynecology Oncology  
Memorian Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
New York,  NY 10021 
(646) 227 -2232 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 21 -  
  
 
• The MSK CC RSA is responsible for sub mitting  all SAEs to the MSKCC  IRB as 
speci fied in 17.2 . 
 
• The MSK CC PI is res ponsible for informing all  participating sites  about  unexpected  
SAEs within 30 days of  recei ving the  stamped S AE from the MSKCC I RB/PB.  
• Any report pertaining  to a grade 5 e vent wi ll be distributed to  the pa rticipating s ites as 
soon as pos sible. 
 
 
17.3 Safety  Reports  
 
• MSKCC  will dis tribute outside safety repor ts to the par ticipating sites  immediately up on 
receipt. 
• MSKCC  must sub mit outside safety reports  to the  MSKCC I RB/PB accor ding to 
institutional  guide lines. 
• Participating sites must submit safety repor ts to their institution’s IRBs wi thin 30 days  of 
receipt from MSKCC or  per pa rticipating s ite guidelin es. 
 
 
 
18.0 INFORM ED CONSENT PR OCEDURES  
 
Before prot ocol-specified procedu res are carried out, conse nting pro fessionals wi ll explain full 
details of the protoc ol and study pr ocedures  as well as the risks involved  to pa rticipants pri or to 
their inclusion in the study. Part icipants will  also be in formed that they a re free to wit hdraw from 
the study  at any ti me. All pa rticipants must sign an IRB/PB -approved c onsent form indica ting 
their conse nt to p articipate. This co nsent form meets the req uirements of  the Code of Federal 
Regulatio ns and the In stitutional Re view Board/ Privacy Bo ard of this Center. The c onsent form 
will i nclude  the followi ng: 
 
1.   The nature  and objec tives, poten tial risks and be nefits of  the intended study. 
2.   The length of study and the lik ely follow-up requ ired. 
3.   Altern atives to the proposed study. (This will  include av ailable standard and 
inves tigational th erapies. In add ition, patie nts wi ll be o ffered an option of  supporti ve care 
for therape utic studies.) 
4.   The na me of the inv estigator(s) responsible for the protoc ol. 
5.   The right of  the pa rticipant to a ccept or refuse st udy int erventions/in teractions and to 
withdraw from participation at any time. 
 
Before any protoc ol-specific pro cedures can be carried out,  the consen ting pro fessio nal wi ll fully 
explain  the aspects of  patient privacy  concer ning research spe cific information.  In ad dition to 
signing t he IRB In formed Consent, all patients must agr ee to the Rese arch Authoriz ation 
component  of the in formed consent form. 
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 22 -  
  
 
Each par ticipant and co nsenting profession al will sign the  consent form. The par ticipant must 
receive a c opy of  the si gned in formed consent form. 
 
 
 
18.1 For Parti cipating  Centers  
 
The inves tigators  listed on the cov er page and th eir qualified designees  at each pa rticipating 
institution may obtain  consent and care for the p articipants according  to good cli nical practice 
and protoc ol guide lines. 
 
Duplica te originals or c opies of  the signed in formed consent should be di stributed as follows: 
One copy will be given to the pa rticipant to be  retained for their personal records. One  copy will 
be maintained on file at  the MSKC C. The third  copy will be  confidenti ally maintain ed by the 
participating institution. 
 
A note will  be placed  in the medical  record d ocumenting that  informed consent was obtained for 
this study, and that  the participa nt acknowledges  the risk of  participation. 
 
19.0 referenc e(s) 
 
i Beutner, KR, Geisse, JK, He lman D, Fox TL,  Ginkel A, Owens ML. Therape utic response of 
basal cell carcino ma to the immune response modifier imiquimod 5% cr eam. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 41:1002 -7, 19 99 
 
ii Tester man TL, Gerster  JF, Imbertson LM et al.  Cytokine i nduction by  the immunomodulators 
imiquimod and S-27609. J Leukocyte  Biol  58:3 65-372, 1995  
 
iiiZampogna  JC, Flowers FP, Roth  WI, Hassenein,  A. Treat ment of primary li mited cut aneous 
extra mammary Page t’s disease w ith topic al imiquimod monotherapy.  T wo case reports.  J Am 
Acad Der matol 47:22 9-35, 2002  
 
iv Wang LC,  Blanchard A, Judge DE, Lorincz AA, Medeni ca MM, Busbey S.  Success ful 
treatment of recu rrent extramammary Paget 's dise ase of  the vu lva with to pical imiquimod 5% 
cream. J Am Acad Der matol. 4 9(4):769-72, 2003  
 
v Qian Z, Ze itoun N, Shieh S et al. S uccess ful treatment of  extra mammary Paget’s Di sease with  
Imiquimod. J Drugs De rmatol 2:73 -76, 2003  
 
vi Berman B,  Spencer J et al.  Success ful treatment of  extra mammary Paget’s disea se of the 
scrotum  with I miquimod 5% cr eam.  At: the Eu ropean Aca demy of Dermatology Meeting, O ct 
2002, Prague, Czech Republic  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 23 -  
  
 
vii Jones RE, Austin C, Acker man A B, Extra mammary Paget’s Diseas e: A cri tical 
reexa mination.  Am J. Dermatopathol  1:101 -102, 1979  
 
viii Fanning J,  Lamber L et al.   Page t’s disease of  the vulva:  Prevalen ce of associ ated underl ying 
adenoca rcinoma, invasi ve Paget’s disease, and  recurre nce after sur gical excision.   Am J Obstet 
Gynecol  180:24 -7, 1999  
 
ix Bewley AP,  Bracka A et  al.  Ext ramammary Paget’s d isease of the scrot um:  treat ment with 
topic al 5-fluoroura cil and plas tic surgery.  Br J  Dermatol  131:445 -46, 1994 
 
x Watring WG, Roberts JA et al.  Tr eatment of  recurre nt Pag et’s disease of the vulva  with top ical 
Bleomycin.  Cancer 41: 10-11, 1978  
 
xi Beutner, KR, Geisse, JK, He lman D, Fox TL,  Ginkel A, Owens ML. Therape utic response of 
basal cell carcino ma to the immune response modifier imiquimod 5% cr eam. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 41:1002 -7, 19 99 
 
xii Tester man TL, Gerster  JF, Imbertson LM et al.  Cytokine i nduction by  the immunomodulators 
imiquimod and S-27609. J Leukocyte  Biol  58:3 65-372, 1995  
 
xiiiZampogna  JC, Flowers FP, Roth  WI, Hassenein,  A. Treat ment of primary limited cut aneous 
extra mammary Page t’s disease w ith topic al imiquimod monotherapy.  T wo case reports.  J Am 
Acad Der matol 47:22 9-35, 2002  
 
xiv Wang LC,  Blanchard A, Judge DE, Lorincz AA, Medeni ca MM, Busbey S.  Success ful 
treatment of recu rrent extramammary Paget 's dise ase of  the vu lva with to pical imiquimod 5% 
cream. J Am Acad Der matol. 4 9(4):769-72, 2003  
 
xv Qian Z, Ze itoun N, Shieh S et al. S uccess ful treatment of  extra mammary Paget’s Di sease with  
Imiquimod. J Drugs De rmatol 2:73 -76, 2003  
 
xvi Berman B,  Spencer J et al.  Success ful treatment of  extra mammary Paget’s disea se of the 
scrotum  with I miquimod 5% cr eam.  At: the Eu ropean Aca demy of Dermatology Meeting, O ct 
2002, Prague, Czech Republic  
 
 
xviii Product In formation: Imiquimod(R), imiquimod 5% cr eam. 3M Phar maceuticals, St. Paul, 
MN, 2004.  
 
xix Beutner K, Spruance S,  Douglas J et  al. Double -blind, ve hicle contr olled, rando mized, 
multice nter trial of 5% imiquimod cream  for the tre atment of genit al and peria nal wa rts 
(abstract). Second Int Cong Papill omavirus H uman Pathol  93, 1994  
Memo rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#: 07-029A(6) 
Amended:  3/5/14  
- 24 -  
  
 
xx Dusza S, Delgado R, Busam  K, Marghoob A, Halpern A.  Treatment of  Dysplast ic Nevi with  
5% I miquimod Crea m, A Pilot Stu dy.  J Drugs Der matol 5:56 -62, 2006  
 
xxi Denehy T, MsWeeney  D, Taylor R, Gregori C,  Breen JL.  Success ful immune modulation 
therapy w ith topic al imiquimod 5% cream  in the management of recurre nt extra mammary 
Paget’s disease (EMPD)  of the vulv a.  Proc Soc Gynecol Oncol 2006.  Poster session  3/23/06.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.0 APPE NDICES 
Appendix 1. Patie nt calendar 