Developing a Mobile Intervention to Reduce Suicidal Cognitions in Veterans 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Study Protocol and Statistical Design 
3/27/2023  
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 1 of 18 PROTOCOL TITLE: Developing a Mobile Intervention to  Reduce Suicidal Cognitions in 
Veterans 
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kirsten H. Dillon, Ph.D. 
 SPONSOR/FUNDING SOURCE:  HSR&D SPRINT Planning Grant  
 Purpose The goal of this research is to develop, refi ne, and pilot-test a mobile interpretation bias 
modification intervention to reduce cognitions that contribute to elevated suicide risk and to assess the impact of reductions in suicide cognitions and hostile interpretation bias on suicide risk and functioning.  Background and Significance According to the fluid vulnerability theory, suicide risk fluctuates as a function of chronic and acute vulnerability factors.
1 One of the factor s that contributes to persistent 
vulnerability is what is known as a “suicidal belief system”.1 This belief system is made 
up of several well-studied, cognitive constructs, such as hopelessness2, thwarted 
belongingness, perceived burdensomeness 3,4 unlovability, unbearability, and 
unsolvability4,5. Each of these constructs have been associated with suicide-related 
outcomes.6 For example, suicide cognitions hav e been prospectively associated with 
subsequent suicide attempts among military personnel.5 In another study, suicide 
cognitions were stronger predictors of future suicide attempts than current suicidal ideation or prior suicide attempts.
4 In fact, thwarted belong ingness, unlovability, and 
unbearability were uniquely related to prospecti ve attempts over a two-year period, 
above and beyond other well-es tablished risk factors.4 Suicide cognitions are 
conceptualized as enduring, chronic vulnerabilit y factors that predispose individuals to 
suicidal crises. Therefore, modification of these beliefs may reduce suicidal thoughts 
and behaviors.  
 
In addition to suicide cognitions, another potent ially modifiable risk factor for suicide is 
anger. Recent research (including from our team) has demonstrated a strong, 
consistent relationship between anger and suicidal thought s and behaviors in civilian 
and veteran samples.7-9 For example, in a longitu dinal, nationally-representative 
sample, anger was prospectively associat ed with subsequent suicidal ideation and 
attempts, even after adjusting for well-established risk factors.7  
 
Interpretation bias modification techniques  have been used in recent years to modify 
cognitive biases that cause and maintain psychiatric disorders.10 Interpretation bias 
modification is delivered via computer, tablet, or smar t phone and essentially helps 
participants to adopt more adaptive interpreta tional styles through repeated practice. Dr. 
Dillon has developed an app to deliver her hostile interpretation bias modification 
intervention with ~10 minute treatment se ssion delivered 5-7 times per week for 4 
weeks. The current project will use this par adigm to develop a similar intervention to 
reduce suicidal cognitions for Veterans. The im pact of this intervention as well as the 
hostile interpretation bias intervention on su icide risk and daily functioning will be 
examined.  
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 2 of 18 Aims 
Aim 1(a). Develop a mobile interpretation  bias modification intervention entitled 
Mobile Intervention for Suicidal Thought s (MIST) to reduce cognitions that 
contribute to elevated suicide risk.  We will develop content to target cognitive factors 
that contribute to suicide risk and program th is content into a mobile application similar 
to an existing app developed by the team to ta rget hostile interpretation bias, entitled 
MIRA.  
 
Aim 1(b). Use a suc cessive cohort design to refine the MIST intervention among 
Veterans with PTSD, problematic ange r, and elevated suicidal ideation. To refine 
the intervention developed in Aim 1(a), t he app will be tested in two cohorts (each n = 5) 
of Veterans with problematic anger, and suici dal ideation. After each cohort uses the 
MIST application for four weeks, a quant itative and qualitative evaluation will be 
conducted with each Veteran. Revisions wil l be conducted before the next cohort is 
treated. Then, a third cohort ( n = 4) will be recruited to test  a web-based version of the 
MIST intervention delivered via Qualtrics. 
 
Aim 2. Assess the impact of  reductions in suicide cognitions and hostile 
interpretation bias on suicide risk and functioning. After using the MIST intervention 
for four weeks, participants will use the MARI  intervention for another four weeks. For 
the duration of the study (all eight weeks of  treatment), EMA data  will be collected to 
evaluate the impact of both interventions  on suicide risk and daily functioning.  
Design The proposed research project has two aims: 1) to develop and refine the MIST mobile 
intervention; and 2) to assess the impact of reductions in suicide cognitions and hostile 
interpretation bias on suicide risk and func tioning among Veterans with problematic 
anger, and elevated suicidal ideation. The project has been designed in order to 
complete both aims simultaneously. The first st ep is to develop traini ng scenarios for the 
MIST intervention. Dr. Dillon has already started developing these scenarios to fit into specific themes of types of cognitions that  have been theoretically and empirically linked 
to suicide: unbearability ( I can’t tolerate being this upset ), unlovability ( I am unworthy of 
love), unsolvability ( Nothing can solve my problems ), thwarted belongingness (I do not 
belong), perceived burdensomeness ( Others are better off without me ), and 
hopelessness about the future ( Things will not improve ). Unique scenarios will be 
developed for 28 treatment sessions (daily  sessions for four weeks). When the 
scenarios have been developed, they will be reviewed by a team of experts (i.e., doctoral level psychologists with experience working with this Veteran population) who 
will rate them on how relevant they are fo r the Veteran population. They will also share 
comments and suggestions for refining these sc enarios. Each scenario will be reviewed 
by at least one expert. Scenarios with low rele vance will be revised before inclusion in 
the app. These are the same procedures used to develop the content for the MARI app.  
 
In order to refine the MIST mobile intervention, a successive cohort design11 will be 
used. Successive cohort design utilizes an it erative process for by which psychosocial 
treatments in the early  stages of development are syst ematically refined and modified. 
Qualitative and quantitative data collected by providing the treatment to these small 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 3 of 18 cohorts is used to inform these revisions. Accordingly, we will be refining the treatment 
approach with two successive cohorts of n= 5 Veterans with problematic anger, and 
elevated suicide risk. After the first cohor t uses the applicati on, a qualitative and 
quantitative evaluation will be conducted. Revisions will then be made based on these evaluations before another cohort of n  = 5 Veterans is treated. Again, following 
treatment an evaluation will be completed and further revisi ons will be made to the 
treatment. This same method was used successfully to develop the MARI app. 
 Following completion of the second cohor t, we will be testing a third cohort ( n=4) using 
the web-based version of the MI ST intervention delivered via Qualtrics. This intervention 
will include the same MIST treatment scenarios and EMA questionnaires delivered via 
Qualtrics links directly to the Veterans’ phones. 
 Procedures:  All study procedures can be completed remotely using video conferencing 
services and mailings to minimize potential COVID-19 exposure. Pa rticipant will provide 
informed consent and HIPAA authorization via mail or with DocuSign where available. 
At an initial assessment, after establishing that they meet study criteria, they will 
complete a battery of baseline self-report questionnaires.  They will then be instructed 
on how to complete the MIST treatment se ssions and diary entries via their phone 
through Qualtrics. Four weeks later, eac h participant will complete a post-MIST 
interview during which they will provide det ailed feedback on their experience using the 
MIST intervention and some self-report questionnaires. These semi-structured 
interviews will assess how helpful they f ound the intervention. They will be asked to 
elaborate upon what aspects of the intervention they think are most and least helpful 
and to provide suggestions on how it could be improved. They will also be shown a list 
of 100 random MIST treatm ent scenarios and asked to  provide feedback and 
suggestions on the content and wo rding of these scenarios. 
 They will then be instructed to complete the MARI treatment sessions and diary entries 
via Qualtrics for another per iod of four weeks.  
 Following the completion of each cohor t, quantitative and qua litative data will be 
analyzed. Based upon results, the interven tion structure and content will be revised. 
The content that will be subject to revi sions includes IBM content (e.g., topics and 
themes of scenarios). After t he final cohort is completed, the MIST intervention will be 
finalized.   Measures:  The following self-report measures wil l be administered at pre-treatment, 
post-MIST, and post-MA RI assessments: suicide cognitions  will be assessed with the 
Suicide Cognitions Scale4, Beck Hopelessness Scale12, Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire13; hostile interpretation bias  will be assessed with the Word Sentence 
Association Paradigm-Hostility14; suicide risk  will be assessed with the C-SSRS15 and 
the Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation; anger  will be assessed with the Dimensions of 
Anger Reactions16; functioning and quality of life will be assessed with the Brief 
Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning (IPF)17 and WHOQOL-BREF18. Participants will 
also complete the PTSD Checklist for DSM- 5, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9, and a 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 4 of 18 brief questionnaire to assess their self-eff icacy at managing suicidal thoughts and 
anger. On a 1-5 Likert scale they will be asked to rate: “how confident are you with your 
ability to cope with suicidal thoughts?” and “ how confident are you with your ability to 
cope with anger?”. At the pos t-MIST and post-MIRA assessm ents, they will complete 
the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire. 
 EMA assessments will also be conducted for the duration of the time  that participants 
are engaged in the MIST and MARI intervent ions (8 weeks). T here will be one random 
alarm-prompted diary entry during the day  and a nightly diary using established 
procedures from our team.
19,20 The EMA diary will include assessments of: suicidal 
ideation; and functioning and health re lated quality of life  using the brief IPF21 and items 
from the WHOQOL-BREF18. EMA entries will also ask about affect and alcohol and 
substance use.  
Demographics and Background Measures Time 
(min) Baseline Post-MIST Post-MIRA 
Demo graphics 2 ●   
Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire (TLEQ ) 10 ●   
Diagnostic Interviews   
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 60 ●   
Feasibilit y and Acceptabilit y Measures   
Participant Recruitment -- ●   
Treatment Retention --  ● ● 
Withdrawals -- ● ● ● 
App Utilization --  ● ● 
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ ) 5  ● ● 
Post-MIST Interview 30  ●  
Clinical Measures   
Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire (INQ) 5 ● ● ● 
Suicide Co gnitions Scale (SCS) 5 ● ● ● 
Beck Hopelessness Scale 5 ● ● ● 
Word Sentence Association Paradigm-
Hostilit y (WSAP-H ) 10 ● ● ● 
Columbia-Suicide Severit y Ratin g Scale 5 ● ● ● 
Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation 5 ● ● ● 
Dimensions of An ger Reactions (DAR ) 5 ● ● ● 
Brief Inventor y of Ps ychosocial Functionin g 5 ● ● ● 
WHOQOL-BREF 5 ● ● ● 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9 ) 5 ● ● ● 
PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5 ) 10 ● ● ● 
 
Mobile Device Use 
Study participants will access the MI ST, MARI, and EMA interventions and 
assessments using their personal mobile devic es. They will receive Qualtrics links to 
access the treatment sessions and EMA diary entries. These data will be collected via the VA instance of Qualtrics.    
Risk/Benefit Assessment 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 5 of 18 Participation is completely voluntary and parti cipants are informed that they are free to 
refuse to answer any items on the questionnai res or questions from the interview that 
they do not wish to answer. They are also  informed that they are free to decline 
participation in any procedure and can withdraw from the st udy at any time. Regarding 
qualitative data, participant s will be informed that a ll published results will be 
anonymized, including any mention of city/medical center/clinic to protect the identity of 
participants.  Potential risks will be minimized by carefully  screening potential participants according 
to the inclusion/exclusion criteria, closel y monitoring symptom levels, and following 
established laboratory procedur es. To ensure confidentiality,  all records will be identified 
by the participant’s identification number, not by name. All raw hard copy data will be 
kept in a locked file cabinet in a lock ed room. Data files will be stored on secure, 
password-protected com puters. Finally, all project staf f will complete educational units 
required by the Durham VAHCS IRB.   While participants may benefit from using t he mobile intervention, there are no 
guaranteed benefits to the individual participant and no i mmediate benefits of the 
proposed research to others. T here are potential benefits to others from the information 
generated that potentially will be helpful in increasing reach of treatments to target suicidal ideation and anger and developing more  effective interventions for Veterans 
with suicidal ideation, PTSD , and problematic anger. In our opinion, the anticipated 
benefits of this study out weigh the potential risks. 
 Selection of Subjects 
We will screen up to 30 participants for the projec t for a desired total sample size of 14.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Veterans must meet all inclusion criteria: Veterans who meet any one of the 
exclusion criteria will be excl uded:              
 Report a score of ≥12 on the 5-item 
Dimensions of Anger Reactions Scale  
 Can read at least 6th grade level 
material 
 Report a score of 1-3 (indicating 
ideation without intent) on the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) 
 Are engaged in mental health treatment 
and regularly attending appointments with a provider (e.g., therapy, counseling, medication management) at least every 3 months.   Currently in a period of active 
psychosis or mania. 
 Current moderate or severe alcohol 
or substance use disorder, established via SCID-5* 
 Current imminent suicide risk or 
homicidal ideation requiring immediate intervention.  
 * SCID-5 interviews will be administered by trained lab personnel who have been trained using standardized traini ng, which consists of review of interview manuals, 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 6 of 18 training videotapes, and co-rating training with  an experienced rater. Across previous 
studies, interrater reliability based on vi deotapes of participant interviews has been 
excellent (kappa = .96). 
 Subject Recruitment Participants will be recruited using a Data Access Request Tracker (DART) request to identify Veterans with PTSD diagnoses from Regional and/or Corporate Data Warehouse. Potential participants will be sent an introductory letter that describes the 
study and informs them that they will be call ed regarding participati on. In the letter, 
potential participants will be gi ven an “opt-out” number to call in order to decline 
participation and/or further c ontact regarding participation.  Seven business days after 
the mailing, Veterans who have not called the toll-free number to decline participation will be contacted by a study team member to request their participation in the research study.   We will also recruit veterans from the Traumatic Stress and Health Laboratory’s 
“Contact Database,” IRB #1080; this database contains information about previous lab 
study participants who have agreed to be cont acted about other studies for which they 
may qualify.   Clinicians in clinics throughout the medica l center will be provided information about 
study eligibility and basic procedures (see brochure), and will be asked to refer potentially eligible veterans. Clinicians have r eported that Veterans often indicate that 
they prefer that their names and contact information be provided directly to study staff.  
We’d like to make it easy for interested Ve terans to get involved in research, while 
protecting the privacy of those Veterans w ho are not interested in research. Towards 
that end, we would like to allow a clinician to  refer a participant directly to our clinic by 
adding the study PI or study c oordinator as a co-signer to a note in CPRS in which the 
clinician has documented that the participant wishes to be contacted about participation.  Any Veteran who contacts or is contacted by the study team will be told that their 
participation is voluntary, and they may choose not to answer any questions that they find too sensitive. Also, Veterans will be told t hat their participation will not affect their 
care at the VA. The study team member will explain the study in detail, including 
compensation. No study proc edures will begin until formal, wr itten informed consent and 
HIPAA authorization have been obtained.  
 Study Interventions Two interventions will be studied in the current project, the MARI and the MIST 
interventions. The MARI intervention has already been developed by Dr. Dillon (IRB # 
2168). The MIST intervention is going to  be developed in a similar manner. The 
interventions will be very similar except for the content of the treatment sessions. Below, 
we explain the layout of the MARI inte rvention and then the changes that will be made 
for the MIST intervention.  
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 7 of 18 MARI Intervention.   
The IBM intervention. The IBM 
treatment works as follows (see Figure 
6). Participants are shown ambiguous, anger-relevant scenarios and instructed to imagine themselves in the described situation. For example, “You speak to someone and they do not respond.” Next, another sentence appears that offers a benign, non-threatening interpretation of the scenario. For example, the sentence following this particular scenario reads, “This person is unaw_re.” The participants fill in the missing letter of the word, forming the word “unaware,” and assigning the benign inte rpretation. This interpretation is then 
reinforced by requiring the participants to  correctly answer “yes” or “no” to a 
comprehension question (i.e., “Did this person hear  you?”). In this example, they must 
answer “no” to proceed. Across treatment  sessions, unique scenarios are presented 
(i.e., participants do not see the same sc enario twice). Scenario s have been developed 
to capture a wide range of different themes that are likely to be anger-provoking. 
Themes include: physical aggression, drivin g situations, irritating traits of 
others, thinking you are being ignored by others, feeling argued with or 
criticized, thinking someone is stealing from you, having people block you, thinking that 
others have hostile feelings, feeling disr espected, thinking that people will not help 
you, thinking that others do not appreciate y ou, and thinking that situations are unfair. 
See Figure 7 for an example of a trai ning scenario in the MARI app.  
 
We will be delivering the intervention daily for 4 weeks. It will include 28 treatments sessions that will each take approximately 10 minutes to complete. Each session will include 42 training scenarios. No scenario will be 
repeated across these sessions. To this end, 1,176 unique training scenarios have been developed. Scenarios have been reviewed by  9 PTSD experts in the field and 

Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 8 of 18 individuals with PTSD to confirm the content is relevant to this patient population. 
Additionally, the reading level has been asse ssed using an online readability calculator 
(“Readability Formulas”) and all scenarios are at a 6th grade reading level or less. 
Qualtrics will time stamp use by  the participants so that tr eatment time and completion 
for each participant can be calculated. 
   MIST Intervention 
The MIST intervention will be identical to the MARI intervention. The only difference is 
that the treatment sessions  will include the scenarios t hat are being developed (see 
Design section) to target su icide cognitions.  For example,  “You make a mistake.” Next, 
another sentence appears that offe rs a resolution to the scenario that is incompatible 
with the suicide cognition being targeted (in this example, unsolvability). The sentence 
following this particular scenario reads, “I t can be fi_ed.” The participants fill in the 
missing letter of the word, forming the word “fixed,” and resolving the scenario in a way 
to change the targeted suicidal cognition. This is then reinforced by requiring the 
participants to correctly answer “yes” or “no”  to a comprehension q uestion (i.e., “Are 
things permanently damaged?”). In this exampl e, they must answer “no” to proceed. 
 
Staff Readiness to Handle Potential Disruptive Behavior Principal investigators in the Traumatic Stress and Health Research Laboratory have 
been working with Veterans with PTSD since t he mid-1990s, and much of their clinical 
and research work has involved providing anger  interventions to these Veterans. Our 
laboratory currently has three other studies in  which we provide anger interventions to 
Veterans with PTSD (IRB #s 1731, 2063, and 2168). Over the course of those studies, 
we have not had any need to report any disruptive behaviors or contact VA police. Dr. Dillon, recently completed a pilot study of the computer-based hostile interpretation bias intervention (IRB # 2136) and is currently conducting another study of the mobile hostile interpretation bias intervention (IRB # 2168). She has not had any Veterans express anger regarding the intervention.  
 Senior staff members are well trained in utilization of counseling techniques such as 
active listening, which helps to minimize the likelihood of angry outbursts. Study staff members are asked to attend levels 2 and 3 of the VA’s Preventio n and Management of 
Disruptive Behavior (PMDB) training, which is the VA’s workplace violence prevention 
program. This level of training is the highest offered to  VA employees in outpatient 
settings. Finally, office areas that are used for clinical interventions, interviews, etc. are 
equipped with panic alarms, and staff are trained in how/when to use the alarms.   Costs and/or Payments to Subjects The study involves up to three visits. Pa rticipants who are screened and found ineligible 
for the study will receive $40 for their time. Eligible participants will receive $100 for 
completing the first visit, $50 for completi ng the post-MIST visit, $25 for providing 
feedback on the 100 MIST scenarios, and $50 for completing the post-MIRA visit. They 
will also be paid for completing the EMA monito ring for the 8-week dur ation of the study. 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 9 of 18 They will receive $30 for each week that they do the EMA monitoring (8 weeks total) 
plus a $20 compliance bonus each week that they complete at least 2/3rds of the prompted diaries. Participants can receive up to $625 for completion  of the study.  
 Data and Safety Monitoring The PI and study staff will be responsible fo r data safety and monitoring. There will be 
several ongoing mechanisms for monitoring and reporting of AEs: 1) ongoing participant 
contact via study personnel, 2) a toll-free number provided to participants to report concerns related to study participation; 3) weekly meetings between the PIs and study 
personnel. Study-related serious adverse event s (SAEs) for participants in this project 
are not expected, but should t hey occur, they will be reported to the Durham VA Health 
Care System Institutional Review Board in accordance with local human protections 
program guidelines.  The PI will meet at least w eekly with study personnel to discuss participants’ reactions 
to the intervention, proper delivery of the intervention,  and any adverse events or 
unanticipated problems. Monthl y meetings between the investigators and the project 
manager will allow for ongoing pr ogress reports, including the number of participants 
currently involved in the study, attriti on rates, and scheduled data collection from 
participants, as well as notification and review  of any AEs. Safety monitoring for AEs will 
be conducted in real time by the PI and/or  project manager. The following information 
about adverse events will be coll ected: 1) the onset and re solution of the AE, 2) an 
assessment of the severity or intensity (u se existing grading scales whenever possible), 
3) an assessment of the relati onship of the event to the study (definitely, probably, 
possibly or not related), and 4) action taken (e.g., none, referral to physician, start or 
increase concomitant medication). The PI will determine the severity of the event, will 
assign attribution to the event, and will monitor the event until its resolution. Any adverse events will be reported to the IR B in accordance with the local Human 
Research Protection Program’s Standards of Practice. All research projects conducted 
at the Durham VAHCS are required to have yearly IRB review. Reports of non-serious 
AEs are required as part of these progre ss reports. Additionally, any changes to the 
project between review periods must be app lication by the IRB prior to fielding. 
 Withdrawal of Participants The PI may withdraw participants due to inabilit y, or unwillingness, to complete study 
procedures or attend appointments.  COVID-19 Temporary Study Procedures The informed consent process will occur ov er the phone or via an approved telehealth 
platform. Potential participants will be mail ed the consent and HIPAA authorization, and 
a study staff member will call them to di scuss the consent and HIPAA. Participants will 
be asked to return the signed consents by mail/UPS.   Study visits will be completed via an approved telehealth platform, with phone as a back-up measure. If the study staff member has access to Audacity via 
CAG,he/she/they will record the interviews (think-aloud and post-treatment qualitative 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 10 of 18 interview) directly to the VA secured server (in lieu of videorecording with an external 
device). If telehealth visits are done using VA’s  instance of WebEx, audiorecordings will 
be done to the VA WebEx cloud and moved as soon as possible to the VA secured 
server. Questionnaires will be completed ora lly, by mail, and/or via MyHealthyVet.  
 We would like to ask participants to complete  measures related to stress, trauma, and 
coping strategies during the pandemic. New par ticipants will complete these measures 
at their first visit, and ongoing participants will complete them at their next study visit. 
We are adding the CAIR Pandemic Impact Questionnaire (Lang, 2020; https://www.nlm.nih.gov/dr2/CAIR-PIQ_scoring.pdf ), and another measure, COVID 
Core Questions, with variables of interes t. If a participant endorses any item marked 
with an asterisk on the COVID Core Questions measure, we will ask them to complete a 
PTSD Checklist 5 related to that specific event. Because these are temporary measures 
to be used only during the COVID-19 pande mic, we have not added them to the 
consent form. Instead, participants will be info rmed verbally re: t he measures, and will 
be told that they can refuse to answer them.  Safety Concerns.  Study therapists will be informed that  prior to beginning interviews 
participants will need to identify an emergency c ontact for the participant to be used 
only in true emergencies (e.g., medical cris is, high risk suicidal ideation). If any 
participant expresses suicidal or homicidal i deation (SI and HI, respectively), study staff 
will respond using a standard of practice that has been used successfully in our lab’s past telehealth-based trials. The study staf f member responsible for the call will be 
instructed to gather more information from the participant, including information about 
plan, means, intent, intended vi ctim (in the case of HI) and history of suicidal and 
homicidal behavior. Any participant who expr essed SI will be provided with the suicide 
hotline number. The parti cipant will be informed t hat the PI may contact him/her to talk 
more about his/her SI or HI. The study coordinator will obtai n current contact 
information for the participant and inform the PI, who will contact the participant as 
necessary to ensure participant safety. In cases of imminent homicidality or suicidality, 
which are not anticipated, we will seek gui dance from the Psychia tric Emergency Clinic 
on best strategies for follow-up, which coul d include, but is not limited to, self-
presentation at the VA’s em ergency room with the help of an emergency contact, calling 
911, or calling local police  for a wellness check.  
 Study Communication. For any participant who indica tes that they are willing to 
receive study communications via email, we will use Azure to send secure 
communications to them re: appointment scheduling, missed appointments, etc. 
Content from the study’s  IRB-approved letters will be included in the emails. 
Data Analysis and Statis tical Considerations 
Rapid turn-around analysis of the qualitative interviews wil l be conducted according to 
methods described by Hamilton.
23 Participant impressions of the MIST app, feedback 
on the content of the scenar ios, usability of the app, perceived strengths and 
weaknesses, and suggestions for improvement will be compiled and used to make 
modifications to the app content and design.  
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 11 of 18 Recognizing that it is inappropriate to examine efficacy in a small pilot trial, we will focus 
on feasibility and acceptability objectives.24 As appropriate for this  stage of treatment 
development and evaluation, analysis and interpretation will focus on describing the primary outcomes: acceptability of the inte rvention and feasibility of  the trial approach. 
Additionally, although we will not be able to  statistically analyze changes in suicide 
cognitions and hostile interpretation bias , we will describe the changes including 
whether they were observed in the expected directions.  Data will be analyzed using SAS. In the event that required SAS modules are not 
available at VINCI, deidentified data will be mo ved to Duke University Medical Center 
for analysis. Any data movement outside the protected VA env ironment will be 
accomplished using a VA-issued and own ed FIPS-140-2 encrypted thumb drive loaned 
to a VA study staff member. Data will be stored at Duke on a protected server to which only Dr. Dillon and her study staff have access; data are encrypted at rest.  Multilevel modeling (MLM) will be used to analyze  the EMA data. MLM is a technique 
for analyzing repeated observations of data acro ss multiple individuals. Unlike repeated-
measures ANOVA, MLM can incorporate time -varying and time-invariant predictors to 
model between-person differences in withi n-person relationships. MLM can also 
accommodate imbalanced data and unequal vari ances. To examine the association 
between app use on suicide risk and functioning (Aim 2), three models will be analyzed 
in which each of the continuous outco me variables recorded during EMA will be 
modeled via MLM during each of the 4-week intervention periods as a function of 
frequency of app use.  
Privacy, Confidentiality, and Information Security 
1. Lists of Data Reviewed and/or Co llected for Screening/Recruitment and 
Conduction of Study:  
The Personal Health Information that will be obtained, used, and/or shared for this study 
includes:   
Identifier (s) Source (s) of Health Information 
 Names  Medical history & physical exam 
information 
 All geographic subdiv isions smaller than 
a State, including street address, city, 
county, precinct, and zip code.  Describe: Participants’ addresses will be collected during the study in order to pay them for participation.  Photographs, videotapes, audiotapes, 
or digital or other images 
 All elements of dates (except year) for 
dates directly related to an individual, including birth date, admission date, 
discharge date, visit or treatment dates, etc.; 
and all ages over 89,  Describe: Date of 
participation will be co llected. In addition, 
treatment records, laborator
y results, etc.  Biologic specimens (e.g., blood, 
tissue, urine, saliva). Describe: 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 12 of 18 Identifier (s) Source (s) of Health Information 
will be collected. 
 Telephone numbers  Progress notes 
 Fax numbers  Diagnostic / Laborator y test results 
 Electronic mail addresses  Operative reports 
 Social Securit y Numbers  Imaging (x-ray, CT, MRI, etc. ) 
 Medical record numbers  Dischar ge summaries 
 Health plan beneficiar y numbers  Surve y / Questionnaire responses 
 Account numbers  Billin g records 
 Certificate and/or license numbers   HIV testin g or infection records  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, 
includin g license plate numbers   Sickle cell anemia information  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers  Alcoholism or alcohol use information  
 Web Universal Resource Locators 
(URLs )  Drug abuse information 
 Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  Mental health (not psychotherapy) 
notes 
 Biometric identifiers, including finger & 
voice prints  Psychological test results 
 Full-face photographic images and any 
comparable ima ges  Genetic testing  
 Any other unique id entifying number, 
linked study ID, characteristic, or code, 
describe:    Other, describe:        
 
2. Data and/or Specimen Acquisition:    
Data for this study will be collected through ( check all that apply ): 
  Prospective data and/or specimen collecti on obtained from participants.  Provide 
description of processes:  Data will be obtained through self-report questionnaires, 
semi-structured interviews, and app utilization.  
  Retrospective data collection and/or specimens obtained fr om medical chart 
review/data access.  Describe how data will be obtained (e.g., filem an, CDW, etc.):  In 
accordance with a Waiver or Alteration of  HIPAA Authorization,  names, addresses, 
telephone numbers, social security numbers,  and diagnostic information of potential 
participants will be obtained from the VA’ s Regional Data Warehouse. 
  Retrospective data collection and/or specimens obtained fr om an IRB-approved 
data and/or specimen repository.   Indicate the repositor y source including name, VA 
location, and IRB number:       . 
Note:  for data and/or specimens obtained fr om a VA approved data repository, a Data 
Use Agreement (DUA) must be executed prior to obtaining data and/or specimens.  See 
VHA Handbook 1200.12 for further information.  3. Level of Data:    
The following level(s) of data will be ac quired/maintained for this study ( check all that 
apply ): 
  Identified (e.g., names, addresses or other identifiers included)  
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 13 of 18   Coded (direct and/or all identifiers removed, but study code/ID included)  
  De-Identified (all HIPAA 18 and study ID/code removed): 
  Verified Statistically  
 OR 
  Verified by Absence or Removal of HIPAA 18 and study ID  
  Limited Data Set 
  Other: Describe:        
 
4. Location of Data and/or Specime ns, and Data Retention Plan:   
A. Data and/or Specimen Location:  Data will be stored electronically in 
\\VHADURFPC02B\groups1\Nicotine Res earch\Study Information\Study 
Logbooks\Kirsten SPRINT and \\VHADURFPC02B\groups1\Nic otine Research\Study 
Information\Study Databases\Kirsten SPRINT.  Data that will be stored electronically 
include name, address, phone number, social  security number, amount of study 
payment earned, and date of visits (in St udy Logbooks location). The study logbook will 
contain the key connecting PHI and the study identification number. Paper records of 
data include study consent form and HIPAA authorization (identifi ed), questionnaire 
responses, and interview notes (coded). Audi o recordings will be made using Audacity 
or WebEx. Any recordings made using WebE x will be transferred from the cloud to the 
“Study Logbooks” location listed above for l ong term storage, audio recordings may be 
moved to an encrypted DVD that is passwor d-protected. Any encrypted DVDs will be 
stored in a locked filing cabinet in a lock ed office.  Transcriptions from the study 
interviews will be stored electr onically at the Study Logbooks location listed above. Data 
will also be stored within VA Qualtrics, which is FedRAMP approved for collection and storage of PHI and sensitive information, and has an Authority to Operate (ATO) within 
VA. Data will be moved from Qualtrics \\VHADURFPC02B\groups1\Nicotine Research\Study Information\Study Databas es\Kirsten SPRINT for permanent storage.  
  Data will be also be placed at the VA Info rmatics and Computing Interface (VINCI; 
http://vaww.vinci.med.va.gov/v incicentral/VINCIWorkspace.aspx ). The VA Informatics 
and Computing Infrastructure is a partner ship between the VA Office of Information 
Technology and the Veterans’ Health Admi nistration Office of Research and 
Development.  Researchers and operations staff can use VINCI to access data and 
statistical analysis tools in a virtual wo rking environment through a certified VHA 
network computer using the VA Intranet or Virtual Private Network (VPN).  
B. Data Retention Plan 
 Research records will be maintained and destroyed according to the National 
Archives and Records Administration, Records Schedule Number:  DAA-0015-2015-
0004.  Records destruction, when authorized, will be accomplished using the then current requirements for the secure disposal  of paper and electronic records.  Currently, 
destruction of research records (see D AA-0015-2015-0004, sect ion 7.6 “Research 
Investigator Files” for mate rials included in research records) is scheduled for 6 years 
after the cut-off (the cut-off is the completion of the rese arch project) and may be 
retained longer if required by  other federal agencies.  Records will not be destroyed 
without pre-notification to the facility records manager. 
  Other data retention plan, describe:        
 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 14 of 18 5. Data Access and Data Recipients:  Only members of our  DVAMC research team 
will have access to identifiers and coded data. In order for data analysis to occur using 
SAS software, a de-identified dataset will be uploaded to VINCI for analysis. 
 All VA research personnel who have acce ss to VHA records are instructed, in 
accordance with VA policy, on the requirements of Federal privacy and information laws 
and regulations, VA regulations and policies, and VHA policy. All study personnel who 
are VA employees working within the VA sys tem have fulfilled all required HIPAA and 
other VA security and privacy policy training requirements and have agreed to follow guidelines pertaining to the prot ection of patient data. All re search staff sign VA Rules of 
Behavior, and all study staff are up-to-date with VHA Privacy Policy Training and the VA Office of Cyber and Information Security Awar eness Training Course. The data security 
and privacy procedures summarized in that c ourse include logging off or locking the 
computer when walking away from it; no sharing of access codes, verify codes or 
passwords; not allowing anyone else to use the computer under one’s password; and 
disposing of sensitive information using VA- approved methods (e.g., shredder bins). 
Access to study data will be removed for all study personnel when they are no longer part of the research team.   Study visits will either be conducted at the main VA Hospital or at the MIRECC at 
Croasdaile, based on participant preference and space avail ability. Data that is 
transported between the main hospital and Croasdaile offices will be secured in a 
lockable briefcase. 
 
6. Data and/or Specimen Transportation an d/or Transmission for all data and/or 
specimens involved in the study:    
I. 
  Data and/or specimens will not be transported or transmitted outside of 
Durham VAMC environment. 
II.   Data and/or specimens will be trans ported BETWEEN sites that are under 
the auspices of the Durham  VA Medical Center.   
III.    Data and/or specimens will be transmitted to other VA sites using the 
following method(s): A. Data 
  Data are de-identified and thus will be sent via unencrypted e-mail or 
unencrypted disk (encryption is optional). 
  Data are coded or contain id entifiers and thus will be sent  
  Other, describe:        
B. Specimens 
  Specimens are de-identified and t hus will be sent via standard carrier 
(tracking is optional). 
  Specimens are coded or contain i dentifiers and thus will be sent via VA-
authorized carrier with tracking.   
  Other, describe:        
IV.   Data and/or specimens will be transported to non-VA/VHA sites (e.g., 
academic affiliates, laboratories, et c.) using the following method(s): 
A. Data 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 15 of 18   Data are de-identified and thus will be sent via unencrypted e-mail or 
unencrypted CD. 
  Data are coded or contain ident ifiers and thus will be sent via <chose 
method of transfer such as FI PS 140-2 encrypted CD or FIPS 140-2 
encrypted hard drive/flash drive>  using VA—approved carrier with tracking.   
  Data are coded or id entified and will be uploade d to sponsor website 
using electronic case report form (eCRF) < insert information including 
sponsor name and URL and the encryption the site uses.> 
 Other, describe:        
B. Specimens 
  Specimens are de-identified and t hus will be sent via standard carrier 
(tracking is optional) or will be hand-de livered by research study personnel.  
Specify method of delivery:        
  Specimens are coded and thus will be sent via VA-approved carrier with 
tracking or will be hand-de livered by research study personnel.  Specify 
method of delivery:        
In accordance with the HIPAA and the Privacy Act, for any coded or identifiable data or 
specimens released from the Durham VAMC (wit h the exception of Limited Data Sets), 
an Accounting of Disclosure (AOD) will be maintained (e.g., in a database or 
spreadsheet) that includes the participant’s nam e, date of the disclos ure, description of 
the nature of the Individually Identifiable In formation (III) discl osed, purpose of each 
disclosure, and the name and address of th e person/agency to whom the disclosure 
was made. 
C.       Local DVAMC memorandum “Authorizati on to Use, Process, Store, or 
Transmit VA Sensitive Information Outs ide VA Owned or Managed Facilities” has 
been pre-filled out for each study team  member who may transport the data 
and/or specimens off-site.  This (t hese) forms are included with the IRB 
materials.  
 
D.   Containers (e.g., briefcase, bin) are labeled with the follo wing notice (label 
placed on the outside of container) in accordance with VHA Directive 6609:  
NOTICE!!! 
Access to these records is limit ed to: AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY. 
Information may not be disclosed from this  file unless permitted by all applicable 
legal authorities, which may include the Privacy Act; 38 U.S.C. §§ 5701, 5705, 
7332; the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act; and regulations 
implementing those provisions, at 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.460 – 1.599 and 45 C.F.R. 
Parts 160 and 164. Anyone who discloses information in violation of the above 
provisions may subject to ci vil and criminal penalties. 
 
7. Risk Mitigation Strategies:   
  Data are fully de-identified (stripped of HIPAA 18 and study ID /code) before being 
shared outside of Durham VAMC. 
  Specimens are fully de-identified (str ipped of HIPAA 18 and study ID/code before 
being shared outside of  Durham VAMC. 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 16 of 18   Direct identifiers will be maintained separat ely from data and or specimens by using 
a code to “identify” subjects.   In a separate database (i.e., a “linking” or “cross-walk” 
database) this code will be linked to i dentifying subject information.   
  Other, specify:        
 
8. Suspected Loss of VA Information: Should any incident such as theft or loss of data, unauthoriz ed access of sensitive data 
or non-compliance with security controls o ccur it will be immediatel y reported according 
to VA policy. All incidents regarding in formation security/privacy incidents will be 
reported to the ISO and PO within 1 hour of acknowledg ement of issue and done so 
using the VHADUR Research  Events Report e-mail group 
(VHADURResearchEventReport@va.gov ). 
 9. Reporting of Results:    
  Reporting of results, such as in sci entific papers and presentations, will never 
identify individual subjects.  Data will be presented in ag gregate and individual-level 
data will not be published. 
  Other results reporting pl an, describe:       
 10. Future Use of Data: 
  Data will be retained for future use.  This is described el sewhere in the protocol and 
is noted in the HIPAA authorization.  
  Future Use of data is optional (i.e., not  required by the research subject). 
  Future Use of data is required for participation in the study. 
  No future use of data is currently planned. 
 11. Use of Mail Merge Technology 
  Mail merge programs will be used to gener ate letters and/or address labels for 
mailings to potential or already enrolled resear ch subjects. The study team is aware that 
to reduce risk of mail merge related priv acy incidents, use of mail merge programs 
requires a 25% accuracy check to verify th at (potential) research subject name and 
mailing address are properly “matched”.  If  discrepancies are found, a 100% accuracy 
check is required before le tters may be mailed.   
 12. Use of Non-Standard Software 
 I do NOT intend to use any new specialized software (i.e. Software that’s not already 
approved OR installed) in this study.  
 I intend to use specialized software that  has not already been installed and it has 
been approved for use by the VA Technica l Reference Model (TRM) Group.  
(Note: All new software must be approved by  TRM before it can be installed on VA 
systems.)  
 I intend to use previously insta lled software on my VA computer.  
 13. Use of Cloud Computing Services 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 17 of 18  Cloud computing services will NOT be used in this study. 
 
 Cloud computing services WILL be used in this study as described below and have 
been approved nationally by the VA Chief Informa tion Officer (CIO).  (Note: ONLY cloud 
computing services that have been approved nationally may be used.) If telehealth 
study visits are performed using VA’s instan ce of WebEx, the visits may be audio-
recorded to the VA’s WebEx cloud, as  has been previously approved by VA.  
 
  References  
1. Rudd, M.D. Fluid Vulnerabilit y Theory: A Cognitive Approach to Understanding the Process of 
Acute and Chronic Suicide Risk. In: Ellis, T.E., ed. Cognition	 and	suicide:	Theory,	research, 	and	
therapy : American Psychological Association; 2006:355–68. 
2. O'Connor, R.C., Smyth, R., Ferguson, E., Ryan, C.  & Williams, J.M. (2013). Psychological processes 
and repeat suicidal behavior: a four-year prospective study. J	Consult	Clin	Psychol,	81, 1137-43. 
PMCID: PMC3933214. 
3. Chu, C., Buchman-Schmitt, J.M., Stanley, I.H., Hom, M.A., Tucker, R.P., Hagan, C.R., Rogers, M.L., 
Podlogar, M.C., Chiurliza, B., Ringer, F.B., Michaels , M.S., Patros, C.H.G. & Joiner, T.E. (2017). The 
interpersonal theory of suicide: A systematic review and meta-analy sis of a decade of cross-national 
research. Psychol	 Bull,	143, 1313-45. PMCID: PMC5730496. 
4. Bryan, C.J., David Rudd, M., Wertenberger, E., Etienne, N., Ray-Sanneru d, B.N., Morrow, C.E., 
Peterson, A.L. & Young-McCaughon, S. (2014). Im proving the detection and prediction of suicidal 
behavior among military personnel by measuring suicidal beliefs:  an evaluation of the Suicide 
Cognitions Scale. J	Affect	Disord,	159, 15-22.  
5. Bryan, C.J., Rozek, D.C. & Khazem, L.R. (2020). Prospective Validity of th e Suicide Cognitions Scale 
Among Acutely Suicidal Military Personnel Seeking Unscheduled Psychiatric Intervention. Crisis,	41, 
407-11.  6. Bryan, C.J.H., J. A. (2019). The Structure of Su icidal Beliefs: A Bifactor  Analysis of the Suicide 
Cognitions Scale. Cognitive 	Therapy	and	Research, 	43, 335-44.  
7. Dillon, K.H., Van Voorhees, E.E.  & Elbogen, E.B. (2020). Associations between anger and suicidal 
ideation and attempts: A prospective study using the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and 
Related Conditions. J	Psychiatr 	Res,	122, 17-21. PMCID: PMC7010536. 
8. Wilks, C.R., Morland, L.A., Dillon, K.H., Mackin tosh, M.A., Blakey, S.M., Wagner, H.R., Workgroup, 
V.A.M.-A.M. & Elbogen, E.B.  (2019). Anger, social support, and suicide risk in U.S. military veterans. J	
Psychiatr 	Res,	1
09, 139-44.  
9. Hawkins, K.A. & Cougle, J.R. (2013). A test of the unique and interactive roles of anger experience 
and expression in suicidality: Findings from a population-based study. The	Journal	 of	Nervous	and	
Mental	Disease,	201, 959-63.  
10. Menne-Lothmann, C., Viechtbauer, W., Höhn, P., Ka sanova, Z., Haller, S.P., Drukker, M., van Os, J., 
Wichers, M. & Lau, J.Y. (2014). How to boost positive interpretations? A meta-analysis of the 
effectiveness of cognitive bias modification for interpretation. PloS	One,	9, e100925.  
11. Epstein, E.E., McCrady, B.S., Morgan, T.J., C ook, S.M., Kugler, G. & Zi edonis, D. (2007). The 
successive cohort design: A model for developing ne w behavioral therapies for drug use disorders, 
and application to behavioral couple treatment. Addictive 	Disorders	 &	Their	Treatment, 	6, 1-19.  
12. Beck, A.T., Steer, R.A. (1993). Manual	for	the	Beck	Hopelessness 	Scale . San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 
Mobile Intervention for Suicide Cognitions 
Research Protocol, Version Date: 3/27/23      Page 18 of 18 13. Van Orden, K.A., Cukrowicz, K.C., Witte, T.K. & Joiner, T.E. (2012). Th warted belongingness and 
perceived burdensomeness: construct validity and psychometric properties of the Interpersonal 
Needs Questionnaire. Psychol	 Assess,	24, 197-215. PMCID: PMC3377972. 
14. Dillon, K.H., Allan, N.P., Cougle, J.R. & Finc ham, F.D. (2016). Measuring hostile interpretation 
bias: the WSAP-hostility scale. Assessment, 	23, 707-19.  
15. Posner, K., Brent, D., Lucas, C., Gould, M., Stanley, B., Brown, G., ... & Mann, J. . (2008). Columbia ‐
suicide	severity	 rating	scale	(C‐SSRS) . New York, NY: Columbia Un iversity Medical Center. 
16. Novaco, R.W. (1975). Dimensions of Anger Reactions. Irvine,	CA:	University 	of	California .  
17. Bovin, M.J., Black, S.K., Rodrig uez, P., Lunney, C.A., Kleiman, S. E., Weathers, F.W., Schnurr, P.P., 
Spira, J., Keane, T.M. & Marx, B.P.  (2018). Development and validation of a measure of PTSD-related 
psychosocial functional impairment: The In ventory of Psychosocial Functioning. Psychol	Serv,	15, 
216-29.  18. Group, W. (1998). Development of the World Health Organization WHOQOL -BREF quality of life 
assessment. The WHOQOL Group. Psychol	 Med,	28, 551-8.  
19. Dillon, K.H., Glenn, J.J., Dennis, P.A., LoSavi o, S.T., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Gromatsky, M.A., 
Beckham, J.C., Calhoun, P.S. & Kimbrel, N.A. ( 2021). Anger precedes and predicts nonsuicidal self-
injury in veterans: Findings from an ecological momentary assessment study. J 	Psychiatr 	Res,	135, 
47-51.  20. Beckham, J.C., Calhoun, P.S., De nnis, M.F., Wilson, S.M. & Dedert, E.A. (2013). Predictors of lapse 
in first week of smoking abstinence in PTSD and non-PTSD smokers. Nicotine	Tob	Res,	15, 1122-9. 
PMCID: PMC3646653. 21. Kleiman, S.E., Bovin, M.J., Black, S.K., Rodrig uez, P., Brown, L.G., Brown, M.E., Lunney, C.A., 
Weathers, F.W., Schnurr, P.P., Spira, J., Keane, T.M. & Marx, B.P. (2020). Psychometric properties of a 
brief measure of posttraumatic stress disorder -related impairment: The Brief Inventory of 
Psychosocial Functioning. Psychol	 Serv,	17, 18
7-94.  
22. Lewis, Z.H., Swartz, M.C. & Ly ons, E.J. (2016). What's the poin t?: a review of reward systems 
implemented in gamification interventions. Games	for	Health	Journal,	5, 93-99.  
23. Hamilton, A. Qualitative methods in ra pid turn-around health  services research. VA 	HSR&D	
National	Cyberseminar 	Series:	Spotlight 	on	Women's 	Health	 2013. 
24. Leon, A.C., Davis, L.L. & Krae mer, H.C. (2011). The role and in terpretation of pilot studies in 
clinical research. Journal	 of	Psychiatric 	Research,	 45, 626-29.  
 