Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 1  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018Title of  Research Study: Examining the Effects of Popular Diet Intervention on Epigenetics
Investigator: Dr.  Melinda Ring, MD, FACP; Lifang Hou, MD, PhD; Brian Joyce, PhD
Supported By:  This research is supported by The Osher Center for Integrative Medicine and 
the Center for Population Epigenetics at Northwestern University.
Why am  I being asked to take part in this research study?
You are  being asked to take part in this research study because you are a healthy young adult of 
normal body weight. You are in general good health and have no significant dietary limitations. 
This Consent Form document has important information about the reason for the study, what you 
will do if you choose to be in this research study, and the way we will use the information 
collected through this study. You are being given this information to help you decide if you would 
like to participate in the study.
If you  have any questions, you can ask the study investigator and/or staff.
What should  I know about a research study?
●Someone will explain this research study to you.
●Whether or not you take part is up to you.
●You can choose not to take  part.
●You can agree to take part and later change your mind.
●Your decision will not be held against you.
●You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.
Why is this  research being done?
The purpose  of this study is to test the effectiveness of dietary interventions that have the 
possibility to improve markers of gut health and improve general well-being. This study will allow 
healthcare professionals to learn how dietary interventions involving fasting can affect health.
Food is  increasingly recognized as important to treating and preventing disease. Juice fasting 
has quickly become one of the most popular self-prescribed dietary interventions in the United 
States. A wide variety of juice fasts are available in the popular market, the most popular 
variation is the three-day juice and vegetable fast. The purpose of this study is to assess the 
effects of a 3 day juice fast on certain markers of age-related disease and bio-markers of 
longevity. In particular, this study will assess certain epigenetic markers. Epigenetics are how 
the environment (including diet) can change the way that genes are expressed (whether genes 
are active or inactive) without changing the genes themselves. This study will also look at the 
body’s microbiome- especially the bacteria that live in our gut- and how the body handles 
carbohydrates and sugar in the diet.
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 2  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018How long  will the research last and what will I need to do?
We expect  that you will be in this research study for 21 days. Total time commitment for the 21- 
day period is estimated at 6.5 hours, not including actual consumption of food and beverages. 
The time allotted may vary depending on amount of time participants require for sample 
collection and recording. You will also need to have access to adequate food storage, such as a 
refrigerator.
While you  are in the study you will be required to do the following:
Dietary intervention:  For 3 days during the study you will be required to follow a specific diet 
which may include a juice fast. We refer to this as the period of dietary intervention. You will 
also have dietary restrictions for the 3 days before and after this intervention.
Diet diary  recording: Includes documenting all consumed food and beverages during the periods 
of dietary restriction and dietary intervention (overall time commitment: 3.0 hours).
Biomarker collection:  At four points in the study a small amount of blood will be collected on 
campus by the research assistant using a finger prick along with measures of blood pressure, 
weight and waist circumference. You will be asked to self-collect saliva at home using a tube and 
a cheek swab, and stool using a wipe for collection four times (overall time commitment: 3.0 
hours).
Daily check-in: You  will be contacted by the research staff daily during the diet portion of the 
study for a check-in. During the 3 days of dietary intervention, you will also respond to a brief  
validated measurement survey online about how you are feeling. (overall time commitment: 0.5 
hour).
More detailed  information about the study procedures can be found under the section What 
happens if I say “Yes, I want to be in this research”?
Is there  any way being in this study could be bad for me?
The risk  to participants during this study is expected to be minimal. The assigned dietary 
interventions over short periods are generally safe, but may cause some minor discomfort 
during the study period. Similarly, biological sample collection may cause some minor 
discomfort.
More detailed  information about the risks of this study can be found under “Is there any way 
being in this study could be bad for me? (Detailed Risks)”
Will being in  this study help me in any way?
We cannot  promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. 
However, possible benefits include health benefits from the dietary intervention. You will also 
receive meals during the 3-day intervention. Participants will be compensated $50 at the third 
visit and $50 at the fourth visit for the study.
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 3  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018What happens  if I do not want to be in this research?
You can choose  not to participate in this research, and it will not be held against you. There will 
be no penalty to you or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled, if you choose not to 
participate in this study. Specifically, your choice not to be in this study will not negatively affect 
your right to any present or future medical treatment to which you are otherwise entitled.
Who can  I talk to?
If you  have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the 
research team at 312-503-5192.
This research  has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB). You 
may talk to them at (312) 503-9338 or irb@northwestern.edu if:
●Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.
●You cannot reach the research team.
●You want to talk to someone besides the research team.
●You have questions about your rights as a research participant.
●You want to get information or provide input about this research.
How many people  will be studied?
We expect  about 30 people here at Northwestern will be in this research study.
What happens  if I say “Yes, I want to be in this research”?
If you  decide to participate in this research study, you will be asked to read and sign this study 
consent form. This consent form should be signed only after all of your questions are answered. 
Once consented, you will be registered to the study. You will be randomly assigned (i.e., by 
chance, like flipping a coin) to a specific dietary intervention. The three possible groups are: Juice 
Fasting, Juice in Addition to Normal Diet, and Caloric Restriction Diet. If in the Juice Fasting 
group, you will be given vegetable/fruit pressed juices and be instructed to engage in a three-day 
juice fast. If in the Juice in Addition to Normal Diet group, you will be given the same juice for 
three days but continue with an ad lib diet in addition to the juice. If in the Caloric Restriction Diet 
group, you will be on a 900 kcal-per-day diet for three days (matching the calories of juice 
fasting) using packaged food that we will provide. You will have an equal (1:1:1) chance of being 
in any group. You will be notified on the day of your baseline visit which group you are assigned 
to. See below for nutrition facts and ingredients.
Diet Intervention
You will  take part in 9 days total of diet intervention. The first three days you will follow an 
elimination diet to prepare for your diet intervention. The elimination diet is outlined in your 
provided “Study Diet Guide” and includes limiting sugar, alcohol, caffeine, gluten and dairy. After 
your 3-day elimination diet you will begin your assigned diet intervention. You will be provided any 
food to be consumed during your 3-day diet intervention. You are to consume only the food 
outlined on your “Study Diet Guide” during this period. Finally, you will complete 3-days post-
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 4  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018intervention reintroduction  diet. Again, the information for reintroducing your normal diet will be 
outlined in the “Study Diet Guide.”
Nutrition information for  provided food and drink 
Juice Menu (Delivered by Pressed Vibrance)
Caloric Restriction  diet
~900 Calorie  Plant-Based Daily Meal Plan (Delivered by KitchFix) Calories
Loaded Cauliflower Mash  (No Bacon) + Strawberry Cashew Yogurt + Power 
Green Veggie Quinoa Bowl881
Herbed Root  Vegetable Side + Spice Roasted Sweet Potato Side + Paleo 
Blueberry Muffin + Broccolini879
Paleo Blueberry  Muffin + Loaded Cauliflower Mash (No Bacon) + Spice Roasted 
Sweet Potato Side + Power Green Veggie Quinoa Bowl889
Strawberry Cashew  Yogurt + Herbed Root Vegetable Side + Tomato and 
Roasted Garlic Soup862
Name Calories 
(Calories
 from 
fat)Ingredients
Loaded Cauliflower 
Mash
 (No Bacon), 
141.7 g75
(25)Cauliflower, scallions,  almond, nutritional yeast, 
parsley, thyme, rosemary, garlic, salt, black pepper
Strawberry Cashew  
Yogurt, 198.4 g453
(292)YOGURT cashew,  raw honey, lemon, coconut water, 
vanilla extract, psyllium, salt STRAWBERRY 
strawberry, lemon, honey, salt GRANOLA almonds, 
sunflower seeds, pecans, cashews, almond flour, 
maple syrup, clover honey, coconut oil, flax seed, 
vanilla extract, cinnamon, sea saltName Calories Ingredients
Astound, 16oz 140 Spinach, Kale,  Romaine, Cucumber, Fennel, Parsley, 
Celery, Lemon, Apple, Ginger, Turmeric
Delightful Greens,  16oz 170 Kale, Spinach,  Cucumber, Romaine, Parsley, Celery, 
Ginger, Lemon
Connective, 16oz 120 Aronia Berry,  Spinach, Romaine, Cucumber, Parsley, 
Lemon, Ginger
Mindful, 16oz 130 Spinach, Kale,  Romaine, Cucumber, Parsley, Celery, 
Swiss Chard, Lemon, Lime, Ginger, Apple
Nourishment, 16oz 120 Aronia Berry,  Spinach, Kale, Romaine, Cucumber, 
Parsley, Celery, Lemon, Turmeric, Ginger, Wheatgrass, 
Broccoli Sprouts, Sunflower Sprouts
Aronia Crunch, 16oz 140 Apple, Celery,  Lime, Aronia Berry
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 5  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018Power Green  Veggie 
Quinoa Bowl, 326.0 g353
(188)QUINOA quinoa,  arugula, broccoli, asparagus, kale, 
mustard greens, parsley, salt SAUCE VERTE basil, 
arugula, EVO, garlic, red onion, lemon, capers, dijon, 
red fresno pepper, salt
Herbed Root  Vegetable 
Side, 226.8 g222
(34)Parsnip, carrot,  turnip, redskin potato, high-oleic 
sunflower oil, parsley, salt, black pepper
Spice Roasted  Sweet 
Potato Side, 226.8 g229
(20)Sweet potato,  chili powder, paprika, coconut oil, salt
Paleo Blueberry  Muffin, 
62.0 g162
(106)MUFFIN almond  flour, coconut flour, banana, almond 
butter, almonds, baking powder, salt, baking soda, 
vanilla extract, coconut oil, maple syrup, coconut 
milk, pastured eggs, cinnamon, blueberries
Broccolini, 226.8 g 81
(8)Broccolini, garlic,  salt, black pepper, lemon zest, chili 
flake
Tomato and  Roasted 
Garlic Soup, 453.6 g187
(57)SOUP tomato,  vegetable broth, onion, red bell 
pepper, garlic, carrot, cashew, tomato paste, olive 
oil, basil, salt, black pepper, chili flakes GARNISH 
basil
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 6  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018See supplemental  brochures for full nutrition information.
Food and  drink delivery. Any food or drink that you would receive for the intervention will be 
delivered directly from the manufacturer to your place of residence or another location specified 
by you. The date and time of the deliveries will be arranged with you to ensure that you receive 
and are able to promptly refrigerate your food or drink.
Cheek swab  collection. The research assistant will rub the inside of each of your cheeks with a 
swab for about 15 seconds each. This procedure will happen each time you come into the lab.
Saliva samples.  The research assistant will provide you with training and written instructions in 
how to provide saliva samples and give you a kit that will contain all materials needed for saliva 
collection. The procedure is simple. You will let saliva build in your mouth, place the end of a 
small straw in your mouth, and let the saliva that has built up in your mouth flow through the 
straw into a plastic tube. Once collected, you will promptly label the plastic tube, place it in a 
sealed container, and refrigerate it. You will collect four saliva samples during the duration of the 
study. The first will be collected on the first day of the study, the second on the first day of your 
specific diet intervention, the third at the conclusion of your specific diet intervention, and the 
final on the last day of your participation in the study. The samples will be collected by the 
research assistant each time you come into the lab.
Blood spot  collection. The research assistant will clean your finger with alcohol and then prick 
it with a sterile, disposable, widely available micro-lancet commonly used by diabetics. Five 
drops of whole blood will be collected on standardized filter paper. We will collect the first blood 
sample on the first day of the study, the second on the first day of your specific diet 
intervention, the third at the end of your dietary intervention, and the last 14 days after resuming 
your usual diet. These blood spots will be used to assess whether diet impacts on how your 
genes get expressed.
Stool sample  collection. The research assistant will provide you with a pre-moistened wipe 
and written instructions on how to collect the sample at home. You will collect four samples 
during the duration of the study. You will collect the first sample on the first day of the study, the 
second just before beginning your diet intervention, the third at the end of your diet intervention, 
and the last just before your final lab visit. You will then be asked to provide the sample to the 
research assistant at your next visit.
Questionnaires and  Diet Diary
At your  initial visit you will be asked to complete a series of questionnaires about your normal 
diet history. Additionally, you will be asked to complete a quality of life questionnaire at the 
same points in time that you are collecting your saliva and stool samples.
During the  periods of diet restriction and intervention (9 days), you will be asked to maintain a 
diet diary of any food and beverages you consume. Additionally, you will be contacted daily by 
the research assistant to ensure completion of the diet diary. During the diet intervention 
period, you will also be asked to fill out a brief online survey each day about how you’re 
feeling.
After your  diet intervention is complete and your last-samples have been collected, your 
participation in the study will be complete. The research assistant will contact you regarding 
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 7  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018your compensation  for completing the study. In addition, we will send all participants a Thank 
You letter/email for study participation and provide participants with the option to be notified with 
research results  and publication  information  that results from the study upon study  termination.
What are my  responsibilities if I take part in this research?
If you  take part in this research, you will be responsible to:
●Complete food frequency and quality of life questionnaires prior to participation
●Complete blood spot, cheek swab, stool, and saliva specimen samples at four points 
over the course of the  study
●Adhere to the provided diet for the 3-day dietary intervention and the 6 days of restricted  diet
●Participate in food recall call with Research Assistant
●Report any additional food/beverage items consumed to research assistant
What happens  if I say “Yes”, but I change my mind later?
You can  choose to leave the research study at any time, and it will not be held against you. 
Choosing to withdraw from this study will not result in any penalty to you or loss of benefits to 
which you are otherwise entitled. Specifically, your choice not to be in this study will not 
negatively affect your right to any present or future medical treatment to which you are 
otherwise entitled.
Please note  that you may change your mind and “take back” (revoke) this consent at any time. 
Even if you revoke this consent, the Principal Investigator may still use or share health 
information that was obtained about you before you revoked your consent as needed for the 
purpose of this study. To revoke your consent for the use of your health information, you must 
do so in writing to: Melinda Ring MD, Osher Center for Integrative Medicine at Northwestern 
University, 150 East Huron Avenue, Suite 1100, Chicago, Illinois 60611. Unless you revoke your 
consent, it will not expire.
If you  withdraw from the study, you will be contacted by the Research Assistant to ascertain 
reason for withdrawal (information collected for study accrual reporting), provide you with the 
option to be notified with research results and publication information that results from the study 
upon research completion, and to address any remaining questions/concerns you may have 
about your experience in the research study. This call tends to take approximately five minutes, 
but can take as long as needed to ensure that you have all of your questions/concerns 
addressed.
Detailed Risks:  Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?
This research  may hurt you in the following ways:
Diet intervention : Fasting and juice cleanse diets over short periods are generally safe, but may 
cause some minor discomfort during the study period. For those on restricted intake diets, 
several minor adverse effects may occur and include constipation, headache, muscle cramps, 
diarrhea, general weakness, and rash. Most of these are short-lived, and are generally 
alleviated by adequate fluid intake and other minor diet modifications. The restricted diet may 
lead to decreases in glucose levels.
Blood spot :  There is a small risk that the puncture associated with the blood spot may cause 
bruising or infection at the site of the needle insertion.
Weight, height  and waist circumference measurements: There is no physical risk involved in 
measuring weight, height, and waist circumference but there is a risk of embarrassment or 
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 8  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018discomfort at  being measured in your underclothes.
Behavioral and  psychological questionnaires : These carry a minimal risk for emotional 
discomfort and stress.
This study involves  the use of your identifiable, personal information and there is a chance that 
a loss of confidentiality could occur. The researchers have procedures in place to lessen the 
possibility of this happening. See the section below titled: “What happens to the information 
collected for the research?”
Will it  cost me anything to participate in this research study?
Taking part  in this research study will not lead to any costs to you, including the costs of food and 
drink delivery.
What happens  to the information collected for the research?
Efforts will be  made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including 
research study and medical records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. The Principal Investigator and the Investigator’s study team 
may give information about you to the researchers for this study and other University staff 
associated with the study. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include the 
IRB and other representatives of this institution and study monitors and auditors who make sure 
that the study is being done properly.
Please note  that any research information shared with people outside of Northwestern 
University will not contain your name, address, telephone or any other direct personal identifier 
unless disclosure of the direct identifier is required by law [except that such information may be 
viewed by the Study sponsor and its partners or contractors at the Principal Investigator’s 
office]. Those persons who get your health information may not be required by Federal privacy 
laws (such as the Privacy Rule) to protect it. Some of those persons may be able to share your 
information with others without your separate permission.
Your name  and the address you provide will be shared, without any research information, with 
the manufacturers of the food or drink (depending on your random assignment) for the 
purposes of delivery only.
The results of  this study may also be used for research, publications, or presentations at 
scientific meetings. A unique code number will be assigned to you that will link to some of your 
identifiers. This is maintained in locked offices and a password protected database at the 
Northwestern University Department of Medical Social Sciences. It is accessible only by staff on 
the Northwestern University study team.
Can I  be removed from the research without my OK?
Involuntary withdrawals will  be initiated when participants report experiencing an adverse 
medical event (e.g., fainting or other health effects that may be related to fasting and caloric 
restriction). You will be notified by the research assistant if you are removed from the study.
What else  do I need to know?
If you  become ill or get injured as a result of this study (medications, devices or procedures), 
you should seek medical treatment through your doctor or treatment center of choice. You 
should promptly tell the study doctor about any illness or injury.
The university  will not pay for medical care required because of a bad outcome resulting from 
your participation in this research study. This does not keep you from seeking to be paid back 
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 9  of 9 HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018for care  required because of a bad outcome.
A federal  law, called the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), generally makes it 
illegal for health insurance companies, group health plans, and most employers to discriminate 
against you based on your genetic information. This law generally will protect you in the 
following ways:
●Health insurance companies and group health plans may not request your genetic 
information that we get from this research.
●Health insurance companies and group health plans may not use your genetic 
information when making decisions regarding your eligibility or premiums.
●Employers with 15 or more employees may not use your genetic information that we get 
from this research when making a decision to hire, promote, or fire you or when setting 
the terms of your employment.
Be aware  that this federal law does not protect you against genetic discrimination by companies 
that sell life insurance, disability insurance, or long-term care insurance.
If you agree  to take part in this research study, we will pay you $100 in gift card form for your 
time and effort. This amount is pro-rated for research visit completion, with $50 being paid for 
the third sample collection and $50 for the fourth.
If you  would like to be notified of study results, please contact the research team at 312-503- 
5192.
Optional Elements:
The following research  activities are optional, meaning that you do not have to agree to them in 
order to participate in the research study. Please indicate your willingness to participate in these 
optional activities by placing your initials next to each activity.
I agree I disagree
_______ _______The researcher  may contact me in the future to see whether I am 
interested in participating in other research studies by the 
Principal Investigator of this study.
_______ _______The researcher  may retain any leftover blood or tissue samples 
taken during the study. These samples may be used for other 
research not related to this study. These samples will be retained 
in non-identifiable form, meaning that there will be no information 
associated with the blood or samples that will allow anyone to 
readily ascertain my identity. 
Your signature  documents your permission to take part in this research. You will be provided a 
copy of this signed document.
Signature of  Participant Date
Printed Name  of Participant
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.
Permission to Take  Part in a Human Research Study
Do not sign this consent if today’s date is later than the stated expiration date above.
Page 10  of 
9HRP-592 /  v1.5 05-23-2018Signature of  Person  Obtaining Consent Date
Printed Name  of Person Obtaining Consent
IRB #: STU00206611-MOD0003 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 5/24/2018 through 2/21/2019.