Official	Title:		Early	Treatment	Versus	Delayed	Conservative	Treatment	of	the	Patent	Ductus	Arteriosus	in	Preterm	infants-a	Multicenter	Trial			[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]	Document	Date:	6/19/13	This	prospective	RCT	was	conducted	between	January	2014	and	June	2017	at	17	international	sites	after	obtaining	Institutional	Review	Board	approval	at	each	site.	Written	informed	parental	consent	was	obtained	before	enrollment.	Additional	scientific	review	of	the	trial	protocol	was	provided	by	the	Gerber	Foundation	and	the	trial	was	registered	with	ClinicalTrials.gov	([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).	Infants	were	eligible	for	the	study	if	they	met	all	three	of	the	following	conditions:	1)	they	were	between	6-14	days	old	(day	of	birth	=	day	0)	(if	delivered	between	230/7	–	256/7)	or	8-14	days	old	(if	delivered	between	260/7	–	276/7),	2)	had	a	moderate-to-large	PDA	(see	below	for	criteria),	and	3)	were	receiving	greater	than	minimal	respiratory	support	defined	as	either	positive	pressure	ventilation,	CPAP,	or	high	flow	nasal	cannula	support	with	>2	L/min	cannula	flow	and	FiO2	>0.25.	Eligible	infants	were	excluded	from	participation	if	they	had	received	prior	treatment	with	indomethacin	or	ibuprofen,	had	chromosomal	anomalies,	congenital	or	acquired	gastrointestinal	anomalies,	prior	episodes	of	necrotizing	enterocolitis	(NEC)	or	intestinal	perforation,	active	pulmonary	hemorrhage	at	the	time	of	enrollment,	or	contraindications	to	the	use	of	indomethacin	or	ibuprofen	(e.g.,	hydrocortisone	administration	within	preceding	24	hours,	urine	output	<	1	ml/kg/h	during	preceding	8	hours,	serum	creatinine	>1.6	mg/dl,	platelet	count	<50,	000/mm3,	or	abnormal	coagulation	studies).	Sixteen	of	the	17	centers	also	excluded	infants	if	they	needed	inotropic	support	for	hypotension	at	the	time	of	enrollment.	 The	echocardiographic	studies	included	two	dimensional	imaging,	M-mode,	color	flow	mapping	and	Doppler	interrogation	as	previously	described.	A	moderate-to-large	PDA	was	defined	by	a	ductus	internal	diameter	≥	1.5mm	(or	PDA:left	pulmonary	artery	diameter	ratio	≥0.5)	and	one	or	more	of	the	following	echocardiographic	criteria:	a)	left	atrium-to-aortic	root	(LA/Ao)	ratio	≥1.6,	b)	ductus	flow	velocity	≤2.5m/sec	or	mean	pressure	gradient	across	the	ductus	≤8mm,	c)	left	pulmonary	artery	diastolic	flow	velocity	>	0.2	m/sec,	and/or	d)	reversed	diastolic	flow	in	the	descending	aorta.	Ductus	that	failed	to	meet	these	criteria	were	considered	to	be	“constricted”	(small	or	closed)	and	not	eligible	for	enrollment	or	treatment.	 Randomization	was	stratified	by	gestational	age	(230/7-256/7	or	260/7–276/7)	and	by	center.	Block	randomization	(in	blocks	of	two)	occurred	at	each	site	for	each	gestational	age	group	with	an	allocation	ratio	of	1:1.	Blinded	randomization	was	assigned	sequentially	from	sealed	envelopes.	 Our	trial	was	a	pragmatic	RCT.	Infants	randomized	to	the	Early	Routine	Treatment	(Early	Rx)	group	received	either	indomethacin,	ibuprofen,	or	acetaminophen	(with	indomethacin	backup	if	the	PDA	failed	to	constrict	after	the	initial	treatment).	Since	the	drugs	appear	to	have	similar	efficacies	in	closing	the	PDA,	the	choice	of	drug	treatment	was	left	to	each	center	according	to	their	standard	practice.	After	completing	the	initial	treatment,	infants	were	followed	to	determine	if	they	met	eligibility	criteria	for	"Rescue”	treatment	(see	below).	The	"Rescue”	treatment	was	the	same	drug	treatment	protocol	used	for	the	initial	Early	Rx	at	that	site.	 Infants	randomized	to	the	Conservative	group	did	not	receive	any	initial	pharmacologic	treatments	to	close	the	PDA.	Study	randomization	was	blinded,	but	treatment	allocation	by	the	medical	team	
was	not	blinded.	Although	this	may	have	affected	some	of	our	outcome	measures,	we	chose	this	approach	since	treatment	blinding	would	have	required	unnecessary	intravenous	lines	and	therapy	as	well	as	additional	blood	tests	for	infants	in	the	Conservative	group.	 Infants	in	both	groups	had	repeat	echocardiograms	performed	7-10	days	after	randomization.	Infants	with	a	persistent	moderate-to-large	PDA	after	the	first	week	were	followed	with	frequent	(every	7-14	days)	echocardiograms	to	determine	when	ductus	constriction	occurred.	Echocardiograms	were	performed	until	ductus	closure	or	hospital	discharge.	Infants	with	a	“constricted”	(small	or	closed)	ductus	were	examined	daily	for	a	change	in	clinical	symptoms	indicative	of	a	reopened,	moderate-to-large	PDA	(systolic	murmur	or	hyperdynamic	precordium).		If	either	of	these	occurred,	an	echocardiogram	was	performed	within	24	hours.	In	addition,	routine	echocardiograms	were	performed	every	2-3	weeks	until	ductus	closure	or	hospital	discharge	in	infants	with	a	“constricted”	PDA. Infants	in	the	Conservative	group,	with	a	persistent	moderate-to-large	PDA	after	the	first	week,	were	eligible	for	rescue	PDA	drug	treatment	only	if	they	met	one	or	more	of	the	following	prespecified	“Rescue”	criteria:	1)	Inotrope-dependent	hypotension	that	required	continuous	dopamine	support	for	at	least	3	days	(with	no	obvious	cause,	other	than	the	moderate	PDA,	to	explain	the	condition).	Hypotension	was	defined	as	mean	BP	at	least	2-to-	3	mm	Hg	below	the	infant’s	corrected	postmenstrual	age	(in	mm	Hg).	2)	Oliguria	that	persisted	for	at	least	2	days	with	no	obvious	cause,	other	than	the	moderate	PDA,	to	explain	the	condition.	3)	Requirement	for	gavage	feedings	beyond	35	weeks	corrected	age	due	to	increased	work	of	breathing.	4)	Respiratory	support	needed	after	the	following	postnatal	ages	that	surpassed	specific	minimal	ventilation	and	FiO2	requirements:	>15	days	(if	still	required	intubation	and	FiO2	>0.30),	>20	days	(if	still	required	intubation	and	FiO2	≤0.30;	or	still	required	Nasal	CPAP	or	Nasal	ventilation	and	FiO2	>0.30),	>30	days	(if	still	required	Nasal	CPAP	or	Nasal	ventilation	and	FiO2	0.25-0.30),	and	>45	days	(if	still	required	Nasal	CPAP	or	Nasal	ventilation	and	FiO2	<0.25).	 The	"Rescue”	drug	treatment	for	the	Conservative	group	was	the	same	drug	treatment	protocol	used	in	the	Early	Rx	group	at	that	site.	Neonatologists	caring	for	infants	in	the	Conservative	group	were	not	required	or	encouraged	to	treat	infants	who	met	“Rescue”	criteria.	Rather,	the	“Rescue”	criteria	served	as	the	threshold	or	minimal	criteria	that	were	needed	before	infants	in	the	Conservative	group	could	be	eligible	for	closure	treatment.	Infants	in	the	Early	Rx	group,	with	persistent	moderate-to-large	PDAs	after	the	first	week,	could	receive	rescue	treatment	at	the	clinician’s	judgment,	whether	or	not	they	met	“Rescue”	criteria.	 Surgical	ligation	was	used	only	if	pharmacologic	agents	had	failed	or	were	contraindicated.	The	decision	to	use	rescue	ligation	was	left	to	the	attending	neonatologist.	 A	Data	Safety	Monitoring	Board	performed	regular	interim	analyses	for	both	safety	and	efficacy	and	reviewed	all	serious	adverse	events.	 Statistical	analysis	 Our	trial	was	planned	as	a	pilot	exploratory	trial.	The	primary	outcome	was	“need	for	ligation	or	the	need	for	PDA	cardiology	follow-up	after	discharge”.	We	chose	this	outcome	because	we	anticipated	that	with	200	patients	we	had	sufficient	power	to	detect	a	significant	increase	in	the	“need	for	ligation	or	the	need	for	PDA	cardiology	follow-up	after	discharge”	from	an	expected	rate	of	41%	in	
the	Early	Treatment	group	(based	on	prior	data	from	University	of	California	San	Francisco	-	data	not	shown)	to	greater	than	62%	in	the	Conservative	management	group.	 One	of	the	main	goals	of	our	small,	exploratory	trial	was	to	determine	the	incidence	of	serious	neonatal	morbidities	in	the	two	treatment	groups	so	that	hypotheses	for	future	appropriately	powered	large	scale	RCTs	could	be	generated.	In	our	proposal	to	the	funding	agency	we	prespecified	several	secondary	outcomes	that	we	planned	to	examine	and	present	descriptively	because	of	the	small	size	of	the	study	population.	These	included	the	duration	of	intubation	and	respiratory	support,	the	need	for	diuretic	therapy,	the	time	before	full	enteral	intake	was	achieved,	the	duration	of	gavage	feeding,	the	average	daily	weight	gain,	the	incidence	of	persistent	moderate-to-large	PDA	shunt	10	days	after	enrollment,	the	incidence	of	rescue	treatment	eligibility	criteria	met,	and	the	incidence	of	serious	neonatal	morbidities	(NEC,	BPD,	Death,	BPD/Death).	The	incidence	of	several	other	important	morbidities	and	therapies	were	also	examined	as	additional	“exploratory	analyses”.	 All	analyses	were	based	on	the	infants’	group	randomization	assignments.	STATA	(StataCorp.	2015.	Stata	Statistical	Software:	Release	14.	College	Station,	TX:	StataCorp	LP)	was	used	for	all	statistical	analysis.	Chi-Squared	tests	were	used	to	compare	the	treatment	groups	for	categorical	variables.	For	continuous	variables,	Student’s	t-tests	were	used	to	compare	groups	for	parametric	variables	and	Wilcoxon	rank	sum	tests	to	compare	groups	for	non-parametric	variables.	Logistic	regression	was	used	to	determine	the	risk	ratio	and	risk	difference	for	the	predictor	variable	(treatment	group)	and	the	various	outcome	measures.	Linear	regression	and	Poisson	regression	were	used	to	determine	the	mean	difference	between	the	groups	where	appropriate.	Generalized	estimating	equations	were	used	to	determine	if	the	infants’	gestational	age	modified	the	effects	of	treatment	assignment	on	the	various	outcomes	of	interest.	 Despite	randomization,	infants	in	the	two	treatment	groups	differed	in	two	of	the	prenatal	and	neonatal	demographic	variables	(multiple	birth	and	early	onset	bacteremia).	Therefore,	we	created	additional	multivariate	models	designed	to	examine	the	effects	of	the	treatment	assignment	on	neonatal	outcomes.	The	adjusted	multivariate	models	used	generalized	estimating	equations	to	account	for	clustering	within	center,	and	included	gestational	age,	multiple	births,	early	onset	bacteremia,	and	the	variable	of	interest	(treatment	assignment).	An	interaction	term	between	treatment	assignment	and	gestational	age	was	also	included	in	the	model	for	a	particular	outcome	if	the	interaction	between	treatment	assignment	and	gestational	age	for	that	outcome	reached	a	level	of	significance	of	p<0.15.	  