Protocol s15-00862
COMPARING  INTERVENTIONS FOR OPIOID DEPENDENT PATIENTS PRESENTING IN MEDICAL EDs
Version June 26, 2017
Version 5.0
Principal Investigator
Michael P. Bogenschutz,  M.D.
Professor, Department of Psychiatry
NYU School of Medicine
646-501-4026
Michael.Bogenschutz@nyumc.org
Co-investigator 
Ryan McCormack, M.D.
Assistant Professor, Department  of Emergency Medicine
NYU School of Medicine
Collaborator*
Richard Rapp, Ph.D.
Assistant Professor, Department  of Community Health
Wright State  University
*Dr. Rapp is the principal developer of Strengths-Based Case Management.  He will provide 
training and ongoing supervision to the interventionists providing brief Strengths-Based Case  
Management to participants in this study, but will not directly perform  any study-related  
procedures. 
2SPECIFIC AIMS
We propose to investigate the effects of a promising brief treatment model on treatment initiation and 
engagement, substance use outcomes, and broader health outcomes for opioid dependent patients seen in 
a medical emergency department (ED) who are not currently engaged in treatment. The study will compare 
the effects of brief strengths-based case management (SBCM) to the effects of screening, assessment and 
referral alone (SAR). Participants will be screened and assessed in the ED using procedures based closely 
on those used in our recently-completed NIDA Clinical Trials Network trial of brief interventions for drug 
users presenting in EDs. Participants who report three or more opioid dependence criteria on the DSM-IV 
checklist will be randomly assigned (150 per group) to receive 1) up to 6 sessions of SBCM based on the 
model previously implemented by Rapp et al. (2008); or 2) SAR. Follow-up assessments will be completed 
at 3 and 6 months, by staff that is blinded to treatment condition.
Aims of the study are:
1.To identify the main effects of SBCM in mobilizing initiation of addiction treatment and engagement 
in pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence (in primary care or specialty care settings).
Hypothesis 1: SBCM will result in higher rates of initiation and engagement than SAR.
2.To identify the main effects of SBCM in reducing substance use.
Hypothesis 2: SBCM will result in greater reductions in opioid use than SAR.
3.To identify the main effects of SBCM on broader measures of health and life functioning.
Hypothesis 3: SBCM will result in greater improvement in quality of life related to psychological, 
social, environmental, and physical health domains than SAR.
4.To examine the interactions between treatment assignment and selected participant attributes in 
predicting treatment initiation, pharmacotherapy engagement, and substance use outcomes.
Hypothesis 4: SBCM will have a larger effect on initiation and engagement in participants with 
lower environmental stability at baseline.
5.To examine effects of treatment involvement on substance use outcomes.
Hypothesis 5: Treatment initiation and pharmacotherapy engagement will significantly mediate 
the effects of study interventions on substance use outcomes, accounting for the main effects of 
treatment assignment on opioid use.
3RESEARCH STRATEGY
a. Significance
a.1. SUDs are highly prevalent among ED patients
High rates  of psychoactive substance use have been found in EDs, with prevalences far exceeding community 
rates [1-3]. For example, one large US study reported estimates  of current use among male and female ED 
patients of 21% and 13% for marijuana, 14% and 12% for opioids, and 4% and 10% for stimulants, 
respectively [2]. Among  a group of 1,933 patients  admitted into a hospital emergency department,  198 (10%)  
had a substance use disorder which contributed to the emergency  department admission [3]. The prevalence 
of illicit drug use is substantially greater in EDs than in primary care settings  [4]. Illicit drug use significantly  
complicates the initial  diagnosis and medical management of the substance abusing patient [5]. Despite this, a 
relatively large percentage of such substance abusing  patients are not referred to appropriate psychosocial 
services [1, 3]. The resources required to attend to these conditions  places increased burden on the medical 
system, including considerable  costs that are often not recovered  [6]. As an example, individuals seen in EDs 
in Tennessee who were  judged to have  a substance use disorder (SUD) and for whom some  form of treatment 
would be appropriate  were much more likely to require hospitalization and had higher  rates  of previous ED 
utilization than those  not having  a SUD, accounting for an estimated US $777.2  million in extra  hospital 
charges in 2000 dollars [1]. 
a.2. ED interventions for SUDs
In response to the impact and cost, both to individuals and health care delivery systems, there has been an 
increased focus  on developing, implementing, and evaluating methods  to identify and provide appropriate 
services to individuals  having problematic substance use who are seen in EDs [1, 2, 6-12]. With regard to 
alcohol use disorders, several efficacy and effectiveness trials in ED settings have  demonstrated that 
screening, brief interventions, and/or referral to specialized substance abuse  treatment for those  with alcohol 
use disorders and alcohol related problems can contribute to both subsequent reductions  in alcohol 
consumption [13-18] and alcohol-related  consequences [17, 19, 20]. However, other well-designed  studies did 
not find significant intervention effects  [21-25]. A 2008 meta-analysis reported that brief interventions reduced  
subsequent alcohol-related injury (OR = .59), but did not find a significant effect on drinking  [26]. Another 
recent review  focusing on brief alcohol interventions for injury patients in the ED noted that more  intensive 
interventions tended to yield more favorable  results, and that the heterogeneity of populations and 
interventions among  these studies limit the strength of the conclusions  that can be drawn [27]. 
Considerably less is known about  the best methods of identifying and intervening  with individuals using 
illicit drugs or abusing  prescription medications. As opposed to dealing  with hazardous or harmful  drinking  in 
ED settings,  the evidence  of the effectiveness of such interventions has been  considered  only suggestive  for 
drug use disorders  [11] and there has been a call for further research on the efficacy of screening  and brief 
interventions for drug use, as well as the need to test the effectiveness  of such  interventions in real world 
settings [12]. In general, brief motivational interventions appear to be somewhat less effective with drug 
abusers than with alcohol-involved individuals with respect to engaging  them  into treatment [28, 29] or 
modifying their drug use [30-32]; what positive effects are obtained tend to deteriorate  over time [33]. 
Among the CSAT-funded SBIRT sites [10], Washington State chose  to implement  its SBIRT program in 
EDs [34]. From its inception in 2003 through  July 3, 2008, a total of 89,901 patients had received services 
through the 9 emergency departments  participating in the WASBIRT project.  Of these, 23.4% (21,074) 
screened positive and received an intervention and/or additional services  for substance use. Over 2,000  
patients, identified as either high or moderate  drug use risk based on their screening scores,  received either 
brief intervention  or brief intervention followed by brief therapy or chemical dependency treatment, and were  
followed up at 6 months. Average days of drug use declined from 13.7 in the 30 days prior to the baseline 
assessment in the ED to 6.5 days in the 30 days prior to the 6-month follow-up.  While a significant reduction in 
drug use was found in both high and moderate risk groups, the greatest reduction was seen in the high risk 
group, with more intensive  treatment among  the high-risk  users associated with greater change.  In addition  to 
changes in substance use, Medicaid costs were reduced by $366 per member  per month, and inpatient days 
were significantly  reduced  [35].
In spite of these encouraging results, randomized trials  are necessary to draw inferences with 
confidence. Findings  from a randomized trial of adolescent and young  adult marijuana users  in a pediatric ED 
4indicated that a brief intervention plus booster session resulted in higher rates of marijuana abstinence  and 
reduced consumption  compared to the assessment  control condition  [36]. We recently completed a multi-site  
trial (N = 1285) of an SBIRT intervention for drug users presenting in EDs through the NIDA CTN (CTN 
Protocol 0047) which was the first large  randomized trial of an SBIRT intervention focused on adult drug users 
in EDs. Methods  and rationale for this study  have  been described [37]. Briefly, the study included three 
conditions. The first control group received minimal screening only.  A second  group received much more 
intensive assessment  and, if they met criteria for probable substance  dependence, a referral  to treatment. This 
group served as both an attention control  and a minimal intervention.  The third group received an intervention 
consisting of a 30 minute motivational enhancement therapy  session conducted  in the ED, followed by two 
telephone “booster” sessions of approximately 20 minutes. This 3-session intervention,  an abbreviated form of 
Motivational Enhancement Therapy, could  be considered either a very robust brief intervention or a very brief 
treatment. In spite of robust implementation of the interventions and excellent  follow-up rates,  no meaningful 
significant differences in outcome were  found  among the three treatment groups [38]. Furthermore, no 
significant treatment effects were found  for clinically meaningful  sub-groups  defined  by primary drug of abuse 
(cannabis, opioids, or cocaine), gender, ethnicity, or severity.  These  findings, combined with negative findings 
from recent large-scale trials of brief interventions for drug users conducted in primary care settings  [39, 40], 
indicate that more intensive interventions may be required  to benefit  individuals  with serious drug use 
disorders.
a.3. The treatment needs of opioid dependent patients are not met by brief interventions
Opioid dependence is a major public health problem which has grown due to the persistent elevation in 
prescription opioid misuse in the past decade [41, 42]. It seems clear that patients with moderate to severe 
opioid use disorder,  a disorder which  is severe and often chronic,  are likely to benefit from more intensive 
treatment. Opioid dependence is different  from other  drug use disorders in that highly effective 
pharmacotherapies exist. Decades of research support the efficacy of methadone and other full agonists [43, 
44]. Buprenorphine is well established  as an effective partial  agonist treatment [45, 46], and may be prescribed  
effectively in primary care settings  [47, 48]. Both also reduce overdose deaths in comparison to drug-free 
treatment [49-51]. Although naltrexone in pill form has had only a small impact  on treatment of opioid  
dependence, the depot formulation has been approved by the FDA for treatment of opioid dependence, and is 
another effective  option that may be prescribed in medical settings [52, 53].
Brief interventions have  limited effectiveness in getting drug dependent people to treatment. In an 
inner-city population of heroin and cocaine  addicts receiving  primary care, Bernstein  et al. reported extremely 
low rates of addiction  treatment involvement other than detoxification following  brief intervention [54]. In an 
analysis of data from the SAMHSA-funded  WASBIRT project in Washington State, Krupski  et al. reported  that 
patients receiving  a brief intervention were somewhat more likely to engage in addiction treatment than 
propensity score-matched controls  [55]. Overall,  33.8% of those receiving  BI engaged in SUD treatment  
compared to 22.5%  of controls.  The effect  of BI was less pronounced among those who had received prior 
SUD treatment. In a sample  of substance users seeking treatment through a centralized intake unit, a single 
session intervention  based on motivational interviewing did not significantly increase rates  of linkage to 
treatment over standard  of care (44.7%  vs. 38.7%) [56]. One attractive alternative approach is to initiate 
buprenorphine treatment  in the ED [57] (Currently  being evaluated  in R01DA025991, D’Onofrio PI ). However, 
this requires  both acceptance of this responsibility by the ED, and immediate access  to follow-up outside of the 
ED. These conditions appear to limit the applicability of this model  outside  of academic settings. 
a.4. Case Management  is an effective  method  of linking dependent patients  to definitive treatment
Case management has repeatedly been shown to be effective in improving treatment linkage and retention for 
substance abusers. Controlled trials  of case management have included diverse substance abuse populations  
and settings, demonstrating improved linkage and retention  among injection drug users  and methadone 
maintenance programs  [58-60], crack cocaine users and centralized intake units [56, 61], female welfare  
recipients [62], homeless substance abusers  [63], dually  diagnosed substance  abusers [64], and crack cocaine 
users in aftercare treatment [65, 66]. In a large  retrospective cohort  study (N = 7,776) case managed  clients 
were more likely to enter  some form of on-going treatment following  detoxification than non-case managed 
clients [67]. A recent meta-analysis co-authored by Collaborator Richard Rapp examined the case 
management literature relative to substance  abusing populations and identified a mean effect  size of d = .42 
5for linkage  outcomes [68]. The effectiveness of case management  in improving linkage and retention  predicted 
improvements in outcomes such as reduced  drug use and legal severity [65, 66].
SBCM, the case management model we propose to use (described in detail in Section c.8.2), has a 
particularly strong evidence base in populations relevant to the proposed trial. Both long-term and brief 
adaptations of SBCM have improved linkage and retention rates  in a general  population of substance  abusers 
[69], opioid dependent drug users entering  agonist treatment programs [59], and crack  cocaine users 
participating in aftercare treatment [65, 66] and linking with substance  abuse  treatment [56]. In a study 
involving 678 patients with substance  use disorders (68%  cocaine  or heroin)  presenting at a centralized intake 
unit, those randomly  assigned to 5 sessions of SBCM were  more  likely to link to treatment than those receiving 
motivational interviewing  (55.0%  vs. 44.7%, p<.05) or standard-of-care referral (55.0% vs. 38.7%, p<.01) 
[56].The  brief model of SBCM also demonstrated  positive  outcomes in a multi-site CDC clinical  trial in which  
five session SBCM was used to improve linkage with care among  newly  diagnosed HIV positive individuals 
[70]. Those  receiving  SBCM  were  significantly more likely  than those who received  passive referral to have  
had at least one HIV primary  care visit in each of 2 consecutive  6-month follow-up periods. The sites from this 
controlled trial also participated in a follow-up implementation study to determine  whether the model would  be 
as effective when  implemented by community HIV/AIDS  organizations as it was in a closely  monitored clinical 
trial [71]. The linkage rate across the ten sites was 79%, matching that of the controlled trial.
b. Innovation
As addiction treatment becomes increasingly integrated into the medical care system  [72, 73], two models 
have rightly received a great deal of attention.  The first is the use of SBIRT models to identify cases,  provide 
therapeutic contact, and refer the more severe  cases  to longer-term care [9, 11, 74]. The second is the 
treatment of addictions using  medical  models of care, including those that can be implemented  in primary  care 
settings. Prime examples of the latter are buprenorphine [47, 75-78 ] and pharmacotherapies  for alcohol 
dependence [79-82]. However, much less attention has been paid to optimizing strategies for bridging  the gap 
between SBIRT and more  intensive/longer-term treatment for those with more severe  substance  use disorders.  
This factor is of critical importance  for opioid dependent patients, whose needs are not met by brief 
interventions or brief treatment, and for whom pharmacotherapy is often indicated.  
Emergency room interventions for substance use disorders have been largely limited  to brief 
interventions/SBIRT models,  and these have focused primarily on alcohol. Although there is a substantial 
literature documenting  the value of case management in linking drug users to treatment, this approach has not 
been applied  to drug users in the ED setting. The proposed study  will be the first to use a case management 
approach to link drug dependent patients presenting  in EDs to longer-term addiction treatment. It will be one of 
the first trials  focusing  specifically on opioid  dependent patients in medical EDs. A further innovative feature  is 
that the case  management  approach will emphasize  linkage to pharmacotherapy,  facilitating linkage to office-
based buprenorphine, methadone, or naltrexone for patients who desire  these treatments. 
c. Approach
c.1. Overview
We propose a 2-group design in which ED patients meeting  criteria for opioid dependence are randomly 
assigned to receive up to 6 sessions of SBCM based on that used in prior trials [56, 70]; or Screening, 
Assessment, and Referral (SAR) without  any on-site treatment.    The initial  SBCM session will take place as 
soon as possible following the participant’s random  assignment to the SBCM condition. If possible, this session  
will be completed before the participant leaves the ED, where  patients have  been successfully recruited for the 
now closed study:  Screening, Motivational Assessment, Referral and Treatment in Emergency Departments 
(SMART-ED) (PI: Ryan McCormack,  #i11-00298).  Subsequent SBCM sessions will be conducted in the 
community or at Bellevue Hospital Center. Screening and assessment procedures will be similar to those used  
in the SMART-ED trial.
c.2. Participants 
Participants will be adult men and women  presenting for medical treatment in the ED. 
c.2.1. Inclusion Criteria: 1) Registration  as patient in the ED during study  screening hours; 2)  Endorsement 
of three or more opioid dependence criteria  by self-report on the DSM-IV checklist; 3) Age 18 years or older; 4) 
Adequate English proficiency; 5) Ability to provide informed consent; 6) Self-report use of opioids in last 30 
days.
6c.2.2. Exclusion Criteria: 1) Inability to participate due to emergency treatment; 2) Significant impairment of 
cognition or judgment rendering the person incapable of informed consent. (e.g.,  traumatic  brain injury, 
delirium, intoxication); 3) Status as a prisoner or in police custody at the time of screening; 4) Current 
engagement in substance use disorder treatment;  5) Inability to provide sufficient contact information (must 
provide at least 2 reliable  locators); 6) Unavailable  for follow-up (e.g., planning to relocate within 6 months); 7) 
Prior participation in the current study; 8) Current participation  in a research study related to substance use.
c.2.3. Vulnerable Populations: Children will not be enrolled in the study. Pregnant  women will be allowed to 
participate in the study. Because the interventions  in this study are purely  psychosocial  (i.e., no medications 
are administered), the risks and benefits  to pregnant women are not significantly different from those of other  
participants, so there is no justification  for excluding them.   No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be 
offered to terminate a pregnancy.  Individuals  engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to 
the timing, method, or procedures used to terminate the pregnancy.  Individuals engaged in the research will 
have no part in determining  the viability of a neonate.
Prisoners will not be enrolled in the study.  If a subject becomes incarcerated during the study, the 
individual may remain  in the study and treatment and follow-up procedures may be continued  in accordance 
with IRB and OHRP approvals. It is expected that approximately 10% of randomized participants will become 
incarcerated during the six months of their study  participation. It is ethically problematic to exclude  the 
vulnerable population since  they have an even greater need for effective linkage to treatment than those 
without criminal justice involvement. It deprives this significant  group of opioid addicted patients  of possible 
benefits from evidence  that this intervention could help them. Additionally,  excluding  prisoners compromises 
the scientific integrity of the study by causing  a significant decrease in the follow-up rate. Based on other 
studies in similar populations, the overall  follow up rate would be about 85% including prisoners, so without  
prisoners, closer to 75%. It's particularly problematic because  the cases  won't be missing  at random. 
Allowance to extend the study  intervention and substance  use assessments to this population allows  for 
continued engagement  with treatment-focused research and continuity  of case management.  Participants in 
the SAR treatment group who become incarcerated will continue to participate in study activities which are 
considered to be above treatment-as-usual, including substance use assessments and referral to treatment. 
Consequences of discontinuation for SAR participants includes loss of these  activities  and information to which 
they would  be otherwise  entitled, all of which are considered  to be beneficial  to study participants.  Participants 
in the SBCM treatment  group who become incarcerated will participate in the same  study  activities as SAR 
participants and additionally engage  in time-limited case management sessions. Consequences of 
discontinuation due to incarceration for participants  in the SBCM  group include loss of assessment, planning, 
linking, monitoring and advocacy provided  by the case manager.  Local standard  operating procedures for the 
collection of prisoner data will be approved by the IRB.  Data  may be collected either in person, by phone, or in 
writing, provided that data collection follows  the procedures approved by OHRP and the IRB. The research 
team will not share details  of the nature of the research with staff at the jail/prison, or with parole or probation 
officers. Visits, whether  in person or by phone, will only be conducted if the participant’s confidentiality can be 
maintained and no audio-taping occurs.  Incarcerated participants  will be clearly informed in advance  that 
participation in the research will have no effect  on their probation or parole, nor will it confer any advantages or 
amenities beyond the potential benefits stated at the time of informed consent.  Any possible advantages 
accruing to prisoners through participation in the research—when compared to the general living conditions, medical  
care, quality of food, amenities and opportunity  for earnings in the jail/prison—are  not of sufficient magnitude as to 
impair prisoners’  ability  to weigh the risks of the research against the value of such advantages in the limited choice 
environment of the prison.
c.3. Recruitment and screening 
c.3.1. Recruitment. Participants will be recruited from the Bellevue Hospital Center ED, a large, urban, public-
sector ED. The recruitment target for the proposed study is 2 participants  per week.  
c.3.2. Screening. Potential participants will be identified in two ways: 
Method 1) Patients with known opioid use will be referred to the study team by clinical ED staff. 
As part of an ongoing clinical (non-research)  SBIRT program taking place in the Bellevue ED, ED 
staff screen and assess ED patients for unhealthy tobacco, alcohol, and drug use. ED staff will 
introduce patients who report illicit or non-medical use of opioids in the past year to study staff.  
Study RAs will then complete screening procedures (detailed below)  with referred patients. This 
referral arrangement allows  the ED staff to make the initial  determination that the patient is 
7appropriate for potential  study  inclusion with regard to patient’s medical  stability  and capacity to 
provide informed consent. 
Method 2) Study staff will introduce themselves to ED staff and inquire about patients who may 
be eligible to participate in the study. Study staff may approach ED patients directly only after ED 
staff has provided permission to do so.  
The study RA will then request the patient’s  verbal  consent, to complete the prescreen research assessment 
using an IRB-approved  verbal consent  script. After  the patient has provided verbal (not signed) consent, the 
RA will collect anonymous information  including  English proficiency, age, gender, reason for ED visit, triage 
acuity level, non-prisoner status, days of opioid  use in the past 30 days, and availability for treatment  (See form 
entitled “Brief Information Tool”)  in order to determine potential eligibility and to collect data on 
representativeness of the study sample. These data will be collected by interviewing the patient, except for the 
triage level and reason  for ED visit, which will be obtained from the “white board” (a patient  tracking system 
which is visible to all staff working  in the ED). 
The RA will then administer the DSM-IV Checklist. Patients who meet  DSM-IV criteria (endorsement of 
three or more opioid dependence  criteria) will be further screened for eligibility using the Screening  Instrument 
Secondary Screening Form. This form will provide  a complete review of eligibility criteria. Those who are 
interested and eligible  will then undergo the written informed consent process described  in the Protection  of 
Human Subjects section. Patients who screen  out of the study will receive  no further study intervention,  but   
will receive the standard clinical intervention by ED staff as well as any patient education materials that are 
typically distributed after screening.  Anonymous screening data will be kept to allow description  of those  who 
do not qualify. This is necessary to assess the representativeness of the included sample, and required by high 
quality medical  journals.   
Screening data will be collected by research personnel using direct entry into tablet  computers  to 
facilitate rapid screening, electronic data capture, and mobility  within  the busy  ED setting. Refusals  and 
inability to participate  (e.g., unavailable  due to emergency medical treatment, left without being seen)  will be 
recorded. Study staff will time their intervention to minimize  interference  with medical treatment. Patients who 
show signs  of intoxication (e.g., somnolence,  slurring of speech) will not be screened unless and until these 
signs resolve.
c.4. Baseline  Assessment  
The baseline  assessment for this trial will be kept considerably briefer  than those traditionally used in addiction 
treatment trials. There are both methodological and practical reasons for this. It is important to keep the 
assessment battery brief in order to minimize  assessment  reactivity that can obscure treatment effects  [83-87].  
This is of particular  concern for trials in which the dose of treatment is relatively small. The practical  issue is 
that extensive  assessments  are likely to interfere  with the rapid pace of clinical  treatment in the ED setting. A 
cumbersome assessment process  is also likely  to impede the successful completion of the study through an 
adverse effect on recruitment and on the quality of the relationship between  study  staff and clinical ED staff. 
The baseline  assessment will include an abbreviated  Form-90 interview (described below) as the primary 
baseline measure  of substance use. All consenting participants will also complete a demographic 
questionnaire, provide locator  information, and provide a urine sample which  will provide  an objective  measure 
of substance use, as well as the TCU-TMA, BTI, SIP-D, and WHOQoL Bref forms described  in section c.10 
below.  None of the baseline assessments  are clinical assessments.  All study personnel will be trained in the 
administration of the assessments  via formal protocol training.  A Training Documentation Form,  endorsed by 
the study’s  Principal Investigator, will certify the research team member’s competence to complete the 
measures. The total time burden  for the baseline assessment  is approximately  100 minutes, comparable to 
that of the SMART-ED study (approximately  90 minutes). Participants who sign informed consent, complete  
the baseline assessment and meet all inclusion and exclusion criteria will proceed to randomization. 
c.5. Randomization
Eligible participants  will be randomly assigned in 1:1 ratio to (1) screening  plus assessment and referral  (SAR), 
(2) up to 6 sessions of strengths-based case management (SBCM). Randomization will follow  a randomly 
permuted block  randomization  schedule set up within REDCap prior to beginning the trial, and allocation for 
each participant will be revealed only at the point of randomization. The RA will use a Randomization Form to 
document eligibility, treatment assignment, if randomized and, if not, the reason an eligible participant  was not 
randomized. Once eligibility has been established, randomization will be performed and documented  by 
8pushing the “Randomize” button on the Randomization form. There are a number of possible pre-treatment 
predictors of treatment  engagement and opioid use outcomes, including age, gender, treatment history, 
addiction severity, psychosocial instability (e.g., housing), psychiatric comorbidity, and co-occurring other drug 
and alcohol  use [88-91]. Studies are not consistent  as to which  factors are predictive, and existing studies may 
or may not be relevant  to ED patients  receiving SBCM.  Therefore, randomization  will not be stratified.
c.6. Follow-Up
Follow-up assessments will be conducted  at 3 and 6 months post randomization.  Different RAs will be used to 
complete baseline and follow-up assessments, in order  to maintain blinded  follow-up assessment. If possible, 
follow-up will be conducted in person at Bellevue Hospital Center. If necessary, follow-ups may be completed  
in the community. If in-person follow-up is not possible, follow-up visits may be conducted  by phone. 
Substance use measures (Barriers to Treatment, Short Inventory of Problems, TCU Treatment Motivation 
Scales, The World Health Organization Quality of Life [WHOQoL  Bref],  Form  90-D,   and Urine Drug  Screen, 
and objective verification of pharmacotherapy through the New York Prescription Drug Monitoring Program and 
methadone programs where participants report receiving treatment) similar to those  of the baseline 
assessment will be completed at follow-up,  and comprehensive treatment  utilization data will be collected using 
the Form 90-D. None of the follow up assessments  are clinical  assessments.  All study  personnel will be 
trained in the administration  of the assessments via formal  protocol training.  A Training Documentation Form, 
endorsed by the study’s  Principal Investigator, will certify  the research team member’s competence to 
complete the measures.  If a participant  comes in for his or her 6-month follow-up  and he or she has missed 
the 3-month follow-up, the RA will reconstruct the Form 90-D  for the first 3-month period and complete all 6-
month follow-up assessment items.   
c.7. Blinding
As in almost all psychosocial treatment protocols, study participants  will not be blinded.  However, RAs will be 
blinded to treatment condition at follow-up. At the beginning  of the follow-up interview, the RAs will read a brief 
script that informs the participant  that they should not reveal  their treatment assignment.  
c.8. Interventions
c.8.1. Screening, Assessment and Referral. Following randomization, participants in the SAR condition will 
be provided with minimal scripted feedback to let them  know that their assessment indicates  substance 
dependence, and given a recommendation to seek treatment. The RA will provide these participants  with an 
information sheet listing treatment (including both specialty treatment centers and primary care clinics that 
provide buprenorphine) and self-help resources in their community. The referral  sheet includes names, 
addresses, and phone numbers  of local addiction treatment agencies. Because  the Bellevue Hospital  Center 
ED does not currently screen or refer systematically, the SAR condition represents a level of care significantly  
higher than “treatment  as usual.”  Participants will also receive an informational  pamphlet about drug use and 
its consequences, addiction, and treatment,  as used in the SMART-ED study. 
c.8.2. Brief Strength-Based Case Management. The structure of SBCM follows the widely accepted 
functions of case management —assessment, planning, linking, monitoring and advocacy [92, 93]—and the 
theory-driven gestalt  of the strengths perspective [94]. Strengths-based principles include an emphasis  on 
client strengths,  teaching clients a method for setting and completing goals, and development of a strong 
working alliance [94, 95]. The emphasis on client strengths is based on the work  of Bandura who found that 
individuals are most  likely to repeat successful  behaviors if they can find precedent for those behaviors in their 
own experiences [96-98]. The importance of relationship development, or working alliance, has repeatedly 
been identified as one of the most crucial elements  of client  success, both in therapy and case management  
relationships [99-101]. The importance  of client-driven goal setting was established  in earlier  clinical trials of 
SBCM [94, 95, 102]. SBCM addresses barriers  in four broad areas—logistical, coordinative, individually and 
socially mediated —articulated by Messeri in a study of linkage to medical  care [103]. Case  managers are 
expected to be intimately familiar  with community resources,  including  substance abuse treatment, housing 
services, medical clinics, job banks, etc., in order to help inform client’s  selections of services. Additionally, 
case managers will provide resources to participants such  as program brochures,  printed applications for 
social services and informational pamphlets, etc., to help facilitate linkage with care. When logistical difficulties 
such as transportation, childcare and identification are present, case managers make  transportation 
arrangements or provide transportation themselves. 
9The six case management sessions  for the proposed  trial are based  on those described in manuals 
developed by Dr. Rapp  for two clinical  trials, one supported by NIDA [56] and another by the CDC [70]. Each  
session is guided by specific objectives  that promote  linkage with and retention  in substance  abuse treatment,  
particularly pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence in a specialty or primary care setting. Objectives from the 
earlier trials  will be adapted  to fit the specific context of this trial, linking with and staying in treatment following 
an ED visit. Initiation of the relationship between client  and case manager  begins immediately following  
random assignment and termination takes place when either  (1) six sessions have occurred; (2) ninety days  
have elapsed; or (3) clients discontinue involvement.
Session One. The first session will take place as soon as possible following patient’s random 
assignment to the SBCM condition. If possible,  this session  will be completed before the participant leaves the 
ED. The primary  goal of session one is to begin development of a relationship between case manager  and 
client. The following objectives  guide  the initial one-half hour session: discussion of services  available with 
SBCM, discussion of the events preceding  the emergency department visit, initial identification of strengths, 
assets and abilities,  identifying the client’s opinion about going to substance abuse  treatment and making  plans 
for linkage  to treatment (if the client has already decided to pursue substance abuse treatment)  or a next 
meeting with the case manager  (if the client has not yet decided  to enter treatment). Whether  the client is 
linking with treatment or working  on other  goals case managers will utilize  the Linkage and Personal Goals 
Roadmap. The Roadmap will provide a structure for writing objectives in specific,  measurable  terms  and 
identifying the strategies  that will need to be implemented  to accomplish objectives. 
Session Two. If the client has already  linked with care the case  manager  will engage him/her  in a 
discussion of early  treatment experiences and actual  or potential barriers  to continuing retention. Together  the 
client and case  manager will develop a plan for addressing  these barriers. Clients  who have  not yet linked with 
care will continue to work with the case  manager on the objectives that were  formulated during the first 
session. Case managers will integrate discussions about linking into the session,  helping  clients to identify  the 
way in which  substance use interferes with clients’ plans. Identification  of client strengths enhances the case 
manager relationship with the client and increases clients’ sense of self-efficacy in accomplishing their goals.
Sessions Three - Five. These three sessions will follow objectives  similar to the first two sessions. For 
clients already  linked  with care the continuing  emphasis will be on identifying potential  barriers  to continued  
retention and making  plans to mitigate  those barriers  before  they actually occur. Efforts will often  involve  
reducing tangible  barriers to treatment such as transportation, scheduling, or intake procedures. Other  barriers  
may become  apparent  during this time, such as lack of family  or social support or a need to preserve 
confidentiality. If linkage to treatment has not yet occurred, the case manager will continue  to help the client to 
consider their immediate  needs  and possible barriers  to linkage.  Throughout these sessions  the case  manager  
will remind the client of the limited number of sessions that they have remaining to work  together.  This is done 
as part of the disengagement process and to encourage  the client  to make best use of the time remaining, 
hopefully by linking with addiction treatment in a specialty or primary care setting.
Session Six (Final  session). During  this meeting the client  and case manager  will finalize the 
disengagement process. For linked  clients, this includes a review of the barriers overcome, a reinforcement  of 
the client’s strengths and self-identified  rationale  for linking to medical care, and a review  of the plan for 
continuing in care.  Clients who have not linked to care will also benefit from a review of their progress in 
transitioning to the community and a reiteration  of the benefits of eventual  linkage to treatment. At this time the 
case manager and client will develop a provisional outline  for how to link to care if the client  subsequently  
elects to seek  treatment.
c.9. Assessment schedule. The selected assessment  battery attempts to balance  the value  of 
comprehensive data against  the costs of data collection in terms of staff time, feasibility of completion  in the 
ED, financial cost, and assessment reactivity. Therefore, assessments have been  limited  to those that 
contribute directly  to the objectives  of the study.  Estimated times for the baseline, 3-month, and 6-month 
assessments are 100 min., 80 min., and 80 min., respectively.
Table 1.  Assessment Schedule*
Procedure / Measure Baseline 3-M follow up 6-M follow up
Form 90-D X X X
Demographics X
10Locator  form X X X
Urine  drug screen (UDS) X X X
Texas Christian University – Treatment  
Motivation Assessment (TCU-TMA)X X X
Barriers to Treatment (BTI) X X X
WHO Quality  of Life-BREF (WHOQoL Bref) X X X
Short Inventory of Problems  (SIP) X X X
Assessment of AEs & SAEs
(if spontaneously reported)X X X
*Working Alliance  Inventory-Short Version (WAI-SR) is completed immediately after the first SBCM session for 
participants assigned  to SBCM.
c.10. Measures
c.10.1. Screening  instrument. The logistics of screening in the ED require that the screening  process be 
relatively brief.  The screening  instrument includes the Brief Information Tool (BIT), the DSM-IV Checklist  and 
the Screening Instrument  Secondary Screening Form. The BIT will collect  anonymous information including 
English proficiency,  age, gender, reason for ED visit, triage acuity  level, non-prisoner status, and availability for 
treatment. The Screening  Instrument  Secondary Screening  Form  will provide a complete review of eligibility  
criteria prior to the informed consent.   
c.10.2. DSM-IV substance use disorder criteria. Substance use disorder criteria will be queried  by self-report 
using the DSM-IV [112] checklist used in several past NIDA CTN trials involving patients with opioid 
dependence with or without co-occurring stimulant  dependence [113-115 ]. A recent  secondary analysis in a 
sample of 383 stimulant-using  methadone maintenance patients demonstrated  that all symptoms assessed in 
this manner had moderate to high discrimination of drug use severity,  and that the internal consistency of item 
sets for both opioid dependence and cocaine  dependence was high (Cronbach’s alphas  > 0.8), supporting the 
use of this methodology in settings where efficiency and ease of administration  is critical [116]. 
c.10.3. Form 90-D: Substance use and treatment participation.  The Form 90, originally  developed for 
Project MATCH, provides  reliable measures of drug and alcohol use, treatment, and general functioning [117-
119]. For the proposed  study we will use the Form 90-D, a version of the Form 90 which has been modified to 
assess for all substances rather than focusing on alcohol. The Form 90-D incorporates time-line  follow-back 
procedures [120, 121] using a calendar-based interview which  yields  a continuous  daily record  of use of each  
category of illicit drug. For each  substance, each day of use is categorized  as light, medium,  or heavy use, and 
mode of administration  (e.g.,  IV use) is recorded. Test-retest  reliability for current (past  90 days)  substance use 
is very good  [119, 122], and concurrence  with urine  drug screen data is good [119]. Three  modifications  will be 
made to the standard  Form 90-D. First, as in the SMART-ED study  the baseline  assessment the period of 
assessment will be limited to 30 days.  Second, the actual dates  of counseling and pharmacotherapy will be 
recorded on the calendar, to allow temporal ordering  of treatment activities  and substance use, necessary for 
Aim 5. Third, separate items will be created  for methadone, buprenorphine, oral naltrexone, depot naltrexone, 
and overdose reversal kits containing naloxone,  and the form will capture setting of all addiction treatment  
services received (specialty  vs. primary care). It is estimated that the Form 90-D assessment will take 
approximately 30 minutes to complete  at baseline (30 day assessment period) and approximately 45 minutes 
at follow-up (approximately 90 day assessment period). 
c.10.4. Urine  drug  screens. As an objective measure of opioid use, a temperature-monitored urine sample 
will be obtained at baseline, the 3-month follow-up visit and the 6-month follow-up visit, and tested on site 
using an immunoassay for opiates, cocaine,  oxycodone,  methadone, propoxyphene,  as well as 
methamphetamine, amphetamine, benzodiazepines, buprenorphine,  MDMA, phencyclidine, tricyclic 
antidepressants, and cannabinoids. While we considered more frequent urine drug screening,  we propose to 
defer all outcome  assessments until the 3-month follow-up, as done  in the SMART-ED study,  in order to 
minimize the effects of contact, particularly in the SAR group, prior to the primary outcome assessment  at 3 
months. These data will not be included  in subjects’ medical records.
c.10.5. Objective verification of pharmacotherapy  received. In order  to verify self-reported use of 
medications for opioid dependence, two sources of information will be used. First, we will obtain  dosing 
information from methadone and buprenorphine  programs where participants report  they have been  treated. 
11Second, the New York Prescription  Drug  Monitoring Program will be accessed  to identify all opioid 
prescriptions that participants fill during the follow-up period.  While this does not prove that the participant 
actually took the medication prescribed, it allows verification  of self-report. 
c.10.6. Session Record  Form s. Session  Record  Forms will be completed for each SBCM session and will 
capture basic information about each session. These forms will include session date, time, whether  the session 
was interrupted, case management  functions  performed and whether a referral to treatment was made.
c.10.7. Non-Study Treatment  Form (NTF) . The NTF will be completed  by RAs at approximately  1 month after 
the patient’s  admission to the ED using chart review. This form will track ED discharge diagnoses, whether the 
patient was admitted to the hospital  and length of stay, whether the patient received any additional  substance-
related interventions during their ED visit, and whether the patient was discharged  with any substance use 
medications (e.g., withdrawal medications).
c.10.8. Assessment  of Motivation: The TCU-TMA. Several well-established  scales exist for the assessment 
of motivation in substance abuse populations, including the SOCRATES  [123], the URICA [124], the TREAT 
[125], the Readiness  to Change Questionnaire [126], and the Texas Christian University-Treatment Motivation 
Assessment (TCU-TMA)  [127], derived from the CMRS treatment motivation instrument  [128]. The TCU-TMA 
was used in an earlier  NIDA clinical trial of SBCM (Dr. Rapp, PI) [56] because  of its widespread  use in relevant 
populations including  methadone maintenance patients [127, 129], probationers  [130], patients in residential  
treatment [131] , and cocaine  abusers [132]; and its prediction of session  attendance and treatment 
engagement in prior studies [129, 131, 133]. Analysis of TCU-TMA  data from a pre-linkage  population 
demonstrated that the factor structure was different than that of post-linkage populations [134, 135] . Twenty of 
the original 23 items from the TCU-TMA provided  the best fit to the data,  with factors: Problem Recognition 
(alpha = 0.90), Desire for Change (alpha = 0.57), Treatment Readiness (alpha  = 0.82),  and Treatment 
Reluctance (alpha = 0.69) [135]. The TCU-TMA will be administered at baseline, 3, and 6 months.  
c.10.9. Working Alliance  Inventory – Short Version (WAI) . The 12-item  Working  Alliance Inventory (WAI-
SR) [136] is a self-report  measure based on Bordin’s [137] formulation of working alliance. The WAI-SR 
comprises 12 Likert-scaled items  that assess the extent to which the individual experiences the therapist and 
therapy as helpful. Similar to the original  36-item WAI, the WAI-SR consists  of three subscales: the Goal 
subscale addresses the extent to which therapy goals are important, mutual, and capable of being 
accomplished; the Task subscale  focuses on the participant’s agreement about  the steps taken to help 
improve the client’s situation;  and the Bond subscale measures mutual  liking  and attachment. A psychometric 
evaluation of the WAI-SR [136] indicated that the instrument demonstrated  adequate factor structure, 
differentiated between  Goal, Task,  and Bond alliance  dimensions, and correlated well with other alliance 
measures. Tracey and Kokotovic [138] reported  strong internal consistency  (Cronbach’s alpha = .98) of the 
WAI-SR. The WAI-SR  will be completed  following initial SBCM session. 
c.10.10. Barriers to Treatment Inventory (BTI). Participants will complete  the 25-item Barriers to Treatment 
Inventory [139] at baseline and at 3-month follow-up.  This Likert-scaled questionnaire  has seven internally 
consistent subscales relating to Absence of Problem, Negative  Social Support, Fear of Treatment, Privacy 
Concerns, Time  Conflict, Poor  Treatment Availability, and Admission Difficulty. It may be used to identify 
perceived barriers  regardless of whether the individual has sought or engaged in treatment. We will add three 
items to this scale related  to child-care, child custody, and child protective services involvement. The BTI has 
demonstrated validity across gender, ethnicity, and age [140, 141]. 
c.10.11. Locator Questionnaire. An electronic  locator form, including  home  address, will be completed at 
baseline and updated at the 3- and 6- month follow-up visits and in-between  visits, if new locator information is 
obtained. Data collected on the Locator Questionnaire will be used to facilitate contact with the participants 
during the research and follow-up. Participants  will be asked  to provide locator  information including their 
contact information  and the contact information of friends  or relatives who can reach the participant if the 
participant cannot be reached directly.
c.10.12. Consequences  of substance  use. The drug-specific form of the Short Inventory of Problems (SIP-D) 
[142] past 3 month  version,  will be used to measure  consequences of drug use at each time point. The SIP-D 
is derived from the original alcohol-specific  SIP, a short (15-item) form of Drinker’s Inventory of Consequences 
(DrInC) [143]. Psychometric evaluation  of the SIP-D in a severely impaired population of patients entering 
substance abuse treatment yielded a single  factor with Cronbach’s alpha  = 0.97, and strong evidence 
convergent and discriminant validity [142]. Although versions  of the SIP exist that combine alcohol and drug 
12consequences [144, 145], the correlation between alcohol and drug consequences can be low [142], 
suggesting that it is important to assess drug consequences separately  if they are of primary interest.
c.10.13. Physical, psychological, social,  and environmental quality of life (WHOQoL Bref). Quality of Life 
will be assessed  at baseline and at 3 and 6 months.  At least 15 measures have been used to assess  quality of 
life opioid dependent populations [146]. Quality of Life has consistently  been  found to improve  following  
engagement in addiction  treatment. Case Management addresses many different life domains  that have an 
impact on quality of life, such  as work,  housing, and legal  problems as well as medical,  psychiatric,  and dental 
needs; we hypothesize that people with more  needs in these areas will benefit more  from SBCM. For this 
reason we wish to use a broad measure of QoL rather than an instrument focusing narrowly  on health-related  
QoL. Of available  brief general QoL measures, The WHOQoL Bref [147] is an attractive  option because it is 
well validated in a variety  of populations  including  opioid dependent  patients.  Studies using the WHOQoL have  
demonstrated lower quality of life among opioid  addicts than in controls [148, 149], and improvements  in 
quality of life with opioid replacement therapy  [150-152].  The WHOQoL  Bref includes 26 items with 4 subscales 
covering the physical health, psychological, social, and environmental domains. The domain scores have good 
internal consistency,  test-retest reliability, and discriminant  validity [147]. 
c.11. Training, Supervision, and Fidelity Monitoring Procedures for Study Interventions  
c.11.1. Training and Credentialing in SBCM
Training for SBCM. A 2-day training  in SBCM  will be required of research study  staff who will deliver the 
strengths based  case management.  The content of the training will be based on existing 2-day training  
formats, modified as needed  for the specific content of the SBCM sessions described  in the SBCM manuals. 
This training  will consist of a basic introduction to the SBCM model, role-play exercises, complete review  of the 
study treatment  manual,  and practice  sessions  of the study interventions.  
Pilot Delivery of Interventions. Upon completion of the basic training, interventionists conducting  the 
brief interventions in the ED will be required to complete  at least 2 practice cases (totaling no less than 5 
SBCM sessions)  with consenting  pilot/training  patients, and receive  satisfactory  fidelity ratings in order to be 
certified.  If the pilot cases  are judged by the supervisor to be satisfactory  in quality, the data from the pilot 
participants will be included in the main trial. 
c.11.2. Treatment Fidelity for SBCM. 
Supervision of Interventionists. All SBCM  sessions will be digitally audiotaped  if possible.  Participants 
may opt out of audiotaping.  These files could theoretically be identifiable by voice  quality or details of the 
conversation. The digital audio recordings will be transferred from the audio recorder  to a password protected, 
HIPAA compliant secure storage drive.  Recordings will be identified by participant number, session number,  
date, and research  study member.   The recordings will only be accessible to study team  members  including 
the SBCM  supervisor. Supervision for SBCM  will be provided by collaborator Richard Rapp, PhD., of Wright  
Stated University. Dr. Rapp is the person who developed  the SBCM model of case management. His role on 
the project is limited  to training and supervision/fidelity  monitoring  of staff who are conducting the SBCM 
intervention. Audiotapes of all interventionists will be reviewed and scored  by Dr. Rapp (using the same 
Adherence Scale used  by the fidelity monitor-see below) and reviewed in a biweekly telephone supervision 
session. Research  study members will also have back-up  available through  the existing clinical  hierarchy at the 
Bellevue Hospital  Center  ED.
Quality Control of SBCM.  Following completion  of the trial, a randomly selected sample of 20% of 
sessions completed during the trial will be coded using  the SBCM Adherence Scale as a formal measure of 
treatment fidelity  during the trial.  The digital audio recordings will be destroyed  upon  completion of the quality 
control of SBCM.
SBCM Adherence  Scale. This scale includes 5 Likert-scaled items, 5 in each of 3 dimensions  of the 
SBCM model.  The “Strengths” dimension  rates the extent to which  the case manager elicits  and affirms client  
strengths, and incorporates these strengths into assessment and the planning of goals.  The “individual-driven” 
dimension supports  participant  autonomy and choice in the determination of goals and courses of action  in 
working with the case manager.  The “relationship” dimension  rates the extent to which the case  manager  
establishes a strong alliance with the participant and demonstrates  respect and empathy for their concerns. 
c.12. Statistical Methods
An extensive set of preliminary analyses are planned but are not fully described because of page 
restrictions. In addition to the assessment of the distributional properties of key measures at baseline and 
13follow-up, we will evaluate the nature and pattern of missing data and assess treatment group equivalency 
at baseline on primary substance use measures and patient characteristics that are central to study aims. 
Three areas of preliminary analyses are highlighted below given their importance for the achievement of 
study aims. All primary analyses will be based upon an intent-to-treat (ITT) approach. 
c.12.1. Self-selection and Attrition. The DSM-IV will be administered as a measure of substance use prior 
to informed consent, a procedure that facilitates comparing (1) substance use patterns of eligible and 
ineligible participants, and (2) eligible prospects who do and do not elect to participate in the study. 
Contingent on the scale of measurement of the comparison variable, unprotected t-tests and Chi Squares 
will be done to compare these groups. Two strategies will be used to examine the impact of attrition on 
study internal validity, and both strategies will employ hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) with binary 
outcomes depicting attrition status (yes/no) jointly at three and six-months (Bernoulli function). First, we will 
examine attrition by group assignment. Here, the HLM will identify both the main effect of group assignment 
on later attrition as well as the potential for a group-by-time attrition effect. Second, group equivalency on 
factors potentially predictive of future treatment seeking will be evaluated with one-way ANOVA’s using 
scales from the BTI, TCU-TMA, and WHO-QoL scales as dependent measures. Third, using a lagged HLM 
we will examine how, if at all, substance use and general functioning at baseline and three-month follow-up 
predicts attrition at the three and six-month follow-up.  
c.12.2. Convergent validity of self-report of substance use and urine toxicology. The veracity of self-
reported illicit drug use will be examined by determining the concordance between positive urine toxicology 
screens and Form 90-D self-reported use at baseline, and at the 3 and 6 month follow-ups. Concordance 
will be determined both in categorical terms (agreement on the presence or absence of substance use) via 
Chi Square with kappa correction and, for continuous daily counts of substance use, Intraclass correlation. 
c.12.3. Convergent validity of pharmacotherapy initiation and engagement data. The initiation and 
engagement in treatment and pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence will be determined using three 
methods. The Form 90-D interview will collect retrospective report of frequency of counseling sessions, 
inpatient/residential treatment, ambulatory and hospital-based detoxification (items 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 23, 
and 24) and pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence. Days use of one (or more) of four medications will be 
summed to indicate days of pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence: methadone, buprenorphine, P.O. 
naltrexone, and depot naltrexone (one injection of depot naltrexone will count as 30 days of 
pharmacotherapy). These events will be recorded on the day-by-day calendar to allow for the investigation 
of temporal associations between medication and substance use. As described in Section c.10.5, two 
objective methods will be used to verify self-reported use of medications for opioid dependence: methadone 
and buprenorphine clinic dosing records and New York State’s Prescription Monitoring Program. Days of 
pharmacotherapy will be estimated from these records based on days dispensed or administered, and 
concordance between the objective records and self-report will be computed. Discrepancies will be 
reconciled prior to conducting primary analyses (self-reported days of pharmacotherapy will be capped at 
the number of days of medication that was dispensed or administered).
c.12.4. Study Aim 1. The a priori pairwise contrast (SBCM vs. SAR) will investigate the main effect of study 
group assignment on initiation of addiction treatment and engagement in pharmacotherapy for opioid 
dependence. Following Rapp et al. [56], “Initiation” will be defined as a dichotomous outcome (yes/no), and 
will be considered to have occurred if patients report any substance abuse counseling sessions (excluding 
SBCM) from the time of the baseline assessment up to the day before the three-month interview. Using the 
same timeframe as “initiation,” “engagement” will be defined as the number days of medication use for 
opioid dependence, based on self-report verified by clinic dosing logs and Prescription Drug Monitoring 
Program records. Generalized linear modeling (GLM) will be used to test the planned contrasts, with group 
assignment as the between-subject factor (df = 1), and baseline measures of days substance use, number 
of lifetime treatment episodes for substance misuse, and readiness for change used as covariates. A logit 
link function will be used with the dichotomous outcome measure, initiation, while a linear distribution will be 
assumed with the continuous engagement outcome measure. Given the definitional overlap between the 
two primary dependent measures and our planned contrasts we will apply a Bonferroni correction of α = 
.05/2 = .025 (two-tailed) in rejecting the null hypothesis. 
c.12.5. Study Aim 2. Pairwise between-group contrasts analogous to those in Aim 1 are planned for Aim 2, 
with the difference that post-randomization opioid use is the outcome. The primary analysis will be based 
on a dichotomous measure of “successful outcome,” analogous to the outcomes used in a recent NIDA 
14CTN trial of buprenorphine with and without opioid drug counseling [153], and in the NIAAA COMBINE trial 
[82]. For the present study “successful outcome” will be defined as 1) 3-month urine negative for opioids 
(opiates, oxycodone, methadone, buprenorphine, or propoxyphene) unless prescribed for opioid 
dependence, and 2) no more than two days of self-reported opioid use in the 4 weeks prior to the 3-month 
evaluation. Here, we will perform logistic regressions in which 3-month successful outcome (yes/no) is the 
dependent measure and baseline covariates are entered in step 1. Baseline days of opioid use will be used 
as a covariate as well as baseline readiness for change and number of lifetime treatment episodes for 
substance misuse. Treatment group will be dummy coded and entered in step 2 of the analysis. Secondary 
analysis will separately examine urine drug screen data and three-month self-reported opioid use, here 
defined as the total number of days of opioid use in the 30-day window before the 3-month interview (Form 
90). Additional parallel analyses will be conducted for other drugs of abuse, IV drug use, and six-month 
substance use defined using the same strategies described above. 
c.12.6. Study Aim 3. To test the effects  of SBCM on other  important life-functioning areas we will contrast 
SBCM with SAR (both groups combined) on each of the 4 subscales of the WHOQoL  Bref. Baseline scores for 
each of these  measures will be used as covariates when investigating its corresponding three-month value. 
GLM-based application of ANCOVA will be used to test the main effect of SBCM and alpha  for each  test will be 
set at .0125 (.05/4). Two sets of secondary  analyses  are planned. First we will investigate  the extent, if any, 
that improvement in life-functioning  areas (3-months)  has a prognostic main effect on 6-month substance use 
reductions. Second, using longitudinal HLM we will investigate  the trajectories  of change in quality of life from 
baseline to the 6-month follow-up. 
c.12.7. Study Aim 4. We predict  that (1) SBCM will have a larger effect (relative to SAR) on initiation and 
engagement in participants with higher levels of environmental instability at baseline. Definitions of initiation 
and engagement will parallel the definitions used in Aim 1. Environmental instability at baseline will be 
defined by summing five items in the Form 90-D interview, with higher scores reflecting more instability: 
number of days homeless, days living with others (not paying rent), days living in a halfway house, days 
incarcerated, and days not paid for work (all past 30 days). GLM will be used to test the predicted 
interactions. Covariates in these analyses will include baseline measures of days of opioid use and number 
of lifetime treatment episodes for substance misuse. Main effect terms representing treatment group and 
the selected participant attribute and the interaction term (group x attribute) will be entered simultaneously. 
For the environmental instability moderator we predict that the slope between instability and outcome will 
be significant and positive within the SBCM group while this parameter estimate within the SAR condition 
will be non-significant (ordinal interaction). 
c.12.8. Study Aim 5. This aim will identify the relative  importance of study treatment effects and later initiation  
of/engagement in non-study treatment  in predicting substance  use reductions,  i.e., does initiation or 
engagement mediate  the relationship between study group assignment and outcome?  Analyses will focus on 
3-month opioid use outcome although  6-month outcomes will be investigated to ascertain the stability of 
findings over time. Three-month substance use will be defined as the total number of days of opioid use in 
the 30-day window before the 3-month (Form 90-D). To provide for non-overlapping data initiation and 
engagement will be defined the same way as in all other aims (two measures), but this time only 
considering post-randomization months 1 and 2. Baseline days of opioid use as well as number of lifetime 
treatment episodes for substance misuse will be used as covariates. Aim 4 findings may result in one 
additional covariate, environmental instability. Using GLM, we plan to assess the mediating effect of 
initiation and engagement (separately for each measure) in two steps: in step 1, the main effect of 
treatment assignment (df = 2) and covariate effects will be tested against a protected alpha of .05/2 = .025. 
In step 2 the main effect of initiation or engagement will be entered into the model, with the prediction that 
this term will eliminate the main effect of treatment assignment. Parallel and confirmatory analyses will be 
done using “successful outcome” and 3-month opioid drug screen results as dependent measures. 
Following the same stepwise strategy used in the GLM, separate logistic regression models will be used to 
determine if initiation and engagement measures account for the dichotomous outcomes over and above 
the benefits from the SCBM intervention.  Several additional secondary analyses are planned to 
investigate, in detail, the temporal relationship between daily substance use, use of medications for opioid 
dependence, and treatment group assignment. As an example, we will use a hierarchical  generalized linear 
model (HGLM:  Bernoulli sampling model and a logit link function) to prospectively  determine  if the initiation of 
15medications for opioid dependence predicts, in a lagged design,  reduction  in opioid use, and whether the 
strength of this relationship varies by treatment condition, e.g., cross-level  interactions [154]. 
c.13. Statistical power 
Power analyses were calculated for Aims 1 and 2 as these objectives involve between-group contrasts 
pertaining to the most important outcome measures: linkage to addiction treatment and opioid use. In our 
planned pairwise contrasts for both Aims 1 and 2 we anticipate an attrition rate of 15% leading to a reduced 
N of 127 per cell, and base our calculations on a desired power of .80. For Aim 1, effect size estimates are 
based on reported effects for case management relative to treatment as usual (TAU) or another less 
intensive treatment. In reviewing 10 studies investigating the effectiveness of case management versus 
TAU in facilitating later treatment engagement, the Cochrane group reported an effect size of d = .43 
favoring case management, with a larger effect (d = .70) for SBCM and for studies in which the treatment 
was manualized (d = .56) [68]. Assuming a two-tailed test, df = 1, our power projections suggest that the 
proposed cell sizes after attrition and Bonferroni correction (α = .025) are sufficiently powered to detect a 
differential effect as small as d = .32. Regarding drug use (Aim 2), studies contrasting the effectiveness of 
case management with that of treatment as usual or lower intensity treatments have yielded heterogeneous 
results. While the overall effect relative to TAU was small (d = .12), larger effects on drug use were found in 
three studies with above average linkage effects (d = .33) [68]. In the single most relevant trial, a large (n = 
711) study with an opioid dependent sample, case management yielded an intermediate (d = .23) reduction 
in drug use relative to psychoeducation and drug counseling [68]. We have calculated that with a two-tailed 
test, df = 1, α = .05, our proposed cell sizes will have sufficient power to detect effects as small as d = .20 
to reject the null hypothesis, an effect size that falls midway between small and moderate [155].
16PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
1. RISKS TO HUMAN  SUBJECTS
1.1. Human  Subjects  Involvement  and Characteristics.   
The protocol will enroll approximately 400 women and men, age 18 or greater, with opioid dependence, 
recruited from the Bellevue Hospital Center  Emergency Department.  Participants will be recruited between 
approximately January 2016 and December 2019. Participants will be screened and assessed in the ED 
using procedures based closely on those used in our recently completed CTN-0047 trial.  Participants 
identified as having opioid dependence will be randomly assigned (150 per group) to receive 1) up to 6 
sessions of Strength-Based Case Management (SBCM) based on the model previously implemented by 
Rapp et al. [56]; or 2) screening, assessment and referral alone (SAR).  Follow-up assessments will be 
completed at 3 and 6 months, by RAs who are blinded to treatment condition.
The treatment sessions  will all be scheduled  within a 90-day  period for SBCM.  Including screening  and 
follow-up visits, the total duration of participant involvement will be approximately  6 months.   Total time of 
contact during these 6 months  is estimated at 5-10 hrs.  Participants will meet the aforementioned  inclusion  
and exclusion criteria. As noted  in section  c.2.3, the study will not recruit  prisoners. If a subject becomes 
incarcerated during  the study, treatment  and follow-up procedures may be continued in accordance with IRB 
and OHRP  approvals.
1.1.1.Research sites
Screening, consent, baseline assessments, and the initial intervention session will be performed at Bellevue 
Hospital Center  Hospital.  SBCM sessions 2-6 and follow-up assessments may be conducted at Bellevue  
Hospital Center,  at NYULMC, or in the community. Should  the initial  intervention  not occur  on the date of 
consent and baseline, the session may take place as soon as possible and at locations noted  for sessions 2-6 
and follow-up assessments.  Supervision of the SBCM intervention will be performed remotely by Dr. Richard 
Rapp at Wright State University. 
1.2. Sources of Materials.  
Urine samples will be obtained from participants.  Data  will be collected through  use of interviews, 
questionnaires, and data collected from treatment  providers and the New York Prescription Drug Monitoring 
Program.  These  data will include measures of substance use and substance  use disorder diagnoses,  
consequences of substance use, treatment participation,  motivation, therapeutic  alliance, barriers to treatment, 
demographics, contact  information, and quality of life.  Case  management sessions  will be audiotaped for 
fidelity monitoring purposes.  Participants  may opt out of audio-recording. 
These materials and data will be obtained  specifically for research purposes, and the link to subject identifiers  
will be kept only on a separate enrollment log and in the REDCap database, accessible only to project staff.  
1.3.  Potential Risks
1.3.1. Risks of psychosocial treatments
There are no known specific risks to any of the psychosocial treatments employed in this study.  Non-specific 
risks of psychosocial treatments include discomfort with sharing personal information, and the risk of therapist 
misconduct.  These risks are judged to be very minor.
As a consequence of study participation, subjects may receive information concerning  the severity of their 
substance use problems, and their participation implies  that they may have an opioid use disorder.  This risk is 
judged to be minimal, since patients are already being screened for drug and alcohol  use as part of standard of 
care treatment. It is very unlikely that qualifying participants are unaware  that they have significant problems  
with opioid use.  In addition, the consent  form explicitly  states that the study is testing an intervention linking 
patients to treatment for substance use disorder.  Therefore, patients are unlikely to agree to participate if they 
do not already  think that they have  or may have an opioid use disorder.  
171.3.2. Risks of assessment  procedures  
There are no known psychological  risks associated  with the questionnaires used in the study, all of which have  
been used  extensively in clinical populations.   It is possible that discussing substance use and consequences 
may cause emotional discomfort  in some  participants.  To minimize  such discomfort, the following steps will be 
taken.  The consent form will fully inform  the participants about the nature of the information to be disclosed in 
the protocol, and the participants  will be informed in the consent  form that they can refuse to answer any 
questions or withdraw from the study  at any time.  Participants will be informed that all information is 
confidential, and the steps taken to guard confidentiality, as well as the limits to confidentiality, will be 
described.  One of the investigators of the project  will be available to meet with any participant  who becomes 
distressed about  any aspect of the protocol and wishes  to discuss this.  
1.3.3. Risks to confidentiality and potential  legal  consequences.  
Records which identify subjects and the consent  form signed by subjects may be inspected  by the NYU 
Institutional Review Board.  The purpose  for the review  of this information would be to encourage and assess 
compliance with GCP requirements and to document the integrity of the trial progress. De-identified information 
may also be reviewed  by NIH, the sponsor of this study. Because of the need to release information to these 
parties, absolute confidentiality cannot  be guaranteed. No information  will be shared with outside parties during 
objective verification of pharmacotherapy received. Because illicit substance use and addiction are 
stigmatized, there are possible social and legal consequences to breach of confidentiality  concerning this 
information.  The results  of this research project may be presented at meetings  or in publications.   However, 
the identity of individual subjects will not be disclosed  in those presentations.  
1.3.4. Risks and benefits of alternative treatments.  
There is no standard emergency  department treatment  for opioid dependence in the Bellevue Hospital Center 
ED. Patients who are noted  to have opioid dependence are sometimes  referred to social  work to be referred 
for treatment.  It is possible for ED physicians with a CSAT waiver to initiate treatment with buprenorphine, but 
this happens  rarely.  Because of the ethical  problem of participants receiving a lower level of care due to 
participation in the study (particularly those in the SAR group), participation in the study will not preclude the 
participants’ receiving whatever clinical care would otherwise be provided  by the ED.  Therefore such 
interventions are not actually “alternative” treatments but rather  additional treatments that study  participants 
may or may not receive independent  of study participation.  
2. ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION  AGAINST RISKS
2.1. Recruitment and Informed Consent
2.1.1. Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited from the Bellevue  Hospital Center ED.  
2.1.2. Informed  consent  process and document.   
2.1.2.1 Bellevue ED staff will introduce the ED patient to study staff.  
2.1.2.2 Using a brief IRB-approved script,  study  staff will request the patient’s  verbal  consent,  to complete the 
prescreen assessment.
2.1.2.3 The RA will collect anonymous information  from potentially eligible patients including English 
proficiency, age, gender, reason for ED visit, triage level,  non-prisoner status,  days of opioid use in 
the past 30 days, and availability for treatment (See form entitled “Brief  Information Tool”)  in order to 
determine potential  eligibility  and collect data on representativeness of the study  sample.
2.1.2.4   A research  study member will administer the DSM-IV Checklist.
2.1.2.5 ED patients who meet DSM-IV inclusion criteria (endorsement of three or more  opioid dependence 
criteria on the DSM-IV Checklist.)  will be further  screened for eligibility by the RA using the Screening 
Instrument Secondary Screening Form. Those who are interested  and eligible will then undergo the 
written informed  consent process.
18Trained research  staff will conduct  the informed consent process  in private locations as noted  below. 
Interested patients will be provided  with an informed  consent form including all pertinent details of the study 
including description of the following: the assessment interview  and questionnaires; the follow-up  interviews; 
description of experimental treatment; risks and benefits of study procedures;  alternatives to participation in the 
study; confidentiality; emergency treatment and compensation  for injury; payment for participation; a statement 
that patients  will be informed of any new findings  affecting the risks or benefits of the study; a statement that 
participation is voluntary  and that the patient  may withdraw at any time;  and information about  whom to contact 
with questions or in case of emergency.   The consent form will also include assurances  of confidentiality and a 
statement that participation is entirely voluntary, that the decision to participate will in no way influence other  
aspects of the patient’s treatment or involvement in the main trial, and that the participant is free to withdraw 
participation at any time.  Patients indicate their consent to participate in the study by signing and returning the 
informed consent form.  This form provides documentation that written informed consent has been obtained. A 
copy of the signed informed consent form will be given to the study participant.   
2.2. Protection Against Risk
2.2.1. Management of risk due to study treatments
The psychosocial treatments employed in this study are minimal risk.  Risks will be minimized  by thorough 
training, supervision, and monitoring of those providing the interventions,  as described  in Section 3.c.11 of the 
Research Plan. 
2.2.2. Minimization  of risk to confidentiality and privacy
Confidentiality of participant records will be secured  by the use of study codes for identifying participants  on 
CRFs, secure storage of any documents that have participant identifiers, and secure  computing  procedures for 
entering and transferring  electronic data.   No identifying information will be disclosed in reports, publications or 
presentations. Confidentiality will be maintained in accordance with all applicable federal regulations and/or  
state law and regulations.
All project  staff will be thoroughly trained in issues relating to confidentiality.   Data  will be entered into 
“Research Electronic Data  Capture”  (REDCap) which is maintained by the NYU CTSI.  The link between 
participant identifiers  and participant study ID will be maintained only in REDCap and on a password-protected 
electronic storage drive.  REDCap was designed  specifically to protect  patient  privacy and confidentiality while 
assisting investigators  in conducting  clinical research.  System-level  and application-level security  features 
include:  SSL encryption of internet traffic  (e.g. https pages); Hosting in the secure data centers  with 
centralized nightly  backup; Sanitization of database inputs against scripting or SQL injection attacks;  Fine-
grained control over user rights; Detailed audit trails;  Record-locking;  De-identification functions for data export.  
At the conclusion of this study de-identified data will be downloaded and the project will be deleted off of 
REDCap. Confidentiality of hard copy (paper) research materials  will be ensured by storing the research  
materials in locked cabinets.  Material will be available only to project staff, and only as needed.  Participants 
will be identified  in CRFs  by a unique identification code.  Documents containing participants’ identities 
(consent forms, source documents) will be stored in a separate locked cabinet.  Audio files of sessions will be 
stored on a password protected, HIPAA compliant secure server.  Published  reports  will be based on group 
data; no individual  data will be reported.   No information will be shared with outside parties during objective 
verification of pharmacotherapy  received.
As a further protection to confidentiality, the principal investigator  has obtained a federal Certificate of 
Confidentiality (CoC) from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), protecting participants 
against disclosure  of sensitive information  (e.g., drug use).  The NIH office that issues  the CoC will be advised 
of changes in the CoC application information. With this Certificate, the investigators cannot be forced (for 
example by court order or subpoena) to disclose research information that may identify individual patients in 
any Federal, State,  or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative,  or other  proceedings.  Disclosure will be 
necessary, however, upon request of DHHS for audit or program evaluation purposes.   DHHS ensures 
confidentiality of requested data.  Data and study records (including  consent forms, locator  forms, source 
documents, session  audio files, and CRFs) will be kept a minimum of 3 years after all final reports  have been 
19submitted to NIDA.  After that they will be destroyed. A de-identified database will be retained  in electronic form 
as a permanent  record of the study.   
Bellevue ED staff will introduce the potential participants to study  staff at a time when they are deemed  to be 
medically and psychiatrically stable, when their medical care will not be disrupted or delayed,  and when the 
adequate privacy exists.  
The interviewer will ensure a private  setting for the interview and will ask the patient’s comfort with the privacy 
prior to interview initiation. Screening, informed consent, assessment, and initial SBCM sessions may be 
completed in private rooms or other private  treatment areas (e.g.,  ophthalmology  room).  If the patient  is 
moved, the staff member will notify  patient’s doctor or nurse  so that medical  staff is aware  of patient location. If 
the patient is unable to move easily, either  due to lack of mobility  or proximity to certain medical machines, the 
staff member will consult  with a nurse  as to whether it is possible to move participant.  If it is not possible,  the 
staff member will explore possibility with nurse as to whether  patients  surrounding  the participant can be 
moved to afford the participant  more privacy.
If the patient feels uncomfortable  with or is emotionally disturbed by any portion of the interview, s/he may elect 
to not answer  portions of the interview  or may end the interview  without loss of the compensation for their time.
3. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO HUMAN SUBJECTS AND OTHERS  
3.1. Potential benefits  to participants  
Participants in both groups will receive care above  treatment-as-usual. All participants will receive  substance 
use screening, assessment and information on local substance use treatment programs. Participants assigned 
to SBCM will additionally  receive up to 6 SBCM  sessions with a trained case manager who can provide 
additional resources  and support to the participant.  Referral  to treatment and case management are evidence-
based treatments  in other contexts. As stated in section c.2.3, incarcerated  participants will be clearly informed  
in advance that participation in the research will have no effect on parole, nor will it confer  any advantages or 
amenities beyond the potential benefits stated at the time of informed consent.  
3.2. Potential benefits  to others.   
Knowledge gained through this study may aid the development  of more effective treatments for individuals with 
opioid dependence and other  addictive  disorders.  
3.3. Risk-benefit assessment
Risks to individual  participants appear  to be outweighed by the likely  benefits of study participation and the 
potential benefits  to others.   
4. COMPENSATION TO PARTICIPANTS
Participants will receive reimbursement for research assessments as follows:  Screening and Baseline 
assessment: $50, 3-month follow-up: $75, 6-month  follow-up: $75.  Participants completing all of the 
assessments would therefore receive a total of $200. Upon request, participants randomized to SBCM will be 
given a roundtrip Metro Card  for each case management visit.  Upon  request,  both groups  (SBCM and SAR) 
will be given  a roundtrip Metro Card for the 3 and 6 month follow-up interviews.   If a participant is found to be 
incarcerated at time of follow-up, the participant  will be compensated the agreed  upon amount as approved by 
local IRB and/or collaborating correctional facilities.
5. COSTS TO PARTICIPANTS
None.
6. IMPORTANCE  OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED
20There is an urgent need to develop more effective methods  to help people who suffer  from opioid dependence.  
The knowledge gained  through this study  could  help establish effective ways  of facilitating engagement  in 
addiction treatment by patients with opioid dependence who present for treatment in medical EDs.   
7.  DATA AND  SAFETY  MONITORING PLAN
7.1. General Considerations  
The risks of the interventions used  in this study are minimal.  However, the population under study is at high 
risk for serious adverse  events unrelated to study participation. The data and safety monitoring plan is 
therefore designed 1) to monitor study progress, including recruitment, retention, data quality,  and adherence 
to the protocol; and 2) to ensure that the risks of study-related procedures  are carefully monitored, and that all 
reportable adverse events are systematically  evaluated.  
7.2. Institutional  Review  Board (IRB)  
All study  procedures will be approved  by the NYU IRB prior to beginning the study.  
7.3. Data and Safety Monitoring Committee
A Data and Safety Monitoring Committee will be established comprising the Principal Investigator  and Co-
investigators, the Protocol Manager, and an external physician reviewer  who is not otherwise  affiliated with the 
study and does not report directly or indirectly  to the PI.  This committee  will meet at least  twice per year to 
review data quality,  recruitment and retention, and to review all serious or clinically  significant adverse events.  
In addition, the committee will review safety  data, including AEs/SAEs and reportable new information following 
any serious adverse  event that appears  to be study  related.  Patterns of adverse events as well as individual 
events may indicate the need for operational changes or protocol modifications, or termination of the study.  
Because this study involves a very low-risk  psychosocial intervention,  there are no predefined stopping rules 
for the study. DSMC reports will be forwarded  to the IRB with the annual  continuing  review.
7.4. Procedures for Monitoring and Reporting Adverse Events.  
AEs will be reported in accordance with federal law, NIH policies, and NYUSOM IRB policies to the NYU  IRB.  
In addition, information on adverse events will be captured as follows.
7.4.1. Data Collection for Adverse  Events and Serious Adverse Events 
7.4.1.1. Adverse Events.  For the purpose of this study, the following events will not be reported  as AEs: 
Grade 1 (mild) unrelated event.
Grade 2 (moderate) unrelated event.  This would typically include physical events such  as headache, 
cold, etc. that were considered unrelated to study participation. 
Substance Use Events, including:
oWorsening of drug use 
oNeed for higher level of care 
oSigns and symptoms of withdrawal  
oDrug craving 
oMedical events that are directly related to substance use 
Events that are severe, life threatening, or result in death will be recorded  as AEs or SAEs as appropriate and 
documented in the study progress note and in the data system.  
7.4.1.2. Serious Adverse Events. For the purpose  of this study, the following events will not be reported as 
SAEs: 
• Admission  to a hospital or freestanding residential  facility for drug detoxification or drug treatment. 
• Admission  to a hospital/surgery center for preplanned/elective  surgeries; 
• Admission  to a hospital for scheduled  labor and delivery; 
21• Inpatient hospital admission for a medical  event (i.e. gallbladder  surgery, pneumonia, substance  
related). 
7.4.1.3 Reportable New Information .  For the purpose of this study, the following information  will be 
reported to the NYU SoM IRB within 5 business  days:
Information that indicates  new or increased risk, or a safety  issue.
Any harm experienced by a subject or another individual that, in the opinion  of the investigator, is 
unexpected and at least probably related to the research procedures.   
Non-compliance with federal regulations governing the research or within the requirements  or an 
allegation of such  non-compliance.
Audit, inspection or inquiry by a federal  agency.
Written reports  of study monitors.
Failure to follow the protocol  due to the action or inaction of the investigator or research staff.
Breach of confidentiality.
Unreviewed change  to the protocol taken  without prior IRB review to eliminate an apparent 
immediate hazard to a subject.
Complaint  of a subject that cannot  be resolved by the research team.
Premature suspension  or termination of the research by the sponsor, investigator  or institution.
8.  CLINICALTRIALS.GOV REQUIREMENTS
This application includes  a trial which requires registration in ClinicalTrials.gov. The signature on the 
application of the Authorized Organizational Representative assures compliance for the registration of any 
such trial.
22REFERENCES
1. Rockett, I.R.H., et al., Unmet  substance abuse treatment need,  health services utilization,  and cost: A 
population-based emergency department study. Annals of Emergency Medicine,  2005.  45(2): p. 118-
127.
2. Rockett, I.R.H., et al., Declared and undeclared substance  use among emergency  department patients: 
a population-based study. Addiction, 2006. 101(5): p. 706-712.
3. Calle, P.A.,  et al., A survey  on alcohol  and illicit drug abuse among emergency department  patients. 
Acta Clin Belg, 2006. 61(4): p. 188-95.
4. Cherpitel, C.J. and Y. Ye, Drug use and problem  drinking associated with primary care and emergency 
room utilization  in the US general population:  data from the 2005 national alcohol survey.  Drug  Alcohol 
Depend, 2008. 97(3): p. 226-30.
5. Lucas, C.E., The impact of street drugs  on trauma care. Journal of Trauma,  2005.  59(3 Suppl): p. S57-
60.
6. Gentilello, L.M., et al., Alcohol interventions  for trauma patients treated in emergency  departments and 
hospitals: A cost benefit analysis. Annals of Surgery, 2005. 241(4): p. 541-550.
7. Gentilello, L.M., Alcohol and injury: American College of Surgeons  Committee on trauma  requirements 
for trauma center intervention. Journal of Trauma, 2007. 62(6 Suppl): p. S44-45.
8. Barrett, B., et al., Cost-effectiveness  of screening and referral  to an alcohol health worker in alcohol 
misusing patients attending an accident  and emergency  department:  A decision-making  approach.  
Drug and Alcohol  Dependence, 2006. 81(1): p. 47-54.
9. Babor, T.F., et al., Screening,  Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT): toward a public 
health approach  to the management of substance abuse.  Subst Abus,  2007.  28(3): p. 7-30.
10. Madras, B.K.,  et al., Screening,  brief interventions, referral to treatment (SBIRT) for illicit drug and 
alcohol use at multiple healthcare sites: Comparison at intake and 6 months  later. Drug and Alcohol  
Dependence, 2009. 99(1-3):  p. 280-295.
11. Babor, T.F. and R.M. Kadden, Screening and interventions for alcohol and drug problems in medical  
settings: what works? Journal of Trauma, 2005. 59(3 Suppl): p. S80-87.
12. Saitz, R., Screening and brief intervention enter their 5th decade. Substance  Abuse, 2007.  28(3): p. 3-
6.
13. Monti, P.M., et al., Motivational  interviewing  versus  feedback only in emergency  care for young  adult  
problem drinking. Addiction, 2007.  102(8): p. 1234-43.
14. Academic_ED_SBIRT_Research_Collaborative, The impact of screening, brief intervention, and 
referral for treatment  on emergency department patients'  alcohol use. Ann Emerg  Med,  2007. 50(6): p. 
699-710, 710 e1-6.
15. Blow,  F.C., et al., The efficacy  of two brief intervention strategies among injured, at-risk drinkers  in the 
emergency department: impact of tailored messaging and brief advice. J Stud Alcohol, 2006.  67(4): p. 
568-78.
16. Spirito, A., et al., A randomized clinical  trial of a brief motivational intervention for alcohol-positive  
adolescents treated in an emergency department.  J Pediatr,  2004. 145(3): p. 396-402.
17. Crawford, M.J., et al., Screening and referral for brief intervention of alcohol-misusing patients in an 
emergency department: a pragmatic  randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 2004.  364(9442): p. 1334-9.
18. Neumann, T., et al., The effect  of computerized tailored brief advice on at-risk drinking in subcritically 
injured trauma patients. J Trauma, 2006.  61(4): p. 805-14.
19. Longabaugh, R., et al., Evaluating  the effects of a brief motivational intervention  for injured drinkers in 
the emergency department. J Stud Alcohol, 2001.  62(6): p. 806-16.
20. Monti, P.M., et al., Brief intervention for harm reduction with alcohol-positive  older adolescents in a 
hospital emergency department. J Consult Clin Psychol, 1999. 67(6): p. 989-94.
21. Daeppen, J.B., et al., Brief alcohol intervention and alcohol assessment do not influence alcohol use in 
injured patients  treated in the emergency  department: a randomized  controlled clinical  trial. Addiction, 
2007. 102(8):  p. 1224-33.
22. Maio,  R.F., et al., A randomized controlled trial of an emergency department-based  interactive  
computer program to prevent alcohol  misuse among injured adolescents. Ann Emerg Med, 2005. 45(4): 
p. 420-9.
2323. Dauer, A.R., et al., Brief intervention in alcohol-positive traffic casualties: is it worth the effort? Alcohol  
Alcohol, 2006. 41(1): p. 76-83.
24. D'Onofrio, G., et al., Brief intervention for hazardous and harmful drinkers  in the emergency 
department. Ann Emerg  Med,  2008.  51(6): p. 742-750  e2.
25. Dent, A.W., et al., Opportunistic screening and clinician-delivered brief intervention for high-risk  alcohol 
use among emergency department attendees: a randomized controlled trial. Emerg Med Australas, 
2008. 20(2): p. 121-8.
26. Havard, A., A. Shakeshaft, and R. Sanson-Fisher,  Systematic  review and meta-analyses  of strategies 
targeting alcohol problems in emergency  departments:  interventions reduce alcohol-related injuries. 
Addiction, 2008. 103(3): p. 368-76; discussion 377-8.
27. Nilsen, P., et al., A systematic review of emergency care brief alcohol interventions  for injury  patients. J 
Subst Abuse Treat, 2008.  35(2): p. 184-201.
28. Donovan, D.M., et al., Attrition prevention with individuals  awaiting publicly funded  drug treatment. 
Addiction, 2001. 96(8): p. 1149-1160.
29. Tait, R.J., G.K. Hulse,  and S.I. Robertson, Effectiveness of a brief-intervention and continuity  of care in 
enhancing attendance for treatment by adolescent substance  users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 
2004. 74(3): p. 289-296.
30. Marsden, J., et al., An evaluation  of a brief motivational intervention among young ecstasy and cocaine 
users: no effect on substance  and alcohol use outcomes.  Addiction,  2006. 101(7): p. 1014-1026.
31. Miller, W.R., C.E. Yahne, and J.S. Tonigan,  Motivational interviewing  in drug abuse  services: a 
randomized trial. J Consult Clin Psychol.,  2003.  71(4): p. 754-763.
32. Stein, M.D., D.S. Herman, and B.J. Anderson, A motivational intervention trial to reduce cocaine use. 
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 2009.  36(1): p. 118-125.
33. McCambridge, J. and J. Strang, Deterioration over time in effect of Motivational Interviewing in reducing 
drug consumption  and related  risk among young  people.  Addiction,  2005.  100(4): p. 470-478.
34. Estee, S. and L. He, Use of alcohol and other drugs declined among emergency  department patients 
who received brief interventions for substance use disorders through  WASBIRT. 2007, Washington 
State Department of Social  and Health Services: Olympia,  WA.
35. Estee, S., et al., Evaluation of the Washington state screening,  brief intervention,  and referral to 
treatment project: cost outcomes  for Medicaid patients screened  in hospital emergency departments.  
Med Care, 2010.  48(1): p. 18-24.
36. Bernstein, E., et al., Screening  and brief intervention to reduce marijuana use among youth and young 
adults in a pediatric emergency  department.  Academic Emergency Medicine, 2009. 16(11): p. 1174-
1185.
37. Bogenschutz, M.P.,  et al., Design of NIDA CTN Protocol  0047: screening,  motivational assessment,  
referral, and treatment in emergency departments (SMART-ED).  Am J Drug  Alcohol Abuse, 2011.  
37(5): p. 417-25.
38. Bogenschutz, M.P.,  et al., Brief Intervention  for Patients With Problematic Drug Use Presenting in 
Emergency Departments: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med,  2014.
39. Roy-Byrne, P., et al., Brief intervention for problem drug use in safety-net primary care settings: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA,  2014.  312(5): p. 492-501.
40. Saitz, R., et al., Screening and brief intervention for drug use in primary care: the ASPIRE randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA, 2014. 312(5): p. 502-13.
41. Okie, S., A flood of opioids, a rising tide of deaths. N Engl J Med.  363(21):  p. 1981-5.
42. SAMHSA, Results from the 2010 National  Survey on Drug  Use and Health: Summary of National  
Findings, in NSDUH Series H-41, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 11-4658. 2011: Rockville, MD.
43. Mattick,  R.P.,  et al., Methadone maintenance therapy versus  no opioid replacement therapy for opioid  
dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2009(3): p. CD002209.
44. Amato, L., et al., An overview  of systematic reviews  of the effectiveness  of opiate maintenance 
therapies: available evidence to inform  clinical practice  and research. J Subst Abuse Treat,  2005.  28(4): 
p. 321-9.
45. Ling, W., Buprenorphine for opioid dependence. Expert Rev Neurother,  2009.  9(5): p. 609-16.
46. Mattick,  R.P., et al., Buprenorphine maintenance versus  placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid  
dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2008(2): p. CD002207.
2447. Fiellin,  D.A., et al., Long-term  treatment with buprenorphine/naloxone in primary care: results  at 2-5 
years. Am J Addict, 2008.  17(2): p. 116-20.
48. Fiellin,  D.A., et al., Counseling  plus buprenorphine-naloxone maintenance therapy for opioid 
dependence. N Engl J Med,  2006. 355(4): p. 365-74.
49. Brugal, M.T., et al., Evaluating the impact of methadone maintenance programmes on mortality  due to 
overdose and aids in a cohort of heroin users in Spain. Addiction,  2005. 100(7): p. 981-9.
50. Caplehorn, J.R., et al., Methadone maintenance and addicts' risk of fatal heroin  overdose.  Subst Use 
Misuse, 1996.  31(2): p. 177-96.
51. Clark, R.E., et al., The evidence doesn't justify steps by state Medicaid programs to restrict opioid 
addiction treatment  with buprenorphine.  Health Aff (Millwood). 30(8): p. 1425-33.
52. Comer, S.D., M.A. Sullivan, and G.K. Hulse, Sustained-release naltrexone: novel treatment for opioid 
dependence. Expert Opin Investig Drugs,  2007.  16(8): p. 1285-94.
53. Comer, S.D., et al., Injectable, sustained-release naltrexone  for the treatment of opioid dependence: a 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry,  2006. 63(2): p. 210-8.
54. Bernstein, J., et al., Brief motivational intervention  at a clinic visit reduces cocaine and heroin use. Drug 
Alcohol Depend, 2005. 77(1): p. 49-59.
55. Krupski, A., et al., Impact of brief interventions and brief treatment on admissions to chemical  
dependency treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2010.  110(1-2): p. 126-36.
56. Rapp, R.C., et al., Improving linkage with substance abuse treatment using  brief case  management and 
motivational interviewing. Drug Alcohol Depend,  2008.  94(1-3): p. 172-82.
57. Berg, M.L.,  et al., Evaluation  of the use of buprenorphine  for opioid  withdrawal in an emergency 
department. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2007.  86(2-3):  p. 239-44.
58. Coviello, D.M.,  et al., The effectiveness  of outreach case  management in re-enrolling  discharged 
methadone patients. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2006. 85(1): p. 56-65.
59. Strathdee, S.A., et al., Facilitating entry into drug treatment among injection drug users referred from a 
needle exchange  program:  Results from a community-based  behavioral intervention  trial. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence,  2006.  83(3): p. 225-232.
60. Zanis, D.A., et al., Efficacy  of enhanced outreach  counseling to reenroll  high-risk  drug users 1 year 
after discharge from treatment.  American  Journal of Psychiatry, 1996. 153(8): p. 1095-1096.
61. Scott, C.K.,  et al., Impact  of centralized intake on case management  services. Journal of Psychoactive 
Drugs, 2002.  34(1): p. 51-57.
62. Morgenstern, J., et al., Effectiveness of intensive case  management for substance-dependent women  
receiving temporary assistance  for needy  families. American Journal of Public  Health, 2006. 96(11): p. 
2016-2023.
63. Braucht, G.N., et al., Effective services for homeless  substance abusers. Journal of Addictive Diseases,  
1995. 14(4): p. 87-109.
64. Morse, G.A.,  et al., Treating homeless clients  with severe mental illness and substance use disorders:  
Costs and outcomes.  Community  Mental  Health  Journal,  2006. 42(4): p. 377-404.
65. Rapp, R.C., et al., Predicting post-primary treatment  services  and drug use outcome: A multivariate  
analysis. American  Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 1998.  24(4): p. 603-615.
66. Siegal, H.A., L. Li, and R.C. Rapp, Cae management as a therapeutic enhancement:  Impact  on post-
treatment criminality. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 2002. 21(4): p. 37-46.
67. Shwartz, M., et al., Improving  publicly funded substance  abuse  treatment:  The value of case 
management. American Journal of Public  Health, 1997. 87(10): p. 1659-1664.
68. Hesse, M., et al., Case management  for persons with substance use disorders. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev, 2007(4): p. CD006265.
69. Vaughan-Sarrazin, M.S., J.A. Hall, and G.S. Rick, Impact  of case management on use of health 
services by rural clients  in substance abuse  treatment.  Journal of Drug Issues, 2000. 30(2): p. 435-463.
70. Gardner, L.I., et al., Efficacy of a brief case management intervention  to link recently diagnosed HIV-
infected persons  to care.  AIDS, 2005. 19(4): p. 423-431.
71. Craw, J.A., et al., Brief strengths-based  case management promotes entry into HIV medical care: 
Results of the Antiretroviral Treatment  Access Study-II.  Journal of Acquired  Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome, 2008. 47(5): p. 597-606.
2572. Buck, J.A., The looming expansion  and transformation of public substance abuse treatment under the 
Affordable Care Act. Health Aff (Millwood). 30(8): p. 1402-10.
73. Butler, M., et al., Integration of mental health/substance  abuse and primary care. Evid Rep Technol  
Assess (Full Rep),  2008(173):  p. 1-362.
74. Davoudi, M. and R.A. Rawson, Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (SBIRT) 
initiatives in California:  notable trends, challenges, and recommendations. J Psychoactive Drugs. 
Suppl 6: p. 239-48.
75. Alford, D.P., et al., Collaborative  care of opioid-addicted patients in primary care using buprenorphine: 
five-year experience. Arch Intern Med. 171(5): p. 425-31.
76. Soeffing, J.M., et al., Buprenorphine maintenance treatment in a primary care setting: outcomes at 1 
year. J Subst Abuse  Treat, 2009. 37(4): p. 426-30.
77. Roux, P., et al., Buprenorphine in primary care: risk factors  for treatment injection and implications for 
clinical management. Drug Alcohol  Depend, 2008. 97(1-2): p. 105-13.
78. Mintzer, I.L., et al., Treating opioid addiction with buprenorphine-naloxone in community-based  primary 
care settings.  Ann Fam Med, 2007.  5(2): p. 146-50.
79. Lee, J.D., et al., Extended-release  naltrexone for treatment of alcohol dependence in primary care. J 
Subst Abuse Treat. 39(1): p. 14-21.
80. O'Malley, S.S., et al., Initial and maintenance  naltrexone treatment for alcohol dependence using 
primary care vs specialty care: a nested  sequence of 3 randomized  trials.  Arch Intern Med,  2003. 
163(14): p. 1695-704.
81. Kiritze-Topor, P., et al., A pragmatic trial of acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence in 
primary care. Alcohol Alcohol, 2004. 39(6): p. 520-7.
82. Anton, R.F., et al., Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol dependence: 
the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled  trial. JAMA, 2006. 295(17):  p. 2003-17.
83. Walters,  S., T., et al., Reactivity to alcohol assessment measures: an experimental  test. Addiction, 
2009. 104(8):  p. 1305-1310.
84. McCambridge, J. and K. Kypri, Can simply answering research questions  change behaviour?  
Systematic review  and meta  analyses of brief alcohol  intervention trials. PLoS ONE,  2011.  6(10): p. 
e23748.
85. McCambridge, J. and M. Day, Randomized controlled trial of the effects of completing  the Alcohol  Use 
Disorders Identification Test questionnaire  on self-reported hazardous  drinking. Addiction, 2008. 
103(2): p. 241-248.
86. Kypri, K., et al., Assessment may conceal  therapeutic benefit: findings from a randomized controlled 
trial for hazardous drinking. Addiction, 2007. 102(1): p. 62-70.
87. Clifford,  P.R.,  S.A. Maisto, and C.M. Davis,  Alcohol treatment research assessment exposure subject  
reactivity effects: part I. Alcohol use and related consequences. J Stud Alcohol Drugs, 2007. 68(4): p. 
519-28.
88. Ziedonis, D.M., et al., Predictors of outcome  for short-term  medically supervised  opioid withdrawal 
during a randomized, multicenter trial of buprenorphine-naloxone and clonidine in the NIDA  clinical 
trials network drug and alcohol dependence. Drug  Alcohol  Depend, 2009. 99(1-3): p. 28-36.
89. Williamson,  A., et al., The effect  of baseline cocaine  use on treatment outcomes for heroin dependence 
over 24 months:  findings from the Australian Treatment Outcome  Study. J Subst Abuse Treat, 2007.  
33(3): p. 287-93.
90. Salamina, G., et al., Effectiveness of therapies for heroin  addiction  in retaining patients in treatment: 
results from the VEdeTTE study.  Subst  Use Misuse, 2010. 45(12): p. 2076-92.
91. Hesse, M., The Beck Depression  Inventory in patients  undergoing opiate agonist  maintenance 
treatment. Br J Clin Psychol,  2006. 45(Pt 3): p. 417-25.
92. Siegal, H.A.,  Comprehensive  case management for substance abuse treatment, C.f.S.A. Treatment, 
Editor. 1998, U. S. Department  of Health  and Human Services: Rockville,  MD.
93. Ballew, J.R. and G. Mink, Case management in social  work . 1996,  Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
334.
94. Rapp, R.C.,  Strengths-based case management: Enhancing tratment for persons with substance abuse 
problems, in The strengths perspective in social  work practice, D. Saleebey, Editor. 2006,  Pearson, 
Allyn-Bacon: Boston.  p. 128-147.
2695. Redko, C., et al., Understanding  the working  alliance between persons with substance abuse problems 
and strengths-based case managers. Journal of Psychoactive  Drugs, 2007. 39(3): p. 241-250.
96. Bandura,  A., A Social  Cognitive perspective on Positive Psychology. Revista De Psicologia Social, 
2011. 26(1): p. 7-20.
97. Bandura,  A., et al., Impact of Family Efficacy  Beliefs on Quality of Family Functioning  and Satisfaction 
with Family Life. Applied Psychology-an  International Review-Psychologie  Appliquee-Revue 
Internationale, 2011. 60(3): p. 421-448.
98. Bandura,  A. and C.J. Kupers, Transmission  of patterns of self-reinforcement through modeling. Journal  
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1964. 69(1): p. 1-9.
99. Barber, J.P., et al., Therapeutic alliance  as a predictor of outcome in treatment of cocaine dependence. 
Psychotherapy Research, 1999. 9(1): p. 54-73.
100. Meier, P.S., et al., Predicting the early therapeutic  alliance in the treatment of drug misuse. Addiction, 
2005. 100(4):  p. 500-511.
101. Petry,  N.M. and W.K. Bickel, Therapeutic alliance and psychiatric  severity as predictors of completion 
of treatment for opioid dependence. Psychiatric Services,  1999. 50(2): p. 219-227.
102. Brun, C. and R.C. Rapp, Strengths-based case management: Individuals' perspectives on strengths 
and the case manager relationship. Social  Work,  2001.  46(3): p. 278-288.
103. Messeri, P.A.,  et al., The impact of ancillary HIV services on engagement in medical care in New York 
City. AIDS Care, 2002. 14(Supplement 1): p. S15-S29.
104. Skinner, H.A.,  The Drug Abuse Screening Test. Addictive Behaviors, 1982. 7(4): p. 363-371.
105. Gavin, D.R., H.E. Ross, and H.A. Skinner, Diagnostic validity of the Drug  Abuse Screening Test in the 
assessment of DSM-III drug disorders. British Journal of Addiction,  1989. 84(3): p. 301-307.
106. Diaz, F.J., et al., A brief measure of high nicotine  dependence for busy clinicians and large  
epidemiological surveys. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,  2005.  39(3): p. 161-168.
107. Heatherton, T.F., et al., The Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence: A revision  of the Fagerström 
Tolerance Questionnaire. British Journal of Addiction, 1991. 86(9): p. 1119-1127.
108. Bush, K., et al., The AUDIT alcohol consumption questions  (AUDIT-C): an effective brief screening test 
for problem drinking.  Ambulatory  Care Quality Improvement  Project  (ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders  
Identification Test. Arch Intern  Med, 1998. 158(16): p. 1789-1795.
109. Cocco, K.M. and K.B. Carey, Psychometric properties of the Drug Abuse Screening  Test in psychiatric  
outpatients. Psychological Assessment, 1998. 10(4): p. 408-414.
110. Yudko, E., O. Lozhkina, and A. Fouts, A comprehensive review of the psychometric properties of the 
Drug Abuse  Screening Test. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 2007. 32(2): p. 189-198.
111. Bradley, K.A.,  et al., AUDIT-C as a brief screen for alcohol misuse in primary care. Alcoholism:  Clinical 
and Experimental  Research, 2007.  31(7): p. 1208-1217.
112. American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic  and Statistical  Manual of Mental  Disorders Text Revision. 
4th ed. 2000: American Psychiatric Press.
113. Ling, W., et al., Buprenorphine tapering  schedule and illicit opioid  use. Addiction,  2009. 104(2): p. 256-
65.
114. Peirce, J.M., et al., Effects of lower-cost incentives on stimulant  abstinence in methadone maintenance 
treatment: a National  Drug Abuse Treatment  Clinical  Trials Network study. Arch Gen Psychiatry,  2006. 
63(2): p. 201-8.
115. Ling, W., et al., A multi-center randomized trial of buprenorphine-naloxone versus clonidine  for opioid 
detoxification: findings from the National Institute on Drug Abuse Clinical  Trials Network. Addiction, 
2005. 100(8):  p. 1090-100.
116. Wu, L.T., et al., The construct  and measurement equivalence of cocaine and opioid dependences: a 
National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network (CTN) study. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2009. 
103(3): p. 114-23.
117. Miller, W.R.  and F.K. Del Boca,  Measurement of drinking behavior using the Form 90 family of 
instruments. J Stud Alcohol Suppl, 1994. 12: p. 112-8.
118. Tonigan, J.S., W.R. Miller, and J.M. Brown, The reliability  of Form  90: an instrument for assessing 
alcohol treatment outcome. J Stud Alcohol,  1997. 58(4): p. 358-64.
119. Westerberg, V.S., J.S. Tonigan, and W.R. Miller, Reliability  of Form 90D: An Instrument for Quantifying 
Drug Use. Subst Abus, 1998.  19(4): p. 179-189.
27120. Sobell, L.C. and M.B. Sobell, Timeline Follow Back:  A calendar  method  for assessing alcohol and druq 
use (User's Guide). 1996, Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.
121. Sobell, L.C. and M.B. Sobell, Timeline follow-back: A technique for assessing self-reported alcohol 
consumption, in Measuring alcohol consumption: Psychosocial and biological methods, R.A. Litten  and 
J.P. Allen, Editors.  1992, Humana Press: Totowa, NJ.
122. Slesnick, N. and J.S. Tonigan, Assessment  of Alcohol  and Other  Drug Use by Runaway Youths: A 
Test-Retest Study of the Form 90. Alcohol Treat Q, 2004.  22(2): p. 21-34.
123. Miller, W.R.  and J.S. Tonigan, Assessing drinker's motivation for change: The Stages of Change 
Readiness and Treatment  Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology of Addictive Behaviors,  1996. 
10: p. 81-89.
124. McConnaughy, E.A., et al., Stages of change in psychotherapy: A follow-up report. Psychotherapy: 
Theory, Research,  Practice,  Training, 1989.  26(4): p. 494-503.
125. Freyer,  J., et al., Readiness to change versus readiness  to seek help for alcohol problems: the 
development of the Treatment Readiness  Tool (TReaT).  J Stud Alcohol, 2004.  65(6): p. 801-9.
126. Rollnick, S., et al., Development of a short 'readiness to change'  questionnaire for use in brief,  
opportunistic interventions among  excessive  drinkers.  Br J Addict,  1992.  87(5): p. 743-54.
127. Simpson, D.D. and G.W. Joe, Motivation  as a predictor of early  dropout  from drug abuse treatment.  
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,  Training, 1993. 30: p. 357-368.
128. De Leon, G. and N. Jainchill,  Circumstance,  motivation, readiness, and suitability as correlates of 
treatment tenure. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 1986. 18: p. 203-208.
129. Simpson, D.D. and G.W. Joe, A longitudinal evaluation of treatment engagement and recovery  stages. 
J Subst Abuse  Treat, 2004.  27(2): p. 89-97.
130. Sia, T.L., D.F. Dansereau, and M.L. Czuchry, Treatment readiness training  and probationers' 
evaluation of substance abuse  treatment in a criminal justice setting. J Subst Abuse  Treat,  2000. 19(4): 
p. 459-67.
131. Knight, K., et al., Legal  pressure, treatment readiness,  and engagement in long-term  residential 
programs. Journal  of Offender Rehabilitation, 2000. 31: p. 101-115.
132. Rapp, R.C., et al., Demographic and clinical correlates of client  motivation among substance  abusers. 
Health Soc Work, 2003. 28(2): p. 107-15.
133. Joe, G.W., D.D. Simpson, and K.M. Broome, Effects of readiness  for drug abuse treatment on client 
retention and assessment of process.  Addiction, 1998. 93(8): p. 1177-90.
134. Rapp, R.C., et al., Understanding  treatment readiness in recently  assessed, pre-treatment substance 
abusers. Substance  Abuse,  2007. 28(1): p. 11-23.
135. Rapp, R.C., et al., Development of the pretreatment  readiness  scale for substance  abusers: 
Modification of an existing motivation assessment. Substance Abuse, 2008. 29(4): p. 39-50.
136. Hatcher, R.L. and J.A. Gillaspy, Development and validation  of a revised short version  of the Working 
Alliance Inventory. Psychotherapy  Research,  2006. 16(1): p. 12-25.
137. Bordin, E.S.,  Theory  and research on the therapeutic working alliance: New directions, in The working 
alliance: Theory, research, and practice., A.O. Horvath and L.S. Greenberg,  Editors. 1994,  John Wiley  
& Sons: Oxford England. p. 13-37.
138. Tracey,  T.J. and A.M. Kokotovic,  Factor structure of the Working Alliance Inventory.  Psychological 
Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,  1989. 1(3): p. 207-210.
139. Rapp, R.C., et al., Treatment barriers  identified by substance  abusers assessed at a centralized  intake 
unit. J Subst Abuse Treat, 2006. 30(3): p. 227-35.
140. Xu, J., et al., The multidimensional  structure  on internal barriers to substance  abuse treatment and its 
invariance across gender, ethnicity, and age. Journal of Drug Issues, 2007. 37(2): p. 321-340.
141. Xu, J., et al., The multidimensional structure  on external barriers to substance abuse treatment and its 
invariance across gender, ethnicity, and age. Substance  Abuse, 2008.  29(1): p. 43-54.
142. Alterman, A.I., et al., Reliability  and validity  of the alcohol short  index of problems and a newly 
constructed drug short index  of problems. J Stud Alcohol  Drugs, 2009. 70(2): p. 304-7.
143. Miller, W.R., J.S. Tonigan, and R. Longabaugh, The Drinker Inventory of Consequences  (DrInC): An 
instrument for assessing adverse consequences of alcohol abuse. Test Manual (Vol. 4). 1995, 
Rockville, MD: US Government Printing  Office.
28144. Blanchard, K.A.,  et al., Assessing Consequences of Substance Use: Psychometric  Properties of the 
Inventory of Drug  Use Consequences.  Psychol Addict Behav, 2003. 17(4): p. 328-331.
145. Bender, R.E., et al., Assessing  negative consequences in patients  with substance  use and bipolar 
disorders: psychometric properties of the short inventory of problems (SIP). Am J Addict,  2007. 16(6): 
p. 503-9.
146. De Maeyer, J., W. Vanderplasschen, and E. Broekaert, Quality of life among opiate-dependent 
individuals: A review of the literature. Int J Drug  Policy, 2010. 21(5): p. 364-80.
147. The WHOQOL  Group, Development of the World Health  Organization WHOQOL-BREF quality of life 
assessment. The WHOQOL Group.  Psychol Med,  1998. 28(3): p. 551-8.
148. Yen, C.N., et al., Quality  of life and its correlates among heroin  users in Taiwan.  Kaohsiung J Med Sci, 
2011. 27(5): p. 177-83.
149. Bizzarri, J., et al., Dual diagnosis and quality of life in patients in treatment for opioid dependence.  
Subst Use Misuse, 2005. 40(12): p. 1765-76.
150. Tran, B.X., et al., Changes in drug use are associated  with health-related quality of life improvements 
among methadone maintenance patients  with HIV/AIDS. Qual  Life Res, 2011.
151. Padaiga, Z., E. Subata, and G. Vanagas, Outpatient methadone maintenance treatment program.  
Quality of life and health of opioid-dependent persons  in Lithuania. Medicina (Kaunas), 2007. 43(3): p. 
235-41.
152. Lawrinson, P., et al., Key findings from the WHO collaborative  study  on substitution therapy for opioid 
dependence and HIV/AIDS. Addiction, 2008. 103(9): p. 1484-92.
153. Weiss, R.D., et al., Adjunctive counseling during brief and extended  buprenorphine-naloxone treatment 
for prescription opioid dependence:  a 2-phase  randomized  controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2011. 
68(12): p. 1238-46.
154. Raudenbush, S.W. and A.S. Bryk, Heirarchical linear models:applications and data analysis methods . 2 
ed. Advanced quantitative techniques in the social sciences,  ed. J. de Leeuw. Vol. 1. 2002,  Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
155. Cohen, J., Statistical Power Analysis  for the Behavioral  Sciences ( 2nd ed.). 1988,  Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.