Date: May 28, 2020  
Principal Investigator: Sophie Lanzkron  
Application Number: IRB00159636  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessing the Safety of Buprenorphine in People With Sickle Cell Dise ase 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Last updated on: May 28, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 8  
JHM IRB  - eForm A  – Protocol  
 
  
 Use the section headings to write the  JHM  IRB eForm A , inserting the appropriate material in 
each. If a section is  not applicable,  leave heading in and insert N/A.  
 When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised) , enter the date submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM  IRB eForm A . 
 
****************************************************************************** *********** **********  
 
 
1. Abstract  
Provide no more than a one page research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importance of the research.  
There are only a few therapies available to decrease vaso -occlusive crisis (VOC) in people with sickle cell  
disease; stem cell transplant, chronic transfusion therapy and hydroxyurea.  Most recently L -glutamine 
has been FDA approved but it is reserved for only a small subset of people with the disease. Transplant is 
the only known cure for this disease . Its saf ety and efficacy, especially in adults, remains a concern and is 
only available to adults as a research protocol. Chronic transfusion therapy is an effective way of 
decreasing the risk of several complications of SCD including stroke and VOC events . Hydrox yurea is an 
effective disease -modifying therapy that decreases the risk of VOC by 50%. However, neither chronic 
transfusions nor hydroxyurea have been shown to decrease the intensity of chronic pain. There is a 
subset of patients who are on effective disea se modifying therapy, yet continue to have frequent acute 
visits for parenteral opioids and are maintained on high dose oral opioids as outpatients.  
Buprenorphine is a partial mu -agonist an d kappa antagonist and has a very high affinity for the mu 
recepto rs, with an elimination half -life of 28 -37 hours for the sublingual administratio n. The lower risk for 
misuse, diminished withdrawal symptoms and cravings for opioids as well as the reduced risk of 
overdose in  this drug make it an appealing alternative to full agonist opioid use in a subset of patients 
with sickle cell dise ase on  who are unable to wean off of opioids.  
Most relevant to SCD patients on high doses of opioids, there has been recent data on successful 
conversion for patients with chronic pain w ho are on high -dose opioids, from 100mg to 400mg morphine 
equivalents, to SL buprenorphine. This study reported a decrease in pain scores after the initiation of SL 
buprenorphine therapy for more than two months. Our goals of this study is to assess patien t important 
outcomes post conversion to buprenorphine.  
 
 
2. Objectives  
The p urpose of this study  is to assess the safety and benefit of convert ing adults with sickle cell disease on 
high dose opioid therapy with evidence of opioid use disorder to buprenorphi ne. The primary outcome will 
be to assess the safety of the protocol. Secondary outcomes will include measures of acute care utilization 
and health related quality of life after conversion.   
Primary Endpoint : This will be a descriptive study assessing the  safety and benefit of converting subjects 
from full agonist opioids to buprenorphine. Data will be collected on need for hospitalization within 72 hours 
of conversion due to withdrawal induced VOC, as well as average COWS scores.  
Secondary Endpoint : Meas urement of quality of life , decrease  in pain measured  by the BPI and Promis pain 
tools  decrease acute care utilization.   In addition we will collect data from the 15 -20 patients that have 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 8 already been converted to buprenorphine as part of routine care to f ormally examine utilization pre and post 
conversion.  
 
3. Background  
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a genetic disorder of the hemoglobin that leads to severe morbidity and early 
mortality. It is the most common disease detected by newborn screening efforts in th e United States (U.S.) 
[1]. Between 80,000 and 100,000 individuals in the U.S. are affected by some form of SCD [2]. African -
Americans (AA) are most affected in the U.S., as 1 per every 400 AA newborns is born with the disease. There 
are several genotypes that lead to similar phenotypes in SCD. Those who are homozygote for the sickle 
mutation (SS) have the most severe form of the disease and typically make up 60 -70% of those with sickle 
cell disease. People with SC disease are compound heterozygotes and are  considered to have a milder  
phenotype but there is a wide spectrum and chronic pain is quite prevalent in people with SC disease often 
due to avascular necrosis of the hips and shoulders. The damage SCD inflicts on sufferers is dramatic. The 
disease reduc es life expectancy by approximately 30 years compared to the general population [3]. 
Furthermore, the disease limits quality of life - as severely as does end -stage renal disease requiring 
hemodialysis [4].  
The best -known complication of SCD is the vaso -occlusive crisis (VOC). These acute, excruciatingly painful 
events are the leading cause of hospital and emergency department utilization [5], and can be associated 
with such lethal and disabling complications as acute chest syndrome and stroke. Triggers fo r the 
development of VOC include intravascular volume depletion, stress and infection. In addition to these acute 
episodes of pain, the prevalence of chronic pain is very high [6], [7]. Acute and chronic pain and disease 
severity contribute to extraordinar ily high levels of unemployment, and decreased productivity in this patient 
population. Therefore, the persistent balance of pain control and quality of life remains a challenge.  
The mechanisms of chronic pain in SCD are poorly understood. A number of fac tors ranging from genetic to 
behavioral likely regulate the pain response in people with SCD and include interactions between the 
nervous, endocrine, and immune systems [8]. The role of the immune system is of particular interest in 
understanding pain due to SCD; the role of inflammation in acute painful episodes is currently being  explored 
through clinical trials investigating new treatment modalities. That ongoing inflammation may play a role in 
chronic pain is suggested by the identification of elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines  and substance P, 
the neuropeptide modulator of inflammation and nociception, in SCD [9]. Additionally, chronic pain resulting 
from SCD is now hypothesized to be partly a disorder of central sensitization and peripheral neur al 
sensitization. Central sensitization is a complex phenomenon, with contributions from plasticity induced by 
excitatory amino acids via NMDA receptors [10] and neural changes induced by inflammatory mediators and 
other nociceptive chemical messengers. To  make things more complicated, our group and others have shown 
that opioid induced hyperalgesia may contribute to chronic pain via central sensitization [11]. A fascinating 
outcome of successful, curative stem cell transplant is that almost every adult pat ient reported in the 
literature who was on chronic opioid therapy prior to transplant was weaned off of those medications post -
transplant. This phenomenon, which we have seen in our own transplant population, suggests that bone 
damage is likely a small com ponent of the chronic pain and raises even more concern that hyperalgesia 
induced by opioid use itself may be playing a role in the patient experience of chronic pain.  
The current standard of care for the treatment of chronic pain in people with sickle ce ll disease is the use of 
both long and short acting opiates. Full agonists are opioid drugs that bind completely to mu opioid receptors 
in the brain, and cause them to produce endorphins which relieve pain [12]. The best approach to the 
treatment of chroni c pain in people with sickle cell disease is unclear and there is little literature on the 
effectiveness of chronic opioid therapy in this patient population. In a recently published paper we compared 
pain symptoms in 83 adults who were either on chronic o pioid therapy or not. We found that those on 
chronic opioid therapy exhibited greater levels of clinical pain, central sensitization as well as higher levels of 
healthcare utilization. This suggested that despite the use of opioid therapy, patients continu ed to have a 
very high symptom burden.  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 4 of 8 As with any persistent use of opiates for other chronic pain conditions, there is an increase probability of 
opioid dependency and in rare cases, an increased probability of aberrant opioid use. Opioid induced 
hypera lgesia, central sensitization and refractory pain are potential long -term outcomes for many SCD 
patients on long term opioids, potentially leading to higher doses of opioids over time [11]. Therefore, there 
may be great value in reducing the use of full ag onist opioids for patients with sickle cell disease.  
There are only three therapies available to decrease vaso -occlusive crisis (VOC); stem cell transplant, chronic 
transfusion therapy and hydroxyurea. Transplant is the only known cure for this disease; i ts safety and 
efficacy, especially in adults, remains a concern and is only available to adults as a research protocol. Chronic 
transfusion therapy is an effective way of decreasing the risk of several complications of SCD including stroke 
and VOC events [ 13]. Hydroxyurea is an effective disease -modifying therapy that decreases the risk of VOC by 
50%. However, neither chronic transfusions nor hydroxyurea have been shown to decrease the prevalence of 
chronic pain. There is a subset of patients who are on eff ective disease modifying therapy, yet continue to 
have frequent acute visits for parenteral opioids and are maintained on high dose oral opioids as outpatients.  
Buprenorphine is classified as a partial mu -agonist and kappa antagonist and has a very high a ffinity towards 
the mu receptors, with an elimination half -life of 28 -37 hours for the sublingual administration [14]. The 
lower risk for misuse, diminished withdrawal symptoms and cravings for opioids as well as the safety profile 
of this drug make it an appealing alternative for full agonist opioid use in a subset of patients with sickle cell 
disease who are unable to wean off of opioids.  
Most relevant to SCD patients on high doses of opioids, there has been recent data on successful conversion 
for patie nts with chronic pain who are on high -dose opioids, from 100mg to 400mg morphine equivalents, to 
SL buprenorphine. This study reported a decrease in pain scores after the initiation of SL buprenorphine 
therapy for more than two months [14]. Reports of seve re withdrawal requiring hospitalization on the day of 
conversion to buprenorphine have been reported. As we have started converting patients as our standard of 
care we will collect data on patient important outcomes to document improved outcomes post conve rsion.  
 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS  
We have collected preliminary data on 8 patients that we successfully converted from relatively low dose of 
chronic opioid therapy to buprenorphine. Table 1 details patient characteristics and outcomes post 
conversion.  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 Table  1: Preliminary results from SCD patients who have successfully converted from chronic opioid therapy to 
buprenorphine.  
Pt ID  Hemoglobin 
Genotype  Sex  Total opioid 
dose/day 
prior to 
conversion 
(morphine 
milligram 
equivalents)   Num ber of 
acute pain 
visits in 6 
months 
prior to 
conversion  Initial dose of 
Buprenorphine   Number of 
acute pain 
visits in 6 
months 
post 
conversion  Complications 
(w/i 72 hours 
of initiation)  
B001  SS  M  34.32 mg  0  Suboxone 
2mg/0.5mg  0  NONE  
B002  SC  F  137.28 mg  2  Suboxone 
24mg  2  Abdominal 
pain/cramping  
B003  SS  M  156.52mg  25  Zubsolv 
17.1mg/4.3mg  1  None  
B004  SS  M  45 mg  32  Butrans 20mcg  24  None  
B005  SS  M  34.32 mg  56  Zubsolv 
4.2mg/1.08mg  2  None  
B006  SS  F  90 mg  22  Zubsolv 12.6mg  3  Acute pain  
B007  SS  M  90 mg  11  Zubsolv 17.4mg  0 
(admitted 
x4 for DKA ) None  
B008  SS  M  96 mg  7  Suboxone 8mg  4  None  
 
 
4. Study Procedures  
Prior to enrolling on this trial participants will have already made a decision to conver t to 
buprenorphine therapy after lengthy discussions with the clinical care team. That discussion 
includes risks and benefits of buprenorphine  and the need to be in mild - moderate withdrawal 
prior to initiating buprenorphine.  In addition, most patients wi ll be weaned down as much as 
possible from their current opioid dose prior to initiating the protocol below.   
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures .   
1. Within 90 days prior to day 0  subject will sign  Informed Consent Form (ICF ) (R) , have urine 
toxicology testing, and complete HRQ oL tool (ASCQ -Me) (R),brief pain inventory  (BPI)  (R), the 
PROMIS Pain Interference – Short Form instrument  (R), and the PROMIS Physical Function – 
Short Form instrument  (R). The ASCQ -Me tool is a valid ated health related quality tool for use 
specifically in SCD. The PROMIS Pain Interference instrument measures the degree to which 
pain hinders social engagement and life enjoyment. The PROMIS Physical Function instrument 
measures the degree to which pain affects everyday physical activities.  
2. Data will be collected on acute care utilization, sickle cell disease co -morbidities from chart 
abstraction and recorded in case report forms.  
3. Day 0:   
a. Subject will complete ASCQ -Me, PROMIS Pain Interference, PROMIS Physical Function,  
and BPI with 7 day anchor  (R).  
b. Prior to discharge from SCIC subject will have COW S assessment, pain rating collected . 
4. Day 1: Subject  will return  to repeat COW S. 
5. Subject will return day 14 , day 30 , day 90 , and day 180  to repeat ASCQ -Me, PROMIS Pain 
Interference, PROMIS Physical Function , and BPI (R), or subject will complete these surveys 
over the phone or online on those days in lieu of coming for a study visit.  Acute care utilization 
will be collected from subject, medical record and Cr isp.  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 a. The only change in the ICF version approved by IRB on November 6 2019 was the option of 
completing the study surveys remotely (over the phone or online) for participants. Patients 
that were consented using a previous version of the ICF and are enroll ed to the study 
before the November version, have agreed to all study procedures, but have not agreed to 
having the option to complete the study surveys online  or over the phone . The study team 
will reach out to these currently enrolled patients during in -person clinical visits,  via 
telemedicine appointments or over the phone to re -consent them to the study  in-person or 
remotely  using the ICF version approved on November 6 2019. On the instances when the 
re-consent  process is done remotely, the person obta ining the re -consent will:  
i. Sign, print their name, and add date and time of the re -consent, under the consenter 
line.  
ii.  Add on the line of the patient signature: [First and Last name of patient] provided 
verbal affirmation of this newer version of their pre viously signed consent ( the only 
change from previous signed version by patient is that the surveys can be completed 
remotely ). 
6. Data will be extracted from EPIC and CRISP on health care utilization for the 6 months prior to 
enrollment and 3 years  post conv ersion.  
7. We will also collect data on the 15 -20 patients that we have now converted to buprenorphine.  
We will retrospectively review charts to collect genotype data, acute care utilization (ED, sickle 
infusion clinic and hospitalizations), COWS scores, sex , age and any complications that occurred 
with conversion.  These subjects will be asked to complete ASCQ -Me and Promis tools.  
b. (distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care ).   
All research activit ies are noted with (R) above.  
c. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participant s.   
Each participant will be enrolled for 3 years  and will have  up to  6 study visits  with the possibility of 
completing the ASCQ -Me, BPI and Promis tools over the phone or online in stead of coming in for a 
study visit .  The initial visit is part of routine care that we provide for conversion from opioids to 
buprenorphine.  
d. Blinding , including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable . NA 
e. Justification o f why participant s will not receive routine  care or will have current therapy 
stopped.   
NA 
f. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group . NA 
g. Definition of treatment failure or participant  removal criteria . NA 
h. Description of what happens to participant s receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant ’s participation in the study end s prematurely .  
NA this is an observational trial.  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
a. Inclusion Criteria : 
1. Has SCD, any genotype  
2. Is being converted from full agon ist opioid therapy to buprenorphine.  
3. Able to provide consent  
4. Is between the ages 18 and 100.  
 
b. Exclusion  Criteria :  
1. Unwilling to sign consent.   
2. Medical disorder, condition, or history that in the investigator’s judgement would impair 
the patient's abi lity to participate or complete this study or render the patient to be 
inappropriate for enrollment.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used .  
NA 
b. Justification and safety information i f FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant  populations are 
changed . NA 
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered . NA 
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable .  
Primary Endpoint:  This will be a descriptive study assessing the safety and benefit of converting 
subjects from full agonist opioids to buprenorphine. Data will be collected on need for hospitalization 
with in 72 hours of conversion due to withdrawal induced VOC, as well as average COW S scores.  
b. Secondary outcome variables .  
Secondary Endpoint : Measurement of quality of life  and decrease d pain measured by  the BPI,  ASCQ -
Me, PROMIS Pain Interference, PROMIS Phy sical Function  and decrease d acute care utilization.  
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and inte rim data analysis .  
Descriptive study: Paired t -test will be used to compare patient’s results on  surveys  and acute care 
utilization pre - and post - conversion .  
d. Early stopping rules .   
NA 
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency .   
b. Participants may feel uncomfortable filling out surveys.  Steps taken to minimize the risks.    
Participants can  stop filling out surveys at any time.  
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations .  
All study deviations and adverse events will be reported to the IRB.  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidential ity. NA 
e. Financial risks to the participant s.  
NA. 
 
9. Benefits  
Description of the probable benefits  for the participant and for society .  
If successful we anticipate that participants will have an improved quality of life with less chronic pain and 
fewer visi ts for acute pain management.  For society Identifying alternative treatment options for pain 
management in people with sickle cell disease will help others who are suffering.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
Detail compensation  for participant s including possib le total compensation, proposed bonus, and 
any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing the protocol.    
Participants will be compensated $20.00 for each follow -up visit which is not part of usual care. Other costs 
associated with participation w ill be part of standard care.  
 
11. Costs  
Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participant s and identify who will 
pay for them.    
NA 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 12. References  
[1]  C. Kaye, F. Accurso, S. La Franchi, P. Lane, N. Hope, P. Sonya, S. G Bradley and  A. L. Michele, "Newborn screening 
fact sheets," Pediatrics, vol. 118, pp. e934 -e963, 2006.  
[2]  K. Hassell, "Population estimates of sickle cell disease in the US.," American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. S512 -S521, 2010.  
[3]  O. Platt, D. Brambilla, W. Rosse, P. Milner, O. Castro, M. Steinberg and P. Klug, "Mortality in sickle cell disease: 
life expectancy and risk factors for early death," New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 330, no. 23, pp. 1639 -
1644, 1994.  
[4]  D. K. McC lish, L. T. Penberthy, V. E. Bovbjerg, J. D. Roberts, I. P. Aisiku, J. L. Levenson, S. D. Roseff and W. R. 
Smith, "Health related quality of life in sickle cell patients: the PiSCES project," Health and Quality of Life 
Outcomes, vol. 3, p. 50, 2005.  
[5]  O. Platt, B. Thorington, D. Brambilla, P. Milner, W. Rosse, E. Vichinsky and T. Kinney, "Pain in sickle cell disease. 
Rates and risk factors," New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 325, pp. 11 -16, 1991.  
[6]  F. Antunes, V. Propheta, H. Vasconcelos and R . Cipolotti, "Neuropathic pain in patients with sickle cell disease: a 
cross -sectional study assessing teens and young adults," Ann Hematol., vol. 96, no. 7, pp. 1121 -1125, 2017.  
[7]  A. M. Brandow, R. A. Farley and J. A. Panepinto, "Neuropathic Pain in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease," Pediatr 
Blood Cancer, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 512 -517, 2014.  
[8]  C. R. Chapman, R. P. Tuckett and C. W. Song, "Pain and Stress in a Systems Perspective," J Pain, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 
122-145, 2008.  
[9]  L. A. Michaels, K.  Ohene -Frempong, H. Zhao and S. D. Douglas, "Serum Levels of Substance P Are Elevated in 
Patients With Sickle Cell Disease and Increase Further During Vaso -Occlusive Crisis," Blood, vol. 92, pp. 3148 -
3151, 1998.  
[10]  E. Celerier, J. Laulin, A. Larcher, M. Le Moal and G. Simonnet, "Evidance for opiate -activated NMDA processes 
masking opiate analgesia in rats," Brain Res, vol. 847, no. 1, pp. 18 -25, 1999.  
[11]  C. Carroll, S. Lanzkron, C. J. Haywood, K. Kiley, M. Pejsa, G. Moscou -Jackson, J. Haythornthwa ite and C. 
Campbell, "Chronic Opioid Therapy and Central Sensitization in Sickle Cell Disease," Am J Prev Med, vol. 51, pp. 
S69-77, 2016.  
[12]  R. Al Hasani and M. R. Bruchas, "Molecular Mechanisms of Opioid Receptor -Dependent Signaling and Behavior," 
Anesthesiology, vol. 115, no. 6, pp. 1363 -1381, 2011.  
[13]  L. J. Estcourt, P. M. Fortin, S. Hopewell, M. Trivella and W. C. Wang, "Blood transfusion for preventing primary 
and secondary stroke in people with sickle cell disease," Cochrane Database Syst Re v, vol. 11, 2017.  
[14]  D. Daitch, J. Daitch, D. Novinson, M. Frey, C. Mitnick and J. J. Pergolizzi, "Conversion from high -dose full -opioid 
agonists to sublingual buprenorphine reduces pain scores and improves quality of life for chronic pain patients," 
Pain Med., vol. 15, pp. 2087 -2094, 2014.  
[15]  D. Wesson and W. Ling, "The Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS)," J Psychoactive Drugs, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 
253-259, 2003.  
 