BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
1 
 An adjunctive family intervention for individual PTSD  treatment  
 
NCT number: 02956434  
 
Document dat e: 7/2/21  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
2 
  (1)  Rationale  
 
 (a)  Statement of the Problem.   Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a significant 
public health problem, with lifetime prevalence rates of 8% (Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, 
& Nelson, 1995) . The national burden of the disorder, and particularly its impact on the VA 
system, has increased in magnitude as military personnel return from the recent conflicts in Iraq 
and Afghanistan; rates of PTSD among these veterans are estimated at 13 -20% (Kok, Herrell, 
Thomas, & Hoge, 2012) . Although trauma -focused cognitive -behavioral treatments have been 
shown to be effective in the treatment of PTSD (Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2009) , up to 
two-thirds of Veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan receive less than minimally adequate levels of 
care for PTSD (Lu, Duckart, O’Malley, & Dobscha, 2011; Spoont, Murdoch, Hodges, & Nugent, 
2010) . This is in part due to very high levels of treatment dropout, which can reach 36% (Imel, 
Laska, Jakcupcak, & Simpson, 2013) . These high dropout rates are consistent across clinical 
trials and civilian studies of PTSD treatment (Edlund et al., 2002; Imel, Laska, Jakupcak, & 
Simpson, 2013; Swift, Greenberg, Whipple, & Kominiak, 2012; Wang et al., 2005) . Premature 
treatment termination is clearly a critical predictor of PTSD treatment failure, and thus bolstering 
engagement/retention is central to improving the effectiveness of evidence -based treatments.  
 
Family members represent one potentially powerful resource that could be harnessed to 
enhance treatment engagement and outcomes. Lack of social su pport is one of the strongest 
predictors of the development and maintenance of PTSD (Brewin, Andrews, & Valentine, 2000; 
Ozer, Best, Lipsey, & Weiss, 2008) , and poor family functioning negatively affects tre atment 
outcomes (Evans, Cowlishaw, Forbes, Parslow, & Lewis, 2010; Evans, Cowlishaw, & Hopwood, 
2009; Tarrier, Sommerfield, & Pilgrim, 1999) . In the case of Veterans, family involvement in 
mental health services is now a national priority (Department of Veterans Affairs, 2006; New 
Freedom Commi ssion on Mental Health, 2003) , and all mental health providers are encouraged 
to involve families in Veterans’ care (Veterans Health Administration, 2008) . However, analysis 
of data from the VA’s national records system showed that only 4.2% of Veterans receiving 
mental health care in the VA had any type of family session ; this incl uded sessions with or 
without the Veteran present, multi -family groups, or family psychoeducation (Laws & Hoff, 
2015) . In 20 13 family sessions accounted for <1% of all VA mental health visits (Laws & Hoff, 
2015) , despite social support being associ ated with 15 -20% of the variance in PTSD symptoms 
(Brewin et al., 2000; Wright, Kelsall, Sim, Clarke, & Creamer,  2013) .  
 
 (b)  Hypotheses or Key Question.    
Hypothesis 1:  Levels of feasibility and acceptability of the family -inclusive treatment among 
Veterans, family members, and VA clinicians will be high.  
 
Hypothesis 2a: Patients whose family members receive fam ily-inclusive treatment will show 
lower levels of PTSD symptoms at post -treatment and greater engagement throughout 
treatment compared to control patients.  
Hypothesis 2b:  Family members who receive family -inclusive treatment will show more 
active support for treatment and less accommodation than control family members.  
 
 (c)  Specific Objectives.   Immediate objectives are to test the feasibility and effectiveness of a 
family -inclusive intervention for Veterans with PTSD. Longer -term objectives are to exami ne the 
mechanisms of family -inclusive treatment and the factors associated with its successful use in 
VA clinics.  
 
 (2)  Background and Significance  
 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
3 
 (a) Background.    
Family -involved PTSD treatment can enhance Veterans’ sense of support and connection to 
their family members; positive, active encouragement of treatment by family members such as 
verbal support, practical help getting to appointments, and reminders to practice homework 
assignments is likely to reduce Veterans’ levels of perceived criticism. Per ceived criticism is 
associated with worse PTSD treatment outcomes (Tarrier et al., 1999) , whereas positive family 
encouragement may be a powerful source of motivation for patients and a way for families to 
interact in a positive manne r. The sense of the family being on the same “team” against the 
disorder, along with the practical assistance in attending sessions and remembering homework 
assignments, will likely enhance Veterans’ treatment participation.  
 
On the other hand, families ma y also be inadvertently engaging in behavior that 
undermines the Veterans’ PTSD treatment. One such problematic behavior is symptom 
accommodation, or changes that family members make to their own behavior in order to reduce 
or prevent disorder -related dist ress in patients. Although often driven by compassion or by 
simple practical concerns (Boeding et al., 2013; Calvocoressi et al., 1995, 1999; Thompson -
Hollands, Kerns, Pincus, & Comer, 2014) , accommodation allows patients to avoid their 
emotional experi ence, and therefore reinforces the disorder pathology. Accommodation has 
been most well -studied in OCD, where it has been found to have strong associations with 
increased symptoms and functional impairment (Amir, Freshman, & Foa, 2000; Calvocoressi et 
al., 1999; Stewart et al., 2008) , and both cross -sectional and longitudinal studies have shown 
that higher levels of family accommodation are associated with poorer treatment outcomes 
(Amir et al., 2000; Merlo, Lehmkuhl, Geffken, & Storch, 2009) . Although the research literature 
is most robust in patients with OCD, accommodation is a transdiagnostic phenomenon that is 
found across a range of d isorders (Lebowitz et al., 2013; Lebowitz, Scharfstein, & Jo nes, 2014; 
Thompson -Hollands et al., 2014)  In PTSD, accommodation may involve family behaviors such 
as a partner avoiding topics of conversation related to the military or combat, or the partner 
doing all of the family’s shopping because the Veteran can’t  tolerate crowded stores (Fredman, 
Vorstenbosch, Wagner, Macdonald, & Monson, 2014) . Accommodation of PTSD symptoms is 
associated with patients’ PTSD symptoms and relati onship distress (Fredman et al., 2014) . 
Furthermore, accommodation also conflicts with a fundamental goal of current gold -standard 
treatments for PTSD: patients allowing themselves to experience and accept their emotions 
surrounding the trau ma, and the elimination of trauma -related avoidance in their daily lives (Foa, 
Hembree, & Rothbaum, 2007; Resick & Schnicke, 1992) . A recent study by Campbell and 
colleagues (Campbell, Renshaw, Kashdan, Curby, & Carter, in press)  found evidence of a bi -
directional relationship between PTSD symptoms and accommodation: PTSD symptoms among 
military service members predicted later accommodation by romantic partners, and partners’ 
earlier accommodation behaviors contributed specifically to service members’ later avoidance 
symptoms. Taken together, these results indicate that accommodation is an  especially 
important interpersonal variable to target as Veterans begin a course of trauma -focused 
treatment.  
 
Existing Family Treatments: Several family -based interventions for PTSD have been 
developed, but these are quite extensive in terms of both thei r clinical targets and their number 
of sessions. For example, Cognitive -Behavioral Conjoint Therapy (Monson, Stevens, & Schnurr, 
2005)  (CBCT) is a 15 -session treatment designed to treat the symptoms of PTSD while also 
improving overall relationship functioning. A family -based intervention for PTSD that was 
specifically developed for use in the VA, REACH (Reaching out to Educate and Assist Caring, 
Healthy families; formerly the S.A.F.E. program) involves attending sessions for up to 9 -months 
(Fischer, Sherman, Han, & Owen, 2013; Glyn n et al., 1999; Sherman, 2006) . These treatments 
are generally effective in reducing PTSD symptoms and improving relationship satisfaction (e.g., 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
4 
 Monson et al., 2011, 2012) . However, they are costly to the healthcare system, demanding 
many hours of time from highly trained staff. In addition, the lengthy commitments are difficult 
for families, who may need to arrange child/elder care or ta ke time off from work to attend. The 
protocols are also burdensome to clinicians; in addition to the time cost, many clinicians do not 
have expertise in family or couples treatment, which may make them reluctant to take on this 
work. Furthermore, the large  number of intervention targets in each of these treatments 
(psychoeducation, problem -solving, communication skills, etc.) makes isolating specific 
mechanisms of change much more complex. There is no currently existing short -term family 
intervention that f ocuses solely on increasing treatment engagement and reducing avoidance.  
 
The Brief Family Intervention (BFI):  The PI has previously developed and tested a brief 
family intervention (BFI) for reducing family accommodation in the context of treatment for OC D 
(Thompson -Hollands, Abramovitch, Tompson, & Barlow, 2015) . The intervention is not a stand -
alone treatment, but is rather designed to complement the patient’s course of evidence -based 
treatment. The protocol is delivered to an adult family member individually, without the patient 
present, in two 50 -minute sessions scheduled at the beginning of the patient’s individual 
treatment. The goal s of the BFI are to increase family members’ active support for treatment 
and to reduce family accommodation of the Veteran’s PTSD symptoms. The approach is highly 
behavioral, focusing on identifying relevant examples and practicing how to complete them. T he 
clinician and the family member each play an active role during the sessions, and there is an 
approximately equal amount of time devoted to didactic information and discussions/role -plays.  
The BFI’s strengths in comparison to existing family -based treat ments in PTSD include: 
shorter duration , reducing burden to families, clinicians, and the system; individual rather than 
couples’ sessions , negating the need for clinicians to be comfortable with couples or family 
work; and a limited, highly behavioral foc us, relying on concepts and strategies which will be 
familiar to any clinician with CBT experience.  
 
 (b)  Significance.   The proposed study may identify a new, feasible, and effective family -
inclusive treatment to enhance existing PTSD treatments. A subst antial number of Veterans 
with PTSD who complete trauma -focused treatment are not completely symptom -free at 
treatment termination, or they drop out of treatment prematurely. The proposed intervention may 
reduce these numbers by enhancing the effect of tre atment and encouraging Veterans not to 
drop out.  
 
 (c)  Relevance to Veterans Health.   
There are large numbers of Veterans who suffer from PTSD, and PTSD in turn affects Veterans’ 
relationships with significant others. Family -inclusive treatment has the po tential to enhance 
existing treatments in terms of their effects on PTSD symptoms, while also improving 
relationship functioning. An increase in treatment effectiveness and Veteran quality of life would 
be a substantial benefit. Furthermore, the BFI has th e potential to provide these benefits in an 
extremely cost -effective and efficient manner compared to existing family -focused interventions. 
Should the BFI prove to be effective in this population and setting, it would provide a more 
parsimonious way for c linicians and administrators to fulfill the directive to involve families in 
Veterans’ care.  
 
 
 (3)  Work Accomplished   
 
As noted above in section 2a, Dr. Thompson -Hollands (PI) has already developed and 
tested the BFI, which was originally piloted among  a sample of family members of patients with 
obsessive -compulsive disorder (OCD). In that study, a randomized clinical trial with 36 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
5 
 participants (18 patient -family member dyads), the BFI was rated by family members as being 
highly satisfactory (mean satis faction = 6.88 out of 7, SD = .35) and useful (mean = 6.29/7, SD 
= .76) (Thompson -Hollands et al., 2015) . Family members who received the BFI demonstrated 
significantly greater decreases in  accommodation compared to controls; at the end of the study, 
average accommodation scores in the control group remained at 78% of their baseline levels, 
while scores in the BFI group had dropped to 37% of baseline. Moreover, patients whose family 
member h ad participated in the BFI had significantly lower levels of OCD symptoms following 
their individual treatment ( d = 1.27) , and changes in family accommodation significantly 
predicted patients’ later symptom levels. These promising initial efficacy outcomes  support the 
use of the BFI in the present effectiveness trial.  
 
Although the BFI has only been previously tested in the context of OCD, the protocol’s 
applicability is not limited to OCD. Accommodation is not a disorder -specific phenomenon; any 
disorder t hat involves avoidance (essentially all of the so -called “emotional disorders” (Moses & 
Barlow, 2006) ) is likely to produce family accommodation in addition to the patient’s own 
attempts to avoid. Indeed, previous work by the PI and oth ers has shown that accommodation 
occurs across a wide range of disorders (Lebowitz et al., 2013; Thompson -Hollands et al., 
2014) , including PTSD (Fredman et al., 2014) .  
 
 
 (4)  Work Proposed  
 
 We expect to begin enrollment in the wi nter of 2016/2017. A total of 48 Veteran -family 
member p articipants will be enrolled ( 24 dyads ). We will enrol l approxima tely 2 part icipants (i.e., 
a dyad of one Veteran and their adult family member) per mo nth, for a recruitment rate of 12 
dyads ove r the course of a year. Veterans and their family members will participate in the study 
for 16 weeks total.  
 
 The pr oposed stud y will use an effectiveness design to evaluate a brief intervention 
targeting reductio ns in family accommodation and increases in  active family support for 
treatment (the BFI). Veterans with PTSD who are beginning a course of trauma -focused 
treatment and t heir adult family members (one family member per Veteran) will be recruited at 
VA Bost on.   
 
 All Veterans enrolled in the study will be beginning a course of either Prolonged Exposure 
(PE) or Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT), which will be de livered as usual by PT SD clinical 
staff. As the BFI is an adjunctive intervention, Veterans’ trau ma-focused treatment is considered 
separate  from the present study. The Veterans will be seen by regular clinical staff and no 
artificial limits will be impose d upon thei r treatment , although treatment engagement will be 
tracked (see Assessment section, be low). Veterans and their family members wil l be recruited 
for the present study at the beginning of a course of treatment at the clinic. Phase I  will be an 
open pilot tri al of 4 dyads. All family members in Phase I will receive the BFI, which will be 
delivered as 2 weekly 50 -minute sessions of the BFI, consistent with the application with the BFI 
in previous work (Thompson -Hollands et al., 2015) . Phase II  will include 20 dyads (N=40) usin g 
identical recruitment, inclusion/exclusio n criteria, and assessment structure; however, in this 
second phase family members will be randomly assigned to rece ive or not receive the BFI, and 
VABHS clinicians will deliver the BFI sessions (rather than the P I as in Phase I ). 
 
Veterans:  
Inclusion crit eria.  
(1) has a current diagnosis of PTSD  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
6 
 (2) is 18 years of age or older  
(3) has  an eligible family member (defined as a  spouse/significant other, parent, adult child, 
sibling, etc., 18 years of age or older who curre ntly has substantial daily or weekly contac t with 
the Veteran)  
(4) is beginning a course of either CPT or PE at VA Boston.  
 
Exclusion criteria.   
(1) has curre nt diagnoses of unstable bipolar disorder, past or present psychos is, or 
organic mental disorder  
(2) has clear and current suicidal risk (as sessed via the MINI -Suicide Module (Sheehan et 
al., 1998) , see Assessment section below)  
(3) has current moderate or severe substance use disorder  
(4) is currently participati ng in family -based therapy/couples -counseling  
 
Family members : 
Inclusion criteria.  
(1) is 18 years of age or older  
(2) is the family member  (defined as a spouse/significant other, par ent, adult child, sibling, 
etc.) of the Veteran  
(3) currently has substanti al daily or weekly contact  with the Veteran  
 
Exclusion criteria.   
(1) has a current diagnosis of PTSD  
(2) has current diagnoses of unstable bipolar disorder, past or present psychosis, or 
organic mental disorder  
(2) has clear and current suicidal risk (ass essed via the MINI -Suicide Module (Sheehan et 
al., 1998) , see Assessment section below)  
(3) has current moderate or severe substance use disorder  
(4) is cur rently participating  in family -based therap y/couples -counseling  
 
 Recruitment of Veterans and family members will occur through the VABHS outpatient 
mental hea lth clinics (e.g., the PTSD Clinic, the Women’s Clinic, General Mental Health, Center 
for Returni ng Veterans, etc.). All interested particip ants will be contacted by the PI for a phone 
screen, where the study and its procedures will be described and a shor t screen for eligibility will 
be administered. If the initial screening requirements are met, par ticipants will be invited to an 
in-person a ssessment. During the first appointment, the Veteran and family member will be 
provided with a thorough description of the project and the informed consent form will be 
reviewed and signed. Baseline assessment mea sures will then be administered (see 
Assess ment section).  
 
 Veterans will proceed with PE or CPT as usual through the clinic, with no restrictions or 
limitatio ns. Should a Veteran choose to discontinue PE or CPT, he or she will continue to be 
enrolled in t he proposed study for follow -up assessments , as treatment drop -out is a variable of 
interest. All family members who are to receive the BFI (i.e., all family m embers in Phase I  and 
half of family members in Phase II ) will participate in the two BFI session s, and then move into 
the follow -up portion  of the study.  
 
 
BFI: The BFI is a 2 -session individual intervention delivered by a clinician to the adult 
family me mber of a Veteran with PTSD who is beginning a course of CPT or PE treatment. The 
BFI sessions ar e guided by a manual, which has previously been developed by the PI but will 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
7 
 be revised for the purposes of the current study as described earlier to enhance i ts relevance to 
the families of Veterans with PTSD.  The BFI may be completed either in person or remotely via 
telephone.  
 
The protocol begin s with a brief assessment of the family member’s current 
accommodation behaviors, as captured by the SORTS interview  (Fredman et al., 2014) . The 
clinician explores the circumstances in which the fam ily member engages in accommodation 
and hel ps to determine the primary motivations for that accommodation (e.g., fears that 
upsetting the Veteran will cause em otional damage, or a desire to communicate support to the 
Veteran by “taking care of him” or “not  stressing him out”). This discussion helps  the clinician to 
begin conceptualizing how best to approach reducing accommodation, as well as providing an 
importa nt view of how PTSD has affected this individual family or relationship.  
 
The family member is ne xt provided with psychoeducation regarding a cognitive -behavioral 
conceptualization of PTSD, with particular attention paid to how avoidance of distress result s in 
temporary relief but ultimately reinforces the psychopathology and increases further avoidan ce 
in the long term. The model of exposure is then explained as a powerful mechanism for testing 
fears and learning to tolerate discomfort. The clinician expli citly addresses issues regarding the 
safety of exposure -based treatment, including whether exposu re makes patients “go crazy” and 
why a mode st, temporary increase in intrusive thoughts about the trauma early in treatment is a 
positive sign. The clinician a lso briefly describes the research support for trauma -focused 
treatment, to assure family members  that these interventions have been rigorou sly studied and 
found to be safe and effective.  
 
The clinician then works with family members to brainstorm ideas of  how they can support 
the Veteran’s efforts in treatment. Relatives are encouraged to come up wit h as many 
possibilities as they can, from l arge (e.g., committing to driving the Veteran to each treatment 
session) to small (e.g., making a note in the calend ar to ask the Veteran if he or she needs to 
complete any homework before the next session). In ad dition to these practical forms of 
support,  the family member is also strongly encouraged to provide verbal support to the 
Veteran. This can include praising t he Veteran’s efforts in treatment (e.g., consistency in 
attending sessions, challenging him or he rself to change unhelpful behaviors) as wel l as 
reminders that seeking treatment benefits and is appreciated by the family. Family members are 
coached to expli citly note any positive changes they observe in the Veteran as treatment 
progresses; such comment s may increase the Veteran’s motivation to continue with treatment, 
and also convey pride, gratitude, and hope on the part of the family member.  
 
Following the  overview of the treatment and treatment support, the clinician returns to the 
topic of accommoda tion. Accommodation is described as an unde rstandable and common 
response from family members, but one which is also a form of avoidance. Personalized 
examples  from the SORTS are used to illustrate how accommodation results in short -term relief 
for the pat ient but ultimately prevents him or her fro m testing out maladaptive beliefs and 
learning to tolerate discomfort. Family members are encouraged to capitalize o n the Veteran’s 
starting treatment by shifting their own behavior to be more consistent with the treatment 
approach. By highlighting the ben efits of making these family changes now, while the Veteran is 
making other positive changes to address his or her P TSD, we reduce shame regarding the 
family member’s past accommodation behavior and focus on their  potential to work in 
coordination with thi s new phase of treatment.  
 
All BFI sessions across both Phases will be audiotaped and quality assurance will be 
asse ssed by an independent study staff member familiar with the BFI.  Family members will be 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
8 
 provided  with $10 in travel compensation for each B FI session that they attend  in person  (total 
of $20 ); sessions conducted remotely will not be eligible for travel co mpensation . 
 
During the pilot Phase I  the PI will serve as the BFI clinician. The PI has consider able 
clinical experience in the treatment o f Veterans with PTSD. Additionally, as described above, 
the PI designed the BFI and has successfully tested its effi cacy in a study of patients with OCD 
and their family members. Beginning in Phase II  the PI will no longer deliver the intervention; 
instead , a minimum of 3 clinicians from the VABHS PTSD clinic will be recruited and trained to 
deliver the BFI.  
 
Comparison  condition:  Family members in the control or comparison condition of Phase 
II will not receive th e BFI or any other study -specific family se ssions (aside from the 
assessments described below). In keeping with the effectiveness aims of the present study, 
family members in the comparison condition (and the BFI condition) will not be prohibited from 
receiving any family -inclusive services or sess ions that would normally be offered to them in the 
context of usual VA care.  
 
Independent variables:  Receiving or no t receiving the BFI (for Veterans/family members); 
receiving or not receiving training in the BFI  (for clinicians).  
 
Dependent variables:  Treatment engagement and PTSD symptoms (for patients); 
accommodation and active treatment support (for family members) ; qualitative feedback and 
rates of participation (for Veterans, family members, and clinicians).  
 
Assessment:   
Measures and assessment poin ts are shown in Table 1. Qualitative interviews with 
stakeholders (Veterans, family members, and clinicians) will co ntinue throughout both Phases of 
the study, as described below.  Clinician -rated assessments of Ve terans and family members 
will be completed  (in person or via telephone/mail, or a combination of in person and remotely)  
at baseline and weeks 6, 12, and 16 ; Veterans and family members will be compensated $50 
for each of these 4 assessment visits that th ey complete (total of $200  for the major  
assessments ). Finally , PE and CPT  therapists will complete ratings of Veterans’ treatment 
engagement at each session, and will monitor dr opout.  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
9 
  Table 1. Assessment Measures and Timepoints  
 
 
  Time of Administration  
 Baseline  Weeks  
0-6 Every 
PE/CPT 
session  Week 
6 Week 
12 Week 
16 
CAPS -5 Xv   Xv Xv Xv 
SCID -5 Xv, f      
Demographics form (Vet/FM)  Xv, f      
Demographics form (Clin)  Xtx      
Relati onship information form (Vet)  Xv      
Relationship information form (FM)  Xf      
LEC-5 Xv, f      
WTAR  Xv, f      
MOCA  Xv, f      
AUDIT  Xv, f      
MINI -Suicide module * Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
PCS Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
MSPSS  Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
RDAS  Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
DERS  Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
ODSIS  Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
OASIS  Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
IPF-80 Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
PCL-5 Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
CTS-2SF Xv, f   Xv, f Xv, f Xv, f 
PABQ  Xv   Xv Xv Xv 
PTCI  Xv   Xv Xv Xv 
Homework Compliance Scale    Xtx    
Treatment attendance/dropout    Xtx    
SORTS  Xf   Xf Xf Xf 
Caregiving appraisal scale  Xf   Xf Xf Xf 
ITC    Xf Xf Xf 
TEQ  
Administered to family members after BFI 
sessions 1 and 2, respectively  CSQ   
WAI  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
10 
 Note: Xv = measure completed with/by Veteran; Xtx = measure completed by Veteran’s individual therapist; Xf = 
measure complet ed with/by f amily member ; *MINI -Suicide module is only administered to family members at 
follow -up if they scored ≥ 1 at baseline  
 
 
Veteran -specific assessm ents:   
Clinician Administered PTSD Scale for DSM -5  (CAPS -5) (Weathers et al., 2013) .  
 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 – Research Version (SCID -5) (First, Williams, Karg, & S pitzer, 
2015).  
 
Demographics form . This form collects basic demographic information (age,  marital status, etc), as well as 
a very brief overview of medical, social, and psychiatric status/history.  
 
Relationship information form  
 
Life Events Checklist for DSM -5 (National Center for PTSD)  
 
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading  (WTAR; Wechsler, 2001)  
 
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment  (MoCA; Nasreddine et al., 2005)  
 
Alcohol Use Disorders Inventory (AUDIT)  
 
MINI -Suicide module  (Sheehan et al., 1998)  Individuals will be excluded from enrolling in this study if they 
score 17  or higher (high risk) on the MINI suicide module at the initial assessment.  
 
The Revised Dyadic Adjustment Scale  (RDAS; Busby, Christensen, Crane, & Larson, 1995) is a 14 -item 
scale measuring relationship satisfaction in couples. The scale consists of 3 s ubscales: dyadic consensus, 
stability, and engagement.  
 
Perceived Criticism Scale  (Hooley  & Teasdale, 1989)  
 
Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support  (Zimet, Powell, Farley, Werkman, & Berkoff, 1990)  
 
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale  (Gratz & Roemer, 2004)  
 
The Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996)   
 
The Beck Anxiety Inventory  (BAI; Beck et al., 1988)  
 
The Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning  (IPF-80; Bovin et al., 2018) will be used to index objective role 
functionin g/impairment  in the following domains: romantic relationship, family, parenting, work, fri endships and 
socializing, education, and self -care  
 
PTSD Checklist -5 (PCL -5) (Weathers, Litz, Huska, & Keane, 1994)  
 
Revised Conflict Tactics Scale  (CTS -2; Straus, Hamby, Boney -McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996)  
 
Posttraumatic Avoidance Behavior Questionnaire  (PABQ; v an Minnen & Hagenaars, 2010 )  
Posttraumatic Cognitions Inventory  (PTCI;  Foa, Ehlers, Clark, Tolin, & Orsillo, 1999)  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
11 
 At each PE or CPT session, the Veteran’s the rapist will complete (1) a record of session attendance  (or 
dropout, if applicable), along  with (2) the Homework Compliance Scale  (Leung & Heimberg, 1 996) (HCS).  
 
 
Family member -specific assessments:   
Family members will complete/be assessed using the following previously described measures, as 
outlined in Table 1:  
 
SCID -IV 
Demographics form  
Relationship information form  
AUDIT  
LEC-5 
WTAR  
MOCA  
MINI -Suicide module  (only administered at follow -up if score was ≥ 1 at baseline,  see DSMB section ) 
RDAS  
PCS 
MSPSS  
DERS  
BDI-II 
BAI 
IPF-80 
CTS-2-SF 
PCL-5 (family members will  rate the PCL -5 based on their perception of the Veteran’s current symptoms)  
 
Family membe rs will also c omplete the following (timing outlined in Table 1):  
 
Significant Others’ Responses to Trauma Scale  (Fredman et al., 2014)  (SORTS)  
 
Careg iving Appraisal Scale  (Lawton, Moss , Hoffman, & Perkinson, 2000)  
 
Involvement in Therapy C hecklist  (ITC) . This measure consists of a checklist of involvement in the 
Veteran’s treatment since the last assessment (assisting with therapy homework, driving pat ient to 
appointments, attending therapy sessions with the Veteran, etc.).  
 
Treatment Expec tancy Question naire  (TEQ; Borkovec & Nau, 1972). The TEQ will be administered 
immediately after the first BFI session.  Wording was modified slightly to better describ e the family program.  
 
 
The therapeutic alliance following the BFI will be assessed using the 12 -item th erapist and client versions of 
the Working Alliance Inventory  (WAI; Horvath & Greenberg, 1989; Tracey & Kokotovic, 1989). Wording was 
modified slightly to better describe the family program.  
 
 The Client Satisfaction questionnaire (CSQ) will assess family members’ satisfaction with the overall 
program.  
 
 
Clinician -specific assessments:   
Demographics form  
 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
12 
 Assessment Quality Assurance.  The CAPS -5 and SCID -5 will be administered by assessors  who have at least 
MA-level education background. IEs w ill be trained  to reliability by Dr. Sloan as part of the ongoing training 
process in her lab. After achieving gold -standard reliability, assessors will continue to h ave ongoing 
supervision by Dr. Sloan throughout the course of the study. Reducing assessor  drift. All as sessments will be 
audio recorded and 15% of randomly selected interviews will be re -rated at regular intervals to establish 
interrater reliability. If r eliability falls below criteria, IEs will be retrained.  
 
Data Management.  All study data will be entere d into SPSS database, which will be housed on a secure 
network server accessible only by project staff.  SPSS software is provided by the NC -PTSD and th e license 
fees are paid by the NC -PTSD. The PI will check all data on the same day as entr y to ensure co mpleteness. 
Any incomplete data will be brought to the attention of the assessor and/or therapist and every effort will be 
made to complete ratings. Fie ld parameters will be specified such that suspect or missing values are either 
disallowed or flagged for  the immediate attention. Prior to data analysis, all data will be cleaned and rechecked 
for accuracy before conducting data analysis. Three times per y ear, blinded data will be compiled and 
reviewed by the PI and Co -I’s to ascertain overall completeness a nd issues requiring clarification, as well as for 
purposes of providing information to the da ta safety and monitoring board. Files will be destroyed acc ording to 
the VA Record Control Schedule.  
 
 
Power analysis:  
Given the aims and scope outli ned here, the present study is considered preliminary. It will provide pilot 
data to assess the feasibility and preliminary effectiveness of the BFI. The use of repea ted measures increases 
our ability to detect significant relationships. Our results will i nform next ste ps in the investigation of the 
effectiveness and implementation of the BFI, including a fully powered study examining the BFI in comparison 
to an establ ished family -based treatment in a routine VA clinic.  
 
k.  Human Studies Section   
 
1. Risk s to the Subje cts 
a. Human subjects involvement, characteristics, and design  
Over the two phases of the study, the participant population is to be composed of  48 Veterans and family 
members. Veterans will be recruited on the basis of the presence of a curr ent diagnosis of PTSD; family 
members will be adult relatives of the Veterans. These individuals will be recruited on a volunteer basis. As 
indicated in the Method se ction, inclusion criteria for Veterans are: (1) Currently enrolled in the VA Healthcare 
System; (2) meet s current criteria for DSM -5 PTSD; (3) 18 years of age or older; (4) has an eligible family 
member who is willing to participate; and (5) beginning a co urse of Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT) or 
Prolonged Exposure (PE) at VA Boston. Inclus ion criteria f or family members are: (1) Spouse/significant other, 
adult child, parent, sibling, or other relative of the Veteran; (2) currently has substantial daily  or weekly contact 
with the patient; (3) 18 years of age or older.  
 
Exclusion criteria for  Veterans and family members are: (1) Presence of current unstable bipolar disorder, past 
or present psychosis, organic mental disorder, or significant cognitive impa irment (standard cut -off score of 
<14 on the Mini Mental Status Examination -Brief Form  (Folstein, Folstein, & Fanjian g, 2001) ); (2) clear and 
current suicidal risk (assessed via the MINI -Suicide Module  (Sheehan et al., 1998) ); (3) current moderate or 
severe substance use disorder, and (4) current participation in family -based therapy/couple s-counseling.  
 
Only individuals who provide written informed consent will participate. A p articipant may  withdraw his or her 
consent at any time and without prejudice. A clear and detailed explanation will precede all procedures. At the 
beginning of the fi rst session participants will be fully informed about their condition assignment (BFI duri ng 
Phase I; ra ndom assignment to BFI or no BFI during Phase II). Participants will also be informed that they are 
free to withdraw from the study at any time without any consequences. It will be clearly explained to all 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
13 
 participants that a decision by eith er the Veteran  or the family to withdraw from this study will not  affect the 
Veteran’s individual CPT or PE treatment in any way.  
 
At the conclusion of the study, an in-depth debriefing will explain all procedures and hypotheses, and answer 
any remaining q uestions. The debriefing will be conducted at the final follow -up assessment session. 
Participants will be told the exact nature of the study cannot be revealed to th em until completion of the follow -
up visits to reduce any bias in the results. Any partici pant withdrawi ng early from the experiment will be 
provided with a debriefing at the time of withdrawal.  
 
This application also involves clinician participants curren tly working in a VA Boston mental health clinic and 
regularly providing CPT and/or PE ( n ≤ 20). This par t of the proposed study involves: (1) Conducting qualitative 
interviews with providers regarding family -inclusive PTSD treatment; (2) providing training to providers in the 
delivery of the BFI; (3) collecting recordings of BFI sessions for t he purposes of training and measuring fidelity; 
and (4) notes and recordings from supervision. Clinicians administering the BFI in Phase II will be asked to 
complete qualitative interviews at posttreatment and turn in audio recordings of sessions. Data in the form of 
ratings of digital audio recordings of BFI sessions will be collected from the clinicians to monitor their in -session 
use of the BFI and assess modifications/adaptations to the protocol. These digital audio recordings will either 
be hand -delive red to the PI ( on the recording device) for her to upload onto a secure research drive, or the 
recordings will be uploaded to a subfolder on the research drive by the clinicians themselves. Each clinician 
will have access to a dedicated subfolder on the PI ’s research dri ve in which to deposit session recordings ; 
these personal subfolders will also include any training materials or other relevant study information from the PI 
to the clinician . Clinicians will be therapists who are providers in the VA Boston Healthcare Syst em. Thus they 
will be over 18, as they will need to have completed their training to become therapists.  
 
b. Sources of research materials  
All information pertaining to this project (e.g., screening forms, questionnaire data, recordings of as sessment 
sessio ns and BFI sessions for all participants) will be held in the strictest confidence and will be kept in locked 
files located within the PI’s locked office at the National Cen ter for PTSD (NCPTSD)  (or, during construct ion on 
the 13th floor of Building 1 in J P, in a secure basement storage area appropriate for materials containing PII) . 
Data will be available only to individuals di rectly involved with the project. Under no circumstances will 
individually identifiable data be released to anyone without written consent of the participant. Results will be 
published as group findings only. Experimental results will be discussed with the  participant at their request.  
 
Additionally, clinician -related data collection will include surveys and digital audio recordings o f BFI sessions 
and interviews. Notes will be taken at meetings with clinicians during training and used for research. Audio 
recordings of BFI sessions will be obtained and will be rated using a standardized rating instrument by an 
adherence rater. Intervie ws will be reviewed and coded. Veteran symptom inventories and feedback forms will 
be collected for the purposes of the study . All data obtained in the study will be used exclusively for the 
purposes of the proposed research.  
 
c. Potential Risks  
Interventi on: Some risks are associated with the administration of psychosocial interventions. The primary risk 
is the evocation of unc omfortable levels of anxiety or other emotions during the sessions. Some participants 
may find sessions or assignments stressful an d react to them with anxiety. We have no reason to anticipate 
that these potential negative reactions will be of any greater magnitude than would be experienced in standard 
family -inclusive interventions.  
 
Recording:  Some participants may feel uncomfortabl e about the assessment, intervention, and interview 
sessions being recorded. However, this will be a required procedure. The purpose of the recording will be 
explained, confidentiality will be respected, and both informed consent and authorization for reco rding will be 
obtained as per requirements put forth by the Healthcare Information Portability and Accountability Act 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
14 
 (HIPAA) . Recordings will be marked only by subject identification codes and stored on a password -protected 
research drive.  
 
Self-Report M easures and Assessor Ratings:  No risks are seen associated with these assessment 
procedures other than discomfort associated with the recording. These will be handled as described above for 
recording of assessment and BFI sessions.  
 
Clinician Data:  The maj or types of risk stemming from study participation include the discomfort of revealing 
personal information and opinions duri ng surveys or interviews, and an unforeseen breach of confidentiality, 
which could affect employment. Every effort will be made to minimize this risk. Providers who participate will 
experience risks associated with the evaluations and monitoring of the eff ects of training on their ability to use 
the BFI. The major types of risk stemming from study participation include: the discomfort  of revealing personal 
information on the surveys or interviews and discomfort at having their in -session behaviors evaluated  and 
monitored to assess their ability to adhere to the protocol.  
 
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
a. Recruitment and conse nt procedures  
Following the recruitment procedures used in recent clinical trials within BSD, we plan to recruit participants  
from various specialty clinics at VABHS. Patients will be recruited in these clinics by providing clinic staff and 
directors infor mation about the study and placing study advertisements around VABHS. A recent PTSD trial 
using this technique was able to ra ndomize 3 participants per month. Given that the criteria are not very 
stringent for the proposed study, we expect a good flow of r ecruitment. The study announcements will state 
that the free family intervention is part of a research study that is availabl e to qualified individuals. Interested 
individuals will be instructed to call for further information.  
 
In accordance with HIPAA re gulations, written informed consent will be obtained from each participant after a 
thorough explanation of procedures by a pr oject staff person and the opportunity for the participant to ask and 
receive answers to questions. Participants will be informed o f the nature of the investigation, the types of 
assessments and treatments involved, alternative treatments, and the potentia l risks involved in participation 
and will be asked to sign an informed consent statement prior to participating in the proposed st udy. In 
addition, the participant will receive an explanation of how information related to their case will be handled 
includ ing all parties involved, data management, and plans to publish data in group format without identifying 
information. Participants will also be informed that if suicidal intentions are disclosed confidentiality may be 
broken in order for protective measure s to be taken. See Section 5 (Data Safety and Monitoring Plan) for 
specific information on assessment of suicidal information from participants and at what point action(s) would 
be taken.  
 
To prevent clinic staff from feeling pressure to participate, the f ollowing measures will be taken: Several clinics 
that commonly treat PTSD (e.g., the PTSD Clinical Team, Women’s Stress Disorders T reatment Team, 
General Mental Health, Center for Returning Veterans) and employ multiple clinicians (more than 5) will be 
contacted at the time of recruitment and informed of the option to participate. It will be made clear that surveys 
and interviews asse ssing information that is gathered during the study will not be shared with the 
administration (other than in the prepared re search report, which will not disclose participant name or 
identifying characteristics). Providers who participate will receive a t horough description of study -related 
procedures, will have the opportunity to ask questions, and will provide informed consen t. Providers who 
participate by providing the intervention, and/or completing surveys and interviews all will be asked to provide 
informed consent. Interview, survey responses, and competence and adherence data collected will not be 
made available to emplo yers or become a part of their employment records and will remain confidential.  
 
b. Protection against risk  
 1. We will carefully s creen to identify individuals whose risk for potential adverse outcomes is elevated 
were they to participate in the proposed research. Such individuals will be excluded from the study. As an 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
15 
 example, an actively suicidal person would be excluded from study  participation and appropriate clinical 
treatment or referrals provided.  
 2. Clinical staff will be trained to cope with any anxiety/distress experienced by participants during the 
assessments and intervention.  Staff will also monitor assessment items that  ask about risk of suicide or current 
domestic violence at each timepoint. These items will be reviewed immediately upon comp letion, and 
participants who endorse elevated risk of suicide or current domestic violence will meet with the PI for further 
assess ment. See Section 5b (“Safety monitoring plan”) below for details of the standard procedure for suicidal 
risk. For current do mestic violence, the PI (in consultation with a licensed clinical supervisor on site) will assess 
risk and provide the participant with clinical and community referrals as needed.  
 3. Careful monitoring of participants during study participation will be co nducted by the project staff. 
Participants will be monitored for any increase in symptoms as the study progresses. Each participant  will see 
the same clinician for each of their treatment or intervention visits (in the case of Veterans, their same usual 
care clinician. In the case of family members, the same BFI clinician), and the same assessor for each 
assessment occasion when appro priate. Following the clinical trial policy of the VA Boston Healthcare System, 
all participants will be given an emergency n umber to call in case of an emergency. This number will be the 
psychiatry on call system of the VA Boston Healthcare System.  
 4. Pa rticipants will be instructed to contact study personnel at any time (including during the follow -up 
period) in the event of worsening symptoms. Participants whose clinical condition has deteriorated will be 
removed from the study and given appropriate cli nical care. See DSMP for details.  
 5. Veterans will be under treatment with clinicians at the VA Boston Healthcare System, an d thus will 
be monitored by their clinicians and will be provided with appropriate referrals as necessary at the end of their 
PTSD treatment. Family members failing to benefit from the study intervention will be provided with appropriate 
clinical care and referrals. The exact nature of these referrals will be determined by the judgment of clinicians 
and supervisor familiar with the sp ecific participant and may include services delivered by the Social Work 
Service of VA Boston or other community resources.  
 6. As in any type of treatment or clinical research program, participants’ (those receiving interventions 
and all clinician partici pants) confidentiality must be carefully guarded and respected. All data with identifying 
information will be stored in locke d files or password -protected computer servers. Data being analyzed will be 
identified by subject codes, and identifying informatio n will be removed. The identity of participants will not be 
revealed in the presentation or publication of any results from t he project. All personnel working on the project 
will be educated about the importance of strictly respecting participants’ rights to confidentiality and will have 
completed several training courses including proper practice in accordance with HIPAA regula tions, protection 
of human subjects, and computer security.  
 
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Oth ers 
There is no direct benefit to participants who enter this study, although some may experience relief from PTSD 
symptoms, decreased avoidance, decreased conflict, and increased quality of life.  
 
The clinician participants may receive benefit from the tr aining in a new brief family intervention, from access to 
expert consultation on the intervention, and/or by providing feedba ck about the potential barriers that require 
addressing within the mental health clinics. Providers who participate in the treatmen t portion of the study will 
receive free training in a new psychotherapy intervention, and this training will also be made av ailable to 
clinicians who would like the training but do not wish to provide the intervention in the context of the study. 
Over the  longer term, they may also benefit professionally (e.g., future job opportunities at agencies that value 
family -inclusive ap proaches to treatment) from the training. Consequently, the potential risks of participation in 
the study are outweighed by the pot ential benefit to the participants.  
 
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
PTSD is a significant public health problem,  with national lifetime prevalence rates of 8% (Kessler et al., 1995)  
and estimated rates in  Veterans of the current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan of 13 -20%(Kok et al., 2012) . 
Family members may serve as a unique resource t hat can be harnessed to improve outcomes for PTSD 
treatment; social support is one of the most important predictors of the de velopment and maintenance of 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
16 
 PTSD (Ozer et al., 2 008), and family members may provide substantial practical and emotional support for 
treatment. However, relatives may also inadvertently behave in ways that contribute to the maintenance of the 
disorder (Erbes et al., 2008) . The proposed study wi ll examine a brief family intervention (BFI) delivered in 
conjunction with individually -delivered trauma -focused treatment.  
 
5. Dat a Safety and Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
 
a. Data Monitoring Plan.  Data will be collected using standardized forms and will only b e identified using the 
participants’ ID number (no names or identifying information will be on the forms). A username and password 
is required to gain access to the network server, permission is needed to access the data drive, and a separate 
password is n eeded to gain access to the database. Data will be stored on a VABHS server 
(VHABOSCLURES1 ) and is backed up nightly ; no data will be stored on a hard drive .  
 
The codes that link the names of participants and their ID numbers will be kept confidential by the PI in a 
secured cabinet located within the PI’s office  (JP campus, r oom 13B -60) (or, during construct ion on the 13th 
floor of Building 1 in JP, in a secure basement storage area appropriate for materials containing PII) . Collected 
data forms will be in a locked file cabinet located in the PI’s office  (or, during construct ion on the 13th floor of 
Building 1 in JP, in a secure basem ent storage area appropriate for materials containing PII) . These data are 
accessible to the  PI and personnel working on the project. Data will be ent ered electronically by trained staff, 
and data entry discrepancies will be corrected by the data entry sup ervisor based on source documents. The 
quality of the data will be monitored quarterly.  Data will be securely transmitted using VA approved methods.   
 
Audio recordings will be captured using Philips recorders with FIPS 140 -2 validated encryption. Recordin gs 
may be obtained while stu dy staff are teleworking; in these cas es the recorders will be stored in  the home in  a 
locked cabinet /drawer  that is only accessible to the study staff member. Recorders will be hand -carried to the 
VA as soon  as it is feasible a nd safe to do so, at which point the recordings will be uploaded t o the PI ’s 
personal research dri ve behind the VA firewall and deleted from the reco rding device.  
 
The primary outcomes measures will be CAPS -5 total scores and ratings of homework completion  (from the 
Homework Completion Scale), and nu mber of sessions atte nded/dropout. Data quality will be monitored by 
inspection of the completed forms by the research assistant and any problems detected will be discussed with 
the PI. All assessors will be ful ly trained on the assessment measures, per th e usual training proc edures within 
BSD. Adherence to the intervention will be monitored using recordings of sessions and weekly supervision, as 
described previously. If diagnostic and/or intervention drift is ob served, staff will be retrained until accepta ble 
reliability is re ached.  
 
b. Safety Monitoring Plan.  In the proposed study we will use the FDA definition of adverse events (AE) and 
serious adverse events (SAE). Any SAE, whether or not related to the study intervention, will be reported 
immediately to  the IRB. In the even t that a participant either withdraws from the study or the PI decides to 
discontinue a participant due to an SAE, the participant will be monitored by the PI via ongoing status 
assessment u ntil (a) a resolution is reached (e.g., the p roblem has resolved o r stabilized with no further 
change expected), (b) the SAE is determined to be clearly unrelated to the study intervention, or (c) the SAE 
results in death. Outcomes of SAEs will be regularl y reported to the IRB. A summary of the SAEs that occurred 
during the previous year will be included in the annual IRB renewal. Suicidal ideation and AEs will be formally 
assessed at baseline and at all other assessment visits (see below for detailed infor mation regarding 
assessment of suicidal ideat ion). 
 
Participants w ill be informed that the interim results of the study will not necessarily be revealed to them, even 
if there is a suggestive trend in favor of the treatment, so as to maintain the scientifi c integrity of the 
study (Slutsky & Lavery, 2004) . During the fi rst in person screeni ng, potential participants will undergo a 
comprehensive screening to determine their eligibility for, and safety for, participation in the study. Attention will 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
17 
 be paid to current suicidal i deation. Individuals who report imminent risk  will be excluded fro m participation in 
the study and will be provided with appropriate clinical referrals.  
 
b.1. Assessment of suicidal ideation: During the course of the study the clinician -administered MINI 
suicide module will be used to thoroughly asse ss participant suicid al risk and distress beyond what would be 
expected in treatment for trauma. The MINI suicide module consists of 9 questions related to suicidal ideation 
and behaviors, with possible scores r anging from 0 to 53. Low suicide risk is defi ned as 0 -8 points, mo derate 
suicide risk is defined as 9 -16 points, and high suicide risk is defined as scoring 17 or greater. The MINI 
suicide module includes clear guidelines for determining suicide risk, and requires approximately 10 minutes to 
administ er. Individuals will be excluded from enrolling in our proposed trial if they score 17 or higher on the 
MINI suicide module at the initial assessment. Individuals who are excluded will be provided with appropria te 
clinical referrals. The PI will follow up with each of these in dividuals within one week to make sure they have 
connected with appropriate clinical care.  
 
Additionally, if at any point during the study (either baseline or follow -up) a participant descr ibes a clear 
intent or inability/unwillingnes s to develop and foll ow a Suicide Prevention Safety Plan, which is a VA standard 
of care, then they will be terminated from the study and the crisis will be managed. Specifically, staff will 
immediately locate D r. Sloan, who is a licensed psychologist, or another licensed psyc hologist, who will follow 
standard VA suicide prevention and risk management procedures. A licensed clinical psychologist will always 
be on -site when assessments are conducted. The psycholog ist will intervene by (a) following up with d irect 
questions about  suicidal behaviors, (b) assessing mental status by asking about psychotic symptoms, mood 
symptoms, and drug and alcohol use, (c) scheduling extra contacts if necessary, emphasizing problem solving, 
(d) helping the participant to gener ate short -term object ives, and (e) collaboratively developing or refining a 
Safety Plan using the VA’s comprehensive Safety Planning template and manual. The plan will address what 
actions need to be taken in th e succeeding days to solve the problems that precipitated suicidal  behavior. The 
plan will also address the use of voluntary and involuntary hospitalization, if necessary. In addition to these 
formal assessments, all participants will be given the number o f the on -call psychiatry service at VA Boston  
Healthcare System an d informed that they should call this number after normal business hours in the event 
that they are feeling suicidal and/or distressed, as well as the National Suicide Prevention hotline num ber, 
which is a 24 -hour service with a specif ic line dedicated to Veterans. During business hours the participants 
will be instructed to contact the PI. Should a participant call to indicate suicidal risk, then the previously 
described intervention plan wi ll be followed. All Veterans in the study wil l also be under non -study care through 
the VABHS, and will be monitored as appropriate by their individual clinicians.  
 
Veteran participants will be administered the MINI -Suicide module at baseline and at each f ollow -up 
assessment. Family members will be a dministered the MINI -Suicide module at the baseline assessment; those 
family members who score a 0 at baseline on the MINI -Suicide module will not be reassessed at future follow -
up points. However, any family me mbers that score ≥ 1 baseline will continue t o have the MINI admin istered at 
follow -up assessments to monitor risk.  If at any point during these follow -up assessments a family member 
indicates that they are experiencing high levels of suicidal thoughts, study staff will proceed with the  steps 
outline d above (e.g., furthe r assessment  by a licensed psychologist  of the intensity of thoughts, assessment of 
any related behaviors, collaborative completion of a Safety Plan, scheduling of additional contacts in the  near 
term, and/or potentially a voluntary or  involuntary hospital ization, as determined by the licensed psychologist).  
 
In the event that a participant experiences high distress (i.e. exacerbated symptoms) but without any suicidal 
ideation or threat, then  the PI will intervene by asking direct quest ions about the nature  and causes of the 
distress, conduct a symptom assessment, and schedule extra contacts (assessments) and/or work closely with 
the patient’s other VA providers if deemed necessary. Veterans’ PTSD care will not be constrained or limited in 
any way by their p articipation in the study; therefore, their individual clinicians will be free to make any 
appropriate treatment decisions in response to increased distress, including seeking hospitalizatio n or another 
higher level of care, discontinu ing PE/CPT and instea d conducting supportive or crisis -oriented therapy, etc. 
Any such changes in treatment focus will be monitored and reported to the IRB as appropriate.  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
18 
 DATA ANALYSIS.   
Data management:  All clinician -administered and self -report questionnaire data will be entered into the 
database by the Research Assistant (RA) on the same day of administration to ensure completeness. All data 
will be cleaned and rechecked for accuracy before being expor ted into the appropriate program (e.g., SPSS, 
MPlus, and NVivo) for analysis. Data collected via mEMA will be continuously available via the secure cloud -
based storage system and accessible via a unique access site available only to study staff.  
 
Overview of data analysis:  Quantitative data analysis will be performed using MPlus and SPSS, and 
NVivo management software will be used for qualitative data. Prior to full data analysis, the balance of 
randomization will be checked and unbalanced factors between g roups will be controlled for in subsequent 
analyses. Similarly, all major variables will be assessed for skewness and outliers, and in cases where 
parametric analytic assumptions are violated we will use transformations. Preliminary analyses will consist o f 
descriptive statistics by assessment period. All quantitative outcomes will be tested at a two -sided =.05 level.  
 
Data checking:  Standard data checking procedures will include checking forms for missing data, double 
entry with discrepancy resolution, da ily back -up copies of computer files, and examination of key variables for 
skewness, variability, missing data, and outliers. Data will be transformed to achieve normality if needed. If any 
outcome variable is too zero -inflated to allow for transformation,  it will be analyzed with logistic regression or 
generalized estimating equation techniques (appropriate for this small pilot study).  
 
Missing data : We will make every effort to retain participants, but as treatment engagement is a key 
outcome of the pres ent study we will also carefully tabulate and report dropout rates and patterns in the 
present study, including exact timing of dropout. Multilevel regression models will be used to evaluate 
treatment outcomes; this approach is robust to missing data and i s considered “state of the art” for use with 
unbalanced data sets due to treatment dropout (Schafer & Grah am, 2002) . There are also several methods for 
correcting biases due to missing data when using a multilevel regression approach (e.g., pattern -mixture 
modeling).  
 
Power analyses:  Determining sample sizes for multilevel models is a complex issue and "rul es of thumb" 
are disputed (Maas & Hox, 2005; Mok,  1995) . Furthermore,  "effective" sample sizes in MLMs (as opposed to 
nominal sample sizes) will vary according to the model's predictors (Bickel, 2007) . Given the aims and scope 
of this funding mechanism, the present study is considered preliminary. It will provide pilot data to assess the 
effectiveness of the BFI as well as exploring the proposed mechanisms  of action. The use of repeated 
measures increases our ability to detect significant relationships. Our results will inform next steps in the 
investigation of the effectiveness and implementation of the BFI, including a fully powered R01 application to 
examine the BFI in comparison to an established family -based treatment in a routine VA clinic.  
 
Defining key concepts for analyses:  
Treatment dropout:  Consistent with past trials of CPT and PE, treatment dropout will be defined by 
ending treatment prior to th e allocated treatment period. In the case of CPT full treatment duration is 12 
sessions, while in the case of PE full treatment duration is at least 8  sessions and the concomitant agreement 
of the therapist that an appropriate ending place has been reached . Any Veteran who ends treatment prior to 
these milestones will be considered a dropout.  
 
Feasibility/Acceptability:  In the current study, feasibility and acceptability will refer to the evaluation and 
analysis of recruitment, randomization, retention, tre atment adherence and fidelity, and use of the BFI with the 
families of Veterans beginning PTSD treatment. These variables help to determine the acceptability of the 
treatment and procedures for future studies.  
 
Aim 1:  Collect qualitative and quantitative d ata on feasibility and acceptability of the BFI in a routine care 
setting.  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
19 
  
Hypothesis 1:  Levels of feasibility and acceptability of the BFI among Veterans, family members, and 
clinicians will be high and comparable to levels found in the previous efficacy  trial in OCD.  
 
Hypothesis 1 analytic strategy:  We will examine the feasibility and acceptability of the BFI by examining 
rates of BFI recruitment and refusal, as well as level of drop -out from the BFI sessions. These data will be 
benchmarked to previous B FI efficacy data. We will also assess the success of the clinician training program 
by reviewing rates of clinician recruitment and attitudes reported on the EBPAS -50.  Furthermore, we will 
conduct detailed in -person, semi -structured exit interviews with V eterans, family members, and clinicians in 
order to collect qualitative data. These data will allow us to contextualize our findings related to the protocol’s fit 
in this novel setting and its acceptability to Veterans, families, and providers. The qualita tive interviews will 
provide more nuanced feedback regarding the perceived fit of the BFI, and further identify necessary 
modifications to the protocol (see below for qualitative analytic strategy).  
 
Aim 2:  Assess the BFI’s effects on symptoms as well as potential mechanisms of change using multilevel 
modeling.  
 
Hypothesis 2a: Veterans whose family members receive the BFI will show lower levels of PTSD symptoms 
at post -treatment and greater engagement throug hout treatment compared to control Veterans.  
 
Hypothesis 2b:  Family members who receive the BFI will show more active support for treatment and less 
accommodation than control family members.  
 
   Hypothesis 2c:  Family members’ active support for treatment  will be positively related to Veterans’ 
treatment engagement, and Veterans’ levels of perceived criticism will be negatively related to their treatment 
engagement  
 
   Hypothesis 2a -2c analytic strategy:  Multilevel regression (i.e., hierarchical linear mod eling (HLM), growth 
curve analysis, etc.) will be used to evaluate change in continuous outcome variables (Singer & Willett, 2003) . 
Multilevel regression is a robust method for analyzing change over time, with excellent options for hand ling 
missing data, powerful estimation abilities, and flexibility of modeling. This approach will allow for the analysis 
of an intent -to-treat sample in line with CONSORT guidelines (Altman et al., 2001) . For our analysis of change 
in the variables of interest we will use a multilevel framework in the Mplus program to model time as a Level 1 
predictor of the outcome variables (baseline and weeks 6,  12, and 16). We will first specify an unconditional 
model to ascertain the shape of the change trajectories (e.g., linear versus quadratic change over Time), and 
will subsequently specify conditional multilevel models to examine treatment effects and the impact of other 
variables as predictors of individual differences in change. We will also calculate the Cohen’s d effect size and 
95% confidence intervals in order to provide a benchmark for future trials.  
 
 
 
 
o.  Literature Cited  
 
Aarons, G. A., Cafri, G., Lugo, L., & Sa witzky, A. (2010). Expanding the domains of a ttitudes towards 
evidence-based practice: The Evidence Based Practice Attitude Scale -50. Administration and Policy in 
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research , 39(5), 331 –340. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10 488-
010-0302 -3 
Amir, N., Freshman, M., & Foa,  E. B. (2000). Family  distress and involvement in relatives of obsessive -
compulsive disorder patients. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 14(3), 209 –217. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0887 -6185(99)00032 -8 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
20 
 Beck, A.T., Steer , R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inv entory manual 2nd ed. , San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation  
Boeding, S. E., Paprocki, C. M., Baucom, D. H., Abramowitz, J. S., Wheaton, M. G., Fabricant, L. E., & 
Fischer, M. S. (2013). Let me check that f or you: symptom accommodation in romantic par tners of 
adults with Obsessive -Compulsive Disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 51(6), 316 –322. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2013.03.002  
Borkovec, T.D., & Nau, S.D. (1972). Credibility of analogue therapy r ationales. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Ex perimental Psychiatry , 3, 257-260. 
Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Valentine, J. D. (2000). Meta -analysis of risk factors for posttraumatic stress 
disorder in trauma -exposed adults. Journal of Consulting and Clini cal Psychology , 68(5), 748 –766. 
http://doi.or g/10.1037/0022 -006X.6 8.5.748  
Busby, D.M., Christensen, C., Crane, D.R., & Larson, J.H. (1995). A revision of the dyadic adjustment scale for 
use with distressed and nondistressed couples: Construct hierarchy and  multidimensional scales. 
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 2 1, 289. 
Calvocoressi, L., Lewis, B., Harris, M., Trufan, S. J., Goodman, W. K., McDougle, C. J., & Price, L. (1995). 
Family accommodation in obsessive -compulsive disorder. American Journal o f Psychiatry , 152, 441 –
443. 
Calvocoressi, L.,  Mazure, C., Stanisla v, K., Skolnick, J., Fisk, D., Vegso, S., … Price, L. H. (1999). Family 
accommodation of obsessive -compulsive symptoms: Instrument development and assessment of 
family behavior. Journal of N ervous and Mental Disease , 187(10), 636 –642. 
Campbell, S. B., Rens haw, K. D., Kashdan, T. B., Curby, T. W., & Carter, S. P. (in press). A daily diary study of 
posttraumatic stress symptoms and romantic partner accommodation. Behavior Therapy . 
Department of  Veterans Affairs. (2006, June). VHA Directiv e 2006 -041. Author.  
Devilly, G.J., & Borkovec, T.D. (2000). Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy questionnaire. 
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 31, 73-86. 
Edlund, M. J.,  Wang, P. S., Berglund, P. A., Katz, S. J., L in, E., & Kessler, R.  C. (2002). Dropping out of mental 
health treatment: Patterns and predictors among epidemiological survey respondents in the United 
States and Ontario. American Journal of Psychiatry , 159(5), 845 –851. 
Erbes, C. R., Polusny, M. A., MacD ermid, S., & Compton,  J. S. (2008). Couple therapy with combat veterans 
and their partners. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 64(8), 972 –983. http://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20521  
Evans, L., Cowlishaw, S., Forbes, D.,  Parslow, R., & Lewis, V. (2010). Longitudina l analyses of family 
functioning in veterans and their partners across treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology , 78(5), 611 –622. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0020457  
Evans, L., Cowlishaw, S., & Hopwoo d, M. (2009). Family functioning predicts out comes for veterans in  
treatment for chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Family Psychology , 23(4), 531 –539. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0015877  
Fischer, E. P., Sherman, M. D., Han, X., & Owen, R. R. (20 13). Outcomes of participation in the REACH 
multifamily group prog ram for veterans with PTSD and their families. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice , 44(3), 127 –134. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0032024  
Foa, E.B., Ehlers, A., Clark, D.M., Tolin, D.F. , & Orsillo, S.M. (1999). The Posttraumatic C ognitions Inventory 
(PTCI): Development and validation. Psychological Assessment, 11, 303-314. 
Foa, E. B., Hembree, E., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged exposure therapy for PTSD: Emotional 
processing of trau matic experiences (Therapist guide)  (1 editio n). New York: Oxford University Press.  
Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen, J. A. (Eds.). (2009). Effective treatments for PTSD: 
Practice guidelines from the International Society for Traumatic St ress Studies  (2nd ed.). New York, 
NY: The Gui lford Press.  
Folstein , M. F., Folstein, S. E., & Fanjiang, G. (2001). MMSE: Mini -Mental State Examination . Psychological 
Assessment Resources, Incorporated.  
Fredman, S. J., Vorstenbosch, V., Wagner, A. C., Macdo nald, A., & Monson, C. M. (2014). Partner 
accommodation in posttra umatic stress disorder: Initial testing of the Significant Others’ Responses to 
Trauma Scale (SORTS). Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 28(4), 372 –381. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.04.0 01 
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
21 
 Glynn, S. M., Eth, S., Randolph, E. T., Fo y, D. W., Urbaitis, M ., Boxer, L., … Crothers, J. (1999). A test of 
behavioral family therapy to augment exposure for combat -related posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 67(2), 243 –251. http://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -
006X.67.2.243  
Imel, Z.  E., Laska, K., Jakcupcak, M., & Simpson, T. L. (2013). Meta -analysis of dropout in treatments for post -
traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 81(3), 394 –404. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0031474  
Imel, Z. E., Laska, K., Jakupc ak, M., & Simpson, T. L. (2013). Meta -analysis of dropout in treatments for 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 81(3), 394 –404. 
http://doi.org/10.10 37/a0031474  
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Brom et, E., Hughes, M., &  Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in 
the national comorbidity survey. Archives of General Psychiatry , 52(12), 1048 –1060. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1995.0395024006601 2 
Kok, B. C., Herrell, R. K., Thomas, J. L., & Hoge, C. W. (2012).  Posttraumatic stress disorder associated with 
combat service in Iraq or Afghanistan: Reconciling prevalence differences between studies. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease , 200(5), 444 –450. 
Kubany, E. S., Haynes, S. N., Leisen, M. B., Owens, J. A., Kap lan, A. S., Watson, S. B., et al. (2000). 
Development and preliminary validation of a brief broad -spectrum measure of trauma exposure: the 
Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 12 (2), 210 -224. 
Laws, H., & Hoff,  R. (2015, April). Family engagement in Veteran’s mental health care . Presented at the 
National Center for PTSD Lecture Series.  
Lebowitz, E. R., Scharfstein, L. A., & Jones, J. (2014). Comparing Family Accommoda tion in Pediatric 
Obsessive -Compulsive Disord er, Anxiety Disorders , and Nonanxious Children. Depression and 
Anxiety , n/a–n/a. http://doi.org/10.1002/da.22251  
Lebowitz, E. R., Woolston, J., Bar -Haim, Y., Calvocoressi, L., Dauser, C., Warnick, E., … Leckman,  J. F. 
(2013). Family accommodation in pediat ric anxiety disorders . Depression and Anxiety , 30(1), 47 –54. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/da.21998  
Leung, A. W., & Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Homework compliance, perceptions of control, and outcome of 
cognitive -behavior al treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Rese arch and Therapy , 34(5–6), 423 –432. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/0005 -7967(96)00014 -9 
Lu, M. W., Duckart, J. P., O’Malley, J. P., & Dobscha, S. K. (2011). Correlates of utilization of PTSD specialty 
treatment among re cently diagnosed veterans at the VA. Psychiat ric Services , 62(8), 943–949. 
Merlo, L. J., Lehmkuhl, H. D., Geffken, G. R., & Storch, E. A. (2009). Decreased family accommodation 
associated with improved therapy outcome in pediatric obsessive –compulsive diso rder. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psyc hology , 77(2), 355 –360. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0012652  
Monson, C. M., Fredman, S. J., Adair, K. C., Stevens, S. P., Resick, P. A., Schnurr, P. P., … Macdonald, A. 
(2011). Cognitive –behavioral conjoint therapy f or PTSD: Pilot results from a community sampl e. Journal 
of Traumat ic Stress , 24(1), 97 –101. http://doi.org/10.1002/jts.20604  
Monson, C. M., Fredman, S., Macdonald, A., Pukay -Martin, N., Resick, P. A., & Schnurr, P. P. (2012). Effect of 
cognitive -behavioral couple therapy for ptsd: A randomized contro lled trial. JAMA , 308(7), 700 –709. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2012.9307  
Monson,  C. M., Stevens, S. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2005). Cognitive -behavioral couples treatment for 
posttraumatic stress disorder. In T. A. Corales (Ed.), Focus on posttraumatic stress  disorder research  
(pp. 251 –280). Hauppague, NY: Nova Science.  
Moses, E. B., & B arlow, D. H. (2006). A New Unified Treatment Approach for Emotional Disorders Based on 
Emotion Science. Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15(3), 146 –150. 
http://doi. org/10.1111/j.0963 -7214.2006.00425.x  
Nasreddine, Z.., Phillips, N.., Bedirian, V ., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., et al. (2005). The 
Montreal cognitive assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for mild cognitive im pairment. Journal of 
the Amer ican Geriatric Soc iety, 53, 695-699. 
New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. (2 003). Achieving the promise: Transforming mental health care 
in America. Final report  (Vol. DHHS Pub. SMA -03–3832). Rockville, MD: Author.  
BFI-CDA 7/2/21 
 
22 
 Ozer, E.  J., Best, S. R., Lipsey, T. L., & Weiss, D. S.  (2008). Predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and 
sympt oms in adults: A meta -analysis. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy , 
S(1), 3 –36. 
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing therapy for sexual assault  victims. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 60(5), 748 –756. http://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -006X.60.5.748  
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., … Dunbar, G. C. (1998). 
The Mini -Intern ational Neuropsych iatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of  a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 
59 Suppl 20 , 22–33;quiz 34 –57. 
Sherman, M . D. (2006). Updates and Five -year Evaluation o f the S.A.F.E. Program: A Family 
Psychoeducational Program for  Serious Mental Illness. Community Mental Health Journal , 42(2), 213 –
219. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10597 -005-9018 -3 
Slutsky, A. S., & Lavery, J. V. (2004). Data Safety and Monit oring Boards. New England Journal of Medicine , 
350(11), 1143 –1147. http://doi.or g/10.1056/NEJMsb033476  
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1994). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV— 
Patient editio n. New York: New York State P sychiatric Institu te, Biometrics Research Department.  
Spoont, M. R., Murdoch, M. , Hodges, J., & Nugent, S. (2010). Treatment receipt by veterans after a PTSD 
diagnosis in PTSD, mental health, or general medical clinics. Psychia tric Services , 61(1), 58 –63. 
Stewart, S. E., Be resin, C., Haddad, S., Stack, D. E., Fama, J., & Jenike, M. (2 008). Predictors of family 
accommodation in obsessive -compulsive disorder. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry , 20, 65–70. 
Straus, M.A., Hamby, S.L., Bon ey-McCoy, S., & Sugarman, D.B . (1996). The Revi sed Conflict Tactics Scale 
(CTS2): Development and preliminary  psychometric data. Journal of Family Issues, 17, 283-316. 
Swift, J. K., Greenberg, R. P., Whipple, J. L., & Kominiak, N. (2012). Practice recommen dations for reducing 
prematur e termination in t herapy. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice , 43(4), 379–387. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0028291  
Tarrier, N., Sommerfield, C., & Pilgrim, H. (1999). Relatives’ expressed emotion (EE) and PTSD treatment 
outcome. Psychological Medici ne, 29(04), 801 –811. 
Thompson -Hollands, J., Abramovitch, A., Tompson, M. C., & B arlow, D. H. (2015). A Randomized Clinical Trial 
of a Brief Family Intervention to Reduce Accommodation in Obsessive -Compulsive Disorder: A 
Prelimi nary Study. Behavior Therapy , 46(2), 218 –229. h ttp://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.11.001  
Thompson -Hollands, J. , Kerns, C. E., Pincus, D. B., & Comer, J. S. (2014). Parental accommodation of child 
anxiety and related symptoms: Range, impact, and correlates. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 28(8), 
765–773. h ttp://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.09.007  
Van Minnen, A., & Hagenaars, M.A. (2010). Avoidance behavior of patients with posttraumatic stress disorder: 
Initial development of a questionnaire, psychometric pro perties and treatment sensiti vity. Journal of 
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 41, 191-198. 
Veterans Health Administration. (2008). VHA Handbook 1160.01 . Washington D.C.: Author.  
Ware, J.E., & Sherbourne, C.D. (1992). The MOS 36 -Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -36): I. C onceptual 
framewor k and item selection. Medical Care, 30, 473-483. 
Wang, W., Lan e, M., Olfson, M., Pincus, H. A., Wells, K. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2005). Twelve -month use of 
mental health services in the united states: Results f rom the national comorbidity survey replication . 
Archives of General Psychiatry , 62(6), 629 –640. http://doi.o rg/10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.629  
Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013). The 
Clinician -Admi nistered PTSD Scale for DSM -5 (CAPS -5). Nationa l Center for PTSD, www.ptsd.va.gov.  
Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Huska, J. A., & Keane, T. M. (1994). The PTSD checklist -civilian version (PCL -C). 
Boston, MA: National Center for PTSD.  
Wechsler, D. (2001). Wechsler Test of Adult Reading:  WTAR.  Psychologic al Corportation.  
Wright, B. K., Kelsall, H. L., Sim, M. R., Cl arke, D. M., & Creamer, M. C. (2013). Support mechanisms and 
vulnerabilities in relation to PTSD in veterans of the Gulf War, Iraq War, and Afghani stan deployments: 
A systemati c review. Journal of Traumatic Stress , 26(3), 310 –318. http://doi.org/10.1002/jt s.21809  
 
 