Vtesse,  Inc. a Mallinckrodt  Pharmaceutical  Company  
Clinical Research 
Pr
otocol   
Version  2.0 
Protocol  Synopsis  for Parts  A/B 
Full protocol  to be disclosed  with Part C Results  
A Phase  2b/3 Prospective,  Randomized,  Double -Blind, Sham -Controlled  Trial  
of VTS -270 (2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with  Neurologic 
Manifestations of Niemann -Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
Protocol Number:  VTS301 
Version  Number:  – Version  2.0 
Version  Date:  18 October  2019 
Investigational Product:  VTS -270 (specific  and well-characterized  mixture  of 
2-hydroxypropyl- β-cyclodextrin [HP- β-CD])
IND Number:   
EudraCT Number:  2015- 002548- 15 
Development Phase:  2b/3 
Sponsor:  Vtesse,  Inc a Mallinckrodt  Pharmaceutical  Company 
1425 US Route 206 
Bedminster, NJ 07921 
Co-Principal  Investigator:  Name:   Telephone:  
Fax:  
E-mail: 
Co-Principal  Investigator  Name:   Telephone:  
Fax:  
E-mail:  
This confidential information about an investigational product is provided for the exclusive use of 
investigators  of this product  and is subject  to recall  at any time.  The information in this document may  not be 
disclosed unless federal or state law or regulations require such disclosure. Subject to the foregoing, this 
information may be disclosed only to those persons involved in the study who have a need to know, with the 
obligation not to further disseminate this information.  
NCT #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  17 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  5. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS
Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
Sponsor  Vtesse,  Inc a Mallinckrodt  Pharmaceutical  Company 
1425 US Route 206  
Bedminster,  NJ 07921 
Number  of Sites  Approximately 24 sites worldwide  
Study  Design  This is a multicenter,  multinational,  prospective,  randomized,  double -blind,  sham -controlled, 
3-part, efficacy  and safety  trial of VTS -270 administered  by the lumbar  intrathecal  (IT) route
every 2 weeks, with a planned enrollment of approximately 51 subjects (in Parts A and B)
with Niemann -Pick type C1 (NPC1)  disease.  The study will be conducted in 3 parts:  Parts  A,
B, and C.
Part A evaluated 3 different dose levels of VTS -270 versus sham control, administered as 4 
lumbar  IT injections  every  2 weeks,  to determine  the dose level  for Parts  B and C. A total of 
12 subjects were enrolled and have completed Part A.  
Part B will evaluate the safety and efficacy of the dose selected from Part A, 900 mg, 
comp ared with sham control in approximately 51 subjects, including the 12 subjects from 
Part A. Subjects  will receive treatment  with VTS -270 for up to 52 weeks  (inclusive  of Part 
A). Subjects who elect not to continue with Part C will have 26 weeks of follow -up. 
Part C will be an open -label extension phase of the study. Subjects who complete Part B, 
meet  the criteria  for dose reduction  for a second  time,  or meet  the rescue therapy  criteria  after 
6 months of participation in Part B are eligible to participate in Part C. Subjects who are currently active in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) phase 1 study (Protocol 13 -CH- 
0001) will  also be eligible to participate upon  completion  of their participation  in the phase 1 
study. Additionally, subjects who have received prior written authorization from Vtesse to enroll  directly  into Part C are eligible  to participate.  Part A and B subjects  who transition  into 
Part C will receive treatment with VTS- 270 until the investigator considers VTS -270 to no 
longer  be beneficial,  VTS -270 receives  marketing  authorization,  or the  development  program 
is discontinued. NIH phase 1/2a subjects who transition into Part C will receive treatment with VTS- 270 until the investigator considers VTS -270 to no longer be bene ficial to the 
subject, VTS- 270 receives marketing authorization, or the development program is 
discontinued.  
A European site -specific substudy will be conducted as part of the Part C study. This 
substudy will assess the safety and tolerability of the B. Braun Celsite
® Spinal Access Port 
System (hereafter generally referred to as the “device”) for the administration of VTS -270 
every 2 weeks. The device is CE marked in Europe and consists of a subdermal access port connected to a catheter that is positioned in the lumbar IT space. Given that VTS -270 does 
not penetrate the blood- brain barrier and requires IT administration, the ability to administer 
VTS -270 via the device will obviate  the need  for biweekly  lumbar  punctures  (LPs), as well as 
anesthesia, thereby removing a significant burden for subjects and site personnel. In this device safety and tolerability substudy, approximately 6 eligible Part C subjects who have 
received at least 3 lumbar IT doses (900 mg VTS -270) in Part C will und ergo baseline 
assessments approximately 3 days prior to implantation of the device (same day as their last 
administration of VTS- 270 via LP). The device will be implanted in the hospital, and the 
subject will remain in the hospital for 2 additional days post implantation. During the 3 -day 
confinement period (Day 1 surgery, Days 2 and 3), subjects will be given intravenous (IV) antibiotics, which are part of the routine implantation procedure.  
Subjects  entering  the European  site-specific  device safety  and tolerability  substudy will 
continue on their Part C schedule of  assessments but will have additional device safety  

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  18 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
evaluations. After a minimum of  2 weeks after placement of the device and confirmation of 
catheter patency, subjects will receive their VTS -270 dose via device infusion. Dosing will 
continue every 2 weeks for a total of 9 doses via the device. Specific evaluations will be 
conducted during  the treatment period to  assess device safety. These visits, designated Visit 
D1 through Visit D9, will occur at the same time as the subject’s Part C schedule. Where there is duplication of assessments with the Part C schedule, only 1 assessme nt will be 
conducted. Following 9 device infusions of VTS -270 and the specific device safety 
assessments conducted during the treatment period, subjects will either enter the device pharmacokinetic (PK)  substudy described  below  or will remain  in the main  Part C study and 
continue to receive VTS -270 via the device to evaluate its long- term safety  and tolerability.  
A European site -specific device PK substudy will also be conducted and include 
approximately 6 eligible subjects under Part C of the VTS301 study.  Eligible subjects will 
have completed the device safety  and tolerability substudy, i.e., received 9 consecutive doses 
of 900 mg VTS -270 via the device. In addition, after 6 subjects have completed the device 
safety  and tolerability  substudy,  subjects  in the main  Part C study who are  on a stable  dose of 
900 mg VTS -270 via LP and eligible for device insertion will be eligible to participate in the 
European site -specific device PK substudy. During a single dosing session using the device, 
blood and CSF samples will be collected just before VTS -270 infusion and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 
approximately  24, and approximately 30 hours after infusion. The 30- hour time point should 
be at least 6 hours after the 24 hour time point. Subjects who enter the device PK substudy from the main Part C study must receive at least 3 device infusions of 900 mg VTS -270 
before PK assessments are performed. Following the full PK assessment visit, subjects will continue  in the main  Part C study and have  CSF samples  collected  for measurement  of trough 
2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin (HP -β-CD) concentration prior to each subsequent device
infusion of VTS -270.
Dose  Reduction  The following  are guidelines  for which  dose reduction  on an individual  subject  basis  is 
allowed in Part B: 
Subjects  who,  in the opinion of the investigator,  experience a  drug- related  adverse event  (AE) 
after any blinded IT treatment that is considered clinically relevant and impactful to the 
subject’s function may have their dose reduced to 600 mg per IT administration for 
subsequent IT dosing intervals following discussion with the unblinded medical monitor. If, following dose reduction to 600 mg, a subject continues to experience AEs as described above, the subject’s dose may be further reduced to 400 mg per IT administration for subsequent dosing intervals following discussion with the unblinded medical monitor.  
If, following dose reduction to 400 mg, a subject continues to experience a drug- related 
clinically relevant AE, the dose is NOT to be reduced further and the subject is to be discontinued from Part B  of the study, being given the option to transition into Part C at a 
lower  dose,  based  on discussion  with the unblinded medical monitor  and on a case- by-case 
basis.  
During Part C, the same  guidelines  apply for dose reduction,  with each  subject  for whom  dose 
reduction is considered being individually reviewed with the medical monitor.  
Dose  
Re-Escalation  Under  specific  circumstances, and after discussion  with and approval  by the medical  monitor, 
an investigator may be allowed to re -escalate the dose for an individual study subject in Part  
C. If a subject has had his/her dose reduced and is in Part C on a tolerable dose, the subject
may be dose titrated  back  up (e.g., from  400 mg to 600 mg and from  600 mg to 900 mg)  to a
tolerable dose as determined by the investigator.
Rescue Option  Subjects  who are enrolled  in Part B and manifest  significant disease  progression according  to 
predefined clinical criteria after 26 weeks or more of treatment will have the option to enter  

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  19 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
Part C. The blinded medical monitor will notify the blinded Rescue Option Criteria 
Committee (ROCC). Alternatively, a blinded site clinician may contact the blinded medical 
monitor to request a blinded ROCC review if he/she feels the disease symptoms have progressed substantially since the beginning of the trial. If a subject still meets criteria for predefined worsening at the confirmatory visit, the ROCC will make a recommendation as to whether  the subject  has the option to enter  the open- label  extension study or to withdraw  from 
the program.  
Primary  Objective Part  A: 
The primary  study objective  in Part A was to select  the dose of  VTS -270 to be used in Part B 
and Part C. Dose selection criteria included safety and tolerability including a thorough audiologic evaluation. Preliminary efficacy data was provided to the Dose Selection Committee (DSC) to assist, if necessary, in dose selection.  
Part  B: 
The primary study objective in Part B is to evaluate, in a double -blind sham -controlled  
design,  the progression  of the neurologic manifestations  of NPC1 disease  following  52 weeks 
of treatment  for subjects  treated  with VTS -270 compared  to sham  control,  using the following 
assessments:  
•The NPC -SS composite  which  consists  of the sum of 4 components  of the
Niemann Pick Type C Severity Scale (NPC -SS): ambulation, fine motor,
cognition, and swallowing.
•The blinded Clinician -Global  Impression  of Change  (CGIC)
Part  C: 
The primary  study objective  in Part C is to evaluate the long-term safety,  tolerability,  and 
efficacy of VTS -270. 
Secondary 
Objectives  Part  A: 
There  are no secondary  objectives  for Part A. 
Part  B: 
The secondary objectives  for Part B are divided into 2 categories:  key secondary  objective 
and other secondary objectives.  
The key secondary objective for Part B is to evaluate the progression of the neurologic 
manifestations of  NPC1 disease using the total NPC -SS score, excluding the hearing domain 
and auditory  brainstem  response  (ABR)  modifier  results,  following  52 weeks  of treatmen t for 
subjects treated with VTS- 270 compared to sham controls and the Caregiver CGIC.  
Other  secondary  objectives  are to: 
1.Evaluate  the Safety  and Tolerability  of VTS -270 Administered  IT Via LP Every
2 Weeks, Compared to Sham Control
2.Assess  Quality  of Life Using  the EQ-5D-3L Following  52 Weeks  of Treatment
for Subjects Treated for  52 Weeks with VTS -270 Compared to Sham  Controls
3.Further  Assess the Efficacy  of VTS -270 on Treating  the Neurologic  Symptoms
of NPC1 by Comparing Subjects Treated for 52 Weeks with VTS -270
Compared to Sham Control on:
•Subjects  Who  Required  Rescue  Following  At Least  6 Months  of Treatment
•the 9 Major  Domains  of the NPC -SS
•the Total NPC -SS Score  (Hearing  Domain  and ABR Modifier  Included)
•Time  to a One Point  Increase (Worsening)  on the NPC -SS Composite  Score

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  20 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
•the Annualized  Rate of Change  (Slope)  of The NPC -SS Composite
•Timed  Up And Go (TUG)  Test
•9-Hole  Peg Test
Part  C: 
The secondary  study  objectives  in Part C are to: 
1.Assess  the safety  and tolerability  of the B. Braun  Celsite  Spinal  Access  Port
utilized to administer VTS- 270 (device safety and tolerability substudy).
2.Assess  the plasma  and CSF PK of VTS -270 and trough HP-β-CD concentration
in subjects receiving the 900 mg dose of VTS -270 via the B. Braun Celsite
Spinal Access Port (device PK substudy).
Exploratory 
Objectives  Part  A: 
There  are no exploratory objectives  for Part A. 
Part  B: 
The exploratory study objectives  in Part B are to: 
•Collect cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF),  urine,  and plasma  samples  from  the subjects
receiving  study drug, and urine and plasma samples from  subjects  randomized
to sham control, will be collected at prespecified intervals and stored for
exploratory biomarker analyses.
•Further  evaluate the efficacy  of VTS -270 on treating  the neurologic  symptoms
of NPC1 by comparing subjects treated with VTS -270 compared to sham
control on:
1.The composite  NPC -SS in completers.
2.The composite  NPC -SS outcome  assuming  data missing  at random  using a
standard multiple imputation model
3.The composite  NPC -SS using a pattern  mixture  model
4.Assigning individual  subject  changes  (+1 if improved,  0 if unchanged,  or -
1 if worse relative to baseline)
Part  C: 
There  are no exploratory  objectives  for Part C. 
Number  of 
Subjects  Approximately  51 in Parts  A and B. 
Part C may enroll  more  than 51 subjects.  
Approximately  6 in the device  safety  and tolerability  and device PK substudies.  
Subject  Selection 
Criteria  Parts A and B 
Inclusion  Criteria:  
Subjects  must  meet  the following  criteria  to be included:  
1.Male or female  subjects,  4 to 21 years  of age at time of  screening,  with onset  of
neurological symptoms prior to 15 years of age.
2.Diagnosis  of NPC1  determined  by one of the following:
a.Two NPC1  mutations;
b.Positive  filipin  staining  or oxysterol  testing  and at least one NPC1  mutation;
c.Vertical  supranuclear  gaze palsy  (VSNGP)  in combination with either:
i. One NPC1  mutation,  or
ii. Positive  filipin  staining  or oxysterol  levels  consistent  with NPC1
disease and no NPC2 mutations.

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  21 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
3.Subject  or parent/guardian  must  provide  written  informed consent  to participate
in the study. In addition to parental consent, assent to participate must also be
sought from minor children.
4.Ability  to undergo a LP and IT drug administration  under  monitored  anesthesia
care (conscious sedation) or if medically necessary, general anesthesia.
5.An NPC -SS score  of 0 through  4, inclusive,  on the cognition  component,  and 1
through 4 in two or more  of the following  components:  ambulation, fine motor
skills, or swallowing.
6.Total NPC -SS score  of 10 or greater.
7.Subjects with adequately controlled seizures may qualify for enrollment.
Subjects with a history of seizures should have a stable pattern of seizure
activity  and be on a stable  dose and regimen  of antiepileptic  medication  during
the 3 months prior to screening without change in dose or regimen up to and
including Study Day 0.
8.If taking miglustat, must have been on a stable dose for the past 6 to 8 weeksand be willing to remain on a stable dose for the duration of participation in
Parts A and B of the study. Alternatively, subjects may elect to discontinue
miglustat use and be eligible  for trial entry  after undergoing a minimum  6-week
washout period prior to Study Day 0.
9.Agree  to discontinue  all nonprescription supplements  such as coenzyme Q10,
curcumin , cinnamon, fish oil supplements, high- dose vitamin D
(> 500 mIU/day), N- acetylcysteine, acetylleucine, or gingko biloba  at least
1 month  prior  to first dose (Study Day 0). Note: Daily  administration  of an age- 
appropriate multivitamin is allowed.
10.Agree  to discontinue  any other  investigational treatments  for NPC  including,  for
example, vorinostat or arimoclomol at least 3 months prior to first dose (Study
Day 0).
11.Females  of childbearing potential (not surgically  sterile)  must  use a medically
acceptable method of contraception and must agree to continue use of this
method for the duration of the study and for 30 days after participation in the
study. Acceptable methods of contraception include barrier method withspermicide, intrauter ine device, steroidal contraceptive in conjunction with a
barrier method, or abstinence.
12.Subject  or caregiver  must  possess the ability,  per the investigator,  to understand
and comply with protocol requirements including clinical outcome
measurements and instructions for the entire duration of the study.
13.Caregiver, parent,  guardian  or responsible  adult  must  be able and willing  to
accompany the subject to study visits.
Exclusion  Criteria:  
Subjects  meeting  any of the following  criteria  are to be excluded:  
1.Exclusion criteria  as assessed  by NPC -SS:
a.Unable  to walk,  wheelchair  dependent  (ambulation  score  = 5).
b.Needs  a nasogastric  tube or gastric  tube for all feedings  (swallowing  score
= 5). Note: Nasogastric or gastric tube use for supplemental feeding or
medication  administration  is permitted  and will not exclude a subject  from
this trial.
c.Severe dysmetria  (fine  motor  score  = 5).
d.Minimal cognitive  function  (cognition  score  = 5).
2.Body weight  < 15 kg.

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  22 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
3.Prior treatment with IV 2 -hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD) for NPC1
disease, unless the subject has undergone a minimum 3- month washout period
prior to Study Day 0. Note: Any prior IT administration of HP -β-CD for the
treatment  of NPC1  disease  will exclude  a subject  from  enrollment.  Treatment  of
other medical conditions with drug preparations containing HP -β-CD as an
excipient (inactive ingredient) is acceptable and will not exclude a subject from
immediate entry into this trial (no washout period required).
4.Status  epilepticus  occurring within  3 months  of screening  and/or  seizure
frequency that cannot be quantified.
5.Subjects  on typical or atypical antipsychotics  for treatment  of psychosis. Note:
Use of antipsychotic  medication  for treatment of other  disorders  (e.g.,  attention
deficit hyperactivity  disorder) will not exclude a subject from this trial.
6.History  of hypersensitivity  reactions  to any product  containing HP-β-CD.
7.Prior  treatment  with any other  investigational product  within  3 months  prior  to
first dose (Study Day 0).
8.Female subjects  who are pregnant  or nursing.
9.Subjects  with suspected  infection  of the central  nervous  system  (CNS)  or any
systemic infection.
10.Spinal  deformity  that could  impact  the ability  to perform  a LP.
11.Skin infection  in the lumbar  region within  2 months  of study entry.
12.Neutropenia,  defined  as an absolute  neutrophil  count  (ANC)  of less than 1.5 ×
109/L.
13.Thrombocytopenia  (platelet count  less than 75 × 109/L).
14.Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) or prothrombin time (PT)
prolonged by greater  than 1.5 times  the upper  limit of normal  (ULN)  or known
history of a bleeding disorder.
15.Evidence  of obstructive  hydrocephalus  or normal  pressure  hydrocephalus.
16.Recent  use of anticoagulants  (in past 2 weeks  prior  to first dose [Study Day 0]).
17.Aspartate  aminotransferase (AST) or alanine  aminotransferase (ALT) greater
than 4 times the ULN.
18.Anemia:  hemoglobin more  than 2 standard  deviations  below  normal  for age and
gender.
19.Estimated  glomerular  filtration  rate (eGFR)  < 60 mL/minute/1.73m2 calculated
using the modified Schwartz formula (2009) for subjects aged 6 through
17 years  old or using the Chronic  Kidney Disease  Epidemiology Collaboration
(CKD -EPI) formula for subjects aged 18 years or older.
20.Active  pulmonary disease,  oxygen requiremen t, or clinically  significant history
of decreased blood oxygen saturation, pulmonary therapy, or requiring active
suction.
21.Subjects  who,  in the opinion of the investigator,  are unable to comply with the
protocol  or have medical  conditions  that would  potentially  increase the risk of
participation.
22.Life expectancy  less than 1 year.
Part  C 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1.Subject  has completed  Part B, meets  the criteria  for dose reduction  for a second
time or meets the criteria for the rescue option
OR

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  23 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
2.Subject  is a current  participant  in the NIH phase  1/2a open- label  study and:
a.Subject  agrees  to convert  from  the dose of VTS -270 currently  receiving  as a
subject  in the NIH phase 1/2a protocol  to the dose chosen for Parts  B and C
of this study, 900 mg;
b.Subject  agrees  to convert  from  the monthly dosing regimen  used in the NIH
phase 1/2a protocol to an every 2- week dosing regimen.
c.In instances  where  NIH phase  1/2a subjects  eligible  to enroll  into Part C  are
unable to convert from their current NIH phase 1/2a dose or monthly
regimen, the investigator must receive prior written authorization from thesponsor for the subject to enter Part C of the study on an amended doseand/or regimen.
OR
3.Subject  has received  prior  written  authorization  from  Vtesse  to enroll  directly
into Part C.
4.Females  of childbearing potential (not surgically  sterile)  must  use a medically
acceptable method of contraception and must agree to continue use of this
method for the duration of the study and for 30 days after participation in the
study. Acceptable methods of contraception include barrier method withspermicide, intrauterine device, steroidal contraceptive in conjunction with a
barrier method, abstinence, or same- sex p artner.
5.Subject  or parent/guardian  must  provide  written  informed consent  to participate
in the study. In addition to parental consent, assent to participate must also be
sought from minor children.
Subject  Inclusion Criteria  for European Site-Specific  Devi ce Safety  and Tolerability 
Substudy  
The European  site-specific  device  safety  and tolerability  substudy will evaluate 
approximately 6 subjects who are currently enrolled in VTS301 Part C.  
A subject  must  meet  all the following  inclusion  criteria  to be eligible  to enroll  in the 
substudy:  
1.Subject  must  be enrolled  in Study VTS301  Part C.
2.Subject  must  have  received  a minimum  of 3 doses  of VTS -270 (900 mg each)  in
Part C of Protocol VTS301 (frequency of every 2 weeks) and be on a stable
dose to be eligible for device placement.
3.Subject  or parent/guardian  must  provide  written  informed consent  to participate
in the study. In addition to parental consent, assent to participate must also be
sought from minor children.
4.Females  of childbearing potential ( not surgically  sterile)  must  use a medically
acceptable method of contraception and must agree to continue use of thismethod for the duration of the study and for 30 days after participation in the
study. Acceptable methods of contraception include barrie r method with
spermicide, intrauterine device, steroidal contraceptive in conjunction with a
barrier method, abstinence, or same- sex partner.
5.Subject or caregiver must possess the ability, in the judgment of theinvestigator,  to understand and comply with protocol  requirements,  including
clinical outcome  measurements  and instructions,  for the entire  duration of the
study.
6.Caregiver, parent,  guardian,  or responsible  adult  must  be able and willing  to
accompany the subject to study visits.

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  24 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  for the European  Site-Specific  Device  Safety  and Tolerability 
Substudy  
The presence of any of the following excludes  a subject  from  substudy enrollment: 
1.Musculoskeletal/spinal abnormality  or other  anatomic  abnormality  identified  by
symptoms, history, physical/neurological examination, and/or imaging studies
that would impact placement and patency of the device (port and catheter).
2.Skin infection  in the lumbar  or abdominal  region within  3 months  prior  to
device placement.
3.Subjects  who,  in the opinion of the investigator,  are unable  to comply with the
protocol  or have disease severity  or medical conditions that would potentially
increase the risk of participation or confound study results.
4.Subjects  with suspected  or confirmed  infection  of the CNS  or any systemic
infection.
5.Absolute  neutrophil  count  less than 1.5 × 109/L.
6.Platelet count  less than 100 × 109/L.
7.aPTT  or PT greater  than 1.5 times  the ULN or known  history  of a bleeding
disorder.
8.Requirement  for anticoagulation  therapy.
9.Evidence  of obstructive  hydrocephalus  or normal  pressure  hydrocephalus  based
on symptoms, history, and physical/neurological examination, or elevated
intracranial pressure (ICP; opening ICP > 25.0 cm H 2O).
10.AST  or ALT  greater  than 4 times  the ULN,  or total bilirubin  greater  than 2
times ULN.
11.Anemia:  hemoglobin more  than 2 standard  deviations  below  normal  for age and
gender.
12.eGFR  less than 60 mL/minute/1.73 m2 calculated  using the modified  Schwartz
formula (2009) for subjects aged 4 through 17 years or using the CKD -EPI
formula for subjects aged 18 years or older.
13.Active  pulmonary disease,  oxygen requirement, or clinically  significant history
of decreased blood oxygen saturation, pulmonary therapy, or requiring active
suction.
14.Hypersensitivity  to any materials  contained  in the device port or catheter.
15.Subjects  with a CNS  shunt.
16.Prior  radiation  therapy to the area for device  placement.
17.Expected  need  for magnetic  resonance  imaging  during participation  in the study,
with exception of the following allowable conditions for safe scanning
immediately after device placement:
a.Static  magnetic  field of 3 Tesla  and 1.5 Tesla
b.Maximum  spatial gradient  magnetic  field of 710 Gauss/cm  or less
c.Maximum  whole  body averaged  specific  absorption rate of 2.9 W/kg for 15
minutes of scanning
Subject  Inclusion Criteria  for the European Site-Specific  Device Pharmacokinetic  (PK) 
Substudy  
A subject  must  meet  the following  inclusion  criteria  to be eligible  to enroll  in the device  PK 
substudy:  
1.Subject  has completed  the device safety  and tolerability  substudy and received  9
consecutive doses of 900 mg VTS -270 via the device

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  25 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
Or 
2.After  6 subjects  have  completed  the device  safety  and tolerability  substudy,
subjects  in the main  Part C study  who are receiving  a stable  dose of 900 mg
VTS -270 via LP and are eligible for device implantation per the above
eligibility criteria for the device safety and tolerability substudy.
3.Subject  or parent/guardian  must  provide  written  informed consent  to participate
in the study. In addition to pare ntal consent, assent to participate must also be
sought from minor children.
Test and Control 
Product, Dose, 
and Route of Administration  VTS -270 will be provided in appropriately labeled vials, formulated as a 200 mg/mL 
injectable solution. An unblinded pharmacist/designee at each investigational site will be responsible  for dispensing or preparing  the assigned  dosage  of 900 mg for administration  in 
4.5 mL. In the case of dose reduction,  the 600 mg dose is administered  in 3 mL  and the 400 
mg dose is administered in 2 mL.  
VTS -270 Administration  via Lumbar  Puncture  and Sham  Lumbar  Puncture  
In Part A, VTS -270 administration via LP and sham will be performed every 2 weeks for 4 
administrations.  In Part B, VTS -270 administration  via LP and sham  will be performed  every 
2 weeks for 52 weeks. In Part C, VTS -270 will be administered via LP or the device every 2 
weeks. Instructions for administration via the device are presented in the following subsection.  
The LP and/or  sham  is to be performed  under monitored anesthesia  care (conscious  sedation) 
with an appropriate  oral or IV agent  and performed  by an unblinded study  physician.  General 
anesthesia will be allowed on a case- by-case basis, following discussion with the medical 
monitor, in those subjects for whom a medical condition necessitates it.  
Parents/caregivers  will not be present  in the room  during lumbar  IT or sham  treatment. Thus, 
the subject and the parent will be blinded to treatment, the  former a consequence of 
anesthesia.  
The sham procedure will consist of 1 to 2 small needle pricks on the lower back at the 
location where the LP and IT injection is normally made. The needle(s) will break the skin but no lumbar puncture or needle insertion will occur. The needle prick(s) will be covered with the same bandage that is used to cover the IT injection normally, thus simulating the appearance of an IT LP injection. To maintain the blind, a similar type of anesthesia, 
sedation, or minimal  sedation (e.g., a low  dose of an anxiolytic) should be used for the sham 
procedure as for the subject receiving study drug, following institutional procedures. The 
subject  will be kept in the procedure  room  for approximately 30 minutes,  simulating  the same 
amount of time that subjects administered study drug are kept for administration procedure.  
VTS -270 will be administered as an IT slow  bolus (1 to 2 minutes, depending on the volume 
administered) LP injection (maximum rate of administration = 4.5 mL/minute). The volume of the injection  is determined by the dose group. Prior to the VTS -270 injection, a volume of 
CSF fluid  approximately equal  to the VTS -270 dose is to be removed. Anesthesia  or sedation 
will be used for the IT dosing procedure, following institutional guidelines and procedures.  
All subjects, sham and study drug, are required to lie flat with feet elevated for 30 to 45 minutes  following  dosing. For  the 3 days following  each procedure, subjects  in both the sham 
and active treatment groups are to avoid acoustic overstimulation and minimize exposure to 
loud noises, e.g., headphones for music or video games.  
Device Administration  (European  Site-Specific  Device Safety  and Tolerability  Substudy,  
Part C)  

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  26 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
VTS -270 administration via the device will be conducted every 2 weeks. There are no 
adjustments for weight or subject age. The device area will be prepared for sterile 
manipulation following standard site procedures. Cerebrospinal fluid will be withdrawn through the port of the device. The first 1 mL  will be discarded, and then at least 3 mL  will be 
collected for clinical laboratory tests (approximately 2 mL) and VTS -270 concentration 
(approximately  1-2 mL).  The volume  of CSF to be removed should be approximately equal  to 
that being administered. VTS -270 will be administered as a slow bolus over 1 to 2 minutes 
with a maximum rate of infusion of 4.5 mL/minute. Non- coring needles adapted for use with 
the device  should be  used.  Normal  hypodermic  needles will damage the port septum and may 
cause leakage of the system or blockage due to small silicone particles from the septum.  
Subjects  are to receive the same  dose of VTS -270 administered  during Study VTS301 Part C 
by IT LP.  
Following  the infusion of VTS -270, the system  should be flushed  with 1.5 mL of 
preservative- free 0.9%  saline  solution.  For 30 to 45 minutes  following  dosing,  subjects  should 
lie flat with feet elevated.  
Duration of Subject Participation and Duration  of Study  Parts  A and B 
Total duration  of subject  participation  in Parts  A and/or  B will be approximately 58 weeks,  to 
include a screening period of up to 45 days (maximum), and 52 weeks of serial IT injections or sham control procedures given on a 2- week cycle. An additional 26 weeks of post - 
treatment f ollow -up will be included for any subject who elects not to participate in Part C, 
for a total of 84 weeks.  
Below  is a summary  of the duration  of Part A and B: 
•Up to 45 days screening
•Up to 8 weeks  in Part A 
•Up to 52 weeks  of dosing,  inclusive  of the 8 weeks  for subjects  from  Part A, for
subjects enrolled in Part B.
•Up to 26 weeks  of follow -up for Part B subjects  who elect not  to participate  in
Part C.
Part  C 
Part C is an open- label  extension.  The total duration  of subject  participation  is until the 
investigator  considers  VTS -270 to no longer  be beneficial  to the subject,  VTS -270 receives 
marketing authorization, or the development program is discontinued.  
Efficacy  Evaluations  
Primary  Endpoint  Part  B: 
The co-primary  efficacy  analysis  will be based  on: 
•Change  from  baseline  in NPC -SS composite  score  at Week  52 in the group
treated with VTS- 270 vs. the sham control group.
•Blinded  Clinician  CGIC at Week  52 in the group  treated  with VTS -270 vs the
sham  control  group.
Secondary 
Endpoints  Part  B: 
The secondary outcomes  for Part B are divided into 2 categories: Key  secondary  outcome  and 
other secondary outcomes.  
The key secondary  e ndpoints  are 
•Change from baseline at Week 52 in the total NPC –SS score with the hearing
domain and ABR modifiers  removed in the group  treated  with VTS -270 vs. the
sham  control  group.

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  27 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
•Proportion of Caregiver CGIC responders (defined as a score of no change,
minimally  improved,  moderately  improved or markedly improved)  at Week  52
in the group treated with VTS -270 vs. the sham control group.
Other  (non-key) secondary endpoints:  
•Summary  of AEs,  concomitant  medications,  physical  examinations,  audiologic
examination, and clinical laboratories
•Change  from  baseline  in the EQ-5D-3L questionnaire  at Week  52
•Proportion  of subjects  in each group,  treated  for at least 6 months  who qualified
for the rescue option.
•Change  from  baseline  to Week  52 in each of the 9  clinical domains  of the NPC - 
SS
•Change  from  baseline  to Week  52 in the total NPC -SS with hearing  domain  and
ABR modifier included
•Time  to one point  increase (worsening)  in NPC -SS composite  score
•The composite  NPC -SS mean  annualized  rate of change (slope) from  baseline  to
Week 52
•Change  from  baseline  in the TUG  test at Week  52
•Change  from  baseline  in the 9-hole peg test at Week  52
Part  C: 
•The change  from  baseline  to each assessment  in a composite  outcome  that is the
sum of the ambulation, cognition, fine motor, and swallowing components ofthe NPC -SS
•The change  from  baseline  to each assessment  in total NPC -SS with the hearing
domain and ABR modifiers removed
•Proportion  of responders  (defined  as no change  or improvement  on NPC -SS
total score with hearing domain and ABR modifiers removed) at each
assessment
•Proportion of Blinded Clinician -CGIC responders (defined as a score of no
change,  minimally  improved,  moderately  improved,  or markedly  improved)  at
each assessment compared to baseline
•Summary  of AEs,  concomitant  medications,  physical  examinations,  audiologic
examination, and clinical laboratories
•Change  from  baseline  in the EQ-5D-3L questionnaire  at each assessment
•Change  from  baseline  to each assessment  in each of the 9 clinical  domains  of
the NPC -SS
•Change  from  baseline  to each assessment  in the total NPC -SS with hearing
domain and ABR modifier included
•Time  to one point  increase (worsening)  in NPC -SS composite  score
The composite  NPC -SS mean  annualized  rate of change (slope)  from  baseline
to each assessment
Other  Evaluations  •CSF,  urine,  and plasma  protein (e.g., calbindin D) biomarkers
•CSF and plasma  sterol  biomarkers
•Gene and protein  expression
Safety  Evaluations  •AEs
•Audiologic  testing

VTS-270 Solution for Injection 
Protocol VTS
-270-301  
Page  28 of 136 
Confidential  and Proprietary  Title  A Phase  2b/3 Prospective, Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Sham - Controlled  Trial  of VTS -270 
(2-hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin)  in Subjects  with Neurologic  Manifestations  of Niemann - 
Pick Type C1 (NPC1) Disease  
•Clinical laboratory tests (hematology,  chemistry,  coagulation,  urinalysis)
•Vital signs
•Physical  and neurological  examinations
•Electrocardiograms  (ECGs)
•Wound check  / port and catheter  track  check  for device safety  and tolerability
•Intracranial  pressure  via LP for subjects  with device
•CSF routine  laboratory tests for subjects  with device
Statistics  
Primary  Analysis 
Plan Analysis  populations:  
The intent -to-treat (ITT) population will include all randomized subjects categorized by  their 
randomized treatment assignment. The modified intent -to-treat (mITT) population will 
consist of all randomized subjects who received at least one dose of VTS -270 infusion or 
sham control. The primary population for the primary efficacy assessment will be the mITT. 
The per -protocol (PP) population will consist of all randomized subjects who had no major 
protocol deviation that would have had an impact on the primary outcome and who received 
at least 75% of their scheduled VTS -270 IT administrations. The safety population will also 
consist of  all randomized subjects who receive at least one dose of  VTS -270 or  sham  control. 
The European  site-specific  device safety  population  will consist  of all subjects  who receive  at 
least 1 dose of VTS -270 via the device.  The PK population will consist  of subjects  enrolled  in 
the device PK substudy and whose plasma and/or CSF drug concentrations will provide at 
least 1 of  the PK parameters of  interest. Subjects in  the PK population will be used for all PK 
data summaries. 
Primary  outcome  measure:  
The co -primary efficacy endpoints are the change from baseline in NPC -SS composite score 
(sum  of the ambulation,  cognition,  fine motor, and swallowing  components  of the NPC -SS) at 
Week 52 and the blinded Clinician CGIC at Week 52.  
The NPC -SS composite score is  the sum of the ambulation, cognition, fine motor, and 
swallowing  domains  of the NPC -SS. For the primary  efficacy  analysis,  any missing  Week  52 
assessments will be imputed.  Subjects who take the rescue option will be considered 
dropouts and will need to have their missing Week 52 assessment imputed.  
The Clinician  CGIC is a 7-point Likert scale. The scale requires  assessment  of change from  a 
baseline level of disease activity, with anchors ranging from markedly improved, moderate ly 
improved, and minimally improved to no change and corresponding worsening (minimally, 
moderately, markedly). The analysis of the blinded Clinician CGIC at Week 52 will be conducted using the nonparametric Van Elteren method to test for the treatment eff ect using 
study part as a blocking variable. Average  ranks  will be assigned when there  are ties within  a 
block.  Missing Week 52 assessments will be imputed.  
Analysis  of secondary  endpoints:  
The following key secondary endpoints comparing subjects treated w ith VTS- 270 with the 
sham  controls  will be analyzed  using a hierarchical  testing,  serial  gatekeeping  strategy  based 
on the mITT population.  
•The change  from  baseline  to Week  52 in total NPC -SS with the hearing domain
and ABR modifiers removed.
•Proportion of Caregiver  CGIC responders  (defined  as a score  of no change,
minimally  improved,  moderately  improved  or markedly  improved)  at Week  52.
