Signed copy on file at IRB                v. 02/26 /19 New York State Psychiatric Institute  
Institutional Review Board  
 
September 3 , 2021  
 
To:  Dr. Ronit Kishon  
From :  Dr. Edward Nunes, Co -Chair  
  Dr. Agnes Whitaker, Co -Chair      
Subject : Approval Notice *: Continuation  
 
Your p rotocol # 6806R  entitled: PSYCHOLOGICAL MINDEDNESS AS A PREDICTOR OF COGNITIVE 
BEHAVIOR THERAPY OUTCOME (FORMERLY #5768)  Protocol version date 09/03 /2021 and consent 
forms have been approved by the New York State Psychiatric Institute - Columbia University 
Department of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board from September 9 , 2021 to September 8 , 
2022. (Reviewed at the Full Board meeting on August 23 , 2021.) 
 
Consent requirements:  
      Not applicable:  
    45CFR46.11 6 (f)(3) waiver  of consent  
     √  Signature by the person(s) obtaining consent is required to document the consent process  
      Documentation of an independent assessment of the participant’s  capacity to consent is also 
required.  
Approved for recruitment of subjects who lack capacity to consent : √ No  Yes     
 
Field Monitoring Requirements:  √ Routine  Special: ___________________  
 
 
  Only copies of consent documents that are currently approved by the IRB may be used to obtain 
consent for participation in this study.  
  A progress report and application for continuing review is required 2 months prior to the 
expiration date of IRB app roval.  
  Changes to this research may not be initiated without the review and approval of the IRB except 
when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to participants.  
  All serious and/or unanticipated problems or events involving risks to subjects or others must be 
reported immediately to the IRB.  Please refer to the PI -IRB website at http://irb.nyspi.org  for 
Adverse Event Reporting Procedures and additional reporting requirements.    
 
*Approved under 45CFR46.204  
 
Cc: RFMH Business Office (NIMH 1R21 MH121915 -01A1 ) 
 
Encl:   CF, recruitment materials, HIPAA  
 
 
EN/AHW/alw  
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 1 of 21
Protocol Title:
Psychological Mindedness as a Predictor  of 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy Outcome (formerly #5768)
Protocol Number:
6806R
First Approval:
09/10/2013
Expiration Date:
09/08/2022Version Date:
09/03/2021
Contact Principal Investigator:
Ronit Kishon, PHD
Email: kishonr@nyspi.columbia.edu
Telephone: 646 774 8030Co-Investigator(s):
Jurgen Kayser, PHD
Maren Westphal,  PHD
Research Chief:
B. Timothy  Walsh,  MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Department & Unaffiliated Personnel
Department
What Department does the PI belong to?Clinical TherapeuticsWithin the department, what Center  or group are  you affiliated with,  if any? 
Depression Evaluation Services
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 2 of 21
None 
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
Subject enrollment is  ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.The first 3 months,  we were challenged by COVID, and recruitment was sparse; however,  after  6 months, 
we were actively  recruiting patients  as expected.  Patients come to  PI only for  blood work and  EEG tests at  
baseline and  the end  of the study.  Therefore,  they  come to PI  only  3 times during  the study and are not  at 
risk besides the usual risk of being currently going outside  due to  COVID.  In addition, they receive  12 CBT 
sessions on Zoom, and they fill the  self-report  measure on RedCap. These procedures are running  well and 
seem to  be as  effective  as they were when done in person. We are looking forward  to continuing another 
year of the R21.
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator and other investigators made all required disclosures of financial  interest  in 
the study sponsor/product?Yes
Summary
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
NoHave there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
YesIs the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 3 of 21
No
Overall Progress
Approved sample size150Total number  of participants enrolled to date
124Number of participants  who  have completed the study to date 
116Have there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? NoComments / additional information 
Sample Demographics
Specify population18-70Total number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
126Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown 
Adults White 
(not Hispanic origin) Black
(not Hispanic origin) Hispanic Asian or Pacific Islander
American Indian/Alaskan
Nativeother Total
Female 53 4 5 6 0 2 72
Male 37 6 5 6 0 0 54
Total 92 10 10 12 0 2 126
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out  
Number of participants  who  signed consent  in the past year
16Number of participants  currently enrolled
10Did the investigator  withdraw participants from the study? 
NoDid participants  decide  to discontinue study involvement? 
No
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 4 of 21
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Neuropsychological Evaluation
   Psychotherapy Trial
   Audio or Videotaping
   Internet-based Data Collection  or Transmission
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Pregnant Woman
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNIMHGrant NameR21Grant Number1R21MH121915 - 01A1Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness Office
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 5 of 21
RFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
This protocol  describes research conducted  by the  PI at other facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
      Psychological Mindedness  (PM) is viewed as the ability and  motivation to  achieve a psychological 
understanding of the self. A person is considered  to be  psychologically  minded  if she or he can access their 
feelings, is  willing  to try and understand oneself  and others, and  has an interest in the meaning and 
motivation of his  or her own  and others’  behavior.  Historically, interest in  PM grew out  of attempts  to 
identify patients best  suited for psychoanalytically  oriented psychotherapy. There has been limited attention 
regarding its potential impact on other therapeutic approaches. In recent years different  theorists  (Conte, 
Ratto, and  Karusa, 1996; Grant, 2001) have noted that PM may have particular relevance for cognitive  
behavioral therapy (CBT) because PM  includes self-monitoring and self-evaluation of one’s cognitions,  
emotions, and  behaviors which are central to the successful practice of CBT. This study aims to see if  PM is 
a component in the mechanism  of change that is activated in CBT treatment for depression. As such, it may 
be related to change of symptoms during CBT, and at post-treatment. Mindfulness is another  construct of 
self-awareness that is related to PM and yet distinct. We are studying  to see its role  in CBT for  depression,  
and its  relationship with PM. We  will be administrating a  few self-report  measures of PM that have been 
used in other studies. We will also begin validating  a structured interview of PM that we created in our 
lab. We also measure other  concepts  found to be  related  to PM and  mindfulness, rumination, alexithymia, 
and self-compassion. 
Our studies  and those of other researchers have  found  evidence  that pretreatment resting EEG, event-related  
brain potentials (ERPs), and performance on neurocognitive tests show  promise  of being predictors of 
subsequent clinical response  to antidepressants or CBT.  However, the  extent to  which these tests  predict 
response to specific treatments for depression  or the mechanisms underlying  successful response to CBT is  
not known. We propose to test depressed patients before they begin a  treatment  study as well as after 
treatment (pre-post design) to confirm the value  of resting EEG,  ERPs,  dichotic listening, and  
neuropsychological tests for predicting treatment  response in  MDD. Patients  will be randomized between 12 
sessions of CBT  and a  control condition of non-specific supportive therapy for 12 weeks so  to match  the 
experimental condition of CBT with respect to receiving support by a  professional,  creating an  alliance  with 
the therapist, length of sessions, and duration of  treatment.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 6 of 21
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Depression is one  of the most common psychiatric conditions in the United States. It is a  chronic and 
disabling disorder associated with substantial impairment, decreased quality of life, and  psychiatric 
comorbidity. The two standard treatments for depression are  pharmacotherapy  and cognitive behavior  
therapy (CBT). Both  treatment modalities are similar in that they are only moderately  effective, with a  large  
proportion of patients  remaining symptomatic  after the initial intervention. Possibly the primary reason for 
the substantial individual  differences in treatment  responsiveness is  heterogeneity  within current psychiatric 
disease categories, which  are present  at all levels (i.e.genetic, neurobiological,  and psychological levels) 
(Hollon et al., 2006). In  the present  study, we measure the changes in  self-awareness and specific 
biomarkers through 12 weeks of CBT for depression and a  control condition of 12 weeks of 
psychoeducation for  depression. Psychological mindedness (PM), an aspect of self-awareness, has long  
been considered to be an  essential psychological mediator for therapy outcome. Through the history of  
clinical psychology, PM was mostly  used  intuitively by clinicians  to evaluate the psychotherapy process, 
and more  specifically, in predicting  a patient’s ability and  motivation in psychotherapy (Farber & Golden, 
1977). However, most  definitions and measures of PM have approached the task from  a psychodynamic 
perspective, thus limiting the use  of this construct  by clinicians and  researchers  from evidence-based 
psychological perspectives, such as CBT (Grant 2001). Two measures presently being used in  studies, the 
Psychological Mindedness  Scale (PMS) (Conte, Ratto, &  Karasu  1996), and  the more recent  measure,  
Balanced Index  of Psychological Mindedness (BIPM) (Nyklíček &  Denollet,  2009), have shown some 
predictive value in different  studies of treatment  in mentally ill patients.  They have not though  been 
thoroughly investigated as  predictors  in evidence-based psychotherapies  such  as CBT for depression. A 
third measure, the  Self-Reflection Index Scale (SRIS; Grant, Franklin, &  Langfirm) is an  evolved form of 
the Private Self- Consciousness Scale  (PrSCS;  Fenigstein, Scheier, &  Buss, 1975) which is another  method  
to assess PM, and also recommended  in RDoC  as a measure of self- knowledge. SRIS is compromised of 
two separate factors labeled Self-Reflection (SRIS-SR) and Insight  (SRIS-IN) which are parts of self-  
awareness but differently correlate with depression:  in studies,  the SRIS-SR  correlated positively with 
anxiety and stress, but  not with depression  and alexithymia.  The SRISIN was negatively correlated with  
depression, anxiety, stress, and alexithymia, and positively correlated with cognitive flexibility and  self-
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 7 of 21
regulation (Grant at  el. 2002). In addition to PM we examine other  concepts  that relate to  self-awareness so 
to capture  the whole spectrum  of one's ability and will to  observe oneself. Mindfulness has been found  to 
relate to  the construct of PM in a nonclinical sample (Beitel, Ferrer, & Cecero, 2005), yet no study has 
examined its relationship with PM in a clinical sample despite a  growing body of research  supporting  the 
role of mindfulness in facilitating clinical improvement in CBT. We measure facets of  mindfulness that  are 
particularly relevant to PM  and examine  their  interactions and relative contribution  to predicting  CBT  
outcomes in depressed patients. We  added  a rumination measure because it is a core process in the 
development and maintenance of depression.  Consistent  with research indicating  a distinction  between 
rumination as a  maladaptive form of  self-attentiveness, and reflection  as an adaptive intellectual form  of 
self-attentiveness thought to underlie PM (Trapnell &  Campbell,  1999), we examine the added  value  of the 
level of rumination in predicting  CBT  outcome and its longitudinal relationship with  PM through the CBT. 
Another important  construct that has  been lately related to different forms of self-awareness and self-
observation is self-compassion (Neff, 2003). This is a third construct that  may  be important for 
understanding the  proposed relationship  between  increases in  PM and symptomatic improvement in 
depression throughout treatment. There is increasing evidence that  self-compassion is a robust predictor of 
lower psychopathology (for reviews,  see Barnard & Curry, 2011; MacBeth &  Gumley, 2012). A  recent 
controlled treatment study suggests that self-compassion is a  particularly  salutary  form of emotion 
regulation in individuals with high levels of depressed mood  (Diedrich,  Grant,  Hofmann, Hiller, &Berking, 
2014). To our knowledge, no published research has yet examined  the relation  between PM and self- 
compassion. Individuals high in PM may be  more likely to  develop greater self-compassion  throughout 
CBT treatment as  PM taps qualities that  may be essential to  developing self-compassion. We examine 
potential interaction  effects for self-compassion  and PM in the  prediction  of depression levels pre and  post 
CBT treatment, for example, PM-related symptomatic improvement in  depression may be more pronounced 
for individuals  scoring  high  in self-compassion.  Studies have found evidence  that pre-treatment resting 
EEG, event-related  brain  potentials (ERPs), and performance on neurocognitive tests  show promise of being 
predictors of  subsequent clinical response  to antidepressants or  CBT (Bruder, Kayser, & Tenke,  2012). 
However, the extent to which these tests predict response to specific treatments for depression or the mechanisms underlying successful  response to CBT are not  known.  We propose  to test depressed patients, 
under Dr. Kayser's protocol  (#6559) before they begin a treatment study, both in  the CBT  condition and  
control condition, as well as after treatment  (pre-post design) to  confirm the value of resting EEG, ERPs, 
dichotic listening, and neuropsychological tests for  predicting treatment response in  MDD.  Patients  are 
retested after the  successful completion  of CBT, which will take  12 weeks  and at the  end of 
psychoeducation treatment (12 weeks).  The development of biomarkers for predicting treatment response 
would be important for personalizing  treatment in depression (i.e., determining who  will and  who will not 
respond to CBT).
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
Study aims:  (1) to examine whether  pre-treatment PM scores predict the  reduction of depressive symptoms 
at the end of treatments,  (2) to determine whether an increase in  PM during  therapy is associated with a  
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 8 of 21
decrease in symptom levels during 12 weeks  in both treatments (3) to  examine the relationship  between  PM 
and conceptually  related and distinct concepts: self-reflection,  insight, rumination, mindfulness, and self-
compassion, and if and how they are related to a reduction  of symptoms in  CBT  and in the control 
condition, (4) to obtain  neurocognitive and electrophysiologic (EEG and ERP) measures so as to  further 
evaluate hypotheses  that depressive disorders involve abnormalities of frontal and  temporoparietal  function 
(Dr. Jürgen Kayser's protocol  (#6559); (5) to evaluate the prediction that  treatment with  CBT will result in  
acute and chronic  changes  in neurocognitive,  EEG and ERP  measures; (6) measures  of left hemisphere 
processing will be  predictive of clinical response to cognitive behavioral  therapy; (7) to evaluate any 
interactions between psychological  measures  and brain  variables  in predicting change in  symptoms during 
treatments.
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Adults who  suffer from  depression
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
130Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
150Age range of subject  population
18 to 70
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Gender breakdown:  60% Female/40% Male
  
Ethnicity breakdown: The composition of  the sample is  likely  to be 10% non-Hispanic African American,  
30% Hispanic/Latino,  5% other minority, and  55% non-Hispanic white.
 
Description of subject populationThis pilot study will  enroll 150 subjects between  the ages of 18 and  70 with  primary DSM-V-TR diagnosis 
of major depression.
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 9 of 21
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Recruitment will  occur  via referral  from  other mental health care professionals and physicians, and  via self-
referral prompted by advertising. 
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
A DES research  assistant will  conduct a 20-minute  telephone screening interview, performed under the 
DES'#6669R to determine likely diagnostic  suitability.  It includes subject's  name, address, demographic 
information, source of referral, presenting problem,  psychiatric history, past treatment, social history,  family 
history, medical  history, mental status, provisional diagnosis, and  disposition.  Potentially eligible 
participants will  be invited to the DES Clinic at  NYSPI for a psychiatric intake evaluation and structured 
clinical interview,  which  will be performed  under  the DES’s Consent  # 6669R. Informed consent will be 
obtained prior  to any procedure  after a subject has  been found qualified both medically and diagnostically to 
participate. A full explanation of  all research  procedures, risks,  benefits, and  rights  of the subject will be  
given before proceeding. Recruitment to this protocol will be restricted to  those  who enroll in protocol  
#6559. Participansts in  this study will need need to have EEG measures  (#6559)  before 12 sessions of 
CBT and control  group,   and at the end of of the 12 weeks.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Online advertisements  will be placed on websites that may include RecruitMe  (recruit.cumc.columbia.edu, 
a  CU research site aimed at aiding recruitment  of study  participants),  Craigslist,  in sections including 
volunteers, gigs, and  jobs, Google  AdWords, Facebook, Research Match, academic  listserv, radio, and  
others. We will  advertise  this study to Columbia-affiliated clinicians  on the Columbia University 
PsychoPharmacology (CUPP) list-serve. We will approve through  the IRB any future advertisement 
material.  
 
 
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
YesDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED],
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
Yes
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 10 of 21
Describe concurrent research  involvement
Patients recruited for current protocol will also  participate in  protocol  # 6559R.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sampleDepressed adultsCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
Males or females between  ages  18-70 (inclusive)      Screening interview
 
Primary diagnosis of  Major Depression                     SCID and clinical review
 
Beck Depression Inventory                                         BDI  ≥13 BDI
 
Hamilton Rating Scale for  Depression                        HRSD ≥ 14
 
Participation in protocol #6559 
 
No psychotropic medication or over-the-counter 
antidepressant for  at least  one month  prior  to recruitment
and three months  for fluoxetine.                               Clinical interview
 
Ability to give inform  consent                                   Interview, the capacity  to consent
 
Fluent in English Intake interview                             Self-Report
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
Disorder or organic mental disease                             Clinical interview
 
DSM-V substance  abuse  or dependence within 6 months (except  nicotine or
caffeine).                                                                     Toxicology, screen,  intake
 
Currently taking psychotropic medication.                  Clinical interview
 
Currently receiving another type  of psychotherapy      Clinical interview
or any other  therapeutic  intervention.
 
 
Participants who have used any of  the  psychedelic drugs 
(Ketamine, Psilocybin, LSD, MDMA) 
for the current episode  of depression.                           Clinical  interview
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 11 of 21
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
YesIndicate NYSPI IRB # 6669RDescribe Study Consent Procedures
Consent procedures are the following:
 
When subjects are eligible for the study, they will be  scheduled to  meet Dr. Kishon via  Webex (HIPAA-
compliant teleconference) before signing a study consent form. A copy  of the consent form  will be provided 
to the participant before consent  is obtained via encrypted email.  Subjects will be accessible to  an electronic 
consent form via REDCap and join a HIPAA-compliant teleconference with Dr. Kishon  to discuss consent. 
Afterward, they  will digitally sign the consent  form  with the e-signature function  in REDCap. 
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Kayser, Jurgen, PHDKishon Ph.D.,  Ronit
Type in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 12 of 21
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
Baseline visits
Subjects will be  briefed  on the newly implemented COVID-19  safety  protocol  to reassure them precautions 
are being taken.  This protocol is based on NYSPI COVID19  Amendment  guidelines for research on April 
20 and NYSPI Remote  communication guidelines for clinical care and research 3.30.20). In the  current 
study, all procedures will be done remotely.
Subjects who sign the DES screening consent  will be contacted within two weeks after the screening call; 
they received the diagnoses of  major depressive disorder. The DES  psychiatrist will approve their medical 
tests. An evaluator  will rate the HRSD-17, CGI-Severity, and  Beck  Depression Inventory. If still  eligible, 
subjects will be presented  with  the study consent  form via REDCap  and have their  questions  answered by 
Dr. Kishon via  Webex.  Once they signed the  study consent form via REDCap,  subjects will complete  a 
battery of  self-report measures in REDCap. Patients will also take part in  EEG and cognitive  tests 
administered under Jurgen  Kayser's  protocol #6559R. The patients will be randomized to the experimental 
condition of  12 sessions of CBT for depression  and 12 sessions of control condition of nonspecific 
supportive treatment. CBT and  supportive therapy are provided by Ph.D. student psychologists  who are 
screened and interviewed by Dr. Kishon and approved and credentialed by Dr.  Laura Mufson. All  sessions 
will be administered via Webex. Dr.  Kishon  will supervise all therapists  every  week  via Webex.  
Psychotherapy sessions will  be audiotaped unless  the subject  does  not consent; audiotaping of sessions 
is optional. The audio recording will not include the subject’s full name and will be  reviewed by Dr. 
Kishon, who will evaluate the treatments  provided  by therapists in this study. The audio recordings will be 
kept for no more than ten  years, after which they  will be destroyed.
If the patient withdraws  his or her  consent, audio recordings can  be destroyed  during  or after the  procedure.  
The patient  reserves the  right  to withdraw  this consent at any time before or during  the audiotaping. Ph.D. 
students in psychology supervised by Dr.  Kishon will provide nonspecific  treatment. Sessions in  the control 
group will be audio  recorded
 
CBT Treatment Protocol
CBT protocol represents  incorporation and integration  from  several sources.  These include (a) prior  
experience of the  therapist with the treatment of depression and (b) published cognitive  therapy (CBT) 
manual published by Emery (2000). The  present  protocol encourages  therapist's flexibility  in approach, yet 
during the treatment, specific tools and  methods of coping with  depression are given to  each subject.  The 
subject will learn to use the following basic  cognitive-behavioral  techniques  for the treatment of depression: 
constructing an  ‘Action Schedule’, setting goals, doing  ‘behavioral  experiments,’ and creating a  Distorted 
Thought Record (DTR). The patient  is expected  to experiment with the tools  between sessions.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 13 of 21
A nonspecific treatment control condition
Therapists will provide 12 sessions of support focused on the three facilitative  conditions (warmth, genuine, 
and empathy). They will  provide  support and will assess the patients for levels of depression and  suicidality 
in each session. Approved DES  evaluators will administer to all patients in both  groups the Hamilton Rating 
Scale for  Depression (HRSD-17) via  Webex, and the CGI Severity and  Improvement Scales  at baseline via 
REDCap. The HRSD-17  will be  administered  every three weeks and at post-treatment via  Webex. The CGI 
will be filled every week  and at posttreatment.  If there is no improvement  in depressive symptoms  at week 
6, the study PI will conduct an  informal interview  in which she will discuss  with the  participant alternative 
treatments. The discussion will be documented in the participant’s  chart.
 
Post-Treatment Assessment Visit
Post-treatment assessment visits will  occur within 12 days of the subject’s last therapy session. All baseline 
rating scales will be administered (HRSD-17, CGI) via Webex and REDCap, as well  as all  self-report 
measures (BDI-II,  Work  and Social Adjustment, TAS-20, PM, BIPM, SRIS,  Treatment  Credibility and  The 
Expectancy of  Improvement Scale,  Reasons for Living, Ruminative Response Scale (RRS),  The Mindful 
Attention Awareness Attention Scale(MAAS), Five-Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire  (FFMQ), and Self-
Compassion Scale  (SCS) via REDCap. The  SCIP  -M will be done  via Webex.  Patients  will also take  part in 
EEG and cognitive tests administered under Jurgen Kayser's protocol #6559R. If a  patient terminates before 
completing the  entire  12-session protocol,  in each of the groups, this  visit  will be conducted as  close as 
possible to the last  session.  Study participants who do  not remit (end treatment HDRS-17 > 7, BDI-II>13) at 
the end of  the trial  will be  offered a referral for psychotherapy or medications  per subject's preference, or if 
in the control group will be offered  CBT based  on the availability of therapists.  
I attest to follow the COVID-19 Safety Guidelines  for Columbia Psychiatry and
NYSPI Re-Entry outlined  in the  NYSPI  Director’s  June 1st memo,  which includes but
are not limited to:
• Infection Control/PPE – Guidelines• Research participants will only come  on-site if absolutely necessary for the study
procedures.• No volunteers/externs on-site during Stage 1.
• Clinical research teams will screen their participants for  COVID  symptoms (night
before and day of the onsite visit, documenting this  in the chart), and escort them  in and
out of the  building.
• COVID/COVID-like  symptoms in participants will be reported to the IRB via
PRISM as an SAE.
 
 
 
 
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 14 of 21
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
The subject  will be withdrawn and  prematurely  terminated from  the study under any of the following 
circumstances:
1. The subject  requests to withdraw from the study.
2. The subject  exhibits  a clear-cut worsening of anxiety or mood symptoms, e.g., subject whose  CGI  
Improvement score  rating  increases to 6 (much worse) or 7 (very much worse).
3. The subject  reports suicidal ideation  of sufficient concern to  require hospitalization. Visit the emergency 
room without admission will be judged on a  case-by-case basis erring on the side of ending study 
participation.
4. The appearance  of a new or undercurrent illness that prevents the patient from  complying with the 
protocol.
5. The subject  has missed four sessions or is not responding to repeated attempts to  contact  him or her. 
Careful medical and  psychiatric screening  would be conducted to identify patients  with risk for potential  
adverse events if  they were to participate  in the study treatments.  As examples,  patients for whom suicide is 
considered a significant risk will be excluded from all study participation,  and subjects with  uncontrolled  
mental impairment.
Any patient who evidences significant clinical deterioration, such as unusually high levels of distress or suicidality at significant risk during the treatments will be removed  from the study and treated with  
alternative and appropriate  clinical care at  the DES until referred to another treatment. Signs of deterioration 
will be monitored weekly by the protocol  therapist and PI of the study. At each visit during the 12 weeks of 
the treatments, the clinician will monitor, via clinical interview and various assessment  measures for  signs 
of increased  severity of  depression or the emergence of a  major depressive episode. If  in the judgment of the 
clinician and the PI removal  of a participant from  the study is indicated due to  increased severity of 
depression, the  patient will be removed and treated  by the study PI (Ronit Kishon)  until appropriate referrals 
will set in place. The  threshold for  mandatory removal from the study is a CGI Global Improvement score 
of 6 or 7 (worse  to very much worse). Such ratings at any evaluation would prompt premature termination.  
However, clinicians  and patients can  end the study at any time; i.e. a  CGI-GI  score  > 6 is not required to 
remove a patient from  the study.
Assessment Instruments
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 15 of 21
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Screening Visit:
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-V (SCID-V) (2 hours)
Iowa Personality Disorder Screen (7 minutes)
Global Impressions Index: Severity Scale (CGI) (5 minutes)
 
Total time =  2 hours 12 minutes
 
Baseline Visit
HAM-D (15  minutes)
CGI - Severity (1 minute)Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) (5 minutes)
Twenty Item  Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20) (5 minutes)  
Work and  Social Adjustment Scale (5  minutes)
Reasons for Living Scale (5 minutes)Psychological Mindedness  Scale (PM Scale)  (5 minutes)
The Balanced Index of  Psychological Mindedness (5 minutes)
The Self Reflection and  Insight Scale (5 minutes)
The Ruminative Response Scale (RRS) (5 minutes)
The Mindful  Attention Awareness Scale  (MAAS) (5 minutes) 
Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire  (FFMQ) (5 minutes)
Self Compassion Scale (SCS) (5 minutes)
Structured Clinical Interview for Psychological  Mindedness  (SCIP-M).  (45 min)
Parental socioeconomic status (SES) (15 min)
Emotional Regulations Questionnaire  (ERQ)  (15 min)
Brunel Lifestyle Physical Activity Questionnaire  (10 min)
The Pittsburgh Sleep  Quality Index (10 min)
Social Adjustment  Scale (10 min)
EEG and cognitive tests were administered  under  Jurgen Kayser's protocol #6559R  (2.5 hrs).
 
 
Total time =  4 hours and 30 minutes.
 
During-Session Process Measures (week  2, 6, 12)
Treatment credibility and  Expectancy of Improvement Scale (3 minutes)
The Working Alliance  Inventory (7 minutes)
 
Total time =10 minutes.
 
Evaluation of depressive symptoms every 3 weeks:
HAM-D (10  minutes)
 
Mid and Post-treatment Assessments  (week 6, 12)
HAM-D (10  minutes) CGI -  Severity (2 minutes)
Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) (5 minutes)
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 16 of 21
Twenty Item  Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20) (5 minutes)
Work and  Social Adjustment Scale (5  minutes)
Reasons for Living Scale (5 minutes)Psychological Mindedness  Scale (PM Scale)  (5 minutes)
The Balanced Index of  Psychological Mindedness (5 minutes) 
The Self-reflection and  Insight  Scale  (5 minutes)
The Ruminative Response Scale (RRS) (5 minutes)The Mindful  Attention Awareness Scale  (MAAS) (5 minutes) 
Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire  (FFMQ) (5 minutes)
Self-Compassion Scale (5 minutes)
Structured Clinical Interview for Psychological  Mindedness  (SCIP-M).  (45 min)
Parental socioeconomic status (SES) (15 min)
Emotional Regulations Questionnaire  (ERQ)  (15 min)
Brunel Lifestyle Physical Activity Questionnaire  (10 min)
The Pittsburgh Sleep  Quality Index (10 min)
Social Adjustment  Scale (10 min)
EEG and cognitive tests were administered  under  Jurgen Kayser's protocol #6559R  (2.5 hrs).
 
 
 
Total time =  4 hour 30 minutes
 
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
At the end of  study participation, non-remitters  will be offered appropriate referrals as clinically  indicated.
They will  discuss it with their  therapist, and after  the end of sessions  will continue  to meet Dr. Kishon  as
needed, until  an appropriate referral will put in place.
Remitters will  discuss  potential  referrals  with the therapist in the last 3 weeks of treatment.  During this
period, and at the end  of treatment, Dr. Kishon will be available to  meet  with  the patient to  consult on
the nature of the  referral. After the subject concludes where to be  referred,  the project coordinator  of the 
study will  provide a  list of referrals to the patient  and will remain in contact so as to follow  how  the patient 
integrates with  the new treatment  place.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesCBT is an accepted  and empirically supported  form of  treatment  for depression,  and thus is not  considered
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 17 of 21
experimental. Non-specific supportive treatment  was also  found to  be effective  for depression  through  in
smaller percentages  than  CBT. Subjects may  want to be medicated for their depression in  which case they
will appropriately be  referred  to during  the screening/evaluation process.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Assessment procedure: Subjects  could develop mild to moderate emotional  discomfort  or frustration
associated with  psychiatric interviewing,  or filling out questionnaires. Only experienced clinicians  will
administer these interviews; they  are well trained and experienced in  recognizing and dealing with
emotional discomfort. Also, subjects will be informed that  they  can end  the meeting  at any time, or skip
uncomfortable questions. Unless  such  skipped questions prevent a  diagnosis  or other clinical issues from
being adequately  assessed, the subject  will remain  study  eligible. Subjects’ mood symptoms  may also
worsen during treatment.  See procedures  for minimizing risk in the next section.
 
CBT and nonspecific supportive treatments: Subjects may  exhibit subjective  distress during CBT or
supportive treatment, which, if it occurs, is likely to be mild  and transient.  We will closely monitor
reactions and address them therapeutically.  In the unlikely event that  a subject manifests  unusually high
levels of distress, the  PI will  withdraw him or her from the study and provide the necessary support until  a 
referral will be in place.Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
Careful medical and  psychiatric screening  will be conducted to  identify subjects  with  elevated risk for
potential adverse  effects. For example, participants  for whom suicide is  considered  a significant risk will be 
excluded from the  study.
 
Any subject  who evidences significant clinical deterioration, such as unusually high level of distress or
suicidality at significant risk during CBT or supportive treatment, will be removed from  the study and
treated with alternative and appropriate  clinical  care  at the DES until  a referral plan is set in  place.  Signs of
deterioration will be  monitored weekly  by the protocol therapist, study PI,  and a psychiatrist at the DES  as
needed. In addition,  at each visit during the 12 weeks  of CBT  and control group, the treating clinician will 
monitor various  assessment measures  for signs  of increased severity of depression via clinical interview. If 
in the judgment of the clinician  and the PI, the removal of a participant from the study is indicated due to
increased severity of depression,  the patient will be removed  and treated until  the referral is in  place  or
clinically indicated. The threshold for mandatory  removal from  the study  is a CGI  Global Improvement
score of  6 or 7 (worse to very much worse).  Such ratings at any evaluation would prompt premature
termination. However,  clinicians and subjects can  end the study at any time;  i.e., a CGI-GI score > 6 is not 
required to remove a subject  from the study. 
 
Precautionary measures will be taken to prevent the transmission of COVID-19 in experimental  processes.  
The changes we proposed  in the amendment section will  minimize the subjects' infection risk for COVID-
19. We are minimizing  risks of in-person  visits  by conducting 12 virtual CBT  sessions  and 12 virtual control 
group therapy sessions.  All self-report  measures and interviews measures  will be done remotely. 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 18 of 21
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
All collected data will be kept confidential  and used for research  purposes  only.  Patient charts and hard  copy 
data will be held in locked file cabinets  and identifiable only  by number  and a naming code of initials. 
Access to research records is restricted to research staff and  regulatory  authorities.  No research participant’s 
identifying data will be published. All electronic records will be  kept confidential  to the extent permitted  by 
law. Participant’s names  and other personal  identifying information will be stored  in an  electronically secure 
database at  the New York  State Psychiatric Institute on a registered  password-protected  computer. The 
information may  be accessed only  by the  PI and the research coordinator. The study Data  Manager  will 
manage a data file on SPSS  that has all study data  without identifying  information. Patients’ names will not 
be entered into  the study  database, and each  will be uniquely identified only  by the ID  number.  All data will 
be entered once but checked and audited  by two different staff members. When data entry is complete, all 
data will be cleaned and  rechecked  for accuracy before being backed up on an encrypted flash  drive. Any 
data that is transmitted electronically will be fully encrypted and  password protected.
 
Due to remote administration  of intake evaluation procedure, therapy  sessions, clinical interviews through  
sessions,  and self-report measures at pretreatment, mid-treatment, and post-treatment, confidentiality is protected through   HIPAA-compliant videoconferencing  and web-based platforms, and encrypted  email 
communication. 
 
 
 
 
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
All participants  will receive a  complete  medical and psychiatric evaluation, and the PI  will share  the
necessary information with the participant.Benefits to participants are direct  (i.e.,  treatment of depression; amelioration  of symptoms).  Also, some
participants may experience relief of their depressive symptoms.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 19 of 21
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
No
References
References
 
Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., &  Toney, L. (2006). Using  Self-Report  Assessment
Methods to Explore Facets of Mindfulness. Assessment, 13(1), 27-45. doi: 10.1177/1073191105283504
 
Barnard, L.  K., & Curry, J. F. (2011). Self-compassion: Conceptualizations, correlates,  & interventions.
Review of General Psychology, 15(4), 289-303. doi: 10.1037/a0025754
 
Beitel, M.,  Ferrer, E., & Cecero, J. J. (2005). Psychological mindedness and awareness of self and others.
Journal of Clinical  Psychology,  61(6), 739-750. doi: 10.1002/jclp.20095
 
Brown, K. W.,  & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The  benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its role in
psychological well-being. Journal of  personality and social psychology,  84(4), 822-848. doi: 10.1037/0022-
3514.84.4.822
 
Bruder, Kayser, J., Tenke,  C.E. (2012).  Event-related brain potentials in  depression: Clinical, cognitive and
neurophysiologic implications. In S.J. Luck & E.S. Kappenman  (Eds.),  The Oxford  Handbook  of
EventRelated Potential  Components  (pp. 563-592). New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Conte, H. R., Ratto, R., & Karasu,  T. B. (1996).  The Psychological Mindedness Scale: Factor structure and
relationship to outcome of psychotherapy.  Journal  of Psychotherapy  Practice and  Research,  5, 250–259.
 
Diedrich, A., Grant, M., Hofmann, S. G., Hiller, W.,  & Berking, M. (2014).  Self-compassion  as an emotion 
regulation strategy in major depressive disorder. Behaviour Research and  Therapy, 58, 43-51.  doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2014.05.006
 
Farber, B. A., & Golden,  V. (1997). Psychological-mindedness in psychotherapists.
In M. McCaUum  & W.  Piper (Eds.), Psychological- mindedness. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.
 
Fenigstein, A., Scheier,  M.F., & Buss, A.H. (1975). Public and private self- consciousness:  Assessment  and 
theory. Journal  of counseling and Clinical  Psychology, 43, 522-527.
 
Grant, A. M.  (2001).  Rethinking psychological  mindedness: Metacognition  self-reflection  and insight.
Behavior Change, 18(1), 8-17.
 
Grant, A. M., Franklin, J., &  Langford, P. (2002). The self-reflection and insight scale: A  new  measure of
private self-consciousness. Social  Behavior  and Personality: an international journal,  30(8), 821-835.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 20 of 21
Hollon, S.D., Shelton, R. C., Wisniewski,  S. et al. (2006). Presenting characteristics of depressed outpatients 
as a function  of recurrence: preliminary findings from the STAR*D clinical trial. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, February 40 (1), 59-69
 
Kayser, J., Tenke, C.E., Abraham, K.S., Alschuler,  D.M., Alvarenga,  J.E., Skipper,  J., Warner, V.,  Bruder,
G.E., & Weissman, M.M.  (2017). Motivated attention and  family  risk for depression: Neuronal generator
patterns at scalp elicited by lateralized aversive pictures reveal blunted emotional responsivity. NeuroImage: Clinical, 14, 692-707.
MacBeth, A., & Gumley,  A. (2012). Exploring compassion: A meta-analysis of the association between
self-compassion and psychopathology. Clinical  Psychology Review, 32(6),  545-552. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2012.06.003
 
Neff, K. D. (2003). The development and validation of a scale  to measure self-compassion. Self  and
Identity, 2(3), 223-250.
 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S.  (2000). The role of rumination  in depressive  disorders and  mixed anxiety/depressive
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109(3),  504-511. doi: 10.1037/0021-843x.109.3.504
 
Nyklíček, I.,  & Denollet, J. (2009). Development and evaluation of the Balanced Index of Psychological
Mindedness. Psychological  Assessment,  21, 32–44.
 
Trapnell, P. D., & Campbell, J. D. (1999). Private self-consciousness  and the five-factor  model  of
personality: Distinguishing rumination from  reflection. Journal  of personality  and social psychology, 
76(2),284-304. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.2.284
Treynor, W., Gonzalez, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema,  S. (2003). Rumination  reconsidered:  A psychometric
analysis. Cognitive  Therapy and Research, 27(3), 247-259. doi: 10.1023/a:1023910315561
 
Watkins, E. R. (2008).  Constructive and unconstructive repetitive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2),
163-206. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.134.2.163
 
 
 
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Consent form non bolded  8_27_2021docx.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Consent form bolded  8_27_2021docx.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Protocol Summary  Form
6806R
Kishon, Ronit
Page 21 of 21
Recruit me non  bolded blurb 8_27_21_.pdf
Recruit me bolded blurb 8_27_21_.pdfBriefPoster_Example_8_27_21 final.pdfUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
HIPPA Form October , 2017.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
Consent form undbolded  8_21_2021docx.pdf
 
 Twelve Weeks of Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) vs. Supportive Therapy for 
Depression  
Sponsor:  National Institute of Mental Health  
Enrolling:  Male and Female Patients  
Study Length:  15 Weeks  
Clinic Visits:  3 visits in person  
Age Range:  Between 18 and 65 years old  
IRB Number:  6806R  
US Government  ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Contact:   Ronit Kishon Ph.D.: 646 724 4171        Tayler. Wilson @nyspi.columbia.edu  
 
Additional Study Information : 
      This study offers 12 individual free sessions of Cognitive Behavior Th erapy (CBT) or 
Supportive  Therapy to people who suffer from depression. All sessions will be administered 
virtually using  HIPAA -compliant video teleconferencing. Participants must have access to  the 
internet and have video conferencing capabilities . During  the study , participants can’t be on 
psychotropic medications nor attend any other  psychotherapy . Participants will need to come in 
person once for a urine & blood test (protocol #6669) and twice  for an  electroencephalogram 
(EEG) (protocol #6559). Please  exercise caution when  traveling in public and follow public 
health guidelines, such as wearing masks in public and  avoiding crowds. It is important for you 
to stay informed of public health recommendation s and guidelines regarding COVID -19, such as 
those issued by the Centers for Disease Control  (CDC.gov) and local government s. If you have 
questions or do not feel safe traveling, please let us know, and know that you  can call to 
reschedule visits . 
      CBT is a well -established psychotherapy for depression. CBT’s primary goal  is to provide  
specific tools and methods of depression management. The primary goal of supportive  
psychotherapy is to strengthen the patient’s ability to cope effectively with various  life stressors.  
The purpose of this research study is to learn which psychophysiological and psychological  
variables predict who will benefit from each treatment and how these variables may change  
throughout therapy.  
      Participants are randomized to one of these groups and are required to fill out measures that  
assess various psychological variables at three -time points through 12 weeks of treatment in  
addition to  shorter measures throughout the treatment . These measures will be filled o ut online 
using HIPPA -compliant platforms. We will assist you in accessing and filling out those  measures 
online. We plan to recruit 60 participants with depression who will complete the psychotherapy, 
study forms, and EEG.  

 
 Twelve Weeks of Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) vs. Supportive Therapy for 
Depression  
Sponsor:  National Institute of Mental Health  
Enrolling:  Male and Female Patients  
Study Length:  15 Weeks  
Clinic Visits:  3 visits in person  
Age Range:  Between 18 and 65 years old  
IRB Number:  6806R  
US Government  ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Contact:   Ronit Kishon Ph.D.: 646 724 4171        Tayler. Wilson @nyspi.columbia.edu  
 
Additional Study Information : 
      This study offers 12 individual free sessions of Cognitive Behavior Th erapy (CBT) or 
Supportive Therapy to depressed adults. All sessions will be given virtually using Zoom. 
Participants must have internet access and video conferencing capabilities. During the study, 
participants can't be on psychotropic medications or atten d any other psychotherapy. Participants 
will need to come in person before receiving sessions for a urine & blood test (protocol #6669) 
and once before and once after sessions for an EEG (protocol #6559). Please exercise caution 
when traveling in public an d follow public health guidelines, such as wearing masks in public 
and avoiding crowds. In addition, you need to stay informed of public health recommendations 
and guidelines regarding COVID -19, such as those issued by the CDC (CDC.gov) and local 
governmen ts. If you have questions or do not feel safe traveling, please let us know, and know 
that you can call to reschedule visits. CBT is well -established psychotherapy for depression. 
CBTs primary goal is to provide specific tools and methods of depression man agement. 
Supportive Psychotherapy's primary goal is to strengthen the patient's ability to cope effectively 
with various life stressors. The purpose of this research study is to learn which variables 
predict who will benefit from each treatment and how the se variables may change 
throughout therapy. Participants are randomly assigned to receive one of the two therapies 
and are required to fill out forms weekly through the 12 weeks of treatment. These forms 
will be filled out online using HIPPA -compliant plat forms. We plan to recruit 60 
participants with depression who will complete the psychotherapy, study forms, and EEG.  
 
 
We offer 12 free online psychotherapy 
sessions focused on treating depression  
 
We are seeking  adult  study participants that 1) are depressed , 
2) not on  antidepressants  (prescribed or over -the-counter ), 
3) not currently receiving psychotherapeutic treatment . 
 
Participants  will attend 12 therapy sessions over 12 weeks, and come to 
our laboratory three times: on ce for a blood and urine screen , and tw ice 
for EEG  (brainwave)  testing. There are no cost s for the psychotherapy 
sessions no r is there any  financial compensation for study participati on. 
 
 
For full details please call or email : 
646 7 74 8030  Ronit.Kishon @nyspi.columbia.edu  
 Research Study Psychotherapy for 
Depression at Columbia University  
 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  1 
        
 
 
Consent Summary Page  
  
• Overview  
Below is a summary of the study that you are asked to participate in.  This outline is meant to be a guide for you to 
use while considering the study and reading the consent form.   It is not meant to replace the consent form, which 
you will have to sign if you decide to participate in the study.   The consent form contains detailed information 
about the study and about the risks which you will need to consider before making your decision.   Read the 
consent form carefully and discuss it with others before deci ding to take part.   And remember that, even if you 
agree to participate,   you can change your mind at any time.  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT)  
and Nonspecific supportive treatmen t, and examine whether  their effectiveness relate s to concepts about self and 
others. In each therapy you will receive 12 individual sessions. You will not be able to choose which therapy you 
will receive but both are considered effective for treating depr ession. Precautionary measures will be taken to 
prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental processes. Most of your visits will be conducted remotely 
using the telephone or HIPAA -compliant video teleconferencing.  
 
• Voluntary  
As with all research, t his is a voluntary study, and you do not have to participate if you do not want to.   Also, you 
may stop participating at any time.  
 
• Alternative Treatments/Alternatives to Participation  
Medications, interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), dialectic behavior therapy (DBT), group therapy.  
 
• Procedures  
1. Evaluation for Major Depression Disorder (remote session).  
2. Self-report study measures (beginning, midpoint, end) done online . 
3. EEG and cognitive tests  (beginning and end) done in the lab at NYSPI.  
4. 12 weekly  sessions of Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression or 12 weekly sessions of Supportive 
Therapy for Depression(remote sessions).  
5. Participants cannot be on psychotropic medications during the study. Medicating for depression will not be 
part of this stud y.  
6. Participants will be interviewed about symptoms of depression every 3 weeks, and will fill a self -report 
measure on their symptoms every week (remote sessions, and measures done online).  
 
• Risks and Inconveniences  
This study includes some risks and disc omforts (please refer to the consent form for further details and 
explanations of these risks).   These include no change of your depressive symptoms. Sometimes psychotherapy 
might increase sadness and anxiety.  
You should exercise caution when traveling in  public and follow public health guidelines, such as wearing masks 
in public and avoiding crowds. It is important for you to stay informed about public health recommendations and 
guidelines regarding COVID -19, such as those issued by the Centers for Diseas e Control (CDC.gov) and local 
government guidelines and directives. If you have questions about how you will travel for appointments, or do not 
feel safe traveling, please let us know, and be advised that you can call to reschedule visits  
 
• Benefits  
Althoug h some benefit is possible such as reduction of depressive symptoms, you may not have any benefit if the 
treatment is not effective.  
 
• Questions  
You may contact the study principal investigator, Ronit Kishon , at 646 724 4171 with any question  
 
   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  2 
 
 
 
 
CONSENT FORM Study # 6806R  
Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression  
 
 
Purpose and Overview  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression since we still can’t predict 
which one will be more helpful for a particular person. Previous studies suggested that Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy (CBT) is an effective treatment for d epression in nearly half of the individuals who 
do it, however there are others who do not benefit from it. Nonspecific supportive treatment focuses 
on meeting with a therapist, receiving support, having one's hope restored, and overcoming 
demoralization. In each of the treatments you will receive12  virtua l sessions. You will be randomly 
assigned to one or the other. The purpose of this study is to explore whether your concepts about 
yourself and others are related to the effectiveness of each of the treatm ents. Also, you must enroll  
in Dr. Kayser's study (#6559) for the purpose of behavioral and electrophysiological tests at two time 
points that will contribute to our study. The aim is to learn more about brain function in people who 
are depressed and recei ve different types of talk therapy.  
 
 
Voluntary  
Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if you later decide 
to stop participating, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. A decisio n not 
to participate or withdraw your participation will not affect your current or future treatment at the New 
York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia University Medical Center . If you are determined to be 
eligible for the study and later stop your p articipation for any reason, the study principal investigator, 
Dr. Kishon will treat you until the appropriate referral will be in place . You will be notified of significant 
new findings that may relate to your willingness to continue to participate in the  study.  
 
 
Alternative Treatments/ Alternatives to Participation  
You do not have to participate in this study to receive treatment for your depression. CBT and 
nonspecific supportive therapy can be obtained outside of study participation. There are medicati ons 
that have been shown to be effective for depression and can be prescribed by your regular physician. 
There are also other non -medication treatments for depression beside CBT such as interpersonal 
psychotherapy, or group therapy.  
 
 
Procedures  
Precaution ary measures will be taken to prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental  
processes. All  your visits  in this protocol  will be conducted remotely using the telephone or HIPAA -
compliant video teleconferencing. In this study most of the evaluation  process  and all  psychotherapy  
sessions will be done virtually . We will discuss with you the technology HIPAA -compliant platforms to 
be used and any concerns you may have, such as access to a private space in which to take calls, or 
accessibility —access at  home to adequate devices, cell signal, or Wi -Fi. In the CBT treatment, you will 
receive 12 weekly remote psychotherapy sessions that last about 50 minutes each. The treatment 
involves being asked questions about your thoughts and feelings, as well as lear ning skills to manage 
   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  3 
them. In nonspecific supportive therapy you will also receive 12 sessions that last 50 minutes each.  
In the sessions you will receive support and understanding for your problems, so to have your hope  
restored and to overcome demoralization.  
 
Study measures :  
You will be interviewed  remotely  and you will fill some self -report measures  online   for a total of an hour 
and 15 minutes before treatment, in week 6, and after 12 weeks when the treatment is completed. We 
will also ask you before each session to fill a self -report measure that takes 5 minutes so we can 
monitor your symptoms. Every 3 weeks we will inter view you for 15 minutes, again with the intention of 
monitoring your level of symptoms.  The brain tests will be administered  in Dr. Kayser’s study( #6559).   
 
Medications during the study :  
You can participate in the study if you did not take prescribed antidepressant, or over the counter 
antidepressant medications, in the past month (three months for fluoxetine). You will be able to 
continue receiving psychotherapy sessions in the study if your  clinical condition will initiate your outside 
physician to prescribe psychotropic medications.  
 
The study doctors will end your study participation if they determine it is no longer in your best interest. 
In addition, you may stop participating in this st udy at any time for any reason. If you  stop participating 
in the study before 12 weeks end , the study principal investigator, Dr. Kishon, will continue to see you  
for sessions until an appropriate referral will be made. Completion of the study is not requ ired for you to  
receive these sessions by Dr. Kishon.  
 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Nonspecific Supportive Therapy – Audiotaping : 
You  will be audiotaped during your treatment visits. The audiotaping is optional . The audio recording 
will be used for edu cation, research or training purposes only. Any audio recording will not include your 
full name, and will be reviewed by Dr. Kishon who will evaluate the treatment provided by therapists in 
this study. The audio recordings are kept for no more than 10 year s after which they will be destroyed. 
If you withdraw your consent, audio recordings can be destroyed during or after the interview or 
procedure.  
 
Treatment After the End of the Study :  
After the study is over, the Principal Investigator, Dr. Kishon, will meet with you, and answer any 
questions you may have. If after completion of the study you have not improved, you will receive 
referrals for continuation of psychotherapy and/or medications. You will be able to see Dr. Kishon for 
weekly sessions until the referral is in place.   
 
Investigator Initiated Discontinuation of Study :  
There may be times when the investigator carrying out this study decides to stop the study even 
though you may wish to continue to participate. Examples include missing 4 number of sessions or not 
responding to repeated attempts to contact you.  
 
Risks and Inconveniences  
The primary risk of participating in this study is that the treatment may not help your symptoms. If you 
do not improve it may be up to 12 weeks from the time you enter the study until you would be provided 
with another type of treatment. Therefore, if you  do not improve, participating in this study will delay your  
receiving treatment for up to 12 weeks with medications and other psychotherapies known to be helpful.  
The risks of psychotherapy treatment include the possibility of increased anxiety or sadnes s, and the 
therapists will try to help you with that if it occurs. We anticipate that the risks of study participation are 
   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  4 
no greater than those encountered in routine clinical treatment. However , you may be withdrawn from  
the study and offered other treat ment.  
 
Benefits:  
A direct benefit to you is the possibility that the treatments will help your symptoms of depression. In 
addition, your participation may help researchers learn more about how to treat depression. There may 
be no benefit to you if the trea tment is not effective.  
 
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to a better understanding of psychiatric disorders,  
and it may contribute to the development of objective measures for diagnosis and treatment selection.  
 
Confidentiality  
All rec ords will be stored in locked files and will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. 
Records will be available to research staff, and to Federal, State and Institutional regulatory personnel 
(who may review records as part of routine audits).  
 
Your name and other personal identifying information will be stored in an electronically secure database 
at New York State Psychiatric Institute. Research data that is entered into the computer will be stored 
according to study ID. A master list linking t he patient name to the assigned ID is kept in a separate file.  
In order to access, the computer and appropriate data files, the staff member must know have 
knowledge of the password and be given rights to access the data by the data manager.  
All data that  is transmitted via computer is encoded and identifying information is removed.  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by  
U.S. Law. This Web si te will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.  
 
Your private information could be used for future research studies or distributed to  
another inve stigator for future research studies, with or without identifiers. Should any of the information 
gathered from you be used for scientific publications or presentations, you will be protected through the 
use of a system of codes that will not reveal the ide ntity of individuals. Any report based on this study 
will only be used as grouped information without mention or description of the individual participants.  
 
The NYSPI Remote Communications Guidance will be followed to ensure protection of  
confidentiality.  This discussion and documentation of consent is carried out in a HIPAA – compliant 
teleconference  as well as the psychotherapy sessions . Instruments to be completed  
will be completed via REDCap , a HIPAAA -compliant platform  to ensure confidentiality . Our research 
assistants will assist you in using those platforms.  
 
In case of Injury  
Federal regulations require that we inform participants about our institution's policy with regard to 
compensation and payment for treatment of research -related injuries. If you believe that you have 
sustained an injury as a result of participating in a research study, you may contact the Principal 
Investigator Dr. Ronit Kishon at 646 -724-4171 so that you can review the matter and identify the 
medical resources that may be available to you.  
 
In case of injury, New York State Psychiatric Institute will provide short -term emergency medical 
treatment, which has been determined to be necessary by New York State Psychiatric Institute's 
doctors, and whic h is within the capability of New York State Psychiatric Institute to provide. In addition, 
we will provide assistance in arranging follow up care in such instances.  
   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  5 
 
New York State Psychiatric Institute and Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene do not pr ovide 
compensation or payment for treatment of research related injuries. However, you should be aware that 
you do not give up your legal right to seek such compensation through the court by participating in this 
research.  
 
 
Questions  
Dr. Kishon will answer to the best of her ability any questions that the participant may have now or in the 
future about the research procedures, or about the subject's response to the procedures. She can be  
 
reached during the day, and outside of regular  business hours at 646 -724-4171. Dr. Kishon can be 
called outside of regular business hours for important issues that should not wait until the next business 
day. In the case of an EMERGENCY go to your nearest emergency room and call Dr.  
Kishon.  
 
If you ha ve any questions about your rights as a research participant, want to provide feedback, or have  
a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB). (An IRB is a committee that 
protects the rights of participants in research studies). You  may call the IRB Main Office at (646)774 -
7155 during regular office hours.  
 
You will be given a copy of the signed Consent Form.
                                                           08/26/2020  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
Docume ntation of Consent  
 
I voluntarily agree to participate in the research study described above.  
 
 
 
Name :___________________________  ( print)  
 
Signe d __________________________    Study Participant  
 
Date: __________________________  
 
 
I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, 
benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in 
the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my 
opini on is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.  
 
 
 
Name:  ______________________    (print)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________  Person Designated to Obtain Consent  
 
 
 
 
Date:__________ _  
 
 08/20/2021  
Consent Summary Page  
•Overview
Below is a summary of the study that you are asked to participate in.  This outline is meant to be a guide for you to 
use while considering the study and reading the consent form.   It is not meant to replace the consent form, which 
you will have to sign if you decide to participate in the study.   The consent form contains detailed information 
about the study and about the risks which you will need to consider before making your decision.   Read the 
consent form carefully and discuss it with others before deci ding to take part.   And remember that, even if you 
agree to participate,   you can change your mind at any time.  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT)  
and Nonspecific supportive treatmen t, and examine whether  their effectiveness relate s to concepts about self and 
others. In each therapy you will receive 12 individual sessions. You will not be able to choose which therapy you 
will receive but both are considered effective for treating depr ession. Precautionary measures will be taken to 
prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental processes. Most of your visits will be conducted remotely 
using the telephone or HIPAA -compliant video teleconferencing.  
•Voluntary
As with all research, t his is a voluntary study, and you do not have to participate if you do not want to.   Also, you 
may stop participating at any time.  
•Alternative Treatments/Alternatives to Participation
Medications, interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), dialectic behavior therapy (DBT), group therapy.  
•Procedures
1.Evaluation for Major Depression Disorder (remote session).
2.Self-report study measures (beginning, midpoint, end) done online .
3.EEG and cognitive tests  (beginning and end) done in the lab at NYSPI.
4.12 weekly  sessions of Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression or 12 weekly sessions of Supportive
Therapy for Depression(remote sessions).
5.Participants cannot be on psychotropic medications during the study. Medicating for depression will not be
part of this stud y.
6.Participants will be interviewed about symptoms of depression every 3 weeks, and will fill a self -report
measure on their symptoms every week (remote sessions, and measures done online).
•Risks and Inconveniences
This study includes some risks and disc omforts (please refer to the consent form for further details and 
explanations of these risks).   These include no change of your depressive symptoms. Sometimes psychotherapy 
might increase sadness and anxiety.  
You should exercise caution when traveling in  public and follow public health guidelines, such as wearing masks 
in public and avoiding crowds. It is important for you to stay informed about public health recommendations and 
guidelines regarding COVID -19, such as those issued by the Centers for Diseas e Control (CDC.gov) and local 
government guidelines and directives. If you have questions about how you will travel for appointments, or do not 
feel safe traveling, please let us know, and be advised that you can call to reschedule visits  
•Benefits
Althoug h some benefit is possible such as reduction of depressive symptoms, you may not have any benefit if the 
treatment is not effective.  
•Questions
You may contact the study principal investigator, Ronit Kishon , at 646 724 4171 with any question  

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
 
 
 
 
CONSENT FORM Study # 6806R  
Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression  
 
 
Purpose and Overview  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression since we still can’t predict 
which one will be more helpful for a particular person. Previous studies suggested that Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy (CBT) is an effective treatment for d epression in nearly half of the individuals who 
do it, however there are others who do not benefit from it. Nonspecific supportive treatment focuses 
on meeting with a therapist, receiving support, having one's hope restored, and overcoming 
demoralization. In each of the treatments you will receive12  virtua l sessions. You will be randomly 
assigned to one or the other. The purpose of this study is to explore whether your concepts about 
yourself and others are related to the effectiveness of each of the treatm ents. Also, you will be asked 
to consent to participate in Dr. Kayser's study (#6559) for the purpose of behavioral and 
electrophysiological tests at two time points that will contribute to our study. The aim is to learn more 
about brain function in people  who are depressed and receive different types of talk therapy.  
 
 
Voluntary  
Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if you later decide 
to stop participating, you will not lose any benefits to which you are o therwise entitled. A decision not 
to participate or withdraw your participation will not affect your current or future treatment at the New 
York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia University Medical Center . If you are determined to be 
eligible for the  study and later stop your participation for any reason, the study principal investigator, 
Dr. Kishon will treat you until the appropriate referral will be in place . You will be notified of significant 
new findings that may relate to your willingness to co ntinue to participate in the study.  
 
 
Alternative Treatments/ Alternatives to Participation  
You do not have to participate in this study to receive treatment for your depression. CBT and 
nonspecific supportive therapy can be obtained outside of study parti cipation. There are medications 
that have been shown to be effective for depression and can be prescribed by your regular physician. 
There are also other non -medication treatments for depression beside CBT such as interpersonal 
psychotherapy, or group ther apy. 
 
 
Procedures  
Precautionary measures will be taken to prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental  
processes. All  your visits  in this protocol  will be conducted remotely using the telephone or HIPAA -
compliant video teleconferencing. In this st udy most of the evaluation  process  and all  psychotherapy  
sessions will be done virtually . We will discuss with you the technology HIPAA -compliant platforms to 
be used and any concerns you may have, such as access to a private space in which to take calls, or 
accessibility —access at home to adequate devices, cell signal, or Wi -Fi. In the CBT treatment, you will 
receive 12 weekly remote psychotherapy sessions that last about 50 minutes each. The treatment 
involves being asked questions about your thoughts and feelings, as well as learning skills to manage 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
them. In nonspecific supportive therapy you will also receive 12 sessions that last 50 minutes each. In 
the sessions you will receive support and understanding for your problems, so to have your hope  
 
restored and to overcome demoralization.  
 
Study measures :  
You will be interviewed  remotely  and you will fill some self -report measures  online   for a total of an hour 
and 15 minutes before treatment, in week 6, and after 12 weeks when the treatment is completed. We 
will also ask you before each session to fill a self -report measure that takes 5 minutes so we can 
monitor your symptoms. Every 3 weeks we will interview you for 15 minutes, again with the intention of 
monitoring your level of symptoms.  The brain tests will be administered  in Dr. Kayser’s study( #6559).   
 
Medications during the study :  
You can participate in the study if you did not take prescribed antidepressant, or over the counter 
antidepressant medications, in the past month (three months for fluoxetine). You will be able to 
continue receiving psychotherapy sessions in the study if your clinical condition will initiate your outside 
physician to prescribe psychotropic medications.  
 
The study doctors will end your study participation if they determine it is no longer in your best interest. 
In addition, you may stop participating in thi s study at any time for any reason. If you  stop participating 
in the study before 12 weeks end , the study principal investigator, Dr. Kishon, will continue to see you  
for sessions until an appropriate referral will be made. Completion of the study is not required for you to  
receive these sessions by Dr. Kishon.  
 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Nonspecific Supportive Therapy – Audiotaping : 
You  will be audiotaped during your treatment visits. The audio recording will be used for education, 
research or training purposes only. Any audio recording will not include your full name, and will be 
reviewed by Dr. Kishon who will evaluate the treatment provided by therapists in thi s study. The audio 
recordings are kept for no more than 10 years after which they will be destroyed. If you withdraw your 
consent, audio recordings can be destroyed during or after the interview or procedure.  
 
Treatment After the End of the Study :  
After t he study is over, the Principal Investigator, Dr. Kishon, will meet with you, and answer any 
questions you may have. If after completion of the study you have not improved, you will receive 
referrals for continuation of psychotherapy and/or medications. Yo u will be able to see Dr. Kishon for 
weekly sessions until the referral is in place.   
 
Investigator Initiated Discontinuation of Study :  
There may be times when the investigator carrying out this study decides to stop the study even 
though you may wish to  continue to participate. Examples include missing 4 number of sessions or not 
responding to repeated attempts to contact you.  
 
Risks and Inconveniences  
The primary risk of participating in this study is that the treatment may not help your symptoms. If you 
do not improve it may be up to 12 weeks from the time you enter the study until you would be provided 
with another type of treatment. Therefore, if you  do not improve, participating in this study will delay your  
receiving treatment for up to 12 weeks with medications and other psychotherapies known to be helpful.  
The risks of psychotherapy treatment include the possibility of increased anxiety or sadnes s, and the 
therapists will try to help you with that if it occurs. We anticipate that the risks of study participation are 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
no greater than those encountered in routine clinical treatment. However , you may be withdrawn from  
 
 
the study and offered other treatment.  
 
Benefits:  
A direct benefit to you is the possibility that the treatments will help your symptoms of depression. In 
addition, your participation may help researchers learn more about how to treat depression. There may 
be no benefit to you if the treatment is not effective.  
 
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to a better understanding of psychiatric disorders,  
and it may contribute to the development of objective measures for diagnosis and treatment selection.  
 
Confidential ity 
All records will be stored in locked files and will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. 
Records will be available to research staff, and to Federal, State and Institutional regulatory personnel 
(who may review records as part of routin e audits).  
 
Your name and other personal identifying information will be stored in an electronically secure database 
at New York State Psychiatric Institute. Research data that is entered into the computer will be stored 
according to study ID. A master lis t linking the patient name to the assigned ID is kept in a separate file.  
In order to access, the computer and appropriate data files, the staff member must know have 
knowledge of the password and be given rights to access the data by the data manager.  
All data that is transmitted via computer is encoded and identifying information is removed.  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by  
U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.  
 
Your private information could be used for future research studies or distributed to  
another investigator for future research studies, with or without identifiers. Should any of the information 
gathered from you be used for scientific publications or presentations, you will be protected through the 
use of a system of codes that will not rev eal the identity of individuals. Any report based on this study 
will only be used as grouped information without mention or description of the individual participants.  
 
The NYSPI Remote Communications Guidance will be followed to ensure protection of  
confi dentiality. This discussion and documentation of consent is carried out in a HIPAA – compliant 
teleconference  as well as the psychotherapy sessions . Instruments to be completed  
will be completed via REDCap , a HIPAAA -compliant platform  to ensure confidentiality . Our research 
assistants will assist you in using those platforms.  
 
In case of Injury  
Federal regulations require that we inform participants about our institution's policy with regard to 
compensation and payment for treatment o f research -related injuries. If you believe that you have 
sustained an injury as a result of participating in a research study, you may contact the Principal 
Investigator Dr. Ronit Kishon at 646 -724-4171 so that you can review the matter and identify the 
medical resources that may be available to you.  
 
In case of injury, New York State Psychiatric Institute will provide short -term emergency medical 
treatment, which has been determined to be necessary by New York State Psychiatric Institute's 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
doctors, and wh ich is within the capability of New York State Psychiatric Institute to provide. In addition, 
we will provide assistance in arranging follow up care in such instances.  
 
 
 
New York State Psychiatric Institute and Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene do no t provide 
compensation or payment for treatment of research related injuries. However, you should be aware that 
you do not give up your legal right to seek such compensation through the court by participating in this 
research.  
 
 
Questions  
Dr. Kishon will a nswer to the best of her ability any questions that the participant may have now or in the 
future about the research procedures, or about the subject's response to the procedures. She can be  
 
reached during the day, and outside of regular business hours a t 646 -724-4171. Dr. Kishon can be 
called outside of regular business hours for important issues that should not wait until the next business 
day. In the case of an EMERGENCY go to your nearest emergency room and call Dr.  
Kishon.  
 
If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant, want to provide feedback, or have  
a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB). (An IRB is a committee that 
protects the rights of participants in research stud ies). You may call the IRB Main Office at (646)774 -
7155 during regular office hours.  
 
You will be given a copy of the signed Consent Form.  
 
 
 
 
Documentation of Consent  
 
I voluntarily agree to participate in the rese arch study described above.  
 
 
 
Name :___________________________  ( print)  
 
Signe d __________________________    Study Participant  
 
Date: __________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IRB # 6806R    
 
I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, benefits, and 
alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The participant 
has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my opinion is capable of freely consenting to participate 
in this research.  
 
 
 
Name:  ______________________    (print)  
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________  Person Designated to Obtain Consent  
 
 
 
 
Date:__________ ______  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                           08/26/2020  
 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  1 
        
 
 
Consent Summary Page  
  
• Overview  
Below is a summary of the study that you are asked to participate in.  This outline is meant to be a guide for you to 
use while considering the study and reading the consent form.   It is not meant to replace the consent form, which 
you will have to sign if you decide to participate in the study.   The consent form contains detailed information 
about the study and about the risks which you will need to consider before making your decision.   Read the 
consent form carefully and discuss it with others before deci ding to take part.   And remember that, even if you 
agree to participate,   you can change your mind at any time.  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT)  
and Nonspecific supportive treatmen t, and examine whether  their effectiveness relate s to concepts about self and 
others. In each therapy you will receive 12 individual sessions. You will not be able to choose which therapy you 
will receive but both are considered effective for treating depr ession. Precautionary measures will be taken to 
prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental processes. Most of your visits will be conducted remotely 
using the telephone or HIPAA -compliant video teleconferencing.  
 
• Voluntary  
As with all research, t his is a voluntary study, and you do not have to participate if you do not want to.   Also, you 
may stop participating at any time.  
 
• Alternative Treatments/Alternatives to Participation  
Medications, interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), dialectic behavior therapy (DBT), group therapy.  
 
• Procedures  
1. Evaluation for Major Depression Disorder (remote session).  
2. Self-report study measures (beginning, midpoint, end) done online . 
3. EEG and cognitive tests  (beginning and end) done in the lab at NYSPI.  
4. 12 weekly  sessions of Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression or 12 weekly sessions of Supportive 
Therapy for Depression(remote sessions).  
5. Participants cannot be on psychotropic medications during the study. Medicating for depression will not be 
part of this stud y.  
6. Participants will be interviewed about symptoms of depression every 3 weeks, and will fill a self -report 
measure on their symptoms every week (remote sessions, and measures done online).  
 
• Risks and Inconveniences  
This study includes some risks and disc omforts (please refer to the consent form for further details and 
explanations of these risks).   These include no change of your depressive symptoms. Sometimes psychotherapy 
might increase sadness and anxiety.  
You should exercise caution when traveling in  public and follow public health guidelines, such as wearing masks 
in public and avoiding crowds. It is important for you to stay informed about public health recommendations and 
guidelines regarding COVID -19, such as those issued by the Centers for Diseas e Control (CDC.gov) and local 
government guidelines and directives. If you have questions about how you will travel for appointments, or do not 
feel safe traveling, please let us know, and be advised that you can call to reschedule visits  
 
• Benefits  
Althoug h some benefit is possible such as reduction of depressive symptoms, you may not have any benefit if the 
treatment is not effective.  
 
• Questions  
You may contact the study principal investigator, Ronit Kishon , at 646 724 4171 with any question  
 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  2 
 
 
 
 
CONSENT FORM Study # 6806R  
Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression  
 
 
Purpose and Overview  
The purpose of the study is to compare two forms of therapy for depression since we still can’t predict 
which one will be more helpful for a particular person. Previous studies suggested that Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy (CBT) is an effective treatment for d epression in nearly half of the individuals who 
do it, however there are others who do not benefit from it. Nonspecific supportive treatment focuses 
on meeting with a therapist, receiving support, having one's hope restored, and overcoming 
demoralization. In each of the treatments you will receive12  virtua l sessions. You will be randomly 
assigned to one or the other. The purpose of this study is to explore whether your concepts about 
yourself and others are related to the effectiveness of each of the treatm ents. Also, you must enroll  in 
Dr. Kayser's study (#6559) for the purpose of behavioral and electrophysiological tests at two time 
points that will contribute to our study. The aim is to learn more about brain function in people who 
are depressed and recei ve different types of talk therapy.  
 
 
Voluntary  
Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if you later decide 
to stop participating, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. A decisio n not 
to participate or withdraw your participation will not affect your current or future treatment at the New 
York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia University Medical Center . If you are determined to be 
eligible for the study and later stop your p articipation for any reason, the study principal investigator, 
Dr. Kishon will treat you until the appropriate referral will be in place . You will be notified of significant 
new findings that may relate to your willingness to continue to participate in the  study.  
 
 
Alternative Treatments/ Alternatives to Participation  
You do not have to participate in this study to receive treatment for your depression. CBT and 
nonspecific supportive therapy can be obtained outside of study participation. There are medicati ons 
that have been shown to be effective for depression and can be prescribed by your regular physician. 
There are also other non -medication treatments for depression beside CBT such as interpersonal 
psychotherapy, or group therapy.  
 
 
Procedures  
Precaution ary measures will be taken to prevent the transmission of COVID -19 in experimental  
processes. All  your visits  in this protocol  will be conducted remotely using the telephone or HIPAA -
compliant video teleconferencing. In this study most of the evaluation  process  and all  psychotherapy  
sessions will be done virtually . We will discuss with you the technology HIPAA -compliant platforms to 
be used and any concerns you may have, such as access to a private space in which to take calls, or 
accessibility —access at  home to adequate devices, cell signal, or Wi -Fi. In the CBT treatment, you will 
receive 12 weekly remote psychotherapy sessions that last about 50 minutes each. The treatment 
involves being asked questions about your thoughts and feelings, as well as lear ning skills to manage 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  3 
them. In nonspecific supportive therapy you will also receive 12 sessions that last 50 minutes each.  
In the sessions you will receive support and understanding for your problems, so to have your hope  
restored and to overcome demoralization.  
 
Study measures :  
You will be interviewed  remotely  and you will fill some self -report measures  online   for a total of an hour 
and 15 minutes before treatment, in week 6, and after 12 weeks when the treatment is completed. We 
will also ask you before each session to fill a self -report measure that takes 5 minutes so we can 
monitor your symptoms. Every 3 weeks we will inter view you for 15 minutes, again with the intention of 
monitoring your level of symptoms.  The brain tests will be administered  in Dr. Kayser’s study( #6559).   
 
Medications during the study :  
You can participate in the study if you did not take prescribed antidepressant, or over the counter 
antidepressant medications, in the past month (three months for fluoxetine). You will be able to 
continue receiving psychotherapy sessions in the study if your  clinical condition will initiate your outside 
physician to prescribe psychotropic medications.  
 
The study doctors will end your study participation if they determine it is no longer in your best interest. 
In addition, you may stop participating in this st udy at any time for any reason. If you  stop participating 
in the study before 12 weeks end , the study principal investigator, Dr. Kishon, will continue to see you  
for sessions until an appropriate referral will be made. Completion of the study is not requ ired for you to  
receive these sessions by Dr. Kishon.  
 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Nonspecific Supportive Therapy – Audiotaping : 
You  will be audiotaped during your treatment visits. The audiotaping is optional . The audio recording 
will be used for edu cation, research or training purposes only. Any audio recording will not include your 
full name, and will be reviewed by Dr. Kishon who will evaluate the treatment provided by therapists in 
this study. The audio recordings are kept for no more than 10 year s after which they will be destroyed. 
If you withdraw your consent, audio recordings can be destroyed during or after the interview or 
procedure.  
 
Treatment After the End of the Study :  
After the study is over, the Principal Investigator, Dr. Kishon, will meet with you, and answer any 
questions you may have. If after completion of the study you have not improved, you will receive 
referrals for continuation of psychotherapy and/or medications. You will be able to see Dr. Kishon for 
weekly sessions until the referral is in place.   
 
Investigator Initiated Discontinuation of Study :  
There may be times when the investigator carrying out this study decides to stop the study even 
though you may wish to continue to participate. Examples include missing 4 number of sessions or not 
responding to repeated attempts to contact you.  
 
Risks and Inconveniences  
The primary risk of participating in this study is that the treatment may not help your symptoms. If you 
do not improve it may be up to 12 weeks from the time you enter the study until you would be provided 
with another type of treatment. Therefore, if you  do not improve, participating in this study will delay your  
receiving treatment for up to 12 weeks with medications and other psychotherapies known to be helpful.  
The risks of psychotherapy treatment include the possibility of increased anxiety or sadnes s, and the 
therapists will try to help you with that if it occurs. We anticipate that the risks of study participation are 

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  4 
no greater than those encountered in routine clinical treatment. However , you may be withdrawn from  
the study and offered other treat ment.  
 
Benefits:  
A direct benefit to you is the possibility that the treatments will help your symptoms of depression. In 
addition, your participation may help researchers learn more about how to treat depression. There may 
be no benefit to you if the trea tment is not effective.  
 
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to a better understanding of psychiatric disorders,  
and it may contribute to the development of objective measures for diagnosis and treatment selection.  
 
Confidentiality  
All rec ords will be stored in locked files and will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. 
Records will be available to research staff, and to Federal, State and Institutional regulatory personnel 
(who may review records as part of routine audits).  
 
Your name and other personal identifying information will be stored in an electronically secure database 
at New York State Psychiatric Institute. Research data that is entered into the computer will be stored 
according to study ID. A master list linking t he patient name to the assigned ID is kept in a separate file.  
In order to access, the computer and appropriate data files, the staff member must know have 
knowledge of the password and be given rights to access the data by the data manager.  
All data that  is transmitted via computer is encoded and identifying information is removed.  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by  
U.S. Law. This Web si te will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.  
 
Your private information could be used for future research studies or distributed to  
another inve stigator for future research studies, with or without identifiers. Should any of the information 
gathered from you be used for scientific publications or presentations, you will be protected through the 
use of a system of codes that will not reveal the ide ntity of individuals. Any report based on this study 
will only be used as grouped information without mention or description of the individual participants.  
 
The NYSPI Remote Communications Guidance will be followed to ensure protection of  
confidentiality.  This discussion and documentation of consent is carried out in a HIPAA – compliant 
teleconference  as well as the psychotherapy sessions . Instruments to be completed  
will be completed via REDCap , a HIPAAA -compliant platform  to ensure confidentiality . Our research 
assistants will assist you in using those platforms.  
 
In case of Injury  
Federal regulations require that we inform participants about our institution's policy with regard to 
compensation and payment for treatment of research -related injuries. If you believe that you have 
sustained an injury as a result of participating in a research study, you may contact the Principal 
Investigator Dr. Ronit Kishon at 646 -724-4171 so that you can review the matter and identify the 
medical resources that may be available to you.  
 
In case of injury, New York State Psychiatric Institute will provide short -term emergency medical 
treatment, which has been determined to be necessary by New York State Psychiatric Institute's 
doctors, and whic h is within the capability of New York State Psychiatric Institute to provide. In addition, 
we will provide assistance in arranging follow up care in such instances.  

   
                                                                                                                                                       08/20/2021  
                                                                                                                                                                                  5 
 
New York State Psychiatric Institute and Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene do not pr ovide 
compensation or payment for treatment of research related injuries. However, you should be aware that 
you do not give up your legal right to seek such compensation through the court by participating in this 
research.  
 
 
Questions  
Dr. Kishon will answer to the best of her ability any questions that the participant may have now or in the 
future about the research procedures, or about the subject's response to the procedures. She can be  
 
reached during the day, and outside of regular  business hours at 646 -724-4171. Dr. Kishon can be 
called outside of regular business hours for important issues that should not wait until the next business 
day. In the case of an EMERGENCY go to your nearest emergency room and call Dr.  
Kishon.  
 
If you ha ve any questions about your rights as a research participant, want to provide feedback, or have  
a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB). (An IRB is a committee that 
protects the rights of participants in research studies). You  may call the IRB Main Office at (646)774 -
7155 during regular office hours.  
 
You will be given a copy of the signed Consent Form.

                                                           08/26/2020  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
Docume ntation of Consent  
 
I voluntarily agree to participate in the research study described above.  
 
 
 
Name :___________________________  ( print)  
 
Signe d __________________________    Study Participant  
 
Date: __________________________  
 
 
I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, 
benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in 
the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my 
opini on is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.  
 
 
 
Name:  ______________________    (print)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________  Person Designated to Obtain Consent  
 
 
 
 
Date:__________ _  
 

Form  #PP2:  HIPAA  Authorization  for Research  4.14.14 New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI)  
Authorization to Use or Disclose Health Information  during a Research Study  
Protocol Number:  Principal Investigator:  
Name o f Study:  
Before researchers can use or share any identifiable health infor mation  (“Health Information ”) about you  as part of the 
above stud y (the “Research”), the New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) is required to obtain your authorization. Y ou agree  
to allow the following individuals and entities to use and disclose Health Information  about you as described below:  
•New York S tate Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) , your doctors and other health care providers,  if any, and
•The Principal Inv estigator and  his/her staff (together “Researchers”).   Researchers may include staff of NYSPI, the New  York
State Office of Mental Health (OMH), Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), and  Columbia University (CU) ,
provided such staff is  a part of  the study, and
•WƌŽǀŝĚĞƌƐŽĨ ƐĞƌǀŝĐĞƐĨŽƌƚŚĞZĞƐĞĂƌĐŚĂƚ h͕Ez^W/ĂŶĚͬŽƌ Z&D,͕ƐƵĐŚĂƐDZ/ŽƌWd͕ŽƌCentral  Reference  Laboratories 
;EKI), iĨ indicated in the  consent  form.
1. The Health Information that may be used and ͬŽƌ disclosed for this Research includes:
All information collected during the Research as told to you in the Informed Consent Form .   
Health  Information in your  clinical research record which include s the resul ts of  physical exam s, medical and 
psychiatric hi story, laboratory or diagnostic tests, or Health Information relating to a particular condition that is related  to 
the Research.  
Additional information may include:  
2. The Health Information listed above may be disclosed to:
Researchers  and their staff at the following organizations involved wi th this Research : 
The S ponsor of t he Research , 
and it s agents and contractors (together,  “Sponsor”); and  
Repr esentatives of regulatory and government  agencies, institutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers 
and their institutions to the level needed  to carry out their responsibilities  related to the conduct of the research .   
Private laboratories and other persons and organizations that analyze your health information in connection with 
this study  
Othe r (family members or significant others, study buddies,  outside agencies  etc.)  Specify:  
3. By giving permission to release your  Health Information as described  above, you  unders tand that your  Health
Information may be  disclosed to individuals or entities which  are not required to comply with the federal and state privacy laws
which govern the use and disclosure of personal Health Information  by NYSPI.    This means that on ce your  Health#6806Ronit Kishon Ph.D. Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Depression 
Nathan Kline Institute (where laboratory specimens are analyzed)

Form  #PP2:  HIPAA  Authorization  for Research  4.1.14 Information  has been disclosed to a third party which does not have to  follow these  laws (e.g., a drug company or the Sponsor  
of the Research), it may no longer be protected  under the HIPAA or  NYS Mental Hygiene Law requirements but is subject to the 
terms of the consent form and may be subject to other state or federal privacy laws or regulations .  
4. Please note that:
•You do not have to sign this Authorization  form , but if you do not, you  may not be able to participate in the study or
receive study related care .  You may change your mind at any time and for any reason. If you do so, you  may  no
longer be  allowed to participate in the study .  If you withdraw  this Authorization the  research staff and  the Sponsor, if this
is sponsored research, may still use or disclose Health  Information  containing identifying information they already have
collected about  you as needed  to maintain the reliability of the research.   Any reques t to withdraw this  Authorization
must  be made in writ ing to  (enter name and contact inf ormation  below):
•While the Research is going on , you may not be allowed to review the Health Information in your clinical research
record that has been created or collected by  NYSPI .   When this research has been completed  you may be allowed to  see
this information.  If it is needed  for your care, your Health Inform ation will be given  to you or your  Doctor .
5. This Authori zation does not have an end date .
6. You will be given a copy of this form  after you have signed it.
I agree to the use and disc losure of Health Information about me as described above:  
__________________________________________                _____________________  
Signature of Par ticipant/ Legal Representative    Date  
________ ____________ __________________  
Printed Name of Participant 
______________________________________  
Relationship of Legal Representative to Participant (if applicable)  
We also ask you or your legal representative to initial the statements below:  
I have received a copy of the NYSPI/OMH  Notice  of Privacy Practices. Ronit Kishon Ph.D.1051 Riverside DriveNew York, NY 10032Ronit Kishon Ph.D.1051 Riverside DriveNew York, NY 10032
