Study Narr ative  
Title:   Audio Distraction for Traction Pin Placement: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
8/22/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant Contact Project Narrative  
1. Summary   
a. Traction pin placement is a common way to temporarily manage femur fractures and 
unstable acetabular fractures while awaiting surgery. Skeletal t raction is thought to 
reduce patient discomfort by improving fracture alignment as well as relaxing muscle 
spasm pain  felt from the broken bone by stretching out the leg . Skeletal t raction may 
also help prevent articular surface damage in the hip by decreasing joint pressure.  
Despite the benefits of skeletal traction, insertion of the traction  pin can be a painful 
and unpleasant experience for the patient. Our study hopes to see if listening to music 
with headphones during insertion of the traction pin decrease  patient pain  and anxiety .  
 
2. Study aims:  
a. Primary:   
i. To determine if audio  distraction will improve subject ’s overall experience 
during skeletal traction pin placement  compared to those without audio 
distraction . 
ii. To determine if subject anxiety decreases with the use of au dio distraction 
compared to those without audio distraction during skeletal traction pin 
placement  
iii. To determine if subject pain decreases with the use of audio distraction 
compared to those without audio distraction during skeletal traction pin 
placement  
 
b. Secondary:  
i. To determine if audio distraction changes  provider perception of procedure 
difficulty   
ii. To determine if audio distraction changes  overall skeletal traction pin placement 
procedure time  
iii. To determine if pain medicine use is different in patients who have audio 
distraction compared to those without audio distraction during skeletal traction 
pin placement.  
 
3. Background, Rationale, Significance  
a. Lower extremity injuries, including acetabular and mid shaft  femur fractures, are 
common injuries seen at trauma centers ( Liao,  HHS 2015 ). The incidence of acetabular 
fractures has remained stable at 3 /100,000 per year (Laird, JBJ 2005 ) and  diaphyseal 
femur fractures occur at a rate of 1/10,000 per year  (Weiss, JBJS 2010) . Femur and 
acetabular fracture s may disrupt the mechanical axis of the lower extremity, therefore 
causing joint dysfunction if not properly repaired ( Probe, AAOS 2003 ). Due to these 
possible complications, lower extremity fractures are acute issues which a re 
immediately addressed in an  emergent setting. There has been effort to improve 
outcomes by earlier intervention and surgery ( Plaisier, Injury 2000 ). If these fractures 
are unable to be repaired acutely, the current standard of care in orthopedics is to place 
a skeletal traction pin.  
 
Supracondylar femoral skeletal traction pin placement continues to be the popular 
choice for preoperative stabilization of lower extremity fractures, including acetabular 
and femoral fractures ( Resell, 2009 ). The traction pin theoretically improves pain and 
provides axial reduction of pelvic and lower extremity fractures. This, in theory, 
prevents significant skeletal muscle contraction and improves the ease of fracture 
reduction in the operating room. Traction has also been hypothesized to decrease 
damage to articular cartilage from impingement on bone ( Browner, ES 2015 ).  This has 
been the standard of care for decades in orthopedics and therefore has not been 
adequately studied or demonstrated in the literature.  
 
Skeletal traction is useful in immobilization and stabilization of fractures, and can be 
applied quickly and safely with minimal contraindications ( Defroda, EJTES 2016 ). There 
is also data to support less discomfort with traction pin placement compared to casting 
for lower ext remity fractures ( Resell 2009 ). However, the procedure is relatively invasive 
and can cause significant discomfort and anxiety in the patient. The supplies needed 
such as needles for anesthesia, scalpel, traction pin set, drill, and traction frame can be 
intimidating for a patient already experiencing discomfort from a lower extremity 
fracture.  
 
Given that skeletal traction is the current standard of care  at our institution ; our study  
will focus on the use of  audio distraction during placement of skeletal traction and the 
effect on patient discomfort .  There have been multiple studies examining  the use of 
various distraction techniques for pain and anxiety, mainly with patients undergoing GI 
procedures, such as colonoscopy ( Bampton 1997, Bechtold 2006, Pala nkis 1994, Silva 
2016, Smolen 2002) . The goal of our study is to investigate the use audio distraction 
with subject  preferred music from  an mp3 player , and the effect  on patient anxiety and 
pain  during the placement of a skeletal traction pin. Then also retrospectively observe if 
audio distraction alters secondary outcome measures . 
 
b. A pilot study has not been performed, as such there is no preliminary data. However, 
results of studies addressing audio distraction and patient discomfort in Colonoscopy 
proced ures identify significant decreases in subject pain [p<0.0001], discomfort 
[p=0.037], and providers’ perception of procedure difficulty [p<0.02] (Bechtold 2006 & 
Costa 2010). These studies also identify significant increases to overall patient 
satisfaction  [p<0.0001].  
 
c. This research will be important to the scientific and orthopedic community as it will 
potentially establish a method of improving patient care during a frequently used and 
uncomfortable orthopedic procedure.  
 
4. Approach  
a. Study design  
i. This will be a prospective randomized controlled trial  at Regi ons Hospital in 
Saint Paul, MN  and Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis, MN  to 
compare primary outcomes of subjects between audio distraction groups during 
traction pin pl acement.  This study will also include a cross -sectional descriptive 
element by examining above listed secondary outcome measures . It will explore 
if either of these outcomes are different between the two subject groups  in an 
exploratory fashion . 
 
Group sel ection was randomized through Microsoft Excel 2010, of which 
subjects are split into blocks of 10, with each block held at a fix ratio of 0.5 for 
audio distraction and without audio distraction.  
i. Inclusion  
1. >18 years old  
2. Conscious, oriented , able to give in formed consent  
3. Medical need for  distal fem oral or proximal tibia l skeletal traction pin 
placement  
ii. Exclusion  
1. Medical contraindication to skeletal traction  
2. Endotracheal intubation  
3. Unable to participate in verbal communication throughout the 
procedure and in the recovery phase  
4. Sensory impairment to pain  
5. Inability to make accurate mark on VAS 2/2 cognitive, motor or visual 
deficiencies.  
 
b. Data collection process   
i. Identify patients at Regions Hospital who meet inclusion criteria who are 
determined to need skeletal traction pin placement  
1. Patients meeting inclusi on criteria will be identified by the on call  junior 
residents at Regions Hospital  and Hennepin County Medical Center  
ii. Recruitment  of patients fo r inclusion in this stu dy will be complete by the  
orthopedic  resident  placing the skeletal traction pin .  Patients will be recruited 
for inclusion in this study after determining the medical need for placement of a 
skeletal traction pin.   
iii. Consent  
1. Written i nformed consent will be obtained by the orthopedic resident 
performing traction pin placement  prior to initiating steps for traction 
pin placement  
2. Patients will a cknowledge that the study has been explained adequately 
and that they are free to withdraw fro m study at any time without 
effect on their treatment and management  
3. Patients will provide consent for participation in this study at the time 
of consenting for placement of the skeletal traction pin.  Minors do not 
meet inclusion criteria for this study.  
iv. Data sources  needed for this study  
1. Chart review f or current injury , date and time of injury,  and medications 
given during hospital visit.  
2. Chart Review for patient age, gender, height and weight  
3. Survey for patient  
a. Visual analog scale  (VAS) to rate pain  
b. Visual analog s cale (VAS) to rate anxiety  
c. Visual analog scale (VAS) to rate  overall patient experience  
4. Survey for resident  
a. Cooperation of patient  on 1 -10 scale; fully cooperative to 
combative  
b. Ease of procedure  on 1 -10 scale; easy to most difficult  
5. Overall time required for placement of skeletal traction pin  
v. Process steps for data acquisition  
1. Demographic data  (age, sex, injury, date/time of injury) - completed by 
patient; obtained by resident , and/or retrospect ive chart review by the 
research assistant.  
2. Time of procedure from injection of lidocaine to completion 
(disconnecting drill ); obtained by resident  
a. Start time just prior to lidocaine injection  
b. Stop time after drill disconnected from pin  
3. Medications given d uring procedure; obtained via retrospective chart 
review by research assistant  
4. Post -procedure VAS pain, anxiety , and experience  surveys completed by 
patient, obtained by resident  immediately after hanging of traction 
weight.  
5. Post -procedure patient complia nce and ease of procedure survey s 
completed by the resident  after completion of procedure  
 
c. Intervention , treatment s 
i. Standard of care will be provided by the orthopedic resident for skeletal traction 
pin placement .  Those included in this study and randomiz ed into the tre atment 
arm will be given an mp3 device  to listen to genera of music of their choosing in 
addition to be treated to the current standard of care.  Those randomized into 
the control arm will be treated to the current standard of care   
ii. Patients  will be randomized by the orthopedic resident into  2 groups; Audio 
distraction with music versus control group with no music .  This will be done by 
sealed envelopes drawn after consent for the procedure.   
 
d. Outcomes/endpoint and other variable definitions , and i nstruments used    
i. A 10 -point visual analog scale for patient experience ( 1 worst possible 
experience, 10 best possible experience)  
1. Singer 1998; Results suggested that the satisfaction VAS is both reliable 
and valid.  
ii. A 10 -point visual analog scale for pain ( 1 no pain, 10 worst pain)  
1. Bijur 2001; Results demonstrated that the VAS is sufficiently reliable to 
be used to assess acute pain  
2. Todd 1996; demonstrated the validity of the VAS for acute pain 
measurement among ED patients to measure acute p ain 
iii. A 10 -point visual analog scale for anxiety ( 1 no anxiety , 10 worst anxiety ) 
1. Hornblow 1976; Results  suggest that VAS is sufficiently reliable to be 
used to assess acute pain.  
iv. Pain  medication  used pre/post traction pin placement  
v. Overall time required for  placement of skeletal traction pin  
vi. Resident perception of procedural difficulty  
vii. Intermediary Newman -Keuls (SNK) analysis techniques will be utilized to 
regularly perform preliminary post -hoc tests. This will aid towards  
 
e. Statistical analysis plan  
i. T-Test  of Sampling Demographic Data  
ii. T-test of Primary Outcome Measures between subject groups  
1. Pain Survey Scores  
2. Anxiety Survey Scores  
3. Experience Survey Scores  
iii. Linear & Logistic Regression Analysis  of Primary Outcomes  
1. Addition of Demographic Covariates  
2. Observing  both Linear & Non -Linear identities of the relationship.  
iv. T-Test of Secondary Outcome Measures between subject groups  
1. Perception of Difficulty  
2. Procedural Time  
3. Pain Medication  
v. Linear & Logistic Regression Analysis of Secondary Outcomes  
1. Addition of Demographic Covariates  
2. Observing both Linear & Non -Linear identities of the relationship  
vi. Power analysis or statement of precision  
A power analysis was performed to estimate the minimum sample size needed 
to adequately detect a clinically significant change  in anxiety and pain scores 
between the audio distraction groups. At a Type I error rate of 0.05 (α=0.05) and 
80% power (β=0.80), the power analysis identif ies a minimum sample size of 42  
total participants, 21 for each group. The estimated effect size is 2.0 on the 
utilized 10 -point scale with a two -sided standard deviation of two . These 
measures for effect size  are adopted from a previously performed colonoscopy 
audio distraction study which identified clinically significant results (Costa 2010). 
A power analysis for secondary outcome measures was not performed due to 
their non -inferential nature.  
vii. Strengths  
1. Regions Hospital  and Hennepin County Medical Center  provides 
sufficient access to the study population and the facility is adequate to 
conduct the stud y. Both Level I Trauma centers.  
2. Adequate qualified staff members to conduct the study  
3. Staff will be  adequately trained on the protocol and their specific 
research related duties . 
4. Exhaustive primary & secondary outcome assessment.  
5. Use of verified survey techniques.  
6. Conservative effect size estimate compared to previous research . 
viii. Limitations  
1. Traction pin placement is typically done in an acute situation, which 
may limit how much information we will be able to get from the patient 
survey  
2. Subject rec all bias with pain measurement  
3. Different techniques for traction pin placement  
a. Attempt to have a standardized procedure for the residents to 
follow  
4. Pain tolerance of patients  
a. This will be controlled by appropriate randomization  
5. Recall bias with procedural difficulty assessment in participating 
resident providers. Comparing procedural difficulty to previous 
experience, not novel.  
 
5. State that a score of five dictates a normal pr ocedural difficulty then rate procedural difficulty 
based on that score. Median value selected on 10 -point scale.  
Setting/Environment/Organizational feasibility  
a. This study will be conducted at Regions Hospital in Saint Paul, MN  and Hennepin County 
Medical Center (HCMC) in Minneapolis, MN  
b. This HealthPartners setting is a level 1 trauma center with the patient population 
appropriate to  carry out the proposed study .  HCMC is a level 1 trauma center with a 
similarly appropriate patient population.  
c. The orthopedi c department leadership has been engaged in development  and approv al 
of this study  
 
6. Risks and Benefits   
a. Potential risk factors with audio distraction group  
i. Patient may not hear resident when attempting to communicate  
1. Resident will be able to communicate with an assistant in the room to 
get the attention of the patient, if needed.  
ii. Patient may receive less pain management with the assumption they will have 
higher pain tolerance from the audio distraction  
1. Resident will continue to follow standard of care for traction pin 
placement  
iii. Benefit for patient in audio distraction group to experience less discomfort 
during traction pin placement  
iv. Benefit to society, as this study may provide an opportunity for providers to 
decrease the level of discomfort in patients who need traction pin placement.  
 
7. Data Confidentiality and Privacy  
a. In order to secure patient confidentiality and data security, all data will be de -identified. 
All patients will be assigned a research identification number (not their MRN) that 
cannot be associated with their name, birthdate, or other identifying information.  
b. Patient information will only be accessed via secure servers for Regions Hospital and on 
encrypted password -protected computers. If it is necessary to transmit patient data, i t 
will be transmitted in the de -identified format, using only patient research identification 
numbers.  
i. De-identified data will be shared with collaborating sites  (HCMC ) 
c. At the end of the study, the electronic files will be permanently deleted and patient 
identifiers will be removed.  All  hard copies will be shredded.  
 
8. Timeline  
a. August 2017 : IRB submission  
b. September 2017: IRB approval  
c. October 2017: Protocol implementation  
d. October 2017 : Patient enrollment  
e. October 2018: Patient enrollment closes  
f. November 2018 : Data analysis  
g. December 2018: Manuscript preparation  
h. February 2019: Manuscript submission  
 
9. Dissemination/Sharing Results/Integration and Impact  
a. We do plan on publishing to peer reviewed orthopedic journals such as ; 
i. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery  
ii. Clinical Orthopedics and Related Research  
iii. Journal of Orthopedic Trauma  
b. We plan to disseminate the information on a local and regional level by presenting at;  
i. University  of Minnesota Grand Round  
ii. Regions Department of Orthopedic Surgery Grand Rounds  
iii. Minnesota Orthopedic Society poster presentation  
iv. Mid-America Orthopedic Society poster presentation  
c. Results will be shared with HealthPartners  
i. The results of this project could possibly change the stand of care for placing 
skeletal traction pins at Regions  Hospital  
 
10. References  
1. Browner B, Jupiter J, Krettek C, Anderson P. Skeletal trauma: basic science, 
management, and reconstruction. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Sanders; 2015  
2. DeFroda SF, Gil JA, Born CT. Indications and anatomic landmarks for the applicat ion of 
lower extremity traction: a review. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg . 2016;42(6):695 -700. 
doi:10.1007/s00068 -016-0712 -3. 
3. Resell S, Thorngren K. Preoperative traction for hip fracture : A randomized comparison 
between skin and skeletal traction in 78 patients  Preoperative tract ion for hip fracture. 
2009;6470(July 2017):33 -36. doi:10.3109/17453679809000929.  
4. Laird A, Keating JF. Acetabular fractures: a 16 -year prospective epidemiological study. J 
Bone Joint Surg Br. 2005 Jul;87(7):969 -73.Plaisier BR, Meldon SW, Super DM, Malangoni 
MA. Improved outcome after early fixation of acetabular fractures. Injury 2000;31:81 -
4.Weiss R, Jansson K. National data of 6,409 Swedish inpatients with femoral shaft 
fractures. High incidence of older female patients after low-energy trauma. J Bone Joint 
Surg Br. 2010;92(suppl 4):561.  
5. Probe RA. Lower extremity angular malunion: evaluation and surgical correction. J Am 
Acad Orthop Surg . 2003;11(5):302 -311.  
6. Liao F, Xu H, Torrey N, Road P, Jolla L. HHS Public Access. 2015;2(74) :1393 -1403. 
doi:10.1126/scisignal.274pe36.Insulin.  
7. Bampton, P. & Draper, B. (1997). Effect of relaxation music  
on patient tolerance of gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures. Journal of Clinical 
Gastroenterology, 25(1), 343 -345.  
8. Bechtold ML, Perez RA, Puli  SR et al. Effect of music on patients under - going outpatient 
colonoscopy.World J Gastroenterol 2006; 12: 7309 – 7312  
9. Palankis, K. C., DeNobile, J. W., Sweeney, W. B., & Blan - kenship, C. L. (1994). Effect of 
music therapy on state anxiety in patients undergoing flexible sigmoidoscopy. Diseases 
Of The Colon  
10. Silva AP De, Niriella MA, Nandamuni Y, et al. Effect of audio and visual distraction on 
patients undergoing colonoscopy : a randomized controlled study. 2016:1211 -1214.  
11. Smolen D, Topp R, Sin ger L. The effect of self -selected music during colonoscopy on 
anxiety, heart rate, and blood pressure. Appl Nurs Res 2002; Bijur, P. E., Silver, W., & 
Gallagher, E. J. (2001). Reliability of the visual analog scale for measurement of acute 
pain. Academic e mergency medicine, 8(12), 1153 -1157.  
12. Hornblow, A. R., & Kidson, M. A. (1976). The visual analogue scale for anxiety: a 
validation study. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 10(4), 339 -341 
13. Todd KH, Funk KG, Funk JP, Bonacci R. Clinical signifi cance  of reported changes in pain 
severity. Ann Emerg Med.  1996; 4:485 –9. 
14. Singer AJ, Thode HC Jr. Determination of the minimal clinically significant  difference on a 
patient visual analog satisfaction scale. Acad Emerg Med. 1998  Oct;5(10):1007 -11. 
PubMed P MID: 9862594.  
 
 
 
 
 
 