PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1A PHASE 2B/3 RANDOMIZED, DOUBLE-BLIND, PLACEBO-CONTROLLED, 
DOSE-RANGING STUDY TO INVESTIGATE THE EFFICACY AND SAFETY OF
PF-06651600 IN ADULT AND ADOLESCENT ALOPECIA AREATA 
(AA) SUBJECTS WITH 50% OR GREATER SCALP HAIR LOSS
Investigational Product Number: PF-06651600 
Investigational Product Name: Janus Kinase 3 inhibitor
United States (US) Investigational New 
Drug (IND) Number:
European Clinical Trials Database 
(EudraCT) Number:2018-001714-14
Protocol Number: B7981015
Phase: 2b/3
This document and accompanying materials contain confidential information belonging to Pfizer.  Except as 
otherwise agreed to in writing, by accepting or reviewing these documents, you agree to hold this information in confidence and not copy or disclose it to others (except where required by applicable law) or 
use it for unauthorized purposes.  In the event of any actual or suspected breach of this obligation, Pfizer 
must be promptly notified.
CCI
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 2Document History
Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
Amendment 
513April 
2021In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints, in Section 2, 
Objectives and Endpoints, and in Section 9, Data Analysis/Statistical 
Methods, language was added to clarify the known regional requirements 
for the analysis of primary and secondary endpoints.
         Rationale: Differences in regulatory feedback from various regions have 
necessitated distinctive reporting requirements for the primary and 
secondary endpoints.  These differences were already described in the 
protocol; this language provides more clarity.  
Throughout the prot ocol, a key secondary objective for the study was 
added w ith the key secondary endpoint of “Response based on an absolute 
SALT Score ≤10 at Week 24”. This key secondary endpoint will be 
analyzed utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to control overall Type I 
error. This change applies to the overall study; therefore, it does not 
change the primary and key secondary objectives and endpoints for the 
European Medicines Agency (EMA), which are different than those for the 
overall study and remain the same as th e one from previous version of the 
protocol. a key secondary objective for the study was added with the key 
secondary endpoint of “ To evaluate the efficacy of PF -06651600 compared 
to placebo in adult and adolescent alopecia areata (AA) subjects with 50% 
orgreater scalp hair loss on regrow th of lost hair (as measured by an 
absolute Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤10) at Week 24”.  A 
secondary endpoint of “Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤10 at 
Week 24” w as also added and will be analyzed as a key  secondary endpoint 
utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to control overall Type I error.  
This does not change the primary and key secondary objectives and 
endpoints for the European Medicines Agency (EMA), which remain the 
same. 
         Rationale: Previous versions of the protocol indicated that when SALT 
≤20 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, SALT ≤10 
will be analyzed controlling for Type I error. This change formalizes that 
analysis in the form of a key secondary endp oint.
Throughout the protocol, the secondary endpoint of “Response based on a 
SALT score of ≤10 at Week s 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48” w as 
updated to clarify that this refers to “an absolute SALT score” for 
consistency with other SALT endpoints.
         Rationale: This change has been made to correct a typographic error.   
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Section 2, 
Objectives and Endpoints, clarif ication was added regarding the key 
secondary endpoint of “PGI -C response def ined as a score of “moderately 
improved” or “greatly improved” at Week 24” for the EMA and competent 
authorities in the Voluntary Harmonisation Procedure (VHP) countries . 
         Rationale: This key secondary objective for the EMA and competent 
authoriti es in the VHP countries was already described in the protocol; 
addition of this language in the tables describing the study objectives and 
endpoints in the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in 
Section 2, Objectives and Endpoints (rather than just in the footnotes) 
provides more clarity.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 3Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
In the protocol summary, the secondary endpoint for the Patient’s Global 
Impression of change (PGI -C) response w as updated from “PGI -C response 
defined as a score of “moderately improved” or “grea tly improved” at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48” to “PGI -C response defined as a 
PGI- C score of “moderately improved” or “greatly improved” at Weeks 4, 
8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48”.
         Rationale: This change has been made to ensure consiste ncy with the 
wording of this endpoint in Section 2.   
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9. 7, Interim 
Analysis, language was added to provide clarification on the objective of 
the interim analysis and that the results will have no impact on the study 
conduct, analysis, or reporting.
         Rationale: This change has been made at the request of the United States 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to clarify the objectives of the 
interim analysis.
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.1, Sample 
Size Determination,  the sample size section was updated to incorporate the 
power of the study based on the key secondary endpoint of SALT ≤ 10 at 
Week 24, and using the α levels of 0.01 (for EMA) and 0.00125 (for 
FDA/Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency [PMDA]) .
         Rationale: This change has been made to align with the reorganization of 
the endpoints for the study.
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.1, Sample 
Size Determination, a reference w as added for the abstract presenting the 
Concert CTP -543 Phase 2b Study Week 24 data which was used to 
estimate the treatment difference and placebo response rate for the Patient’s 
Global Impression of Change (PGI -C).  
        Rationale: This change has been made to correct an error of omission.
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.2, Efficacy 
Analysis, the definition of the Full Analysis Set (FAS) w as updated.
         Rationale: This change has been made at the request of the FDA to 
include all subjects, regardless of whether they received study 
medication, in the FAS.
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.2.1, 
Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons, this language was revised.  
The Protocol Summary reflects the testing procedure overall for the study 
and Section 9.2.1 and new Sections 9.2.1.1, 9.2.1.2, and 9.2.1.3 detail the 
testing procedures used for the overall study, for the FDA/PMDA, and for 
the EMA.  
         Rationa le: This change has been made to align with the reorganization of 
the endpoints for the study.  
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.2.2, 
Analysis of the Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints, this language was 
revised.  The statis tical methods for the analysis of the primary endpoint for 
the EMA were revised. Section 9.2.2, Analysis of the Primary and Key 
Secondary Endpoints was re -organized by adding new Sections 9.2.2.1 and 
9.2.2.2 to detail the analyses used for the overall stud y, for the 
FDA/PMDA, and for the EMA. In addition, description of the per -protocol 
analysis was moved to a separate section (Section 9.2.2.3).  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 4Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
         Rationale: This change has been made to incorporate advice received 
from a European national agency re garding the approach for how  
missing data due to COVID -19 should be handled in the analysis of the 
primary endpoint.
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.2.2.1, For 
the Overall Study, the FDA/PMDA (Analysis of the Primary Endpoint ), the 
procedure for handling of missing data was updated to exclude subjects 
from the primary analysis who are missing the SALT assessment at Week 
24 due to coronavirus disease 19 (COVID -19) related reasons.  Subjects 
with SALT assessments missing at Week 24 for other reasons will be 
counted as non -responders.  In addition, a supportive analysis has been 
added which will count all subjects with missing Week 24 SALT 
assessments, regardless of the reason, as non -responders. 
         Rationale: This change h as been made to mitigate the impact of missed 
SALT assessments at Week 24 due to COVID -19.  
In the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods and in Section 9.2.3, 
Analysis of Secondary Endpoints, the procedure for handling of missing 
data for binary endpoint s was updated to exclude subjects from the analysis 
of secondary endpoints for any visit for which the assessment is missing 
due to COVID- 19 related reasons.  Subjects with assessments missing for 
other reasons will be counted as non -responders. 
         Rationale: This change has been made to mitigate the impact of missed 
assessments due to COVID -19 and is consistent with the handling of 
missing data for the primary endpoint.  
In Section 1.4, Clinical Experience, references were added to reference the 
clinical study reports or the clinical protocols for the following Pfizer 
studies: B7931005, B7981005, B7981006, B7981007, B7981019, and 
B7981032. 
         Rationale: This change has been made to correct an error of omission.
In Sections 4.2, Exclusion Crit eria and 5.8.2, Prohibited Medications and 
Treatments, the prohibition of medications that prolong the time from the 
beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T w ave (QT interval) w as 
removed.  
         Rationale: Pfizer has performed an analysis of nonclinical and clinical 
data, w hich indicate that there is no evidence of any clinically relevant 
QT interval prolongation due to PF -06651600 and therefore the risk for 
PF-06651600 to cause QT prolongation in humans is low. Prohibition of 
these medication s is no longer required.
In Sections 5.8.3, Vaccinations, language was added to provide 
clarification on the use of COVID -19 vaccines.
         Rationale: This change was necessary due to the wide -spread use of 
COVID -19 vaccines globally in the setting of the COVID -19 pandemic.
In Section 9.2.2 Analysis of the Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints, the 
details of the “tipping point analysis” were removed.
         Rationale: The details of these analysis will be included in the Statistical 
Analysis Plan.    
In Section 9.2.2 .3Per-Protocol Analysis ( Analysis of the Primary and Key 
Secondary Endpoints ), language was added detailing the protocol 
deviations which will be evaluated for each subject prior to unblinding to 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 5Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
determine if a subject w ill be excluded fro m the Per Protocol Analysis Set 
(PPAS).
         Rationale: Feedback from the FDA requested that the criteria used to 
define the per protocol analysis population be included in the protocol.   
Section 9.2.3, Analysis of Secondary Endpoints, was revised to clarify how 
secondary endpoints that are not α -controlled w ill be analyzed. In addition, 
Information from former Section 9.2.2.1, Analysis of the Primary Endpoint 
to Assess the Secondary Objective, was moved to new Section 9.2.3.1 and 
retitled Analysis of Exposure- Response.
         Rationale: These changes w ere made to align with the reorganization of 
the endpoints for the study.
Section 9.2.5 Subgroup Analysis was added to check for consistency of key 
efficacy results from across subgroups which will als o support the 
International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) E17 (General Principles for 
Planning and Design of Multi -Regional Clinical Trials) registration 
approach, as applicable.
         Rationale: The descriptive subgroup analyses will support the eval uation 
of consistency of treatment effect across subsets.   
Added Section 9.4, Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Early Unblinding, 
to provide details regarding early unblinding of the PK/PD data that is 
planned when ≥90% of subjects have reached 24 w eeks po st-randomization 
(or discontinued prior to the Week 24 visit). Access to the unblinded data 
will be limited to the list of PK/PD analysts and programmers that will be 
appropriately documented on the early unblinding for PK/PD form .
Rationale: Early unblinding of the PK/PD data will enable PK and 
concentration /response model building for study readout .
In Appendix 1, Abbreviations, news abbreviations were added for “body 
mass index” or “BMI”; “ Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Device s 
Agency” or “PMDA”; “United States Food and Drug Administration” or 
“FDA”; and “generalized linear mixed model” or “GLMM”.
         Rationale: This change was made for clarification.
Removed Appendices 5 through 1 7 (Severity of Alopecia Tool [SALT], 
Colum bia Suicide Severity Rating Scale [C -SSRS], AAPPO [ Alopecia 
Areata Patient Priority Outcomes] , Patient’s Global Impression of Change 
[PGI- C], Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth [P-Sat], Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale [HADS], EuroQol 5 Dimensions [EQ-5D-5L], 
EuroQol 5 Dimensions –Youth [EQ -5D-Y], Patient Health Questionnaire 
– 8Items [PHQ -8], 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey Version 2 Acute 
[SF-36v2 Acute], Alopecia Areata Resource Utilization [AARU], Work 
Productivity and Activity Impairment: Al opecia Areata [WPAI:AA], and 
Clinician Global Impression –Alopecia Areata [CGI -AA]) as w ell as 
cross -references to the deleted appendices . Remaining a ppendices were 
renumbered as needed due to the deletions. 
         Rationale: Updated per current practi ce not to include copyrighted 
instruments in protocol appendices. 
In Appendix 6.3, Alternative Facilities for Safety Assessments, Table 8 w as 
updated from “Windows for Remote Visits and Laboratory Sample 
Collections if Required Due to COVID -19 Disruptions ” to “Window s for 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 6Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
Remote Visits and Laboratory Sample Collections if Required Due to 
Disruptions from Public Emergencies”.
         Rationale: This change was made for clarification.
Throughout the document, references to the European Union (EU) 
(including VHP countries) were updated to European Medicines Agency 
(EMA) and competent authorities in the VHP countries , as applicable.
         Rationale: This change was made for clarification.
Throughout the document, references to table numbers were updated to 
reflect the addition of Tables 4, 5, 6, and 7 and figure numbers w ere 
updated to reflect the reorganization of the figures in Section 9.2.1.
         Rationale: This change was made for correctness of numbering of in -text 
tables and figures.
Global corrections to typographical errors, abbreviations, and definitions 
were made.
Amendment 
420 October 
2020Throughout the protocol, it has been specifically clarified that for the 
European Union (EU) (including the Voluntary Harmonisation Procedure 
[VHP] countries), the primary objective and primary endpoint will utilize 
an absolute Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score of ≤10 and not ≤20 at 
Week 24.
         Rationale: While this was previously included in the protocol (to use 
either SALT ≤10 or ≤20 for the primary objective and endpoint based on 
regulatory feedback), these changes have been made to align w ith a 
regulatory agency request to specify that SALT ≤10 w ill be used in the 
EU.
Throughout the protocol, it has been specifically clarified that for the EU 
(including VHP countries), the evaluation of the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient centered outcomes (as measured by Patient’s Global Impression of 
Change [PGI -C] response at Week 24) is a key secondary objective.  The 
PGI- C response at Week 24 will b e analyzed as a key secondary endpoint 
utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to control overall Type I error. 
         Rationale: While it was previously included in the protocol that the 
PGI- C response will be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint ut ilizing 
an appropriate testing procedure to control overall Type I error in a 
separate analysis where required, t hese changes have been made to 
specify that in the EU PGI- C response will be analyzed as a key 
secondary endpoint .
Throughout the protocol, foo tnotes d and e in the Objectives and Endpoints 
tables w ere updated to clarify which secondary endpoints will be controlled 
for Type I error based on which SALT parameter at Week 24 (ie, ≤20 or 
≤10) is utilized as the primary endpoint.
         Rationale: While this was previously included in the protocol, the 
footnotes have been revised for clarity. 
Throughout the protocol, footnote gin the Objectives and Endpoints tables 
wasupdated to clarify that for the EU (including VHP countries), the 
endpoints uti lizing the HADS will be analyzed as secondary endpoints.
         Rationale: While this was previously included in the protocol, the 
footnotes have been revised to specify that in the EU the HADS will be 
analyzed as secondary endpoints.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 7Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
Amendment 
314 Jul y 
2020Throughout the protocol, the primary objective and the primary endpoint 
were changed from absolute severity of alopecia tool (SALT) score of 
“≤10” to “≤20”.  It has also been noted that “Response based on an 
absolute SALT Score ≤10 at Week 24” will be analyzed as the primary 
endpoint in a separate analysis where required.
         Rationale: These changes have been made to align with newly published 
literature (Wyrwich et al, 2020 )and new  feedback from clinical experts 
in alopecia areata that SALT ≤20 best distinguishes treatment success 
from lack of success, from the perspective of both clin icians and 
patients . These changes have been made after consultation with a 
regulatory agency.
Throughout the protocol, the secondary endpoint to characterize th e 
exposure response was changed from absolute SALT score of “ ≤10” to 
“≤20” .  It has also been noted that where regulatory agencies require SALT 
≤10 to be utilized for the primary endpoint, exposure response will also be 
analyzed utilizing SALT ≤10 in a separate analysis.
         Rationale: These changes have been made to align with changes to the 
primary endpoint .
Throughout the protocol, secondary endpoints were updated to include: 
SALT score ≤10 at all timepoints (except at Week 24 if SALT ≤10 is 
the primary endpoint);
SALT score ≤20 at all timepoints (except at Week 24 if SALT ≤20 is 
the primary endpoint);
Change from baseline in SALT scores at all timepoints .
Language was also added to indicate that if requested by specific 
regulatory agencies, SALT score ≤20 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, and 18 and SALT 
score ≤10 at Week 24 w ill be analyzed as secondary endpoints with Ty pe 
I error control.  
         Rationale: These changes have been made to align with changes to the 
primary endpoint. 
Throughout the protocol, the secondary endpoint for 90% improvement in 
SALT score from baseline was removed. 
         Rationale: This change has been made to reduce redundancy between 
90% improvement in SALT and SALT ≤10.
Throughout the protocol, a secondary endpoint was added to evaluate the 
Patient’s Global Impression of Change (PGI -C) response defined as PGI -C 
score of “moderately imp roved” or “greatly improved” at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
18, 24, 34, 40 and 48.  In addition, an exploratory endpoint was added to 
evaluate the improvement on the PGI -C at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, 
and 48.  It w as also noted that at the request of regulatory agencies, the 
PGI- C response at Week 24 will be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint 
utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to control overall Type I error in 
a separate analysis where required.
         Rationale: These changes have been made to alig n with regulatory 
agency feedback to include a patient -reported outcome measurement as a 
key secondary endpoint and to report on multiple aspects of this patient 
reported outcome.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 8Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
Throughout the protocol, language was added to indicate that the study 
may b e unblinded once ≥90% of subjects have reached 24 weeks post -
randomization (or discontinued prior to the Week 24 visit).  This includes 
the addition of Section 9.6, Interim Analysis.
         Rationale: These changes are consistent with the study design (placebo -
controlled through Week 24 after which all subjects will receive active 
investigational product); this data will be used for internal decision -
making by the sponsor.
Throughout the protocol, “dose response” was updated to “exposure 
response”.
         Rationale: These changes are made to ensure consistency throughout the 
document.
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Section 2, 
Study Objectives and Endpoints , the following secondary endpoints w ere 
changed to exploratory endpoints:
50% improvement from baseline in SALT score at all timepoints.
Absolute SALT score at all timepoints.
Change from baseline in Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS) at Weeks 4 , 8, 12, 24, and 48.
Change from baseline in 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey version 2 
Acute (SF36v2 Acute) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.
Language was also added to indicate that if required by specific regulatory 
agencies, HADS endpoints will be analyzed as secondary endpoints.
         Rationale: These changes w ere made to align with regulatory feedback 
to reduce the number of secondary endpoints.
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Section 2, 
Study Objectives and Endpoints, refer ence to the specific domain scores 
were removed from secondary endpoint evaluating a change from baseline 
in the Alopecia Areata Patient Priority Outcomes (AAPPO).  The scales are 
now described in section 7.8.1.
         Rationale: These changes have been made because the validation and 
scoring for this patient reported outcome has now been completed and 
this reflects the correct domain scales.
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Section 2, 
Study Objectives and Endpoints, the explorato ry endpoint (previously 
secondary endpoint ) evaluating a change from baseline in the Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) was split into tw o separate 
endpoints to clarify that the depression and anxiety subscales w ill be 
analyzed separately.  In ad dition, tw o new exploratory endpoints were 
added to assess an improvement in HADS subscale scores for anxiety and 
depression, respectively in subjects w ith baseline scores indicative of 
anxiety or depression.
         Rationale: These changes have been mad e to align with feedback from 
the developer’s scoring manual and clinical experts in alopecia areata to 
analyze depression and anxiety separately and to measure a change in 
individual subscales.
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Sec tion 2, 
Study Objectives and Endpoints, the exploratory endpoint for Patient 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 9Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
Satisfaction with Hair Grow th (P -Sat) w as revised from a continuous score 
to a categorical assessment to accurately indicate a subject’s categorical 
improvement at the item level.
         Rationale: These changes have been made because the scaling and 
scoring for this patient reported outcome is still in the process of being 
established.   
In the Protocol Summary –Objectives and Endpoints and in Section 2, 
Study Objectives and Endpoints, footnotes d and e were revised to state 
that the Sponsor may also analyze SALT ≤10 and/or SALT ≤20 at other 
timepoints controlling for Type 1 error at the request of regulatory 
agencies.
         Rationale: The changes have been made to reflect that the decision on 
additional analysis of SALT ≤10 or SALT ≤20 w ill be made following 
consultation with regulatory agencies.
In the Protocol Summary –Study Design, and in Section 3, Study Design, 
language was added to describe the stratification of subj ects during the 
randomization process. 
         Rationale: This change has been made to align with regulatory feedback.  
No changes to the randomization process itself have been implemented.  
This change was previously communicated to sites in the protoco l 
administrative change letter dated 26 June 2019.
Throughout the Protocol Summary –Statistical Methods, and throughout 
subsections of Section 9, Data Analysis/Statistical Methods, the description 
of the primary endpoint, the assumptions for sample size c alculations, and 
the testing procedures for multiple comparisons were all updated to reflect 
the changes in the primary endpoint as w ell as elevation of the PGI -C as a 
key secondary endpoint where required.  
         Rationale: These changes have been mad e to align with changes in the 
primary endpoint and key secondary endpoint. 
In the Schedule of Activities, reference to Appendix 19, Alternative 
Measures During Public Emergencies, was added.
         Rationale: This change has been made to clarify altern ative measures to 
accommodate study procedures during public emergencies, including the 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic.  This change was 
previously communicated to sites in the protocol administrative change 
letter dated 05 June 2020.
In Sche dule of Activities (footnote #k) and in Section 7.5.5, Audiological 
Evaluation, language was added to indicate that all procedures for 
audiological evaluation must be performed according to the Audiometry 
Study Guide. 
         Rationale: These changes hav e been made for clarification.
In Section 1.3, Nonclinical and Phase 1 Efficacy and Safety Data and 
Section 1.6, Dose Rationale, updated information was provided on non -
clinical studies and the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL).
         Rationale: These changes have been made to provide updated 
information to sites.
In Section 1.3, Nonclinical and Phase 1 Efficacy and Safety Data, a 
statement was added to indicate that if new information is available on 
drug-drug-interactions (DDI) demonstrating tha t prohibition of a 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 10Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
concomitant medication is no longer required, this information will be 
communicated to sites via an administrative letter.
         Rationale: This change has been made to clarify the process for updating 
prohibited medications based on emerging results from PF -06651600 
DDI studies.
In Section 1.4, Clinical Experience, and Section 1.4.1, Phase 2a Study in 
Alopecia, information was updated to include new ongoing studies with 
PF-06651600. In addition, a statement was added to indicate that the final 
results of the Phase 2a study in subjects w ith alopecia areata (B7931005) 
are now  available in the Investigator’s Brochure.
         Rationale: This change has been made to provide updated information 
now available in the January 2020 Investigato r’s Brochure.
In Section 1.4.2, Phase 2a Study in Rheumatoid Arthritis, information was 
updated to include the dose of PF -06651600 utilized in the protocol.
         Rationale: This change has been made to align with information 
available in the January 20 20 Investigator’s Brochure.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criteria #6.c, language was updated to correct "a" 
to "the".
         Rationale: This change has been made to correct a typographic error.
Throughout the protocol, several updates w ere made to the list of 
prohibited medications:
Everolimus and ibrutinib w ere included in the list of examples of 
prohibited immunosuppressants.
All cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 3A (CYP3A) inhibitors and several 
sensitive and moderate CYP3A substrates were removed from the 
prohibited medications list.
A separate list was also added to clarify CYP3A inducers and substrates 
which are now  permitted.
Guidance was provided on which medications that prolong QT interval 
are prohibited.
         Rationale: The changes to the list of prohibited CYP3A inhibitors and 
substrates were made to align with results from recent DDI studies.  
Other changes noted here have been made for clarification.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criteria #14 and Section 7.5.9, Varicella -Zoster 
Virus Immunoglobulin G Antibody (VZV IgG Ab) Testing, language was 
updated to reflect that subjects w ith documentation of vaccination (2 doses) 
can be enrolled even if VZV IgG Ab testing is negative.
         Rationale: This change has been made to ensure consistency with the
Centers for Disease Control varicella vaccine recommendations, which 
state that commercial assays are not sensitive enough to always detect 
antibodies after vaccination.  Documented receipt of 2 doses of varicella 
vaccine supersedes results of subsequent serologic testing.         
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/hcp/recommendations.html, 
accessed 27Jan2020).
In Section 4.3.1, Contraception, bilateral tubal ligation was added to the list 
of highly effective contraceptive methods.
         Ration ale: This change has been made for clarification; “bilateral tubal 
occlusion” already listed in this section was intended to encompass the 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 11Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
procedures for both bilateral tubal occlusion and bilateral tubal ligation 
since both prevent ova from moving through the fallopian tubes, thereby 
preventing contact with sperm.  This change was previously 
communicated to sites in the protocol administrative change letter dated 
06 November 2019.
In Section 6.1, Screening, Visit 1, clarifications were made to information 
collected on history of alcohol consumption and of previous drug 
treatments for alopecia areata (AA).
         Rationale: These changes have been made for clarification.  These 
changes were previously communicated to sites in the protocol 
administrative ch ange letter dated 11 October 2019.  
In Section 7, Assessments, reference to Appendix 19, Alternative Measures 
During Public Emergencies, was added.
         Rationale: This change has been made to clarify alternative measures to 
accommodate study procedur es during public emergencies, including the 
COVID -19 pandemic.  This change was previously communicated to 
sites in the protocol administrative change letter dated 05 June 2020.
In Section 7.5.1, Vital Signs, language was updated to allow the use of 
temporal artery temperature measurements.
         Rationale: This change has been made to reflect current clinical practice 
for temperature measurement.
In Section 7.5.6.2.2, Potential Drug -Related Rash and Unexplained Rash, 
the title was updated to include “Po tential” drug -related rashes and 
“Unexplained Rash”.
         Rationale: This update was made for clarification. 
In Section 7. 5.12, Events for Adjudication/Review Committee Submission, 
language was added to indicate that additional types of events, not al ready  
listed in the protocol, may be adjudicated.
         Rationale: This change was made to allow  for addition types of events to 
be requested for review  and adjudication. 
In Section 7.8.1, Alopecia Areata Patient Priority Outcomes (AAPPO), 
language was updated to correct “psychological” to “emotional” to more 
accurately reflect the concepts being measured by the AAPPO.  In addition,
language was relocated from Section 9.2.4, Analysis of Other Endpoints, to 
this section providing information on the ancho r-based methodology to be 
used for interpretation of the AAPPO. 
         Rationale: This change has been made for clarification.
In Section 7.8.4, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), language 
was updated to correct the description of the subscal es for the HADS.  
         Rationale: This change has been to limit any observer bias at sites.
In Section 7.11.1, Samples for Interferon Gamma -Induced Protein – 10 (IP -
10) Analysis, a statement was added to indicate that IP -10 samples will not 
be collect ed if the exportation of these samples from the country of origin 
is prohibited by local regulations or institutional review board (IRB)/ethics 
committee (EC) decision. 
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a decision from one 
country’s l ocal Good Clinical Practices (GCP) office to prohibit the 
exportation of IP -10 samples from within the country of origin to the 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 12Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
central laboratory for analysis.  This change was previously 
communicated to sites in the protocol administrative change letter dated 
18 July 2019.
Throughout the subsections of Section 9, Data Analysis/Statistical 
Methods, language was added to describe the testing method for controlling 
the Type I error for SALT ≤10with a primary endpoint of SALT ≤20.  
         Rationale: These changes have been made to align with changes in the 
primary endpoint and key secondary endpoint. 
Section 9.1.1, Efficacy Analysis changed to Section 9.2 and subsequent 
sections within Section 9 were appropriately renumbered. 
         Rationale: Change m ade to align with protocol template section 
numbering requirements.
In Section 9.2.1, Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons, the 
following statement was removed “ If the observed p -values after 
accounting for the test procedure is ≤0.00125, it w ill be concluded that PF -
06651600 demonstrates ‘clear and compelling ’ evidence of effectiveness in 
treating moderate to severe AA patients as measured by the primary 
endpoint .”
         Rationale: There is no single p -value that will be accepted in all 
regions. While additional statistical thresholds may be considered 
during regulatory reviews, it is not appropriate to include in the protocol. 
In Section 9.2.2, Analysis of the Primary Endpoint, language w as added to 
indicate the key criteria used to define a per -protocol analysis that will be 
performed for the primary endpoint. 
         Rationale: These changes have been made to align with regulatory 
feedback.
In Section 9.2.4, Analysis of Other Endpoints, language was revised to 
reflect that other endpoints wil l not be analyzed using the same procedure 
as the primary endpoint; instead they will be analyzed using descriptive 
statistics.  In addition ,the language describing the anchor -based 
methodology to be used for interpretation of the AAPPO w as revised and 
relocated to Section 7.8.1, Alopecia Areata Patient Priority Outcomes 
(AAPPO).
         Rationale: This change was made for clarification.
Section 9.7, Data Monitoring Committee, was renumbered (previously 
Section 9.6) to allow  for inclusion of new section 9 .6, Interim Analysis. 
         Rationale: These changes have been made for administrative purposes.
In Section 15.1, Communication of Results by Pfizer, language was revised 
to align with updated Pfizer template language on public disclosure of 
clinical t rial results.  
         Rationale: This change has been made to align with updated Pfizer 
protocol template language.
In Section 16, References (#59), and in Appendix 2, Hepatitis B Testing 
Algorithm and Full Eligibility Criteria, a correction has been made to the 
reference for Hepatitis B virus global prevalence.
         Rationale: These changes have been made to correct typographic errors.
In Section 16, References, a new  reference #87 w as added to support the 
clarification that the analysis of the HADS depression and anxiety 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 13Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
subscales should be performed separately to align with feedback from the 
developer’s scoring manual.
         Rationa le: This change has been made to support the updates in the 
analysis of the HADS scores.
In Section 16, References, a new  reference #88 w as added to support the 
addition of exploratory endpoints that evaluate proportion of subjects who 
achieve ‘normal’ anx iety and depression subscale among subjects with 
abnormal scores at baseline.
         Rationale: This change has been made to support the changes in the 
analysis of the HADS scores.
In Section 16, References, a new  reference #89 w as added to provide a 
reference for SALT ≤20 as a clinically meaningful treatment effect.
         Rationale: This change has been made to support the change to the 
primary endpoint.
In Appendix 1, Abbreviations, new abbreviations were added for:
“Brainstem auditory evoked potenti als” or “BAEP”;
“Coronavirus disease 2019” or “COVID -19”;
“Contract research organization” or “CRO”;
“Clinical study report” or “CSR”;
“Cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 3A” or “CYP3A”;
“European Medicines Agency” or “EMA”;
“Per Protocol Analysis Set” or “PPAS”;
“50% improvement in SALT score from baseline” or “SALT50”;
“75% improvement in SALT score from baseline” or “SALT75”;
“Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2” or “SARS- CoV2”;
“Torsades de pointes” or “TdP”.  
         Rationale: These changes have been made for clarification. 
Appendix 3.1, Monitoring, and Appendix 3.2, Discontinuation, all 
references to “creatinine kinase” w ere updated to “creatine kinase”.” to 
correct a typographic error.  
         Rationale: These changes have been made to correct a typographical 
error.
In Appendix 3.1, Monitoring, and Appendix 3.2, Discontinuation, language 
was added to provide clarification regarding the timelines for re -testing of 
laboratory values.
         Rationale: These changes have been made for clarification.
Appendix 3.2, Discontinuation, updated discontinuation criterion for ECG 
findings to clarify that an “increase” from baseline in QTcF of >60 
milliseconds requires discontinuation.  A decrease of this amount does not 
require discontinuation.  
         Rationale: These changes have been made for clarification.
Appendix 19, Alternative Measures During Public Emergencies, w as 
added.
         Rationale: This change has been made to clarify alternat ive measures to 
accommodate study procedures during the public emergencies, including 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 14Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
the COVID- 19 pandemic.  This change was previously communicated to 
sites in the protocol administrative change letter dated 05 June 2020.
Amendment 
230 May 
2019Voluntary Harm onisation Procedure (VHP) w as added to the list of 
abbreviations.  The VHP countries participating in this study areCzech 
Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Spain. 
In theSchedule of Activities, “Contraception check for WOCBP” w as 
updated to “Contraception check, as applicable”.  
       Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to require male subjects in VHP countries in the EU to use a barrier 
method of contraception during heterosexual intercourse.
In the Schedule of Activities, footnote p w as updated to indicate that at 
sites in VHP countries in the European Union (EU) female subjects of 
childbearing potential will be instructed to perform a urine pregnancy test 
at home between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at approximately Week 44). 
        Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to include more frequent pregnancy testing for females of childbearing 
potential in VHP countries in the EU.
In the Schedule of Activities, footn otedd w as updated to indicate that 
pregnancy tests should be performed “according to the Schedule of 
Activities” instead of “at every visit”.
         Rationale: This change was made to ensure consistency with the 
Schedule of Activities. 
In Section 1.7, Summary of Benefit/Risk Assessment, the phrase “Men in 
the study are not required to use birth control because” was deleted.
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to require male subjects in VHP countries in the EU t o use a barrier 
method of contraception during heterosexual intercourse.
In Section 4, Subject Eligibility Criteria, a statement was added to explain 
that there are certain eligibility requirements specific to the VHP countries 
in the EU and to include the list of participating VHP countries.
         Rationale: This change was made for clarification of VHP -specific 
requirements for eligibility. 
In Section 4.1, Inclusion Criteria, criterion #3 w as updated to “Male or 
female subjects age 12 years and older, inclusive, at time of informed 
consent/assent.  Adolescent subjects below  the age of 18 years will only be 
enrolled into this study if permitted by the sponsor, local competent 
authority, and institutional review  board (IRB)/ethics committee (EC).  
Otherw ise, only subjects 18 years or older (or age specified by applicable 
reviewer) w ill be enrolled in those countries, regions, or sites.  Within VHP 
countries in the EU, subjects must be aged 18 through 74 years at the time 
of informed consent.”
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to exclude subjects age 75 years and older in VHP countries in the EU.
In Section 4.1, Inclusion Criteria, criterion #4 w as updated to include male 
reproductive safety requirements.  Specifi cally, it indicates that in VHP 
countries in the EU male subjects should use a male condom during sexual 
intercourse with females of childbearing potential and should refrain from 
donating sperm during the study and for 90 days after the last dose of study
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
intervention.  Language was also added to clarify that there are no such 
requirements outside of VHP countries in the EU.
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to require male subjects in VHP countries in the EU to use a barrier 
method of contraception during heterosexual intercourse and to refrain 
from donating sperm during the relevant period.  
In Section 4.1, Inclusion Criteria, criterion #4.b, bullet 3 (Postmenopausal 
female) w as updated to “A postmenopausal sta te is defined as no menses 
for 12 months without an alternative medical cause.  In addition, a high 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level in the postmenopausal range must 
also be used to confirm a postmenopausal state in women under 60 years 
old and not using hormonal contraception or hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT).  Females on HRT and whose menopausal status is in doubt w ill be 
required to use one of the nonestrogen hormonal highly effective 
contraception methods if they wish to continue their HRT du ring the study.  
Otherwise, they must discontinue HRT to allow  confirmation of 
postmenopausal status before study enrollment.”  The requirement for 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) testing has not changed.
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to update the definition of “postmenopausal state”.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criteria, criterion #8.i, a reference w as added for 
the website www.CredibleMeds.org .  Subsequent references w ere 
renumbered as appropriate.
         Rationale: This change was made to correct an omission of the 
reference.
In Section 4.3.1, Contraception, language was added to indicate that in 
VHP countries in the EU male subjects should use a male condom during 
sexual intercourse with a female of childbearing potential and should 
refrain from donating sperm during the study for 90 days after the last dose 
of study intervention.  Language was also added to clarify that there are no 
such requirements outside of VHP countries in the EU. 
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to require male subjects in VHP countries in the EU to use a barrier 
method of contraception during heterosexual intercourse and to refrain 
from donating sperm during the relevant period.
InSection 6, Study Procedures, paragraph 3 was added to indicate that at 
sites in VHP countries in the EU female subjects of childbearing potential 
will be instructed to perform a urine pregnancy test at home betw een the 
Week 40 and 48 visits (at approximat ely Week 44).
         Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to include more frequent pregnancy testing for females of childbearing 
potential in VHP countries in the EU.
In Section 6.2.11, Visit 12, Day 281/ Week 40 (±7 days) , bullet 6 w as 
updated to indicate that at sites in VHP countries in the EU female subjects 
of childbearing potential will be instructed to perform a urine pregnancy 
test at home between the Week 40and 48 visits (at approximately Week 
44).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 16Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
         Ration ale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to include more frequent pregnancy testing for females of childbearing 
potential in VHP countries in the EU.
In Section 7.1, Check for Initiation of Menarche (for Premenarchal 
Females Only), th e language was updated to indicate that pregnancy tests 
should be performed “according to the Schedule of Activities” instead of 
“at every visit”.
         Rationale: This change was made to ensure consistency with the 
Schedule of Activities.  
In Section 7.2, Pregnancy Testing, the third paragraph w as added to 
indicate that at sites in VHP countries in the EU female subjects of 
childbearing potential will be instructed to perform a urine pregnancy test 
at home between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at approxim ately Week 44).
        Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to include more frequent pregnancy testing for females of childbearing 
potential in VHP countries in the EU.
In Section 7.5.8.1, Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) Test, a typographic 
error in paragraph 2 w as corrected to reflect that the test should be 
performed and interpreted as “negative” (not “positive”) according to local 
standards.
         Rationale: This clarificat ion was made to correct a typographic error and 
was previously communicated to active sites in the protocol 
administrative change letter dated 18 -Apr-2019.
In Section 9, Data Analysis/Statistical Methods was updated to include 
more specific information on the timing of the finalization of the statistical 
analysis plan (SAP). 
        Rationale: This change was made to align with a request from the VHP 
to provide information on when the SAP w ould be finalized.
In Appendix 3, Guidelines for Subject Safety Mon itoring and Discontinuation, 
a typographic error in the monitoring criteria for hemoglobin w as 
corrected to reflect that a decrease greater than or equal to 2.0 g/dL (not 
just a decrease of 2.0 g/dL) requires additional monitoring activities.
         Rationale: This clarification was made to correct a typographic error and 
was previously communicated to active sites in the protocol 
administrative change letter dated 18 -Apr-2019.
In Appendix 5, Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT), typographic errors w ere 
corrected in the calculations shown for the first example. 
        Rationale: This clarification was made to correct a typographic error. 
Amendment 
128 
February 
2019Throughout the protocol , text has been updated to clarify Japan -specific 
requirements for Hepatitis B testing, which have been added to Appendix 
18.1 under country -specific requirements, specifically, in the Schedule of 
Activities (footnotes r and s), Exclusion Criterion #20, Se ction 6.1 
(screening visit), Section 7.5.7 (footnotes d and e for Table 3), 
Section 7.5.11, and Appendix 2.  
         Rationale: This clarification was made to align with local regulations in 
Japan w hich require that Hepatitis B surface antibody testing b e included 
in the initial screening for Hepatitis B testing and not in reflex testing.
Throughout the protocol, the text has been updated to change “audiogram” 
to “audiological evaluation” and to provide additional details on the 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 17Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
required evaluations, specifically in the Schedule of Activities (footnote k) 
and Section 7.5.5, Audiogram.  
         Rationale: This clarification was made to provide a high level summary 
of the tests required for audiological evaluation detailed in the 
Audiometry Study Guide.
Throughout the protocol, “CYP3A4” w as updated to “CYP3A” in all 
references to excluded/prohibited medications.  In addition, Exclusion 
Criteria for use of CYP3A4 inducers were updated to reflect a w ashout 
period of 4 weeks (or 28 days).   
         Rationale: These clarifications were made as the language in the body of 
the protocol w as previously inconsistent with Appendix 4.There are no 
changes to the medications that are excluded/prohibited.
Exploratory Endpoints for Patient’s Global Impression of Change (PGI -C) 
and Patient Satisfaction with Hair Grow th (P -Sat) have been updated from 
“Change from baseline in” to “Absolute score of”.  
         Rationale: This clarification was made as the questionnaires themselves 
report on a change from baseline .
Throughout the protocol, an assessment was added to address a new 
exploratory endpoint.  The Clinician Global Impression –Alopecia Areata 
(CGI -AA) was added to the Protocol Summary, Schedule of Activities, 
Section 2, Study Objectives and Endpoints, Sect ion 6, Study Procedures, 
Section 7.6.5, Clinician Global Impression –Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA), 
Section 7.12, Rater Qualifications, and Appendix 17, Clinician Global 
Impression –Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA).  
         Rationale: The addition of this clinicia n reported outcome assessment 
will provide an additional anchor for validation of the Severity of 
Alopecia Tool (SALT) and w ill provide information on concordance or 
discordance betw een patient and clinician perspectives.
Throughout the protocol, the asses sment of both the Patient’s Global 
Impression of Change (PGI -C) and the Patient’s Impression of Satisfaction 
(P-Sat) w ere removed from the Day 1 visit.  
         Rationale: These questionnaires themselves report on a change from 
baseline; therefore, there is no need to capture a baseline assessment.
Throughout the protocol, the method of body temperature evaluation was 
updated to include “axillary”.  
        Rationale: This clarification w as made to correct an error of omission.
In Section 1.4.1, Phase 2a Study in Alopecia, information was updated to 
reflect changes in the Phase 2a study design, changing the single -blind 
extension phase into an open -label extension phase.
In Section 1.7, Summary of Benefit/Risk Assessment, information on 
fertility was updated.  
         Rationale: This change was made in response to new data available in 
the Investigator’s Brochure.
In Section 4.1, Inclusion Criterion #3 w as updated to “Male or female 
subjects age 12 years and older, inclusive, at time of informed 
consent/ assent. Adolescent subjects below  the age of 18 years will only be 
enrolled into this study if permitted by the sponsor, local competent 
authority, and institutional review  board (IRB)/ethics committee 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 18Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
(EC). Otherwise, only subjects 18 years or older (or age specified by 
applicable review er) will be enrolled in those countries, regions, or sites.”  
         Rationale: This clarification was made to indicate that IRBs/ECs could 
render a decision on the inclusion of adolescents at a site level (in 
addition to local competent authorities and the Sponsor).
In Section 4.1, Inclusion Criterion #6 w as updated from “must” to 
“should”.  
         Rationale: This change is to accommodate the use of some ad hoc 
medications (eg, those medications used for headache, m enstrual 
cram ps, etc).
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criterion #8 sub -bullet d was updated to “5α -
Reductase inhibitors (5 -ARIs) (eg, finasteride, dutasteride)”.  In addition, 
“oral minoxidil” and “spironolactone if used specifically for alopecia 
areata” w ere a lso added to examples of systemic treatments that could 
affect AA.  These changes were also reflected in Section 5.8.2, Prohibited 
Medications and Treatments.  
         Rationale: These clarifications were made to provide more specific 
examples of prohibi ted systemic treatments.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criterion #8 sub -bullet f was updated to include 
“topical irritants (eg, anthralin) and liquid nitrogen cryotherapy”.  These 
changes were also reflected in Section 5.8.2, Prohibited Medications and 
Treatments.  
         Rationale: These clarifications were made to provide more specific 
examples of prohibited topical treatments.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criterion #14 w as updated to clarify the 
eligibility requirements for adolescents regarding varicella ex posure.  This 
clarification was also reflected in the Schedule of Activities, Section 6.1, 
Screening, Visit 1, Section 7.5.7, Clinical Laboratory Tests, and Section 
7.5.9, Varicella- Zoster Virus Immunoglobulin G Antibody (VZV IgG Ab) 
Testing.  
         Ra tionale: This clarification was made to provide specific information 
on the number of required doses of varicella vaccination and to avoid 
any confusion as to how the eligibility criteria related to vaccination 
records and varicella- zoster virus immunoglob ulin G antibody results 
should be applied.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Criterion #21 after sub -bullet c was updated to 
add the following sentence: “A subject who is currently being treated for 
active TB infection must be excluded from the study.”  
         Rationale: This clarification was made to provide specific guidance on 
subjects with active TB infection.  Active infection was already excluded 
under criterion #16; how ever, this language was added to #21 as w ell for 
clarity.
In Section 4.2, Exclusion Cri terion #24 sub -bullet c was updated to 
“Platelet count <150 ×109/L or <150,000/mm3”.  
         Rationale: This change was made to correct a typographic error.  This 
change was previously communicated to active sites in the protocol 
administrative letter dated 16 -Nov-2018. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 19Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
In Section 4.3.1, Contraception, the allowable methods of contraception 
were updated to include the use of combination hormonal contraceptives in 
combination with a barrier method. 
         Rationale: This change has been made based on the results of the 
drug-drug-interaction study B7981018.  Further information is available 
in the current version of the Investigator’s Brochure (IB).
In Section 5.8.1, Permitted Concomitant Medications, the dose of 
acetaminophen was updated from “1.5 g/day” to “3 g/day”.  
        Rationale: This change was made to better align with the dosing 
instructions for acetaminophen. 
In Section 5.8.4, Surgery, the following text was added for clarity: 
“Subjects who do have elective surgery should temporarily disc ontinue 
study intervention for 1 week prior to the surgical procedure and remain off 
study intervention after the surgical procedure until sutures/staples are 
removed.  If absorbing sutures or chemical closure methods are utilized, 
study intervention can b e resumed when the operative site is sufficiently 
healed, and risk of infection is minimal.”
        Rationale: This change was made to provide sites with specific 
instructions on how  to manage dosing of investigational product in the 
event that a subject requires surgery during the study. 
In Section 6.1, Screening, Visit 1, clarified that audiological evaluation can 
be performed within 8 weeks of Day 1. 
        Rationale: This is a clarification to ensure consistency with language in 
the Schedule of Activities and in Section 7.5.5, Audiological Evaluation.
In Section 6.3.2, Early Termination (ET) Visit, and Schedule of Activities, 
the IP -10 assessment has been deleted at the ET visit.  
        Rationale: IP -10 sampling has been removed from the ET vi sit due to the 
intended collection of these samples only up to Week 24, as well as due 
to expected differences in timing of the prior dose of study drug relative 
to IP -10 sampling under early termination circumstances which could 
reduce their value in phar macodynamic analyses.
In Section 7.5.6.2.2, Drug Related Rash, the following text was added “In 
addition, the subject w ill be asked to rate the severity of pruritus within the 
last 24 hours on a scale from 0 (No itching) to 10 (Worst possible itching)”.
        Rationale: The text w as added for clarification of requirements for 
assessment of drug -related rash which were detailed in other supporting 
documentation.
In Section 7.5.6.2.2, Drug Related Rash, the text has clarified tests 
performed and that result s are forw arded to the Sponsor.  
        Rationale: This change was made to correct a typographic error and/or 
omission. 
In Section 7.6.1, Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT), the text has been 
clarified.  
        Rationale: This language was rew orded for clarity. 
In Section 7.5.7, Table 3, Varicella- zoster virus immunoglobulin G 
antibody (VZV IgG Ab) testing was added to the table.  
        Rationale: This change as made to correct a typographic error.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 20Document Version 
DateSummary of Changes and Rationales
In Appendi x 3.2, Discontinuation, text on how to handle subjects w ith a 
clinically meaningful decline in hearing has been updated.  
        Rationale: The clarification w as made to align with instructions included 
in the Audiometry Study Guide. 
In Appendix 4, Proh ibited Concomitant Medications, text has been updated 
to indicate that amiodarone and mitotane can be used in an emergency 
situation, but the subject must then be discontinued from the study.  
        Rationale: This clarification w as made to provide spec ific information on 
how to handle emergency situations requiring these tw o medications.
In Appendix 12, EuroQoL 5 Dimensions -Youth (EQ5D Y), the second 
page of the questionnaire has been added.  
        Rationale: This change was made to correct a typogra phic error. 
Global corrections to typographical errors, abbreviations, and definitions 
were made.
Original 
protocol17 
September 
2018Not applicable (N/A)
This amendment incorporates all revisions to date, including amendments made at the 
request of country  health authorities and institutional review boards (I RBs)/ethics committees 
(ECs).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 21TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 27
LIST OF FIGURES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 27
APPENDI CES ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 28
PROTOCOL  SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .......29
SCHEDUL E OF ACTIVITI ES................................ ................................ ................................ 38
1. INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 45
1.1. Mechanism of Action/I ndication ................................ ................................ ............. 45
1.2. Background and Rationale ................................ ................................ ...................... 45
1.2.1. Background on Alopecia Areata ................................ ................................ .45
1.2.2. Drug Development Rationale .....................................................................47
1.3. Nonclinical and Phase 1 Efficacy  and Safet y Data ................................ ................. 47
1.4. Clinical Experience ................................ ................................ ................................ .48
1.4.1. Phase 2a Study  in Alopecia ................................ ................................ ........ 48
1.4.2. Phase 2a Study  in Rheumatoid Arthritis ................................ ..................... 49
1.4.3. Clinical Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism ...............................................49
1.5. Study  Rationale ................................ ................................ ................................ .......50
1.6. Dose Rationale ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 51
1.7. Summary  of Benefit/Risk Assessment ................................ ................................ ....52
1.8. Additional I nformation ................................ ................................ ............................ 53
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS ................................ ................................ .......54
3. STUDY DESIGN ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 57
4. SUBJECT ELIGIBILI TY CRI TERIA ................................ ................................ ................. 59
4.1. I nclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ .....59
4.2. Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ ....62
4.3. L ifesty le Requirements ................................ ................................ ........................... 68
4.3.1. Contraception ................................ ................................ .............................. 68
4.3.2. Cosmetic Treatments/Applications ................................ ............................. 69
4.4. Sponsor’s Qualified Medical Personnel ................................ ................................ ..70
5. STUDY TREATMENTS ................................ ................................ ................................ .....70
5.1. Allocation to Treatment ................................ ................................ .......................... 71
5.2. Breaking the Blind ................................ ................................ ................................ ..71
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 225.3. Subject Compliance ................................ ................................ ................................ .71
5.4. I nvestigational Product Supplies ................................ ................................ ............. 72
5.4.1. Dosage Form(s) and Packaging ................................ ................................ ..72
5.4.2. Preparation and Dispensing ................................ ................................ ........ 73
5.5. Administration ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 73
5.6. I nvestigational Product Storage ................................ ................................ .............. 74
5.7. I nvestigational Product Accountabilit y................................ ................................ ...75
5.7.1. Destruction of Investigational Product Supplies ........................................75
5.8. Concomitant Medications/Treatment(s)................................ ................................ ..75
5.8.1. Permitted Concomitant Medications ..........................................................75
5.8.2. Prohibited Medications and Treatments ................................ ..................... 76
5.8.3. Vaccinations ...............................................................................................78
5.8.4. Surgery ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 78
6. STUDY PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ................................ .....78
6.1. Screening, Visit 1 ................................ ................................ ................................ ....79
6.2. Study  Period ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 81
6.2.1. Visit 2, Day  1 (Randomization) ................................ ................................ ..81
6.2.2. Visit 3, Day  15/Week 2 (± 3 day s)................................ .............................. 83
6.2.3. Visit 4, Day  29/Week 4 (± 3 day s)................................ .............................. 84
6.2.4. Visit 5, Day  57/Week 8 (± 7 day s)................................ .............................. 85
6.2.5. Visit 6, Day  85/Week 12 (± 7 day s)................................ ............................ 85
6.2.6. Visit 7, Day  127/Week 18 ( ±7 day s)................................ .......................... 86
6.2.7. Visit 8, Day  169/Week 24 ( ±7 day s)................................ .......................... 87
6.2.8. Visit 9, Day  183/Week 26 ( ±3 day s)................................ .......................... 88
6.2.9. Visit 10, Day  197/Week 28 ( ±3 day s)................................ ........................ 89
6.2.10. Visit 11, Day  239/Week 34 ( ±7 day s)................................ ...................... 90
6.2.11. Visit 12, Day  281/Week 40 ( ±7 day s)................................ ...................... 91
6.2.12. Visit 13, Day  337/Week 48/End of Treatment ( ±7 day s)......................... 92
6.3. Follow -up Period ................................ ................................ ................................ .....93
6.3.1. Visit 14, End of Study /Follow-up...............................................................93
6.3.2. Earl y Termination Visit ................................ ................................ .............. 93
6.4. Subject Withdrawal/Earl y Termination ................................ ................................ ..94
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 237. ASSESSMENTS ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 96
7.1. Check for Initiation of Menarche (for Premenarchal Females Onl y)..................... 96
7.2. Pregnancy  Testing ................................ ................................ ................................ ...96
7.3. Banked Biospecimens ................................ ................................ ............................. 97
7.4. Additional Research ................................ ................................ ................................ 98
7.5. Safet y Assessments ................................ ................................ ................................ .98
7.5.1. Vital Signs ................................ ................................ ................................ ..99
7.5.2. Medical History , Phy sical Exam, Height, and Weight ............................... 99
7.5.3. Chest Radiograph y....................................................................................100
7.5.4. Electrocardiogram (ECG) ................................ ................................ ......... 100
7.5.5. Audiological Evaluation ................................ ................................ ........... 101
7.5.6. Special Safet y Assessment ................................ ................................ .......101
7.5.6.1. Suspected Opportunistic Infections ................................ ......... 101
7.5.6.2. Dermatological Events ................................ ............................ 101
7.5.7. Clinical L aboratory  Tests ................................ ................................ ......... 102
7.5.8. Tuberculosis Testing ................................ ................................ ................. 104
7.5.8.1. Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) Test ................................ ...105
7.5.9. Varicella -Zoster Virus I mmunoglobulin G Antibody  (VZV IgG Ab) 
Testing ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 105
7.5.10. Baseline Viral Screen ................................ ................................ ............. 105
7.5.11. Hepatitis B DNA (HBVDNA) Testing ................................ ................... 105
7.5.12. Events for Adjudication/Review Committee Submission ...................... 105
7.6. Clinical Assessments................................ ................................ ............................. 106
7.6.1. Severity  of Alopecia Tool (SAL T)................................ ........................... 106
7.6.2. Ey elash Assessment (EL A)................................ ................................ ......106
7.6.3. Ey ebrow Assessment (EBA) ................................ ................................ ....107
7.6.4. Assessment of Fingernails Affected b y Alopecia Areata ......................... 108
7.6.5. Clinician Global Impression – Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA) ..................... 108
7.7. Assessment of Suicidal I deation and Behavior ................................ ..................... 108
7.7.1. Columbia Suicide Severity  Rating Scale (C -SSRS) ................................ .108
7.8. Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) ................................ ................................ ......... 109
7.8.1. Alopecia Areata Patient Priority  Outcomes (AAPPO) ............................. 109
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 247.8.2. Patient’s Global Impression of Change (PGI -C)................................ ......109
7.8.3. Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth (P -Sat)................................ .......... 109
7.8.4. Hospital Anxiety  and Depression Scale (HADS) ................................ .....109
7.8.5. EuroQoL 5 Dimensions (EQ-5D- 5L) and EuroQoL 5 Dimensions —
Youth (EQ -5D- Y)................................ ................................ .......................... 110
7.8.6. Patient Health Questionnaire – 8 Items (PHQ -8) .....................................110
7.8.7. 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey  Version 2 Acute (SF36v2 Acute) ....110
7.8.8. Alopecia Areata Resource Utilization (AARU) .......................................110
7.8.9. Work Productivity  and Activity  Impairment: Alopecia Areata 
(WPAI : AA) ................................ ................................ ................................ ...110
7.9. Photograph y of Alopecia Areata ................................ ................................ ........... 111
7.10. Pharmacokinetics ................................ ................................ ................................ 111
7.10.1. Plasma for Anal ysis of PF -06651600.....................................................111
7.10.2. Shipment of Pharmacokinetic Samples ................................ .................. 112
7.11. Pharmacod ynamics Markers ................................ ................................ ............... 112
7.11.1. Samples for Interferon Gamma -Induced Protein – 10 (I P-10) 
Analy sis................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 112
7.11.2. Samples for fluorescence -activated cell sorting (FACS) anal ysis (T 
cell, B cell, and NK cell subsets) ................................ ................................ ...113
7.11.3. Samples for Immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM) Anal ysis...................... 113
7.11.4. Shipment of Pharmacod ynamic Samples ................................ ............... 113
7.12. Rater Qualifications................................ ................................ ............................. 113
8. ADVERSE EVENT REP ORTI NG................................ ................................ .................... 113
8.1. R equirements ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 113
8.1.1. Additional Details on Recording Adverse Events on the CRF ................. 115
8.1.2. Eliciting Adverse Event Information ................................ ........................ 115
8.1.3. Withdrawal from the Study  Due to Adverse Events (see also the 
Subject Withdrawal/Early Termination section) ................................ ........... 115
8.1.4. Time Period for Collecting AE/SAE Information....................................115
8.1.4.1. Reporting SAEs to Pfizer Safety ................................ ............. 115
8.1.4.2. Recording Non -serious AEs and SAEs on the CRF ............... 116
8.1.5. Causality  Assessment ................................ ................................ ............... 116
8.1.6. Sponsor’s Reporting Requirements to Regulatory  Authorities ................ 116
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 258.2. Definitions................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 116
8.2.1. Adverse Events ................................ ................................ ......................... 116
8.2.2. Abnormal Test Findings ................................ ................................ ........... 117
8.2.3. Serious Adverse Eve nts................................ ................................ ............ 118
8.2.4. Hospitalization ................................ ................................ .......................... 118
8.3. Sever ity Assessment ................................ ................................ .............................. 119
8.4. Special Situations ................................ ................................ ................................ ..120
8.4.1. Protocol-Specified Serious Adverse Events .............................................120
8.4.2. Potential Cases of Drug -Induced Liver Injury ................................ .......... 120
8.4.3. Exposure to the I nvestigational Product During Pregnancy  or 
Breastfeeding, and Occupational Exposure ................................ ................... 121
8.4.3.1. Exposure During Pregnancy ................................ .................... 122
8.4.3.2. Exposure during Breastfeeding ................................ ............... 123
8.4.3.3. Occupational Exposure ................................ ........................... 123
8.4.4. Medication Errors ................................ ................................ ..................... 123
8.4.5. Safet y Adjudication Committees ................................ .............................. 124
9. DATA ANALYSI S/STA TISTICAL  METHODS ................................ ............................. 125
9.1. Sample Size Determination ................................ ................................ ................... 127
9.2. Efficacy  Anal ysis................................ ................................ ................................ ..128
9.2.1. Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons...........................................128
9.2.1.1. Overall Study  (Testing Procedure for Multiple 
Comparisons I ncorporating the SALT ≤ 10 as a Key  Secondary  
Endpoint) ................................ ................................ ......................... 128
9.2.1.2. For the FDA/PMDA (Testing Procedure for Multiple 
Comparisons With no Key Secondary  Endpoints) .......................... 131
9.2.1.3. For the EMA and Competent Authorities in the VHP 
Countries (Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons 
Incorporating the PGI -C Response as a Key  Secondary  
Endpoint) ................................ ................................ ......................... 133
9.2.2. Analy sis of the Primary  and Key  Secondary Endpoints ........................... 135
9.2.2.1. For the Overall Study  and the FDA/PMDA (Anal ysis of 
the Primary  and Key  Secondary  Endpoints) ................................ ...135
9.2.2.2. For the EMA and Competent Authorities in the VHP 
Countries (Anal ysis of the Primary  and Key  Secondary  
Endpoints) ................................ ................................ ........................ 136
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 269.2.2.3. Per- Protocol Analy sis (Anal ysis of the Primary  and Key  
Secondary  Endpoints) ................................ ................................ ......137
9.2.3. Analy sis of Secondary  Endpoints ................................ ............................. 138
9.2.3.1. Analy sis of Exposure -Response ................................ .............. 138
9.2.4. Analy sis of Other Endpoints ................................ ................................ .....138
9.2.5. Subgroup Analy ses................................ ................................ ................... 138
9.3. Pha rmacokinetic Analysis during the Treatment Period ................................ .......139
9.4. Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacod ynamic Earl y Unblinding ................................ ........ 139
9.5. Safet y Anal ysis................................ ................................ ................................ ......140
9.6.Exploratory  Pharmacody namic Anal ysis................................ .............................. 140
9.7. I nterim Anal ysis................................ ................................ ................................ ....140
9.8. Data Monitoring Committee ................................ ................................ ................. 141
10. QUALITY CONTROL  AND QUALITY ASSURANCE ................................ ............... 141
11. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING ................................ ........................... 141
11.1. Case Report Forms/Electronic Data Record ................................ ....................... 141
11.2. Record Retention ................................ ................................ ................................ .142
12. ETHI CS................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 143
12.1. I nstitutional Review Board/Ethics Committee ................................ .................... 143
12.2. Ethical Conduct of the Study ................................ ................................ .............. 143
12.3. Subject I nformation and Consent ................................ ................................ ........ 143
12.4. Reporting of Safet y Issues and Serious Breaches of the Protocol or ICH 
GCP ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 144
13. DEFINITION OF EN D OF TRIAL ................................ ................................ ................. 145
14. SPONSOR DI SCONTI NUATION CRITERIA ................................ .............................. 145
15. PUBLICATION OF S TUDY RESUL TS................................ ................................ ........ 145
15.1. Communication of Results by  Pfizer ................................ ................................ ..145
15.2. Publications by  Investigators ................................ ................................ .............. 146
16. REFERENCES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 148
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 27LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. PF-06651600 Exposure Margins and No Observed Adverse Effects 
Level ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 52
Table 2. Number and T ype of Tablets for Each Treatment Sequence....................72
Table 3. Laboratory  Tests ................................ ................................ ..................... 103
Table 4. Primary  and Secondary  Endpoints for Overall Study  Reporting and 
Publications.............................................................................................125
Table 5. Primary  and Secondary  Endpoints Organized by  Known Regional 
Regulatory  Requirements ................................ ................................ .......126
Table 6. Statistical Methods for the Anal ysis of the Primary Endpoint for the 
Overall Study , and for the FDA/PMDA ................................ ................. 135
Table 7. Statistical Methods for the Anal ysis of the Primary Endpoint for the 
EMA and Competent Authorities in the VHP Countries ........................ 136
Table 8. Windows for Remote Visits and L aboratory  Sample Collections if 
Required Due to Disruptions from Public Emergencies.........................170
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Study  Design Schematic ................................ ................................ ........... 59
Figure 2. Schematic and Graphical Presentation for Multiple Testing 
Procedure Incorporating a Key  Secondary  Endpoint ............................. 130
Figure 3. Schematic an d Graphical Presentation for Multiple Testing 
Procedure ................................ ................................ ................................ 132
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 28APPENDICES
Appendix 1. Abbreviations ................................ ................................ ................................ ....155
Appendix 2. Hepatitis B Testing Algorithm and Full Eligibility  Criteria ............................. 160
Appendix 3. Guidelines for Subject Safety Monitoring and Discontinuation ....................... 161
Appendix 3.1. Monitoring ................................ ................................ ................................ ......161
Appendix 3.2. Discontinuation ................................ ................................ .............................. 162
Appendix 4. Prohibited and P ermitted Concomitant CYP3A I nducers and Substrates ........ 164
Appendix 4.1. Prohibited Concomitant CYP3A I nducers and Substrates ............................. 164
Appendix 4.2. Permitted Concomitant CYP3A Substrates ................................ ................... 165
Appendix 5. Country -specific Requirements ................................ ................................ ......... 166
Appendix 5.1. Japan- Specific Requi rements for Hepatitis B Testing ................................ ...166
Appendix 6. Alternative Measures During Public Emergencies ................................ ........... 167
Appendix 6.1. Eligibility ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 167
Appendix 6.2. Telehealth Visits ................................ ................................ ............................. 168
Appendix 6.3. Alternative Facilities for Safet y Assessments ................................ ................ 169
Appendix 6.4. I nvestigational Product ................................ ................................ ................... 171
Appendix 6.5. Home Health Visits ................................ ................................ ........................ 172
Appendix 6.6. Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events ................................ ................. 173
Appendix 6.7. Efficacy  Assessments ................................ ................................ ..................... 173
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 29PROTOCOL SUMMARY
Background and Rationale:
Alopecia areata (AA) is a chronic relapsing T- cell mediated autoimmune disorder 
characterized b y non -scarring hair loss affecting children and ad ults across all ages, races, 
and sexes.7,8  AA is associated with other immune diseases including asthma, allergic rhinitis, 
atopic dermatitis, and autoimmune diseases such as thy roiditis and vitiligo.8
CD8+T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and mast cells are involved in the pathogenesis of 
AA.  The possible inflammatory  pathway s in AA include cy tokines from the ty pe1 helper 
Tcell (TH1) axis, including interferon (IFN) alpha ( ), IFN gamma ( ), and IFN -induced 
protein 10 (IP -10).7,9  Mouse models have shown that interleukin (IL) -2 and IL -15 play  a role 
in the initiation of auto -reactive CD8+cells that attack hair follicles.1  IL-12 and IL -23 may  
also play  a role in the pathogenesis of AA.11
Clinical presentation of AA can be limited to small, circular patches of scalp hair loss (patch y 
hair loss, alopecia focalis), involve complete loss of hair on the scalp (alopecia totalis [AT]), 
or total loss of hair on the scalp and bod y (alopecia universalis [AU]).12  AA involving 
50% or greater scalp hair loss, including AT and AU, is considered an advanced form of 
alopecia, according to the United States (US) National Alopecia Areata Foundation.13  Patchy  
alopecia is the most common form of AA which may  develop into the more extensive and 
often treatment -resistant forms of AA, especiall y with earlier age of onset.  It is estimated 
that AA affects as man y as 6 to 7 million individuals in the US8and 147 milli on worldwide.13  
AA is a disease with a significant pediatric prevalence, in addition to the burden of disease 
seen in adults.  A substantial body  of evidence demonstrates a widespread impact of AA on 
the psy chological health of both adult and pediatric patients with AA, including impairment 
in self -esteem, increased incidence of anxiety  and depressive disorders and other 
psychological conditions,21-25problems with social relations,26decreased health -related 
quality  of life (HRQoL) and general quality  of life (QoL), as well as the QoL  of their 
families.27-35
No drugs have been approved for the treatment of AA in most countries/regions, including 
the US and the European Union (EU). Review of treatment guidelines and recommendations 
indicate that a number of off label therapies are frequently  used after assessing factors such 
as the age of the patient, disease extent and disease duration.  However, there is neither a cure 
for AA, nor is there a therap y convincingl y demonstrated to induce and sustai n remission 
long term.38-42
PF-06651600 is an orall y bioavailable, small molecule that is currently being investigated in 
patients with AA.  PF- 06651600 inhibits, by  irreversibly  blocking the adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) binding site, Janus kinase 3 (JAK3) and the ty rosine kinase expressed in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (TEC) kinase family  (BTK, BMX, ITK, TEC, TXK), with high 
selectivity  over the other three JAK isoforms, JAK1, JAK2, and ty rosine kinase 2 [TYK2], as 
well as over the broader kinome.  PF -06651600 potently  inhibits signaling of the co mmon 
-chain receptors for IL- 15 and IL -21, which have been implicated in the pathogenic 
pathway s of AA.1  Additionally , PF-06651600 inhibits the c ytotoxic function of CD8+Tcells 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 30and NK cells which have also been implicated in the pathogenic process of AA.2,3  This 
inhibition may  be mediated through mechanisms dependent on JAK3 and TEC kinase family  
members.4,5,6
Objectives and Endpoints: 
The following table details the overall study objectives and endpoints.  There are some 
region specific differences noted throughout.  Table 5in Section 9lists the primary  and 
secondary  endpoints of the study  organized by  known regional requirements.
Primary Objective(s): Primary Endpoint(s):
 To evaluate the efficacy of PF -06651600 compared t o 
placebo in adult and adolescent alopecia areata (AA) 
subjects with 50% or greater scalp hair loss on 
regrowth of lost hair (as measured by an absolute 
Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤20) at 
Week 24.
Note: For the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
and competent authorities in the Voluntary 
Harmonisation Procedure (VHP) countries,athe 
primary objective is to evaluate the efficacy of 
PF-06651600 c ompared to placebo in adult and 
adolescent AA subjects with 50% or greater scalp hair 
loss on regrowth of lost hair (as measured by an 
absolute SALT Score ≤10) at Week 24. Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤20at 
Week 24.
Note: For the EMA and competent authorities in the 
VHP countries, response based on an absolute SALT 
Score ≤10 at Week 24 will be analyzed as the 
primary endpoint in a separate analysis.
Key Secondary Objective(s): Key Secondary Endpoint(s):
 To evaluate the efficacy of PF -06651600 compared to 
placebo in adult and adolescent AA subjects with 50% 
or greater scalp hair loss on regrowth of lost hair (as 
measured by an absolute SALT Score ≤10) at Week 
24.
Note: This key secondary objective will be utilized as 
the primary object ive for the EMA and competent 
authorities in the VHP countries.  Additionally, this 
key secondary objective will not apply for the United 
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) /Japan 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency 
(PMDA). Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤10 at 
Week 24.
Note: This key secondary endpoint will be utilized as 
the primary endpoint for the EMA and competent 
authorities in the VHP countries.  Additionally, this 
key secondary endpoint will not apply for the 
FDA/PMDA.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on patient 
centered outcomes (as measured by PGI -C response) 
at Week 24.
Note: This key secondary objective is only applicable 
for the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries. PGI-C response defined as a score of “moderately 
improved” or “greatly improved ”at Week 24.
Note: This key secondary endpoint is only applicable 
for the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries.
Secondary Objective(s): Secondary Endpoint(s):
 To characterize the exposure response of 
PF-06651600 on regrowth of lost hair. Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤20 at 
Week 24 will be used to characterize the exposure 
response.b
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 31 To assess the efficacy of PF -06651600 on regrowth of 
lost hair during the treatment period over time. Response based on an absolute SALT score ≤20 at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 34, 40, and 48.c,d
 Response based on an absolute SALT score of ≤10 at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 4 0, and 48.e
 Response based on a 75% improvement in SALT 
score from baseline (SALT75) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Change from baseli ne in SALT scores at Weeks 4, 8, 
12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 grade improvement or 
a score of 3 in Eyebrow Assessment (EBA) score at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 -grade improvem ent or 
a score of 3 in Eyelash Assessment (ELA) score at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient-centered outcomes and payer relevant 
measures to assess treatment benefit from the patient 
perspective and to demonstrate value.f PGI-C response defined as a PGI -C score of 
“moderately improved” or “greatly improved ”at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.f
 Change from baseline in Alopecia Areata Patient 
Priority Outcomes (AAPPO) scales at Weeks 4, 8, 
12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
Safety Objective(s) Safety Endpoint(s)
 To evaluate the safety and tolerability of PF-06651600 
in the treatment period over time. Incidence of treatment -emergent adverse events 
(AEs).
 Incidence of serious AEs (SAEs) and AEs leading to 
discontinuation.
 The incidence of clinically significant abnormalities 
in vital signs.
 The incidence of clinically significant abnormalities 
in clinical laboratory values.
PK Objective(s) PK Endpoint(s)
 To characterize pharmacokinetics of PF -06651600.  Plasma concentrations of PF -06651600 at Weeks 4, 
and 8 or 12.
Exploratory Objective(s): Exploratory Endpoint(s):
 To collect banked biospecimens for exploratory 
research, unless prohibited by local regulations or 
ethics committee decision. Collection of banked biospecimens unless prohibited 
by local regulations or ethics committee decision.  
Additional information on collection and potential 
use is provided in the Banked Biospecimens section.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 32 To assess the efficacy of PF -06651600 on regrowth of 
lost hair during the treatment period over time. Response based on a 50% improvement in SALT 
score from baseline (SALT50) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Absolute SALT scores at Baseline, Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient-centered outcomes and payer relevant 
measures to assess treatment benefit from the patient 
perspective an d to demonstrate value. Improvement on PGI-Cdefined as “slightly 
improved”, “moderately improved”, or “greatly 
improved” at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
 Improvement on Patient Satisfaction with Hair 
Growth (P -Sat) items defined as slightly, mod erately, 
or very satisfied at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, 
and 48.
 Change from baseline in EuroQoL 5 Dimensions 
(EQ-5D-5L) in adults or 
EuroQoL 5Dimensions -Youth (EQ-5D -Y) in 
adolescents at Weeks 4, 12, 24, and 48.
 Change from baseline in Alopecia Area ta Resource 
Utilization (AARU) at Weeks 12, 24, 34, and 48.
 Change from baseline in Work Productivity and 
Activity Impairment: Alopecia Areata (WPAI:AA) at 
Weeks 12, 24, 34, and 48.
 Change from baseline in the depression subscale 
score of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.g,87
 Change from baseline in the anxiety subscale score 
of the HADS at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.g,87
 Improvement on HADS among subjects with a 
baseline subscale score indicative of depression who 
achieved a “normal’ subscale score indicative of an 
absence of depression at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 
48.g,79,88
 Improvement on HADS among subjects with a 
baseline subscale score indicative of anxiety who 
achieved a “normal’ subscale score indicative of an 
absence of anxiety at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 
48.g,79,88
 Change from baseline in 36 -Item Short Form Health 
Survey version 2 Acute (SF36v2 Acute) at Weeks 4, 
8, 12, 24, and 48.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on the clinician 
global impression of severity of scalp hair loss. Change from baseline in Clinician Global Impression 
–Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 To evaluate efficacy of PF -06651600 in AA nail 
disease over time. Change from baseline in fingernails affected by AA 
at Weeks 12, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 33 To assess pharmacodynamic and disease-related 
biomarkers over time. Change from baseline in interferon gamma -induced 
protein 10 (IP -10) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, and 24.
 Change from baseline in percent and absolute 
lymphocyte subsets (T -cell, B -cell, and natural killer 
[NK] cells) at Weeks 4, 12, 24, and 48.
 Change from baseline in immunoglobulins (IgA, 
IgG, IgM) at Weeks 24 and 48.
a. The VHP countries participating in this study are Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Spain.
b. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, when SALT ≤10 is utilized fo r the primary endpoint, 
exposure response will be analyzed utilizing SALT ≤10 in a separate analysis.
c. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, when SALT ≤10is utilized for the primary endpoint, 
SALT ≤20 at Week 24 will be analyzed as a secondary endpoint.
d. When SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, responses based on absolute SALT score 
≤20 at Weeks 18, 12, 8 and 4 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure.  
When S ALT ≤10 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, the response based on absolute SALT 
score ≤20 at Week 24 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure. 
e. When SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is utiliz ed as the primary endpoint, the response based on absolute SALT 
score ≤10 at Week 24 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure.  When 
SALT ≤10 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, the respo nses based on absolute SALT score 
≤10 at Weeks 18, 12, 8 and 4 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure.
f. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, the evaluation of the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient centered outcomes (as measured by PGI-C response at Week 24) is a key secondary objective.  The PGI-C 
response at Week 24 will be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to 
control overall Type I error.
g.For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, endpoints utilizing the HADS will be 
analyzed as secondary endpoints.
Study Design:
This is a Phase 2b/3, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, dose -ranging stud y to 
investigate PF -06651600 in AA.  The study  will have a maximum duration of approximately  
57 weeks.  This includes an up to 5- week Screening period, a 48 -week treatment period, and 
a 4-week follow -up period as shown below.  The treatment period will be comprised of a 
placebo- controlled period that includes a 4 -week loading phase and a 20 -week maintenance 
phase, followed b y a 24-week extension phase.  The study will enroll a total of 
approximately  660 subjects.  The study  will be conducted at approximately 120 sites.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 34To be eligible to enroll in this study , subjects must have moderate to severe AA with 
≥50% hair loss of the scalp (Severity  of Alopecia Tool [SAL T] score ≥50) at both Screening 
and baseline visits, without evidence of terminal hair regrowth within the previous 6 months 
and with the current episode of hair loss ≤10years.
Screening will occur within 35 days prior to the first dose of study  drug to confirm that 
subjects meet selection criteria for the study.  Eligible subjects will be randomized as 
described below.
A stratified randomization will be used for operational purposes in order to ach ieve a target 
global composition for AT/AU and adolescent subjects in the enrolled population.  The 
targets for enrollment are approximately  40% AT/AU and approximately  15% adolescents.  
The randomization will be operationalized as follows.  I n regions enr olling both adolescents 
and adults, there will be four strata:
<18 y ears of age and AT/AU;
<18 y ears of age and not AT/AU;
≥18 y ears of age and AT/AU; and
≥18 y ears of age and not AT/AU.
Within each of these strata, subjects will be randomized in a 2:2:2:2 :1:1:1 manner to blinded 
PF-06651600 and matching placebo for a total of 7 treatment sequences.  
* Primary e ndpoint is response based on absolute Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤20 at Week 24.
1         15         29        57            85              127              169         183      197        239        281         337   365     
BL       2            4          8            12               18                24*          26        28          34                         48   F/U     40    
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 35In regions enrolling onl y adults, there will be two strata:
≥18 y ears of age and AT/AU; and
≥18 y ears of age and not AT/AU.
In these regions, subjects will be randomized using the same ratio as described for regions 
enrolling both adolescents and adults.
All subjects will begin dosing during the loading phase according to their assigned sequence.  
Following the 4 -week loading phase, subjects will continue dosing according to their 
assigned sequence in the 20-week maintenance phase.  At the end of the maintenance phase, 
placebo- treated subjects will be advanced in a prespecified, blinded manner to one of 2 active 
treatment sequences for the remainder of the stud y(through Week 48).  Investigators, 
subjects, and the sponsor study  team will be blinded to treatment throughout the duration of 
the study .  Following the last dose of study  drug, both discontinued and completed subjects 
will enter into a 4 -week follow -up period for safety  monitoring.  Subjects who complete 
treatment may  be eligible for enrollment in a long -term study  (Phase 3 study  B7981032).  
Subjects who enroll immediatel y into the B7981032 study will not be required to complete 
the 4- week follow -up period in this study .
Study Treatments:
Blinded PF -06651600 and its matched placebo will be provided as tablets for oral 
administration.  The 50 -mg and 10 -mg tablets and their matching placebos will be supplied 
in blister cards and labeled according to local r egulatory  requirements.  Subjects will receive 
blinded labeled supplies throughout the stud y.
In order to achieve the proper dosage and maintain the blind throughout the study , tablets 
will be dispensed in a blinded fashion to ensure that all subjects, reg ardless of the assigned 
treatment sequence, will take the same number of tablets/day .  To accomplish this, all 
subjects will take 7 tablets/day  during the loading phase, 4 tablets/day  during the 
maintenance phase, 7 tablets/day  during the first 4 weeks of the extension phase, and 
4tablets/day  for the remainder of the extension phase.
Statistical Methods:
The study  may  be unblinded for Sponsor internal decision-making purposes when ≥90% of 
subjects have reached 24 weeks post -randomization (or discontinued p rior to the Week 24 
visit) , and dissemination of these results will be limited to the unblinded reporting team and 
Sponsor management .  The sponsor personnel who are unblinded will be separate from the 
study  team.  The sponsor will  still maintain the blind for study  team members who will be 
involved in daily  study  conduct, study  management, safet y,and data monitoring through the 
completion of the study .  Investigators and subjects will remain  blinded.  There will be no 
impact on B7981015 study  conduct, ana lysis, or reporting.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 36The sample size for the study was based on the consideration to have sufficient power to 
evaluate the primary endpoint.  A sample size of 120 subjects per group (for the 200 mg/50 mg once daily (QD), 200 mg/30 mg QD, 50 mg/50 mg QD, or 30 mg/30 mg QD groups) will provide more than 90% power to demonstrate that at least the 200 mg/50 mg QD group is superior to placebo by a difference of 24% in the proportion of subjects achieving the primary endpoint (SALT ≤20 at Week 24), assuming a placebo response rate of no more 
than 5%, at α= 0.05 (2-sided significance level).  This sample size accounts for multiplicity 
using a closed testing procedure to ensure strong control of Type I error for all comparisons between active treatment groups and placebo.  This sample size additionally provides > 90% power for the SALT ≤ 10 at Week 24 endpoint assuming that the 200 mg/50 mg QD group is 
superior to placebo by a difference of 20% in the proportion of subjects achieving SALT ≤10, assuming a placebo response rate of no more than 5%, at α = 0.05 (2-sided significance 
level).  The assumption of the placebo response rate for both SALT ≤20 and SALT ≤10, as 
well as the treatment difference, was informed by the Week 24 results from the Phase 2a Study B7931005. 
As noted in Section 9 , regulatory requirements for a marketing authorization approval  
will require significance at an α more stringent than 0.05, although 
the exact level of stringency required may vary (ie, 0.00125 is required by the FDA/PMDA for their requested primary endpoint of SALT ≤20 while 0.01 is required by the EMA for 
their requested primary endpoint of SALT ≤10).  The sample size of 120 subjects per group 
provide power >90% for SALT ≤20 (α = 0.00125) and SALT ≤10 (α= 0.01). 
The 10 mg/10 mg QD group is included to address the secondary objective of characterizing 
the exposure response. The sample size of 60 subjects for this group was chosen to allow for estimation of the exposure-response parameters. 
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries,  that request that the PGI-C 
response at Week 24 be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint, a sample size of 120 subjects per group also provides more than 90% power for PGI-C response assuming a difference of 35% and a placebo response rate of 20%, at α= 0.05 (2-sided significance level).  The 
assumptions of the treatment difference and placebo response rate for PGI-C response were 
based on the Concert CTP-543 Phase 2b Study Week 24 data.
90  Under the above 
assumptions, the power of the study remains >90% at α = 0.01 (EMA required 2-sided 
significance level).
The primary analysis population for efficacy data will be the Full Analysis Set (FAS) defined 
as all randomized subjects, regardless of whether they received study medication.  In the 
comparison to placebo, the data from the 2 groups, F and G, up to Week 24 will be pooled to form the placebo group.
For the overall study and for the FDA/PMDA, the SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is the 
primary endpoint. The SALT ≤10 response at Week 24 will be analyzed as a key secondary 
endpoint for the overall study but not for the FDA/PMDA. The testing procedures are described in Section 9.2.1.1 andSection 9.2.1.2 , and the planned analysis of the primary 
endpoint are described in Table 6 . The primary analysis of the primary endpoint will be CCI
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 37analyzed by Miettinen and Nurminen (MN) method84for the difference in the proportion of 
responders between each active treatment group and placebo.  Subjects with missing SAL T 
score at Week 24 due to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) related reasons will be 
excluded from the anal ysis at that timepoint, whereas missing data due to other reasons will 
be counted as non -responders at that time -point.  As supplementary  analy sis to assess the 
impact of COVID -19-related missing data on the results of the primary  analy sis, the anal ysis 
of the primary  endpoint will be repeated with all missing data considered as non -responders 
regardless of the reason for missingness.
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, the SAL T ≤10 response at 
Week 24 will be the primary  endpoint and the PGI -C response at Week 24 will be anal yzed 
as a key  secondary  endpoint.  The testing procedures are described in Section 9.2.1.3 , and the 
planned anal yses of the primary  endpoint are described in Table 7. The primary  anal ysis of 
the primary  endpoint will be co nducted using a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) 
model for the longitudinal binary data of SALT ≤10 response over time up to Week 24, 
assuming a mechanism of missing at random (MAR) for missing data due to COVID -19. 
Missing data due to reasons not related to COVID -19 will be assumed as non -responders. 
The key  secondary  endpoint will also be analy zed using this approach.
To character ize the exposure (dose or average steady  state drug concentration [C avg]) 
response in achieving the primary  endpoint, a Bayesian three -parameter maximum effect 
attributable to the drug (E max) exposure -response model will be used as the primary  anal ysis 
approach to characterize the exposure response relationship.  The response function will be 
the log odds (logit) of the proportion of subjects achieving the primary  endpoint.  I n 
modelling the exposure response, the effect of loading dose will be included as a fixed factor 
in the model.  Model -based estimation of treatment effect for each dose or associated C avg
compared to placebo will be presented with 95% confidence interval (CI).  The model will be 
described in detail in the Statistical Analy sis Plan (SAP) .  
For secondary  endpoints, all binary  endpoints will be anal yzed in the same way  as the 
primary  endpoint for the overall study .For continuous endpoints, a mixed -effect model with 
repeated measures (MMRM) will be used.  This model will include the facto rs (fixed effects) 
for treatment group, visit, treatment -by-visit interaction, and relevant baseline value when 
modeling the change from baseline.  Within the framework of MMRM, the treatment 
difference will be tested at each time point.
All secondary  endp oints will be evaluated at the 5% level of significance, without 
adjustments for multiple comparisons.
The pharmacokinetic (PK) concentration population is defined as all enrolled subjects who 
received at least 1 dose of PF -06651600 and in whom at least 1 concentration value is 
reported.
The safet y data will be summarized in accordance with Pfizer Data Standards.  All subjects 
who receive investigational product (safet y population) will be included in the safet y 
analyses.  All safety data will be summarized descriptively .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 38SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES
The schedule of activities table provides an overview of the protocol visits and procedures.  Refer to the STUDY PROCEDURES and 
ASSESSMENTS sections of the protocol for detailed information on each procedure and assessment required for compliance with the
protocol.  If subject visits or procedures are affected by  a public emergency , including the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) 
pandemic, please refer to Appendix 6.
The investigator may  schedule visits (unplanned visits) in addition to those listed on the schedule of activities table, in o rder to 
conduct evaluations or assessments required to protect the well -being of the subject.
Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
Enrollment procedure
Informed consent and if applicable 
assentX
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria X X
Demographics X
Medical history and AA disease 
historydX X
Medical procedures
Complete physical examinatione X X X X X
Targeted physical examinationf X X X X X X X X
Vital signsg X X X X X X X X X X X X X
12-Lead ECGh X X X X X X X
Height & Weighti X X X X X
Chest radiographsj X
Audiological Evaluationk X X X X
Laboratory
Hematology & Serum Chemistryl X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Fasting lipid Panelm X X X X X X X X X
Urinalysisn X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Serum FSHo X
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 39Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
Pregnancy test (WOCBP only)p X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
HIV testingq X
Hep B and Hep C Screeningr X
HBVDNA (applicable countries)s X X X X X X
Varicella -zoster virus 
immunoglobulin G antibody (VZV 
IgG Ab) (adolescents only, if 
applicable)tX
Collection of baseline sample for 
potential viral screenuX
Tuberculosis testv X
Laboratory Pharmacodynamics
IP-10 (CXCL10) X X X X X
FACS -TBNK X X X X X X
Immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM) X X X X
Trial treatment
Impala registration X
Randomization X
Investigational product dispensing X X X X X X X X X X X
Investigational product 
administrationwX          
Investigational product 
accountabilityX X X X X X X X X X X X
Clinical assessments
SALT X X X X X X X X X X X X
ELA and EBA X X X X X X X X X X X X
Photographyx X X X X X X X X X
Assessment of Fingernails 
Affected by AAyX X X X X X X
CGI-AA X X X X X X X X X X X X
C-SSRSz X X X X X X X X X X X
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 40Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
Patient reported outcome
AAPPO X X X X X X X X X X
PGI-C and P -Sat X X X X X X X X X
PHQ -8z X
HADS X X X X X X X
SF36v2 Acute X X X X X X X
EQ-5D-5L (adults) or EQ -5D-Y 
(adolescents)X X X X X X
AARU X X X X X X
WPAI: AA (adults only) X X X X X X
Pharmacokinetic
Predose PK samplingaaX
Full PK sampling (including 
predose sampling)bbX X Xbb
Banked Biospecimen Collection 
Genomic banked Biospecimen: 
Prep D1ccX
Other banked biospecimen: 
Prep B1X X X X
Other banked biospecimen: 
Prep B2X X X X
Other banked biospecimen: 
Prep R1X X X X
Other
Prior and current concomitant 
treatment(s) monitoring X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Adverse event monitoring X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Contraception check, as applicable X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Check for initiation of menarche 
(for premenarchal females only)ddX X X X X X X X X X X X X X
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 41Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
Abbreviations: = ongoing/continuous event; AA = alopecia areata; AAPPO = Alopecia Areata Patient Priority Outcomes; AARU = Alopecia Areata R esource Utilization; 
CGI-AA = Clinician Global Impression –Alopecia Areata; C -SSRS = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; CT = Computed Tomography; CXCL -10 = C -X-C motif 
chemokine 10; EBA = Eyebrow Assessment; ECG = electrocardiogram; ELA = Eyelash Assessment; EOT = End of Treatment; EOS = End of Study; EQ-5D -5L = EuroQoL 5 
Dimensions; EQ5D -Y = EuroQoL 5 Dimensions -Youth; ET = Ea rly Termination; FACS -TBNK = fluorescence -activated cell sorting for T -cells, B -cells, and natural killer (NK) 
cells; FSH = follicle stimulating hormone; F/U = follow -up; HADS = Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; HBVDNA = hepatitis B viral DNA; Hep B = hepatitis B; 
Hep C = hepatitis C; HEENT = head, eyes, ears, nose and throat; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; Ig = Immunoglobulin; IP10 = Interferon gamma -induced protein 10 ; 
MRI = Magnetic Resonance Imaging; N/A = Not Applicable; PGI-C = Patient’s G lobal Impression of Change; PHQ -8 = Patient Health Questionnaire –8 items; 
PK = Pharmacokinetic; P -Sat = Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth; SALT = Severity of Alopecia Tool; SF -36v2 = 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey version 2; 
VZV IgG Ab = varicell a-zoster virus immunoglobulin G antibody; WOCBP = women of childbearing potential; WPAI:AA = Work Productivity and Activity Impairment: 
Alopecia Areata.
a.Day relative to start of study treatment (Day 1).
b.If a subject discontinues from the study for any reas on other than death, lost to follow -up, or withdrawal of consent, a Follow -Up Visit must be performed 
within 28 (+7 days) after the Early Termination visit.  In addition, all subjects who complete the study but do not enter the long -term extension study mu st 
have a Follow -Up Visit within 28 (+7 days) of End of Treatment visit.
c.For subjects who discontinue early from the study, the procedures scheduled for ET Visit will be performed on the last day th e subject takes the 
investigational product or as soon as possible thereafter.  Subject w ill then require a Follow -Up Visit within 28 ( ±7)days.
d.Medical history and AA disease history includes detailed histories of conditions specified in Study Procedures Section 6.1.
e.Com plete physical examination consists of general appearance, skin, head, eyes, ears, nose and throat (HEENT); mouth, heart, lungs, abdomen, extremities, 
neurologic function, back, and lymph nodes.  In addition, dermatological full body exam must be performed.  Dermatological ex aminations should include 
visual inspection of the breasts and external genitalia.  When dermatologic adverse events are identified on physical exam, additional procedures may be 
required.  Please refer to Section 7.5.6.2 for additional details.
f.Targeted physical examination consists of skin, heart, lungs, abdomen, neurologic function, and examination of body systems w here there are symptom 
complaints by the subject.
g.Vital signs, including pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and temperat ure (eg, oral, tympanic, or axillary), should be performed before ECG and 
laboratory blood collection as specified in the protocol.
h.ECG should be performed before laboratory blood collection.
i.Height and weight will be measured without shoes or outerwear.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 42Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
j.Chest X -ray or other appropriate diagnostic imaging (ie, CT or MRI) should be performed at Screening (unless taken within 3 months prior to the Screening 
visit).  Chest X- rays are required and should be performed as per local guidelines and standard of care (eg, posterior -anterior and lateral views).  Official 
reading must be located in the source documentation.
k.For Screening, the audiological evaluation may be performed w ithin 8 weeks prior to Day 1 but results must be available prior to Day 1 in order to a ssess 
eligibility.  At Screening, this includes audiological history, otoscopic examination, pure tone audiometry, air and bone con duction, speech audiometry, and 
immittance audiometry.  At subsequent visits, updated audiological history, otoscopic examina tion, and pure tone audiometry will be performed; based upon 
results, additional audiometry assessments may be required.  For details, refer to the Audiometry Study Guide.  All procedure s must be performed as per the 
Audiometry Study Guide.  For subjects w ho terminate early from the study, efforts must be made to complete the audiological evaluation. 
l.Hem atology includes hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cell count, platelet count, white blood cell count, total neutrophils ( %, Abs), basophils (%, Abs), 
eosinophils (%, Abs), lymphocytes (%, Abs), monocytes (%, Abs), and reticulocyte count (%, Abs).  Serum chemistry includes BUN/ur ea, creatinine, 
glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, chloride, total CO 2/bicarbonate, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, direct and indirec t bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, uric acid, 
albumin, total protein, and creatine kinase.  At Weeks 2 and 26, only hematology will be performed.
m.Fasting lipid profile includes total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL, and LDL.  A minimum of 8 -hour fasting is required for fasting lipid profile evaluation.
n.Urinalysis will be performed by the central laboratory.  Microscopic analysis will be performed if urinalysis is positive for blood, nitrite, leukocyte esterase, 
and/or protein.  Urine culture will be performed if urinalysis is positive for nitrite and/or leukocyte esterase or if clinically indicated.
o.Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) test must be performed at Screening to confirm postmenopausal status in female subjects un der 60 years old and who 
have been a menorrheic for at least 12 consecutive months with no alternative pathological or physiological cause to confirm postmenopausal status.
p.Urine pregnancy test must be performed prior to dosing with the investigational product for female subjects of childbear ing potential.  In the event that urine 
pregnancy tests are not permitted at an institution, serum pregnancy tests can be utilized.  In addition to urine pregnancy t ests performed at each study visit, 
sites in Voluntary Harmonisation Procedure (VHP) countr ies in the European Medicines Agency (EMA) should instruct female subjects of childbearing 
potential to perform a urine pregnancy test at home between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at approximately Week 44).  In additio n, the investigator or designee 
will ins truct the subject to contact the site immediately if the urine pregnancy test result is positive or cannot be confirmed as ne gative.  The VHP countries 
participating in this study areCzech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Spain.  
q.Subjects who are positive for HIV antibodies will be screen -failed.
r.All subjects will undergo Screening for Hep B and Hep C for eligibility.  All subjects w ill undergo testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and 
hepatitis B core antibody (HBcAb).  Subjects who are HBsAg positive will not be eligible for this study.  Subjects who are HBsAg negative but HBcAb 
positive will be reflex -tested for hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb).  Additional reflex testing for hepatitis B virus DNA testing (HBVDNA) is also 
required f or HBcAb positive subjects in countries in which Hep B prevalence has been reported at a rate of >5.0% or if required by local standard of care.  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 43Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
Please refer to Appendix 2for testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility criteria.  For Japan -specific requirements, see Appendix 5.1.  For all 
subject s in the study, Hep C testing will be performed using hepatitis C antibody.  Subjects who are HCVAb positive will be reflex -tested for HCV RNA.  
Subjects who are positive for HCVAb and HCV RNA will not be eligible for this study.
s.HBVDNA testing will be per formed at Weeks 12, 24, 34, 48, and Early Termination for subjects who were enrolled with a positive HBcAb and a negative 
HBVDNA in those regions for which Hep B prevalence has been reported at a rate of >5.0% or if required by local standard of care (refe r to Section 7.5.11
for information regarding which screening laboratory results should be used to determine wheth er HBVDNA testing should be performed).  Testing at 
additional time points may be performed as per the local standard of care.  For Japan -specific requirements see Appendix 5.1.  For all other countries, please 
refer to Appendix 2for testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility criteria.
t.Varicella -zoster virus immunoglobulin G antibody (VZV IgG Ab) testing is required to confirm eligibility only in adolescent subjects wh o have no 
documented evidence of having received varicella vaccination (2 doses).
u.A serum sample will be collected at ba seline and submitted to the central lab.  The sample will be stored and analyzed at a later date only at the sponsor’s 
request.  For example, in certain cases of suspected viral infection (eg, disseminated herpes zoster or varicella), the spons or may reque st to analyze the 
sample to determine if the subject had exposure to that virus.
v.A documented TB test performed within 12 weeks prior to Day 1 is acceptable.  Subjects with a history of tuberculosis may not require TB testing as per the 
protocol exclusion criteria in Section 4.2Exclusion Criterion 21.  Perform TB test procedure using the QuantiFERON®-TB Gold In Tube (QFT -G) test.  If 
QFT -G test is not available, the T -SPOT®.TB(T-Spot) test can be used.  A negative Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) test can be s ubstituted for the 
QFT -Gtest or T -Spot test only under specific circumstances described in Section 7.5.8 .
w.Dosing instructions will be provided to the subject and reviewed by the site at each visit.  Subjects should be encouraged to take t he medication in the 
morning whenever possible.  Subjects should take the medication at approximately the same time every day.  How ever, at study visit days, subjects are to be 
instructed to refrain from dosing at home and are to take the dose in the clinic.
x.Scalp photographs will be obtained at Screening to verify eligibility.  Scalp areas photographed should be recorded in study documents so that the same scalp 
region(s) is (are) photographed at all time points as applicable.  Photographs of eyelashes and eyebrows will also be taken. 
y.The number of fingernails affected by AA will be counted.
z.Subjects who have recent or active suicida l ideation or behavior w ill be excluded from the study.  For specific criteria regarding subjects w ith prior suicidal 
ideation or behavior, see Section 4.2.
aa.Only predose blood sample for PK w ill be collected at baseline (Visit 2 Day 1).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 44Protocol Activity Screening 
PeriodTreat ment Period
Loading Phase Maintenance Phase Extension Phase F/UbETc
Visit Identifier 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Visit DayaDay -35 
to -1Day 1 Day 15 Day 29 Day 
57Day 
85Day 
127Day 
169Day 183 Day 197 Day 
239Day 281 Day 337
Week N/A W2 W4 W8 W12 W18 W24 W26 W28 W34 W40 W48/EOT EOS
Visit Window N/A ±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±3 Days based on 
Day 1 visit±7 Days based on 
Day 1 visit+7 
Days
bb.Blood samples for PK will be collected at predose and postdose 0.5 hr, 1 hr and 3 hr at Week 4; blood samples will be collected for p redose and postdose 
0.5hr and 2 hr at Week 8.  For each blood sample collection, the allow able windows are as follows for time postdose: 0.5 hr (±10min), 1 hr (±15min), 2 hr 
(±20min) and 3 hr (±30min).  If the blood samples for PK were collected at We ek 8, no PK samples are required at Week 12.
cc.If not collected on the designated collection day, collect at the next available time point when biospecimens are being colle cted in conjunction with a subject 
visit.
dd.In female subjects who are premenarchal at the start of the study, the investigator must confirm with the subject at every vi sit whether menarche has started 
since the last visit.  If menarche has started, the subject must now  be considered of childbearing potential; therefore, from that point forw ard, the subject 
must be required to use contraception as described in Section 4.3.1 and to undergo contraception checks and pregnancy testing according to the Schedule of 
Activities , starting with the current visit.  In addition, the investigator or designee must instruct the subject to call the study site immediately if the subject 
begins menarche between study visits.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 451.INTRODUCTION
1.1.Mechanism of Action/Indication
PF-06651600 is an orall y bioavailable, small molecule that is currently being investigated in 
patients with alopecia areata (AA).  PF -06651600 inhibits, by  irreversibly  blocking the 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding site, JAK3 and the ty rosine kinase expressed in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (TEC) kinase family  (BTK, BMX, ITK, TEC, TXK), with high 
selectivity  over the other thre e JAK isoforms, JAK1, JAK2, and ty rosine kinase 2 (TYK2), as 
well as over the broader kinome.  PF -06651600 potently  inhibits signaling of the common 
gamma ( )-chain receptors for interleukin (IL) -15 and IL -21, which have been implicated in 
the pathogenic p athway s of AA.1  Additionally , PF-06651600 inhibits the cytotoxic function 
of CD8+Tcells and natural killer (NK) cells which have also been impli cated in the 
pathogenic process of AA.2,3  This inhibition may  be mediated through mechanisms 
dependent on JAK3 and TEC kinase family  members.4,5,6
1.2.Background and Rationale
1.2.1. Background on Alopecia Areata
Alopecia areata is a chr onic relapsing T -cell mediated autoimmune disorder characterized by  
non-scarring hair loss affecting children and adults across all ages, races, and sexes.7,8  AA is 
associated with other immune diseases including asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, 
and autoimmune diseases such as thy roiditis and vitiligo.8
CD8+Tcells, NK cells, and mast cells are involved in the pathogenes is of AA.  The possible 
inflammatory  pathway s in AA include cy tokines from the ty pe1 helper T cell (TH1) axis, 
including interferon (IFN) alpha ( ), IFN gamma ( ), and IFN -induced protein 
10(IP-10).9,10  Mouse models have shown that IL -2 and IL -15 play  a role in the initiation of 
auto- reacti ve CD8+cells that attack hair follicles.1  IL-12 and IL -23 may  also play  a role in 
the pathogenesis of AA.11
Clinical presentation of AA can be limited to small, circular patches of scalp hair loss (patch y 
hair loss, alopecia focalis), involve complete loss of hair on the scalp (alopecia total is [AT]), 
or total loss of hair on the scalp and bod y (alopecia universalis [AU]).12  AA involving 
50% or greater scalp hair loss, including AT and AU, is considered an advanced form of 
alopecia, according to the United States (US) National Alopecia Areata Foundation.13  Patchy  
alopecia is the m ost common form of AA which may  develop into the more extensive and 
often treatment -resistant forms of AA, especiall y with earlier age of onset.15  It is estimated 
that AA affects as man y as 6 to 7 million individuals in the US8and 147 million worldwide.13
The spontaneous remission rates for AA patients presenting with <50% scalp hair loss 
(patch y hair loss, alopecia focalis) are 30 -50% within the first 6 -12months of disease onset, 
and 66% of the patients will show complete regrowth of hair within 5 years.14  The likelihood 
of complete regrowth spontaneously  with AT or AU is less than 10%.16
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 46Further, there is evidence that AA can become refractory to JAK inhibition if it has been 
present for a substantial period of time.  Sp ecifically , a recent case series demonstrated that 
AA patients whose current episode of alopecia totalis or alopecia universalis had lasted more 
than 10 years were highly  non-responsive to off -label tofacitinib treatment in comparison 
with patients with sh orter duration.17
Depression, anxiety , and panic disorders are often observed in patients with AA and the 
coping mechanisms of AA patients mirror those of grief and bereavement.19,20  A substantial 
body  of evidence demonstrates a widespread impact of AA on the psy chological health of 
both adult and pediatric patients with AA, including impairment in self -esteem, increased 
incidence of anxiety  and depressive disorders and other psy cholog ical conditions,21-,25
problems with social relations,26decreased health -related qualit y of life (HRQoL ) and 
general quality  of life (QoL ), as well as the QoL of their families.27-35
AA is a disease with significant pediatric prevalence, in addition to the burden of disease 
seen in adults, and ample evidence is available on the impact of AA on the mental health of 
adolescent patients.  In a US st udy, children with AA had more ps ychological problems than 
those without AA.  Specifically , those with AA exhibited more anxiety , depression, 
tendencies to withdraw, aggression, and delinquency .  In addition, children with AA were 
more likely  to exhibit so matic problems as well as problems in social relations and in 
attention span.  Girls with AA seem to have been affected more in dimensions of total 
problems, anxiety /depression, and internalizing/externalizing s yndromes.  Children with 
AAwere also less li kely to have experienced positive life events in the year prior to 
exhibiting AA sy mptoms.26
In addition to experiencing a significant mental health burden, children with AA report 
experiencing other negative impacts to their QoL.  Specificall y, 75% of children aged 
15-19years reported instances of effects on QoL, 50% reported that the disease limited their 
participation in activities, 40% reported i nstances of bully ing, and 35% reported that others 
noticed and commented on their condition.  Rates of decrement in QoL, limitations on 
participation in activities, and bully ing were heightened in older children aged 15 -19years 
compared to younger childre n.36
Given the finding that complete scalp hair loss with duration >10 years in adults is less likely  
to respond to treatment, pursuing treatment, e ven if only  intermittently , in adolescents or 
even younger patients with stable, severe AA may prevent future irreversible hair loss.17  
Additional ly, an earlier age of first onset has been reported to correspond to an increased 
lifetime risk of extensive disease.  Differences in treatment responses are not expected for 
adolescent versus adult AA patients as suggested in 2 reports of tofacitinib (off -label 
use).17,37
No drugs have been approved for the treatment of AA in most countries/regions, including 
the US and the European Union (EU).  Review of the treatment guidelines and 
recommendations indicate that a number of off -label therapies are frequently  used after 
assessing factors such as the age of the patient, disease extent, and disease duration.  
However, there is neither a cure for AA, nor is there a therap y convincingl y demonstrated to 
induce and s ustain remission long term.38-42
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 471.2.2. Drug Development Rationale
The JAK family , including JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2, is a group of cy toplasmic 
tyrosine kinases that mediate signal transduction via interactions with Ty pe1 and Ty pe2 
cytokine receptors critical for leukocy te activation, proliferati on, survival and function.43,44  
Upon binding of the cy tokine to its receptor, the associated JAKs are activated, and 
phosphory late each other and the receptor.  The phosphory lated receptors serve as docking 
sites for the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) famil y of transcr iption 
factors.  The STATs are phosphory lated and subsequently  translocate to the nucleus where 
they bind to specific gene promoters to activate transcription of a range of target genes.43,44
JAK1 pairs with JAK3 to mediate -common cy tokine signaling and also with JAK2 or 
TYK2 to transmit the signals of additional cy tokines important in inflammation and immune 
responses including IL- 2, IL -4, IL -5, IL -6, IL -12, IL -13, IL -15, IL -21, IL -23, IL -31, IFN , 
and IFN .43
The cy tokine signaling pathway s of IFN and IL -15, among others, can be blocked via JAK 
inhibition, supporting the rationale of a JAK inhibitor in the treatment of AA.45  Treatment 
with the JAK inhibitors tofacitinib and ruxolitinib are reported to reverse AA in a mouse 
model.2  Clinically , there are case reports and case series reporting that these JAK inhibitors 
demonstrate efficacy  in AA.2,17,18,46-51
Based on the mechanism of action of PF- 06651600, this candidate is expected to inhibit the 
signaling of multiple soluble cy tokines and signaling pathway s contributing to the AA 
pathogenesis.
1.3. Nonclinical and Phase 1 Efficacy and Safety Data
Data from nonclinical and Phase 1 programs supports the planned clinical trials wi th 
PF-06651600.
The no observed adverse effect levels (NOAEL) in the 6- month rat and second 9 -month dog 
studies were 200 and 10 mg/kg/day , respectivel y.  In the second 9 -month dog toxicity  study , 
the NOAEL of 10 mg/kg/day  was based on adverse over- immunosu ppression and axonal 
dystrophy  (not axonal degeneration) in the central nervous s ystem and peripheral nervous 
system at ≥20 mg/kg/day, accompanied by  functional auditory  deficits (brainstem auditory  
evoked potentials) at the highest dose of 40 mg/kg/day  (a29-fold exposure multiple relative 
to the clinical dose of 50 mg).  The area under the concentration- time curve (AUC) exposure 
margins in this study  at the NOAEL at study  end were approximately  1.5x and 6.5x relative 
to the predicted exposure at the 200 mg and 50 mg clinical doses, respectively .
Further information is available in the current version of the Investigator’s Brochure (IB).
The potential for PF -06651600 to be involved in drug -drug interaction (DDI) is being 
investigated.  If results exclude a clinically  meaningful DDI (eg, relative to AUC) between 
PF-06651600 and a perpetrator or victim drug then that perpetrator or victim drug will no 
longer be prohibited as a concomitant medication; this information will be communicated via 
an administrative letter.  Refer to Section 5.8.2 for medications prohibited to be used prior to 
and during the study .  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 481.4.Clinical Ex perience
There are complete and ongoing Phase 2 and 3 studies with PF- 06651600 in a number of 
disease indications.  Forty -two (42) patients with rheumatoid arthritis were exposed to 
PF-06651600 in the Phase 2a stud y B7981006.91  Forty-eight (48) subjects were exposed to 
PF-06651600 in the Phase 2a Alopecia Areata study  B7931005 in the initial 24- week 
period.92  There are ongoing studies in subjects with ulcerative colitis (B7981005)93, Crohn’s 
disease (B7981007)94, and vitiligo (B7981019)95.  These studies are expected to expose 
approximately  180, 125, and 330, respectivel y, to once dail y (QD) PF -06651600 treatment.  
The duration of exposure will range from 24 to 32 weeks in B7981005, from 52 to 64 weeks 
in B7981007, and up to 48 weeks in B7981019.  In addition, there is the B7981032 study , an 
ongoing Phase 3 open- label study  for subjects with alopecia areata who have previousl y 
enrolled in either the B7931005 or B7981015 studies as well as de novo subjects who have 
not received stud y intervention in either of those studies.96  Approximately  450 de novo 
subjects and 510 subjec ts from B7931005 or B7981015 will be exposed to PF -06651600 in 
the B7981032 stud y and the duration of exposure will range up to 26 months. 
1.4.1. Phase 2a Study in Alopecia
Study  B7931005 is a Phase 2a, double -blind, placebo -controlled, multicenter study  to 
evaluate the efficacy  and safet y profile of PF -06651600 and PF -06700841 (a TYK2/JAK1 
inhibitor) compared with placebo in adult (18 -75years-old) subjects with scalp hair loss of 
≥50% at baseline.  The study consisted of an initial 24- week double -blind treatment period, 
an up to 12-month extension period, and a 6- month cross -over open label extension period.  
A total of 142 subjects were randomized to study  treatment: 47 subjects received placebo, 
48subjects received PF -06651600 and 47 subjects received the oth er stud y treatment.
During the initial 24 -week treatment period, subjects were treated with 200 mg QD during a 
4-week induction phase followed by  dosing with 50 mg QD in a maintenance phase in the 
PF-06651600 group.  The primary  efficacy  endpoint in the st udy was mean change from 
baseline in SAL T score at Week 24.  At Week 24, anal ysis provided data on both efficacy  
and safet y, and indicated clinical improvement for subjects treated with PF -06651600.  
PF-06651600 met the predefined primary  decision criterio n (mean change from baseline 
[CFB] in SAL T score, adjusted p -value <0.025, and point estimate >20% at Week 24).  The 
Mixed effect Model Repeat Measurement (MMRM) estimates for PF-06651600 compared to 
placebo at Week 24 for SAL T mean CFB (95% CI) were 33.6 [95% CI= (21.4, 45.7); 
Hochberg p (1-sided) <0.0001].  PF -06651600 differentiates from placebo (statistically  
significant), as earl y as Week 6.  Overall, the placebo response was almost negligible.  
PF-06651600 also differentiates from placebo on the propo rtion of responders in ey elash 
assessment (ELA) and eyebrow assessment (EBA). 
During the initial 24 -week treatment period of Study  B7931005, there were no deaths and no 
subject in the PF -06651600 treatment group experienced a serious adverse event (SAE). The 
proportion of subjects who experienced treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) in the 
placebo treatment group (74.5%) was comparable with the PF -06651600 treatment group 
(62.5%).  The TEAEs reported in more than 5% of subjects with AA receiving PF -06651600 
were headache, infections of upper respiratory  tract, acne, diarrhea, nausea, and skin 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 49infections.  The majorit y of events were mild.  No serious infections, malignancies, cases of 
herpes zoster, or cases of herpes simplex were reported in the PF -06651600 group.  
Hematological changes were observed in both active groups during the induction and 
maintenance periods but were not associated with clinically  relevant TEAEs.  During the 
induction period, when subjects received PF- 06651600 200 mg QD for 4 weeks, decreases in 
mean platelet and l ymphocy te counts ( -18% and - 24% mean CFB, respectively ) were 
observed in the PF -06651600 group.  During the maintenance period, when subjects received 
50mg QD for 20 weeks, there was improvement in the platelet and l ymphocy te counts in the 
PF-06651600 group.  Neutrophil counts were increased at Week 4 (12% CFB) and Week 24 
(10% CFB) in the PF -06651600 treatment group.  Two subjects in the PF -06651600 group 
discontinued due to TEAEs.
The final study  results, including the results of the two extension periods, are described in the 
current version of the IB. 
1.4.2. Phase 2a Study in Rheumatoid Arthritis
The completed Phase 2a study  B7981006 was an 8 -week randomized, double -blind, 
placebo- controlled, parallel -group, multi -center study  in subjects with moderate -to-severe 
active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with an inadequate response to methotrexate.  A total of 
70subjects were randomized to study  treatment; 28 subjects received placebo and 
42subjects received PF -06651600 (200 mg Q D). 
PF-06651600 was determined to be generally  safe and well tolerated in this study .  There 
were no deaths or SAEs.  TEAEs were numerically higher in subjects receiving PF -06651600 
compared to those receiving placebo.  The TEAEs reported in more than 5% subjects with 
RA receiving PF -06651600 were influenza and l ymphopenia.  The majority of the TEAEs 
were mild in severit y.  There was 1 mild case of herpes simplex in the PF -06651600 group 
that was considered to be treatment- related with no cases in the plac ebo group.  There were 
no clinically  relevant changes in vital signs, electrocardiogram (ECG), or audiometric 
assessments.  By  the Week 8 time point (as earl y as 2weeks), in the PF -06651600 group, 
there were decreases in the median platelet counts (25% change from baseline), ly mphocy te 
counts (21% change from baseline), neutrophil counts (24% change from baseline), and 
hemoglobin (3% change from baseline).  None of these were deemed to be clinically  relevant 
by the investigator and values returned to near baseline by the 12 -week follow -up visit.
1.4.3. Clinical Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
Pharmacokinetics, bioavailability , and food effect have been studied in several Phase 1 
clinical trials.  For a complete description of these studies, please refer to the IB.
These studies demonstrated that the PK profile of PF- 06651600 is characterized by  rapid 
absorption with time (T max) to first occurrence of maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) 
values <1 hour and rapid elimination (half -life [t ½] of 1.1 –2.5hours).  S ystemic exposures 
increase in an approximately  dose proportional manner across 50 mg to 400 mg total dail y 
dose with observed accumulation ratios (R ac) ranging from 1 -1.8.  A similar PK profile was 
observed in Japanese subjects following administration of 200 mgPF-06651600 QD for 
10days.  The bioavailability  of a solid dose formulation of PF -06651600 relative to a 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 50solution formulation under fasting conditions and the effect of food on the bioavailability  of 
the solid dosage formulation of PF -06651600 was evalua ted.  The relative bioavailability  of 
the PF -06651600 tablet as measured b y area under the plasma concentration time curve from 
time zero to infinity  (AUC inf) is similar to that of an oral solution.  PF -06651600 can be 
administered with or without food. 
In vitro and in vivo metabolite profiling suggested that the primary  clearance mechanisms for 
PF-06651600 were glutathione -related conjugation and cy tochrome P450 (CYP) -mediated 
oxidation with the major contributing isoform being CYP3A4.  No unique human 
metabolites were observed clinically  compared to metabolite profiles in mouse, rat, and dog.  
PF-06651600 showed a low risk of inhibition and induction of the major CYP450 and uridine 
diphosphate glucuronos yltransferase (UGT) enz ymes, although time -dependen t inhibition of 
CYP1A2 (inhibitory  concentration 50% [I C50] = 65 µM) and CYP3A4/5 (IC 50= 11 to 14 M) 
was observed.  PF-06651600 showed a low potential to inhibit organic anion transporting 
polypeptide (OATP) 1B1, OATP1B3, bile salt export pump (BSEP), or ganic cation 
transporter (OCT)2, organic anion transporter (OAT)1, and OAT3 at clinically  relative 
concentrations.  However, PF -06651600 has the potential to inhibit P -glycoprotein (P -gp) 
(systemically  and in the gastrointestinal [GI ] tract), breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) 
(systemically  and in the GI tract), OCT1, multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE)1, and 
MATE2K at clinicall y relevant concentrations.
In general, sy stemic exposures in the adolescent populations do not differ significantl y from 
adults, which justifies similar doses for adults and adolescents.52,53  Based on the current 
knowledge of the disposition of PF -06651600, which is pri marily  metabolism, adolescents 
are expected to have a similar range of exposures as seen in adults. 
1.5.Study Rationale
This study  is being conducted to evaluate the efficacy  and safety  of multiple doses/regimens 
of PF -06651600 in comparison with placebo over the first 24 weeks treatment duration .  This 
will be followed by  an additional 24-week extension period during which all subjects w ill 
receive active treatment including those subjects who received placebo during the initial 
24weeks of the stud y.
This st udy will test multiple dose regimens, including the dose regimen with demonstrated 
clinical efficacy  in the ongoing Phase 2a Study B793100592, as well as several lower doses to 
evaluate dose-response relationships.  The rationale for selection of the dosing regimens in 
this study  is further described in Section 1.6.
In addition to dose -ranging, t he other objectives of th is study  are to support registration for 
treatment of patients with moderate to severe AA and to evaluate safety in this population. 
To achieve this, response based on absolute SALT score ≤20 at Week 24 will be the primary  
endpoint for anal yzing a dose -response and for confirming a clinically  meaningful treatment 
effect in patients with AA.89  SALT is an instrument that is widely  used to assess severit y of 
AA by  visual determination of the amount of terminal hair loss and summing across four 
views of the scalp (left side, right side, top and back; range 0 -100%).54,55  This tool has been 
well accepted and used in multiple AA clinical trials ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; and 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) as a reliable and reproducible measure of disease severity .17,18,49,56  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 51The extension phase of this study will provide additional blinded safety  and efficacy  data, 
including long -term data in subjects initially  randomized to active treatment as well as data in 
subjects initially  randomized to placebo and subsequently  advanced to active treatment at 
Week 24.
The total sample size for the study is approximately  660 randomized subjects.
1.6.Dose Rationale
This study  will eval uate PF -06651600 administered at a loading dose of 200 mg QD for 
4weeks followed b y maintenance doses of 30 mg and 50 mg QD for 20 weeks relative to 
placebo (until the primary endpoint, Week 24).  The maintenance doses will then be 
continued for an additional 24 weeks.  Additionally , doses of 10 mg, 30 mg and 50 mg QD 
will be evaluated relative to placebo for 24 weeks and continued for an additional 24 weeks 
as a fixed- dose regimen (ie, without loading dose). 
The rationale for the selection of the doses and regimens is based on:
Efficacy  and safety results for the initial 24 weeks of PF -06651600 treatment from Study  
B793100592in subjects with AA.
Dose/Exposure response relationships observed for PF-06651600 relevant biomarkers.
Safety  results for PF -06651600 from Study  B798100691in subjects with RA.
Exposure margins of proposed clinical doses relative to nonclinical no observed adverse 
effect level (NOAEL)/lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) exposures
(Table 1). 
An anal ysis of the initial 24 weeks (primary  objective) of the ongoing Phase 2a Study  
B7931005 was performed at Week 24.  In that study , PF-06651600 was evaluated at 200 mg 
QD for 4 weeks followed by  50mg QD for 20 weeks compared to placebo.  Both safety  and 
efficacy  data from the analy sis suggest that this dosing regimen of PF -06651600 is 
appropriate for further investigation.
Mechanistica lly, PF-06651600 inhibits signaling of the common- chain receptors for 
IL-15and IL -21, which have been implicated in the pathogenic pathways of AA.  There is 
also evidence of modulation of I P-10, which is a marker related to IFN .
The need for a loading -dose regimen is based on the hy pothesis that maximal inhibition of 
the relevant immunomodulatory  pathway s at initiation of treatment can accelerate clinical 
response which can be maintained b y the subsequent lower maintenance dose.  The 200 mg 
dose chosen as the loading dose is expected to produce a >70% IL- 15 and IL -21 in vitro 
signaling inhibition, with ~40% reduction in I P-10 levels from baseline.  The 200 mg dose 
has demonstrated acceptable safet y over 4 weeks in B7931005 in AA patients and 8 weeks in 
B7981006 in moderate to severe RA patients as described in Section 1.4.  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 52The highest maintenance dose of 50 mg is expected to produce ~30 -40% IL -15 and IL -21 in 
vitro signaling inhibition, with ~18% reduction in IP -10 levels from baseline.  The 50 mg 
maintenance dose demonstrated acceptable safet y over a 20 -week period in Study B7931005 
in AA patients as described in Section 1.4.1. 
Exposure margins of the proposed clinical doses relative to the NOAEL exposures are 
summarized in Table 1.
The dose of 10 mg is likely  to be a minimally  efficacious dose as it is expected to produce a 
<10% change from baseline in I P-10 levels.
In this study , PF-06651600 doses of 10 mg, 30 mg, and 50 mg will be evaluated as a fixed 
regimen, and 30 mg and 50 mg will also be evaluated following the 200 mg loading dose, in 
order to identify  the optimal clinical dose and regimen necessary .
Table 1.PF-06651600 Exposure Margins and No Observed Adverse Effects Level
Dose/Route Mean AUC in 
Dogs (unbound, 
ng•hr/ml)Mean Clinical 
AUC (unbound, 
ng•hr/ml)Calculated 
Safety Margin
Safety Exposure Margins for Hum an 200 m g QD Dose (B7931005)
Dog 2 -month 
toxicology (Study 1)NOAEL:
45 mg/kg oral44100 5464 8.1
Dog 9 -month 
toxicology (Study 2)NOAEL:
10 mg/kg oral7940 5464 1.5
Safety Exposure Margins for 50 m g QD Dose (B7931005)
Dog 2 -month 
toxicology (Study 1)NOAEL:
45 mg/kg oral44100 1213 36
Dog 9 -month 
toxicology (Study 2)NOAEL:
10 mg/kg oral7940 1213 6.5
Abbreviations: AUC = area under the concentration -time curve; NOAEL = no observed adverse effect level; 
QD=once daily.
1.7. Summary of Benefit/Risk Assessment
In the Phase 2a proof -of-concept Study  B793100592in adult patients with AA, PF -06651600 
met its primary  endpoint of improvement in SAL T score relative to placebo at Week 24.  
PF-06651600 appeared generall y safe and well tolerated as suggested b y adverse event (AE) 
number and profile.  Reductions in platelet counts and ly mphocy te counts were observed 
during treatment with 200 mg QD but were not considered clinicall y meaningful and 
improved after switching to 50 mg QD during the maintenance phase of the study .  
PF-06651600 is an immunomodulator and, as such, can be associated with the potential risk 
of infection (including serious infection), opportunistic infe ctions, and viral reactivation.  The 
risk of infection will be monitored and evaluated in longer term studies of PF -06651600. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 53These preliminary  clinical data indicate that PF -06651600 has a favorable benefit: risk 
profile and provides meaningful clinical benefit in a serious disease with no approved 
treatment options.  The benefit of evaluating PF- 06651600 in adolescents is additionally  
supported by  prevalence of AA in adolescents, the significant ps ychological burden of 
disease in this population, and a r ecent case series suggesting that extended duration of 
AAappears to increase likelihood of being refractory  to off -label tofacitinib treatment.
It is not known whether PF -06651600 is secreted into human milk.  I n animals, PF -06651600 
was associated with f etal changes in bones and some internal organs, and lower fetal body  
weights.  Because of the investigational nature of PF -06651600, it should not be 
administered to pregnant women, breastfeeding women, or fertile women of childbearing 
potential who are un willing or unable to use contraception as defined in the study  protocol.  
PF-06651600 is not likely  to transfer to a partner through semen at pharmacologically  
relevant levels.
Additional information for this compound may  be found in the single reference safet y 
document (SRSD), which for this study  is the Investigator’s Brochure (IB).
1.8.Additional Information
Banked biospecimens will be collected for the purpose of conducting research; specific uses 
are described in the Banked Biospecimens section.  Comparing the deoxy ribonucleic acid 
(DNA), ribonucleic acid (RNA), protein, and metabolite variation patterns of subjects who
respond well and those who respon d poorl y to treatment may help to better define the most 
appropriate group of subjects in which to target a given treatment.  Collecting biospecimens 
for exploratory  pharmacogenomic/genomic/biomarker anal yses and retaining them in the 
Biospecimen Banking S ystem (BBS) make it possible to better understand the investigational 
product’s mechanism of action and to seek explanations for differences in, for example, 
exposure, tolerability , safety , and/or efficacy  not anticipated prior to the beginning of the 
study.
Banked biospecimens retained in the BBS also can be used in research on AA.
Providing these biospecimens is a required stud y activity  for study  sites and subjects, unless 
prohibited by  local regulations or ethics committee (EC) decision.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 542.STUDY OBJECTIVE S AND ENDPOINTS
The following table details the overall study objectives and endpoints.  There are some 
region specific differences noted throughout.  Table 5in Section 9lists the primary  and 
secondary  endpoints of the study  organized by  known regional requirements. 
Primary Objective(s): Primary Endpoint(s):
 To evaluate the efficacy of PF -06651600 compared to 
placebo in adult and adolescent alopecia areata (AA) 
subjects with 50% or greater scalp hair loss on 
regrowth of lost hair (measured by an absolute 
Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤20)at week 
24.
Note: For the European Medicines Agency (EMA)
and competent authorities in the Voluntary 
Harmonisation Procedure (VHP) countries,athe
primary objective is to evaluate the efficacy of 
PF-06651600 compared to placebo in adult and 
adolescent AA subjects with 50% or greater scalp hair 
loss on regrowth of lost hair (measured by an absolute 
Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤10) at 
Week 2 4. Response based on an absolute Severity of Alopecia 
Tool (SALT) Score ≤20 at Week 24. 
Note: For the EMA and competent authorities in the 
VHP countries, response based on an absolute SALT 
Score ≤10 at Week 24 will be analyzed as the primary 
endpoint in a separate analysis.
Key Secondary Objective(s) Key Secondary Endpoint(s):
 To evaluate the efficacy of PF -06651600 compared to 
placebo in adult and adolescent AA subjects with 50% 
or greater scalp hair loss on regrowth of lost hair (as 
measured by an absolute SALT Score ≤10) at Week
24.
Note: This key secondary objective will be utilized as 
the primary objecti ve for the EMA and competent 
authorities in the VHP countries.  Additionally, this 
key secondary objective will not apply for the United 
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)/Japan 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency 
(PMDA). Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤10 at 
Week 24.
Note: This key secondary endpoint will be utilized as 
the primary endpoint for the EMA and competent 
authorities in the VHP countries . Additionally, this 
key secondary endpoint will not apply for the 
FDA/PMDA. 
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on patient 
centered outcomes (as measured by PGI -C response) 
at Week 24.
Note: This key secondary objective is only applicable 
for the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries. PGI-C response defined as a score of “moderately 
improved” or “greatly improved ”at Week 24.
Note: This key secondary endpoint is only applicable 
for the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries.
Secondary Objective(s): Secondary Endpoint(s):
 To characterize the exposure response of 
PF-06651600 on regrowth of lost hair. Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤20 at 
Week 24 will be used to characterize the exposure 
response.b
 To assess the efficacy of PF -06651600 on regrowth of 
lost hair during the treatment period over time. Response based on an absolute SALT score ≤ 20at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 34, 40, and 48.c,d
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 55 Response based on an absolute SALT score of ≤10 at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.e
 Response based on a 75% improvement in SALT 
score from baseline (SALT75) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48. 
 Change from baseline in SALT scores at Weeks 4, 8, 
12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 -grade improvement or
a score of 3 in Eyebrow Assessment (EBA) score at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 -grade improvement or 
a score of 3 in Eyelash Assessment (ELA) score at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient-centered outcomes and payer relevant 
measures to assess treatment benefit from the patient 
perspective and to demonstrate value.f PGI-C response defined as a PGI -C score of 
“moderately improved” or “greatly improved ”at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24,34, 40, and 48.f
 Change from baseline in Alopecia Areata Patient 
Priority Outcomes (AAPPO) scales at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
 Safety Objective(s) Safety Endpoint(s)
 To evaluate the safety and tolerability of 
PF-06651600 in the treatment period over time. Incidence of treatment -emergent adverse events 
(AEs).
 Incidence of serious AEs (SAEs) and AEs leading to 
discontinuation.
 The incidence of clinically significant abnormalities 
in vital signs.
 The incidence of clinically significant abnormalities 
in clinica l laboratory values.
 PK Objective(s) PK Endpoint(s)
 To characterize pharmacokinetics of PF -06651600.  Plasma concentrations of PF -06651600 at Weeks 4, 
and 8 or 12.
Exploratory Objective(s): Exploratory Endpoint(s):
 To collect banked biospecimens for exploratory 
research, unless prohibited by local regulations or 
ethics committee decision. Collection of banked biospecimens unless prohibited 
by local regulations or ethics committee decision.  
Additional information on collection and potential 
use is pro vided in the Banked Biospecimens section.
 To assess the efficacy of PF -06651600 on regrowth of 
lost hair during the treatment period over time. Respo nse based on a 50% improvement in SALT 
score from baseline (SALT50) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Absolute SALT scores at Baseline, Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 56 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on 
patient-centered outc omes and payer relevant 
measures to assess treatment benefit from the patient 
perspective and to demonstrate value. Improvement on PGI-Cdefined as “slightly 
improved”, “moderately improved”, or “greatly 
improved” at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.  
 Improvement on Patient Satisfaction with Hair 
Growth (P -Sat) items defined as slightly, moderately, 
or very satisfied at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 
48.
Change from baseline in EuroQoL 
5Dimensions (EQ -5D-5L) in adults or 
EuroQoL 5Dimensions -Youth (EQ -5D-Y) in 
adolescents at Weeks 4, 12, 24, and 48.
Change from baseline in Alopecia Areata 
Resource Utilization (AARU) at Weeks 12, 24, 
34, and 48.
Change from baseline in Work Productivity and 
Activity Impairment: Alopecia Areata (WPAI:AA) at 
Weeks 12, 24, 34, and 48.
 Change from baseline in the depression subscale 
score of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.g,87
 Change from baseline in the anxiety subsc ale score of 
the HADS at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.g,87
 Improvement on HADS among subjects with a 
baseline subscale score indicative of depression who 
achieved a “normal’ subscale score indicative of an 
absence of depression at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 
48.g,79,88
 Improvement on HADS among subjects with a 
baseline subscale score indicative of anxiety who 
achieved a “normal’ subscale score indicative of an 
absence of anxiety at Weeks 4, 8 , 12, 24, and 48.g,79,88
 Change from baseline in 36 -Item Short Form Health 
Survey version 2 Acute (SF36v2 A cute) at Weeks 4, 
8, 12, 24, and 48.
 To evaluate the effect of PF -06651600 on the 
clinician global impression of severity of scalp hair 
loss. Change from baseline in Clinician Global Impression 
–Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 
24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 To evaluate efficacy of PF -06651600 in AA nail 
disease over time. Change from baseline in fingernails affected by AA 
at Weeks 12, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
 To assess pharmacodynamic and disease-related 
biomarkers over time. Change from baseline in interferon gamma -induced 
protein 10 (IP -10) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, and 24.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 57 Change from baseline in percent and absolute 
lymphocyte subsets (T -cell, B -cell, and natural killer 
[NK] cells) at Weeks 4, 12, 24, and 48.
 Change from baseline in immunoglobulins (IgA , IgG, 
IgM) at Weeks 24 and 48.
a. The VHP countries participating in this study are Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Spain.
b. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, when SALT ≤10is utilized for the primary endpoint, 
exposure response will be analyzed utilizing SALT ≤10 in a separate analysis.
c. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, when SALT ≤10is utilized for the primary endpoint, 
SALT ≤20 at Week 24 will be analyzed as a secondary endpoint.
d. When SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, responses based on absolute SALT score 
≤20 at Weeks 18, 12, 8 and 4 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure.  
When SALT ≤10 response at Week 24 is u tilized as the primary endpoint, the response based on absolute SALT 
score ≤20 at Week 24 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure. 
e. When SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, the response based on absolute SALT 
score ≤10 at Week 24 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure.  When 
SALT ≤10 response at Week 24 is utilized as the primary endpoint, the responses based on absolute SALT score 
≤10 at Weeks 18, 12, 8 and 4 will be analyzed controlling for Type I error utilizing an appropriate testing procedure. 
f. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, the evaluation of the effect of PF-06651600 on 
patient centered outcomes (as measured by PGI-C response at Week 24) is a key secondary objective.  The PGI-C 
response at Week 24 will be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint utilizing an appropriate testing procedure to 
control overall Type I error.
g. For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries , endpoints utilizing the HADS will be analyzed as 
secondary endpoints.
3.STUDY DESIGN
Study  B7981015 will investigate PF -06651600 in subjects with moderate to severe AA.  This 
is a Phase 2b/3, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, dose -ranging stud y.  The 
study  will have a maximum duration of approximately  57 weeks.  This includes an up to 
5-week Screening period, a 48-week treatment period, and a 4- week follow -up period as 
shown in Figure 1.  The treatment period will be comprised of a placebo -controlled period 
that includes a 4 -week loading phas e and a 20- week maintenance phase, followed by  a 
24-week extension phase.  The study  will enroll a total of approximately  660 subjects.  The 
study  will be conducted at approximately  120 sites. 
To be eligible to enroll in this study , subjects must have mod erate to severe AA with 
≥50% hair loss of the scalp (SAL T score ≥50) at both Screening and baseline visits, without 
evidence of terminal hair regrowth within the previous 6 months and with the current episode 
of hair loss ≤10years.  The full list of eligi bility  criteria for the study  is included in 
Section 4 .
Screening will occur within 35 days prior to the first dose of study  drug to confirm that 
subjects meet selection criteria for the study .  Photographs will be taken at the Screening 
Visit to verify  eligibility  (AA with ≥50% hair loss of the scalp).  Eligible subjects will be 
randomized as described below.
A strati fied randomization will be used for operational purposes in order to achieve a target 
global composition for AT/AU and adolescent subjects in the enrolled population.  The 
targets for enrollment are approximately  40% AT/AU and approximately  15% adolescents.  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 58The randomization will be operationalized as follows.  In regions enrolling both adolescents 
and adults, there will be four strata:
<18 y ears of age and AT/AU;
<18 y ears of age and not AT/AU;
≥18 y ears of age and AT/AU; and
≥18 y ears of age and not AT/A U.
Within each of these strata, subjects will be randomized in a 2:2:2:2:1:1:1 manner to blinded 
PF-06651600 and matching placebo for a total of 7 treatment sequences.  
In regions enrolling onl y adults, there will be two strata:
≥18 y ears of age and AT/AU; and
≥18 y ears of age and not AT/AU.
In these regions, subjects will be randomized using the same ratio as described for regions 
enrolling both adolescents and adults.
Figure 1provides a schematic of the study  design and the 7 treatment sequences.  All 
subjects will begin dosing during the loading period according to their assigned sequence.  
Following the 4 -week loading period, subjects will continue dosing according to their 
assigned sequence in the 20- week maintenance period.  At the end of the maintenance period, 
placebo- treated subjects will be advanced in a prespecified, blinded manner to one of two 
active treatment sequences for the remaind er of the study  (through Week 48).  Investigators, 
subjects, and the sponsor study  team will be blinded as to treatment group throughout the 
duration of the study .  Following the last dose of study  drug, both discontinued and 
completed subjects will enter into a 4 -week follow -up period for safet y monitoring.  Subjects 
who complete treatment may  be eligible for enrollment in a long -term study  (Phase 3 study  
B7981032).  Subjects who enroll immediately  into the B7981032 study  will not be required 
to complete t he 4-week follow -up period in this study .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 59Figure 1.Study Design Schematic
4. SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
This study  can fulfill its objectives only  if appropriate subjects are enrolled.  The following 
eligibility  criteria are designed to select subjects for whom participation in the study  is 
considered appropriate.  All relevant medical and nonmedical conditions should be taken into 
consideration when deciding whether a particular subject is suitable for this protocol. 
Subject eligibility  should be reviewed and documented by  an appropriate member of the 
investigator’s stud y team before subjects are included in the study. 
NOTE: There are certain eligibility  requirements specific to subjects within Voluntary  
Harmonisation Procedure (VHP) countries in the EMA.  The VHP countries participating in 
this study  are Czech Republic, German y, Hungary, Poland, and Spain.
4.1.Inclusion Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment into the 
study :
1.Evidence of a personally  signed and dated informed consent document indicating that 
the subject or a legally  acceptable representative/parent(s)/legal guardian has been 
informed of all pertinent aspects of the stud y.
2.Willing and able to comply  with scheduled visits, treatment plan, laboratory tests, and 
other study  procedures.
* Primary endpoint for the overall study is response based on absolute Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT) Score ≤20 at 
1         15         29        57            85              127              169         183      197        239        281         337   365     
BL       2            4          8            12               18                24*          26        28          34                         48   F/U     40    
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 603.Male or female subjects age 12 years and older, inclusive, at time of informed 
consent/assent.  Adolescent subjects below the age of 18 years will only be enrolled 
into th is study  if permitted by  the sponsor, local competent authority , and institutional 
review board (IRB)/ethics committee (EC).  Otherwise, only  subjects 18 years or 
older (or age specified b y applicable reviewer) will be enrolled in those countries, 
regions, or sites.  Within VHP countries in the EMA, subjects must be aged 18 
through 74 years at the time of informed consent.  
4.Subjects must meet/comply  with the following reproductive criteria:
Females:
Female subjects are eligible to participate if they  are not pregnant or breastfeeding, 
and at least 1 of the following conditions applies: 
a.Is a woman of childbearing potential (WOCBP) and using a contraceptive method 
that is highly  effective (with a failure rate of <1% per y ear), as described in 
Section 4.3 , during the intervention period and for at least 28 days after the last 
dose of study  intervention.  The investigator should evaluate the effectiveness of 
the contraceptive method in relationship to the first dose of study  intervention.
OR
b.Is not a WOCBP (see definitions below): 
Women in the following categories are not considered WOCBP:
Premenarchal.
Premenopausal femal e with 1 of the following:
Documented h ysterectomy ;
Documented bilateral salpingectomy ;
Documented bilateral oophorectom y.
For individuals with permanent infertility  due to an alternate medical 
cause other than the above, (eg, Müllerian agenesis, androgen 
insensitivity ), investigator discretion should be applied to determining 
study  entry .
Note: Documentation for any of the above categories can come from the 
site personnel’s review of the participant’s medical records, medical 
examination, or medical histor y interview.  The method of documentation 
should be recorded in the participant’s medical record for the stud y.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 61Postmenopausal female:
A postmenopausal state is defined as no menses for 12 months without an 
alternative medical cause.  In addition, a high f ollicle stimulating hormone 
(FSH) level in the postmenopausal range must be used to confirm a 
postmenopausal state in women under 60 years old and not using 
hormonal contraception or hormone replacement therap y (HRT).  Females 
on HRT and whose menopausal status is in doubt will be required to use 
one of the nonestrogen hormonal highly effective contraception methods if 
they wish to continue their HRT during the stud y.  Otherwise, they must 
discontinue HRT to allow confirmation of postmenopausal status befor e 
study  enrollment.
The investigator is responsible for review of medical history , menstrual history , and 
recent sexual activity  to decrease the risk for inclusion of a woman with an earl y 
undetected pregnancy .  Documentation of this review should be included in the 
participant’s medical record for the stud y.
Males:
Outside of VHP countries in the EMA, no contraceptive methods are required for 
male subjects in this study .
Within VHP countries in the EMA, male subjects are eligible to participate if they  
agree to the following requirements during the intervention period and for at least 90 
days after the last dose of study  intervention: 
Refrain from donating sperm.
AND
Use one acceptable method of contraception as described in Section 4.3.  
5.Must meet the following AA criteria:
a.Have a clinical diagnosis of AA with no other etiology  of hair loss (eg, telogen 
effluvium, androgenetic alopecia, etc.).
b. ≥ 50% hair loss of the scalp, including alopecia totalis (AT) and alopecia 
universalis (AU), without evidence of terminal hair regrowth within 6 months at 
both the screening and baseline visits. 
AT is defined as complete (100% ) scalp hair loss.
AU is defined as complete (100%) scalp, facial, and body  hair loss. 
Percentage of hair loss on the scalp will be measured b y SALT. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 62Photographs taken at Screening must be submitted to the Sponsor or designee 
for verification of SALT sco re≥50 and hair loss due to AA.  Subjects must 
not be randomized until verification has been confirmed.
c.Current episode of hair loss ≤10years.
6.If receiving permitted concomitant medications for an y reason other than AA, 
subjects should be on a stable regimen, which is defined as not starting a new drug or 
changing dosage within 7 days or 5 half-lives (whichever is longer) prior to Day 1.  
Subject must be willing to stay  on a stable regimen during the duration of the study  
(see Section 5.8). 
7. Must agree to avoid prolonged exposure to the sun and not to use tanning booths, sun 
lamps or other ultraviolet light sources during the study .
4.2. Exclusion Criteria
Subjects with any  of the following characteristics/conditions will not be included in the 
study :
1.Investigator site staff members directl y involved in the conduct of the study and their 
family  members, site staff members other wise supervised by  the investigator, or 
subjects who are Pfizer employ ees, including their family  members, directly  involved 
in the conduct of the study .
2. Participation in other studies involving investigational drug(s) within 8 weeks or 
within 5 half-lives (if known), whichever is longer, prior to study  entry  and/or during 
study  participation.
3.Other ty pes of alopecia (including, but not limited to traction and scarring alopecia, 
telogen effluvium).  Subjects with known androgenetic alopecia will be excluded . 
4.Other scalp disease that may  impact AA assessment (eg, scalp psoriasis, dermatitis, 
etc).
5.Active sy stemic diseases that may  cause hair loss (eg, lupus ery thematosus, 
thyroiditis, sy stemic sclerosis, lichen planus, etc).
6.Any psychiatric condition includi ng recent or active suicidal ideation or behavior that 
meets an y of the following criteria: 
a.Suicidal ideation associated with actual intent and a method or plan in the past 
year: “Yes” answers on items 4 or 5 of the Columbia Suicide Severity  Rating 
Scale (C -SSRS). 
b.For subjects who had previous history  of suicidal behaviors in the past >1 y ear to 
<5 years: “Yes” answer (for events that occurred in the past 5 years) to an y of the 
suicidal behavior items of the C- SSRS or any  lifetime history  of serious or 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 63recurrent suicidal behavior, a risk assessment must be performed, and 
documented, b y a qualified mental health professional to assess whether it is safe 
for the subject to participate in the trial.
c.Clinically  significant depression as indicated by  the Pati ent Health 
Questionnaire - 8Items (PHQ -8) total score ≥15. 
d.The presence of any current major psychiatric disorder that is not explicitly 
permitted in the inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
NOTE: For an y subject who has significant depression or an y suicidal behavior, the 
subject will not be randomized and should be referred for appropriate evaluation and 
treatment .
7. Have hearing loss with progression over the previous 5 years, or sudden heari ng loss, 
or middle or inner ear disease such as otitis media, cholesteatoma, Meniere’s disease, 
labyrinthitis, or other auditory  condition that is considered acute, fluctuating or 
progressive. 
8.Received an y of the following treatment regimens specified in the timeframes 
outlined below:
a.At any time : previous use of an y JAK inhibitor for use in any disease indication 
or an y non -B-cell selective ly mphocy te-depleting agent (eg, alefacept, 
alemtuzumab).
b.Within 6 months of first dose of study  drug or 5 half-lives (if known), or until 
lymphocy te count returns to normal, whichever is longer: any  B-cell-depleting 
agents including but not limited to rituximab.
c.Within 12 weeks of first dose of study  drug or 5 half-lives (if known), whichever 
is longer: other immunomodu latory  biologic agents.
d.Within 8 weeks of first dose of study  drug or within 5 half-lives (if known), 
whichever is longer:
Other s ystemic treatments that could affect AA including:
Immunosuppressants (eg, cy closporine A, azathioprine, methotrexate 
[MTX], sulfasalazine, mycophenolate mofetil [MMF], everolimus, 
ibrutinib).
Intralesional, oral, or injectable steroids.
5α-Reductase inhibitors (5 -ARIs) (eg, finasteride, dutasteride).
Oral minoxidil.
Spironolactone if used specificall y for AA.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 64e.Within 6 weeks of first dose of study  drug: vaccination with live or attenuated 
live vaccine.
f.Within 4 weeks of first dose of study  drug: Ultraviolet B (UVB) phototherap y, 
Psoralen Ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy , other phototherap y, contact 
immunotherapy  (eg, dipheny lcyclopropenone [DPCP], squaric acid dibuty lester 
[SADBE], and 1 -chloro-2,4- dinitrobenzene [DNCB]), topical irritants (eg, 
anthralin), and liquid nitrogen cry otherapy .
g.Within 4 weeks of first dose of study  drug or 5 half-lives (whichever is longer): 
prohibited cy tochrome P450 isoenzy me 3A (CYP3A) inducers as described in 
Appendix 4.
h.Within 2 weeks of first dose of study  drug: topical treatments on areas under 
assessment (ie, scalp, ey ebrows, ey elashes, and fingernails) that could affect AA 
(eg, steroid cream, medicated shampoo, minoxidil).
i.Within 1 week of first dose of study  drug:
Herbal medications with unknown properties or known effects for AA.
Prohibited C YP3A substrates as described in Appendix 4(within 7 days or 
5half-lives, whichever is longer).
j.Subjects with shaved heads must not enter the study until hair has grown back and 
is considered stable b y the investigator.
9. Treatment anticipated with prohibited concomitant medication(s) (see Section 5.8.2
andAppendix 4) during the course of the stud y.
10.Current or recent history  of clinically  significant severe, progressive, or uncontrolled 
renal (including but not limited to active renal disease or recent ki dney  stones), 
hepatic, hematological, gastrointestinal, metabolic, endocrine (particularl y thyroid 
disease which can be associated with hair loss), pulmonary , cardiovascular, 
psychiatric, immunologic/rheumatologic or neurologic disease; or have an y other 
severe acute or chronic medical or ps ychiatric condition or laboratory  abnormality  
that may  increase the risk associated with study participation or investigational 
product administration, or interfere with the interpretation of study results; or in the 
opinion of the investigator or Pfizer (or designee), the subject is inappropriate for 
entry  into this study , or unwilling/unable to comply  with STUDY PROCEDURES
and Lifestyle Requirements .
11.Any present malignancies or history  of malignancies with the exception of adequatel y 
treated or excised non -metastat ic basal cell or squamous cell cancer of the skin or 
cervical carcinoma in situ.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 6512.History  of any  lymphoproliferative disorder such as Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) related 
lymphoproliferative disorder, history  of lymphoma, history  of leukemia, or signs and 
symptoms suggestive of current l ymphatic or l ymphoid disease.
13.History  (single episode) of disseminated herpes zoster or disseminated herpes 
simplex, or a recurrent (more than one episode of) localized, dermatomal herpes 
zoster.
14. Adolescent subjects 12 to <18 years-old without one of the following:
Documented evidence of having received varicella vaccination (2 doses); or
Evidence of prior exposure to varicella- zoster virus (VZV) based on 
serological testing (ie, a positive VZV immunoglobulin G antibody  [VZV IgG 
Ab] result) at screening.
NOTE: Serological testing must be performed for VZV IgG Ab only in the 
absence of documented evidence of having received varicella vaccination 
(2doses).  If serological testing is performed in the presence of documented 
evidence o f having received varicella vaccination (2 doses), subjects are 
eligible to enter the study regardless of the result of serological testing.
15.History  of systemic infection requiring hospitalization, parenteral antimicrobial 
therap y, or as otherwise judged c linicall y significant by the investigator within 
6months prior to Day 1 (for criteria regarding Tuberculosis [TB] infection, see 
Exclusion Criterion 21).
16. Active acute or chronic infection requiring treatment with oral antibiotics, antivirals, 
antiparasitics, antiprotozoals, or antifungals within 4 weeks prior to Day 1 or 
superficial skin infection within 1 week prior to Day 1.  NOTE: subjects may  be 
rescreened after the infection resolves.
17.Significant trauma or major surgery  within 1 month of the first dose of study  drug.
18.Considered in imminent need for surgery  or with elective surgery  scheduled to occur 
during the stud y. 
19.Known immunodeficiency disor der, including positive serology  for human 
immunodeficiency  virus (HIV) at screening, or a first -degree relative with a 
hereditary  immunodeficiency .
20.Infection with hepatitis B or hepatitis C viruses according to protocol -specific testing 
algorithm. 
a.For he patitis B, all subjects will undergo testing for hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) and hepatitis B core antibod y (HBcAb).  Subjects who are HBsAg 
positive will not be eligible for this study .  Subjects who are HBsAg negative but 
HBcAb positive will be re flex tested for hepatitis B surface antibody  (HBsAb).  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 66Additional reflex testing for hepatitis B virus DNA testing (HBVDNA) is also 
required for HBcAb positive subjects in countries in which Hep B prevalence has 
been reported at a rate of >5.0% or if required b y local standard of care.  Please 
refer to Appendix 2for testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility 
criteria.  For Japan -specific requirements, see Appendix 5.1.
b.For hepatitis C, all subjects will undergo testing for hepatitis C antibody  
(HCVAb) during Screening. 
Subjects who are HCVAb positive will be reflex- tested for hepatitis C RNA 
(HCV RNA).  Subjects who are HCVAb and HCV RNA positive are not 
eligible for the study . 
21.Have evidence of untreated or inadequatel y treated active or latent M ycobacterium 
tuberculosis (TB) infection as evidenced b y the following:
a.A positive QuantiFERON®-TB Gold In -Tube (QFT -G) test or positive or 
borderline T -SPOT®.TB(T-Spot) test performed within the 3 months prior to 
Baseline (Visit 2).  If the laboratory  reports the test as indeterminate, the test 
should be repeated.  If the result of the repeat test is indeterminate, a purified 
protein derivative (PPD) test may  be substituted for the QFT -G test or T -Spot test 
only with approval from the Pfizer Medical Monitor on a case- by-case basis.
b. Chest radiograph with changes suggestive of active TB infection within 3 months 
prior to Screening.  Chest radiograph should be performed according to local 
standards of care or country -specific guidelines.
c.History  of either untreated or inadequately treated latent or active TB infection.
If a subject has previously  received an adequate course of therapy  for either latent 
(9months of isoniazid in a locale where rates of primary  multi- drug resistant TB 
infection are <5% or an acceptable alternative regimen) or active (acceptable 
multi- drug regimen) TB infection, neither a QFT -G test, a T -Spot test, nor a PPD 
test need be obtained.  Details of the previous course of therap y (eg, medication(s)
used, dose, duration of therap y) should be documented in the source 
documentation.
A chest radiograph should be obtained if not done within the 3 months prior to 
Screening.  To be considered eligible for the study, the chest radiograph must be 
negative for active TB infection. 
A subject who is currently being treated for active TB infection must be excluded 
from the study .
A subject who is being treated for latent TB infection can only  be enrolled with 
confirmation of current incidence rates of multi -drug resistant TB infection, 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 67documentation of an adequate treatment regimen, and prior approval of the 
Sponsor.
22. Abnormal findings on the Screening chest radiographs (eg, chest x- ray) including, but 
not limited to, presence of active TB, general infections, car diomy opathy , or 
malignancy .  NOTE: Chest radiograph examination may  be performed up to 3 months 
prior to Screening visit.  Documentation of the reading b y a qualified radiologist or 
pulmonologist must be available in the source documentation.
23.ANY of the fo llowing conditions at screening:
a.Screening 12- lead ECG that demonstrates:
Clinically  significant abnormalities requiring treatment (eg, acute my ocardial 
infarction, serious tach y-or brad y-arrhythmias) or indicating serious 
underly ing heart disease (eg, cardiomy opathy , Wolff -Parkinson–White 
syndrome); 
Confirmed QT interval corrected using Fridericia’s correction factor QTc F
(QTc F) prolongation (>450 milliseconds).
b.Long QT S yndrome, a family  history  of Long QT Sy ndrome, or a history  of 
Torsades de Pointes; 
24.ANY of the following abnormalities in clinical laboratory  tests at screening, as 
assessed b y the stud y-specific laboratory  and confirmed by  a single repeat, if deemed 
necessary :
a.Absolute neutrophil count <1.2 x 109/L (<1200/mm3);
b.Hemoglobin <11.0 g/dL or hematocrit <33%; 
c.Platelet count <150 × 10 9/L or <150,000/mm 3;
d.Absolute ly mphocy te count of <0.8 x 109 /L (<800/mm3); 
e.Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <60 ml/min/1.73 m2based on the age 
appropriate calculation;
f.Enzy mes aspartate transaminase (AST) or alanine transaminase (ALT) values 
>2× upper limit of normal (ULN);
g.Total bilirubin >1.5 × ULN; subjects with Gilbert's s yndrome would be eligible 
for this study  provided the direct bilirubin is ≤ULN;
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 68h.In the opinion of the investigator or Pfizer ( or designee), have any  clinically  
significant laboratory  abnormality  that that could affect interpretation of study  
data or the subject’s participation in the study .
25.Have an active history  of alcohol or substance abuse within 1 year prior to Day 1. 
26.Donati on of blood in excess of 500 mL within 8 weeks prior to Day 1.
4.3.Lifestyle Requirements
4.3.1. Contraception
The investigator or his or her designee, in consultation with the subject, will confirm that the 
subject has selected an appropriate method of contraception for the individual subject from 
the permitted list of contraception methods, and will confirm that the subject has been 
instructed in its consistent and correct use.  At time points indicated in the Schedule of 
Activities, the investigator or designee will inform the subject of the need to use highl y 
effective contraception consis tently  and correctly  and document the conversation and the 
subject’s affirmation in the subject’s chart (subjects need to affirm their consistent and 
correct use of at least 1 of the selected methods of contraception).  In addition, the 
investigator or desig nee will instruct the subject to call immediately  if the selected 
contraception method is discontinued or if pregnancy  is known or suspected in the subject (if 
WOCBP) or partner.
Males
Outside of VHP countries in the EMA, no contraception methods are req uired for male 
subjects in the study .
Within VHP countries in the EMA, male subjects must agree to one of the following 
contraception requirements during the intervention period and for at least 90 day s after the 
last dose of investigational product.
1.Be ab stinent from sexual intercourse with a female of childbearing potential as their 
preferred and usual lifesty le (abstinent on a long term and persistent basis) and agree 
to remain abstinent. 
2. Use a male condom during sexual intercourse with a female of childbearing potential.
3.Have undergone a vasectomy  (with the confirmed absence of sperm, considering that 
the spermatogenesis cy cle is approximately  90 day s).
Females
The following applies to female subjects who are considered WOCBP.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 69Highly Effective Contracep tive Methods
1.Oral, injectable, or implantable progestogen -only hormone contraception associated 
with inhibition of ovulation.
2.Intrauterine device (IUD).
3.Intrauterine hormone -releasing s ystem (IUS).
4. Bilateral tubal occlusion or bilateral tubal ligation.
5.Oral, intravaginal, transdermal, or injectable combined (estrogen- and 
progestogen- containing) hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of 
ovulation used in combination with a barrier method. 
Acceptable barrier methods include:
Male or female condom with or without spermicide;
Cervical cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide.
Male condom and female condoms should not be used together (due to risk of failure 
with friction).
6.Vasectomized partner.
Vasectomized partner is a highl y effective contraceptive method provided that the 
partner is the sole sexual partner of the WOCBP, and the absence of sperm has been 
confirmed.  If not, an additional highly  effective method of contraception should be 
used.  The spermatogenesis cy cle is approximately  90days.
7.Sexual abstinence.
Sexual abstinence is considered a highl y effective method only  if defined as 
refraining from heterosexual intercourse during the entire period of risk associated 
with the study  intervention.  The reliability  of sexual abstinence needs to be evaluated 
in relation to the duration of the study and the preferred and usual lifest yle of the 
participant.
Additionally , contraceptive use should be consistent with local regulations or guidance 
regarding the use of contraceptive methods for those participating in clinical trials. 
4.3.2. Cosmetic Treatments/Applications
Following screening, subjects must not shave th e hair on the scalp, ey ebrows, or ey elashes 
for the duration of the study .  Subjects wishing to keep their hair short are permitted to do so 
and an appropriate length should be discussed with the investigator to allow for assessment 
of hair re -growth.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 70In addition, the following applies to other cosmetic treatments/applications:
1.Hair transplants and tattooing of scalp, ey ebrows, and ey elashes, including 
procedures such as microblading, are not permitted during the course of study  but 
these procedures perform ed prior to screening may not, in the investigator’s opinion, 
exclude a subject from enrollment.
2.Hair prosthetics (eg, wigs, hair extensions) are permitted but must be removed for 
clinical assessments of AA at all study  visits.
3.Hair d ye is permitted to be used during the stud y, but subjects should be discouraged 
from undergoing any hair dying process for 7 days prior to a study  visit.
4.Mascara and false ey elashes are permitted but must be removed for clinical 
assessments of AA at all study  visits.  The use o f false ey elashes with adhesive should 
be discouraged, where possible, due to the risk of ey elash loss during removal.
5. Nail polish/varnish is permitted but must be removed for assessments of fingernails 
affected b y AA.
6.False fingernails or gel applications to the fingernails should be discouraged, where 
possible, due to the risk of damage to the subject’s natural fingernails and must be 
removed for clinical assessments of fingernails at all study  visits.
4.4.Sponsor’s Qualified Medical Personnel
The contact inf ormation for the sponsor's appropriately  qualified medical personnel for the 
study  is documented in the study  contact list located in the supporting study  documentation.
To facilitate access to appropriatel y qualified medical personnel on stud y-related med ical 
questions or problems, subjects are provided with a contact card.  The contact card contains, 
at a minimum, protocol and investigational product identifiers, subject study numbers, 
contact information for the investigator site, and contact details for a contact center in the 
event that the investigator site staff cannot be reached to provide advice on a medical 
question or problem originating from another healthcare professional not involved in the 
subject’s participation in the study.  The contact num ber can also be used by investigator 
staff if they  are seeking advice on medical questions or problems; however, it should be used 
only in the event that the established communication pathway s between the investigator site 
and the study  team are not availa ble.  It is therefore intended to augment, but not replace, the 
established communication pathway s between the investigator site and the study  team for 
advice on medical questions or problems that may arise during the stud y.  The contact 
number is not inte nded for use b y the subject directly, and if a subject calls that number, he 
or she will be directed back to the investigator site.
5.STUDY TREATMENTS
For the purposes of this study , and per International Council for Harmonisation (I CH) 
guidelines, investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 71ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference/comparator in a clinical trial, 
including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or 
packaged) in a way  different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved 
indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use (I CH E6 1.33). 
For this study , the investigational product is PF -06651600.
Subjects will be randomized in a 2:2:2:2:1:1:1 manner to 1 of 7 treatment sequences using 
blinded PF -06651600 and matching placebo which are defined in Section 3 .
5.1.Allocation to Treatment
Allocation of subjects to treatment groups will proceed through the use of an interactive 
response technology  (IRT) sy stem (interactive Web -based response [I WR] called Impala).  
The site personnel (stud y coordinator or specified designee) will be required to enter or select 
information including but not limited to the user’s identification (ID) and password, the 
protocol number, and the subject number.  The site personnel will then be provided with a 
treatment assignme nt, randomization number, and dispensable unit (DU) or container number 
when investigational product is being supplied via the I RT s ystem.  The IRT sy stem will 
provide a confirmation report containing the subject number, randomization number, and 
DUor con tainer number assigned.  The confirmation report must be stored in the site’s files.
The study -specific I RT reference manual will provide the contact information and further 
details on the use of the IRT system. 
5.2.Breaking the Blind
The study  will be sponso r, subject, and investigator blinded.  
At the initiation of the study , the investigator site will be instructed on the method for 
breaking the blind.  The method will be an electronic process.  Blinding codes should be 
broken only in exceptional circumsta nces when knowledge of the actual treatment code is 
absolutely  essential for further management of the subject.  Investigators are encouraged to 
discuss with a member of the study  team if they  believe that unblinding is necessary .  When 
the blinding code i s broken, the reason must be fully  documented and entered on the case 
report form (CRF).
5.3. Subject Compliance
Subject compliance will be verified b y the accounting of investigational product at each visit.  
When investigational product is administered at the clinic, it will be administered b y the 
appropriatel y designated staff at the investigator site.
Compliance of the investigational product will be monitored by  delegated site personnel by  
the accounting of unused medication returned by  the subject at the s tudy visits.  Compliance 
will be documented on the CRF and source document.  If compliance is <80%, the 
investigator or designee is to counsel the subject and ensure steps are taken to improve 
compliance.  Subjects interrupting investigational product for more than 10 days between 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 72visits must be discussed with the sponsor for possible withdrawal from the study .  If the 
subject is over -compliant (>120%) with study  drug (intentional or accidental) the investigator 
or designee is to counsel the subject and ens ure correct understanding of the study  drug 
dosing regimen.  The investigator should contact the Pfizer Study  Clinician promptly  with 
any over -compliance that may  potentiall y impact the safe use of stud y drug or that may result 
in a serious adverse event.
5.4.Investigational Product Supplies
5.4.1. Dosage Form(s) and Packaging
Blinded PF -06651600 and its matched placebo will be provided as tablets for oral 
administration.  The designation “PF -06651600 -15” may  appear on labeling and indicates a 
salt.  I t is equivalent to “PF -06651600” with regard to this protocol.  The 50 mg and 10 
mgtablets and their matching placebos will be supplied in blister cards and labeled according 
to local regulatory  requirements.  Subjects will receive blinded labeled supplies throughout 
thestudy .
In order to achieve the proper dosage and maintain the blind throughout the study , tablets 
will be dispensed in a blinded fashion to ensure that all subjects, regardless of the assigned 
treatment sequence, will take the same number of tablets/day . To accomplish this, all 
subjects will take 7 tablets/day  during the loading period, 4 tablets/day  during the 
maintenance period, 7 tablets/day  during the first 4 weeks of the extension period, and 
4tablets/day  for the remainder of the extension period.  The number and t ype of tablets taken 
per day  for each treatment sequence is detailed in Table 2.
Table 2.Number and Type of Tabl ets for Each Treatment Sequence
Treatm ent 
SequenceLoading Period
Day 1 to Week 4
(No. of Tablets)Maintenance Period
Weeks 4 to 24
(No. of Tablets)First 4 Weeks of 
Extension Period
Weeks 24 to 28
(No. of Tablets)Rem ainder of 
Extension Period
Weeks 28 to 48
(No. of Tablets)
A 4 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo
B 4 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active4 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active
C 1 of 50 mg active
3 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo
D 4 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active4 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg active
E 4 of 50 mg size pbo
1 of 10 mg active
2 of 10 mg size pbo1of 50 mg size pbo
1 of 10 mg active
2 of 10 mg size pbo4 of 50 mg size pbo
1 of 10 mg active
2 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg size pbo
1 of 10 mg active
2 of 10 mg size pbo
F 4 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo4 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 73Table 2.Number and Type of Tabl ets for Each Treatment Sequence
Treatm ent 
SequenceLoading Period
Day 1 to Week 4
(No. of Tablets)Maintenance Period
Weeks 4 to 24
(No. of Tablets)First 4 Weeks of 
Extension Period
Weeks 24 to 28
(No. of Tablets)Rem ainder of 
Extension Period
Weeks 28 to 48
(No. of Tablets)
G 4 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 50 mg size pbo
3 of 10 mg size pbo1 of 50 mg active
3 of 10 mg size pbo
Abbreviations: No. = Number; Pbo = placebo.
5.4.2. Preparation and Dispensing
The investigational product will be dispensed using an IRT drug management sy stem at each 
visit.  A qualified staff member will dispense the investigational product via unique container 
numbers on the blister cards provided, in quantities appropriate for t he study  visit schedule.  
The subject/caregiver should be instructed to maintain the product in the blister cards 
provided, and the tablets should not be removed from the blister until the investigational 
product is to be administered.  Subjects/caregivers will be instructed to return the blister 
cards to the site at the next study  visit . 
5.5.Administration
Subjects will be provided clear dosing instructions. 
Sites will be trained on how subjects should take tablets at home through an I nvestigational 
Product manual and/or other vehicle(s).  Sites are responsible for communicating this 
information and site staff should review the dosing instructions with subjects at every 
study visit.
Subjects should take their tablets from a single row in the blister card each day .  Subjects 
should not take more than one row of tablets out of the blister card at a time as mixing tablets 
between rows may  change the amount of active medication taken in that day .  If a tablet is 
dropped or damaged, skip taking that tablet and note this on the diary  card.  Subjects should 
not take a tablet from another row.
Subjects should take the tablets orally according to the dosing instructions provided with the 
medication.  Subjects will be encouraged to take the medication in the morning 
whenever possible .  Subjects should take the medication at approximately  the same time 
every  day.  However, for study visit days , subjects are to be instructed to refrain from 
dosing at home and are to take the dose in the clinic.
If a dose is missed and the interval to the next dose is <8 hours, the missed dose should not 
be administered.  If a dose is missed and the interval to the next dose is ≥8hours, the missed 
dose should be administered.
PF-06651600 dose may  be temporaril y withheld for a maximum of 10days between visits at 
the discretion of the investigator.  Subjects interrupting investigational product for more than 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 7410days between visits must be discussed with the sponsor for possible withdrawal from the 
study .
5.6.Investigational Product Storage 
The investigator or an approved representative, eg, pharmacist, will ensure that all 
investigational products are stored in a secured area with controlled access under required 
storage conditions and in accordance with applicable regulatory  requirements.
Investigational products should be stored in their original containers and in accordance with 
the labels. 
Any storage conditions stated in the SRSD will be superseded b y the storage conditions 
stated on the product label.
Site sy stems must be capable of meas uring and documenting (eg, via a log), at a minimum, 
daily  minimum and maximum temperatures for all site storage locations (as applicable, 
including frozen, refrigerated, and/or room -temperature products).  This should be captured 
from the time of investig ational product receipt throughout the stud y.  Even for 
continuous- monitoring sy stems, a log or site procedure that ensures active evaluation for 
excursions should be available.  The intent is to ensure that the minimum and maximum 
temperature is checked e ach business day  to confirm that no excursion occurred since the last 
evaluation and to provide the site with the capability  to store or view the minimum/maximum 
temperature for all non- working day s upon return to normal operations.  The operation of the 
temperature monitoring device and storage unit (eg, refrigerator), as applicable, should be 
regularl y inspected to ensure they  are maintained in working order. 
Any excursions from the product label storage conditions should be reported to Pfizer upon 
discovery .  The site should actively  pursue options for returning the product to the storage 
conditions described in the labeling as soon as possible.  Deviations from the storage 
requirements, including any  actions taken, must be documented and reported to Pfi zer. 
Once an excursion is identified, the investigational product must be quarantined and not used 
until Pfizer provides permission to use the investigational product.  It will not be considered a 
protocol deviation if Pfizer approves the use of the inves tigational product after the 
temperature excursion.  Use of the investigational product prior to Pfizer approval will be 
considered a protocol deviation.  Specific details regarding information the site should report 
for each excursion will be provided to the site.
Receipt of materials, door opening and closing, and other routine handling operations where 
the products are briefl y out of the temperature range described in the labeling are not 
considered excursions.
Site staff will instruct subjects on the proper storage requirements for investigational 
products taken home.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 755.7.Investigational Product Accountability 
The investigator site must maintain adequate records documenting the receipt, use, loss, or 
other disposition of the investigational product supplies .  All investigational products will be
accounted for using a drug accountabilit y form/record. 
All study  drug, including empty  blister cards, must be returned to the investigator by  the 
subject at every  visit and at the end of the trial.
5.7.1. Destruction of In vestigational Product Supplies 
The sponsor or designee will provide guidance on the destruction of unused investigational 
product (eg, at the site).  If destruction is authorized to take place at the investigator site, the 
investigator must ensure that the materials are destroy ed in compliance with applicable 
environmental regulations, institutional policy , and any  special instructions provided by  
Pfizer, and all destruction must be adequatel y documented.
For all blisters returned to the investigator b y the subject, the investigator will maintain the 
returned suppl y until destruction is authorized.  Pfizer will provide instructions as to the 
disposition of any  unused investigational product.
5.8.Concomitant Medications/Treatment(s)
Medications/treatments that a re taken in the Screening period (after informed consent is 
obtained and before the first dose of study  drug) as well as any  medications/treatments taken 
for the treatment of AA at any  time prior to the Screening visit will be documented as prior 
medicatio ns/treatments.  Medications/treatments taken after the first dose of study  drug has 
been administered will be documented as concomitant medications/treatments.  All 
concomitant medications/treatments taken during the study  must be recorded in study  records
with indication, daily  dose, and start and stop dates of administration.  Subjects will be 
queried about concomitant medication (including topical medications and treatments, 
over-the-counter and prescription medications and treatments, and vaccinations) at each 
study  visit.  Any  new concomitant medications/treatments or dose changes to current 
concomitant medications should be evaluated for potential new or worsening adverse events.
The start date, stop date, and indication for all therapies will be recor ded on the CRF.
5.8.1. Permitted Concomitant Medications
For the purposes of this protocol, dietary  supplements are defined as vitamins, minerals, and 
purified food substances with pharmaceutical properties.  Vitamins, minerals and purified 
food substances are al lowed in amounts not known to be associated with adverse effects 
(such as h ypervitaminosis).
A subject who is receiving a permitted concomitant medication for an y reason must be on a 
locally -approved medication and dose for the treated indication, and this must be 
documented on the CRF.  
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 76With the exception of those medications prohibited for use in Append ix4,CYP3A inhibitors 
are permitted to be used during the stud y.  Sensitive and moderate sensitive CYP3A 
substrates permitted to be used during the stud y are listed in Appendix 4.
Acetaminophen may  be used intermittently  (not to exceed 3 g/day ).  Subjects are not allowed 
any other investigational drugs or treatments during the study . 
Subjects should refrain from starting new or changing doses of permitte d prescription or 
non-prescription drugs, vitamins, and dietary  supplements within 7 days or 5 half-lives 
(whichever is longer) prior to Day 1 and prior to study  visits throughout the study , unless 
otherwise noted below. 
Subjects should report any  changes to permitted medications during the study  to the 
investigator as soon as they occur.  Medication changes must be documented in the subject’s 
record and CRF. 
Unless a prohibited medication or treatment, subjects may  be ad ministered any  other 
medications necessary  for the treatment of concomitant medical disorders as deemed 
necessary  by the treating phy sician.  Following Day 1, addition of concomitant medications 
or an y change in the dosage should be limited to those consid ered medicall y essential.
5.8.2. Prohibited Medications and Treatments
Subjects will abstain from all concomitant medications as described in Exclusion Criterion 8
and Section 4of the protocol and Appendix 4.  Medicall y necessary medications should not 
be discontinued without prior evaluation of acceptable alternatives, including consultation 
with prescribing health professional.
Subjects should be instructed at e ach visit to contact the study  site investigator promptly  if 
there are an y intended changes or additions to concomitant medications. 
All medications and treatments that could affect AA must be discontinued.   During the 
study  if it is discovered that a subject has been taking a medication or treatment that could 
affect AA, the investigator should contact the Sponsor for each case to determine whether the 
subject should be discontinued. 
Subjects must also avoid prolonged exposure to the sun and avoid the us e of tanning booths, 
sun lamps or other ultraviolet light sources during the study .
Prohibited Concomitant Medications/Treatments:
The following medications and treatments are prohibited for use during the study .  Subjects 
who are treated with an y prohibited medication or treatment during the course of the study  
may be discontinued.  NOTE: Examples provided do not represent an all -inclusive list of 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 77medications and treatments.  I f there is a question about whether a particular medication is 
prohibite d, the medication should be discussed with the sponsor.
Medications and treatments that could affect AA:
JAK inhibitors for use in any  disease indication.
Immunosuppressants (eg, cy closporine A, azathioprine, methotrexate [MTX], 
sulfasalazine, my cophenolate mofetil [MMF], everolimus, ibrutinib).
Intralesional, oral or injectable steroids.
5α-Reductase inhibitors (5 -ARIs) (eg, finasteride, dutasteride).
Oral minoxidil.
Spironolactone if used specificall y for AA.
Other s ystemic treatments that could affect AA .
Topical treatments that could affect AA on areas under assessment (ie, scalp, 
eyebrows, ey elashes, and fingernails) (eg, steroid cream, medicated shampoo, 
minoxidil).
Phototherapy  (eg, Ultraviolet B [UVB] phototherapy , Psoralen Ultraviolet A 
[PUVA]).
Contact immunotherapy  (eg, dipheny lcyclopropenone [DPCP], squaric acid 
dibuty lester [SADBE], and 1- chloro-2,4- dinitrobenzene [DNCB]).
Topical irritants (eg, anthralin) and liquid nitrogen cry otherapy .
Cosmetic treatments/applications as described in Section 4.3.2 . 
Medications with potential drug -drug interactions or potential safet y concerns:
Lym phocy te-depleting agents/ther apies, including both non-B- cell selective and 
B-cell-depleting agents (eg, alefacept, alemtuzumab, rituximab).
Other biologics with immunomodulatory  properties.
Live (attenuated) vaccines: restrictions on vaccinations are described in more 
detail in Section 5.8.3 .
Moderate to potent CYP3A inducers (See Appendix 4).
Specific sensitive to moderate sensitive CYP3A substrates (See Appendix 4).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 78Herbal medications with either unknown properties or pharmaceutical pro perties 
that impact AA.
Investigational compounds.
5.8.3. Vaccinations
Vacc ination with live virus, attenuated live virus, or any  live viral components is prohibited 
within the 6 weeks prior to the first dose of study  drug, during the study , and for 6 weeks 
after the last dose of investigational product.  Similarly , current routine household contact 
with individuals who have been vaccinated with live vaccine components should be avoided 
during study treatment and for 6 weeks following completion of study  treatment.  Following 
vaccination with live component vaccines, the virus may  be shed in bodily  fluids, including 
stool, and there is a potential risk that the virus may be transmitted. 
Such vaccines include but are not limited to: FluMist®(intranasal influenza v accine), 
attenuated rotavirus vaccine, varicella (chickenpox) vaccine, attenuated typhoid fever 
vaccine, oral polio vaccine, MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine, vaccinia (smallpox) 
vaccine, and Zostavax®(zoster vaccine live). 
Vaccines (including COVID -19 vaccines) that are not live attenuated are permitted.  
5.8.4. Surgery
During the study , no elective surgery  should occur without first consulting with the Pfizer 
Medical Monitor or designee. Preferabl y, elective surgery  should occur before the study  or 
be de layed until participation in the study  is completed.  Subjects who have elective surgery  
should temporarily  discontinue study  intervention for 1 week prior to the surgical procedure 
and remain off study  intervention after the surgical procedure until sutur es/staples are 
removed. If absorbing sutures or chemical closure methods are utilized, study  intervention 
can be resumed when the operative site is sufficiently  healed, and risk of infection is 
minimal. 
The Pfizer Medical Monitor or designee should be not ified if a subject requires surgery  
(including dental surgery) during the study  to determine whether the subject should 
discontinue from the study and/or discontinue investigational product prior to the surgical 
procedure.  The Pfizer Medical Monitor or de signee should be notified as soon as possible if 
a subject undergoes a surgical procedure without first informing the stud y staff.
6. STUDY PROCEDURES 
Refer to the Schedule of Activities for a detailed list of study  procedures as they  should be 
conducted at each respective visit.  Visit windows are based on Day 1 visit.
Subjects are required to fast for at least 8hours prior to all visits that include fasting lipid 
profile panel testing.  During the fasting period, subjects should refr ain from all food and 
liquids (water and medications other than investigational product are permitted). 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 79To assure consistency  and reduce variabilit y, visits should occur at approximately the same 
time of day  throughout the study .  Subjects should be encouraged to attend visits in the 
morning and prior to the subject’s dosing of investigational product as subjects will receive 
their dose at the clinic during their stud y visit. 
Urine pregnancy  test must be performed at each visit (and must be negative) prio r to dosing 
with the investigational product for female subjects of childbearing potential through end of 
study  (EOS).  In addition to urine pregnancy  tests performed at each study  visit, sites in VHP 
countries in the EMA should instruct female subjects of childbearing potential to perform a 
urine pregnancy  test at home between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at approximately  Week 44).  
In addition, the investigator or designee will instruct the subject to contact the site 
immediately  if the urine pregnancy  test result is positive or cannot be confirmed as negative.  
The list of VHP countries participating in the protocol can be found in Section 4.
The patient reported outcome assessments should be completed before the other evaluations 
or treatments at the clinical visits whenever it is possible.  Vital signs and electrocardiograms 
(ECGs) should be performed before an y laboratory  blood collection.  The CGI S-AA should 
be completed after other clinical assessments of AA (ie, SALT, EBA, ELA, and assessment 
of fingernails affected b y AA), whenever it is possible.  All other evaluations (unless noted 
otherwise) do not need to be performed in an y specific order.
Refer to Appendix 3for guidelines on subject safety  monitoring and discontinuation.
6.1.Screening, Visit 1
Subject s will have up to 35 days of a screening period prior to the first dose of study  drug to 
confirm that they  meet the subject selection criteria for the study .  The investigator (or an 
appropriate delegate at the investigator site) will obtain informed conse nt from each subject 
(or parent(s)/legal guardian and assent from the subject, as appropriate) in accordance with 
the procedures described in the Schedule of Activities section.
Due to possible need for tuberculin testing and chest r adiograph, as well as to allow time for 
verification of SALT scores, screening procedures may  be performed over more than 1 visit 
within the 35 days prior to the Day 1 visit. 
Screening laboratory  tests with abnormal results may  be repeated once to confirm abnormal 
results (with the same screening number); the last value will be used to determine eligibility.  
If results return to normal within the 5 -week screening period, the subject may  enter the 
study . 
Sites may  be permitted to re -screen subjects (with a new screening number) who initially  do 
not meet eligibility  criteria once following agreement with the Sponsor.
The following procedures will be completed:
Obtain written informed consent (or parent(s)/legal guardian and assent from the 
subject, as appropriate).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 80Register subject in I mpala.
Review Inclusion and Exclusion criteria.
Administer patient reported outcome (PRO) questionnaire: Patient Health 
Questionnaire –8 items (PHQ -8).
Collect demograph y. 
Complete AA disease history includes collection of details of AA at Screening: 
AAbackground, AA history , AA diagnosis, pattern of scalp hair loss, body hair loss, 
nail involvement, the use of topical treatments, s ystemic treatments and other 
treatments for AA used at any time prior to the Screening visit.
Complete medical history, in addition to AA history , including but not limited to 
comorbidities associated with AA, history  of drug, alcohol, tobacco use, skin rash, 
and infection will be collected at Screening.  Smoking status and alcohol 
consumption wil l also be collected.
Obtain complete medication history  of all other prescription or nonprescription drugs, 
and dietary  and herbal supplements taken within 35 days prior to the Screening Visit.
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Perform single 12- lead ECG.
Obtain height and weight. 
Conduct complete phy sical examination including dermatological full body  
examination.
Perform audiological evaluation (unless performed within 8 weeks of Day 1).
Perform chest radiograph (if previous chest radiograph has not been performed within 
3months prior to Screening visit; this may  be performed at a different location 
outside of the study  site).
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hemato logy, blood chemistry , urinalysis, serum 
FSH (in female subjects under 60 years -old and who have been amenorrheic for at 
least 12 consecutive months with no alternative pathological or ph ysiological cause to 
confirm postmenopausal status), urine pregnancy  test (female subjects of childbearing 
potential), and testing for human immunodeficiency  virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B core antibody  (HBcAb), hepatitis B reflex testing (if 
applicable) (See Appendix 5.1for Japan-specific requirements), hepatitis C antibody  
(HCVAb), and hepatitis C reflex testing (if applicable).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 81In all adolescent subjects, confirm presence or absence of docu mented evidence of 
having received varicella vaccination (2 doses).
Only  in adolescent subjects who have no documented evidence of having received 
varicella vaccination (2 doses): perform VZV IgG Ab testing to confirm eligibility.
Perform TB testing (unles s performed within 12 weeks of Day 1). QFT -G test is 
preferred; however, the T -Spot is also permitted. I f Mantoux PPD tuberculin skin test 
is performed, the subject must return between 48 -72hours post -injection for 
evaluation of induration (see Section 7.5.8 for further details on TB testing).
Take scalp photographs to verify  eligibility.  Take ey elash and ey ebrow photographs.
Condu ct clinical evaluations: Severity  of Alopecia Tool (SAL T), Ey ebrow 
Assessment (EBA), Ey elash Assessment (ELA), and CGI -AA.
Conduct Columbia Suicide Severit y Rating Scale (C -SSRS).
Assess need for contraception and adherence to applicable lifest yle requirem ents (see 
Section 4.3).  Establish willingness and ability  to comply  with lifesty le requirements 
going forward in stud y.
Assess for o ccurrence of SAEs and non -serious AEs: the reporting period starts with 
the signing of the informed consent.
6.2.Study Period
The visit window for all visits during the study  period is based on the date of Visit 2, Day 1 
(Randomization).
6.2.1. Visit 2, Day 1 (Random ization)
Prior to randomizing the subject in I mpala, the inclusion/exclusion criteria must be reviewed 
against all information/results from Visit 1 (screening) in addition to information collected at 
Visit 2 (randomization) including prior/concomitant medi cations, changes in medical 
conditions, phy sical exam findings, pregnancy  test results, contraception check, C -SSRS 
results, and SALT score.  NOTE: Subject eligibility , as based on external review of 
Screening photographs, must be available prior to random ization.  At any  time during the 
Day 1 visit, if it is determined that the subject does not meet eligibility  criteria, it is not 
necessary  to perform an y further assessments at Day 1. 
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: Alopecia Areata Patient Priority  Outcomes 
(AAPPO), Hospital Anxiety  and Depression Scale (HADS), 36- Item Short Form 
Health Survey  version 2 Acute (SF36v2 Acute), Alopecia Areata Resource 
Utilization (AARU), Work Productivity  and Activity  Impairment: Alopecia Areata 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 82(WPAI :AA) in adults, and EuroQoL 5 Dimensions (EQ -5D- 5L) in adults or EuroQol 
5Dimension – Youth (EQ -5D- Y) in adolescents.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the su bject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.  NOTE: subjects who experience an y terminal hair regrowth 
between the Screening and Day 1visits are not eligible for randomization.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s prior and concomitant treatment information.
Review medical history  and AA disease history .
Assess for occurrence of AEs: The reporting period starts with the signing of the 
informed consent.
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Obtain height and weight.
Conduct complete phy sical examination. 
Perform single 12- lead ECG.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for other laboratory  testing: hematology , serum chemistry , urinaly sis, 
interferon gamma- induced protein 10 (IP-10), fluorescence -activated cell sorting for 
T-cells, B -cells, and natural killer (NK) cells (FACS -TBNK), and immunoglobulins 
(IgA, IgG, IgM). 
Collect sample for viral screen.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 83Collect a genomic banked biospecimen (Prep D1).  If missed, collect at the next 
available time point when biospecimens are being collected in conjunction with a 
subject visit.
Obtain Prep B1, B2, and R1 samples.
Review of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria.
If subject meets all I nclusion/Exclusion criteri a, randomize subject into the study  in 
Impala.
Prior to dosing, obtain samples for PK analy sis.
Administer first dose of study  drug to subject.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense study  drug supply  to the subject.
6.2.2. Visit 3, Day 15/Week 2 ( ±3 day s)
The following procedures will be completed:
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Obtain samples for other lab oratory  testing: hematology .
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 846.2.3. Visit 4, Day 29/Week 4 ( ±3 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, P- Sat, HADS, SF36v2 Acute, a nd 
EQ-5D- 5L in adults or EQ -5D-Y in adolescents. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Perform single 12- lead ECG.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain fasting sample s for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, IP -10, 
and FACS -TBNK.
Obtain Prep B1, B2, and R1 samples.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Prior to dosing, obtain sample for PK analy sis and then at 0.5 hour, 1 hour, and 
3hours after dosing.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 856.2.4. Visit 5, Day 57/Week 8 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI- C, P- Sat, HADS, and SF36v2 Acute.
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, and 
IP-10.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contrace ption requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, and CGI -AA.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Prior to dosing, obtain sample for PK anal ysis and then at 0.5 hour and 2 hours after 
dosing.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject. 
6.2.5. Visit 6, Day 85/Week 12 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI-C, P- Sat, HADS, SF36v2 Acute, 
AARU, WPAI : AA in adults, and EQ -5D- 5L in adults or EQ -5D- Y in adolescents. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respira tory rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 86Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, 
HBVDNA (if applicable), I P-10, and FACS- TBNK. 
Obtain Prep B1, B2, and R1 samples.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs. 
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Prior to dosing, obtain sample for PK anal ysis and then at 0.5 hour and 2 hours after 
dosing.  If PK samples were collected at Week 8, no PK samples are required at 
Week 12. 
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedure s.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject. 
6.2.6. Visit 7, Day 127/Week 18 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, and P -Sat.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 87Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , and urinaly sis.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruct ion.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.7. Visit 8, Day 169/Week 24 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, P- Sat, HADS, SF36v2 Acute, 
AARU, WPAI : AA in adults, and EQ -5D- 5L in adults or EQ -5D- Y in adolescents. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Perform single 12- lead ECG.
Obtain height and weight.
Conduct complete phy sical examination.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 88Perform audiological evaluation.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, 
HBVDNA (if applicable), I P-10, FACS -TBNK, and immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, 
IgM). 
Obtain Prep B1, B2, and R1 samples.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs. 
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.8. Visit 9, Day 183/Week 26 ( ±3 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Perform urine pre gnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Obtain samples for other laboratory  testing: hematology .
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 89willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y.
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.9. Visit 10, Day 197/Week 28 ( ±3 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Perform single 12- lead ECG.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , and urinaly sis.
Confirm whether menarche has started in prev iously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Capture photographs.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 90Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provi de and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.10. Visit 11, Day 239/Week 34 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, P-Sat, AARU, and WPAI: AA in 
adults. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinalysis, and 
HBVDNA (if applicable).
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception require ments (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 91Provide and review dosing instruction.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.11. Visit 12, Day 281/Week 40 ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be co mpleted:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, and P -Sat. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , and urinaly sis.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contracept ion requirements (see Section 4.3) 
going forward in stud y. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential o nly).  In 
addition to urine pregnancy  tests performed at each study  visit, sites in VHP countries 
in VHP countries in the EMA should instruct female subjects of childbearing 
potential to perform a urine pregnancy test at home between the Week 40 and 48 
visits (at approximately  Week 44).  In addition, the investigator or designee will 
instruct the subject to contact the site immediately if the urine pregnancy  test result is 
positive or cannot be confirmed as negative.  The list of VHP countries participating
in the protocol can be found in Section 4.
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject, administer dose to subject, and perform 
accountability  procedures.
Provide and review dosing instruction.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 92Capture photographs.
Dispense new stud y drug to the subject.
6.2.12. Visit 13, Day 337/Week 48/End of Treatment ( ±7 days)
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, P- Sat, HADS, SF36v2 Acute, 
AARU, WPAI : AA in adults, and EQ -5D- 5L in adults or EQ -5D- Y in adolescents. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Perform single 12- lead ECG. 
Obtain height and weight. 
Conduct complete phy sical examination.
Perform audiological evaluation.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, 
HBVDNA (if applicabl e), FACS -TBNK, and immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM).
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contracep tion requirements (see Section 4.3) 
through 28 days after the last dose of study  medication. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female sub jects of childbearing potential only ).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs. 
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 93Collect study  drug from subject and perform accountability  procedures.
6.3.Follow -up Period
6.3.1. Visit 14, End of Study/Follow -up
If a subject discontinues from the study  for any  reason other than death, lost to follow -up, or 
withdrawal of consent, a Follow-Up Visit must be performed within 28 (+7 days) after the 
Early Termination visit.  In addition, all subjects who complete the stud y but do not enter the 
long-term extension study  must have a Follo w-Up Visit within 28 (+7 days) of End of 
Treatment visit.
The following procedures will be completed:
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
Conduct targeted ph ysical examination.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , and urinaly sis.
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  premenarchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
6.3.2. Early Termination Visit
For subjects who discontinue early from the study, the procedures scheduled for early 
termination (ET) Visit will be performed on the last day  the subject takes the investigational 
product or as soon as possible thereafter.  Su bject will then require a Follow -up visit 
occurring within 28 (+7 days).
The following procedures will be completed:
Administer PRO questionnaires: AAPPO, PGI -C, P- Sat, HADS, SF36v2 Acute, 
AARU, WPAI : AA in adults, and EQ -5D- 5L in adults or EQ -5D- Y in adol escents. 
Obtain vital signs: pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory  rate (after at least 5 minutes 
of rest), and temperature.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 94Perform single 12- lead ECG. 
Obtain height and weight. 
Conduct complete phy sical examination.
Perform audiological evaluation.
Obtain fasting samples for fasting lipid panel.
Obtain samples for laboratory testing: hematology, blood chemistry , urinaly sis, 
HBVDNA (if applicable), FACS -TBNK, and immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM).
Confirm whether menarche has started in previously  preme narchal subjects.  If 
menarche has started, the subject must undergo a pregnancy  test and establish 
willingness and abilit y to comply with contraception requirements (see Section 4.3) 
through 28 days after the last dose of study  medication. 
Perform urine pregnancy test (female subjects of childbearing potential only).
Confirm proper contraception is being used.
Capture photographs. 
Conduct clinical evaluations: SAL T, EBA, ELA, assessment of fingernails affected 
by AA, and CGI -AA.
Conduct C -SSRS.
Review an y changes in the subject’s concomitant treatments information.
Assess for occurrence of AEs.
Collect study  drug from subject and perform accountability  procedures.
6.4.Subject Withdrawal/Early Termination
Subjects may withdraw from the study  at any  time at their own request, or they  may  be 
withdrawn at an y time at the discretion of the investigator or sponsor for safety (see also the 
Withdrawal From the Study  Due to Adverse Events section) or behavioral reasons, or the 
inability  of the subject to comply  with the protocol -required schedule of study  visits or 
procedures at a given study  site. 
Subjec ts who discontinue study  treatment from the Treatment Period for any  reason other 
than death, lost to follow-up, or withdrawal consent will enter into the Follow-up Period (see 
Withdrawal of Consent section below). The procedures scheduled for Early  Termination 
Visit will be performed on the last day  the subject takes the investigational product or as soon 
as possible thereafter.  Subjects will then require a Follow-Up Visit within 28 (+7 days).  In 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 95addition, all su bjects who complete the study but do not enter the open- label extension study  
must have a Follow -Up Visit within 28 (+7 days) of End of Treatment visit.
See Appendix 3for guidelines on subject safety  monitoring and discontinuation.  The Earl y 
Termination Visit only  applies to subjects who are randomized, received at least one dose of 
study  drug, and then a re prematurel y withdrawn from the study treatment.
If a subject does not return for a scheduled visit, every  effort should be made to contact the 
subject.  All attempts to contact the subject and information received during contact attempts 
must be documen ted in the subject’s medical record.  In an y circumstance, every  effort 
should be made to document subject outcome, if possible.  The investigator should inquire 
about the reason for withdrawal, request that the subject return all unused investigational 
product(s), request that the subject return for a final visit, if applicable, and follow -up with 
the subject regarding an y unresolved AEs.
Withdrawal of consent :
Every  effort will be made to complete Earl y Termination and Follow -up Visits as described 
above for subjects who request to discontinue receipt of study  treatment during the Treatment 
Period (withdrawal consent).  The only  exception to this is when a subject specificall y 
withdraws consent for any further contact with him or her or persons previously  authorized 
by the subject to provide this information.  Subjects should notify  the investigator in writing 
of the decision to withdraw consent from future follow-up, whenever possible.  The 
withdrawal of consent should be explained in detail in the medical records by  the 
investigator, as to whether the withdrawal is only  from further receipt of investigational 
product or also from study procedures and/or post treatment study  follow -up and entered on 
the appropriate CRF page.  In the event that vital status (whether the subject is alive or dead) 
is being measured, publicly  available information should be used to determine vital status 
only as appropriatel y directed in accordance with local law.
If the subject withdraws from the study , and also withdraws conse nt for disclosure of future 
information, no further evaluations should be performed, and no additional data should be 
collected.  The sponsor may  retain and continue to use any  data collected before such 
withdrawal of consent.
Lost to follow- up: 
All reasonable efforts must be made to locate subjects to determine and report their ongoing 
status.  This includes follow -up with persons authorized by  the subject as noted above.  Lost 
to follow -up is defined by  the inabilit y to reach the subject after a minimum of 2documented 
phone calls, faxes, or e -mails as well as lack of response b y the subject to 1 registered mail 
letter.  All attempts should be documented in the subject’s medical records.  If it is 
determined that the subject has died, the site will use lo cally  permissible methods to obtain 
the date and cause of death.  I f the investigator’s use of a third -party representative to assist 
in the follow -up portion of the study  has been included in the subject’s informed consent, 
then the investigator may use a sponsor -retained third -party representative to assist site staff 
with obtaining the subject’s contact information or other public vital status data necessary  to 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 96complete the follow -up portion of the study .  The site staff and representative will consult 
publicly  available sources, such as public health registries and databases, in order to obtain 
updated contact information.  I f, after all attempts, the subject remains lost to follow -up, then 
the last -known- alive date as determined by  the investigator shou ld be reported and 
documented in the subject’s medical records.
Subjects who withdraw from the study  may  be replaced at the discretion of the investigator 
upon consultation with the sponsor.
7.ASSESSMENTS
Every  effort should be made to ensure that the protoc ol-required tests and procedures are 
completed as described.  However, it is anticipated that from time to time there may  be 
circumstances outside of the control of the investigator that may  make it unfeasible to 
perform the test.  In these cases, the inve stigator will take all steps necessary  to ensure the 
safet y and well -being of the subject.  When a protocol -required test cannot be performed, the 
investigator will document the reason for this and any corrective and preventive actions that 
he or she has t aken to ensure that normal processes are adhered to as soon as possible.  The 
study  team will be informed of these incidents in a timely  manner.
For samples being collected and shipped, detailed collection, processing, storage, and 
shipment instructions and contact information will be provided to the investigator site prior 
to initiation of the study .
If subject visits or procedures are affected b y a public emergency, including the COVID -19 
pandemic, please refer to Appendix 6.
7.1.Check for Initiation of Menarche (for Premenarchal Females Only)
In female subjects who are premenarchal at the start of the stud y, the investigator must 
confirm with the subject at every  visit w hether menarche has started since the last visit.  I f 
menarche has started, the subject must now be considered of childbearing potential; 
therefore, from that point forward and starting with the current visit, the subject will be 
required to establish will ingness and ability  to comply  with contraception requirements (see 
Section 4.3 ) and to undergo contraception checks and pregnancy  testing according to the 
Schedule of Activities, starting with the current visit.  I n addition, the investigator or 
designee will instruct the subject to contact the site immediately  if the subject begins 
menarche betw een study  visits.
7.2.Pregnancy Testing
Pregnancy  tests are required to be done (if applicable) as specified in the Schedule of 
Activities. 
Pregnancy  tests must have a sensitivity  of at least 25 mIU/mL.  Pregnancy  tests should be 
urine pregnancy  tests.  In the event that urine pregnancy  tests are not permitted at an 
institution, serum pregnancy  tests can be utilized.  Pregnancy  tests will be performed in 
WOCBP at the times listed in the Schedule of Activities .  Following a negative pregnancy 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 97test result at screening, appropriate contraception must be verified, and a second negative 
pregnancy  test result will be required a t the baseline visit prior the subject receiving the 
investigational product.  Pregnancy  tests will also be done whenever 1 menstrual cy cle is 
missed during the active treatment period (or when potential pregnancy  is otherwise 
suspected) and at the end of the study .  Pregnancy  tests may  also be repeated if requested b y 
institutional review boards (I RBs)/ethics committees (ECs) or if required by  local 
regulations.  If a urine test cannot be confirmed as negative (eg, an ambiguous result), a 
serum pregnancy  test is required.  In such cases, the subject must be excluded if the serum 
pregnancy  result is positive.  In the case of a positive confirmed pregnancy , the subject will 
be withdrawn from administration of investigational product but may  remain in the stud y for 
follow -up.
In addition to urine pregnancy  tests performed at each study  visit, sites in VHP countries in 
the EMA should instruct female subjects of childbearing potential to perform a urine 
pregnancy  test at home between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at approximately Week 44).  In 
addition, the investigator or designee will instruct the subject to contact the site immediately  
if the urine pregnancy  test result is positive or cannot be confirmed as negative.  The list of 
VHP countries participating in the protocol can be found in Section 4.
7.3.Banked Biospecimens
Banked biospecimens will be collected from subjects for expl oratory  research relating to the 
drug response and disease/condition under study .  These collections are not ty picall y 
associated with a planned assessment described in the protocol.  They  will be handled in a 
manner that protects each subject’s privacy  and confidentiality .  Banked biospecimens will 
be assigned the subject’s study  identification code (ID) at the site.  The data generated from 
these banked biospecimens will also be indexed by  this ID.  Biospecimens will be kept until 
destruction in facilities with access limited to authorized personnel, and biospecimen- derived 
data will be stored on password -protected computer sy stems.  The key  between the subject’s 
ID and the subject’s direct personall y identifying information (eg, name, address) will be 
held at the study  site.  Biospecimens will be used only  for the purposes described in the 
protocol and informed consent document; an y other uses require additional ethical approval.  
Unless a time limitation is required b y local regulations or ethical require ments, 
biospecimens will be stored for man y years (no time limit) to allow for research in the future, 
including research conducted during the length y drug -development process and also 
postmarketing research.  Subjects may withdraw their consent for the us e of their banked 
biospecimens at an y time by  making a request to the investigator; in this case, any  remaining 
biospecimens will be destroy ed, but data already  generated from the biospecimens will 
continue to be available to protect the integrit y of exist ing analyses. 
Unless prohibited by  local regulations or ethics committee decision, a 4-mL blood genomic 
banked biospecimen Prep D1 (dipotassium edetic acid [ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid] 
[K2EDTA] whole -blood collection optimized for DNA analysis) will be collected at the 
time specified in the Schedule of Activities section of the protocol to be retained for potential 
pharmacogenomic/genomic/biomarker analy ses related to drug response and 
disease/condition under study .  For example , putative safety biomarkers, drug -metabolizing 
enzy me genes, drug -transport protein genes, or genes thought to be related to the mechanism 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 98of drug action may  be examined.  The primary  purpose is to examine DNA; however, the 
biospecimen may  also be used to study  other molecules (eg, RNA, proteins, and metabolites).
Additional banked biospecimens to be retained for such exploratory  anal yses in this study  
include the following: 
Prep B1 (K2EDTA plasma collection optimized for 
biomarker/proteomic/metabonomic analysis): a 10-mL blood biospecimen will be 
collected at times specified in the Schedule of Activities section of the protocol. 
Prep B2 (serum collection optimized for biomarker/proteomic/metabonomic 
analysis): a 10-mL blood biospecimen will be collected at times specified in the 
Schedule of Activities section of the protocol. 
Prep R1 (PAXGene whole -blood collection optimized for RNA analysis): A 
2.5mL blood biospecimen will be collected at ti mes specified in the Schedule of 
Activities section of the protocol.
The banked biospecimens will be collected from all subjects unless prohibited by  local 
regulations or IRB/EC decision. 
It is possible that the use of these biospec imens may  result in commercially viable products.  
Subjects will be advised in the informed consent document that they  will not be compensated 
in this event.
7.4.Additional Research
Unless prohibited by  local regulations or IRB/EC decision, subjects will be as ked to indicate 
on the consent form whether they will allow banked biospecimens to also be used to design 
and conduct research in order to gain a further understanding of other diseases and to 
advance science, including development of other medicines for p atients.
Subjects need not provide additional biospecimens for the uses described in this section; the 
biospecimens specified in the Banked Biospecimens section will be used.  Subjects may  still 
participate in the study if they elect not to allow their banked biospecimens to be used for the 
additional purposes described in this section.
7.5.Safety Assessments
Safety  will be assessed by  the spontaneous repor ting of AEs, ph ysical examinations and 
clinical laboratory  results in all subjects who receive at least one dose of the investigational 
product.  Unscheduled safety  assessments may  be performed at an y time during the stud y to 
assess an y perceived safety  concerns.  Investigators and Pfizer Clinicians (or designees) will 
review individual subject data throughout the conduct of the study  to ensure subjects’ 
well-being.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 997.5.1. Vital Signs
Vital signs (pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and oral, t ympanic, or axillary  
temperature) will be measured after 5 minutes of rest as indicated in the Schedule of 
Activities. 
Vital signs should be performed before laboratory blood collection and ECG. 
It is preferred that bod y temperature be collec ted using the t ympanic or oral methods; 
however, the axillary  and temporal artery  methods are also permitted.  The same method will 
be used consistently  throughout the study . 
Blood pressure (BP) will be measured using a standard calibrated blood pressure measuring 
device.  A BP device that uses multiple cuff sizes based on the arm circumference is the 
required t ype of device.  The appropriate cuff size for the subject must be used to ensure 
accurate measurement.  The arm circumference at the midpoint of th e length of the upper arm 
should be measured to determine the appropriate cuff size in accordance with the 
specifications of the BP measuring device.  The same properly  sized and calibrated blood 
pressure cuff will be used to measure blood pressure each ti me. 
Subjects should be seated in a chair, back supported, and arms bared (free of restrictions such 
as rolled-up sleeves, etc.) and supported at heart level.  Measurements should be taken on the 
same arm at each visit (preferabl y non -dominant).  Subjects should refrain from smoking or 
ingesting caffeine during the 30 minutes preceding the measurements.  Measurements should 
begin after at least 5 minutes of rest. 
Pulse rate should be measured at approximately  the same time as BP for a minimum of 
30seconds .
7.5.2. Medical History, Physical Exam, Height, and Weight
Complete AA disease history  includes collection of details of AA at Screening: AA history , 
AAdiagnosis, pattern of scalp hair loss, bod y hair loss, nail involvement, the use of topical 
treatments, sy stemic treatments and other treatments for AA.  Medical history , in addition to 
AAhistory , including, but not limited to, comorbid conditions, history  of drug, alcohol, 
tobacco use, dermatologic history , and infection will be collected at Screening and basel ine 
(if applicable).  Smoking status and average weekly  alcohol consumption (units/week) will 
also be collected.
Height and weight will be measured without the subject wearing shoes or outerwear.  Height 
(inches or centimeters) and weight (lbs or kgs) will be measured and recorded in the source 
document at the Screening visit and at various timepoints according to Schedules of 
Activities.
Complete phy sical examinations must be performed by  the investigator, sub -investigator or a 
quali fied health professional per local guidelines.  Complete physical examinations consist of 
assessments of general appearance; skin; head, eyes, ears, nose and throat (HEENT); mouth, 
heart; lungs; abdomen; extremities; neurologic function, back, and l ymph no des.  In addition, 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 100dermatological full bod y exam must be performed by  the investigator, sub -investigator or a 
qualified health professional per local guidelines.  Dermatological examinations should also 
include visual inspection of the breasts and external genitalia.
Targeted ph ysical examinations must be performed by  the investigator, sub -investigator or a 
qualified health professional per local guidelines and should include skin, heart, lung, and 
abdomen, neurologic function, and examination of body  systems where there are s ymptom 
complaints by  the subject. 
When dermatologic adverse events are identified on phy sical exam, additional procedures 
may be required.  Please refer to Section 7.5.6.2 for additional details.
Subjects with clinically  meaningful changes from baseline in neurologic signs or s ymptoms 
should be referred to a neurologist to undergo a formal neurolog ic evaluation.
Complete and Targeted phy sical examinations are performed at various time points, see 
Schedules of Activities .
7.5.3. Chest Radiography
Chest X -ray (posterior -anterior and lateral views are recommended, however local guidelin es 
should be followed) or other appropriate diagnostic image (ie, c omputed tomograph y or 
magnetic resonance imaging [MRI ]) should be taken at Screening or within 3 months prior to 
Screening visit and read by  a qualified radiologist or pulmonologist and mus t show no 
evidence of abnormalities including but not limited to current, active TB or previous inactive 
TB, general infections, heart failure or malignancy.  Documentation of the official reading 
must be located and available in the source documentation.
7.5.4. Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Single 12-lead ECGs should be collected at times specified in the Schedule of Activities . 
ECG should be performed before laboratory  blood collection.
All scheduled ECGs should be performed after the subject has rested quietly  for at least 
10minutes in a supine position and prior to any  blood collection. 
The Screening ECG values will serve as each subject’s baseline values.  To ensure safet y of 
the subjects, qualified medical personnel will review all ECGs and make comparisons to 
Screening measurements.  A paper or digital cop y of the ECG should be filed in the subject’s 
chart and must be available to the sponsor upon request.  Any  clinically  significant changes 
will be recorded and evaluated further, as clinically  warranted.  In some cases, it may  be 
appropriate to repeat abnormal ECGs to rule out improper lead placement as contributing to 
the ECG abnormality .  Subjects will be discontinued from study  with a confirmed QTc F
>500 milliseconds or a confirmed QTc Fchange from baseline of >60 milliseconds.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1017.5.5. Audiological Evaluation
All subjects will have an audiological evaluation at times specified in the Schedule of 
Activities.  When po ssible, the subject should have the audiological evaluation performed at 
the same evaluation center during the stud y. 
A full audiological evaluation must be completed at Screening or within 8 weeks prior to 
Day 1.  This evaluation includes audiological hi story , otoscopic examination, pure tone 
audiometry , air and bone conduction, speech audiometry , and immittance audiometry .  All 
audiological results must be available prior to Day 1 to assess eligibility . 
At subsequent visits, updated audiological history , otoscopic examination, and pure tone 
audiometry  will be performed; based upon results, additional audiometry  assessments may  be 
required.
For subjects who terminate earl y from the study, efforts must be made to complete the 
audiological evaluation.
If there is a clinicall y meaningful, treatment -emergent decline in hearing from baseline, the 
subject must be promptly evaluated b y a medicall y qualified specialist to assess for possible 
causes.  Evaluation results should then be discussed with the Sponsor to determine if the 
subject should be discontinued from the study .  Discontinued subjects must be followed up 
off-treatment with appropriate testing at regular intervals, until hearing returns to baseline or 
is determined to be clinically  stable. 
Refer to the most current version of the Audiometry  Study  Guide for details on auditory  
evaluation.  All procedures must be performed as per the Audiometry  Study  Guide.
7.5.6. Special Safety Assessment
7.5.6.1. Suspected Opportunistic Infections
In the event of a suspected opportunistic infection, every  effort should be made to identify  
the pathogen utilizing laboratory  or other methods appropriate to the clinical situation.
7.5.6.2. Dermatological Events
All subjects will have a dermatological full bod y exam at Screening Visit and as noted in the 
Schedule of Activities.
Guidelines for the assessment of herpetiform rash and drug -related rash are noted in 
Sections 7.5.6.2.1 and 7.5.6.2.2 , respectivel y.
7.5.6.2.1. Herpetiform Rash
For an y occurrence of a suspected herpetiform rash (eg, herpes zoster and herpes simplex) o r 
eczema herpeticum specimens for viral DNA analysis will be obtained: a swab of the 
affected area will be collected for confirmation.  Details for this collection will be provided 
in the laboratory  manual.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1027.5.6.2.2. Potential Drug- Related Rash and Unexplained Rash
All potential drug- related reports of rash will be followed up until resolution or clinically  
stable or in agreement with the sponsor. 
All events of rash should be treated according to international and local guidelines for the 
treatment of rash, eg, wher e appropriate, topical corticosteroids and/or agents such as 
antibiotics or antivirals could be prescribed. 
All subjects reporting an unexplained skin rash should undergo a formal comprehensive 
dermatologic evaluation.  I n addition, the subject will be asked to rate the severit y of pruritus 
within the last 24 hours on a scale from 0 (No itching) to 10 (Worst possible itching).  
A 4mm punch biopsy  will be taken unless there is a clear, non- drug related etiology  (eg, 
infection, including herpes virus, pre -existing condition) or other clinical rationale (eg, if the 
rash is present on the face it may  not be appropriate to take a biops y) or subject refuses to 
have biops y performed.  The biopsy will be sent to the local laboratory for histological 
investigation of the rash in order to gain insight into potential etiology  of the rash.
In addition to a biopsy  of suspected drug -related rash, a swab (for microbiological 
assessment) of the affected area will also be taken for culture and sensitivity  to assess (at the 
local laboratory ) for any  bacterial, fungal, or viral pathogens, if applicable.
Photographs of the rash will be taken.
All de -identified biopsy  results, culture results, photographs, and any  additional relevant test 
results should be forwarded to the Spons or for review.  This should occur within 30 days of 
receipt of results by  the principal investigator (PI).
7.5.7. Clinical Laboratory Tests
The following laboratory tests ( Table 3 ) will be performed at time points identified in the 
Schedule of Activities.  Unscheduled clinical labs may  be obtained at an y time during the 
study  to assess an y perceived safet y concerns at the investigator’s discretion.
Sample collection, labeling, storage, and shipping information can be found in the laboratory  
manual.  All laboratory  tests with clinically  important changes from baseline identified after 
administration of investigational product will be followed until the value stabilizes.  I n 
addition, there are laboratory  results which require specific follow -up described in 
Appendix 3.1Monitoring Criteria. 
Subjects must abstain from all food and drink (except water and non -study  
medications) for an 8 -hour fast prior to fasting lipid profile panel collection according 
to Schedule of Activities.  All other labs (including PK sample collections) do not 
require fasting.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 103Table 3. Laboratory Tests
Hematology Serum Chemistry Urinalysis 
(performed by the 
central laboratory)Other
Hemoglobin
Hematocrit
Red blood cell count
Platelet count
White blood cell count
Total neutrophils (%, Abs)
Basophils (%, Abs)
Eosinophils (%, Abs)
Lymphocytes (%, Abs)f
Monocytes (%, Abs)
Reticulocyte count (%, Abs)BUN or Urea
Creatinine
Glucose 
Calcium
Sodium
Potassium
Chloride
Total CO 2or Bicarbonate
AST
ALT
Total bilirubin
Direct and indirect bilirubin
Alkaline phosphatase
Uric acid
Albumin
Total protein
Creatine kinasep
Follow -up testing for 
potential DILI casesqpH
Glucose
Protein
Blood
Ketones
Nitrites
Leukocyte esterase
Urobilinogen
Urine bilirubin
Microscopyh
Urine culturejFSHa
Pregnancy testsb
HIVc
HBsAg
HBcAb
HBsAbd
HBVDNAe
HCVAb
HCVRNAg
VZV IgG Abi
QFT -G test or T-Spot testk
Viral screenl
Ig subtypes
Skin biopsies/swabsm
IP-10n
Fasting lipid profileo
Tcell, B cell and NK cell subsets
a. In females under 60 years old and who are amenorrheic for at least 12 consecutive months with no alternative 
pathological or physiological cause to confirm postmenopausal status.
b. Pregnancy tests (urine) for women of childbearing potential.  In the event that urine pregnancy tests are not permitted 
at an institution, serum pregnancy tests can be utilized.
c. HIV testing per local regulations.  Subjects who are p ositive for HIV antibodies will be screen-failed.
d. HBsAb will be performed as reflex testing for any subject who is HBsAg negative but HBcAb positive.  For Japan 
only: In addition to HBsAg and HBcAb, HBsAb testing will be performed at screening for all subj ects rather than as a 
reflex test.  For Japan -specific requirements see Appendix 5.1.  For all other countries, please refer to Appendix 2for 
testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility criteria. 
e. HBVDNA testing will be performed at Week 12 for subjects who were enrolled with a positive HBcAb and a negative 
HBVDNA in those regions for which Hep B prevalence has been reported at a rate of >5.0% or if required by local 
standard of care (refer to Section 7.5.11 for information regarding which screening laboratory results should be used to 
determine whether HBVDNA testing should be performed).  Testing at additional time points may be performed as per 
the local standard of care.  For Japan specific requirements see Appendix 5.1.  For all other countries, please refer to 
Appendix 2for testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility criteria.
f. Subjects with absolute lymphocyte counts <500/mm3(0.5×109/L) will be reflex -tested for FACS -TBNK until the 
absolute lymphocyte count resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the investigator and the sponsor.
g. HCVRNA will be performed as reflex testing for any subject who is HCVAb positive.
h. Only if urine dipstick is positive for blood, nitrites, leukocyte esterase, and/or protein.
i. VZV IgG Ab testing is required to confirm eligibility only in adolescent subjects who do not have documented 
evidence of having received varicella vaccination (2 doses).
j. Urine culture will be performed if urinalysis is p ositive for nitrite and/or leukocyte esterase or if clinically indicated.
k. The QFT -G test is preferred; however, the T-Spot test is also permitted.  A negative PPD test can be substituted for the 
QFT -G test or T-Spot test only under specific circumstances described in Section 7.5.8 .
l. A serum sample will be collected at baseline and submitted to the central lab.  The sam ple will be stored and analyzed 
at a later date only at the sponsor’s request.  In certain cases of suspected viral infection (eg, disseminated herpes zoster 
or varicella), the sponsor may request to analyze the sample to determine if the subject had expos ure to that virus.
m. When required in cases of skin rash adverse events.  See applicable sections for herpetiform rash ( Section 7.5.6.2.1 ) 
and potential drug -related rash (Section 7.5.6.2.2 ).
n. After randomization, the investigator and Pfizer study personnel directly involved in the conduct of the trial will be 
kept blinded of the results of this test.
o. Lipid profile panel will include total cholesterol, low -density lipoprotein (LDL), high -density lipoprotein (HDL), and 
triglycerides.  A minimum of 8 -hour fasting is required for lipid profile evaluation.
p. Urine myoglobin will be performed as reflex testing for any subject with a creatine kinase >10 × ULN.
q. In cases of suspected potential drug-induced -liver -injury (DILI), follow -up testing should be performed according to 
requirements in Section 8.4.2 .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 104Clinically  significant abnormal findings should be recorded as AEs.  Abnormal test results 
determined to be caused from laboratory  error should not be reported as AEs.  Clinically  
significant labo ratory  findings at the final assessment should be followed up to resolution or 
until determined by  the Investigator to be stabilized.  Repeat tests may  be indicated to 
establish this.  Refer to Appendix 3for laboratory  discontinuation criteria.
7.5.8. Tuberculosis Testing
During the Screening period, it must be determined and documented that a subject does not 
have evidence of active or latent or inadequatel y treated infection with Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (TB) per the Inclusion Criteria .  The results of TB screening conducted in the 
12weeks prior to Day 1 visit or during the Screening period must be documented in study  
records prior to Baseline (Visit 2).
QuantiFERON®-TB Gold I n-Tube (QFT -G) test is the preferred testing method; however, the 
T-SPOT®.TB(T-Spot) test is also permitted.  Borderline results from the T- Spot test should 
be considered an exclusionary  test result for this study . 
If the laboratory  reports tha t the QFT -G test or T -Spot test results are indeterminate, the test 
should be repeated.  If the result of the repeat test is indeterminate, then subjects may  be 
screened using the Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) Tuberculin Skin Test (Mantoux 
method) with approval of the Pfizer Medical Monitor.
The QFT -G test is an in vitro diagnostic test using a peptide cocktail simulating earl y 
secreted antigenic target of 6 kiloDalton (ESAT- 6), culture filtrate protein 10 kiloDalton 
(CFP-10),and TB 7.7 proteins to sti mulate cells in heparinized whole blood.  Detection of 
interferon -gamma b y Enzy me-Linked Immunosorbent Assay  (ELISA) is used to identify  in 
vitro responses to these peptide antigens that are associated with M.tuberculosis infection.  
The T- Spot test is al so an in vitro diagnostic test; however, it differs in that it uses a peptide 
cocktail simulating ESAT -6 and CFP -10 proteins to stimulate peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells.  Both the QFT -G test and the T -Spot test are indirect tests for M.tuberculosis infection 
(including disease) and are intended for use in conjunction with risk assessment, radiograph y 
and other medical and diagnostic evaluations.
A blood sample will be collected at screening for either the QFT -G or the T -Spot testing.  
The site must determine which test will be performed as sample collection and processing 
guidelines differ.  QFT -G testing will be performed at the central laboratory  and T -Spot 
testing will be performed at the site’s local laboratory.  Following QFT -G sample processing, 
the sample will be shipped to the central laboratory  for testing.  The procedure for processing 
and preparing the sample for shipment is described fully  in the laboratory  manual, which will 
be provided to investigators.
In addition to TB testing as specifie d in this clinical protocol, a chest X -ray will be 
performed as described in Section 7.5.3.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1057.5.8.1. Purified Protein Deriva tive (PPD) Test
If the QFT -Gtest or T -Spot test cannot be performed, or if the results from the reference 
laboratory  are indeterminate, then subjects may  be screened using the PPD Tuberculin Test 
(Mantoux method), with the approval of the Pfizer Medical M onitor. 
Subjects must have the PPD test administered and evaluated b y a health care professional 
48to 72 hours later in order to be eligible for the study , unless performed and documented 
within the last 12 weeks.  The test should be performed and interp reted as negative according 
to local standards (eg, induration of <5 mm).
7.5.9. Varicella- Zoster Virus Immunoglobulin G Antibody (VZV IgG Ab) Testing
Only  adolescent subjects without documented evidence of having received varicella 
vaccination (2 doses) will be tested for VZV IgG Ab as described in the lab manual.  
7.5.10. Baseline Viral Screen
A serum sample will be collected at baseline and submitted to the central lab.  The sample 
will be stored and analy zed at a later date onl y at the sponsor’s request.  In certain cases of 
suspected viral infection (eg, disseminated herpes zoster or varicella), the sponsor may  
request to anal yze the sample to determine if the subject had exposure to that virus.  
Additional sample collection instructions will be provided in the lab manual.  The retained 
samples will be destro yed upon subject completion of this study  or the long -term extension 
study .
7.5.11. Hepatitis B DNA (HBVDNA) Testing
For subjects in countries in which hepatitis B prevalence has been reported at a rate of 
>5.0%59or if required b y local standard of care, H BVDNA testing will be performed as 
reflex testing for an y subject who is HbcAb positive at screening.  In addition, HBVDNA 
testing will be performed at Weeks 12, 24, 34, 48, and Earl y Termination for subjects who 
were enrolled with a positive HBcAb and a n egative HBVDNA in those regions for which 
hepatitis B prevalence has been reported as a rate of >5.0% or if required by local standard of 
care.  Testing at additional time points may  be performed as per the local standard of care.  
Please refer to Appendix 2for testing algorithm, reflex testing, and full eligibility  criteria; for 
Japan -specific requirements, see Appendix 5.1.
7.5.12. Events for Adjudication/Review Committee Submission
The identification of events requiring submission to an adjudication/review committee will 
be made b y the stud y site and communicated to Pfizer or designee.  In addition, events 
requiring review, including opportunistic infections, cardiovascular, or malignancy events 
may also be identified by the Pfizer Study  Team or designee during the review of subject 
data listings or b y site monitors during routine monitoring of subject’s study  records.  
Additional ty pes of events for review and adjudication may  be identified b y Pfizer.  The 
Pfizer Study  Team or designee will notify  the study  site of any  events should they  identify .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 106The Pfizer Study  Team or designee will provide a listing of specific documents needed to 
support event adjudication by  the Adjudication/Review Committees.  Obtaining and 
submitting the documentation will be the responsibility  of the study  site.  Event 
documentation will vary with the event requiring adjudication and may include (but not be 
limited to): hospital discharge summaries, operative reports, clinic notes, ECGs, diagnostic 
tests, pathology  reports, autopsy  reports and death certificate information, as applicable.
7.6.Clinical Assessments
7.6.1. Severity of Alopecia Tool (SALT)
Severity  of alopecia tool (SAL T) is a quantitative assessment of AA severity  based on scalp 
terminal hair loss.
Score parameters utilize a visual aid showing the division of the scalp hair into four 
quadran ts (back, top of scalp, and both sides), with each of the four quadrants given an 
accurate determination of the % of scalp surface area covered, representing 24%, 40%, 18%, 
and 18% of the total scalp surface area, respectively .  
Subject must have a SALT s core ≥50 at both Screening and Baseline to be eligible for 
the study. 
Photographs of scalp taken at the Screening visit will be reviewed b y an independent 
consultant to confirm the SAL T scores; photographs taken at other study  visits may  also be 
reviewed.   For more information on photography  required for this protocol, see Section 7.9.
Hair prosthetics (eg, wigs, hair extensions) must be removed for clinical assessments of 
AAat all study  visits.
7.6.2. Eyelash Assessment (ELA)
The ey elash assessment (EL A) is a numeric rating scale (NRS) developed to characterize 
eyelash hair loss.  The numeric rating scale ranges from 0 (none) to 3 (normal) as described 
below. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 107Score Description
0 None E yelash
No eyelashes of both right and left upper and low er eyelashes.
1 Minimal Ey elash
Modestly or severely decreased density of and/or large gap(s) in one or both upper eyelashes.
2 Moderate E yelash
Normal density of both upper eyelashes without gap(s), and decreased density or gap(s) is 
present in one or both lower eyelashes, OR
Normal density of both upper eyelashes with short gap(s), OR
Mildly decreased density of one or both upper eyelashes with or w ithout short gap(s).
3 Normal Ey elash
Normal density of both right and left upper and low er eyelashes from near medial canthus to 
near lateral canthus without any gap(s).
NOTE: 
Density of low er eyelashes is usually less than upper eyelashes.
A short gap does not significantly distort the appearance of the eyelash(es).
Moderate Eyelash score does not require presence of lower eyelashes.
Mascara and false eyelashes must be removed for clinical assessments of AA at all study  
visits.
7.6.3. Eyebrow Assessment (EBA)
The ey ebrow assessment (EBA) is an NRS developed to characterize ey ebrow hair loss.  The 
numeric rating scale ranges from 0 (none) to 3(normal). 
Score Description
0 None E yebrow
No eyebrow  hair.
1 Minimal Ey ebrow
Normal or decreased density of one or both eyebrow s with large gap(s).
Severely decreased density of one or both eyebrows with or without gap(s).
2 Moderate E yebrow
Normal density of both eyebrows with short gap(s) that does not significantly distort the 
appearance of the eyebrows, OR
Mildly decreased density of eyebrow s with or without short gap(s), OR 
Moderately decreased density of eyebrows without short gap(s).  There i s visual definition of 
eyebrow s at a distance of 3 feet. 
3 Normal Ey ebrow
Normal density of both right and left eyebrow s spanning usual length (ie, from glabella to 
near temple) and width.  There are no gap(s).
NOTE: 
Density of lateral aspect of eyebrows may be mildly less than medial eyebrow s.
A short gap does not significantly distort the appearance of the eyebrow (s).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1087.6.4. Assessment of Fingernails Affected by Alopecia Areata
The number of fingernails affected b y AA will be counted in all subjects at baseline.  The 
number of affected fingernails will be counted at subsequent visits during the study  treatment 
period (see Schedule of Activities ).  Fingernai ls may  have an y of the following changes to be 
considered “affected”: nail pitting; trachy onychia (roughening of nail surface); ony chorrhexis 
(brittle nails); koilony chia (transverse and longitudinal concavit y of nail, ie, “spoon shaped”); 
onychomadesis (s eparation of nail plate from nail bed); longitudinal ridging or striations; 
leucon ychia (white lines or spots in nail plate); red spotting of the lunulae.58,60-76
Photographs may  be taken of affected nails at baseline visit and during study treatment at 
investigator’s discretion.
Nail polish/varnish, false fingernails, and gel applications must be removed for assessments 
of fingernails affected b y AA.
7.6.5. Clinician Global Impression – Alopecia Ar eata (CGI -AA)
The Clinician Global I mpression –Alopecia Areata (CGI -AA) is a single clinician -reported 
item developed to assess the clinical impression of severit y of scalp hair loss.  The rater is 
asked to rate the subject’s current hair loss on a scale ranging from “None (no hair loss)” to 
“Ver y severe or complete hair loss”, with higher scores indicating more severe hair loss.  The 
CGI-AA should be completed after other clinical assessments of AA (ie, SAL T, EBA, ELA, 
and assessment of fingernails affect ed by AA), whenever it is possible.
7.7.Assessment of Suicidal Ideation and Behavior
7.7.1. Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)
Columbia suicide severity rating scale is a validated tool to evaluate suicidal ideation and 
behavior. 
There are 2 versions of the C -SSRS to be utilized in this study  -“C-SSRS for screening and 
baseline visits” and “C -SSRS for any  post -baseline visits”.  The version used is dictated by  
the actual stud y visit.
At Screening or Day 1 visits, if the subject has had suicidal ideation associated with actual 
intent and a method or plan in the past y ear (“y es” answers on items 4, 5), the subject will not 
be included in the study .  For subjects who have had previous history  of suicidal behaviors in 
the past 5 years, a risk assessment must be performed and documented b y a qualified mental 
health professional to assess whether it is safe for the subject to participate in the trial. 
For all subjects who screen failure due to suicidal behavior, the subject should be referred for 
appropriate e valuation and treatment.
At any  post -baseline visits, if there are “y es” answers on items 4, 5, or on any  question in the 
suicidal behavior section of the C -SSRS, the subject will be discontinued from the study  and 
referred to a mental health professional for appropriate evaluation and treatment.  If the 
subject cannot be seen b y a mental health professional within 24 hours, then the subject 
should be sent to a local emergency  room for ps ychiatric assessment.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1097.8.Patient Reported Outcome (PRO)
Every  effort shou ld be made to have the subject complete all patient reported outcome 
questionnaires before any other evaluations.  All PROs should be completed as per Schedule 
of Activities.
7.8.1. Alopecia Areata Patient Priority Outcomes (AAPPO)
The Alopecia Areata Patient Priority  Outcomes (AAPPO) scale is a self- administered 
questionnaire that measures hair loss, emotional sy mptoms, and activit y limitations over the 
past week.  This measure was developed based on qualitative patient input as well as rev iew 
of other data sources (eg, literature, expert input, other existing measures, etc.).  The first 
four items of the tool, which cover hair loss from the scalp, ey ebrows, ey elashes, and bod y, 
ask the patient to describe the current amount of hair loss usi ng a 5 point response scale that 
ranges from “no hair loss” to “complete (do not have any  hair on m y [insert body  area]).”  
The remaining items ask the patient to rate the impact of AA over the past week on a 5 -point 
scale ranging from “never” to “alway s.”  The PGI -C and P -Sat enable an anchor- based 
method for interpreting meaningful changes in the AAPPO domain scores.  
7.8.2. Patient’s Global Impression of Change (PGI- C)
The Patient’s Global Impression of Change (PGI -C) asks the subject to evaluate the 
improvement or worsening of their AA as compared to the start of the study using a 
single -item, “Since the start of the study , my alopecia areata has: …”.  The patients will 
select one of seven responses ranging from “greatly  improved” to “greatl y worsened .”
7.8.3. Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth (P- Sat)
The Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth (P -Sat) asks the subject to evaluate his/her 
satisfaction with the hair that has regrown since the start of the stud y.  This measure is 
comprised of three items aski ng about satisfaction with the “amount” and “quality ” of hair as 
well as “overall” satisfaction with the hair.  The patients will select one of seven responses 
ranging from “very  satisfied” to “very  dissatisfied.”
7.8.4. Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HAD S)
The Hospital Anxiety  and Depression Scale (HADS) is a validated 14- item PRO measure 
used to assess states of anxiety  and depression over the past week.  Items are rated on a 
4-point severity  scale.  The HADS produces 2 scales, one for anxiety  (HADS –A) and one for 
depression (HADS –D), differentiating the two states with established normal score 
cut-offs.79,88  The instrument has been validated for use b y adolescents aged 12 and older.79
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1107.8.5. EuroQoL 5 Dimensions (EQ -5D- 5L) and EuroQoL 5 Dimensions —Youth 
(EQ-5D- Y)
The EuroQoL 5 Dimensions (EQ -5D- 5L) is a validated, standardized, generic ins trument that 
is the most widely  used preference -based HRQoL questionnaire in cost- effectiveness and 
health technologies assessment (HTA).80-82  The measure is a well- established instrument 
used to measure health states and utilities in various disease areas.  The measure contains 
5items that cover mobility , self -care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and 
anxiety /depression, as well as a visual analogue scale.  A version of the instrument 
specificall y developed and validated for use b y youths aged 12 through 17 years is called the 
EuroQoL 5 Dimensions —Youth (EQ -5D- Y) will be used for adolescent subjects.
7.8.6. Patient Health Questionnaire – 8 Items (PHQ -8)
The Patient Health Questionnaire –8 items (PHQ -8) is a patient -reported questionnaire that 
consists of 8 items to assess subject depression leve l.  Subjects with clinically  significant 
depression as noted b y a PHQ -8 total score ≥15 at Screening must not be enrolled in the 
study .
7.8.7. 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey Version 2 Acute (SF36v2 Acute)
The 36- Item Short Form Health Survey  version 2 Acute (SF 36v2) is a validated generic 
health status measure which measures concepts of HRQoL  over the past week.  It is 36 items 
and measures 8 general health domains: phy sical functioning, role limitations due to phy sical 
health, bodily  pain, general health percep tions, vitality , social functioning, role limitations 
due to emotional problems, and mental health.  These domains can also be summarized as 
physical and mental component summary  scores.  Of note, the Mental Component Score 
(MCS) may  be of particular interest to measure change in this patient population.
7.8.8. Alopecia Areata Resource Utilization (AARU)
The Alopecia Areata Resource Utilization (AARU) is a PRO that measures the resource 
utilization associated with AA.  The AARU is a 3 -item questionnaire which asks patients 
about medical or nonmedical practitioner visits, cosmetic covering of hair loss, and career 
impact they  may  have had over the past 3 months.
7.8.9. Work Productivity and Activity Impairment: Alopecia Areata (WPAI: AA)
The Work Productivity  and Activity  Impairment: Alopecia Areata (WPAI : AA) is a validated 
scale that was developed to measure the effect on work productivity  and regular activities 
during the past 7 days, which has been modified specificall y for patients with AA.  The 
WPAI : AA will be comple ted by adult subjects only .  Adolescents aged 12 -17years will not 
complete this assessment.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1117.9.Photography of Alopecia Areata
Photographs of stud y subjects will be obtained (according to the separatel y provided 
Photograph y Instructions) at various time points as per Schedule of Activities.  Photographic 
services will be provided through a central photograph y lab selected b y the sponsor.  
Detailed procedures to assure photographic quality and consistency  will be provided 
separately  in a central photography  laboratory  instruction manual.
Scalp photographs will be taken at the Screening Visit to verify  eligibil ity (eg, ≥50% hair 
loss of the scalp).  Scalp areas photographed should be recorded in stud y documents so that 
the same scalp region(s) will be photographed at all time points as applicable .  Photographs 
of ey elashes and ey ebrows will also be taken.  Photographs will also be taken at Baseline, 
Weeks 4, 12, 24, 28, 40, and 48 (or ET) visits.  Photographs of affected fingernails may  be 
taken at the investigator’s discretion.
The photographs may  be reviewed b y an independent consultant(s) to confirm SAL T scor es.
7.10. Pharmacokinetics
7.10.1. Plasma for Analysis of PF -06651600
During all study  periods, blood samples to provide plasma for PK analysis will be collected 
into appropriatel y labeled tubes containing K 2EDTA anticoagulant at times specified in the 
Schedule of Activities section of the protocol.
Blood will be collected at the time points identified in the Schedule of Activities section of 
the protocol.  All efforts will be made to obtain the pharmacokinetic samples at the exact 
nominal time relative to dosing.  For each blood sample collection, the allowable windows 
are as follows for time postdose: 0.5 hr (±10min), 1 hr (±15min), 2 hr (±20min) and 
3 hr (±30 min).  The date and exact time of the sample collection is to be noted on the source 
document and data collection tool (eg, CRF), as well as the date and time of the previous 
dose.  Samples obtained outside the windows specified in the Schedule of Activities will be 
considered a pr otocol deviat ion.
The plasma will be stored in appropriatel y labeled screw -capped pol ypropylene tubes at 
approximately  -20°C or colder within 1 hour of collection.
Further details regarding the collection, processing, storage and shipping of the blood 
samples will be p rovided in the lab manual.
Samples will be analy zed using a validated anal ytical method in compliance with Pfizer 
standard operating procedures. 
The PK samples must be processed and shipped as indicated to maintain sample integrit y.  
Any deviations from the PK processing steps, including any  actions taken, must be 
documented and reported to the sponsor.  On a case -by-case basis, the sponsor may  make 
a determination as to whether sample integrit y has been compromised.  Any sample 
deemed outside of establis hed stability , or of questionable integrity , will be considered a 
protocol deviation.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 112As part of understanding the pharmacokinetics of the study  drug, samples may  be used 
for metabolite identification and/or evaluation of the bioanal ytical method.  These d ata 
will be used for internal exploratory  purposes and will not be included in the clinical 
report.
7.10.2. Shipment of Pharmacokinetic Samples
The shipment address and assay lab contact information will be provided to the I nvestigator 
site prior to initiation of the study .  The central laboratory  will provide collection materials 
and directions for packaging and shipment of samples and will forward samples to the 
contract anal ytical laboratory .  The contract anal ytical laboratory  will be provided with 
randomization codes so that only  samples in the PF -06651600 treatment groups are assay ed.  
Placebo samples may  be assay ed in the event of suspected error in subject randomization.  
Refer to the central lab vendor manual for further information.
7.11. Pharmacodynamics Markers
The pharmacod ynamic (PD) samples must be processed and shipped as indicated to maintain 
sample integrity .  An y deviations from the PD processing steps, including any actions taken, 
must be documented and reported to the sponsor.  On a case -by-case basis, the sponsor may  
make a determination as to whether sample integrity  has been compromised.  Depending on 
sampling and transport constraints, it is possible that not all biomarker samples will be 
collected in all study  regions.
All efforts will be made to o btain the PD samples at the exact nominal time relative to 
dosing.  Please consult the laboratory  manual(s) for final instructions on sample collection, 
storage, and shipping requirements.  These manual(s) supersede the instructions listed in the 
applicabl e protocol sections.  Samples that are handled according to the respective manual 
guidance are considered “per protocol”.
Samples will be analy zed using fit for purpose or validated anal ytical methods in compliance 
with Pfizer standard operating procedures .
As part of understanding the pharmacod ynamics of the study  drug and the disease under 
study , samples may  be used for evaluation of the bioanaly tical method.  These data will be 
used for internal (ie, Pfizer) exploratory  purposes and may  not be included i n the clinical 
report.
7.11.1. Samples for Interferon Gamma -Induced Protein – 10 (IP -10) Analysis
Blood samples to provide serum for the anal ysis of I P-10 will be collected into appropriatel y 
labeled tubes according to the times outlined in the Schedule of Activities.  IP-10 samples 
will be collected from all subjects unless the exportation of these samples from the country of 
origin is prohibited b y local regulators or IRB/EC decision.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1137.11.2. Samples for fluorescence -activated cell sorting (FACS) a nalysis (T cell, B cell, 
and NK cell subsets)
Blood samples for the assessment of percent and absolute ly mphocy te subsets will be 
collected and will be analy zed by  FACS to identify  Tcell, B cell, and NK cell subsets 
according to the times outlined in the Schedule of Activities.
7.11.3. Samples for Immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM) Analysis
Blood sample for the analy sis of immunoglobulin subty pes (IgA, IgG, and IgM) will be 
collected according to the times outlined in the Schedule of Activities . 
7.11.4. Shipment of Pharmacodynamic Samples
The shipment address and assay  lab contact information will be provided to the investigator 
site prior to initiation of the study .
7.12. Rater Qualifications
Diagnosis of AA must be performed b y a qua lified dermatologist (board certified or 
equivalent) who has experience with AA.  The assessment of fingernails affected b y AA 
must be performed b y a qualified dermatologist (board certified or equivalent).  An 
experienced and qualified phy sician or health care professional may  be permitted to perform 
the clinical evaluations of AA (SALT, ELA, EBA, and CGI- AA).  The C -SSRS may  be 
performed b y site staff.  For all assessments, the rater must be formally  delegated to perform 
this assessment by  the PI and recei ve training (with proper documentation) on the protocol 
and applicable assessment scales prior to performing these evaluations.  To assure 
consistency  and reduce variability , the same rater should assess dermatological clinical 
evaluations for a given proc edure and for an individual subject throughout the study  (eg, one 
rater performs all SALT evaluations throughout the study ).The same rater must assess the 
SAL T and CGI -AA for an individual subject.  A back- up experienced and qualified, 
protocol -trained r ater will only  be allowed in special situations when the designated rater is 
unable to perform the evaluation. Use of the back -up rater will be documented.
8.ADVERSE EVENT REPORT ING
8.1.Requirements
The table below summarizes the requirements for recording safe ty events on the CRF and for 
reporting safety  events on the Clinical Trial (CT) Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Report Form 
to Pfizer Safety .  These requirements are delineated for 3 types of events: (1) SAEs; 
(2)non-serious adverse events (AEs); and (3) expo sure to the investigational product under 
study  during pregnancy  or breastfeeding, and occupational exposure. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 114Safety Event Recorded on the CRF Reported on the CT SAE 
Report Form to Pfizer 
Safety Within 24 Hours of 
Awareness
SAE All All
Non-serious AE All None
Exposure to the 
investigational product 
under study  during 
pregnancy  or 
breastfeeding, and 
occupational exposureAll (regardless of whether 
associated with an AE), 
except occupational 
exposureExposure during pregnancy  
(EDP), exposure via 
breastf eeding, occupational 
exposure (regardless of 
whether associated with an 
AE)
All observed or volunteered events regardless of treatment group or suspected causal 
relationship to the investigational product(s) will be reported as described in the following 
paragraphs.
Events listed in the table above that require reporting to Pfizer Safet y on the CT SAE Report 
Form within 24 hours of awareness of the event by  the investigator are to be reported 
regardless of whether the event is determined by the investigato r to be related to an 
investigational product under study .  In particular, if the SAE is fatal or life -threatening, 
notification to Pfizer Safety  must be made immediately , irrespective of the extent of available 
event information.  This time frame also app lies to additional new (follow -up) information on 
previously  forwarded reports.  I n the rare situation that the investigator does not become 
immediately  aware of the occurrence of an event, the investigator must report the event 
within 24 hours after learn ing of it and document the time of his/her first awareness of the 
event.
For each event, the investigator must pursue and obtain adequate information both to 
determine the outcome and to assess whether it meets the criteria for classification as an SAE 
(see the Serious Adverse Events section below).  In addition, the investigator may  be 
requested b y Pfizer Safety to obtain specific follow -up information in an expedited fashion.  
This information is more detailed than that recorded on the CRF .  In general, this will include 
a description of the event in sufficient detail to allow for a complete medical assessment of 
the case and independent determination of possible causalit y.  An y information relevant to 
the event, such as concomitant medications and illnesses, must be provided.  I n the case of a 
subject death, a summary of available autopsy  findings must be submitted as soon as possible 
to Pfizer Safety .  Any pertinent additional information must be reported on the CT SAE 
Report Form; additional source documents (eg, medical records, CRF, laboratory  data) are to 
be sent to Pfizer Safet y ONLY upon request.
As part of ongoing safet y reviews conducted b y the sponsor, an y non -serious AE that is 
determined b y the sponsor to be serious will be reported by the sponsor as an SAE.  To assist 
in the determination of case seriousness, further information may  be requested from the 
investigator to provide clarity  and u nderstanding of the event in the context of the clinical 
study .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1158.1.1. Additional Details on Recording Adverse Events on the CRF
All events detailed in the table above will be recorded on the AE page(s) of the CRF.  I t 
should be noted that the CT SAE Report Form for reporting of SAE information is not the 
same as the AE page of the CRF.  When the same data are collected, the forms must be 
completed in a consistent manner.  AEs should be recorded using concise medical 
terminology  and the same AE term should be used on both the CRF and the CT SAE Report 
Form for reporting of SAE information.
8.1.2. Eliciting Adverse Event Information
The investigator is to record on the CRF all directly  observed AEs and all AEs spontaneously  
reported b y the stud y subject/parent(s)/legal guardian/legally  acceptable representative.  In 
addition, each study subject/parent(s)/legal guardian/legally acceptable representative will be 
questioned about the occurrence of AEs in a non -leading manner.
8.1.3. Withdrawal from the Study Due to Adverse Events (see also the Subject 
Withdrawal/Early Termination section)
Withdrawal due to AEs should be distinguished from withdrawal due to other causes, 
accordi ng to the definition of AE noted below, and recorded on the CRF. 
When a subject withdraws from the study  because of an SAE, the SAE must be recorded on 
the CRF and reported, as appropriate, on the CT SAE Report Form, in accordance with the 
Requirements section above.
8.1.4. Time Period for Collecting AE/SAE Information
The time period for actively  eliciting and collecting AEs and SAEs (“active collection 
perio d”) for each subject begins from the time the subject provides informed consent, which 
is obtained before the subject’s participation in the study  (ie, before undergoing any  
study -related procedure and/or receiving investigational product), through and inc luding a 
minimum of 28 calendar days; except as indicated below after the last administration of the 
investigational product.
For subjects who are screen failures, the active collection period ends when screen failure 
status is determined.
8.1.4.1. Reporting SAEs t o Pfizer Safety
All SAEs occurring in a subject during the active collection period are reported to Pfizer 
Safety  on the CT SAE Report Form.
SAEs occurring in a subject after the active collection period has ended are reported to Pfizer 
Safety if the investigator becomes aware of them; at a minimum, all SAEs that the 
investigator believes have at least a reasonable possibility  of being related to investigational 
product must be reported to Pfizer Safety .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 116Follow -up by  the investigator continues througho ut and after the active collection period and 
until the event or its sequelae resolve or stabilize at a level acceptable to the investigator, and 
Pfizer concurs with that assessment.
8.1.4.2. Recording Non -serious AEs and SAEs on the CRF
During the active collectio n period, both non -serious AEs and SAEs are recorded on the 
CRF.
Follow -up by  the investigator may  be required until the event or its sequelae resolve or 
stabilize at a level acceptable to the investigator, and Pfizer concurs with that assessment.
8.1.5. Causalit y Assessment
The investigator’s assessment of causalit y must be provided for all AEs (serious and 
non-serious); the investigator must record the causal relationship on the CRF, and report such 
an assessment in accordance with the SAE reporting requirements , if applicable.  An 
investigator’s causalit y assessment is the determination of whether there exists a reasonable 
possibility  that the investigational product caused or contributed to an AE; generall y, the 
facts (evidence) or arguments to suggest a causal relationship should be provided.  If the 
investigator does not know whether or not the investigational product caused the event, then 
the event will be handled as “related to investigational product” for reporting purposes, as 
defined b y the sponsor.  If the investigator's causality  assessment is “unknown but not 
related” to investigational product, this should be clearl y documented on study  records. 
In addition, if the investigator determines that an SAE is associated with study  procedures, 
the investiga tor must record this causal relationship in the source documents and CRF, and 
report such an assessment in the dedicated section of the CT SAE Report Form and in 
accordance with the SAE reporting requirements.
8.1.6. Sponsor’s Reporting Requirements to Regulatory Authorities
AE reporting, including suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions, will be carried out 
in accordance with applicable local regulations.
8.2.Definitions
8.2.1. Adverse Events
An AE is an y untoward medical occurrence in a study subject administered a product or 
medical device; the event need not necessaril y have a causal relationship with the treatment 
or usage.  Examples of AEs include, but are not limited to: 
Abnormal test findings;
Clinically  significant signs and sy mptoms;
Changes in ph ysical examination findings;
Hypersensitivity ;
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 117Progression/worsening of underl ying disease;
Drug abuse;
Drug dependency .
Additionally , AEs may  include signs and s ymptoms resulting from:
Drug overdose;
Drug withdrawal;
Drug misuse; 
Drug interactions;
Extravasation;
Exposure during pregnancy  (EDP);
Exposure via breastfeeding;
Medication error;
Occupational exposure.
8.2.2. Abnormal Test Findings
Abnormal objective test findings should be recorded as AEs when an y of the following 
conditions are met: 
Test result is associated with accompan ying symptoms; and/or
Test result requires additional diagnostic testing or medical/surgical intervention; 
and/or
Test result leads to a change in stud y dosing (outside of an y protocol -specified dose 
adjustments) or discontinuation from the s tudy, significant additional concomitant 
drug treatment, or other therap y; and/or
Test result is considered to be an AE b y the investigator or sponsor.
Merel y repeating an abnormal test, in the absence of an y of the above conditions, does not 
constitute an AE.  An y abnormal test result that is determined to be an error does not require 
recording as an AE.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1188.2.3. Serious Adverse Events
A serious adverse event is any  untoward medical occurrence at any  dose that:
Results in death;
Is life -threatening (immediate risk of death);
Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;
Results in persistent or significant disability /incapacity  (substantial disruption of the 
ability  to conduct normal life functions);
Results in congenital anomaly /birth defect.
Or that is considered to be:
An important medical event.
Medical and scientific judgment is exercised in determining whether an event is an 
important medical event.  An important medical event may  not be immediately  
life-threatening and/or result in death or hospitalization.  However, if it is determined 
that the event may  jeopardize the subject or may  require intervention to prevent one 
of the other AE outcomes, the important medical event should be reported as serious.
Examples of s uch events are intensive treatment in an emergency  room or at home for 
allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization; 
or development of drug dependency  or drug abuse.
8.2.4. Hospitalization
Hospitalization is defined as an y initial admission (even less than 24 hours) in a hospital or 
equivalent healthcare facility , or any  prolongation of an existing admission.  Admission also 
includes transfer within the hospital to an acute/intensive care unit (eg, from the psy chiatr ic 
wing to a medical floor, medical floor to a coronary  care unit, or neurological floor to a 
tuberculosis unit).  An emergency  room visit does not necessarily constitute a hospitalization; 
however, the event leading to the emergency  room visit is assessed for medical importance.
Hospitalization does not include the following:
Rehabilitation facilities;
Hospice facilities;
Respite care (eg, caregiver relief);
Skilled nursing facilities;
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 119Nursing homes;
Same -day surgeries (as outpatient/same -day/ambulatory  procedures).
Hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization in the absence of a precipitating clinical 
AE is not in itself an SAE.  Examples include:
Admission for treatment of a preexisting condition not associated with the 
development of a new AE or with a worsening of the preexisting condition (eg, for 
workup of a persistent pretreatment laboratory  abnormality );
Social admission (eg, subject has no place to sleep);
Administrative admission (eg, for yearly physical examination);
Protocol -specified admis sion during a stud y (eg, for a procedure required by the stud y 
protocol);
Optional admission not associated with a precipitating clinical AE (eg, for elective 
cosmetic surgery );
Hospitalization for observation without a medical AE;
Preplanned treatments or surgical procedures.  These should be noted in the baseline 
documentation for the entire protocol and/or for the individual subject.
Diagnostic and therapeutic noninvasive and invasive procedures, such as surgery , should not 
be reported as SAEs.  However, the medical condition for which the procedure was 
performed should be reported if it meets the definition of an SAE.  For example, an acute 
appendicitis that begins during the reporting period should be reported if the SAE 
requirements are met, and the re sulting appendectomy  should be recorded as treatment of the 
AE.
8.3.Severity Assessment
If required on the AE page of the CRF, the investigator will use the adjectives MILD, 
MODERATE, or SEVERE to describe the maximum intensity  of the AE.  For purposes 
of cons istency , these intensity  grades are defined as follows:
MILD Does not interfere with subject's usual function.
MODERATE Interferes to some extent with subject's usual function.
SEVERE Interferes significantl y with subject's usual function.
Note the distinction between the severit y and the seriousness of an AE.  A severe event is not 
necessarily  an SAE.  For example, a headache may  be severe (interferes significantly  with 
the subject's usual function) but would not be classified as serious unless it m et one of the 
criteria for SAEs, listed above.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1208.4.Special Situations
8.4.1. Protocol -Specified Serious Adverse Events
There are no protocol -specified SAEs in this study.  All SAEs will be reported to Pfizer 
Safety  by the investigator as described in previous section s and will be handled as SAEs in 
the safet y database. 
8.4.2. Potential Cases of Drug- Induced Liver Injury
Humans exposed to a drug who show no sign of liver injury  (as determined by  elevations in 
transaminases) are termed “tolerators,” while those who show trans ient liver injury , but adapt 
are termed “adaptors.”  In some subjects, transaminase elevations are a harbinger of a more 
serious potential outcome.  These subjects fail to adapt and therefore are "susceptible" to 
progressive and serious liver injury , commonly  referred to as drug -induced liver injury  
(DILI).  Subjects who experience a transaminase elevation above 3 times the upper limit of 
normal ( ×ULN) should be monitored more frequently  to determine if they are an “adaptor” 
or are “susceptible.”
In the ma jority  of DILI cases, elevations in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and/or alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) precede total bilirubin (TBili) elevations (>2 ×ULN) by  several 
days or weeks.  The increase in TBili ty picall y occurs while AST/ALT is/are still el evated 
above 3 ×ULN (ie, AST/AL T and TBili values will be elevated within the same lab sample).  
In rare instances, b y the time TBili elevations are detected, AST/ALT values might have 
decreased.  This occurrence is still regarded as a potential DILI.  Th erefore, abnormal 
elevations in either AST OR AL T in addition to TBili that meet the criteria outlined below 
are considered potential DILI (assessed per Hy ’s law criteria) cases and should alway s be 
considered important medical events, even before all othe r possible causes of liver injury  
have been excluded.
The threshold of laboratory  abnormalities for a potential DILI case depends on the subject’s 
individual baseline values and underl ying conditions.  Subjects who present with the 
following laboratory  abnormalities should be evaluated further as potential DILI (Hy ’s law) 
cases to definitivel y determine the etiology of the abnormal laboratory  values:
Subjects with AST/AL T and TBili baseline values within the normal range who 
subsequently present with AST OR ALT values >3 ×ULN AND a TBili value 
>2× ULN with no evidence of hemol ysis and an alkaline phosphatase value 
<2×ULN or not available;
For subjects with baseline AST OR ALT ORTBili values above the ULN, the 
following threshold values are used in the definition mentioned above, as needed, 
depending on which values are above the ULN at baseline:
Preexisting AST or ALT baseline values above the normal range: AST or ALT 
values >2 times the baseline values AND >3 × ULN; or >8 × ULN (whichever is 
smaller).
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 121Preexisting values of TBili above the normal range: TBili level increased from 
baseline value b y an amount of at least 1 × ULN or if the value reaches >3 ×ULN 
(whichever is smalle r).
Rises in AST/AL T and TBili separated b y more than a few weeks should be assessed 
individually  based on clinical judgment; any  case where uncertainty  remains as to whether it 
represents a potential Hy’s law case should be reviewed with the sponsor. 
Thesubject should return to the investigator site and be evaluated as soon as possible, 
preferabl y within 48 hours from awareness of the abnormal results.  This evaluation should 
include laboratory  tests, detailed history , and physical assessment. 
In additi on to repeating measurements of AST and AL T and TBili, laboratory  tests should 
include albumin, creatine kinase (CK), direct and indirect bilirubin, gamma -glutam yl 
transferase (GGT), prothrombin time (PT)/international normalized ratio (INR), total bile 
acids, alkaline phosphatase and acetaminophen drug and/or protein adduct levels.  
Consideration should also be given to drawing a separate tube of clotted blood and an 
anticoagulated tube of blood for further testing, as needed, for further contemporaneous 
analyses at the time of the recognized initial abnormalities to determine etiology .  A detailed 
history , including relevant information, such as review of ethanol, acetaminophen (either b y 
itself or as a coformulated product in prescription or over -the-coun ter medications) , 
recreational drug, supplement (herbal) use and consumption, family  history , sexual history , 
travel history , history  of contact with a jaundiced person, surgery , blood transfusion, history  
of liver or allergic disease, and potential occupa tional exposure to chemicals, should be 
collected.  Further testing for acute hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E infection and liver imaging 
(eg, biliary  tract) may  be warranted. 
All cases demonstrated on repeat testing as meeting the laboratory  criteria of AST/ ALT and 
TBili elevation defined above should be considered potential DILI (Hy ’s law) cases if no 
other reason for the liver function test (LFT) abnormalities has y et been found.  Such 
potential DILI (Hy’s law) cases are to be reported as SAEs, irrespective of availability 
of all the results of the investigations performed to determine etiology of the LFT 
abnormalities.
A potential DILI (Hy ’s law) case becomes a confirmed case onl y after all results of 
reasonable investigations have been received and have e xcluded an alternative etiology .
8.4.3. Exposure to the Investigational Product During Pregnancy or Breastfeeding, and 
Occupational Exposure
Exposure to the investigational product under study  during pregnancy  or breastfeeding and 
occupational exposure are reportable to Pfizer Safety  within 24 hours of investigator 
awareness.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1228.4.3.1. Exposure During Pregnancy
For both unapproved/unlicensed products and for marketed products, an EDP occurs if:
A female becomes, or is found to be, pregnant either while receiving or ha ving been 
exposed (eg, because of treatment or environmental exposure) to the investigational 
product; or the female becomes or is found to be pregnant after discontinuing and/or 
being exposed to the investigational product;
An example of environmental exp osure would be a case involving direct contact 
with a Pfizer product in a pregnant woman (eg, a nurse reports that she is pregnant 
and has been exposed to chemotherapeutic products).
A male has been exposed (eg, because of treatment or environmental exposu re) to the 
investigational product prior to or around the time of conception and/or is exposed 
during his partner’s pregnancy . 
If a subject or subject’s partner becomes or is found to be pregnant during the subject’s 
treatment with the investigational pro duct, the investigator must report this information to 
Pfizer Safety  on the CT SAE Report Form and an EDP supplemental form, regardless of 
whether an SAE has occurred.  In addition, the investigator must submit information 
regarding environmental exposure to a Pfizer product in a pregnant woman (eg, a subject 
reports that she is pregnant and has been exposed to a cy totoxic product by inhalation or 
spillage) to Pfizer Safety  using the EDP supplemental form.  This must be done irrespective 
of whether an AE ha s occurred and within 24 hours of awareness of the exposure.  The 
information submitted should include the anticipated date of delivery  (see below for 
information related to termination of pregnancy ).
Follow -up is conducted to obtain general information on the pregnancy  and its outcome for 
all EDP reports with an unknown outcome.  The investigator will follow the pregnancy  until 
completion (or until pregnancy  termination) and notify  Pfizer Safet y of the outcome as a 
follow -up to the initial EDP supplemental form.  In the case of a live birth, the structural 
integrit y of the neonate can be assessed at the time of birth.  In the event of a termination, the 
reason(s) for termination should be specified and, if clinically  possible, the structural 
integrit y of th e terminated fetus should be assessed by  gross visual inspection (unless 
pre-procedure test findings are conclusive for a congenital anomal y and the findings are 
reported).
If the outcome of the pregnancy  meets the criteria for an SAE (ie, ectopic pregnanc y, 
spontaneous abortion, intrauterine fetal demise, neonatal death, or congenital anomal y [in a 
live-born bab y, a terminated fetus, an intrauterine fetal demise, or a neonatal death]), the 
investigator should follow the procedures for reporting SAEs.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 123Addit ional information about pregnancy  outcomes that are reported to Pfizer Safet y as SAEs 
follows: 
Spontaneous abortion includes miscarriage and missed abortion;
Neonatal deaths that occur within 1 month of birth should be reported, without regard 
to causalit y, as SAEs.  In addition, infant deaths after 1 month should be reported as 
SAEs when the investigator assesses the infant death as related or possibly  related to 
exposure to the investigational product.
Additional information regarding the EDP may  be requested by  the sponsor.  Further 
follow -up of birth outcomes will be handled on a case- by-case basis (eg, follow -up on 
preterm infants to identify developmental delay s).  In the case of paternal exposure, the 
investigator will provide the subject with the Pr egnant Partner Release of Information Form 
to deliver to his partner.  The investigator must document in the source documents that the 
subject was given the Pregnant Partner Release of Information Form to provide to his 
partner.
8.4.3.2. Exposure during Breastfeedi ng
Scenarios of exposure during breastfeeding must be reported, irrespective of the presence of 
an associated SAE, to Pfizer Safet y within 24 hours of the investigator’s awareness, using the 
CT SAE Report Form.  An exposure during breastfeeding report is n ot created when a Pfizer 
drug specifically  approved for use in breastfeeding women (eg, vitamins) is administered in 
accord with authorized use.  However, if the infant experiences an SAE associated with such 
a drug’s administration, the SAE is reported to gether with the exposure during breastfeeding.
8.4.3.3. Occupational Exposure
An occupational exposure occurs when, during the performance of job duties, a person 
(whether a healthcare professional or otherwise) gets in unplanned direct contact with the 
product, which may  or may  not lead to the occurrence of an AE.
An occupational exposure is reported to Pfizer Safety  within 24 hours of the investigator’s 
awareness, using the CT SAE Report Form, regardless of whether there is an associated 
SAE.  Since the informatio n does not pertain to a subject enrolled in the study , the 
information is not recorded on a CRF; however, a copy  of the completed CT SAE Report 
Form is maintained in the investigator site file.
8.4.4. Medication Errors
Other exposures to the investigational produ ct under study  may  occur in clinical trial settings, 
such as medication errors.
Safety Event Recorded on the CRF Reported on the CT SAE 
Report Form to Pfizer 
Safety Within 24 Hours of 
Awareness
Medication errors All (regardless of whether 
associated with an AE)Only  if associated with an 
SAE
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 124Medication errors may  result from the administration or consumption of the investigational 
product b y the wrong subject, or at the wrong time, or at the wrong dosage strength. 
Medication errors include :
Medication er rors involving subject exposure to the investigational product;
Potential medication errors or uses outside of what is foreseen in the protocol that do 
or do not involve the participating subject.
For further clarification, a medication error is:
Any preventable event causing or leading to inappropriate medication use or patient 
harm;
When patient misunderstood, could not read, was not aware of, or not given dosing 
instructions.
A medication error is not an inadvertent or intentional missing of a dose or use of extra dose 
of study  medication by  a subject who understands dosing instructions.  This is a compliance 
issue.  Reporting of compliance issues are described in Section 5.3.
Such medication errors occurring to a stud y participant are to be captured on the medication 
error page of the CRF, which is a specific version of the AE page.
In the event of a medication dosing error, the sponsor should be notified immediately .
Whether or not the medication error is accompanied by  an AE, as determined by  the 
investigator, the medication error is recorded on the medication error page of the CRF and, if 
applicable, an y assoc iated AE(s), serious and non-serious, are recorded on an AE page of the 
CRF.
Medication errors should be reported to Pfizer Safety within 24 hours on a CT SAE Report 
Form only when associated with an SAE .
8.4.5. Safety Adjudication Committees
The identification of events requiring submission to an adjudication/review committee will 
be made b y the stud y site and communicated to Pfizer or designee.  Events requiring review, 
including opportunistic infections, cardiovascular, and malignancy  events may  also be 
ident ified by  the Pfizer Study  Team or designee during the review of subject data listings or 
by site monitors during routine monitoring of subject’s study  records.  The Pfizer Study  
Team or designee will notify  the study  site of an y events should they  identify .
The Pfizer Study  Team or designee will provide a listing of specific documents needed to 
support event adjudication by  the Adjudication/Review Committees.  Obtaining and 
submitting the documentation will be the responsibility  of the study  site.  Event 
documentation will vary  with the event requiring adjudication and may  include (but not be 
limited to): hospital discharge summaries, operative reports, clinic notes, diagnostic tests, 
pathology  reports, autopsy  reports and death certificate information, as a pplicable.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1259. DATA ANALYSIS/STATIS TICAL METHODS
This section outlines the key  planned statistical summaries and analy ses for the data collected 
in this study .  Detailed methodology  for summary  and statistical anal yses of the data 
collected in this study  is ou tlined here and further detailed in a statistical analysis plan (SAP), 
which will be maintained by  the sponsor.  The SAP may  modify  what is outlined in the 
protocol where appropriate; however, an y major modifications of the primary endpoint 
definitions or their anal yses will also be reflected in a protocol amendment.  The SAP will be 
finalized prior to database lock and breaking the blind for the primary  analy sis of the 
B7981015 study .
Section 2lists the overall study  objectives and endpoints; the primary  and secondary  
objectives and endpoints for the overall study  reporting and publications are also detailed 
below in Table 4 .  Table 5lists the primary  and secondary  endpoints of the study  organized 
by known regional requirements.
Table 4.Primary and Secondary Endpoints for Overall Study Reporting and 
Publications
Alpha (α) 0.05 (2-sided significance level)
Primary Endpoint Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤20 at Week 24.
Key Secondary Endpoint Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤1 0 at Week 24 .
Secondary Endpoints  Response based on an absolute SALT Score ≤ 20 at Week 24 will be used to 
characterize the exposure response.
 Response based on an absolute SALT score ≤20 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 34, 40, and 
48.
NOTE: Response at Weeks 4, 8, 12, and 18 will be analyzed controlling for Type I 
error.
 Response based on an absolute SALT score of ≤10 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 34, 40, 
and 48.
 Response based on a 75% improvement in SALT score from baseline (SALT75) at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Change from baseline in SALT scores at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 -grade improvement or a score of 3 in EBA s core at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 Response based on at least a 2 -grade improvement or a score of 3 in ELA score at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
 PGI-C response defined as a PGI -C score of “moderately improved” or “greatl y 
improved ”at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
 Change from baseline in AAPPO scales at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 126Table 5. Primary and Secondary Endpoints Organized by Known Regional 
Regulatory Requirements
For the FDA/PMDA For the EMA
and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries
Alpha (α)  0.00125 (2-sided significance level) 0.01 (2-sided significance level)
Primary Endpoint Response based on an absolute SALT Score 
≤20 at Week 24.Response based on an absolute SALT Score 
≤10 at Week 24.
Key Secondary Endpoint Not applicable PGI-C response defined as a PGI-C score of 
“moderately improved” or “greatly improved” at Week 24.
Secondary Endpoints • Response based on an absolute SALT 
Score ≤20 at Week 24 will be used to 
characterize the exposure response.• Response based on an absolute SALT 
Score ≤10 at Week 24 will be used to 
characterize the exposure response.
• Response based on an absolute SALT 
score ≤20 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 34, 
40, and 48.
NOTE: Response at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
and 18 will be analyzed controlling for 
Type I error.• Response based on an absolute SALT 
score ≤20 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 
34, 40, and 48.
NOTE: Response at Week 24 will be 
analyzed controlling for Type I error.
• Response based on an absolute SALT 
score of ≤10 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 
28, 34, 40, and 48.
NOTE: Response at Week 24 will be 
analyzed controlling for Type I error.• Response based on an absolute SALT 
score of ≤10 at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 28, 
34, 40, and 48.
NOTE: Response at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 
and 18 will be analyzed controlling for 
Type I error.
• Response based on a 75% improvement 
in SALT score from baseline (SALT75) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.• Response based on a 75% improvement 
in SALT score from baseline (SALT75) at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
• Change from baseline in SALT scores 
at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.• Change from baseline in SALT scores 
at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
• Response based on at least a 2-grade 
improvement or a score of 3 in EBA score at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.• Response based on at least a 2-grade 
improvement or a score of 3 in EBA score at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 40, and 48.
• Response based on at least a 2-grade 
improvement or a score of 3 in ELA score at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 
40, and 48.• Response based on at least a 2-grade 
improvement or a score of 3 in ELA score at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 
40, and 48.
• PGI-C response defined as a PGI-C 
score of “moderately improved” or “greatly improved” at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.• PGI-C response defined as a PGI-C 
score of “moderately improved” or “greatly improved” at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 34, 40, and 48.
• Change from baseline in AAPPO scales 
at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.• Change from baseline in AAPPO scales 
at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 34, 40, and 48.
- • Change from baseline in the depression 
subscale score of the HADS at 
Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.CCI
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 127Table 5. Primary and Secondary Endpoints Organized by Known Regional 
Regulatory Requirements
For the FDA/PMDA For the EMA
and competent authorities in the VHP 
countries
- • Change from baseline in the anxiety 
subscale score of the HADS at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.
- • Improvement on HADS among 
subjects with a baseline subscale score 
indicative of depression who achieved a 
“normal’ subscale score indicative of an absence of depression at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.
- • Improvement on HADS among 
subjects with a baseline subscale score indicative of anxiety who achieved a “normal’ subscale score indicative of an absence of anxiety at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48.
9.1. Sample Size Determination
The sample size for the study was based on the consideration to have sufficient power to 
evaluate the primary endpoint.  A sample size of 120 subjects per group (for the 200 mg/50 mg once daily (QD), 200 mg/30 mg QD, 50 mg/50 mg QD, or 30 mg/30 mg QD groups) will provide more than 90% power to demonstrate that at least the 200 mg/50 mg group is superior to placebo by a difference of 24% in the proportion of subjects achieving the primary endpoint (SALT ≤20 at Week 24), assuming a placebo response rate of no more 
than 5%, at α= 0.05 (2-sided significance level).  This sample size accounts for multiplicity 
using a closed testing procedure to ensure strong control of Type I error for all comparisons between active treatment groups and placebo.  This sample size additionally provides >90% power for the SALT ≤10 at Week 24 endpoint assuming that the 200 mg/50 mg QD group is 
superior to placebo by a difference of 20% in the proportion of subjects achieving SALT 
≤10, assuming a placebo response rate of no more than 5%, at α= 0.05 (2-sided significance 
level).  The assumption of the placebo response rate for both SALT ≤20 and SALT ≤10, as 
well as the treatment difference, was informed by the Week 24 results from the Phase 2a Study B7931005.
92  
Regulatory requirements for a marketing authorization approval  
 will require significance at an αmore stringent than 0.05, although the exact level of 
stringency required may vary (ie, 0.00125 is required by the FDA/PMDA for their requested primary endpoint of SALT ≤20, while 0.01 is required by the EMA for their requested 
primary endpoint of SALT ≤10). The sample size of 120 subjects per group provides power 
>90% for SALT ≤20 (α= 0.00125) and SALT ≤10 (α= 0.01).CCI
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 128The 10 mg/10 mg QD group is included to address the secondary objective of characterizing 
the exposure response.  The sample size of 60 subjects for this group was chosen to allow for estimation of the exposure response parameters.  
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, that request that the PGI-C 
response at Week 24 be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint, a sample size of 120 subjects per group  also provides more than 90% power for PGI-C response assuming a difference of 
35% and a placebo response rate of 20%, at α= 0.05 (2-sided significance level).  The 
assumptions of the treatment difference and placebo response rate for PGI-C response were based on the Concert CTP-543 Phase 2b Study Week 24 data.
90  Under the above 
assumptions, the power of the study remains >90% at α = 0.01 (EMA required 2-sided 
significance level).
9.2. Efficacy Analysis
The primary analysis population for efficacy data will be the Full Analysis Set (FAS) defined 
as all randomized subjects, regardless of whether they received study medication.  In the 
comparison to placebo, the data from the 2 groups F and G up to Week 24 will be pooled to form the placebo group. 
9.2.1. Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons
This section describes the testing procedure for multiple comparisons.  This  
 will support submission in several regions with different requirements; therefore, this 
section is organized into 3 sections: Section 9.2.1.1 , Section 9.2.1.2 , and Section 9.2.1.3
describe the testing procedure for the overall study, for the FDA/PMDA, and for the EMAand competent authorities in the VHP countries, respectively.
9.2.1.1. Overall Study (Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons Incorporating the 
SALT ≤10 as a Key Secondary Endpoint)
For the overall study the SALT ≤20 response at Week 24 is the primary endpoint and the 
SALT ≤10 response at Week 24 will be analyzed as a key secondary endpoint.  The 
hypotheses to be tested are that each of the active treatment groups is superior to placebo as measured by the proportion of subjects achieving the primary endpoint and the key secondary endpoint.  There are a total of 8 hypotheses to be tested:
•Hypothesis 1 (H1) is to test whether the 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary endpoint; 
•Hypothesis 2 (H2) is to test whether the 50 mg QD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the primary endpoint; 
•Hypothesis 3 (H3) is to test whether the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary endpoint; 
•Hypothesis 4 (H4) is to test whether the 30 mg QD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the primary endpoint;CCI
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 129Hypothesis 1p (H1p) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/50 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 2p (H2p) is to test whether the 50 mgQD dose regimen is superior to
placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 3p (H3p) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 4p (H4p) is to test whether the 30 mgQD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint.
The famil y-wise Ty peI error will be strongl y controlled using a gatekeeping approach as 
described in the following order and shown in Figure 2.  The 10 mg group comparison to 
placebo is not included in the Ty peI error controlled procedure, as this group is only  
included to support the estimation of the exposure response.
The primary  endpoint for 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dos e regimen (H1) will be tested at 
significance level first.  If significant, then the primary  endpoint for 50 mg QD dose 
regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen (H2 and H3) and the key 
secondary  endpoint for 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen (H1p) w ill be tested 
simultaneously . If both the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD 
dose regimen are significant, then the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested. 
For the primary  endpoint, if both the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 
mg QD dose regimen are significant at /4 level, or if one of the dose regimens (50 
mg QD dose regimen or 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen) is significant at /4 
level and the other is significant at /2 level, both dose regimens will be declared as 
significant.  In this case, the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested at /2 level.  If 
only one of the regimens (50 mg QD dose regimen or 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose 
regimen) is signific ant at /4 level and the other is not significant at /2 level, only  
the one significant at /4 level will be declared as statistically  significant.  In this 
case, the testing for the 30 mg QD dose regimen will not proceed.
For the key  secondary  endpoint, the 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen will be 
tested at /2level first.  If significant, then the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 
200mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested simultaneously .  If both the 50 mg 
QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen are significant at 
/4level, or if one of the dose regimens (50 mgQD dose regimen or 
200mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen) is significant at /4level and the other is 
significant at /2level, both dose regimens will be declared as significant.  I n this 
case, the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested at /2level.  If onl y one of the 
regimens (50 mgQD dose regimen or 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen) is 
significant at /4level and the other is not significant at /2level, onl y the one 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 130significant at /4level will be declared as statistically  significant.  In this case, the 
testing for the 30 mg QD dose regimen will not proceed.
If the primary  endpoint for the 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen is significant at α 
level, and all the remaining h ypotheses for the primary  endpoint and key  secondary  
endpoint are significant at the overall /2level, then all 8 hy potheses will be declared 
as statistically  significant. 
If the primary  endpoint for all 4 hy potheses or the primary  endpoint for H1 is 
significant and the key  secondary  endpoint is significant in all 4 hypotheses, then the 
/2 level will be passed to the hy pothesis testing for the other h ypotheses.  In this 
case, the other h ypotheses can be tested at the level instead of the /2level 
following the same procedures for claiming statistical significance outlined in the 
bullets above with the exception of the increased .
Figure 2.Schematic and Graphical Presentation for Multiple Testing Procedure 
Incorporating a Key Secondary E ndpoint
The numbers on each edge indicate the transition rule for the w eights on allocation once a hypothesis is 
rejected. 
Thefollowing approach will be used to control the Ty pe Ierror for SALT ≤20at earlier time 
points.  For a given dose, if the p rimary  endpoint of SAL T ≤20 is declared to be statistically  
significant based on the testing procedure for the primary endpoint, in order to establish the 
onset of efficacy  as measured by  SALT ≤20 at the earliest time point, a step -down approach 
with SAL T ≤20 from Week 24 to earlier time points (order of testing: Weeks 24, 18, 12, 8, 
and 4) will be used for each time point.  Although this testing scheme does not protect the 
Type I error for the family of all possible comparisons, it will provide Type I erro r protection 
for testing the famil y of SAL T ≤20 time points within the same dose group.

PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1319.2.1.2. For the FDA/PMDA (Testing Procedure for Multiple Comparisons With no Key 
Secondary Endpoints)
For the FDA/PMDA, the SAL T ≤20 response at Week 24 is the primary  endpoint and no 
secondary  endpoints will be anal yzed as key  secondary . The h ypotheses to be tested are that 
each of the active treatment groups is superior to placebo as measured b y the proportion of 
subjects achieving the primary  endpoint.  If the hypothesis test is significant at the 
=0.00125 level, the active treatment group will be declared to be superior to placebo group 
in treating patients with moderate to severe AA and the study  will meet its primary  endpoint. 
There are a total of 4 hypotheses to be test ed. 
Hypothesis 1 (H1) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/50 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 2 (H2) is to test whether the 50 mgQD/50 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 3 (H3) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 4 (H4) is to test whether the 30 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint. 
The famil y-wise Ty peI error will be strongly controlled using a gate -keeping approach to 
test these hy potheses in 3 groups.  The first group includes H1; the second group includes H2 
and H3; and the third group includes H4.  The statistical significance of the first hypothesis 
(H1) will allow simultaneous testing of H2 and H3 using Holm’s method.83  Statistical 
significance for both H2 and H3 will enable testin g the statistical significance for the fourth 
hypothesis (H4).  The 10 mg group comparison to placebo is not included in the Ty peI 
error -controlled procedure, as this group is only  included to support the estimation of the 
exposure response.
The grouping of the dose regimens in the test hierarch y was based on the hierarch y of 
2different dose regimens: in the dosing regimens that have a loading dose, the order is 
200mgQD/50 mgQD 200mgQD/30 mgQD; in the regimens without a loading dose, 
the order is 50 mgQD/50 mgQD 30mgQD/30 mg QD.  The testing strategy  proposed 
will allow simultaneous testing of the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD and the 50 mg QD/50 mgQD 
dose regimens against placebo given that it is not known which dose regimen will have a 
better response.  Figure 3 shows a schematic of the procedure for testing each of the active 
treatment groups versus the placebo group for the primary  endpoint. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 132Figure 3.Schematic and Graphical Presentation for Multiple Testing Procedure
The numbers on each edge indicate the transition rule for the w eights on allocation once a hypothesis is 
rejected.  
In the simultaneous test ing of H2 and H3, if both the 50 mgQD/50 mg QD and 
200mgQD/30 mgQD regimens are not significant at /2level, the test for statistical 
significance is stopped.  If one of the h ypotheses for 50 mgQD/50 mgQD and 
200mgQD/30 mgQD regimens is significa nt at /2level and the other hy pothesis is 
significant at level, this family  hypothesis is significant.  If one of the h ypotheses for 
50mgQD/50 mgQD and 200 mgQD/30 mgQD is significant at /2level and the other 
hypothesis is not significant at level, only the hypothesis significant at /2level will be 
declared as statistically significant.  In this case, the testing for statistical significance for 
H4will not proceed.
The following approach will be used to control the Type I error for SALT ≤10 at Week 24 
and SAL T ≤20 at earlier time points.  For a given dose, if SAL T ≤20 at Week 24 is declared 
to be statistically  significant based on the testing procedure for the primary  endpoint, then 
SAL T ≤10 at Week 24 will be tested at the same significance level as the SAL T ≤20 at Week 
24 was tested.  Though this testing scheme does not protect the Ty pe I error for the family  of 
all possible comparisons, it will provide Ty pe I error protection for testing the endpoints 
within the same dose group.  For a give n dose, if the primary  endpoint of SAL T ≤20 is 
declared to be statistically significant based on the testing procedure for the primary 
endpoint, in order to establish the onset of efficacy as measured b y SALT ≤20 at the earliest 
time point, a step -down approach with SALT ≤20 from Week 24 to earlier time points (order 
of testing: Weeks 24, 18, 12, 8, and 4) will  be used for each time point.  Though this testing 
scheme does not protect the Type I error for the family  of all possible comparisons, it will 
provide T ype I error protection for testing the family of SALT ≤20 time points within the 
same dose group. 

PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1339.2.1.3. For the EMA and Competent Authorities in the VHP Countries (Testing 
Procedure for Multiple Comparisons Incorporating the PGI- C Response as a Key 
Secondary Endpoint)
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, the SAL T ≤10 response at 
Week 24 will be the primary  endpoint and the PGI -C response at Week 24 will be anal yzed 
as a key  secondary  endpoint.  The hy potheses to be tested at =0.01 ar e that each of the 
active treatment groups is superior to placebo as measured b y the proportion of subjects 
achieving the primary  endpoint and the key  secondary  endpoint.  There are a total of 
8hypotheses to be tested.
Hypothesis 1 (H1) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/50 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 2 (H2) is to test whether the 50 mgQD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 3 (H3) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the primary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 4 (H4) is to test whether the 30 mgQD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the primary  endpoint;
Hypothesis 1p (H1p) i s to test whether the 200 mgQD/50 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 2p (H2p) is to test whether the 50 mgQD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 3p (H3p) is to test whether the 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen is 
superior to placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint; 
Hypothesis 4p (H4p) is to test whether the 30 mgQD dose regimen is superior to 
placebo for the key  secondary  endpoint.
The famil y-wise Ty peI error w ill be strongl y controlled using a gate -keeping approach as 
described in the following order and shown in Figure 2 in Section 9.2.1.1 . The 10 mg group 
comparison to placebo is not included in the Ty peI error-controlled procedure, as this group 
is only  included to support the estimation of the exposur e response.
The primary  endpoint for 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen (H1) will be tested at 
significance level first.  If significant, then the primary  endpoint for 50 mg QD dose 
regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen (H2 and H3) and the key 
secondary  endpoint for 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen (H1p) will be tested 
simultaneously . If both the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD 
dose regimen are significant, then the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 134For the primary  endpoint, if both the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 
mg QD dose regimen are significant at /4 level, or if one of the dose regimens (50 
mg QD dose regimen or 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen) is significant at /4 
level and the other is significant at /2 level, both dose regimens will be declared as 
significant.  In this case, the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested at /2 level.  If 
only one of the regimens (50 mg QD dose regimen or 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose 
regimen) is significant at /4 level and the oth er is not significant at /2 level, only  
the one significant at /4 level will be declared as statistically  significant.  In this 
case, the testing for the 30 mg QD dose regimen will not proceed.
For the key  secondary  endpoint, the 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen will be 
tested at /2level first.  If significant, then the 50 mg QD dose regimen and the 
200mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested simultaneously .  If both the 50 mg 
QD dose regimen and the 200 mg QD/30 mg QD dose regimen are significant at
/4level, or if one of the dose regimens (50 mgQD dose regimen or 
200mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen) is significant at /4level and the other is 
significant at /2level, both dose regimens will be declared as significant.  I n this 
case, the 30 mg QD dose regimen will be tested at /2level.  If onl y one of the 
regimens (50 mgQD dose regimen or 200 mgQD/30 mgQD dose regimen) is 
significant at /4level and the other is not significant at /2level, onl y the one 
significant at /4level will be declared as statistically  significant.  In this case, the 
testing for the 30 mg QD dose regimen will not proceed.
If the primary  endpoint for the 200 mg QD/50 mg QD dose regimen is significant at 
level, and all the remaining hypotheses for the primary  endpoint and key secondary
endpoint are significant at the overall /2level, then all 8 hy potheses will be declared 
as statistically  significant. 
If the primary  endpoint for all 4 hypotheses or the primary  endpoint for H1 is 
significant and the key  secondary  endpoint is significant in all 4 hypotheses , then the 
/2level will be passed to the hy pothesis testing for the other hypotheses .  In this 
case, the other hypotheses can be tested at thelevel instead of the /2level 
following the same procedures for claiming statistical significance outlined in the 
bullets above with the exception of the increased .
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, for a given dose, if SAL T≤10 
at Week 24 is declared to be statistically  significant based on the testing procedure for the 
primary  endpoint incorporating  the key  secondary endpoint, then SAL T ≤20 at Week 24 will 
be tested at the same significance level as SALT ≤10 at Week 24 was tested. Although this 
testing scheme does not protect the Ty peI error for the famil y of all possible comparisons, it 
will provide Ty pe I error protection for testing the endpoints within the same dose group.  
For a given dose, if the primary  endpoint of SALT ≤10 is declared to be statistically  
significant based on the testing procedure for the primary  endpoint incorporating the key  
secondary  endpoint, in order to establish the onset of efficacy  as measured by  SALT ≤10 at 
the earliest time point, a step -down approach with SAL T ≤10 from Week 24 to earlier time 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 135points (order of testing: Weeks 24, 18, 12, 8, and 4) willbe used for each time point.  
Although this testing scheme does not protect the Ty pe I error for the family of all possible 
comparisons, it w ill provide Ty pe I error protection for testing the famil y of SAL T ≤10 time 
points within the same dose group.
9.2.2. Analysis of the Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints
The anal yses of primary  and key  secondary  endpoints are described separately  for the overall 
study  and for specific regulatory  regions in order to address differences in advice received 
from some regulatory  agencies.
9.2.2.1. For the Overall Study and the FDA/PMDA (Analysis of the Primary and Key 
Secondary Endpoints)
For the overall study  and for the FDA/P MDA, the SAL T ≤20 response at Week 24 is the 
primary  endpoint. The SAL T ≤10 response at Week 24 will be anal yzed as a key  secondary  
endpoint for the overall study  but not for the FDA/PMDA. The testing procedures are 
describ ed in Section 9.2.1.1 andSection 9.2.1.2 , and the planned analy sis of the primary  
endpoint are described in Table 6.
Table 6. Statistical Methods for the Analysis of the Primary Endpoint for the 
Overall Study, and for the FDA/PMDA
Analysis 
#Analysis 
DesignationStatistical 
MethodApproach for 
missing data due 
to COVID -19Approach for 
missing data due to 
other reasons
1 Primary MN Exclude missing Consider missing as 
non-responders
2 Supplementary GLMM MAR MAR
2a Supplementary GLMM/ 
Tipping pointMNAR MNAR
3 Supplementary MN Consider missing 
as non -respondersConsider missing as 
non-responders
Abbreviations: GLMM = generalized linear mixed model; MN = Miettinen and Nurminen; MAR = Missing at random; 
MNAR = Missing not at random
In the primary  anal ysis for the overall study , and for the FDA/PMDA, the primary  endpoint 
will be anal yzed by the MN method84for the difference in the proportion of responders 
between each active treatment group and placebo.  Subjects with missing SAL T score at 
Week 24 due to COVID -19 related reasons will be exclud ed from the anal ysis at that time 
point, whereas missing data due to other reasons will be counted as non -responders at that 
time point (Analy sis 1). As a supplementary  analy sis to assess the impact of COVID -19-
related missing data on the results of the pr imary  anal ysis, the anal ysis of the primary  
endpoint will be repeated with all missing data considered as non -responders regardless of 
the reason for missingness (Anal ysis 3). 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 136As a supplementary  analy sis a GLMM for the longitudinal binary  data of SAL T ≤20
response over time up to Week 24 will be conducted (Anal ysis 2) to evaluate the impact of 
the missing data approach to the primary  conclusion.  I n this analy sis, two different missing 
mechanisms will be assumed: MAR and MNAR.  A tipping point anal ysis wil l be conducted 
under MNAR (Analy sis 2a) .
The key  secondary  endpoint for the overall study  (SAL T ≤10 response at Week 24) will be 
analyzed using the same approach as Anal ysis 1. Analy sis 4 described in Table 7 will also be 
conducted for this endpoint as supplementary .
9.2.2.2. For the EMA and Competent Authorities in the VHP Countries (Analysis of the 
Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints)
For the EMA and competent authorities in the VHP countries, the SAL T ≤10 response at 
Week 24 will be the primary  endpoint and the PGI -C response at Week 24 will be anal yzed 
as a key  secondary  endpoint.  The testing procedures are described in Section 9.2.1.3 , and the 
planned anal ysis of the primary  endpoint are described in Table 7.
Table 7.Statistical Methods for the Analysis of the Primary Endpoint for the EMA 
and Competent Authorities in the VHP Countries
Analysis 
#Analysis 
DesignationStatistical 
MethodApproach for 
missing data due 
to COVID -19Approach for 
missing data due to 
other reasons
4 Primary GLMM MAR Consider missing as 
non-responders
4a Supplementary GLMM/ 
Tipping pointMNAR Consider missing as 
non-responders
1 Supplementary MN Exclude missing Consider missing as 
non-responders
3 Supplementary MN Consider missing 
as non- respondersConsider missing as 
non-responders
Abbreviations: GLMM = generalized linear mixed model; MN = Miettinen and Nurminen; 
MAR = Missing at random; MNAR = Missing not at random
The primary  anal ysis of the primary  endpoint for the EMA and competent authorities in the 
VHP countries (Analy sis 4) will be conducted using a GLMM model for the longitudinal 
binary  data of SALT ≤10 response over time up to Week 24, assuming a missing mechanism 
of MAR for missing data due to COVID- 19. Missing data due to reasons not related to 
COVID -19 will be assumed as non -responders. The key  secondary  endpoint will also be 
analyzed using this approach.
As a supplementary  analy sis, imputations will be implemented under the framework of the 
same GLMM model as above, using a tipping point analy sis (Anal ysis 4a). For this anal ysis, 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 137the assumption of the missing mechanism for this anal ysis will be MNAR for cases of 
missing data due to COVID -19, and missing data due to other reasons will be considered as 
non-responders. 
Additional supplementary  analy ses will use the MN method to estimate 95% CI s and p -
values for the differences in the proportions of response between each active treatment group 
and placebo. In Anal ysis 1 missing data due to COVID -19 will be excluded from the 
analysis, whereas missing data due to other reasons will be considered as non -responders. In 
Analy sis 3, all missing data will be considered as non -responders, regardless of the reason for 
missingness.
9.2.2.3. Per-Protocol Analysis (Analysis of the Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints)
In addition to the anal yses described in Section 9.2.2.1 and in Section 9.2.2.2 , the primary  
analyses of the primary  endpoints and key  secondary  endpoints will also be performed in the 
Per Protocol Anal ysis Set (PPAS), defined as all randomized subjects who do not have an y 
major protocol deviations related to inclusion/exclusion criteria, compliance with 
investigational product or an y other major protocol deviation that might affect the efficacy  
data at Week 24.  
The following protocol deviations will be evaluated for eac h subject prior to unblinding to 
determine if a subject should be excluded from the PPAS: 
1.Subject did not meet the following inclusion criteria for hair loss due to AA at 
Screening or Day  1:
a.Clinical diagnosis of AA with no other known etiology  of hair lo ss, including 
no known androgenetic alopecia
b. ≥ 50% scalp hair loss
c.Current episode of hair loss ≤10 years duration at time of Screening
d.No evidence of terminal scalp hair regrowth within 6 months at both the 
screening and baseline visits
2.Subject met one of the following exclusion criteria regarding medical history  
diagnoses:
a.Another scalp disease which could impact hair loss assessments
b.Active sy stemic disease which can cause hair loss
3.Subjects who were randomized but never received study  drug
4. Prior to the d ate of the Week 24 visit, subject had a dosing interruption of ≥6 weeks 
for an y reason
5. Prior to the date of the Week 24 visit, subject used a prior or concomitant prohibited 
medication that could potentially  impact efficacy  data at Week 24
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 1386.Week 24 SAL T ass essment was impacted in one of the following way s:
a.Visit/assessment was not performed
b.Assessment was not performed properl y (including subject had a shaved head)
7.Subjects with other major prot ocol deviations not listed above that, in the opinion of 
the sponsor study team, could potentially  impact efficacy  data at Week 24
The subjects excluded from this analy sis set will be determined and documented before the 
study  is unblinded.
9.2.3. Analysis of Secondary Endpoints
For all regions, anal yses of secondary  endpoints that are not controlled will use the 
approach outlined below. 
Secondary  endpoints that are binary  variables will be anal yzed using the same approach as 
Analy sis 1 in Table 6.  
For continuous endpoints, a mixed -effects model with repeated measures (MMRM) will be 
used.  This model will include the factors (fixed effects) for treatment group, visit, 
treatment -by-visit interaction, and relevant baseline value when modeling change from 
baseline.  Within the framework of MMRM, the treatment difference will be tested at each 
time point.
All secondary  endpoints will be evaluated at the 5% level of significance, without adjustment 
for multiple comparisons.
Details on the anal ysis of individual secondary  endpoints will be provided in the SAP.
9.2.3.1. Analysis of Exposure -Response
To characterize the exposure response (dose or average stead y state drug concentration 
[Cavg]) in achi eving the primary  endpoint, a Bay esian three- parameter maximum effect 
attributable to the drug (E max) exposure -response model will be used as the primary  anal ysis 
approach to characterize the exposure response relationship.  The response function will be 
the log odds (logit) of the proportion of subjects achieving the primary  endpoint.  I n 
modeling the exposure response, the effect of loading dose will be included as fixed factor in 
the model.  Model -based estimation of treatment effect for each dose or ass ociated C avg
compared to placebo will be presented with 95% CI s.  The model will be described in detail 
in the SAP.
9.2.4. Analysis of Other Endpoints
Analy sis of other endpoints will be conducted using descriptive statistics.  
9.2.5. Subgroup Analyses
Summary  statisti cs for SAL T ≤20response at W eek 24, SAL T ≤10response at W eek 24 ,and 
PGI-C response at Week 24 will be presented by  subgroups, including but not limited to:
Age (y ears) at baseline (12-17, ≥18);
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 139Age (y ears) at baseline (12-17, 18-44, 45-64, ≥ 65);
Body Ma ss Index (BMI) at baseline (<median, ≥median);
Weight at baseline (<median, ≥median);
Gender (male, female);
Race (White, Black, Asian, other);
Region of enrollment (North America, Europe, Asia, Rest of World) 
Region Countries
North America Canada, United States
Europe Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia, Spain, United 
Kingdom
Asia China, Japan, South Korea, Taiw an
Rest of World Australia, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Mexico
Baseline disease severit y (AT/AU, non AT/AU);
AA duration since onset of disease (years) (<median, ≥median);
AA duration since onset of current episode (y ears) (<median, ≥median); 
Prior pharmacological treatment for AA.
Estimates of the response rates for each dose compared to the placebo group and their 95% 
confidence interval (CI) based on MN method will be presented for each defined category  of 
each subgroup.  No p -values will be presented.
The primary  purpose of the subgroup anal yses is to check for consistency  of key  efficacy  
results across subgroups.  No in ferences will be made within subgroups.  These anal yses may  
also be performed on selected country and/or region subpopulation sets in order to meet 
country /region specific regulatory  requirements.
9.3.Pharmacokinetic Analysis during the Treatment Period
The PK concentration population is defined as all enrolled subjects who received at least 
1dose of PF -06651600 and in whom at least 1 concentration value is reported.
PK concentrations listings and summary  by visit and nominal collection time will be 
provided. A population PK model will be developed to characterize the PK and estimate 
PKparameters.  The detailed anal ysis plans will be described in a separate pharmacometric 
analysis plan.
9.4.Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Early Unblinding
Early unblinding for PK/ PD modeling purposes is planned when ≥90% of subjects have 
reached 24 weeks post -randomization (or discontinued prior to the Week 24 visit). 
Unblinding will be limited to the PK/PD analy sts and programmers listed on the earl y 
unblinding for PK/PD form in a ccordance with applicable Pfizer standard operating 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 140procedures for releasing randomization codes, early  unblinding and breaking the stud y blind. 
These data programmers and anal ysts will not serve on the B7981015 study team after the 
PK/PD early  unblinding.
These PK/PD data analy sts and programmers will be unblinded earl y to build the PK and 
concentration /response models for study  readout. Information, such as drug concentration, 
that may  unblind the study  will not be reported to investigator sites or other Pfizer personnel, 
who will all remain blinded. There will be no impact on B7981015 stud y conduct, anal ysis, 
or reporting based on the e arly unblinding of the PK/PD data. The results of these anal yses 
will be reported in a separate pharmacometrics analy sis report.
9.5.Safety Analysis
The safet y data will be summarized in accordance with Pfizer Data Standards.  All subjects 
who receive investigational product (safet y population) will be included in the safet y 
analyses.  All safety  data will be summarized descriptively  through appropriate data 
tabulations, descriptive statistics, categorical summaries, and graphical presentations.  Safety  
data a nalysis for the study  includes:
Incidence and severit y of AEs;
Safety  events that trigger withdrawal of subject from study ;
Incidence of serious infections, defined as an y infection (viral, bacterial, and fungal) 
requiring hospitalization or parenteral antimicrobials;
Change from baseline in vital signs;
Incidence of adjudicated safet y events (eg, opportunistic infections, cardiovascular 
events, and malignancy );
Safety  laboratory  tests will be summarized according to Pfizer Standards.
9.6.Exploratory Pharmacodynamic Analysis
Exploratory  biomarkers will be listed and summarized by  visit and change from baseline for 
these endpoints will also be summarized at specific time points as reported in the Schedule of 
Activities.
Appropriate regressi on models may  be used to look at association between these endpoints 
and an y covariates of clinical interest.
9.7. Interim Analysis
The study  may  be unblinded for Sponsor internal decision-making purposes when ≥ 90% of 
subjects have reached 24 weeks post-randomization (or discontinued prior to the Week 24 
visit), and dissemination of these results will be limited to the unblinded reporting team and 
Sponsor management.  The sponsor personnel who are unblinded will be separate from the 
study  team.  The sponsor will  still maintain the blind for study team members who will be 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 141involved in daily  study  conduct, study  management, safet y and data monitoring through the 
completion of the study .  Investigators and subjects will remain  blinded.  There will be no 
impact on B7981015 study  conduct, anal ysis, or reporting.
9.8.Data Monitoring Committee 
This study  will use an external data monitoring committee (E -DMC ). 
The E-DMC will be responsible for ongoing monitoring of the safet y of subjects in the study 
according to the charter.  The recommendations made by  the E -DMC to alter the conduct of 
the study  will be forwarded to Pfizer for final decision.  Pfizer will forward such decisions, 
which may  include summaries of aggregate analy ses of endpoint events and of safet y data 
that are not endpoints, to regulatory  authorities, as appropriate.
10.QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
Pfizer or its agent will conduct periodic monitoring visits during stud y conduct to ensure that 
the protocol and Good Clinical Practices (GCPs) are being followed.  The monitors may  
review source documents to confirm that the data recorded on CRFs are accurate.  The 
investigator and institution will allow Pfizer monitors/auditors or its agents and appropriate 
regulatory  authorities direct access to s ource documents to perform this verification.  This 
verification may  also occur after study  completion.
During stud y conduct and/or after stud y completion, the investigator site may be subject to 
review b y the IRB/EC, and/or to quality  assurance audits per formed by  Pfizer, or companies 
working with or on behalf of Pfizer, and/or to inspection by  appropriate regulatory  
authorities.
The investigator(s) will notify  Pfizer or its agents immediately  of any  regulatory  inspection 
notification in relation to the st udy.  Furthermore, the investigator will cooperate with Pfizer 
or its agents to prepare the investigator site for the inspection and will allow Pfizer or its 
agent, whenever feasible, to be present during the inspection.  The investigator site and 
investig ator will promptly  resolve any  discrepancies that are identified between the study  
data and the subject's medical records.  The investigator will promptl y provide copies of the 
inspection findings to Pfizer or its agent.  Before response submission to the regulatory  
authorities, the investigator will provide Pfizer or its agents with an opportunity  to review 
and comment on responses to any  such findings.
It is important that the investigator(s) and their relevant personnel are available during the 
monitorin g visits and possible audits or inspections and that sufficient time is devoted to the 
process.
11.DATA HANDLING AND RE CORD KEEPING
11.1. Case Report Forms/Electronic Data Record
As used in this protocol, the term CRF should be understood to refer to either a paper form or 
an electronic data record or both, depending on the data collection method used in this study .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 142A CRF is required and should be completed for each included subject.  The completed 
original CRFs are the sole propert y of Pfizer and should not be made available in any  form to 
third parties, except for authorized representatives of Pfizer or appropriate regulatory  
authorities, without written permission from Pfizer.  The investigator shall ensure that the 
CRFs are securel y stored at the study  site in en crypted electronic and/or paper form and will 
be password protected or secured in a locked room to prevent access b y unauthorized third 
parties.
The investigator has ultimate responsibility  for the collection and reporting of all clinical, 
safet y, and labo ratory  data entered on the CRFs and any  other data collection forms (source 
documents) and ensuring that they are accurate, authentic/original, attributable, complete, 
consistent, legible, timely  (contemporaneous), enduring, and available when required.  T he 
CRFs must be signed b y the investigator or b y an authorized staff member to attest that the 
data contained on the CRFs are true.  An y corrections to entries made on the CRFs or source 
documents must be dated, initialed, and explained (if necessary ) and should not obscure the 
original entry .
In most cases, the source documents are the hospital or the ph ysician subject chart.  In these 
cases, data collected on the CRFs must match the data in those charts.
In some cases, the CRF may  also serve as the source document.  In these cases, a document 
should be available at the investigator site and at Pfizer that clearl y identifies those data that 
will be recorded on the CRF, and for which the CRF will stand as the source document.
11.2. Record Retention
To enable evalu ations and/or inspections/audits from regulatory  authorities or Pfizer, the 
investigator agrees to keep records, including the identity  of all participating subjects 
(sufficient information to link records, eg, CRFs and hospital records), all original sign ed 
informed consent/assent documents, copies of all CRFs, safet y reporting forms, source 
documents, detailed records of treatment disposition, and adequate documentation of relevant 
correspondence (eg, letters, meeting minutes, and telephone call reports).   The records should 
be retained b y the investigator according to the ICH guidelines, according to local 
regulations, or as specified in the clinical study  agreement (CSA), whichever is longer.  The 
investigator must ensure that the records continue to be stored securel y for so long as they are 
retained.
If the investigator becomes unable for an y reason to continue to retain study records for the 
required period (eg, retirement, relocation), Pfizer should be prospectivel y notified.  The 
study  records must b e transferred to a designee acceptable to Pfizer, such as another 
investigator, another institution, or an independent third party  arranged by  Pfizer.
Investigator records must be kept for a minimum of 15 years after completion or 
discontinuation of the st udy or for longer if required by  applicable local regulations.
The investigator must obtain Pfizer's written permission before disposing of an y records, 
even if retention requirements have been met.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 14312.ETHICS
12.1. Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee
It is the responsibility  of the investigator to have prospective approval of the study  protocol, 
protocol amendments, informed consent/assent documents, and other relevant documents, eg, 
recruitment advertisements, if applicable, from the I RB/EC.  All correspond ence with the 
IRB/EC should be retained in the investigator file.  Copies of I RB/EC approvals should be 
forwarded to Pfizer.
The only  circumstance in which an amendment may  be initiated prior to IRB/EC approval is 
where the change is necessary  to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the subjects.  In 
that event, the investigator must notify  the IRB/EC and Pfizer in writing immediately  after 
the implementation.
12.2. Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study  will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, legal and regulatory  
requirements, and the general principles set forth in the I nternational Ethical Guidelines for 
Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (Council for International Organizations of 
Medical Sciences 2002), ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, and the Declaration of 
Helsinki.
12.3. Subject Information and Consent
All parties will comply  with all applicable laws, including laws regarding the implementation 
of organizational and technical measures to ensure protection of subject personal data.  Such 
measures will include omitting subject names or other directl y ident ifiable data in an y 
reports, publications, or other disclosures, except where required b y applicable laws. 
The personal data will be stored at the study  site in encry pted electronic and/or paper form 
and will be password protected or secured in a locked r oom to ensure that only  authorized 
study  staff have access.  The study  site will implement appropriate technical and 
organizational measures to ensure that the personal data can be recovered in the event of 
disaster.  In the event of a potential personal d ata breach, the study site shall be responsible 
for determining whether a personal data breach has in fact occurred and, if so, providing 
breach notifications as required by  law.
To protect the rights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to the proc essing of 
personal data, when study  data are compiled for transfer to Pfizer and other authorized 
parties, subject names will be removed and will be replaced b y a single, specific, numerical 
code, based on a numbering s ystem defined by  Pfizer.  All other i dentifiable data transferred 
to Pfizer or other authorized parties will be identified by  this single, subject- specific code.  
The investigator site will maintain a confidential list of subjects who participated in the 
study , linking each subject’s numerica l code to his or her actual identity .  In case of data 
transfer, Pfizer will maintain high standards of confidentiality  and protection of subjects’ 
personal data consistent with the Clinical Study  Agreement and applicable privacy  laws.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 144The informed consent /assent documents and an y subject recruitment materials must be in 
compliance with ICH GCP, local regulatory  requirements, and legal requirements, including 
applicable privacy  laws.
The informed consent/assent documents used during the informed consent pro cess and an y 
subject recruitment materials must be reviewed and approved b y Pfizer, approved b y the 
IRB/EC before use, and available for inspection.
The investigator must ensure that each study  subject, or his or her legall y acceptable 
representative, or p arent(s) or legal guardian if a minor, is fully  informed about the nature 
and objectives of the study, the sharing of data relating to the study  and possible risks 
associated with participation, including the risks associated with the processing of the 
subject’s personal data.  The investigator further must ensure that each study  subject, or his 
or her legally  acceptable representative, or parent(s) or legal guardian if a minor, is fully  
informed about his or her right to access and correct his or her perso nal data and to withdraw 
consent for the processing of his or her personal data.
Whenever consent is obtained from a subject’s legall y acceptable representative/parent(s) or 
legal guardian, the subject’s assent (affirmative agreement) must subsequently  be obtained 
when the subject has the capacity  to provide assent, as determined by  the IRB/EC.  If the 
investigator determines that a subject’s decisional capacity  is so limited that he or she cannot 
reasonabl y be consulted, then, as permitted b y the IRB/EC and consistent with local 
regulatory  and legal requirements, the subject’s assent may  be waived with source 
documentation of the reason assent was not obtained.  If the stud y subject does not provide 
his or her own consent, the source documents must record w hy the subject did not provide 
consent (eg, minor, decisionally  impaired adult), how the investigator determined that the 
person signing the consent was the subject’s legally  acceptable representative, the consent 
signer’s relationship to the study  subject (eg, parent, spouse), and that the subject’s assent 
was obtained or waived.  If assent is obtained verbally , it must be documented in the source 
documents.
If the stud y includes minor subjects who reach the age of majorit y during the study, as 
recognized under local law, they  must reconsent as adults to remain in the study .  If the 
enrollment of emancipated minors is permitted by  the study  age criteria, the I RB/EC, and 
local law, they  must provide documentation of legal status to give consent without the 
permission of a parent or legal guardian.
The investigator, or a person designated b y the investigator, will obtain written informed 
consent from each subject or the subject's legall y acceptable representative, parent(s), or legal 
guardian and the subject’s assent, when applicable, before an y stud y-specific activity  is 
performed, unless a waiver of informed consent has been granted b y an IRB/EC.  The 
investigator will retain the original of each subject's signed consent/assent document.
12.4. Reporting of Safety I ssues and Serious Breaches of the Protocol or ICH GCP
In the event of an y prohibition or restriction imposed (ie, clinical hold) b y an applicable 
regulatory  authorit y in any area of the world, or if the investigator is aware of an y new 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 145information that mig ht influence the evaluation of the benefits and risks of the investigational 
product, Pfizer should be informed immediately. 
In addition, the investigator will inform Pfizer immediately  of any  urgent safet y measures 
taken b y the investigator to protect th e study  subjects against any  immediate hazard, and of 
any serious breaches of this protocol or of ICH GCP that the investigator becomes aware of.
13.DEFINITION OF END OF TRIAL
A participant is considered to have completed the study  if he/she has completed all phases of 
the study  including the last visit in the Schedule of Activitie s.  The end of the study  is 
defined as the date of the last visit of the last participant in the study .
14.SPONSOR DISCONTINUAT ION CRITERIA
Premature termination of this study  may  occur because of a regulatory  authority  decision, 
change in opinion of the IRB/EC, or investigational product safety  problems, or at the 
discretion of Pfizer.  In addition, Pfizer retains the right to discontinue development of 
investigat ional product at any time.
If a stud y is prematurel y terminated, Pfizer will promptly  notify  the investigator.  After 
notification, the investigator must contact all participating subjects and the hospital pharmacy  
(if applicable) within a time period set by Pfizer.  As directed by  Pfizer, all study  materials 
must be collected and all CRFs completed to the greatest extent possible.
15.PUBLICATION OF STUDY RESULTS
15.1. Communication of Results by Pfizer
Pfizer fulfills its commitment to publicly  disclose clinical tr ial results through posting the 
results of studies on www.clinicaltrials.gov (ClinicalTrials.gov), the EudraCT, and/or
www.pfizer.com , and other public registries in accordance with applicable local 
laws/regulations.  In addition, Pfizer reports study  results outside of the requirements of local 
laws/regulations pursuant to its SOPs.
In all cases, stud y results are reported b y Pfizer in an objective, accurate, balanced, and 
complete manner and are reported regardless of the outcome of the stud y or the c ountry  in 
which the study  was conducted.
www.clinicaltrials.gov
Pfizer posts clinical trial results on www.clinicaltrials.gov for Pfizer -sponsored interventional 
studies (conducted in patients) that evaluate the safety  and/or efficacy  of a product, 
regardl ess of the geographical location in which the study is conducted.  These results are 
submitted for posting in accordance with the format and timelines set forth by  US law.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 146EudraCT
Pfizer posts clinical trial results on EudraCT for Pfizer -sponsored interventional studies in 
accordance with the format and timelines set forth by  European Union (EU) requirements.  
www.pfizer.com
Pfizer posts Public Disclosure Sy nopses (clinical study  report sy nopses in which any  data 
that could be used to identify  individual patients has been removed) on www.pfizer.com for 
Pfizer -sponsored interventional studies at the same time the corresponding study  results are 
posted to www.clinicaltrials.gov.
Documents within marketing authorization packages/submissions.
Pfizer complies with the European Union Policy  0070, the proactive publication of clinical 
data to the European Medicines Agency  (EMA) website.  Clinical data, under Phase 1 of this 
policy , includes clinical overviews, clinical summaries, clinical study  reports (CSRs), an d 
appendices containing the protocol and protocol amendments, sample CRFs, and statistical 
methods.  Clinical data, under Phase 2 of this policy , includes the publishing of individual 
participant data.  Policy  0070 applies to new marketing authorization ap plications submitted 
via the centralized procedure since 01 January  2015 and applications for line extensions and 
for new indications submitted via the centralized procedure since 01 July  2015.
Data Sharing
Pfizer provides researchers secure access to pati ent-level data or full CSRs for the purposes 
of “bona -fide scientific research” that contributes to the scientific understanding of the 
disease, target, or compound class.  Pfizer will make available data from these trials 
24months after study  completion.   Patient- level data will be anon ymized in accordance with 
applicable privacy  laws and regulations.  CSRs will have personall y identifiable information 
redacted.
Data requests are considered from qualified researchers with the appropriate competencies to 
perform the proposed analyses.  Research teams must include a biostatistician.  Data will not 
be provided to applicants with significant conflicts of interest, including individuals 
requesting access for commercial/competitive or legal purposes.
15.2. Publication s by Investigators
Pfizer supports the exercise of academic freedom and has no objection to publication by  the 
principal investigator (PI) of the results of the study based on information collected or 
generated b y the PI, whether or not the results are fav orable to the Pfizer product.  However, 
to ensure against inadvertent disclosure of confidential information or unprotected 
inventions, the investigator will provide Pfizer an opportunity  to review any  proposed 
publication or other t ype of disclosure of the results of the study  (collectively , “publication”) 
before it is submitted or otherwise disclosed.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 147The investigator will provide any  publication to Pfizer at least 30 days before it is submitted 
for publication or otherwise disclosed.  If an y patent actio n is required to protect intellectual 
propert y rights, the investigator agrees to delay  the disclosure for a period not to exceed an 
additional 60 days.
The investigator will, on request, remove an y previously  undisclosed confidential 
information before disclosure, except for an y study -or Pfizer product -related information 
necessary  to the appropriate scientific presentation or understanding of the study  results.
If the stud y is part of a multicenter study, the investigator agrees that the first publicatio n is 
to be a joint publication covering all investigator sites, and that an y subsequent publications 
by the PI will reference that primary  publication.  However, if a joint manuscript has not 
been submitted for publication within 12 months of completion or termination of the study  at 
all participating sites, the investigator is free to publish separatel y, subject to the other 
requirements of this section.
For all publications relating to the stud y, the institution will comply  with recognized ethical 
standar ds concerning publications and authorship, including Section II -“Ethical 
Considerations in the Conduct and Reporting of Research” of the Uniform Requirements for 
Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals, http://www.icmje.org/index.html#authorship , 
established by  the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.
Publication of study  results is also provided for in the CSA between Pfizer and the 
institution.  I n this section entitled Publication s by Investigators, the defined terms shall have 
the meanings given to them in the CSA.
If there is an y conflict between the CSA and an y attachments to it, the terms of the CSA 
control.  If there is an y confl ict between this protocol and the CSA, this protocol will control 
as to any  issue regarding treatment of study  subjects, and the CSA will control as to all other 
issues.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 14816.REFERENCES
1. Suárez-Fariñas M, Ungar B, Noda S, et al. (2015). Alopecia areata profiling shows 
TH1, TH2, and IL -23 cy tokine activation without parallel TH17/TH22 skewing.  J 
Allergy  Clin Immunol. 2015;136(5):1277–87.
2. Xing L, Dai Z, Jabbari A, et al. Alopecia areata is driven by  cytotoxic T lymphocy tes 
and is r eversed b y JAK inhibition. Nat Med. 2014:20(9):1043– 9.
3. Ito T, Ito N, Saatoff M, et al. Maintenance of hair follicle immune privilege is linked to 
prevention of NK cell attack. J I nvest Dermatol. 2008;128(5):1196 –206.
4. Thomis DC, Berg L J. Peripheral expressi on of Jak3 is required to maintain 
Tlymphocy te function. J Exp Med. 1997;185(2):197–206.
5. Atherly  LO, Brehm MA, Welsh RM, et al. Kinases I tk and Rlk are required for CD8+ T 
cell responses to virus infection independent of their role in CD4+ T cell help. 
JImmunol. 2006;176(3):1571 –81.
6. Bao Y, Zheng J, Han C, et al. Tyrosine kinase Btk is required for NK cell activation. 
JBiol Chem. 2012;287(28):23769 –78.
7. Gilhar A, Etzioni A, Paus R. Alopecia areata. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(16):1515– 25.
8. Hordinsky  MK. Overview of alopecia areata. J Investig Dermatol Sy mp Proc. 2013; 
16(1):S13 –5.
9. Gilhar A. Collapse of immune privilege in alopecia areata: coincidental or substantial? J 
Invest Dermatol. 2010;130(11):2535–7.
10. Bertolini M, Zilio F, Rossi A, et al. Abnormal interactions between perifollicular mast 
cells and CD8+ T -cells may  contribute to the pathogenesis of alopecia areata. PL oS 
ONE 2014;9(5):e94260.
11. Guttman -Yassk y E, Ungar B, Noda S, et al. Extensive alopecia areata is reversed b y 
IL-12/IL -23p40 cy tokine antagonism. J Allergy Clin I mmunol 2016;137(1):301 –4.
12. Kassira S, Korta DZ, Chapman L W, et al. Review of treatment for alopecia totalis and 
alopecia universalis. Int J Dermatol. 2017;56(8):801– 10.
13. NAAF website at http:///www.naaf.org . Accessed 14 Mar 2018.
14. Trüeb RM, Dia s MFRG. Alopecia areata: a comprehensive review of pathogenesis and 
management. Clin Rev Allergy  Immunol. 2017;017:8620 –9.
15. Tosti A, Bellavista S, Iorizzo M. Alopecia areata: a long term follow- up study  of 191 
patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;55:438–41.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 14916. Alkhalifah A. Alopecia areata update. Dermatol Clin 2013;31:93– 108.
17. Liu LY, Craiglow BG, Dai F, et al. Tofacitinib for the treatment of severe alopecia 
areata and variants: A study  of 90 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;76(1):22– 8.
18. Kenned y Crispin M, Ko JM, Craiglow BG, et al.  Safety  and efficacy  of the JAK 
inhibitor tofacitinib citrate in patients with alopecia areata. JCI  Insight. 
2016;1( 15):e89776.
19. Hunt N, McHale S. The psy chological impact of alopecia. BMJ. 2005;331(7522):951 –3.
20. McGarvey  EL, Baum LD , Pinkerton RC, et al. Psy chological sequelae and alopecia 
among women with cancer. Cancer Pract 2001;9:283–9.
21. Colon EA, Popkin MK, Callies AL , et al. L ifetime prevalence of ps ychiatric disorders 
in patients with alopecia areata. Comp Psy chiatry  1991;32:24 5–51.
22. Ruiz -Doblado S, Carrizosa A, García -Hernández MJ. Alopecia areata: ps ychiatric 
comorbidity  and adjustment to illness. I nt J Dermatol. 2003;42:434 –7.
23. Chen W, Mempel M, Tradi -Hofmann C, et al. Gender aspects in skin diseases. J Eur 
Acad Dermatol Venere ol. 2010;24:1378 –1385. 
24. Sellami R, Masmoudi J, Ouali U, et al. The relationship between alopecia areata and 
alexithy mia, anxiety  and depression. Indian J Dermatol. 2014;59(4):421.
25. Fricke ACV, Miteva M. Epidemiology  and burden of alopecia areata: a s ystemat ic 
review. Clin Cosmet I nvestig Dermatol. 2015; 8:397 –403.
26. Liakopoulou M, Alifieraki T, Katideniou A, et al. Children with alopecia areata: 
psychiatric s ymptomatology  and life events. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Ps ychiatry . 
1997;36(5):678 –84.
27. Dubois M, Baumsta rck-Barrau K, Gaud y-Marqueste C, et al. Qualit y of life in alopecia 
areata: a stud y of 60 cases. J I nvest Dermatol 2010;130: 2830 –3.
28. Ghajarzadeh M, Ghiasi M, Kheirkhah S. Associations between skin diseases and quality 
of life: a comparison of psoriasis, vi tiligo, and alopecia areata. Acta Medica Iranica. 
2012;50(7):511 –5.
29. Masmoudi J, Sellami R, Ouali U, et al. Qualit y of Life in Alopecia Areata: A Sample of 
Tunisian Patients. Dermatol Res Pract. 2013; 2013:983804.
30. de Hollanda TR, Sodré CT , Brasil MA, et al. Quality  of life in alopecia areata: a case-
control study . Int J Trichology . 2014;6(1):8 –12.
31. Baghestani S, Zare S, Seddigh SH. Severit y of depression and anxiety  in patients with 
alopecia areata in Bandar Abbas, Iran. Dermatol Reports. 2015;7(3):6063.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15032. Jankovic S, Perić J, Maksimović N, et al. Quality  of life in patients with alopecia areata: 
a hospital -based cross -sectional study . J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2016;30(5):840 -6.
33. Rencz F, Gulácsi L, Péntek M, et al. Alopecia areata and heal th-related quality  of life: a 
systematic review and meta -analy sis. Br J Dermatol. 2016;175(3):561 –71.
34. Zhang M, Zhang N. Quality  of life assessment in patients with alopecia areata and 
androgenetic alopecia in the People's Republic of China. Patient Prefer Adherence. 
2017;11:151 –5.
35. NAAF website at https://www.naaf.org/alopecia -areata/alopecia -areata -and-emotional -
wellness -in-children. Accessed 14 Mar 2018.
36. Christensen T, Yang JS, Castelo -Soccio L. Bull ying and Quality  of Life in Pediatric 
Alopecia Areata. Sk in Appendage Disord 2017;3:115–8.
37. Craiglow BG, Liu LY, King BA. Tofacitinib for the treatment of alopecia areata and 
variants in adolescents. J Am Acad Dermatol 2017;76:29 –32.
38. Hordinsky  MK, Donati A. Alopecia areata: an evidence -based treatment update. Am J 
Clin Dermatol. 2014;15(3):231– 46.
39. Hordinsky  MK. Current Treatments for Alopecia Areata. J Investig Dermatol Sy mp 
Proc. 2015;17(2):44–6.
40. Messenger AG, McKillop J, Farrant P, et al. British Association of Dermatologists' 
guidelines for the management of al opecia areata 2012. Br J Dermatol. 
2012;166(5):916 –26.
41. Alkhalifah A, Alsantali A, Wang E, et al. Alopecia areat update: part II –treatment. 
JAm Acad Dermatol. 2010;62(2):191 –202.
42. Delamere FM, Sladden MJ, Dobbins HM, L eonardi- Bee J. I nterventions for alop ecia 
areata. Cochrane Database Sy st Rev. 2008;16;(2).
43. Murray  PJ. The JAK -STAT signaling pathway : input and output integration. 
JImmunol. 2007;178(5):2623 –9.
44. O'Sullivan LA, Liongue C, L ewis RS, et al. Cytokine receptor signaling through the 
Jak-Stat-Socs pathway  in disease. Mol Immunol. 2007;44(10):2497 –506.
45. Fuentes -Duculan J, Gulati N, Bonifacio KM, et al.  Biomarkers of alopecia areata 
disease activity  and response to corticosteroid treatment. Exp Dermatol. 
2016;25(4):282 –6.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15146. Craiglow BG, King BA. Killing two birds with one stone: oral tofacitinib reverses 
alopecia universalis in a patient with plaque psoriasis. J I nvest Dermatol. 
2014;134(12):2988 –90.
47. Jabbari A, Dai Z, Xing L, et al. (2015). Reversal of alopecia areata following treatment 
with the JAK1/2 inhibitor baricitinib. EBioMedicine 2015;2(4):351 –5.
48. Harris JE, Rashighi M, Ngu yen N, et al. Rapid skin repigmentation on oral ruxolitinib 
in a patient with coexistent vitiligo and alopecia areata (AA). J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2016;74(2):370 –1.
49. Mackay -Wiggan J , Jabbari A, Ngu yen N, et al. Oral ruxolitinib induces hair regrowth in 
patients with moderate -to-severe alopecia areata. JCI  Insight. 2016;1(15):e89790.
50. King BA. Treating alopecia areata, vitiligo, and atopic dermatitis: JAK inhibitors, 
something new for dermatology . Am Acad Dermatol. Scientific Meeting, 19 Feb 2018.
51. Shapiro J.  Hair Today , Gone Tomorrow! Maui Derm for Dermatologists meeting. 
31Jan 2018.
52. EMEA/CHMP/EWP/147013/2004: 
www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library /Scientific_guideline/2009/09/WC5
00003066.pdf . Accessed 14 Mar 2014.
53. Momper JD, Mulugeta Y, Green DJ, et al. Adolescent dosing and labeling since the 
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007. JAMA Pediatr. 
2013;167(10):926 –32.
54. Olsen E, Hordinsk y M, McDonald -Hill S et al. Alopecia areata investigational 
assessment guidelines. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:242-6.
55. Olsen EA, Hordinsk y MK, Price VH, et al. National Alopecia Areata Foundation. 
Alopecia areata investigational assessment guidelines --Part II. National Alopecia Areata 
Foundation. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51(3):440 -7.
56. Castela E, Le Duff F, Butori C, et al. Effects of low -dose recombinant interleukin 2 to 
promote T -regulatory  cells in alopecia areata. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150(7):748-51.
57. Woosley  RL, Heise CW, Gallo T, et al.  www.CredibleMeds.org , QTdrugs List. 
Accessed 26 April 2019.
58. Rich, P, Scher RK. Nail Psoriasis Severity  Index: a useful tool for evaluation of nail 
psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2003 Aug; 49(2):206 –12. 
59. The Polaris Observatory  Collaborators. Global prevale nce, treatment, and prevention of 
hepatitis B virus infection in 2016: a modelling study . Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2018;3(6): 383 -403.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15260. Baran R, Dawber RP, Haneke E. Hair and nail relationship. Skinmed. 2005;4(1):18–23.
61. Scheinfeld NS. Trach yonychia: a case report and review of manifestations, associations, 
and treatments. Cutis. 2003;71(4):299-302. 
62. Papadopoulos AJ, Schwartz RA, Janniger CK. Alopecia areata. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, 
and therap y. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2000;1(2):101 -5. 
63. Khoo BP, Giam YC. A pilot study  on the role of intralesional triamcinolone acetonide 
in the treatment of pitted nails in children. Singapore Med J. 2000;41(2):66 -8. 
64. Sharma VK, Dawn G, Muralidhar S, et al. Nail changes in 1000 Indian patients with 
alopecia areata. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 1998;10(2):189-91. 
65. Noronha PA, Zubkov B. Nails and nail disorders in children and adults. Am Fam 
Physician. 1997;55(6):2129 -40.
66. Tosti A, Bardazzi F, Piraccini BM, et al. Is trach yonychia, a variet y of alopecia areata, 
limited to the nai ls? J I nvest Dermatol. 1995;104(5 Suppl):27S -28S. 
67. Tosti A, Morelli R, Bardazzi F, et al. Prevalence of nail abnormalities in children with 
alopecia areata. Pediatr Dermatol. 1994;11(2):112-5. 
68. Bergner T, Donhauser G, Ruzicka T. Red lunulae in severe alope cia areata. Acta Derm 
Venereol. 1992;72(3):203 -5. 
69. Tosti A, Fanti PA, Morelli R, et al. Trach yonychia associated with alopecia areata: a 
clinical and pathologic study . J Am Acad Dermatol. 1991;25(2 Pt 1):266 -70.
70. van der Steen PH, van Baar HM, Happle R, et al. Prognostic factors in the treatment of 
alopecia areata with dipheny lcyclopropenone. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1991;24(2 Pt1):227 -30.
71. Wilkerson MG, Wilkin JK. Red lunulae revisited: a clinical and histopathologic 
examination. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989;20(3):4 53-7. Review. 
72. Laporte M, Andre J, Stouffs -Vanhoof F, et al. Nail changes in alopecia areata: light and 
electron microscop y. Arch Dermatol Res. 1988;280 Suppl:S85-9. 
73. Shelley  WB. The spotted lunula. A neglected nail sign associated with alopecia areata. 
JAm Acad Dermatol. 1980;2(5):385 -7. 
74. Horn RT Jr, Odom RB. Twenty -nail dy strophy  of alopecia areata. Arch Dermatol. 
1980;116(5):573 -4. 
75. Samman PD. Trach yonychia (rough n ails). Br J Dermatol. 1979;101(6):701 -5.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15376. Dotz WI , Lieber CD, Vogt PJ. Leukon ychia punctata and pitted nails in alopecia areata. 
Arch Dermatol. 1985 Nov;121(11):1452 -4. PMID: 4051533.
77. Olsen EA. Investigative guidelines for alopecia areata. Dermatol Ther. 
2011;24(3):311 -9.
78. Posner K, Oquendo MA, Gould M, et al. Columbia classification algorithm of suicide 
assessment (C -CASA): classification of suicidal events in the FDA’s pediatric suicidal 
risk anal ysis of antidepressants. Am J Psy chiatry . 2007;164(7):1035– 43.
79. White D, L each C, Sims R, et al. Validation of the Hospital Anxiety  and Depression 
Scale for use with adolescents. The British Journal of Psy chiatry . 1999 Nov 
1;175(5):452 –4.
80. The EuroQol Group. EuroQol- a new facilit y for the measurement of health -related
quality  of life. Health Policy . 1990;16(3):199–208.
81. Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloy d A, et al. Development and preliminary  testing of the new 
five-level version of EQ- 5D (EQ -5D- 5L). Qual L ife Res 2011; 20(10):1727–36. 
82. Janssen MF, Pickard AS, Golicki D, et al. M easurement properties of the EQ-5D- 5L 
compared to the EQ -5D- 3L across eight patient groups: a multi -country  study . Qual 
Life Res. 2013;22(7):1717–27.
83. Holm S. A simple sequentially  rejective multiple test procedure. Scand J Statistics. 
1979;6(2):65 –70.
84. Miet tinen O, Nurminem M. Comparative anal ysis of two rates. Stat Med. 
1985;4(2):213 –26.
85. Wille N, Badia X, Bonsel G, et al. Development of the EQ -5D- Y: a child -friendly  
version of the EQ -5D. Qual L ife Res. 2010;19(6):875–86. 
86. Kroenke K. The PHQ -9: A new depres sion diagnostic and severit y measure. Psy chiatric 
Annals. 2002;32:509–15.
87. Snaith RP, Zigmond AS. The Hospital Anxiety  and Depression Scale with the 
Irritability -Depression- Anxiety  Scale and the Leeds Situational Anxiety  Scale Manual. 
GL Assessment, 1994.
88. Z igmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety  and depression scale. Acta Psy chiatr 
Scand 1983;67:361 –70.
89. Wyrwich KW, Kitchen H, Knight S, et al. The Alopecia Areata Investigator’s Global 
Assessment (AA -IGA™) Scale: A Measure for Evaluating Clinicall y Meaningful 
Success in Clinical Trials. British Journal of Dermatology  2020. DOI 
10.1111/bjd.18883. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 15490. Cassella J, Hamilton C, von Hehn J, Braman V. CTP- 543, an Oral JAK Inhibitor, 
Achieves Primary  Endpoint in Phase 2 Randomized, Placebo- Controlled Dose -Ranging 
Trial in Patients with Moderate- to-Severe Alopecia Areata [Conference presentation]. 
In: 28th European Academy  of Dermatology  and Venereology  (EADV) Annual 
Congress; 2019 Oct 9 -13, Madrid, Spain. https://www.concertpharma.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/EADV- Late-Breaker -CTP543 -Presentation -FINAL -
12OCT2019.pdf 
91. B7981006. A Phase 2a, Randomized, Double -Blind, Parallel Group, Placebo-
Controlled, Multi -Center Study to Assess the Efficacy  and Safet y Profile of 
PF-06651600 in Subjects With Moderate to Severe Active R heumatoid Arthritis With 
an Inadequate Response to Methotrexate. 25 July  2018 CSR.
92. B7931005. A Phase 2a Randomized, Double- Blind, Placebo- Controlled, Multicenter 
Study  to Evaluate the Efficacy  and Safet y Profile of PF -06651600 and PF -06700841 in 
Subjects W ith Moderate to Severe Alopecia Areata With a Single -Blind Extension 
Period and a Cross -Over Open Label Extension Period. 20 December 2019 CSR.
93. B7981005.  A Phase 2b, Double- Blind, Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Parallel 
Group, Dose Ranging Study  of Oral PF- 06651600 and PF -06700841 as Induction and 
Chronic Therap y in Subjects With Moderate To Severe Ulcerative Colitis. 
94. B7981007.  A Phase 2a, Double -Blind, Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Parallel 
Group Study to Evaluate the Efficacy  and Safet y of Oral PF -06651600 and 
PF-06700841 as Induction and Open Label Extension Treatment in Subjects With 
Moderate to Severe Crohn’s Disease.
95. B7981019. A Phase 2b Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo- Controlled, Multicenter, 
Dose -Ranging Study  to Evaluate the Efficacy  and Saf ety Profile of PF -06651600 With 
a Partially  Blinded Extension Period to Evaluate the Efficacy  and Safet y of 
PF-06651600 and PF- 06700841 in Subjects With Active Non -Segmental Vitiligo.
96. B7981032. A Phase 3 Open- Label, Multi -Center, Long -Term Study  Investigat ing the 
Safety  and Efficacy  of PF -06651600 in Adult and Adolescent Participants With 
Alopecia Areata.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 155Appendix 1.Abbreviations 
This following is a list of abbreviations that may  be used in the protocol.
Abbreviation Term
5-ARIs 5α-reductase inhibitors
AA Alopecia areata
AE Adverse event
AAPPO Alopecia areata patient priority  outcomes
AARU Alopecia areata resource utilization
AE Adverse event
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
AST Aspartate aminotransferase
AT Alopecia Totalis
ATP Adenosine triphosphate
AU Alopecia Universalis
AUC Area under the concentration -time curve
AUC inf Area under the plasma concentration time curve from time zero to 
infinity
BAEP Brainstem auditory  evoked potentials
BBS Biospecimen Banking S ystem
BCG Bacille Calmette Guérin
BCRP Breast cancer resistance protein
BID Twice dail y
BMI Body mass index
BP Blood pressure
BSEP Bile salt export pump
Cavg Average stead y state drug concentration
CFB Change from baseline
CFP-10 Culture filtrate protein 10 kiloDalton
CGI-AA Clinician Global I mpression –Alopecia Areata
CI Confidence interval
CK Creatine kinase
Cmax Maximum plasma concentration
COVID -19 Coronavirus disease 2019
CRF Case report form
CRO Contract research organization
CSA Clinical study  agreement
CSF Cerebrospinal fluid
C-SSRS Columbia suicide severity rating scale
CSR Clinical study  report
CT Clinical Trial
CTA Clinical trial application
CTCAE Common Terminology  Criteria for Adverse Events
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 156Abbreviation Term
CYP Cytochrome P450
CYP3A Cytochrome P450 isoenzy me 3A
DDI Drug -drug interaction
DILI Drug -induced liver injury
DMC Data monitoring committee
DNA Deox yribonucleic acid
DNCB 1-chloro -2,4-dinitrobenzene
DPCP Dipheny lcyclopropenone
DU Dispensable unit
EBA Eyebrow Assessment
EBV Epstein Barr Virus
EC Ethics committee
ECG Electrocardiogram
E-DMC External data monitoring committee 
EDP Exposure during pregnancy
eGFR Estimated glomerular filtration rate
ELA Eyelash assessment
ELISA Enzy me-linked immunosorbent assay
EMA European Medicines Agency
Emax Maximum effect attributable to the drug
EOS End of study
EOT End of treatment
EQ-5D-5L EuroQoL 5 dimensions
EQ-5D-Y EuroQoL 5 Dimensions —Youth
ESAT -6 Early secreted antigenic target of 6 kiloDalton
ET Early Termination
EU European Union
EudraCT European Clinical Trials Database
FACS -TBNK Fluorescence -activated cell sorting for T -cells, B -cells, and natural killer 
(NK) cells
FAS Full anal ysis set
FDA United States Food and Drug Administration
FSH Follicle -stimulating hormone
F/U Follow -up
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GGT Gamma -glutam yl transferase
GI Gastrointestinal
GLMM Generalized linear mixed model
GST Glutathione S transferase
H1 Hypothesis 1
HADS Hospital Anxiety  and Depression scale
HBcAb Hepatitis B core antibody
HBsAb Hepatitis B surface antibody
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 157Abbreviation Term
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen
HBVDNA Hepatitis B viral deox yribonucleic acid
HCRU Healthcare resource utilization
HCVAb Hepatitis C antibody
HEENT Head, ey es, ears, nose, and throat
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HRQoL Health -related qualit y of life
HRT Hormone replacement therap y
HsCRP High -sensitivity  C-reactive protein
HSV1 Herpes simplex virus ty pe 1
HSV2 Herpes simplex virus ty pe 2
HTA Health technologies assessment
IB Investigator’s brochure
IC50 Inhibitory  concentration 50%
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
ID Identification
IFN Interferon
Ig Immunoglobulin
IGA-AA Investigator’s global assessment of alopecia areata
IL Interleukin
IND Investigational new drug application
INR International normalized ratio
IP Investigational product
IP-10 Interferon gamma -induced protein 10
IRB Institutional review board
IRC Internal review committee
IRT Interactive response technology
IUD Intrauterine device
IUS Intrauterine hormone -releasing s ystem
IWR Interactive web response
JAK Janus kinase
K2EDTA Dipotassium ethy lenediaminetetraacetic acid
LFT Liver function test
LOAEL Lowest observed adverse effect level
Logit Log odds
LSLV Last subject last visit 
MAR Missing at random
MATE Multi -drug and toxic compound extrusion
MCS Mental component score
MDR Multi -drug resistance
MMF Mycophenolate mofetil
MMR Measles, mumps, rubella
MMRM Mixed -effect model with repeated measures
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 158Abbreviation Term
MN Miettinen and Nurminen
mNAPSI Modified nail psoriasis severit y index
MNAR Missing not at random
MnB Meningitidis serogroup B
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
MTX Methotrexate
N/A Not applicable
NK Natural killer
NOAEL No observed adverse effect level
NRS Numerical rating scale
OAT Organic anion transporting
OATP1B1 Organic anion transporting pol ypeptide 1B1
OCT Organic cation transporter
PCD Primary  completion date
PD Pharmacod ynamic(s)
PGI-C Patient’s global impression of change
P-gp P-glycoprotein
PGx Pharmacogenomics(s)
PHQ -8 Patient health questionnaire –8 items
PI Principal investigator
PK Pharmacokinetic
PMDA Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency
PPAS Per Protocol Anal ysis Set 
PPD Purified protein derivative
PRO Patient reported outcome
P-Sat Patient Satisfaction with Hair Growth
PT Prothrombin time
PUVA Psoralen ultraviolet A
QD Once dail y
QFT -G QuantiFERON®-TB Gold
QoL Quality  of life
QT interval Time from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave
QTc F QT corrected using Fridericia’s correction factor
QFT -G test QuantiFERON®-TB Gold I n Tube test
RA Rheumatoid arthritis
Rac Accumulation ratio
RNA Ribonucleic acid
SADBE Squaric acid dibut ylester
SAE Serious adverse event
SAL T Severity  of alopecia tool
SAL T50 50% improvement in SALT score from baseline
SAL T75 75% improvement in SALT score from baseline
SAP Statistical analy sis plan
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 159Abbreviation Term
SARS -CoV2 Severe acute respiratory  syndrome coronavirus 2
SDAI Simple disease activity  index
SF-36v2 Acute 36-Item Short Form Health Survey  version 2 Acute
SOC System organ class
SOP Standard operating procedure
SRSD Single reference safet y document
STAT Signal transducer and activator of transcription
t1/2 Half-life
TB Tuberculosis
TBili Total bilirubin
TdP Torsades de pointes
TEAE Treatment -emergent adverse event
TEC Tyrosine kinase expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma
TH1 Type 1 helper
Tmax Time after administration of a drug when the maximum plasma 
concentration is reached
T-Spot test T-SPOT®.TBtest
TYK2 Tyrosine kinase 2
UGT Uridine diphosphate glucuronosy ltransferase
ULN Upper limit of normal
URI Upper respiratory  infection
US United States
UVB Ultraviolet B
VHP Voluntary  Harmonisation Procedure
VZV Varicella -zoster virus
VZV IgG Ab Varicella -zoster virus immunoglobulin G antibody
WOCBP Woman of childbearing potential
WPAI :AA Work productivity  and activity  impairment: alopecia areata
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 160Appendix 2.Hepatitis B Testing Algorithm and Full Eligibility Criteria
All subjects will undergo screening for hepatitis B for eligibility  (See Appendix 5.1for 
Japan -specific requirements).
For subjects in countries in which hepatiti s B prevalence has been reported at a rate of 
>5.0%* or if required by local standard of care , subjects will be tested as follows:
1. At screening, HBsAg and HBcAb will be tested:  
a.If both tests are negative, the subject is eligible for study  inclusion.
b.If HBsAg is positive, the subject must be excluded from participation in the study .
c.If HBsAg is negative and HBcAb is positive, HBsAb and HBVDNA reflex 
testing is required: 
i.If HBsAb is negative, the subject must be excluded from participation in the 
study ;
ii.If HBV DNA is detected, the subject must be excluded from participation in 
the study ;
iii.If HBsAb is positive and HBV DNA is undetectable, the subject is eligible for 
study  inclusion.  If the subject is included in the study , for subsequent visits 
HBVDNA testing must be performed according to the Schedule of Activities.
For subjects in all other countries, subjects will be tested as follows:
1. At screening, HBsAg and HBcAb will be tested:
a.If both tests are negative, the subject i s eligible for study  inclusion.
b.If HBsAg is positive, the subject must be excluded from participation in the study .
c.If HBsAg is negative and HBcAb is positive, HBsAb reflex testing is required: 
i.If HBsAb is negative, the subject must be excluded from pa rticipation in the 
study ;
ii.If HBsAb is positive, the subject is eligible for study  inclusion.  If the subject 
is included in the study , for subsequent visits no hepatitis B testing is required.
*The Polaris Observatory Collaborators.  Global prevalence , treatment, and prevention of hepatitis B virus 
infection in 2016: a modelling study.  Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;3(6): 383 -403.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 161Appendix 3.Guidelines for Subject Safety Monitoring and Discontinuation
These guidelines for subject safety  monitoring and discontinuation are to be applied to all 
subjects in study  B7981015.  Additional individual subject monitoring is at the discretion of 
the investigator and dependent on any  perceived safety concerns.  Unscheduled clinical labs 
may be obtained at any  time d uring the stud y to assess such concerns, and a subject may be 
withdrawn at an y time at the discretion of the investigator.
Appendix 3.1.Monitoring
All potential treatment -related events of rash will be followed up until resolution or 
agreement with Pfizer. 
The following laboratory abnormalities require re -testing until resolution or agreement 
with Pfizer:
Laboratory Variable Laboratory Value Re-testing 
Timeframea
Hem atology
Absolute Neutrophil Count <1000/mm3 (<1.0 ×109/L) Within 1 week
Hem oglobin <10.0 g/dL (<6.21 mmol/L or <100 g/L) 
OR
Decrease of ≥2.0 g/dL from baselineWithin 1 week
Platelet count <100,000/mm3 (<100.0 ×109/L) Within 1 week
Absolute Lymphocyte Countb<600/mm3 (<0.6 ×109/L) Within 1 week
Serum Che mistry
Creatine kinasec>3×ULN Within 1 week
Aspartate aminotransferase See Section 8.4.2 for potential cases of drug -induced 
liver injury.Within 48 hours
Alanine aminotransferase See Section 8.4.2 for potential cases of drug -induced 
liver injury.Within 48 hours
Total bilirubin See Section 8.4.2 for potential cases of drug -induced 
liver injury.Within 48 hours
a. Based on awareness of the abnormal results.
b. Subjects with absolute lymphocyte count <500/mm3 (0.5×109/L) will be reflex -tested for FACS -TBNK until the 
absolute lymphocyte count resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the investigator and sponsor.
c. In addition to re -testing creatine kinase >3 ×ULN, urine myoglobin will be performed as reflex testing for any 
subject with creatine kin ase >10 ×ULN.
In case of positive urine pregnancy  test, the subject will have study  drug interrupted and a 
serum sample collected on the same day  (or as soon as possible) and submitted to the central 
laboratory  for pregnancy  testing.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 162Appendix 3.2.Discontinuation
Treatment will be discontinued, and the subject withdrawn from this study following 
completion of the Early Termination visit and the Follow -up Visit (whenever possible) 
for:
Adverse Events:
Serious infections, defined as an y infection (viral, bacterial, a nd fungal) requiring 
parenteral antimicrobial therap y or hospitalization for treatment or meeting other 
criteria that require the infection to be classified as serious adverse event;
Treatment -related SAEs;
Clinically  meaningful, treatment -emergent decline s in hearing from baseline (refer to 
Audiometry  Study  Guide for details) are to be discussed with the Sponsor for possible 
withdrawal from the study;
Other serious or severe AEs, at the discretion of the investigator or sponsor.
ECG Findings:
Confirmed QTc F >500 milliseconds;
Confirmed increase from baseline in QTcF of >60 milliseconds.
Investigational Product Interruptions:
Subjects interrupting investigational product for more than 10 days between visits are 
to be discussed with the sponsor for possible w ithdrawal from the study .
Laboratory Abnormalities:
All the following laboratory abnormalities require discontinuation if they  are confirmed b y 
re-test.  Refer to the associated re- testing timeframes for laboratory  abnormalities in 
Appendix 3.1:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <750/mm3(<0.75 × 109/L).
Hemoglobin <9.0 g/dL (<5.59 mmol/L  or <90 g/L) or a decrease of >30% from 
baseline (either criterion or both).
Platelet count <75,000/mm3(<75.0 × 109/L).
Absolute Ly mphocy te Count <500/mm3(<0.5 × 109/L).
NOTE: Subjects with absolute ly mphocy te count <500/mm3(0.5 × 109/L) will be 
reflex tested for FACS -TBNK until the absolute ly mphocy te count resolves or 
stabilizes at a level acceptable to the investigator and sponsor.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 163Creatine kinase >10 ×ULN.
NOTE: In addition to re -testing creatine kinase >3 × ULN, urine m yoglobin will be 
performed as reflex testing for an y subject with creatine kinase >10 ×ULN.
Aspar tate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) that meet ANY 
of the following:
>3times the upper limit of normal with at least one total bilirubin value >2 times 
the upper limit of normal;
>3times the upper limit of normal accompanied by  signs or s ymptoms consistent 
with hepatic injury  (eg, new onset elevated PT/INR); 
Two sequential AST or AL T elevations >5 times the upper limit of normal, 
regardless of total bilirubin or accompan ying signs or sy mptoms.
NOTE: In each case, there is a need for additional investigations, such as review 
of ethanol, recreational drug and dietary  supplement consumption; testing for 
acute hepatitis A, B or C infection and biliary  tract imaging should be promptly  
discussed with the sponsor or designee.
Pregnancy:
Female subjects confirmed as pregnant during the study  (see Section 8.4.3.1 ).
Prohibited Medications:
Subjects who are treated with any  prohibited medication during the course of the 
study  may  require discontinuation.  Subjects who are administered a prohibited 
medication are to be discussed with the sponsor for possible withdrawal from the 
study .
Suicidal Ideation:
Subjects with a “y es” answer on items 4, 5, or on any  question in the suicidal 
behavior section of the C- SSRS must be discontinued.  The subject must be referred 
to a mental health professional for appropriate evaluation and treatment.  If the 
subject cannot be seen by a mental health professional within 24 hours, then the 
subject should be sent to a local emergency  room for psy chiatric assessment.
Discontinuation/End of Treatment Monitoring:
Any subject meeting discontinuation criteria must enter into the F ollow -up Period with their 
first follow- up visit occurring 1 week after their last dose whenever possible, until the event 
has returned to normal or baseline levels or is deemed clinically  stable.  The procedures 
scheduled for Earl y Termination Visit will be performed on the last day the subject takes the 
investigational product or as soon as possible thereafter.  The onl y exception to this is when a 
subject specifically  withdraws consent for any  further contact with him or her or persons 
previously  authori zed by  the subject to provide this information.  Additional follow -up visits 
may occur as needed until any  clinically  relevant abnormalities or adverse events have 
resolved, returned to a baseline state, or are deemed clinically  stable. 
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 164Appendix 4.Prohibited and Per mitted Concomitant CYP3A Inducers and Substrates
Please note that this list addresses only CYP3A inducers and CYP3A substrates. Other 
prohibited medications for this trial are listed in Section 5.8.2.  Refer to Section 5.8.1 for 
additional information regarding permitted medications for this trial, including CYP3A 
inhibitors.
This is not an all -inclusive list.  Study personnel should stay  current and consult with their 
pharmacy  to exclude all concomitant medications that are moderate to potent CYP3A 
inducers or sensitive or moderate sensitive CYP3A substrates.  If a medication is a sensitive 
or moderate sensitive CYP3A substrate and is not listed below as prohibited or permitted, 
consultation with the Sponsor is required.
Appendix 4.1.Proh ibited Concomitant CYP3A Inducers and Substrates
Sensitive CYP3A Substrates ## Moderate Sensitive CYP3A 
Substrates §Moderate to Potent CYP3A 
Inducers **
Dasatinib Aprepitant Avasimibe #
Dronedarone Eliglustat Bosentan
Ebastine Pimozide Barbiturates
Lomitapide Rilpivirine Carbamazepine #
Nisoldipine Efavirenz 
Sirolimus Etravirine
Tacrolimus Mitotane #
Tolvaptan Modafinil
Nafcillin
Phenobarbital #
Phenytoin #
Rifabutin #
Rifampin #
St. John’s Wort #
Talviraline
** All prohibited drugs that are CYP3A inducers require at least a 28 day or 5 half-lives (whichever is 
longer) washout prior to the first dose of study intervention.
In a situation where appropriate m edical care of a participant requires the use of a prohibited CYP3A 
inducer: Moderate to potent inducers of CYP3A are not permitted in the study EXCEPT in emergency 
situations.  Note: Mitotane is not permitted for any duration due to its long half -life; however, if necessary 
mitotane may be used in an emergency, however the participant will then be discontinued from the study.  
Topical (including skin or muc ous membranes) application of antimicrobial and antifungal medications is 
permitted.
# Notated as potent inducers. 
## Sensitive CYP3A substrates are drugs that demonstrate an increase in concentration -time curve (AUC) 
of ≥5-fold with strong index inhibi tors of a given metabolic pathway in clinical drug -drug interaction (DDI) 
studies.
§ Moderate sensitive substrates are drugs that demonstrate an increase in AUC of ≥2 to <5 -fold.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 165Appendix 4.2.Permitted Concomitant CYP3A Substrates
Sensitive CYP3A Substrates ## Moderate Sensitive CYP3A 
Substrates §
Alfentanil Midazolam Alprazolam
Avanafil Naloxegol Atorvastatin
Buspirone Quetiapine Colchicine
Darifenacin Sildenafil Rivaroxaban
Eletriptan Simvastatin Tadalafil
Eplerenone Ticagrelor
Felodipine Triazolam
Lovastatin Vardenafil
Lurasidone
## Sensitive CYP3A substrates are drugs that demonstrate an increase in concentration -time curve (AUC) of ≥5-fold 
with strong index inhibitors of a given metabolic pathway in clinical drug -drug interaction (DDI) studies.
Topical (including skin or mucous membranes) application of antimicrobial and antifungal medications is permitted.
§ Moderate sensitive substrates are drugs that demonstrate an increase in AUC of ≥2 to <5 -fold.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 166Appendix 5.Country- specific Requirements
Appendix 5.1. Japan -Specific Requirements for Hepatitis B Testing
1. At screening, HBsAg, HBcAb, and HBsAb will be tested for all subjects in Japan:
a.If all three tests are negative, the subject is eligible for study  inclusion. 
b. If HBsAg is positive, the subject must be excluded from participation in the study .
c.If HBsAg is negative, HBcAb is positive, and HBsAb is negative, the subject 
must be excluded from participation in the study .
d.If HBsAg is negative, HBcAb is negative, HBsAb is positive, and prior HBV 
vaccination is unequivocally  documented, the subject is eligible for the study  and 
does not require HBVDNA monitoring during the study . 
e.If HBsAg is negative, HBcAb is negative, HBsAb is positive, and no unequivocal 
documentation of prior HBV vaccination is available, t he subject is required to 
undergo HBVDNA reflex testing:
i.If HBVDNA is detected, the subject must be excluded from participation in the 
study ;
ii.If HBVDNA is undetectable, the subject is eligible for study  inclusion.  If the 
subject is included in the study , for subsequent visits HBVDNA testing must be 
performed according to the Schedule of Activities.
f.If HBsAg is negative, HBcAb is positive, and HBsAb is positive, the subject is 
required to undergo HBVDNA reflex testing:
i.If HBVDNA is detected, the subject must be excluded from participation in the 
study ;
ii.If HBVDNA is undetectable, the subject is eligible for study  inclusion. If the 
subject is included in the study , for subsequent visits HBVDNA testing must be 
performed according to the Schedule of Activities.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 167Appendix 6. Alternative Measures During Public Emergencies 
Thealternative study  measures described in this section are to be followed during public 
emergencies, including the COVID -19 pandemic.  This appendix applies for the duration of 
the COVID -19 pandemic globall y and will become effective for other public emergencies 
only upon written notification from Pfizer.  NOTE: Any  deviations from the Schedule of 
Activities or the protocol (eg, missed o r partially  completed procedures or assessments) must 
be reported to the Sponsor in a timely  manner and will be reported b y the Sponsor as a 
protocol deviation.
Procedures which are missed due to COVID -19 disruptions are required to be performed at 
the nex t available opportunity , even if outside of a protocol- specified visit window.
Use of these alternative study  measures are expected to cease upon the return of business as 
usual circumstances (including the lifting of an y quarantines and travel bans/adviso ries). 
Appendix 6.1.Eligibility
While severe acute respiratory s yndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV2) testing is not 
mandated for this stud y, local clinical practice standards for testing should be followed.  A 
subject should be excluded if he/she has a positive test resu lt for SARS -CoV2 infection, is 
known to have as ymptomatic infection, or is suspected of having SARS- CoV2.  Subjects 
with active infections are excluded from study  participation per Exclusion #16.  When the 
infection resolves, the patient may  be considered for re -screening.  In addition, the following 
criteria apply :
The subject must be able to perform all Screening and Day 1 procedures per the S chedule 
of Activities at the study  site and/or designated ancillary  facility  (eg, for audiological 
evaluations and chest radiographs) in order to determine whether the subject meets 
eligibility criteria for the study .  This includes collection and resultin g of laboratory  
assessments through the central laboratory  vendor.
The subject must meet eligibility  criteria for the study .
It must be anticipated that the subject will be able to have the Week 2 and Week 4 safet y 
laboratory  tests collected/performed at t he study  site or an alternative clinical 
laboratory  facility  according to the windows in Appendix 6.3
If a subject does not meet the criteria described above, the sub ject cannot be enrolled in 
the study .
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 168Appendix 6.2. Telehealth Visits
In the event that in -clinic study  visits cannot be conducted, every  effort should be made to 
follow up on the safet y of study subjects at scheduled visits per the Schedule of Activities or 
unscheduled visits.  Telehealth visits may  be used to continue to assess subject safet y and 
collect data points.  Telehealth includes the exchange of healthcare information and services 
via telecommunication technologies (eg, audio, video, vi deo-conferencing software) 
remotely , allowing the subject and the investigator to communicate on aspects of clinical 
care, including medical advice, reminders, education, and safet y monitoring.  The following 
assessments must be performed during a telehealth visit:
Review dosing logs and record investigational product, including doses taken and an y 
interruptions in intake of investigational product (ie, missed doses) since the last 
contact, and calculate compliance.
Review and record an yAEs and SAE s since the last contact.  Refer to Section 8.
Review and record an y new concomitant medications or changes in concom itant 
medications since the last contact.
For WOCBP: Review and record contraceptive method and results of pregnancy testing.  
Confirm that the subject is adhering to the contraception method(s) required in the 
protocol Sectio n 4.3.1 .  Refer to Section 7.2 of the pr otocol and Appendix 6.3
regarding pregnancy  tests.
For premenarchal female subjects: Check for initiation of menarche.
Collection of updated audiological history  (Par t 1 in the Audiometry  Study  Guide 
Worksheet for Post Day  1 visits) at visits requiring audiological evaluation.
Body temperature and collection method (eg, oral, tympanic, axillary), pulse rate, and 
respiratory  rate (measured by  study  subject/caregiver).
Administration of the C- SSRS performed by  a qualified rater.  Per Section 7.7.1, if there 
are “y es” answers on items 4 or 5 of the suicidal ideation section or on an y question 
in the suicidal behavior section of the C -SSRS, the subject will be discontinued from 
the study  and referred to a mental health professional for appropriate evaluation and 
treatment.
NOTE: If the investigator dete rmines that additional evaluation is warranted based on the 
information collected during the remote visit described above, follow -up is required 
to be performed, with results submitted to and reviewed b y the investigator prior to 
shipping investigational p roduct to the subject.
Study  subjects must be reminded to promptly  notify  site staff about any  change in their 
health status.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 169Appendix 6.3.Alternative Facilities for Safety Assessments
Laboratory Testing
With the exceptions noted in Appendix 6.1for Screening and Day  1, if a study  subject is 
unable to visit the site for protocol -specified safety laboratory  evaluations, testing may  be 
conducted at a local laboratory  if permitted by local regulations.  The local laboratory  may  be 
a standalone institution or within a hospital.  Collection of blood and urine samples may  also 
be performed at the subject’s home per Appendix 6.5.  The following safety laboratory  
evaluations may  be performed at a local laboratory  or in the subject’s home:
Hematology ;
Serum chemistry ; 
Fasting lipid panel;
Urinaly sis;
Pregnancy  testing (for WOCBP);
Refer to the Schedule of Activities for visits at which these tests are required and to 
Section 7.5.7 for additional details regarding these tests.
If it is not possible for the subject to have the above tests completed within the visit window 
specified in the Schedule of Activities , an extended window may  be allowed to collect 
samples for these laboratory tests, provided that the investigator has performed the remote 
visit as described above, assessed each case, and determined that it would not increase risk to 
a subject.  The extended windows for laboratory  sample collection for each study  visit are 
noted in Table 8 .  These windows apply  only to laboratory  samples collected during 
interruptions due to public emergencies, including the COVID- 19 pandemic, based upon 
writt en notification from Pfizer.  I f the laboratory  samples are not collected within the 
specified extended window for the visit, the subject must temporarily  withhold 
investigational product until the required laboratory samples can be collected. 
If a local laboratory  is used, qualified stud y site personnel must order, receive, and review 
results.  Site staff must collect the local laboratory  reference ranges and 
certifications/accreditations for filing at the site.  Laboratory  test results are to be provided to 
the site staff as soon as possible and must be received and reviewed b y the investigator 
within 14 day s after they  are collected in order to determine eligibility  to continue dosing.  In 
addition, laboratory  test results from the previous visit must be available and reviewed b y the 
investigator prior to shipping investigational product at the current visit.  The local laboratory  
reports must be  filed in the subject’s source documents/medical records.  Relevant data from 
the local laboratory  report must be recorded on the CRF.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 170Special attention should be paid to ensure that laboratory  results are checked against the 
Guidelines for Subject Safet y Monitoring and Discontinuation in Appendix 3and that 
required follow -up is performed as applicable.
If a subject requiring pregnancy  testing cannot visit a local laboratory  for pregnancy  testing, 
a home urine pregnancy  testing kit with a sensitivity  of at least 25 IU/mL may  be used by  the 
subject to perform the test at home, if compliant with local regul atory  requirements.  Urine 
pregnancy  test results may  be collected based on information provided by  the subject (or 
their legally  authorized representative, if appropriate) during the remote visit.  The urine 
pregnancy test result must be available prior t o dispensing or shipping investigational 
product to a subject.  The pregnancy  test outcome must be documented in the subject’s 
source documents/medical records and relevant data recorded on the CRF.  Confirm that the 
subject is adhering to the contraception method(s) required in the protocol. 
NOTE: Pregnancy  testing (for WOCBP) between the Week 40 and 48 visits (at 
approximately  Week 44) and study  site contact with subjects to obtain pregnancy  test results 
is required for WOCBP in VHP countries outlined in the Schedule of Activities and 
Section 7.2 .
Table 8.Windows for Remote Visits and Laboratory Sample Collections if 
Required Due to Disruptions from Public Emergencies
Visit (Day in Study) Rem ote Visit Window
(Day in Study)aLab Collection Window
(Day in Study)b
Week 2 (Day 15) ±3 days (Day 12 -18) ±3 days (Day  12-18)
Week 4 (Day 29) ±3 days (Day 26 -32) -3/ +7 days (Day 26 -36)
Week 8 (Day 57) ±7 days (Day 50 -64) -7/+14 days (Day 50 -71)
Week 12 (Day 85) ±7 days (Day 82 -88) -7/+21 days (Day 82 -106)
Week 18 (Day 127) ±7 days (Day 120 -134) -7/+21 days (Day 120 -148)
Week 24 (Day 169) ±7 days (Day 162 -176) ±7 days (Day 162 -176)
Week 26 (Day 183) ±3 days (Day 180 -186) ±3 days (Day 180 -186)
Week 28 (Day 197) ±3 days (Day 194 -200) -3/+21 days (Day 194 -218)
Week 34 (Day 239) ±7 days (Day 232-246) -7/+21 days (Day 232 -260)
Week 40 (Day 281) ±7 days (Day 274 -288) -7/+30 days (Day 274 -311)
Week 48 (Day 337)c±7 days (Day 330 -344) -7/+30 days (Day 330 -367)
a.These are the same as the window s in the protocol Schedule of Activities . 
b.Laboratory results must be received and rev iewed by the investigator w ithin 14 days after they are 
collected to determine eligibility to continue dosing.  In addition, laboratory test results from the previous 
visit must be available and review ed by  the investigator prior to shipping investigationa l product at the 
current visit.
c.If subject is rolling over into B7981032, labs must be collected prior to enrollment in B7981032.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 171Electrocardiograms
If the subject is unable to visit the study  site for an ECG after Day  1, the subject may  visit an 
alternative facility  to have the ECG performed according to the guidelines in Section 7.5.4.  
Qualified study  site personnel must order, receive, and review results. 
Audiological Evaluation
At visits after Screening which require audiological evaluation, if the subject is unable to 
visit the study  site or designated ancillary  center for audiological evaluation, the audiological 
history  (Part 1 in the Audiometry  Study  Guide Worksheet for Post Day  1 visits) must be 
collected during the remote visit per Appendix 6.2(or during the home health visit per 
Appendix 6.5).  The audiological evaluation must be per formed per Section 7.5.5 at the next 
available opportunit y, even if outside of a protocol- specified visit window.
Appendix 6.4.Investigational Pr oduct
If the safet y of a trial subject is at risk because they cannot complete required evaluations or 
adhere to critical mitigation steps, then discontinuing that subject from investigational 
product must be considered.
Investigational product may  be ship ped b y courier to study subjects if permitted by local 
regulations and in accordance with storage and transportation requirements for the 
investigational product.  Pfizer does not permit the shipment of investigational product b y 
mail.  The tracking record of shipments and the chain of custod y of investigational product 
must be kept in the subject’s source documents/medical records.
If a third- party courier engaged b y Pfizer or Pfizer’s contract research organization (CRO) is 
used for shipping the investiga tional product, written consent must be documented in the 
informed consent document prior to shipping investigational product.  If a third -party courier 
engaged b y Pfizer or Pfizer’s CRO is not used for shipping the investigational product, 
consent must be verball y obtained (or per local guidelines/regulations) and documented in 
site’s source documents prior to shipping investigational product.
Prior to shipping investigational product to a subject, 1) consent must be obtained and 
documented as described ab ove, 2) all required safety  information listed in Appendix 6.2
must have been collected and reviewed b y the investigator, 3) the required laboratory tests 
from the previous visit must have been reviewed by  the investigator, and 4) any additional 
evaluatio n (if requested based on investigator judgment) must have been performed, with 
results submitted to and reviewed b y the investigator.
Investigational product cannot be shipped to the subject and must be temporaril y 
discontinued if 1) the laboratory  tests f rom the previous visit have not been reviewed b y the 
investigator OR 2) after reviewing the required information (including that from a remote 
visit), the investigator cannot make an assessment of whether it is safe for the subject to 
continue investigatio nal product.  Refer to Section 5.5 regarding temporary withholding of 
investigational product.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 172The study  site may  deliver the invest igational product to subjects using an acceptable 
delivery  method only  if this is consistent with local laws and regulations and the site is able 
to ship the investigational product according to the guidelines provided b y the Sponsor in a 
separate document .
The amount of investigational product to be shipped should correspond to the amount 
dispensed per the Impala Quick Reference Guide at the specific study  visit which is being 
conducted remotely .  Dispensing and/or shipment of additional investigational pr oduct to 
extend the visit window is not permitted.  
Subjects should continue taking the current supply of investigational product until the new 
supply  is received (unless temporary  withholding of investigational product is required).
Dosing logs should be shipped with the investigational product.
Study  sites should follow up with the subject once the investigational product is received by  
the subject to review when to start using the new blister cards, the dosing instructions, and 
completion of the dosing logs.
Subjects should be instructed not to re- use or dispose of an y blister cards dispensed at a 
previous visit.  
All blister cards and dosing logs must be returned to the study  site at the next on -site visit.
Appendix 6.5.Home Health Visits
A home health care service may  be utilized to facilitate scheduled visits per the Schedule of 
Activities if operationally  feasible and will be conducted according to local regulations.  
Home health visits include a healthcare provide r conducting an in -person study  visit at the 
subject’s location, rather than an in- person stud y visit at the site. 
If a third- party engaged by Pfizer or Pfizer’s CRO is used for home health visits, written 
consent must be documented in the informed consent document prior to conducting the first 
home health visit.  I f a third -party engaged b y Pfizer or Pfizer’s CRO is not used for home 
health visits, consent must be verball y obtained and documented in site’s source documents 
(or per local guidelines/regulations) prior to conducting the first home health visit.
The following may  be performed during a home health visit:
Review dosing logs and record investigational product, including doses taken and an y 
interruptions in intake of investigational product (ie, missed doses) since the last 
contact, and calculate compliance.
Review and record an yAEs and SAEs since the last contact.  Refer to Section 8.
Review and record an y new concomitant medications or changes in concomitant 
medications since the last contact.
PF-06651600
B7981015
Final Protocol Amendment 5, 13 April 2021 
PFIZER CONFIDENTIAL
Page 173For WOCBP: Review and record contraceptive method and results of pregnancy testing.  
Confirm that the subject is adhering to the contraception method(s) required in the 
protocol Section 4.3.1 .  Refer to Section 7.2 of the protocol and Appendix 6.3
regarding pregnancy  tests.
For premenarchal female subjects: Check for initiation of menarche.
Collection of updated audiological history  (Part 1 in the Audiometry  Study  Guide 
Workshee t for Post Day  1 visits) at visits requiring audiological evaluation.
Body temperature and collection method (eg, oral, tympanic, axillary), pulse rate, and 
respiratory  rate (measured by  study  subject/caregiver).
ECG per Secti on 7.5.4 .
Hematology .
Serum chemistry . 
Fasting lipid panel.
Urinaly sis.
Pregnancy  testing (for WOCBP).
Physical examination.
Appendix 6.6.Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
If a subject has a confirmed or suspected COVID -19 infection during the study , this should 
be reported as an adverse event (AE) or serious adverse events (SAE) and appropriate 
medical intervention provided.  For non -serious COVID -19 infections, temp orary  
discontinuation of the investigational product may  be medicall y appropriate until the subject 
has recovered from the COVID -19 infection.  If this is a serious infection (ie, requires 
parenteral antimicrobial therap y or hospitalization for treatment o r meeting other criteria that 
require the infection to be classified as a serious adverse event), the subject must be 
permanentl y discontinued from investigational product per Appendix 3.2of the protocol.  
Appendix 6.7.Efficacy Assessments
Efficacy  assessments listed in Section 7.6 and Section 7.8are only  to be collected during 
on-site visits.  This includes SALT, ELA, EBA, fingernail assessment, CGI -AA, and all 
patient reported outcomes.