Confidential           
 
Page 1 of 31 
  
TITLE PAGE  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Title: Predictive Analytics and Behavioral Nudges to Improve Palliative 
Care in Advanced Cancer  
BE A PAL : Behavioral Economics and Analytics to improve PALliative care in 
advanced cancer  
 
Protocol  Number :  #851021  
Amendment Number:  6 
Version  Number :  6 (approved June 21 2023 ) 
Sponsor :   Tennessee Oncology, PLLC  
Approval  Date:  Version 1 approved April 2022   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
The information contained in this document, especially any unpublished data, is the property of  
Tennessee Oncology, PLLC (or under its control) and therefore is provided to you in confidence as an 
investigator, potential investigator, or consultant, for review by you, your staff, and an applicable 
Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board. It is  understood that this information will not be 
disclosed to others without written authorization from Tennessee Oncology, PLLC except to the 
extent necessary to obtain informed  consent from persons whom participate . 
Confidential           
 
Page 2 of 31 
  
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1. Synopsi s  
2. Background  
 2.1 Advanced Cancer Burden  
 2.2  Palliative Care Improves Quality of Life & Symptoms  
 2.3 Palliative Care Rarely Used  
 2.4 Improve Short -Term Mortality  Prediction  
 2.5 Palliative Care Underutilized  
 2.6 Palliative Care Biases  
2.7       Palliative Care Constraints  
2.8       Palliative Care  Utilization Improvements  
3. OBJECTIVES  AND OUTCOMES  
            3.1  Overall Objectives  
            3.2 Primary Outcome       
 3.3      Secondary Outcome s 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
4.1       Randomization & Recruitment  
4.2 Potential Study Benefits  
4.3       Study Duration  
4.4       Target Population  
4.5       Inclusions/Exclusions  
4.6       Interventions  
4.7       Innovations  
4.8       Cohort Malignancies  
4.9       Accrual 
4.10 Qualitative Procedures  
4.11. Subject Compensation  
5. ASSESSMENT S 
5.1      Risk Benefit    
       6.  STATISTICAL CONSDERATIONS AND ANAYLSIS PLAN  
6.1 Generalized Considerations  
6.2 Patient & Family Perceptions  
6.3 Risk Score  
6.4   Analysis Measures  
6.5       Sample Size 
6.6       Risks & Benefits  
6.7       Investigators  
7.  DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT   
 7.1 Data Quality Assurance  
 7.2 Data Disclosure  
 7.3 Data Safety & Monitoring  
 7.4 Source Data Documentation  
7.5        Use of Computerized Systems  
7.6        Retention of Records   
8.  ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 8.1 Compliance with Laws & Regulations  
 8.2 Review Board s & Ethics Committee  
 8.3 Informed Consent   
 8.4 Confidentiality  
9.  STUDY DOCUMENTATION , MONITORING,  AND ADMINISTRATION  
 9.1 Study Documentation  
 9.2 Protocol Deviations  
9.3 Clinic  Inspections  
Confidential           
 
Page 3 of 31 
 9.4 Administrative Structure  
9.5       Publication of Data and Protection of Trade Secrets  
9.6       Protocol Amendments  
10. REFERENCES  
Confidential           
 
Page 4 of 31 
 LIST OF EXHIBITS  
 
• Exhibit 1.  Predictive Risk Score  
• Exhibit 2.  Trial Schema  
• Exhibit 3.  Organizational Structure  
• Exhibit 4. Patient Surveys  
• Exhibit 5. EHR Nudge  
• Exhibit 6. Recruitment Emails for Oncology and Palliative Care Clinicians  
• Exhibit 7. VERBAL CONSENT FORM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidential           
 
Page 5 of 31 
  
1. SYNOPSIS  
Patients with advanced cancer suffer from high symptom burden and aggressive end -of-life care. 
Early specialty palliative care is an evidence -based practice that improves symptom burden, quality of 
life, and survival in advanced cancer. However, over half of patients with advanced cancer die before 
receiving palliative care. Clinician -level biases and suboptimal identification of high -risk patients are 
major barrier s to palliative care uptake. In this 2 -arm pragmatic clinical trial, we will randomize 
practices within a large community oncology network to receive an intervention consisting of 
algorithm -based default palliative care referrals. We will study the impact o f such an intervention  on 
palliative care utilization and end -of-life outcomes.  
2. BACKGROUND  
2.1    ADVANCED CANCER  BURDEN  
Over half of patients with advanced cancer report moderate -to-severe symptom burden and poor 
quality of life – both of which are associated with up to 70% lower overall survival.1–3 Despite heavy 
symptom burden, 40% of patients with advanced cancer receive aggressive end -of-life care, including 
chemotherapy and lack of hospice referral close to death, that is not concordant with patient goals.4 
Suboptimal symptom management, poor communication about expected treatment benefit, and lack 
of attention to patient goals and wishes near the end of life contribute to these gaps.5  
2.2    PALLIATIVE CARE IMPROVES QUALITY OF LIFE & SYMPTOMS  
Palliative care is a medical specialty focused on providing relief from the symptoms and stress of 
serious illnesses such as cancer and is available in inpatient, outpatient, and community -based 
settings.6 Outpatient palliative care is available at 98% of NCI -designated cancer centers and 63% of 
non-NCI centers.7 Early outpatient palliative care concurrent with cancer -directed treatment improves 
quality of life, reduces symptom burden, and decreases rates of aggressive end -of-life care.8,9 Since 
2017, the American Society of Clinical Oncology has recommended specialty outpatient palliative 
care consultation for patients within 8 weeks of advanced cancer diagnosis.10 During the COVID -19 
pandemic, other organizations have called for earlier palliative care to ensure that high -risk cancer 
care meets patients’ goals.11,12 Despite such guidelines, nearly two -thirds of patients with advanced 
cancer do not receive palliative care prior to death.4 Delayed or missed outpatient palliative care 
referrals are a major contributor to aggressive end -of-life care.8  
2.3    PALLIATIVE CARE RARELY USED  
NCCN -based indications for palliative care referral include limited prognosis and prognostic risk 
factors, such as uncontrolled symptoms or poor performance status.13 Better awareness of mortality 
risk may inform clinicians’ decisions around palliative care referral and prompt goal -concordant 
cancer care.14 However, oncologists correctly identify only 20% of patients with advanced cancer who 
will die in one year and overestimate prognosis for 70% of patients.15,16 Furthermore, existing 
palliative care triggers ignore patient - and cancer -specific heterogeneity in important variables such 
as laboratories and comorbidities.17 
Confidential           
 
Page 6 of 31 
  
2.4    IMPROVE SHORT -TERM MORTALITY  PREDICTION  
Advances in electronic health record (EHR) infrastructure and predictive analytics allow accurate and 
automated identification of patients with cancer at risk of short -term mortality. We have trained and 
deployed EHR -based predictive algorithms with better  performance (c -statistic >0.80; sensitivity 
>60%) than traditional prognostic aids into routine oncology practice in order to identify patients who 
may benefit from early palliative care and advance care planning.18,19  At Tennessee Oncology, a 
rules -based automated EHR algorithm based on 14 components derived from 2021 NCCN guidelines 
(Exhibit 1)  accurately identifies patients at risk of 180 -day-month mortality.20 This algorithm has been 
incorporated  in pilot studies, and has generated weekly reports of high -risk patients who may benefit 
from timely palliative care referral.  
There is an urgent need to implement strategies based on algorithm -based triggers to increase early 
outpatient palliative care among patients with advanced cancer.  
2.5    PALLIATIVE CARE UNDERUTILIZED  
Two-thirds of patients with advanced cancer do not receive palliative care prior to dying. Furthermore, 
clinicians underutilize palliative care, usually initiating referrals only 2 months before death. Lack of 
standardized referral and screening criteria f or outpatient palliative care contributes to 
underutilization. This is particularly true for Black and Hispanic populations, for whom palliative care 
referrals are 50% lower compared to White populations.  
2.6    PALLIATIVE CARE BIASES  
Status quo bias , which predisposes clinicians to continue current practice even if not the optimal 
option, may lead to delayed or missed palliative care referrals. Additionally, optimism bias,  the 
cognitive bias that causes clinicians to believe that their own patients are at lesser risk of negative 
outcomes, may cause clinicians to underestimate a patient’s mortality risk, thus delaying palliative 
care referral. Finally, overconfidence bias,  the propensity to overestimate one’s desired behaviors 
when it is  not objectively reasonable, may lead clinicians to incorrectly believe they are initiating 
similar or more palliative care referrals than their peers.  
2.7    PALLIATIVE CARE CONSTRAINTS  
Despite increasing availability in tertiary cancer care settings, specialty palliative care is sparsely 
available in community oncology practices – where 75% of patients receive their primary oncologic 
care. Furthermore, while the number of patients with cancer eligible for palliative care is expected to 
grow by 20% in the upcoming decade, there will be a shortage of 18,000 palliative care  specialty 
physicians, particularly in the outpatient setting. Because of these capacity constraints, it is crucial to 
identify scalable  strategies to automatically identify high -risk patients with advanced cancer in order to 
initiate timely outpatient pal liative care referrals.  
 
 
Confidential           
 
Page 7 of 31 
 2.8    PALLIATIVE CARE UTILIZATION IMPROVEMENTS  
Overcoming suboptimal clinician decision -making biases is key to increasing palliative care referrals. 
Principles from behavioral economics can inform “nudges” that change how clinicians receive 
information and make choices such as palliative care referral. Default, opt -out nudges that make the 
optimal choice the path of least resistance can mitigate clinicians’  status quo bias . Reframing 
clinicians’ prognoses via “triggered” identification of high -risk patients may combat optimism bias. 
Finally, peer comparisons use social comparisons to counter overconfidence bias  in order to  increase 
guideline -based practice. These strategies are associated with 10 -25 absolute percentage -point  
increases in guideline -based practices such as statin prescribing and transition from brand to generic 
drugs. However, to our knowledge no published randomized trials have used behavioral strategies to 
improve palliative care utilization in advanced cancer.  
Given rising demand for palliative care with constrained supply across the United States oncology 
care system, our contribution will be significant because it will leverage scalable automated predictive 
algorithms with a behaviorally informed intervention to increase palliative care utilization among high - 
risk patients with advanced cancer. This intervention is expected to create a feasible, adaptable, and 
acceptable process in a community oncology setting that increases palliative care utilization earlier  in 
the advanced cancer disease trajectory.  
3. OBJECTIVE S & OUTCOMES  
3.1  OVERALL OBJECTIVES  
Our main objective is t o evaluate the impact of an intervention consisting of default algorithm -based 
referrals, compared to usual practice, on outpatient palliative care visits and quality of end -of-life care 
among patients with advanced cancer. We hypothesize that this interve ntion will increase palliative 
care visits by 10 percentage points and decrease aggressive end -of-life utilization by 15 percentage 
points, relative to usual practice.  
We will also explore physician and practice -related facilitators and barriers to completion via mixed -
methods interviews .  After completing initial enrollmen t, we aim to conduct a qualitative study through  
approximately 20  semi -structured interviews with :  
1. medical oncology clinicians in the intervention group to understand the impact of the risk -
algorithm and behavioral nudges on their workflow, and explore barriers and facilitators for 
feasibility, scalability, and ultimately increasing palliative care refe rrals for patients with 
advanced lung or non -colorectal gastrointestinal malignancies.  
2. palliative care clinicians who saw patients referred through the study to explore their 
perspectives on seeing patients identified by the risk -algorithm and default referrals.    
3.2  PRIMARY OUTCOME  
Completed palliative care visit within 3 months among high -risk patients  with stage III and IV lung and 
non-colorectal GI malignancies  
3.3  SECONDARY OUTCOME S 
Confidential           
 
Page 8 of 31 
 • Completed palliative care visit among non-high risk patients with stage III and IV lung and non -
colorectal GI malignancies . 
We will also assess on an exploratory basis the impact on  acute care utilization including emergency 
room visits and hospitalizations within participating hospitals in the state of Tennessee ; completed 
palliative care visits among all patients at Tennessee Oncology, number of opioid prescriptions, 
aggressive end -of-life care (no hospice referral or enrollment prior to death, hospice enrollment<3 
days before death, location of death and/or chemotherapy receipt within 14 days of death) ; and 
patient -reported measures such as depression and pain. We will also assess on an exploratory basis 
the quality of life of patients in the intervention group and control group through the FACIT -PAL 14, 
and “Heard & Understood” instrument before  the palliative care visit , and after the visit at 1 -month, 3 -
month and 6-month  intervals  (see Exhibit 4 ). 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
4.1  RANDOMIZATION  & RECRUITMENT  
This 2 -arm randomized trial (six -month enrollment; six-month follow -up) will enroll approximately 400 
patients with advanced lung and gastrointestinal malignancies and 40 clinicians to assess response 
to behavioral nudges to refer to palliative care at  up to 17  practices within Tennessee Oncology, a US 
community oncology network. All practices have access to palliative care and will be randomized to 
usual care vs. intervention. The outcome is completion of a palliative care visit within 3 months 
among high -risk p atients.  
We will randomize practices into two arms using permuted block randomization to balance practice 
size, baseline palliative care referral rate (see Exhibit 1). The Principal Investigator (RBP) and 
primary statistical analyst will be blinded to arm assignment.  
This 2 -arm randomized trial (six -month enrollment , six-month follow -up) is taking place at Tenn essee 
Oncology . Tenn essee Oncology , one of the nation’s largest, community -based cancer care 
specialists, is home to one of the leading clinical trial networks in the country.  
Eligible clinicians will receive notification about the trial via email and in -person presentations. High -
risk patients for the intervention will be identified from weekly runs of the risk score algorithm, in 
coordination with Larry Bilbrey, Tennessee Oncology Care Data Systems Manager.  
For the semi -structured interviews, the r esearch team at Tennessee Oncology will create a list of 
potential clinicians . We will initially contact potential participants via email (see Exhibit 6), and if we 
do not get enough participation, coordinator and site investigator will do in -person recruitment with 
clinicians. For participants that agree to do the interview, clinical research coordinator will create a 
research ID for each participant tha t only key members of research team will have access to. 
Coordi nator will subsequently create a de -identified dashboard to track mode of interview (in -person, 
virtual, telephone), length of interview, participant characteristics (gender, years in practice, palliative 
care v oncology, physician v nurse practitioner), a nd to store audio files, transcripts, and analysis 
documents.  To ensure an adequate number of perspectives on the trial, we will use purposive 
Confidential           
 
Page 9 of 31 
 sampling to sample clinicians who performed at or above vs. below the median response to the 
intervention.  
4.2 POTENTIAL STUDY BENEFITS  
Potential study benefits include improved access to early palliative care  and end-of-life care 
outcomes  in patients with advanced cancer . 
4.3  STUDY  DURATION  
• 12 months (6 months enrollment ; 6 months follow -up) 
• We anticipate the semi -structured interviews take approximately three to four months. In a 
qualitative study, interviews are conducted until thematic saturation is achieved, and we 
anticipate this will be achieved with interviewing approximately 10 oncology clinicians in the 
intervention group and 10 pall iative care clinicians.  
4.4  TARGET POPULATION  
Approximately 400 patients with advanced malignancies and up to 80  clinicians to assess response 
to behavioral nudges to refer to palliative care at up to 17  practices within Tennessee Oncology. The 
split will be into two arms:  approximately  200 intervention, 200 control , and up to 40  clinicians in each 
arm.  Clinicians will be clustered to a single practice for the intervention and analysis in order to  avoid  
contamination of intervention effect into the usual care arm.  
Our target population for the semi -structured interviews includes  clinicians at Tennessee Oncology 
that were included either in the intervention group as oncology providers, and palliative care clinicians 
at Tennessee Oncology that saw patients referred through our intervention.  
4.5    INCLUSIONS/EXCLUSIONS  
Eligible clinicians will be medical oncology physicians and advance practice providers (APPs) 
practicing at Tennessee Oncology . Clinicians will be clustered to a single practice for the intervention 
and analysis in -order -to avoid contamination of intervention effect into the usual care arm. Patients 
will be excluded if they had a palliative care visit or had no  medical oncology visit within the prior 12 
months or are seen for a non -medical oncology encounter.  
Eligible clinicians will receive notification about the trial via email and in -person presentations. High -
risk patients for the intervention will be identified from weekly runs of the risk score algorithm  (see 
Exhibit 1), in coordination with  Tennessee Oncology Care Data Systems Manage r.  
Practicing medical oncology care clinicians that were in the intervention arm of our initial study  and 
practicing palliative care clinicians at Tennessee Oncology are eligible for the semi -structured 
interviews.  Medical oncology clinicians at Tennessee Oncology that were in control arm  will be 
excluded.  
Inclusion  Criteria  
o Clinicians:  
Confidential           
 
Page 10 of 31 
 ▪ Medical oncology physicians and advance practice providers (APPs) 
practicing at Tenn essee Oncology  
o Patients:   
▪ Stage III and IV lung , and non -Colorectal GI cancers, defined using 
internal algorithms based on  International Classification of Diseases (ICD)  
diagnosis codes, EHR entries, and manual screening  
▪ Received cancer treatment (chemotherapy or immunotherapy) in the past 
6 months  
 Exclusion  Criteria  
o Patients : 
• Benign hematology, genetics, survivorship encounters; no prior EHR  data;  
• Deceased or enrolled in hospice care  
• Had a palliative care visit within the prior three months  
• have not  had a medical oncology visit within the prior 6 months or are 
seen for a non -medical oncology encounter  
4.6 INTERVENTION S    
Clinicians of patients in both arms will receive education on the availability of early palliative care and 
performance reports. Clinicians in Arm 1 (intervention) will receive a EHR notification with option to 
opt-out (placed by the research coordinator , see Exhibit 5) for palliative care referral for any eligible 
high-risk patient, defined by a risk score ≥ 1 for Stage IV cancer patients and ≥2 for Stage III cancer 
patients . If the risk score is above 8, they will be scheduled within 2 weeks, and all other patients  will 
be scheduled within 4 weeks. Clinician will have the option to opt -out for any patient by responding  to 
the notification which will be sent to the research coordinator . If the clinician does not respond , the 
research coordinator will approach  patient  via telephone, explain the rationale for referral based on a 
predetermined script, and offer and schedule an outpatient or telemedicine palliative care consultation 
per patient preference. Follow -up visits will occur at the discretion of the  palliative care clinician, 
usually monthly . Clinicians in both arms  will receive  monthly  peer comparison emails that compare 
their palliative care referral rates against other clinicians.  
4.7 INNOVATION S    
Prior retrospective studies have analyzed the effect of educational or trigger -based strategies on 
palliative care utilization. However, three factors limit generalizability: (1) lack of a prospective, 
randomized design; (2) academic study settings with different patient populations and p alliative care 
capacity than most US oncology practices; and (3) referral triggers that require substantial clinician 
cognitive effort. Our approach of a pragmatic randomized clinical trial is unique. Furthermore, our 
behavioral intervention, using default  referrals based on an automated EHR algorithm, tests a 
scalable approach to increasing palliative care utilization. Finally, we will use post -intervention semi -
structured interviews to refine this approach prior to submitting an R01 application for a mult i-
institutional randomized clinical trial that includes algorithm -based behavioral strategies to increase 
palliative care referral in community oncology.  
4.8    COHORT  MALIGNANCIES  
Confidential           
 
Page 11 of 31 
 Stage III and IV lung and non -colorectal G astrointestinal  (GI) cancers, defined using internal 
algorithms based on administrative codes, EHR entries, and treatment regimens. These malignancies 
represent 43% of solid tumor deaths in the US , have positive prospective evidence for early 
outpatient palliative care , and have been used in prior Tennessee Oncology palliative care pilots.  
4.9 ACCRUAL  
Patients will accrue to the trial as their clinic or clinician in enrolled . Included  Tennessee Oncology 
practices will be randomly assigned to usual care or intervention groups. When enrollment starts, 
clinicians in the intervention clinics will receive the EHR nudge for palliative care referral for each 
eligible patient  and based  on the clinic ian response (opt-out or default ), the research coordinator  will 
call and offer palliative care consultation visit to the patient.   
For the semi -structured interviews, p articipants will be initially recruited via internal practice email 
(See Exhibit 6 ) from the clinical research coordinator. If we don’t receive enough interest, we will 
then recruit by visiting the clinicians in -person in their clinics. In -person recruitment will be done by 
site investigator and/or clinical research coordinator at Tenne ssee Oncology.  
Approximately 20 e ligible clinician participants  from the intervention group  will be interviewed  (1) in -
person, (2) virtual ly, or (3) via telephone.  To ensure an adequate number of perspectives on the trial, 
we will use purposive sampling to sample clinicians who performed at or above vs. below the median 
response to the intervention.  The clinical research coordinator will email and schedule the interviews 
through outlook. A confirmation email will be sent to the clinician 24 hours before the interview unl ess 
the interview will occur less than 24 hours after scheduling.   Two pilot interviews will be conducted 
and used in analysis (pending major edits are not required).  
4.10 QUALITATIVE PROCEDURES  
1. Interviews will be conducted in -person or virtually at a time and location that is convenient for 
the participant. Typically, this would be in their home clinic within their private office space. If 
needed, there is office space available in our practice a dministrative suite in Nashville, TN. If it 
is difficult to schedule an in -person interview,  or if the interviewer is the Penn CRC,  we will 
offer a virtual (zoom or skype) interview or telephone interview.  
2. There will be two CRCs conducting interviews for this study.  One of the CRCs is based at 
Tennessee Oncology and one is based at Penn.  Both will be trained by the research team on 
conducting  semi -structured interviews.  
3. All interview supplies will be readied before the interview begins. The following items are 
needed: recorder and charger, laptop and charger, interview guide.  
4. At time of interview, clinical research coordinator (interviewer) will follow the listed procedures 
in order:  
a. A final confirmation will be made that the clinician can talk at that time  
b. The interviewer will confirm the email or address to which compensation should be 
sent after the interview.  
c. Interviewer will obtain verbal  consent  using the consent language included in the 
appendix.  
Confidential           
 
Page 12 of 31 
 d. Interviewer will begin recording on audio recording device  or Zoom . Interviewer will 
state clinician ID number and date of the interview.  
e. Interviewer will conduct semi -structured interview based on a prepared interview 
guide with open -ended questions either in -person , over Zoom,  or on the telephone.  
f. To wrap up interview, the interviewer will ask if the clinicians has any final thoughts 
or questions. Once these are addressed, interviewer will state that recording will 
stop, and the interviewer will stop the audio recorder.  
g. At the end of the interview, the interviewer will debrief the participant. This is not a 
structured process, but rather time to answer any questions the participant has 
about the study. We don’t anticipate significant enough emotional distress in clinical 
providers to warrant support resources.  
5. Immediately following the end of the call, the interviewer will save the audio recording on a 
password -protected laptop, upload to Monday.com study dashboard, and memo the interview 
by writing down an overall summary of the interview and if there is anythi ng else that was 
noteworthy. This document will be saved for future use as needed in Monday.com.   
6. The interviewer will also send a brief thank you note and incentive via email.  
Post-Interviews  
1. As the interviews are being completed, audio recordings will be collected and sent for 
transcription by a third -party transcription company. When files are sent to the external 
company, the staff member will note to the transcribers to remove any individua l names of 
people (e.g., clinicians, health system leaders, staff, patients), sites, etc. that have been used 
in transcript if any are mentioned during recording.  
2. After transcription has been completed, the coding and analysis process will begin.  
Coding Interviews  
1. Interview coding will require a minimum two individuals (this can include the interviewing 
research staff member)  
2. Both coders will carefully read each interview and then meet to discuss common themes  
3. Once coders have discussed common themes, a list of coding nodes will be created for use in 
Dedoose  qualitative software.  
4. One coder will import the transcripts and insert the node list in a single file. Both coders will 
use this same origin file as they code.  
5. The coders will meet every 2 -3 interviews that they code to discuss their coding and to ensure 
that there are few to no discrepancies between coding styles.  
6. The two coders will each code all transcripts.  
7. The codebook will be edited on an ongoing basis as needed, as determined by the emergence 
of new themes.  
8. Following the completion of successful coding, Dedoose  can be used to pull different 
qualitative data points as needed for analysis.  
9. Coders will develop theme sheets based on those excerpts identified in coding as relevant to 
each theme  
10. The team will review theme sheets and discuss the message of each theme . 
Confidential           
 
Page 13 of 31 
 11. The team will come to consensus on quotes that are exemplary of each theme . 
4.11 SUBJECT COMPENSATION  
We will offer participants in the semi -structured interviews monetary compensation of $100 with a 
Clincard  gift card.  
5. ASSESSMENTS  
5.1  RISK BENEFIT   
The risk/benefit ratio of this study is very favorable. The study team will take necessary steps to 
maintain confidentiality and privacy throughout the study period.  
The potential risks associated with this study are minimal.  Breach of data is a potential risk that will 
be mitigated by using HIPAA compliant and secure data platforms as described.  There are also 
potential emotional risks to patients if they misunderstand the role of palliative care. Our research 
coordinator will be trained in helping patients and their caregivers understand the supportive role of 
palliative care.  
There may be some emotional discomfort or distress with doing patient -reported surveys . If this 
occurs, subjects will have the option to stop the phone call and questionnaire, and we will also 
provide support resources to help cope with this afterwards  including referral to our internal 
psychology team or state -funded mental health support crisis hotline (855-274-7471).  
 
6. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
6.1    GENERALIZED CONSIDERATIONS  
Our study setting is a large community -based oncology network. This population is  similar  to many 
other community oncology practices in that it is not affiliated with a large hospital or health system, 
and thus the major source of palliative care is in the outpatient setting. However, Tennessee 
Oncology has a robust outpatient and telemedicine pal liative care infrastructure consisting of 2.5 FTE 
physicians and 8.0 FTE advance practice providers.  Our study findings may be challenging to 
generalize to oncology practices with limited access to outpatient specialty palliative care. However, 
within the  next 5 -10 years, most community oncology practices will have access to ambulatory or 
telemedicine outpatient palliative care. Furthermore, our algorithm -based approach account s for 
limited palliative care capacity by customizing thresholds; thus, it is more flexible than previously -used 
rules -based triggers.  
We expect to generate results and manuscripts within 2 years due to quick enrollment and the 
presence of an existing and accepted risk score, which obviates the need to create another algorithm. 
If necessary, we will submit an amended version requirement b y spacing out PI, co -investigator, and 
research coordinator effort and enrollment over a three -year period and by using a higher risk score 
threshold to control high -risk patient enrollment.  
Confidential           
 
Page 14 of 31 
 Due to p ayer considerations  with the COVID -19 pandemic, telemedicine palliative care has been 
reimbursed at ambulatory rates; thus, 40% of palliative care visits at Tennessee Oncology are 
currently via telemedicine. Reimbursement landscape changes may impact palliative care access, 
altho ugh this would occur in both the control and intervention arms and should not compromise the 
intervention effect.  
6.2    PATIENT & FAMILY PERCEPTIONS  
The phrase “palliative care” is often stigmatized to the point where patients and their caregivers 
sometimes are fearful of this clinical service, worried that it means cancer -directed treatment is no 
longer effective. Our coordinator will educate and explain the focus on quality of life regardless of 
their treatment plan or outcome. Furthermore, we will make every effort to schedule in-person  or 
telemedicine  visits to minimize patient and caregiver burden  
6.3    RISK SCORE  
To identify patients who may benefit most from early outpatient palliative care, we use a rules -based 
algorithm based on 14 NCCN -endorsed criteria for palliative care referral. This stands in contrast to 
previous randomized trials that have randomized pati ents to palliative care at the point of diagnosis. 
Compared to such trials, our approach may identify patients relatively late and does not pre -specify 
the frequency of palliative care appointments. However, this approach is generalizable to other 
systems that collect similar data, since outpatient specialty palliative care at the point of diagnosis is 
often infeasible due to lack of palliative care capacity. Furthermore, our algorithm still identifies 
patients well before the immediate end -of-life period, and thus is expected to increase referrals 
among many eligible patients. The risk algorithm also ensures that the highest risk patients get seen 
earlier and in a more -timely fashion.   
6.4    ANALYSIS  MEASURES  
The primary study endpoint is completion of a palliative care visit within 3 months of enrollment 
among high -risk patients . The secondary outcome is  complet ion of  palliative care visit s among non -
high-risk patients .  
We will also assess on an exploratory basis the impact on acute care utilization including emergency 
room visits and hospitalizations within participating hospitals in the state of Tennessee ; completed 
palliative care visits among all patients at Tennessee Oncology ; number of opioid prescriptions ; 
aggressive end -of-life care (no hospice referral or enrollment prior to death, hospice enrollment<3 
days before death, location of death and/or chemotherapy receipt within 14 days of death) and 
patient -reported me asures including depression, pain, quality of life measured by FACIT -PAL 14, and 
the heard and understood measure. All exploratory outcomes will be measured by descriptive 
statistics.   
Patients will be followed for exploratory outcomes for six months or death.  
The semi -structured interviews will be transcribed and uploaded to Atlas.ti, a data management 
software. We will inductively develop a codebook following the initial interviews based on the 
structure of the interview guide. One of two reviewers will code e ach transcript, and approximately 20 -
Confidential           
 
Page 15 of 31 
 25% of total transcripts will be coded by both reviewers to establish inter -rater reliability. The 
adequacy of the codebook will be periodically assessed by the reviewers in partnership with the 
research team and modifications will be made as their underst anding of the data and emergent 
themes evolves over time. The reviewers will meet regularly to discuss discrepancies and update the 
code book as needed, with record keeping adequate to track changes to the code book and the 
rationale. Kappa statistics will  be generated to estimate inter -rater reliability. Coding will then be 
reviewed to summarize key themes, and representative quotes will be selected to illustrate those 
themes.  
6.5    SAMPLE SIZE  
Currently, there are approximately 4000 eligible patient -encounters over a six -month period at our 
study practices. Given prior work showing the algorithm flags 8-10% of eligible patients as high -risk, 
we anticipate enrolling at least 360  patients. The unit of analysis is the patient. We will use multilevel 
mixed -effects models, adjusted for relevant covariates , to assess outcomes. Assuming baseline 
palliative care rate=26.9% (SD=10%), a 10% dropout rate,  two-sided alpha=0.05, a sample of 360 
patients ( 180 intervention, 180 control) will provide 80% power to detect a meaningful 15 percentage -
point increase in palliative care visits.  
6.6 RISKS & BENEFITS  
The risk/benefit ratio of this study is very favorable. The study team will take necessary steps to 
maintain confidentiality and privacy throughout the study period.  
The potential risks associated with this study are minimal.  Breach of data is a potential risk that will 
be mitigated by using HIPAA compliant and secure data platforms as described.  There are also 
potential emotional risks to patients if they misunderstand the role of palliative care. Our research 
coordinator will be trained in helping patients and their caregivers understand the supportive role of 
palliative care.  
There may be some emotional discomfort or distress with doing patient -reported surveys . If this 
occurs, subjects will have the option to stop the phone call and questionnaire, and we will also 
provide support resources to help cope with this afterwards  including referral to our internal 
psychology team or state -funded mental health support crisis hotline (855-274-7471).  
Potential study benefits include improved consideration of stakeholder input into our planned 
palliative care intervention and more informed decision -making regarding palliat ive care treatment 
plans.  
6.7 INVESTIGATORS  
Ravi Parikh, MD, MPP is the Principal Investigator.  Dr. Parikh is an Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy and Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania with 
experience implementing pragmatic clinical trials of similar  scale at the University of Pennsylvania 
Health System.    
Confidential           
 
Page 16 of 31 
 Sandhya Mudumbi, MD is the Principal Investigator.   Dr. Mudumbi is Medical Director of Palliative 
Care at Tennessee Oncology, a multispecialty network of community oncology practices in 
Tennessee and Northern Georgia.   
Stephen Schleicher , MD, MBA  is Chief Medical Officer and Medical Oncologist  at Tennessee 
Oncology, PLLC . (See Exhibit 3) 
 
7. DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT  
7.1 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE  
Tennessee Oncology will supply Electronic Medical Record (EMR)  specifications for this study. 
Tennessee Oncology  will be responsible for  data management of this study, including quality 
checking of the data. Data entered manually will be collected via EMR using source documents. 
Clinics  will be responsible for data entry into the EMR  system. In the event of discrepant data, 
Tennessee Oncology will request data clarification from the clinics to  resolve electronically in the 
Electronic Data Capture (EDC)  system.  
Tennessee Oncology will produce a Data Quality Plan that describes the quality checking to be 
performed on the data. EMR and correction documentation will be maintained in the EDC system’s 
audit trail. System backups for data stored at the clinic(s) and records retention for  the study data will 
be consistent with the Tennessee Oncology standard procedures.  
Tennessee Oncology  will perform oversight of the data management of this study, including approval 
of data management plans and specifications. Tennessee Oncology  standard procedures will be 
used to handle and process the electronic transfer of these data.  
7.2 DATA DISCLOSURE  
Information will not be disclosed to anyone outside of the study team.  
7.3 DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING  
All data will be stored on secured Tennessee Oncology  servers and all files will be password 
protected.  
7.4 SOURCE DATA DOCUMENTATION  
Tennessee Oncology monitor (s) will perform ongoing source data verification to confirm that critical  
protocol data (i.e., source data) entered into the Electronic Medical Record (EMR)  by authorized site 
personnel are  accurate, complete, and verifiable from source documents.  
Source documents (paper or electronic) are those in which patient data are recorded  and 
documented for the first time. They include, but are not limited to, hospital records,  clinical and office 
charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, patient -reported outcomes,  evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated  instruments, copies of transcriptions that are 
certified after verification as being accurate  and complete, microfiche, photographic negatives, 
microfilm or magnetic media,  radiology reports , patient files, and records kept at pharmacies, 
laboratories, and medico -technical  departments involved in a clinical trial.  
Confidential           
 
Page 17 of 31 
 Before study initiation, the types of source documents that are to be generated will be  clearly defined 
in the Trial Monitoring Plan. This includes any protocol data to be  entered directly into the EMR  (i.e., 
no prior written or electronic record of the data) and  considered source data.  
Source documents that are required to verify the validity and completeness of data  entered into the 
EMR  must not be obliterated or destroyed and must be retained per  the policy for retention of records 
described in Section 7.6. 
 
To facilitate source data verification, the investigators and institutions must provide University of 
Pennsylvania direct access to applicable source documents and reports for trial -related  monitoring, 
audits, and IRB/EC review. The clinics  must also allow  inspection by applicable health authorities.  
 
7.5 USE OF COMPUTERIZED SYSTEMS  
When clinical observations are entered directly into the clinic’s  computerized medical record system 
(i.e., in lieu of original hardcopy records), the electronic record can serve as the source document if 
the system has been validated in accordance with health authority requirements pertaining to 
computerized systems us ed in clinical research. An acceptable computerized data collection system 
allows preservation of the original entry of data. If original data are modified, the system should  
maintain a viewable audit trail that shows the original data as well as the reaso n for the change, name 
of the person making the change, and date of the change.  
All Tennessee Oncology users and any use of any IT resource(s) are required to read and 
under stand  our data transmission security policy  and procedure.  
The purpose of our Data Transmission Security Policy and Procedures is to guard against 
unauthorized access to electronic protected health information that is being transmitted over an 
electronic communications network. The establishment and implementation  of effective Data 
Transmission Security Procedures is a crucial element in our overall objective or providing 
reasonable protections for individually identifiable health information, including Protected Health 
Information (“PHI”, as defined by HIPAA).  
7.6 RETENTION OF RECORDS  
Records and documents pertaining to the conduct of this study and the distribution of  data, including 
EMR , paper PRO data (if applicable), Informed Consent Forms,  laboratory test results, and 
medication inventory records must be retained by the  Principal Investigator for at least 15 years after 
completion or discontinuation of the  study, or for the length of time required by relevant national or 
local health authorities,  whichever is longer. After that period  of time, the documents may be 
destroyed, subject  to local regulations.  
The research team will destroy audio -recordings 18 months after the study is complete.  All data will 
be de -identified when stored.  We will destroy all data 18 months after the study is complete.  
No records may be disposed of without the written approval of Tennessee Oncology . Written  
notification should be provided to Tennessee Oncology  prior to transferring any records to  another 
party or moving them to another location.  
8. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Confidential           
 
Page 18 of 31 
 8.1  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND REGULATIONS  
This study will be conducted in full conformance with the ICH E6 guideline for Good  Clinical Practice 
and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, or the laws and  regulations of the country in which 
the research is conducted, whichever affords the  greater protection to the individual. The study will 
comply with the requirements of the  ICH E2A guideline (Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions 
and Standards for  Expedited Reporting).  
8.2 REVIEW BOARDS & ETHICS COMMITTEE  
As required by local regulations, the Investigator  will ensure approval of the appropriate regulatory 
bodies is obtained, prior to study initiation. If required, the Investigator  will also ensure that the 
implementation of substantial amendment to the protocol and other relevant study documents happen 
only after approval by the relevant regulatory authorities.  
The Advarra Institutional Review Board (IRB) will review Tennessee Oncology’s research activities. 
The Advarra IRB is an independent IRB that provides services for academic and non -academic 
institutions.  The study protocol will also be submitted to the University of Pennsylvania IRB for review.  
8.3  INFORMED CONSENT  
For administering quality of life and communication questionnaires, w e request a verbal consent 
process. This is requested since our intervention will be being conducted via telephone and with the 
large geographic distribution of our practice  (over 130 miles between clinics) , it would not be feasible 
to obtain written consent for the questionnaire component of the study fo r patients. An information 
form will be read to the patient and mailed to them if they consent to completing the questionnaire via 
telephone.  
For the intervention itself, a  waiver of informed consent is requested. This is a health system initiative 
that will be implemented.  The study is to evaluate that initiative.  Therefore, physicians and their 
patients will not be consented as this is the standard of practice per the he alth system initiative.  
Without a waiver of the consent, the initiative would still be implemented by the health system, but the 
study would be infeasible.  There are several additional reasons why we feel a waiver of consent  
should be granted.  First, it is not feasible to consent every physician and as mentioned this initiative 
would occur with or without the study of it.  Second, if members of the control group were consented, 
this alone could change their behavior.  This c ould potentially disrupt the design of the study and 
making interpretation of the findings challenging.  Third, physicians are not being forced to refer 
patients to palliative care. This  intervention decreases the cognitive burden of remembering which 
patients are  appropriate and would benefit from palliative care. The oncologist always retains control  
of the referral  by being able to “opt -out” and cancel the referral on a case by case basis.  This 
intervention is working towards better implementation of what is considered standard of care for 
patients with advanced care.  
Verbal consent will be obtained from each clinician who participates in the semi -structured interviews  
(see Exhibit 7 ).  Written consent is not necessary for this part of the project  because clinicians will 
not be required to participate and can opt out at any point. No patient identifying information will be 
provided to clinicians.  
 
Confidential           
 
Page 19 of 31 
 8.4  CONFIDENTIALITY  
Tennessee Oncology  maintains confidentiality standards by coding each patient enrolled in the  study 
through assignment of a unique patient identification number. This means that  patient names are not 
included in data sets that may be  transmitted .  
All efforts will be made by study staff to ensure subject privacy.  Data will be evaluated in a de -
identified manner whenever possible. All transcripts will be de -identified and stored in password 
protected files on a secure folder  at Tennessee Oncology .  
Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study using  access 
privileges and passwords. Wherever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related 
information. Precautions are already in place to ensure the data are secure by using passwords and 
HIPAA -compliant encryption.  
Patient medical information obtained by this study is confidential and may only be  disclosed to 
Tennessee Oncology trained study staff .  Electronic data will be stored on secure, password -
protected firewalled servers.  
Data generated by this study must be available for inspection upon request by  representatives of the 
U.S. FDA and other national and local health authorities,  representatives, and collaborators, and the 
IRB/EC for each study site, as  appropriate.  
The research team at the University of Pennsylvania will not have access to identifiable information in 
this trial. All data for this project will be stored on the secure/firewalled servers of the DART system, in 
data files that will be protected by multiple password layers. These data servers are maintained in a 
guarded facility behind several locked doors, with very l imited physical access rights. They are also 
cyber -protected by extensive firewalls and multiple layers of communication encryption. Electro nic 
access rights are carefully controlled by University of Pennsylvania system managers. We believe 
this multi -layer system of data security, identical to the system protecting the University of 
Pennsylvania Health Systems medical records, greatly minimiz es the risk of loss of privacy. In 
addition, risk of loss of confidentiality will be minimized by storing completed paper copies of the 
surveys and signed informed consent forms in locked file cabinets in locked offices accessible only to 
trained study sta ff. Each subject will be assigned a unique identifier without identifying information, 
and data will be entered into an electronic database using only the unique identifier. Only trained 
study staff will have access to the code that links the unique identi fier to the subject’s identity. 
Electronic data will be stored on secure, password -protected firewalled servers at the University of 
Pennsylvania.  
 
9. STUDY DOCUMENTATION, MONITORING, AND ADMINISTRATION  
9.1 STUDY DOCUMENTATION  
The investigator must maintain adequate and accurate records to enable the conduct of the  
study to be fully documented, including but not limited to the protocol, protocol amendments, and  
documentation of IRB/EC and  governmental approval  when applicable .  In addition, at the end of the  
study the  investigation will receive the patient data, which includes an audit trail containing a   
complete record of all changes to data.  
Confidential           
 
Page 20 of 31 
 9.2 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
The investigator should document and explain any protocol deviations .  The investigator should  
promptly report any deviations  that might impact  study patient data integrity to the IRB/EC in  
accordance with established IRB/EC policies .  As per Tennessee Oncology’s standard operating  
procedures,  perspective to deviate from the protocol, including requests to waive protocol eligibility  
criteria are not allowed.  
9.3 CLINIC  INSPECTIONS  
Clinic  visits will be conducted by Tennessee Oncology or an authorized representative for inspection  
of study data, patients’ medical records, and source documentation.  The investigator will permit  
national and local authorities, collaborators, and the  IRBs/ECs to inspect facilities and records  
relevant to this study.   
9.4  ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE  
The study is sponsored by Tennessee Oncology, PLLC  and University of Pennsylvania .  Tennessee 
Oncology Research Team will perform study and safety monitoring, data collection and management. 
Data analysis  and dissemination of study findings including publication  will be in collaboration with 
research team led by Dr. Ravi Parikh at University of Pennsylvania.  
9.5 PUBLICATION OF DATA AND PROTECTION OF TRADE SECRETS  
Regardless of the outcome of a trial, Tennessee Oncology is dedicated to openly providing 
information on the trial to healthcare professionals and to the public, both at scientific congresses and 
in peer -reviewed journals.  Tennessee Oncology will comply with all requirements for publication of 
study results.   
In accordance with standard editorial and ethical practice, Tennessee Oncology will support 
publication of multi -center s only in their entirety and not as an individual center data.   
9.6 PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS  
Any protocol amendments will be prepared by Tennessee Oncology.  Protocol amendments will be 
submitted to the IRB/IEC and to regulatory authorities in accordance with local regulatory authorities.  
A protocol amendment will be provided if data inclusion/exclusion criteria has been added to the 
study.  
Approval will be obtained from the IRB/IEC and regulatory authorities (as locally required) before 
implementation of any changes, except for changes necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to 
the patients or changes that involve logistical or administra tive aspects only.  
10. REFERENCES  
1. Nipp RD, El ‐Jawahri A, Moran SM, et al. The relationship between physical and psychological 
symptoms and health care utilization in hospitalized patients with advanced cancer. Cancer . 
2017;123(23):4720 -4727. doi:10.1002/cncr.30912  
Confidential           
 
Page 21 of 31 
 2. Hwang SS, Chang VT, Fairclough DL, Cogswell J, Kasimis B. Longitudinal Quality of Life in 
Advanced Cancer Patients: Pilot Study Results from a VA Medical Cancer Center. Journal of Pain 
and Symptom Management . 2003;25(3):225 -235. doi:10.1016/S0885 -3924(02)00641 -3 
3. Subbiah IM, Charone MM, Roszik J, et al. Association of Edmonton Symptom Assessment System 
Global Distress Score With Overall Survival in Patients With Advanced Cancer. JAMA Network Open . 
2021;4(7):e2117295. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.17295  
4. Langton JM, Blanch B, Drew AK, Haas M, Ingham JM, Pearson S -A. Retrospective studies of end -
of-life resource utilization and costs in cancer care using health administrative data: a systematic 
review. Palliat Med . 2014;28(10):1167 -1196. doi:10.1177/0269216314533813  
5. Sullivan DR, Chan B, Lapidus JA, et al. Association of Early Palliative Care Use With Survival and 
Place of Death Among Patients With Advanced Lung Cancer Receiving Care in the Veterans Health 
Administration. JAMA Oncology . 2019;5(12):1702 -1709. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.3105  
6. Palliative Care Definition | What is Palliative Care. Accessed January 17, 2021. 
https://www.capc.org/about/palliative -care/  
7. Hui D, De La Rosa A, Bruera E. State of Integration of Palliative Care at National Cancer Institute –
Designated and Nondesignated Cancer Centers. JAMA Oncol . 2020;6(8):1292 -1295. 
doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2020.1471  
8. Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non -
small -cell lung cancer. The New England Journal of Medicine . 2010;363(8):733 -742. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1000678  
9. Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M, et al. Early palliative care for patients with advanced 
cancer: a cluster -randomised controlled trial. Lancet (London, England) . 2014;383(9930):1721 -1730. 
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(13)62416 -2 
10. Ferrell BR, Temel JS, Temin S, et al. Integration of Palliative Care Into Standard Oncology Care: 
American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Update. JCO. 2017;35(1):96 -112. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.70.1474  
11. Cavalier JS, Maguire JM, Kamal AH. Beyond Traditional Advance Care Planning: Tailored 
Preparedness for COVID -19. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management . 2020;0(0). 
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.08.020  
12. Curtis JR, Kross EK, Stapleton RD. The Importance of Addressing Advance Care Planning and 
Decisions About Do -Not-Resuscitate Orders During Novel Coronavirus 2019 (COVID -19). JAMA . 
2020;323(18):1771 -1772. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4894  
13. Levy M, Smith T, Alvarez -Perez A, et al. Palliative Care Version 1.2016. J Natl Compr Canc Netw . 
2016;14(1):82 -113. doi:10.6004/jnccn.2016.0009  
14. Finlay E, Casarett D. Making difficult discussions easier: using prognosis to facilitate transitions to 
hospice. CA Cancer J Clin . 2009;59(4):250 -263. doi:10.3322/caac.20022  
15. Christakis NA, Smith JL, Parkes CM, Lamont EB. Extent and determinants of error in doctors’ 
prognoses in terminally ill patients: prospective cohort studyCommentary: Why do doctors 
Confidential           
 
Page 22 of 31 
 overestimate?Commentary: Prognoses should be based on proved indices not intuition. BMJ. 
2000;320(7233):469 -473. doi:10.1136/bmj.320.7233.469  
16. Chow E, Harth T, Hruby G, Finkelstein J, Wu J, Danjoux C. How accurate are physicians’ clinical 
predictions of survival and the available prognostic tools in estimating survival times in terminally ill 
cancer patients? A systematic review. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) . 2001;13(3):209 -218. 
17. Kamal AH, Bull J, Kavalieratos D, Taylor DH, Downey W, Abernethy AP. Palliative Care Needs of 
Patients With Cancer Living in the Community. J Oncol Pract . 2011;7(6):382 -388. 
doi:10.1200/JOP.2011.000455  
18. Manz CR, Chen J, Liu M, et al. Validation of a Machine Learning Algorithm to Predict 180 -Day 
Mortality for Outpatients With Cancer. JAMA oncology . Published online September 24, 2020. 
doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2020.4331  
19. Manz CR, Parikh RB, Small DS, et al. Effect of Integrating Machine Learning Mortality Estimates 
With Behavioral Nudges to Clinicians on Serious Illness Conversations Among Patients With Cancer: 
A Stepped -Wedge Cluster Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol . Published online October 15, 
2020:e204759. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2020.4759  
20. Dans M, Kutner JS, Agarwal R, et al. NCCN Guidelines® Insights: Palliative Care, Version 
2.2021. J Natl Compr Canc Netw . 2021;19(7):780 -788. doi:10.6004/jnccn.2021.0033  
 
Confidential           
 
Page 23 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 1  
 
EXHIBIT 1 – Risk Algorithm  
Risk Factor   Point Assignment Rule  Factor 
Value  Risk Score 
Point  
Bone Metastases in Diagnosis List or Charge  If exists  1 1 
Secondary malignant neoplasm of brain  If exists  1 1 
COPD in diagnosis list or charge  If exists  1 1 
CHF in diagnosis list or charge  If exists  1 1 
Dementia in Diagnosis List or Charge  If exists  1 1 
Liver Cirrhosis in diagnosis list or charge  If exists  1 1 
Stroke in diagnosis list or charge  If exists  1 1 
Spinal cord compression in Diagnosis list or 
charge  If exists  1 1 
Most recent NCCN Distress Score  >8 1 1 
Most recent ECOG Performance Score  >2 1 1 
Most recent PHQ -2 Score  >3 1 1 
Number of ED visits in prior 3 months  Each ED visit receives 2 
points  1 2 
Number of Inpatient stays in prior 3 months  Each Inpatient stay 
receives 2 points  1 2 
Low Age  <40 1 1 
High Age  >70 1 1 
 
 
Total Risk Score  Interpretation  Time to Palliative Care Visit  
>1 Stage IV, >2 Stage III  High Risk  2 weeks  
<1 Stage IV, < 2 Stage III  Non -High Risk  4 weeks  
 
 
  
Confidential           
 
Page 24 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 2  
 
 
*Score >1 Stage IV, >2 Stage III – high risk on algorithm  
 
  

Confidential           
 
Page 25 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 3  
   
 
  

Confidential           
 
Page 26 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 4 
Patient Surveys  
FEELING HEARD AND UNDERSTOOD  
Individuals can respond to each data element using discrete values ranging from 1 (Completely true ) to 5 (Not 
at all true. )  
 
Q1. I felt heard and understood by this provider and team.  
1. Completely 
true 2. Very true  3. Somewhat 
true.  4. A little bit 
true.  5. Not at all 
true.  
 
Q2. I felt this provider and team put my best interests first when making recommendations about my 
care.  
1. Completely 
true 2. Very true  3. Somewhat 
true.  4. A little bit 
true.  5. Not at all 
true.  
 
Q3. I felt this provider and team saw me as a person, not just someone with a medical problem.  
1. Completely 
true 2. Very true  3. Somewhat 
true.  4. A little bit 
true.  5. Not at all 
true.  
 
Q4. I felt this provider and team understood what is important to me in my life . 
1. Completely 
true 2. Very true  3. Somewhat 
true.  4. A little bit 
true.  5. Not at all 
true.  
 
 
 
 
  
Confidential           
 
Page 27 of 31 
 FACIT -PAL 14  
Below is a list of statements that other people with your illness have said are important . Please circle 
or mark one number per line to indicate your response as it applies to the past 7 days . 
 
 
  Not at 
all A little 
bit Some -
what  Quite  
a bit  Very 
much  
 GP1 I have a lack of energy
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GP2 I have nausea
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GP4 I have pain
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE6 I worry that my condition will get worse
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF3 I am able to enjoy life
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF5 I am sleeping well
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF7 I am content with the quality of my life right now
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GS2 I get emotional support from my family
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
Sp21  I feel hopeful
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE1 I feel sad
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
Pal4  I feel like a burden to my family
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
Pal5  I am constipated
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
Pal14  I am able to openly discuss my concerns with the 
people closest to me
 ................................ ................................ ..........................    
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
B1 I have been short of breath
 ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
 
  
Confidential           
 
Page 28 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 5  
EHR notification with option to opt -out 
 
Subject: Patient eligible for palliative care referral  
 
Tennessee Oncology is committed to offering palliative care to patients with  advanced  cancer.  
 
Mr./Mrs____ is eligible for palliative care referral due to _____________ (include risk factors that flagged them here).  
 
If you agree with palliative care consultation, there is no need to reply . After 48 hours, we will proceed with calling, 
introducing and offering palliative care to the patient using a validated script. Your patient will have the opportunity to 
ask questions about palliative care and to decline.  
If you DO NOT wish to proceed with palliative care referral, please reply “Opt -Out”. If you opt -out, please indicate why 
from the following choices:  
[     ] I have already referred to  palliative care.  
[     ] I wish to discuss this with my patient first.  
[     ] I do not believe this patient’s disease or clinical factors warrant palliative care.  
[     ] I worry about the patient getting the wrong message with our treatment goals.   
[     ] Other – please explain  
 
Sincerely,  
Sandhya Mudumbi, MD  
Stephen Schleicher, MD  
Natalie Dickson, MD  
 
  
Confidential           
 
Page 29 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 6  
Recruitment Emails for Oncology and Palliative Care Clinicians  
Recruitment Email for Oncology Clinicians   
  
Subject: Re: your feedback on upenn palliative care study   
 
Dear Dr. ___ or NP name,    
 
We have completed enrollment for our palliative care clinical trial with University of Pennsylvania and would love your 
feedback on being a participant in the intervention group.    
 
This is a separate qualitative study where you will be interviewed, and your feedback will be incorporated to improve 
our model for palliative care referrals among patients with advanced lung and non -colorectal GI malignancies.    
 
We are offering a $100 gift card for your time and participation.    
 
Let me know when a good time for us to meet and conduct the interview for approximately 30 minutes. I can meet with 
you in person (for middle TN), virtually (zoom or skype), or via telephone.  
  
Thank you for your time and consideration.   
 
Sincerely,   
Nikki Johnson, RN   
  
Recruitment Email for Palliative Care Clinicians  
  
Subject: Re: your feedback on upenn palliative care study   
 
Dear Dr. ___ or NP name,    
 
We have completed enrollment for our palliative care clinical trial with University of Pennsylvania and would love your 
feedback on being a palliative care clinician in this study.    
 
This is a separate qualitative study where you will be interviewed, and your feedback will be incorporated to improve 
our model for palliative care referrals among patients with advanced lung and non -colorectal GI malignancies.    
 
We are offering a $100 gift card for your time and participation.    
 
Let me know when a good time for us to meet and conduct the interview for approximately 30 minutes. I can meet with 
you in person (for middle TN), virtually (zoom or skype), or via telephone.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.   
 
Sincerely,   
Nikki Johnson, RN   
  
Confidential           
 
Page 30 of 31 
 EXHIBIT 7  
VERBAL CONSENT FORM  
 
Title of Research:  Clinician Perspectives on Predictive Analytics and Behavioral Nudges to Improve 
Palliative Care in Advanced Cancer  
Ravi Parikh, MD   
Principal Investigator:  Ravi Parikh, MD  
Site Investigator : Sandhya Mudumbi, MD   
 
Sponsor:  University of Pennsylvania, Tennessee Oncology  
 
Purpose of the Research  
 
We are asking you to take part in an  interview to hear  your perspective s as a participant in a clinical trial. Th e trial aimed 
to increase utilization of Tennessee Oncology’s  embedded palliative care service in advanced lung and non -colorectal GI 
cancer patients through an “opt -out” nudge or alert.   You’ve been asked to participate in this interview because you were 
a part of this study , either as an Oncology or as a palliative care provider.   
 
Explanation of Procedures   
If you agree, I will ask that you to participate in a 30 -45 minute interview and share with us your perspective on this trial, 
and barriers and facilitators to scaling this model to other Oncology practices.  
This interview will be audio -recorded, transcribed, and analyzed to incorporate your feedback to improve this model of 
palliative care referrals.  
Benefits   
Participating in this interview by giving your honest feedback will give you an active role in developing this model.  
Risks and Discomforts   
There are very minimal risks  to participating in this interview. The main potential risk is a breach of confidentiality; however, 
your name and information will be  not be shared    
Confidentiality   
We want to ensure that you feel comfortable sharing your honest opinions and feedback. If you choose to participate, you 
will be assigned a unique ID number. The link between your name and ID number will be kept in a separate database that 
is accessible only to key study personnel. Everything you say today will be kept confidential. The reco rdings will be 
destroyed at the completion of the study. Any identifying information, like your name or your clinic, will be removed from 
that transcript.  
Voluntary Participation and Withdrawal   
You do not have to answer any questions that you do not want to.  You may withdraw from the interview at any time by 
simply asking to stop your participation.   
Cost of Participation   
Confidential           
 
Page 31 of 31 
 The cost of participating is your time , which we greatly appreciate and for which we offer a token of appreciation.  
Payment for Participation in Research   
You will receive $100 after your interview, even if you choose to withdraw .  
Questions   
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints about the research or a research -related injury including available 
treatments, please contact the principal investigator, Dr. Ravi Parikh, or the site investigator, Dr. Sandhya Mudumbi at 
615-202-7797.  
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, or concerns or complaints about the research, you may 
contact Advarra IRB at 410.884.2900.  
 
We are obtaining verbal consent for your participation in this interview, and therefore if you agree, we  will move forward 
with  the interview. If you would like, a copy of this consent form can be emailed or 
mailed to you.  
 
  
 
 
Printed Name of Person Obtaining Consent  
 
 
 
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent and Date  
 
Reviewed by:  
 
 
 
Printed Name of Principal Investigator  
 
 
 
Signature of Principal Investigator and Date  
 
 