 
 
 
 
 
 
BREATHES:  
Bringing Respiratory Education for Improved 
Adherence and Technique Home Th rough E -
Interventions for Self -management  
 
Document date: September 27, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND  
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)  results in nearly 750,000 hospitalizations 
annually and is the third leading cause  of 30-day hospital readmissions in the United States.1,2 
Improving the quality of care for hospitalized COPD patients has recently become a national 
priority through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Hospital Readmissions 
Reduction Pr ogram.3,4 A key element of improving care quality is translating existing evidence 
into improved p ractice.5,6 Extensive evidence exists to support the efficacy of inhaled 
medications to control and reduce  COPD  symptoms and to improve patient outcomes.7–17 
However, the real -world effectiveness of these medications is often limited due both to poor 
inhaler tech nique and to insufficient adherence to treatment plans.10,11,18 –26 Most interventions for 
hospitalized patients with COPD focus on medication reconciliation, treatment optimization, and 
inhaler technique education prior to being discharged home.27–29 However, after discharge 
home, patients quickly lose inhaler technique skills, have difficulty adhering to complex 
regimens, and lack tools  to aid adherence, such as lung function response to their treatment 
regimen .8,10,11,30,31 Interventions  to reinforce skills and support adherence are needed across 
care transitions to reduce the risk of deleterious health outcomes.  
Simple and feasible a t-home interventions to provide skills training and adherence support are 
needed . Our novel idea is to pai r at-home inhaler skill training with at-home spirometry  
measurements to comprehensively support both medication skill and adherence. I propose 
testing a novel at-home  self-management support  program called “BREATHES” ( Bringing 
Respiratory Education for im proved Adherence and Technique Home through E -interventions 
for Self -management) Program . BREATHES will include two main components: first, self -
directed  inhaler skill training sessions through the virtual Teach -To-Goal (V -TTG) intervention I 
developed and tested during my K2332,33 and, second, a handheld lung function device to 
provide physiologic feedback and capture medication adherence called SpiroPD.34,35 TTG is a 
patient -centered strategy that uses cycles of assessment and demonstration tailored to patients’ 
self-management needs; my research shows  in-person  TTG is effective for tea ching inhaler 
technique and reduces acute care utilization.10,11,18,31,36 Virtual -TTG delivers the key  features of 
TTG using virtual  patient -directed lessons through novel adaptive technology that provides 
tailored self -assessment and training .32,33 My studies demonstrate  participants’ willingness to 
use V -TTG at -home for post -discharge booster education  and show that V-TTG is effective and 
may be non -inferior to in -person TTG in significantly reducing  inhaler misuse  among 
hospitalized  patients .32-33 However, it remains unknown whether  at-home  V-TTG session s will 
maintain self -management skills over the longer term  and how direct physiologic lung 
monitoring support can impact medication adherence . The proposed  studies will determine 
whether combining at -home skill training with objective measurements of lung function and 
adherence monitoring through the BREATHES Pro gram improves self -management skills and 
medication adherence in the first 30 days after hospitalization for COPD.  
PURPOSE & H YPOTHESIS  
Our central hypothesis is  that patients hospitalized for COPD who subsequently complete the 
at-home BREATHES Program wit h V-TTG skill training and SpiroPD adherence support will 
retain increased medication knowledge, skill, self -efficacy, and adherence that otherwise decays 
substantially by 30 days post -discharge. To test this hypothesis, I propose the following specific 
aims: 
SA1. Determine the feasibility of, adherence to, and efficacy of at -home V -TTG for 
ongoing inhaler skill training.  Hypothesis : Participants who complet e both in -hospital and at -
home V -TTG will have a significantly increased likelihood of demonstrating effective respiratory 
inhaler technique within 30 days after hospital discharge compared to in-hospital technique.  
 
SA2. Determine the feasibility of, adherence to, and efficacy of at -home SpiroPD for 
COPD medication adherence support. Hypothesis : Partici pants’ use of S piroPD (PMD 
Healthcare) will significantly improve their COPD medication adherence.   
METHODS OVERVIEW  
We will voluntarily enroll 70 inpatients admitted to the University of Chicago Medicine over the 
course of 12 months into the at -home BREATHES Program.  After obtaining informed consent, 
participants will complete in -hospital skills, lung function, and med ication adherence 
assessments followed by the BREATHES at -home V -TTG inhaler learning program with self -
monitoring and adherence support through the SpiroPD device . Participants will be trained on 
V-TTG and SpiroPD use in the hospital. The V -TTG interventi on uses novel adaptive learning 
features that allow learners to participate in tailored educational sessions. They will begin every -
other -day lung function assessments using the SpiroPD device in the hospital and continue on 
discharge. At 48-72 hours after  discharge, participants will receive  a unique username and 
password  to complete the at -home V -TTG sessions on any of their own desktop or handheld 
devices; they will complete the V -TTG session at least one time in the first 30 days. Participants 
will rec eive reminders for completion of the V -TTG inhaler training and daily lung function 
monitoring via text messaging Adherence to the at -home V -TTG session (captured through the 
Smart Sparrow platform), lung function monitoring (captured via the SpiroPD devic e), and 
objective inhaler medication adherence (captured via Propeller Health Bluetooth objective 
monitoring ; only 30 of these 70 patients will have objective medication adherence captured ) will 
be assessed throughout the 30 -days after discharge via the HI PAA compliant interface . 
Participants will return at 30 days post -hospital discharge for an in -person evaluation of their 
inhaler skills, lung function, and acute care utilization.  
RECRUITMENT  
Admission logs (EPIC) at the University of Chicago will be examined each day to screen for 
potentially eligible inpatients. The treating physician will be contacted for verbal assent using 
standardized text.  Among patients whose physician provides assent, medical records will be 
reviewed to ascertain eligibility and informed consent will be sought from eligible patients.  
Approximately 70 patients  will be recruited at the Univers ity of Chicago Medicine over 12  
months.  
Study Schema  
 Table 1: Data Collection Tools   Hospital  Home  30-day  
V-TTG adherence  Smart Sparrow platform data capture  - X - 
Inhaler technique  Validated inhaler checklists X - X 
Inhaler 
knowledge, 
efficacy, skills  Inhaler step knowledge , applied inhaler use skill, and attitudes  for inhaler self -
efficacy assessed through short -answers.   
X  
X  
X 
Lung function  KoKo® portable spirometer: lung function (FEV1 %predicted).  
Handheld SpiroPD device (up to daily, at home)  X 
X - 
X X 
X 
Treatment 
Adherence  
 Self-reported: Medication adherence report scale (MARS); dose -counter on 
applicable devices; optional medication diary on the SpiroPD device  
Objective: Propeller Health© Bluetooth devices.  X 
 
- - 
 
X X 
 
X 
Self-efficacy   “I am confident that I know how to use [inhaler] correctly, (5 -point scale).  X X X 
Quality of life 
(QOL)  The Airway Questionnaire (AQ -20) 20 -item tool assesses effect of current 
symptoms in everyday life for patients with COPD.   
X  
-  
X 
Symptoms  Modified Borg Dyspnea Scale; COPD Severity Score.  X - X 
Health Literacy  Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults: 36 item tool.  X - X 
Data Collection Time Points  
1. In-Hospital Baseline Assessments . Research Assistant ( RA) will assess participants’ baseline 
inhaler technique, inhaler self -efficacy, lung function, and self -reported adherence to their 
treatment regimen.  
2. In-Hospital Education:  Research Assistant (RA) provides in-person TTG inhaler training and 
training on how to use the V -TTG and lung function monitoring at home.  
3. In-Hospital Post-Education Assessments.  RA will obtain post-education assessments .10  
4. Post-Discharge At -Home BREATHES Program with V -TTG education and lung function 
monitoring. The participant will complete up to daily lung function (goal of every other day) and 
medication adherence diaries using the SpiroPD device.  The RA will give a unique use rname 
and password to each participant to access the V -TTG inhaler training after they have been 
discharged home . The V -TTG should be completed at least once within the first 30 days after 
discharge.  The RA will send  up to three reminders for completion of the lung function monitoring 
and V -TTG via text messaging. Participants will use their own device (tablet, laptop or desk top 
computer, or smartphone)  for V -TTG use at home . For some patient s, data will be collected 
each time they use their inhaled medication as prescribed. This data will be collected 
automatically when medication is utilized via a Propeller Health device attached to the inhaler. 
Patients should use their medication as they ar e instructed by their provider; no specified usage 
will be provided by the research team. Only data from regular use will be collected for this 
portion of the study.  
5. Post-Discharge Assessments . Thirty days (+/ -7 days) after discharge , participants will return 
for an in -person study visit to assess inhaler technique, adherence measures, lung function, and 
other assessments.  
Device Data Collection  
The SpiroPD device will record participant use and lung function scores. These measurements 
are stored in a H IPAA compliant server over wifi and are available to the participant and 
research team.  Data from the V -TTG educational modules will be collected via the Smart 
Sparrow platform. For a subset of approximately 30 patients, a device by Propeller Health wi ll 
measure  objective medication use  and adherence . This device will collect only use of an inhaler 
medication and does not require the participant to use their treatment any differently than 
prescribed by the clinician. T his data will be stored in a HIPPA com pliant server only available to 
the research team.  
Survey Data Collection  
Trained research staff will assess the following at the initial enrollment and the 30 -day follow -up 
visit: 
- Demographics  
- Self-reported treatment adherence  
o MARS  
- Self-reported self -efficacy (5 -point Likert scale)  
- Quality of Life  
o The Airway Questionnaire (AQ -20) 20 -item tool assesses effect of current 
symptoms in everyday life for patients with COPD  
- Symptoms  
o Modified Borg Dyspnea Scale  
o COPD Severity Tool  
- Health Literacy  
o Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults: 36 item tool.  
Spirometry  
Spirometry will be performed  during the initial visit and during the follow up visit  using the 
portable KoKo spirometer  and the SpiroPD device.  
DURATION  
Participants will be enrolled in the at -home BREATHES Program for  30 days after discharge 
from the hospital . They will be in the study for 30 days (with a window of +/ - 1 week for the 30 
day visit) from the time of enrollment.  
LOCATION  
The study will take place at the  University of Chicago Medicine as well as at patient homes.  
TYPE AND NUMBER OF EXPERIMENTAL SUBJECTS  
We will enroll 70 study participants  from patients admitted to the University of Chicago 
Medicine . Only 30 of these 70 subjects will utilize the Propelle r Health device to objectively 
measure medication adherence.  This subset of 30 patients will be chosen based on the 
patients’ prescription of a Propeller -compatible inhaler device (as not all inhalers will be 
compatible with this technology) as well as their willingness to verbally assent  to this portion of 
the stu dy.  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Age 18 years and older  
2. Physician -diagnosed COPD (prior to or during hopsitalization)  
3. Owns a wifi -enabled device (desktop, laptop, tablet, smartphone, etc.)  
4. Discharged with a rescue and/or controller MDI  
5. Visual acuity of at least 20/ 50 in at least one eye (with or without corrective lens provided 
by the reseach team for study purposes)  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Currently in an intensive care unit  
2. Physician declines to provide consent  
3. Patient unable to provide consent (e.g., history of cognitive impairment, unable to 
understand English ) or declines to provide consent  
STATISTICAL ANALYSES  
We will use means, medians, proportions, scatterplots, and histograms to describe the data. We 
will test for group differences using the t-test, the Wil coxon rank sum test, Pearson’s chi -
squared test, or Fisher’s exact tests , as appropriate. The primary outcomes  for Aim 1 are at -
home V -TTG adherence and inhaler technique and for Aim 2,  at-home lung function testing 
adherence and medication adherence. McNe mar’s chi -squared tests will be used to compare 30 
day post -discharge vs. pre -discharge adherence to the devices, prevalence of inhaler misuse 
(≤10/12 steps correct), and medication adherence . Secondary outcomes will include change in 
self-efficacy for inh alers, symptom burden, self -reported utilization of health care services, and 
QOL. A two -tailed p -value less than 0.05 will define statistical significance.  
POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
The subject may be uncomfortable answering some interview questions . All subjects will be told 
that t hey can refuse to answer any question.   
Loss of confidentiality.  To help ensure that patients’ health information remains private, we will 
restrict access to data collected for our study to study personnel only (via use of p assword -
protection and locked cabinets for study documents).  Study ID numbers will be generated and 
will be used when discussing and/or reviewing data at study meetings.  Also, study reports will 
report results in aggregate and not contain information tha t can be used to identify individual 
patients.  
Spirometry is safe and is commonly used to measure disease severity but can cause some 
minor che st soreness or lightheadedness.  
DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board  will be formed to protect the safety of study subjects to 
ensure that they are not exposed to undue risk and to assure that the quality of the research 
data generated is acceptable  and protected . The DSMB will operate without any conflicts of 
interest and /or undue influence from interested parties including the study investigators and 
funder.. The DSMB members’ primary responsibilities will be to ensure sufficient progress and 
implementation of the project and to ensure safety of the participants. This wor k will include 
evaluations  of patient accrual rates  during the recruitment period, patient safety  including 
adverse and/or unplanned events,  and the integrity of the data collection and management 
during this study. All serious adverse events will be forwa rded to the IRB and DSMB within 48 
hours of being recognized by study staff. The DSMB will have authority to recommend 
modifications to the clinical investigations or to stop these investigations if there are concerns 
with patient safety or the integrity o f the study.   
Study investigators will communicate with the DSMB members about the study only as needed 
to make decisions related to meetings and meeting materials. Communication between DSMB 
members will be initiated by the DSMB chair.  Communication with NHLBI will led by the DSMB 
chair and/or PI depending on the circumstances of the required communication such as 
communication regarding the DSMB report.  This DSMB  will consist of 3 members , including two 
faculty at the University of Chicago  and one from Northwestern , who will be involved with the 
safety and monitoring of this study : Kenzie Cameron, PhD, Peter O’Donnell MD, and Matthew 
Churpek MD, PhD. All board members will meet our institution’s requirements for declaring 
conflicts of inter est. The DSMB will convene initially to review, provide feedback on, and 
ultimately approve the data safety monitoring plan prior to beginning enrollment. The board will 
then meet half way through the enrollment period or when we reach 50% enrollment, whic hever 
comes first . The NHLBI Program Office will be notified of scheduled meeting in advance should 
the program manager and/or delegate wish to monitor the meeting . A report of these minutes 
will be forwarded to the PI and to NIH  NHLBI  staff. A summary of DSMB deliberations and 
recommendations  will be submitted to the IRB. Additional DSMB meetings may be scheduled as 
needed.  
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE PARTICIPANTS AND 
OTHERS  
Although we do not believe that participants will directly  benefit from this study, beyond potential 
improved aderence, self -monitoring, and inhaler technique  skills , the risks are reasonable in 
relation to the benefits because the proposed studies could help us learn about better ways to 
patients to self -assess their lung function and continue to learn self -management skills after 
they transition home  post-discharge . 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
We understand the importance of protecting the confidentiality of information from our research 
participants. We will use unique al phanumeric identifiers for the data collection process. These 
unique codes will link all related participant information. All case report forms will be stored in 
locked file cabinets.  All electronic data will be secured using password -protected files. Acc ess 
to these data will be restricted to the research staff only. Analytic files will not contain any 
identifying information. All reports/manuscripts will be prepared in such a way that individual 
patients will not be identifiable.  Additonal specific deta ils are described above.  
 
COMPENSATION  
Participants will receive compensation for their time ($25 inpatient, $50 30 -day in-person visit).  
Additionally, study participants will receive the SpiroPD  for use during the study and will be able 
to keep this device for their personal use upon completion of the study; this device is valued at 
$500.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
Medical records  at the University of Chicago will be examined each day to screen for potent ially 
eligible patients. The treating physician will be contacted for verbal or written assent using 
standardized text. To reduce the burden on busy clinicians of individual pages/phone calls for 
assent, we will also provide additional options for assent a head of clinical rotations (see X).  
Among patients whose physician provides assent, medical records will be reviewed to ascertain 
eligibility and  written  informed consent will be sought from eligible patients .  
REFERENCES  
1.  National Center for Health Sta tistics. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Includes: Chronic Bronchitis and 
Emphysema. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/copd.htm. Last updated May 3, 2017 Accessed February 6, 2018.  
2.  Jencks SF, Williams MV, Coleman EA. Rehospitalizations Among  Patients in the Medicare Fee -for-Service Program. N 
Engl J Med . 2009;360(14):1418 -1428.  
3.  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program. 
https://www.cms.gov/medicare/medicare -fee-for-service -payment/acuteinpatientp ps/readmissions -reduction -
program.html. Published April 18, 2016. Accessed March 12, 2017.  
4.  Feemster LC, Au DH. Penalizing hospitals for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease readmissions. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2014;189(6):634 -639.  
5.  Wagner EH, Austin BT, Davis C, Hindmarsh M, Schaefer J, Bonomi A. Improving chronic illness care: translating 
evidence into action. Health Aff Proj Hope . 2001;20(6):64 -78. 
6.  Avorn J, Fischer M. “Bench to behavior”: translating comparative effectiveness r esearch into improved clinical practice. 
Health Aff Proj Hope . 2010;29(10):1891 -1900.  
7.  Rand CS. Patient adherence with COPD therapy. Eur Respir Rev . 2005;14(96):97 -101.  
8.  George J, Kong DCM, Stewart K. Adherence to disease management programs in patients with COPD. Int J Chron 
Obstruct Pulmon Dis . 2007;2(3):253 -262. 
9.  Zwerink M, Brusse -Keizer M, van der Valk PD, Zielhuis GA, Monninkhof EM, van der Palen J, Frith PA, Effin g T. Self 
management for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2014;(3):CD002990.  
10.  Press VG, Arora VM, Shah LM, Lewis SL, Charbeneau J, Naureckas ET, Krishnan JA. Teaching the use of respiratory 
inhalers to h ospitalized patients with asthma or COPD: a randomized trial. J Gen Intern Med . 2012;27(10):1317 -1325.  
11.  Press VG, Arora VM, Trela KC, Adhikari R, Zadravecz FJ, Liao C, Naureckas E, White SR, Meltzer DO, Krishnan JA. 
Effectiveness of Interventions to T each Metered -Dose and Diskus Inhaler Techniques. A Randomized Trial. Ann Am 
Thorac Soc . 2016;13(6):816 -824.  
12.  Bourbeau J, Julien M, Maltais F, Rouleau M, Beaupré A, Bégin R, Renzi P, Nault D, Borycki E, Schwartzman K, Singh R, 
Collet JP; Chronic Obstru ctive Pulmonary Disease axis of the Respiratory Network Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du 
Québec. Reduction of hospital utilization in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a disease -specific self -
management intervention. Arch Intern Med . 2003;163(5):585 -591. 
13.  Gadoury MA, Schwartzman K, Rouleau M, Maltais F, Julien M, Beaupré A, Renzi P, Bégin R, Nault D, Bourbeau J; 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease axis of the Respiratory Health Network, Fonds de la recherche en santé du 
Québec (FRS Q). Self -management reduces both short - and long -term hospitalisation in COPD. Eur Respir J . 
2005;26(5):853 -857.  
14.  GOLD 2017 Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management and Prevention of COPD. http://goldcopd.org/gold -2017 -
global -strategy -diagnosis -management -prevention -copd/. Accessed March 12, 2017.  
15.  Hanania NA, Darken P, Horstman D, Reisner C, Lee B, Davis S, Shah T. The efficacy and safety of fluticasone propionate 
(250 microg)/salmeterol (50 microg) combined in the Diskus inhaler for the trea tment of COPD. Chest . 2003;124(3):834 -
843. 
16.  Celli BR, Thomas NE, Anderson JA, Ferguson GT, Jenkins CR, Jones PW, Vestbo J, Knobil K, Yates JC, Calverley PM. 
Effect of pharmacotherapy on rate of decline of lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: results from the 
TORCH study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2008;178(4):332 -338.  
17.  Lavorini F, Magnan A, Dubus JC, Voshaar T, Corbetta L, Broeders M, Dekhuijzen R, Sanchis J, Viejo JL, Barnes P, 
Corrigan C, Levy M, Crompton GK. Effect of incorrec t use of dry powder inhalers on management of patients with asthma 
and COPD. Respir Med . 2008;102(4):593 -604.  
18.  Press VG, Arora VM, Shah LM, Lewis SL, Ivy K, Charbeneau J, Badlani S, Nareckas E, Mazurek A, Krishnan JA. Misuse 
of respiratory inhalers in  hospitalized patients with asthma or COPD. J Gen Intern Med . 2011;26(6):635 -642.  
19.  Roggeri A, Micheletto C, Roggeri DP. Inhalation errors due to device switch in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and asthma: critical health and econo mic issues. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis . 2016;11:597 -602.  
20.  Vanderman AJ, Moss JM, Bailey JC, Melnyk SD, Brown JN. Inhaler misuse in an older adult population. Consult Pharm J 
Am Soc Consult Pharm . 2015;30(2):92 -100.  
21.  Bonds RS, Asawa A, Ghazi AI. Misuse of medical devices: a persistent problem in self -management of asthma and 
allergic disease. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol . 2015 Jan;114(1):74 -76.e2.   
22.  Batterink J, Dahri K, Aulakh A, Rempel C. Evaluation of the use of inhaled medications by hos pital inpatients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Can J Hosp Pharm . 2012;65(2):111 -118. 
23.  Melani AS, Canessa P, Coloretti I, DeAngelis G, DeTullio R, Del Donno M, Giacobbe R, Scarlato I, Serafini A, Barbato N, 
Vaghi A, Sestini P; Educational Study Group of the Italian Association of Hospital Pulmonologists (AIPO). Inhaler 
mishandling is very common in patients with chronic airflow obstruction and long -term home nebuliser use. Respir Med . 
2012;106(5):668 -676.  
24.  Melani AS, Bonavia M, Cilenti  V, Cinti C, Lodi M, Martucci P, Serra M, Scichilone N, Sestini P, Aliani M, Neri M; Gruppo 
Educazionale Associazione Italiana Pneumologi Ospedalieri. Inhaler mishandling remains common in real life and is 
associated with reduced disease control. Respir Me d. 2011;105(6):930 -938.  
25.  Melani AS1, Zanchetta D, Barbato N, Sestini P, Cinti C, Canessa PA, Aiolfi S, Neri M; Associazione Italiana Pneumologi 
Ospedalieri Educational Group. Inhalation technique and variables associated with misuse of conventional me tered -dose 
inhalers and newer dry powder inhalers in experienced adults.  Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.  2004;93(5):439 -46. 
26.  McFadden ER. Improper patient techniques with metered dose inhalers: clinical consequences and solutions to misuse. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol . 1995;96(2):278 -283. 
27.  Bhatt SP, Wells JM, Iyer AS, Kirkpatrick DP, Parekh TM, Leach LT, Anderson EM, Sanders JG, Nichols JK, Blackburn 
CC, Dransfield MT.  Results of a Medicare Bundled Payments for Care Improvement Initiative for COPD Readmissio ns. 
Ann Am Thorac Soc . 2017;14(5):643 -648.  
28.  Zafar MA, Panos RJ, Ko J, Otten LC, Gentene A, Guido M, Clark K, Lee C, Robertson J, Alessandrini EA. Reliable 
adherence to a COPD care bundle mitigates system -level failures and reduces COPD readmissions: a  system redesign 
using improvement science. BMJ Qual Saf . 2017;26(11):908 -918.  
29.  Parikh R, Shah TG, Tandon R. COPD exacerbation care bundle improves standard of care, length of stay, and 
readmission rates. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis . 2016;11:577 -583.  
30.  George J, Kong DCM, Thoman R, Stewart K. Factors associated with medication nonadherence in patients with COPD. 
Chest . 2005;128(5):3198 -3204.  
31.  Paasche -Orlow MK, Riekert KA, Bilderback A, Chanmugam A, Hill P, Rand CS, Brancati FL, Krishnan JA.  Tailored 
Education May Reduce Health Literacy Disparities in Asthma Self -Management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 
2005;172(8):980 -986.  
32.  Press VG, Kelly CA, Kim JJ, White SR, Meltzer DO, Arora VM. Virtual Teach -To-GoalTM Adaptive Learning of Inhaler 
Technique for Inpatients with Asthma or COPD. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract . 2017;5(4):1032 -1039.e1.  
33.  Wu M, Woodrick N, Arora VM, Farnan JM, Press VG. Developing a Virtual Teach -To-Goal Inhaler Technique Learning 
Module: A Mixed Methods Approach. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.  2017;5(6):1728 -1736. ] 
34.  Shakkottai A, Nasr SZ. The Use of Home Spirometry in Pediatric Cystic Fibrosis Patients: Results of a Feasibility Study. 
Glob Pediatr Health . 2017;4:2333794X17690315.  
35.  Henriques C. Children with Cystic Fibrosis Who Use Spiro PD at Home Improve Lung Function, Study Shows. Cystic 
Fibrosis News Today. https://cysticfibrosisnewstoday.com/2017/04/25/home -use-of-spiro -pd-improves -lung-function -of-
children -with-cystic -fibrosis/.  April 2017. Accessed October 4, 2017.  
36.  Kripalani S, Bengtzen R, Henderson LE, Jacobson TA. Clinical research in low -literacy populations: using teach -back to 
assess comprehension of informed consent and privacy information. IRB. 2008;30(2):13 -19. 