 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Effect of Single Event Multi Level Chemoneurolysis with AbobotulinumtoxinA 
(Dysport ®) on Energy Expenditure and Walking Efficiency in Children with Cerebral 
Palsy 
Heakyung Kim, M D 
Columbia Un iversity Irving Medical Center, Department of Rehabilitation and Regenerative  
AAAR1322  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version 10/08/2021    
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator: Hea kyung Kim, MD  
Columbia University Irving  Medical Center  
180 Fort Washington Ave  
New York, NY 10032  
 
 
 
 
 
Sponsor: Ipsen Pharmeceuticals  
One Main St.  
Cambridge, MA 02142  
Dysport® (AbobotulinumtoxinA ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Cerebral palsy (CP) is a movement and postural disorder due to lesion to immature brain. 
Spasticity is the most common movement disorder in children with cerebral palsy  (CDC) and 
causes difficulty with walking, musculoskeletal complications such as hip dislocation, scoliosis 
and joint contracture, pain and balance issues ( Balaban et al., 2012) . Spastic muscles  are stiff and 
weak (Campbell & Ball, 1978). A combination of spasticity and  weakness in children with CP 
makes them walk difficult and less efficient. Spasticity management has been very important for 
children with CP for activity of daily living including walking  (Massin & Allington, n.d.) Using 
botulinum toxin  A (BoNT-A) injections to control spastic lower limbs became almost  first line 
treatment for children with CP to improve gait, range of motion and quality of life.  (Ade-Hall & 
Moore, 2000 ). Several studies reported that children with CP showed higher energy expenditure 
during walking compared to typically developing  peers. (Balaban 2007 & Rose et al 1990  Steele 
K et al 2017) This increase is due to combination of the mechanical inefficiencies during 
ambulation caused by spasticity  (Reddihough et al., 2002) , muscle co-contraction  ((Balaban et 
al., 2012) , limited range of motion, muscle weakness and loss of balance (Norman, 2004).   
Perhaps, improving coordination of walking by reducing in spasticity with BoNT -A may 
improve energy expenditure by improving coordination of muscle activity which is related to 
peak power output (Wakeling et al, 2010) . Energy expenditure is an objective measure of 
evaluating the energy cost required for movement  (Rose et al., n.d.)  Generally, the oxygen 
consumption (VO2) is us ed to measure energy expenditure and one of the most significant 
markers of aerobic fitness and endurance (ACSM’s Advanced Exercise Physiology , 2006). The 
rate of oxygen consumption (mL/kg/min) was significantly higher in the children with diplegia 
than in those with hemiplegia or with spina bifida or the healthy children (Rose et al., n.d.) . 
Oxygen cost (mL/kg/m) was significantly higher, and velocity was significantly slower in all the 
groups with disability than in the healthy children  (Duffy and Graham 2014) . Balaban et al 
showed that botulinum toxin A injections to spastic gastric muscles decreased VO2 and gait 
parameters at 2-month post injections.  We hypothesized that BoNT -A injections to spastic lower 
limbs of ambulant spastic CP decrease ener gy expenditure during walking. The aim of this study 
is to investigate the effect of spasticity management using Dysport®  (AbobotulinumtoxinA ) on 
the walking efficiency , oxygen consumption  and gross motor function and gait parameters  of 
children with CP.  
 
 
 2.DESIGN  
 
This study is a single center, open label study.  
 
We seek to recruit 15 children diagnosed with Cerebral Palsy (CP) in order to determine the  
efficacy of single event multi level chemoneurolysis (SEMLC) with Dysport® on energy  
expenditure as measured by oxygen cons umption (VO2) during the 6 minute walk test.  
 
Subject Visits:  
 Baseline: Consent, Modified Ashworth Scale, modified Tardieu Scale, CP Qual ity of 
Life Questionnaire for Children/Adolescents, 6 minute walk with VO2 and gait analysis  
 Treatment: SEMLC treatment  
2 
  4 week follow -up: Modified Ashworth Scale, modified Tardieu Scale, CP Quality of Life  
Questionnaire for Children/Adolescents, 6 minu te walk with VO2 and gait analysis  
 12 week follow -up: Modified Ashworth Scale, modified Tardieu Scale, CP Quality of 
Life Questionnaire for Children/Adolescents, 6 minute walk with VO2 and gait analysis  
 
 2.1 Participants  
 
All subjects will be recruited from Dr. Kim’ s Pediatric Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 
clinic. Dr. Kim will approach  eligible patients and their  parents in order to explain the study and 
to determine interest. A researcher of the study  team will email and/or telephone call eligible 
participants on behalf of Dr. Kim and with her permission to inform the  parents of the eligible 
participant of the st udy. 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 Age: 5-17 years. Must be <18 prior to injection.  
 >10 kilograms at screening and injection visits  
 Diagnosis of spastic diplegia OR mild - to moderate spastic quadriplegia Cerebral Palsy  
 Gross Motor Function Classification System level: I, II, III  
 Ability to ambulate independently without aid, equinus gait  
 Absent of joint or bone deformities  
 Eligible to receive SEMLC  
 Cooperative and tolerant to testing procedures during clinic screening  
 Presence of spasticity in one or both legs  
 Be on a stable dose and regimen if on any prescribed medication/s  
 Parent must have signed written informed consent and the Patient Authorization f or Use 
and Release of Health and Research Study Information  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 Ankle contractures no more than -10 degrees with the knee ex tended 
 Hemiplegia  
 Wheelchair dependent  
 Received Botulinum toxin within previous 4 months  
 Uncontrolled epilepsy or certain types of seizures  
 Fracture in the study limb within previous 12 months  
 Infection or skin disorder at planned injection site  
 Shortness of breath or other respiratory issues  
 Uncontrolled clinically significant medical condition  
 Received phenol or alcohol block in the study limb within previous 6 months  
 Surgery in the st udy limb within previous 12 months  
 Serial casting within previous 12 months  
 New physiotherapy and/or orthotic regimen <1 month before study start. (physiotherapy 
and/or orthotic regimen will be permitted if it began >1 month before study start and 
maintained throughout study)  
 
 
3 
 2.2 Outcome Measures  
 
Primary Question: Does single event multi level chemoneurolysis (SEMLC) have an effect  
on energy expenditure and walking efficiency as measured by oxygen consumption (VO2)  
and gait parameters during the 6 minu te walk test in 15 children diagnosed with cerebral  
palsy (CP)?  
Hypothesis: If 15 children receive SEMLC, then energy expenditure (VO2) will decrease due to  
increased walking efficiency and gait parameters during the 6 minute walk  test. 
 
Secondary Question: Does SEMLC have an effect on 6 minute walking distance in 15 children  
diagnosed with CP?  
Hypothesis: SEMLC will increase the distance walked during the 6 minute walk test.  
 
Secondary Question: Does SEMLC have an effect on the Gros s Motor Functional Classification  
System (GMFCS) classification in 15 children diagnosed with CP?  
Hypothesis: SEMLC will decrease a child's GMFCS classification due to increased physical  
function. 
 
Secondary Question: Does SEMLC have an effect on ankle musc le spasticity as measured by  
the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS) and the modified Tardieu Scale?  
Hypothesis: SEMLC will decrease ankle muscle spasticity and in turn improve MAS and 
modified Tardieu Scale scores.  
 
Secondary Question: Does SEMLC have an effect on dynamic balance during walking in 15  
children diagnosed with CP?  
Hypothesis: SEMLC will increase dynamic balance during walking.  
 
2.3 Procedures  
 
Baseline (within 1 week prior to Dysport® treatment):  
 
Before initiating any study procedures the informed consent will be discussed and signed wit h 
the parent(s) of the  participants and the researcher will answer any questions. If capable of 
providing assent (>7 years old), the participant  will sign the assent form. Once the consent and 
assent forms are discussed and signed the following assessments  will be performed: 
demographics, height, weight, calculated body mass index (BMI), Modified Ashworth Scale 
(MAS), modified Tardieu Scale, range of motion of major joints (i.e., hip, knee, ankle), the 
Cerebral Palsy Quality of Life  Questionnaire (CP QOL)  for Children (9 -12 years) or Adolescents 
(13-18 years), and the CP QOL for caregivers, 6  minute walk test (with mobile oxygen 
consumption), and gait analysis.  
 
Degree of spasticity/tone in the lower limbs will be measured by the Modified Ashworth scale 
while the participant is  relaxed and in the supine position (1). If testing a muscle that primarily 
flexes the hip, knee, or ankle joint the  investigator will place the joint in a maximally flexed 
position and move the joint to a position of maximal extension  over one second. If testing a 
muscle that primarily extends the hip, knee, or ankle joint the investigator will place the  
4 
 joint in a maximally extended position and move the joint to a position of maximal flexion over 
one second.  
 
The Modified Tardieu Scal e will be used to assess spasticity by measuring different angles of 
muscle reaction in  response to a passive force (2). Two angles will be measured from each major 
joint (i.e., hip, knee, ankle): R1, the  angle in which clonus was felt during a quick passi ve stretch 
of the muscle; R2, the angle of full passive range of  motion. The difference between the two 
angles (R2 – R1) will be recorded for each muscle group. The participant will  be lying supine for 
all angle measurements.  
 
Range of motion of the lower l imbs (hip, knee, ankle) will be measured by passively moving the 
patient’s joint to a  point of resistance where then the jo int angle will be measured by a 
goniometer. Hip flexion will be measured with the  patient lying supine. Knee flexion and 
extension wi ll be measured with the patient lying supine. Ankle dorsiflexion will  be measured 
with the knee extended in the supine position. The Thomas Test will also be used to assess hip 
flexion with the patient lying in supine (3).  
 
The CP QOL for children, adolesce nts, and caregivers will be used to assess quality of life and 
wellbeing across  multiple domains of life (4). For children 4 -12 years, we will give the primary 
caregiver version to their parent or  guardian. For children 9 -12 years, we will give the child s elf-
report version. For adolescents 13 -18 years, we will give  the teen self -report version as well as 
the primary caregiver version to their parents or guardian. The sum for each  domain will be 
calculated as well as the total sum.  
 
Gait analysis and the 6 Minute Walk Test (6MWT) with oxygen consumption measurement 
(energy expenditure)  will be performed in the Department of Rehab by an exercise physiologist. 
Children will be given at least a ten minute  rest between measures.  
 
Gait analysis will be measured with the GAITRite® mat, a commercially available instrumented 
mat for collection of  gait data. The GAITRite system is an electronic walkway that connects to a 
computer, and automates the  measurement of temporal (timing) and spatial (d istance) gait 
parameters, such as cadence, step length and velocity.  The standard GAITRite walkway is (5m 
long) and contains 13824 sensors encapsulated in a roll up mat to produce an  active area 0.6 m 
wide and 4.25 m long. The walkway is portable, can be l aid over any flat surface and requires no  
placement of any devices on the patient. GAITRite uses no radiation, electricity or ultrasound to 
measure these  parameters and is therefore a safe method for evaluating walking function, even 
during pregnancy. The system has  been validated for use in healthy children and children with 
movement disorders (such as cerebral palsy, and spinal  muscular atrophy) (5, 6). The laboratory 
consists of a 10 -meter walkway. The GAITRite mat is placed in the middle of  the 10 meter  
walkway to collect data on steady state gait without the influence of gait initiation and 
termination.  Subjects will be asked to wear the same shoes and orthoses throughout the study. A 
gait aid can be used during the  test if the child cannot walk without  it. Subjects will be asked to 
begin walking at a starting position located 1.5 meters  from the mat and walk at their preferred 
typical speed until a termination position marked on the floor (1.5m from the  end of the mat). 
Each subject will perform five tr ials of walking at their preferred speed. We will compute gait 
5 
 velocity, step length, cadence, percent time spent in double support, foot angle, and base of 
support. 
 
After at least a ten minute rest, oxygen consumption via the breath -by-breath method usi ng a 
portable spirometric  device (Cosmed K5; COSMED USA Inc, Concord, CA) will be determined 
while the participant performs the 6MWT  (7). After instruction th e participant will don the face 
mask and a 12 lead ECG will be applied. In order for the child to  become comfortable with the 
face mask, a three minute rest period will be given while resting heart rate (HR) and  
oxygen consumption (VO2) is measured. After the three minute rest, the participant will begin 
the 6MWT while the K5  mobile device collects gas  exchange variables [VO2, VCO2, respiratory 
exchange ratio (RER)] and HR will be  monitored via the 12 -lead ECG as well as cardiac rhythm. 
Participants will be instructed to walk at their normal walking  pace as far as they can for six 
minutes. They will be allowed to walk with any orthoses and/or assistive devices  however the 
same orthoses and/or devices will be used throughout the study. The participant can stop at any 
time if they feel dizzy or fatigued to the point of increased risk of falling. The total distance 
walked (meters) will be recorded at  six minutes . 
 
(Dysport® Injection/Treatment)  
The procedures for Single Event Multi Level Chemon eurolysis (SEMLC) with Dysport® will 
mimic those currently used  by Dr. Kim in the pediatric rehab clinic (8). The study drug, Dysport, 
will be provided by the funding source IPSEN and  will be the sole abobotulinumtoxinA used in 
the SEMLC injection. Dysport ® is currently FDA -approved for pediatric  patients 2 years and 
older to treat lower limb spasticity (gastrocnemius and soleus). Selected dose of medication will  
be determined by affected muscle(s), severity of spasticity, and the patient’s body weight. We 
will follow the  recommended total Dysport dose of 10 -15 units/kg per limb, not to exceed 15  
units/kg for unilateral lower limb, 30  units/kg for bilateral lower l imb, or a total of 1000 units, 
whichever is lower in a given session. The research pharmacy  will be responsible for housing 
and preparing all Dysport® vials according to manufacturer (prescribing information  sheet 
attached). The research pharmacy will also  be responsible for study drug disposal at end of 
study. Electrical  stimulation and/or ultrasound will be used for guidance of injection point. 
General anesthesia will be used to prevent  pain and anxiety in adolescents if extensive multi -
level injections a re planned. All injection procedures will take place in  the pediatric Endoscopy 
Suite (CHONY), and will be led by Dr. Kim (PI).  
 
(4 Weeks Post Treatment)  
All procedures during the 4 weeks post treatment will mimic those conducted during the baseline 
visit (i.e., Modified  Ashworth Scale, Modified Tardieu Scale , range of motion, CP QOL, gait 
analysis, 6MWT with oxygen consumption).  
 
(12 Weeks Post Treatment)  
All procedures during the 12 weeks post treatment day 1 will mimic those conducted during the 
baseline day 1 visit  (i.e., Modified Ashworth Scale, Modified Tardieu Scale, range of motion, CP 
QOL, gait analysis, 6MWT with oxygen  consumption).  
 
(1) Smith, M. B. (2000). Interrater  Reliability of a Modified Ashworth Scale of Muscle 
Spasticity, 1986 –1987. 
6 
 (2)Boyd RN, Graham HK. Objective measurement of clinical findings in the use of botulinum 
toxin type A for the  management of children with cerebral palsy. European Journal of Neurology 
1999;6(suppl. 4):S23 –S35. 
(3)Thomas, H. O. (1974). The classic. Diseases of the hip, knee and ankle joint with their 
deformities treated by a new  and efficient method. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, 
(102), 4–9. Biography, Historical Article, Journal  Article. 
(4)Waters E, Maher E, Salmon L, Reddihough D, Boyd R. Development of a con dition-specific 
measure of quality of  life for children with cerebral palsy: empirical thematic data reported by 
parents and children. Child: Care, Health and  Development. 2005; 31:127 -135. 
(5)Coker P, Karakostas T, Dodds C, Hsiang S. Gait characteristics of children with hemiplegic 
cerebral palsy before  and after modified constraint -induced movement therapy. Disabil Rehabil. 
2010;32(5):402 -8. 
(6)Montes J, Dunaway S, Montgomery MJ, Sproule D, Kaufmann P, De Vivo DC, Rao AK. 
Fatigue leads to gait  changes in spinal muscular atrophy. Muscle Nerve. 2011. Apr;43(4):485 -8. 
(7)Crapo, R. O., Casaburi, R., Coates, A. L., Enright, P. L., MacIntyre, N. R., McKay, R. T., ... 
Mottram, C. (2002). ATS  statement: Guidelines for the six -minute walk test. American Journal 
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 166(1)  111–117. 
https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.166/1/111  
(8)Ploypetch T, Kwon JY, Armstrong HF, Kim H. A Retrospective Review of Unintended 
Effects After Single -Event Multi-Level Chemoneurolysis With Botulinum Toxin -A and Phenol 
in Children With Cerebral Palsy. PM R [Internet].  2015;7(10):1073 –80. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2015.05.020  
 
References:  
ACSM’s Advanced Exercise Physiology . (2006). 
Ade-Hall, R., & Moore, P. (2000). Botulinum toxin type A in the treatment of lower limb 
spasticity in cerebral palsy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001408  
Balaban, B., Tok, F., Tan, A. K., & Matthews, D. J. (20 12). Botulinum Toxin A Treatment in 
Children with Cerebral Palsy. American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation , 
91(1), 53–64. https://doi.org/10.1097/PHM.0b013e31823caae1  
Campbell, J., & Ball, J. (1978). Energetics of walking in cerebral palsy. The Orthopedic Clinics 
of North America , 9(2), 374–377. 
Massin, M., & Allington, N. (n.d.). Role of exercise testing in the functional assessment of 
cerebral palsy children after botulinum A toxin injection. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics , 
19(3), 362–365. 
Oeffinger, D., Bagley, A., Rogers, S., Gorton, G., Kryscio, R., Abel, M., Damiano, D., Barnes, 
D., & Tylkowski, C. (2008). Outcome tools used for ambulatory children with cerebral 
palsy: responsiveness and minimum clinically important differences. Developmental 
Medicine and Child Neurology , 50(12), 918–925. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469 -
8749.2008.03150.x  
Reddihough, D. S., King, J. A., Coleman, G. J., Fosang, A., McCoy, A. T., Thomason, P., & 
Graham, H. K. (2002). Functional outcome of botulinum to xin A injections to the lower 
limbs in cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology , 44(12). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012162201002997  
7 
 Rose, J., Gamble, J. G., Lee, J., Lee, R., & Haskell, W. L. (n.d.). The energy expenditure index: a 
method to  quantitate and compare walking energy expenditure for children and adolescents. 
Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics , 11(5), 571–578. 
  
 
 