 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 1 
 
 TITLE:  MOBILITY - METFORMIN FOR OVERWEI GHT & OBESE CH ILDREN AND 
ADOLESCENTS WITH B IPOLAR SPECTRUM DISOR DERS TREATED WITH 
SECOND -GENERATION AN TIPS YCHOTICS.  
FUNDER : PCORI    
  
A.  SPECIFIC  AIMS   
The specific aim  of this study is to address the significant gap in the evidence base for metformin (MET) 
use in overweight and obese youth with Bipolar Spectrum Disorders ( BSD ).  
 
The overall objective  of this prospective, large, PRAGMATIC  randomized trial is to study the impact of 
MET and healthy lifestyle intervention (LIFE) vs. LIFE alone on patient -centered outcomes of body 
weight, Second Generation Antipsychotics (SGA) adherence and satisfaction, psychiatric symptom 
burden (e.g. mood/a nxiety), and quality of life  (QoL). We will also examine metabolic outcomes.  
 
Specific  Aim 1:  Assess  the overall  and subgroup -specific  impact of MET+LIFE  versus  LIFE  alone  on 
short - (6mo)  and long-term (24mo)  weight and  metabolic  health  in overweight  and obese  youth  with 
BSD.  
Hypothesis  (H)1.1 : Overall,  assignment to treatment with  MET  will abrogate  more  weight gain and lead to 
fewer  adverse  metabolic  outcomes  than LIFE  alone  at 6 and 24 months.  
H1.2  (Heterogeneity  of Treatment Effects  [HTE]):  MET’s  effectiveness  at abrogating  weight  gain and 
components  of metabolic  syndrome  will vary with respect to the following  factors  (see Patient  Population  
and Background  for rationale  and prior  data):  1) Change  in BMI z-score  from  SGA  initiation  to baseline  
(in patients  already  receiving  SGA  treatment);  2) Prior  exposure to and duration  of SGA  treatment; 3) 
Baseline  BMI z- score; 4) Baseline  psychotropic  weight burden  (in SGA  non-naïve  patients;  as defined  in 
Measures  below);  5) BSD  as diagnosed  by a structured  interview;  6) Age;  7) Type  of insurance  
(public/private); 8) Ethnicity  (Hispanic/Non);  9) Baseline  insulin  resistance  (HOMA -IR); 10) Race  
(African -American  (AA)  vs non-AA).  
 
Specific Aim  2:  Assess  the overall  and subgroup -specific  impact of MET+LIFE  vs. LIFE  alone  on short -
(6mo)  and long-term (24mo)  SGA  adherence  and treatment  satisfaction, including  assessment  of how 
these  effects  may be mediated  by MET  effects  on weight gain.  
H2.1 : Overall,  assignment to treatment  with MET  will lead to better  SGA  adherence  and greater treatment  
satisfaction  than LIFE  alone  after both  6 and 24 months.  
H2.2 : (HTE): MET  effectiveness  with regard  to SGA  adherence  will vary with respect to: 1) Baseline  
weight  acceptability;  2) Baseline  psychotropic  medication  treatment  acceptability;  3) Type  of insurance  
(public/private).    
H2.3 : The overall  effects  of MET  treatment on  SGA  adherence  will be mediated  by degree  of weight 
abrogation,  and this relationship  will be stronger among  girls than boys.   We anticipate a possibly 
complex relationship between a brogation  of weight gain  (associated  with MET)  and SGA adherence , 
because weight gain may also be avoided  via SGA non-adherence  (at the  probable  cost of sub-optimal  
psychiatric  outcomes;  see Specific  Aim 3).  A statistical  framework  (marginal  structural  models)  to 
accommodate  this possibility  is described  in the Statistical  Analysis  Plan.   
 
Specific Aim 3: Assess  the overall  and subgroup -specific  impact of MET+LIFE  vs. LIFE  alone  on 
psychiatric  symptom  burden,  psychotropic  treatment changes , and overall and  weight -related  QoL , 
including  assessment  of how these  effects  are mediated  by MET  effects  on weight gain and SGA  
adherence.  
H3.1:  Overall,  assignment to treatment  with MET  will be associated  with lower  psychiatric  symptom  
burden,  decreased  risk for symptom -driven  treatment  changes,  and greater improvements  in overall  and 
weight -related  QoL than LIFE  alone  at both 6 and 24 months , post-randomization.  
H3.2:  (HTE): MET  effects  on psychiatric  symptoms  will be smaller  in patients  who meet full  DSM criteria  
for a BSD.   
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 2 
 
  
 
B.  BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Overweight and Obese Youth with Bipolar Spectrum Disorders (BSD):   1 out of 3 youth in the 
United States is overweight or obese. The rising prevalence of obesity and associated metabolic problems 
has led to elevated healthcare costs, marked morbidity, and high mortality. Compared with the general 
population, individuals  with BSD have higher rates of obesity, poor access to medical care and premature 
mortality, largely due to the greater incidence of cardiovascular disease.1-3 BSD are common psychiatric 
illnesses characterized by periods of mania, hypomania, and depressio n. Epidemiological studies suggest 
that BSD most commonly begin during adolescence and have a prevalence rate of up to 5% in youth.4-7 
Youth with BSD have a relapsing and remitting illness course, with greater functional impairment, poorer 
quality of life (QoL), and greater economic burden   than those with later -onset BSD as well as youth with 
chronic medical and behavioral illnesses (e.g., asthma, heart conditions, and depression).11 A major factor 
contributing to poor outcomes is the high rate of overweight or obesity in youth with BSD.  12 Rates of 
overweight/obesity in youth with BSD vary in studies between 45 -80%, more than double that of the 
general population.12-14 Overweight or obese youth with BSD have a more severe illness course, with a 
greater number of hospitalizations and higher rates of substance use disorders and physical abuse than 
youth with BSD who are not overweight or obese .15  Moreover, these youth typically become overweight 
or obese adults with more medical problems and higher rates of psychiatric symptom recurrence, 
hospitalizations, and suicidality16-18 as well as elevated morbidity and mortality.15,19 Therefore, prevention 
and intervention for weight gain in you th with BSD is of significant public health interest and clinical 
concern.  
 
Treatment with Second Generation Antipsychotics (SGAs) is on the Rise for Youth with BSD:  
Maximizing mood stability and minimizing medication side effects are the primary treatment  goals for 
improving overall outcome and QoL of youth with BSD.20-22 Over the past decade, there has been an 
increase in evidence -based treatments for youth with BSD. There have been at least 10 double -blind 
randomized controlled trials demonstrating that SGAs are effective for treating mania and depression in 
youth with bipolar disorder.20,23 -25 These studies have led to the United States Food and Drug 
Administration’s (USFDA) approval of four SGAs (olanzapine, risperidone, aripiprazole, and quetiapine) 
for the treatment of mania in youth and of olanzapine/fluoxetine combination as the only evidence -based 
treatment for depression associated with bipolar disorder in youth. Furthermore, in contrast to adults with 
bipolar disorder, several studies have recentl y demonstrated that youth with BSD have a significantly 
greater response to SGAs than to other mood stabilizing medications (e.g., lithium, valproic acid).23,29 -31 
In fact, in the only double -blind placebo -controlled study of lithium for mania in youth, on ly 38% had a > 
50% reduction in symptoms of mania, as compared to most studies of SGAs, which report response rates 
of 55 -80%.23 Without equally efficacious evidence -based options for treating BSD in youth, SGAs use 
will likely continue to increase. Althou gh treatment with SGAs offers advantages over conventional 
antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol), such as lower rates of extrapyramidal syndromes, there is significant 
concern about the dramatic increase in SGA prescriptions for youth, because younger patient s are more 
susceptible to SGA -related side effects than adults23 and discontinuing SGAs without an effective 
alternative medication is not a treatment option for many youth with BSD.  
 
Treatment with SGAs often leads to considerable symptom improvement, but  is very commonly 
associated with substantial weight gain early in treatment . A primary etiology of overweight/obesity 
in youth with BSD is SGA exposure.32 SGA -induced weight gain increases their already elevated long -
term risk of cardiovascular disease an d premature mortality.33,34 Furthermore, metabolic syndrome is a 
common, more immediate consequence of SGA treatment in youth.35,36 The risk for SGA -induced weight 
gain is much greater in youth than in adults.23,32,37 The weight gain associated with SGAs i s often 
dramatic and places these youth at risk for dyslipidemias and insulin resistance, which may progress to 
diabetes. Weight gain typically begins immediately following SGA initiation. In a recent study, over 50% 
of 272 treatment -naïve youth gained >7%  of their baseline weight within 12 weeks.38,39 These data may 
underestimate the problem; recently, we determined that 80% of SGA -treated youth gained > 7% of their 
baseline  weight over two months while hospitalized at our Academic Health Center. The so -called 
“appetite aggression” induced by SGAs40,41 may lead to violent behaviors and medication refusal 
following food restraint.   
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 3 
 
  
Although all SGAs cause some weight gain in youth, the amount of weight gain varies by specific SGA, 
prior exposure to SGAs, an d the individual.1,42 Treatment -naïve youth may be more susceptible to SGA -
related weight gain.1,38,43,44 Nonetheless, weight gain typically continues over the course of treatment. 
Indeed, we  found 1 lb/week weight gain over 16 weeks in youth prescribed ol anzapine, risperidone, or 
quetiapine for up to one year.36,45 While it is unclear whether SGA -related weight gain is dose -dependent,  
1,38,46,47 SGA polypharmacy may be associated with greater risk of metabolic syndrome compared to SGA 
monotherapy.43 
 
SGA -related weight gain in this already overweight/obese population is particularly problematic, as most 
obese youth become obese adults.48 In fact, studies report that approximately 70% of youth treated with 
SGAs are overweight or obese.13,49 Although rel atively few youth develop diabetes because of their large 
insulin reserves, 12 -50% of youth treated with SGAs experience hyperinsulinemia and dyslipidemia,50 
which are related to the development of metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortal ity.51 Additionally, obesity during youth influences later morbidity and mortality to a greater extent 
than ob esity present only during adult life  52,53 and the relationship of overweight, obesity, and metabolic 
abnormalities to poor cardiovascular outcome s is accelerated when age -inappropriate weight gain and 
metabolic abnormalities begin during development.54 The immediate and dramatic nature of the 
anthropometric and metabolic effects is a common reason for SGA discontinuation,55,56 is predictive of 
medi cation non -adherence in youth,57 and has a negative impact on overall satisfaction with care and 
illness outcome.58 Moreover, poor adherence in youth  with BSD increases the likelihood of relapse59,60 
and is associated with substance use.59 
 
Evidence -Based  and Accessible Strategies for Managing SGA -related Weight Gain and Obesity in 
Youth with BSD are Urgently Needed.  The mechanisms of SGA -related weight gain are likely multi -
factorial, involving effects on central and peripheral hormonal, neuronal, and metabolic regulation of 
energy intake and consumption.1,61-63 Regardless, the widespread and devastating impact of SG A-related 
weight gain on psychiatric symptoms, other health outcomes, and health care costs have led to an 
immediate need for standardized, evidence -based approaches to manage this common and serious side 
effect.64 
 
Despite SGA -related medical concerns, these medications are highly effective for treating BSD23 and 
thus,  given a choice, patients and their families would prefer to effectively manage this side effect rather 
than change medications and risk relapse (see Significance). Nonetheless, discontinua tion of SGAs or 
switching to a lower -risk SGA is a potential strategy to manage weight gain. Unfortunately, switching 
SGAs produces limited or inconsistent improvements in weight and metabolic outcomes, along with some 
psychiatric risk.65 Indeed, in the re cently completed IMPACT study,66 youth treated with SGAs who were 
randomized to switching to an SGA with lower weight burden experienced significantly greater rates of 
psychiatric symptom exacerbation than those maintained on their original SGA with lifest yle intervention 
or metformin added.     
 
Healthy Lifestyle Interventions  promote physical activity and dietary lifestyle changes. Healthy lifestyle 
programs designed for youth, such as the “Healthy Eating Plan” associated with Healthworks!, developed 
and t ested by Dr. Siegel (Co -Investigator), may lead to weight loss in obese youth.67,68 However, some 
studies  show only limited benefits and involve programs that are not easily accessible.69,70 Studies of 
older adolescents and adults treated with SGAs found that healthy lifestyle interventions are effective for 
preventing weight gain and for weight loss, respectively, as well as for improving QoL, particularly when 
used early in the course of SGA treatment.71-75 In general, 2 -5% reduction in weight or 1 -1.5 b ody mass 
index (BMI) units is reported in studies of healthy lifestyle interventions for patients with mental health 
disorders. However, these studies suffer from high dropout rates, small sample sizes, and short 
duration.65,71 -73,75  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 4 
 
  
Furthermore, the eff ects on weight and other metabolic parameters are small compared with 
pharmacological interventions.65. Despite these limitations, The American Medical Association (AMA) 
200776 provides guidelines on interventions for youth ages 2 -19 years old who meet CDC criteria for “at 
risk for overweight” and “overweight” (BMI% >85%ile) that involve simple education regarding diet and 
physical activity, i.e., healthy lifestyle intervention.  Although these guidelines were not specifically 
developed for mentally ill youth, the approach has advantages for this population, including simple 
dietary guidelines and inexpensive strategies to reduce sedentary behavior. This approach is similar to the  
standardized Healthy Eating Plan and Physical Activity education (LIFE) that will be provided to each 
participant of the proposed trial.67,76  
 
Metformin (MET) for Obesity in Youth . Pharmacological therapies, such as MET, supplement the 
effects of lifesty le interventions for weight loss. MET targets a molecular mechanism for weight gain, i.e., 
hypothalamic neuronal AMP kinase, a metabolic “fuel sensor”. SGAs directly affect hypothalamic AMP 
kinase through histamine H1 receptors, decreasing leptin and insul in sensitivity.77 MET is an oral anti -
hyperglycemic, insulin - sensitizing agent that reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis and is noteworthy among 
diabetes treatments for not promoting weight gain.78 MET is approved by the USFDA for treatment of 
type II diabetes  in youth >10 years. MET decreases food intake in obese, non -diabetic individuals.79 A 
recent meta -analysis80 of 14 randomized clinical trials (N>1000) examining the effectiveness of MET for 
obesity in youth found an average BMI reduction of -1.38 (95% CI,  -1.93 to -0.82) over 6 months 
compared with controls. Although a greater effect was seen for youth with a BMI > 35 at baseline, the 
authors concluded that a large trial is needed to determine the benefits to subgroups. Smaller meta -
analyses report BMI red uctions of -1.1 to -2.7 in obese youth compared with placebo or lifestyle 
intervention alone, in trials ranging from 6 -12 months with MET dosages of 1000 -2000mg/day.81,82 
Fasting insulin resistance, glucose homeostasis, and dyslipidemia improved after MET.  In these studies of 
youth from 8 -18 years old, MET was well -tolerated at up to 2000mg/day.83-85  
 
MET is extremely safe in youth. Lactic acidosis is extremely rare, especially in the non -elderly and those 
with creatinine levels < 1.4, and the risk of neur opathy from chronic vitamin deficiency is low.85 MET for 
Weight Gain in Patients Treated with SGAs. We chose MET over other evidence -based medications for 
weight loss (e.g., orlistat, sibutramine, or topiramate) because MET is the only medication that has been 
systematically studied for reducing weight in adults and youth treated with SGAs and because of its 
superior tolerability and safety profile when prescribed in conjunction with SGAs. Indeed, we first 
reported that MET is safe and effective for minimiz ing weight gain in youth taking SGAs.36,86 
Furthermore, in our  randomized, placebo -controlled study, MET was associated with weight loss and 
improved insulin sensitivity, minimal discontinuation and no significant side effects other than transient 
gastrointestinal symptoms.36 In contrast, 1 in 6 patients discontinued  orlistat and 1 in 2 patients 
discontinued sibutramine because of side effects. Additionally, although topiramate is effective for weight 
loss, cognitive “slowing” commonly leads to discontinuation.87 Subsequent to our studies, the utility of 
MET for weigh t loss in patients treated with SGAs has been confirmed in several RCTs and meta -
analyses.39,65,88 -93 In fact, there are now seven meta -analyses of treatments for weight gain and/or 
cardiovascular risk factors in patients taking SGAs.  
 
Most recently, Gier isch et al,65 conducted a meta -analysis of studies of patients taking SGAs who were 
treated for weight gain and reported that adding MET was the only intervention studied to date that 
improves metabolic parameters, although, “comparative effectiveness stud ies are needed to test multi -
modal strategies.”65 In another review of 11 MET studies (N=685) lasting on average 15.5 weeks, we 
determined that MET: 1) Produces statistically   and clinically significant weight loss ( -3.1 kg; 95% CI -
4.5 to -1.6); 2) Impro ves lipid and glucose levels; 3) Is well tolerated; and 4) That weight gain resumes 
after stopping MET.39 We also concluded that MET’s effects might continue beyond 16 weeks, but noted 
there is a paucity of long -term studies.94   Although MET may be even m ore effective for prevention (i.e., 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 5 
 
 when MET is started concurrently with an SGA) rather than  intervention (i.e., participants were started 
on MET when on a stable dose of SGA), there have been only 2 prevention studies. While these studies 
were both from  China and are therefore difficult to compare to studies conducted in the U.S., their 
findings are highly consistent with our preliminary data. Therefore, based on our patient surveys and 
these data, we opted to include both treatment -naïve and non -naive p atients in our proposed pragmatic 
trial. This would be the first study to directly examine differences in MET’s effectiveness for prevention 
vs. intervention for weight gain in youth taking SGAs. Only one trial has compared MET alone, placebo 
plus healthy lifestyle intervention, and MET plus healthy lifestyle intervention: Wu et al.95 reported 
significant weight reduction and improved glucose and insulin levels for combined MET plus healthy 
lifestyle intervention compared with either alone.95 Based on these  studies, the following 
recommendations were made:    1) The duration of future MET studies must be longer than 16 weeks to 
provide long -term efficacy data; 2) Larger studies are necessary to identify mediators and moderators; 3) 
Studies of MET in compariso n to or combined with other strategies is much needed; 4) Because not all 
patients respond to MET, it is necessary to study heterogeneity of treatment effects (i.e., who is the best 
candidate for MET).85,96,97 
 
In summary, meta -analyses confirm that treatm ent with MET is the strategy for which there is the most 
evidence for weight loss in patients taking SGAs.65,90 However, each of the meta -analyses conclude that 
large - scale studies of MET in community settings and for long duration are urgently needed. We  propose 
to conduct a pragmatic trial that addresses each of these gaps in evidence by investigating the long -term 
effectiveness of MET in obese and overweight youth with BSD, treated with SGAs in a community 
setting.  
 
C.  PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
Pilot natural istic study:  47 youth with a BMI > 85%ile and prescribed an SGA were treated with MET 
at CCHMC’s residential treatment facility, using a MET dose titrated to 850 mg 2x/day over 2 -4 weeks, 
with a further increase to 1000 mg 2x/day by 2 months if weight gain continued. BMI z score was the 
primary outcome measure. Electronic medical record data from two groups of these MET -treated patients 
were analyzed (MS submitted for publication): Group 1 (SGA non -naïve) was taking SGAs for at least 2 
months (mean ± SD = 9.2 ± 7.2 mon ths, range= 2.3 - 24.9) prior to MET initiation (n=29, 47% girls, 
age=13.9 years ± 2.5); Group 2 (SGA naïve) started on MET and SGAs simultaneously (n=18; 59% girls, 
age=14.2 years + 2.8). The groups were similar, and, as in our previous report, 40% receiv ed > 1 
psychotropic medications. 80% of the SGA non -naïve patients had weight gain > 7% over the 2 months 
prior to MET initiation and exhibited a 0.45 sd increase in their BMI z score (Figure 1). Surprisingly, 
more of the SGA naïve (94%) than the SGA non -naïve (78%) patients had a BMI > 95%ile at MET 
initiation. BMI Z score was stabilized by MET in both groups, but there was a significant group by month 
interaction (p=0.003, generalized linear model), even after controlling for the higher baseline BMI z sco re 
(p=0.002).  
  
  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 6 
 
 
Figure  1: MET  prevention  and intervention  effects  SGA -induced  weight  gain in youth  
Group1=SGA -non-naïve  Group  2= SGA -naïve  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This group difference resulted in part from the immediate decrease in BMI z  score in the SGA naïve 
group (BMI z score decreased by 0.23). BMI z score of the SGA non - naïve group decreased by 0.27+0.5 
during the 6 months on MET. SGA naïve patients responded at lower MET doses than SGA non -naïve 
patients (764 ± 225 mg/d vs. 834 ± 2 85). Additional determinates of MET response were: 1) Higher 
baseline BMI z score (p<0.0001); 2) Longer length of SGA treatment prior to MET initiation (p=0.049); 
and, 3) A > 7% increase in weight over the 2 months prior to starting MET (p=0.0007). These d ata 
confirm our previous results that MET abrogates SGA -induced abnormal weight gain in youth and also 
adds concerning information that a larger proportion of youth on SGAs are affected by weight gain than 
previously reported.  
 
IMPACT Study:  Most recently,  Dr. Correll  completed a large rigorously controlled NIMH -supported 
study of youth with psychiatric disorders and BMI > 85%ile and SGA -related weight gain. Participants 
were  randomized to 1 of 3 arms: 1) continuation of current SGA (control arm) (N=44); 2)  switch from 
current SGA to lower -risk agent (LRA) (N=30) or 3) co -treatment with MET + continuation of current 
SGA (MET) (N=46).  
 
Sample characteristics were as follows:  Age: 13.7 (7.6 -19.9; <18=88%) Male=65% Hispanic:12% Black: 
28%. At 12 and 24 weeks t here was a significant decrease in BMI Z -scores in the MET ( -0.034, -0.088, 
respectively) and LRA ( -0.051, -0.112) groups compared with the control group (+0.026, +0.040). 
Additionally, at 24 months weight gain in the control group was 8.5lbs and 0.3lbs in  the LRA group. In 
contrast, the MET group had an average decrease of -0.4lbs. 14.9% in the MET lost >5% of weight 
compared to 2.3% in the control group and 10.0% in the LRA group (Fisher’s exact, p=0.059). 
Importantly, dropout  rates in the LRA (39%) and c ontrol (28%) groups were higher than in the MET 
(24%) group. The most common (58%) reason for discontinuation in the LRA group was “inadequate 
therapeutic effect.”  
 
These findings confirm those of prior studies, including our own.36,90 However, these, alon g with previous 
studies, have been conducted in academic settings, typically with many rigorous study criteria. Findings 
from  such studies may not be generalizable to BSD youth treated in community settings where access to 
these interventions (e.g. healthy  lifestyle strategies and medications) is often limited. Moreover, patient -
centered outcomes were not assessed in these studies.  
 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 7 
 
 D.  INVESTIGATOR EXPERIENCE  
Principal investigator Dr. Melissa P. DelBello and lead Co-investigator Dr. Christoph Correll are 
international experts in BSD research and treatment. Both have been involved in numerous clinical trials 
of SGAs in youth with BSD and have ardently studied and warned about the metabolic side effects of 
SGAs in youth. These efforts led investigators to se ek out effective methods to minimize these side 
effects, including the initial studies of SGAs and MET. This proposal is the culmination of these 
endeavors, seeking to collaboratively expand from clinical efficacy to field effectiveness studies with the 
ultimate goal of providing relevant and immediate information to patients, their family members, 
clinicians and policy makers to enable them to make informed and patient -centered decisions regarding 
SGA and MET use. Both investigators have exceptional track records for study oversight, completion and 
budget management of large projects supported by the National Institutes of Health, industry, and 
foundations.  
 
The project team also includes: 1) Scientific experts in the field of community child and adolescen t 
mental health (Michael Sorter, MD; Brian Kurtz , MD; Victor Fornari, MD), pharmacoepidemiology 
(Stephen Crystal, PhD) pediatric endocrinology (Nancy Crimmins, MD, Phyllis Speiser, MD, Steven 
Chernausek, MD) bipolar disorder and psychopharmacology (John Ka ne, MD; Stephen Strakowski, MS; 
Rodrigo Patino, MD), pediatric healthy lifestyle  management (Robert Siegel, MD), complex database 
management ( Jeffrey Welge, PhD;Yuanfang Xu, PhD; Thomas Blom, MS ), regulatory oversight (Jeremy 
Corsmo, MPH), psychometrics a nd patient -centered outcomes (Adam Carle, PhD), treatment adherence 
and QoL (Avani Modi, PhD; James Varni, PhD) and biostatistics (Jeffrey Welge, PhD; Bing Huang , PhD) 
and 2) Key stakeholders representatives from parents and patients with BSD (Avraham Golds tein, Elaine 
Nowery, Dan Nowery, Adam Schwarber, Bev Schwarber, Sharde Scott -Manning, Barbara Portugal, 
Cindy Starr, Barbara Valerius), advocacy organizations (NAMI -Heather Turner; DBSA -Ingrid Deetz), 
professional organizations (AACAP -Carmen Head; Endocrin e Society -Steven Chernausek) and payers 
(Medicaid -Mary Appelgate, MD and Humana -Nick Patel, PharmD, Vinit Nair, B -Pharm, MS). This 
research team was assembled with the ultimate goal of ensuring the project 1) Answers key clinical 
questions that are importa nt to patients and families; 2) Is completed on schedule, within budget; and 3) 
Holds to the principles of good clinical practice, human subject protection and scientific rigor.  
 
E. EXPRIMENTAL DESIGN & METHODS  
a. Methods and Procedures  
 
Study Overview : We propose a prospective, large, PRAGMATIC , randomized trial to study the impact 
of MET and healthy lifestyle intervention (LIFE) vs. LIFE alone on patient -centered outcomes of body 
weight, SGA -adherence and satisfaction, psychiatric symptom burden (e.g. m ood/anxiety), and QoL. We 
will also examine metabolic outcomes.  
 
The focus of the pragmatic trial is to determine which intervention is most effective through observation 
of care as usual conditions or in “real -world clinical settings” rather than under c ontrolled experimental 
circumstances.  Information should be collected when available as part of routine clinical practice rather 
than through study -specific procedures, with minimal interference to clinical practice. Adherence to 
protocol recommendations from practitioners and patients are observed and documented throughout the 
study.   
 
  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 8 
 
 Subjects:  We propose to recruit approximately 1800 overweight/obese  youth with  BSD who are 
prescribed SGAs from at least 40 public and private mental health practices (approximately 900 each 
from sites under the  coordination of  University of Cincinnati , Midwestern  center and from within the sites 
under the Northwell Health East Coast coordinating center ), to participate in the proposed patient -
centered large pragmatic tr ial examining the effectiveness of MET and LIFE vs. LIFE alone. Patients will 
be eligible  for study participation if they are: 
   
1. Inpatient  or outpatient age  8-19 years  inclusive ; participants must live with a parent, guardian, or 
caregiver;  
2. Fluent in English;  
3. Diagnosed  or told by a clinician  that they have any of the following bipolar  spectrum  disorders 
(BSD): bipolar  I, bipolar  II, unspecified bipolar and related disorders,  Disruptive Mood 
Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD), cyclothymic  disorder , other specified  bipolar and related 
disorders, as well as mood disorder not otherwise specified (if diagnosed in the past as per DSM -
IV);  
4. Body  mass  index >85%ile  for age and sex by standard  growth  charts;  
5. Received  a new or ongoing  prescription  for at least one SGA (i.e., olanzapine, clozapine, 
risperidone, quetiapine, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, iloperidone, lurasidone, paliperidone, 
brexpiprazole or cariprazine ) that is not prescribed as a PRN medication  
 
Additionally, patients will be excluded by the following:   
 
1. Patients will be excluded if they have had exposure to a total daily dose of MET 1000 mg bid for 
at least 2 weeks in the past 3 months;  
2. Patients will be excluded if they could not tolerate MET during the recommended titration 
schedule outlined in the pr otocol;  
3. Major  neurological  or medical  illnesses  that affect  weight  gain (e.g., unstable thyroid disease) or 
require a systemic medication that might impact weight or gluco se regulation (e.g., diabetes 
mellitus [insulin], chronic renal failure [steroids]);  
4. If lab results are available in the last 6 months, then a fasting serum glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL on two 
occasions prior to or during screening, indicating need for prompt treatment.  
5. If lab results are available in the last 6 months, then a serum creatinine ≥1. 3 mg/dL on two 
occasions during screening and/or follow -up, indicating potential impairment of renal functioning  
6. Pregnant or breast feeding;  
7. Based on their clinician’s assessment, children and caregivers who are unable to complete 
screening/baseline assess ments for any reason;  
 
The enrollment rate will be approximately 1-2 patients/month/site for a recruitment time of 57 months.  
 
Randomization:  We will randomize 1800 patients ( 1:1 ratio) to either MET + LIFE or LIFE alone. All 
patients will receive a lifestyle intervention (LIFE) of brief standardized education. Once a patien t is 
determined to meet the above criteria and has provided  appropriate informed consent /assent , site staff will 
assign the participant a  patient ID num ber. The site staff will then log on to the study’s REDCap site and 
enter the Patient ID, and the following stratification factors: site, overweight or obese, previous SGA 
exposure, and sex of patient (transgendered patients will be randomized acco rding to  sex assigned at 
birth) . REDCap has a built in mechanism that prevents duplication of subject ID numbers.  
 
Once all stratification factors have been entered, the REDCap randomization module will return the next 
assignment for the appropriate strata.   
 
  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 9 
 
 OUTCOME MEASURES:  
Due to MOBILITY being a pragmatic and largely observational study, any participant who is deemed 
eligible by the above criteria will be enrolled in MOBILITY . These criteria,  along with providing 
appropriate informed consent/assent, are th e necessary criteria for participation in MOBILITY. We will 
continue to collect data in a naturalistic manner from all patients who have met these criteria regardless of 
whether they begin the intervention to wh ich they have been randomized or have not attended a ll of their  
clinical follow up appointment s. Patients will  have follow -up study visits and data collected concurrent 
with their existing CLINICAL visit schedule .   
 
Primary  Outcome  Measure:  BMI z -score  will be computed  from measurement of height and  weight. 
Raw BMI  is calculated  as (weight  (kg)/ height  (m)2). Normalized  BMI (z-score,  adjusted  for age and sex),  
will be calculated  using  the program  provided  by the USDA/ARS  Children’s  Nutrition  Research  Center at  
Baylor  College  of Medicine  (http://www.bcm.edu/cnrc/bodycomp/bmiz2.html).  At each site weight  will be 
measured with  a Seca scale, model  813, calibrated  to the nearest 0.2 kg per manufacturer  instructions  
annually using  standard  weights. A standard  operating  procedure  on weight  and height measurement  will 
be made  available  to each site, and staff will be trained  in its application.  Scales  will be zeroed  before  each 
individual  measurement and  the patient  will be instructed  to remove  their outer clothing, shoes,  backpack, 
coat,  and any other extra  heavy clothing.  Weight  will be recorded  to the nearest  0.1 kg. Height will be 
measured  with a wall-secured  stadiometer.  The stadiometer is not required to be calibrated as stated by 
manufacturer  instructions . Height will be measured  without  shoes  while  standing  on a flat surface  with 
chin parallel  to the floor. The patient’s  height  will be recorded  to the nearest 0.1 cm. 
 
 
Secondary  Outcome  Measures:  
Metabolic  Health  and Nutrition : As per clinical  standards,  blood  pressure  will be measured  after 5 
minutes  of sitting  at each patient visit.  A minimum of 8-hour fasting  total cholesterol, low -density  
lipoprotein  (LDL) -cholesterol, high  density  lipoprotein  (HDL) -cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose,  insulin,  
and glycosylated  hemoglobin  (HbA1c)  will be recommended for collect ion (see Table  2). For HTE  
analyses  the homeostatic  model  assessment  for insulin -resistance  (HOMA -IR) will be computed  as: 
(Insulin  [IU/mL] x Glucose  [mg/dL]  /405).  Following  the modified  ATPIII  guidelines,130-132 metabolic  
syndrome is  defined  when  >3 of the following:  1) abdominal  obesity  (BMI  >90%ile,  as in NHANES  study  
of metabolic  syndrome  in youth133
; 2) blood  pressure  >90%ile  for height,  age, sex; 3) fasting  triglycerides  
>150 mg/dL; 4) low  HDL  cholesterol  (males  <40 mg/dL  and for females  <50 mg/dL);  5) fasting  glucose  
>100 mg/dL  Fulfillment of individual  criteria  and metabolic  syndrome  will be outcome  measure s. 
 
Adherence  and Treatment Satisfaction  Outcomes:  
Self-Reported  Adherence  and Barriers:  Caregivers  and children  will answer  standardized  questions  related  
to adherence  and adherence  barriers  to taking  SGAs,  MET  (if applicable),  and LIFE.  Information  on 
missed  and partial  doses  of each medication  in the past week  will be ascertained. Questions  prefaced  by 
non-judgmental  language  that normalizes  non-adherence  to treatment will  be used. A time period  of one 
week  will be used to maximize  respondent recall  and minimize  memory  decay.  
 
MEMS®6 TrackCap /SimpleMed PillBox : The Medication Event  Monitoring Systems  (MEMS)  [AARDEX 
Corporation]  and the SimpleMEd PillBox are  electronic  monitoring  system s that measure  the dosing  
histories  of oral medications. They  will be used to monitor  adherence  to SGAs  or MET  in a sub-sample  of 
300 patients  at a subset of sites . They consist  of a standard  plastic  vial or box  with a threaded  opening  and 
a closure  for the vial that contains  a micro -electronic  circuit to register the dates  and times  the 
bottle /pillbox  is opened  and closed.  Data from the MEMS  TrackCap  will be downloaded  at each study  
visit. Patients randomized at an inpatient site to MEMS monitoring will only receive this monitoring if 
they are scheduled to be followed at an outpatient site that was selected for MEMS monitoring; otherwise, 
the MEMS aspect of the randomization should be disregarded.   
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 10 
 
 Treatment  Acceptability : A single -item 5 -category  Likert -type patient report  of satisfaction  with 
psychotropic  medication  regimen  (0=not  at all satisfied  to 4=very satisfied).  
 
International Physical  Activity  Questionnaires (IPAQ):140 The IPAQ is  an instrument  for cross -national 
monitoring  of physical  activity  and inactivity  with good  reliability  and validity  for monitoring  population  
levels  of physical  activity  in diverse  settings to assess  adherence  to LIFE  physical  activity  
recommendations.  
 
We will also assess food choices and eating habits using questions selected from the Healthworks Nutrition 
Screener, Satiety and Food Responsiveness using items from the Child Eating Behavior Questionnaire, and 
Uncontrolled Eating and Cognitive Restraint using items from the 3 -factor Eating Questionnaire.167-168  
 
Psychiatric  Outcome  Measures:   
PROMIS  (Patient -Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System) measures undergo  a 
standardized,  extensive  measure  development  process  which  includes  literature  review,  expert meetings,  
qualitative  interviews  with families,  item development,  cognitive  testing  of the item content, confirmatory  
factor analyses  to establish  construct validity,  and item response  theory  to establish  psychometric  
properties.  We will use items from the validated  short -form assessments  of Anxiety,  Depression  and Anger 
as well as Global  Health  and Peer Relationships  (the latter two  are HRQoL instruments;  see next section).  
 
PROMIS  Anxiety  Short  Form : focuse s on fear (e.g.,  fearfulness), anxious  misery  (e.g., worry),  and 
hyperarousal  (e.g.,  nervousness).  Marginal  Cronbach's  α > 0.85 
 
PROMIS  Depression  Short Form : focuse s on negative  mood  (e.g.,  sadness),  anhedonia  (e.g.,  loss of 
interest), negative  views  of the self (e.g.,  worthlessness,  low self-esteem), and  negative  social  cognition  
(e.g., loneliness,  interpersonal  alienation).  Marginal  Cronbach's  α > 0.85 
 
PROMIS  Anger  Short  Form : assess es angry  moods  (e.g.,  irritability  and reactivity)  and aggression  (verbal  
and physical).  Marginal  Cronbach's  α > 0.80 
 
Clinical Global  Impressions  Scale -Severity  (CGI -S): Single -item assessments  of symptom severity. 
Severity  is rated  from  1 (not at all ill) to 7 (among  the most  severely  ill patients).  
 
Young  Mania  Rating  Scale  (YMRS):   11-item clinician -rated  instrument that  assesses  symptoms  of 
mania.  
 
Children's Depression Rating Scale (CDRS) -Revised selected items:  a clinician -rated scale used for 
assessing severity of depression and change in depressive symptoms.  
 
Quality  of Life (QoL) and  Functional Outcomes:  We will ask patients  and caregivers  the number of 
days that they  missed  from  school  and work, respectively,  in the last month  and will use items from the 
following scales:  
 
PROMIS  Global  Health: assesses  physical,  mental,  and social  health.  Cronbach's  α=0.88.  
 
PROMIS Peer Relationships : measures  understanding  and communication;  companionship;  and quality,  
reciprocity,  and size of patients’  social  network  Cronbach's  α> 0.80.  
 
Children's  Global  Assessment  Scale  (CGAS) : A single -item index  of overall  functional  capacity. Scores  
range  from  1 (indicating  severe  impairment)  to 100 (indicating  superior  functioning).  
 
Sizing Me Up & Sizing  Them  Up: self-report  and parent -proxy  measures of obesity -specific  HRQoL  for 
youth,  with subscales  measuring  Emotional,  Physical  and School  Functioning, Teasing/  Marginalization,  
Positive  Social  Attributes, Mealtime  Challenges, and  Social  Distress/Avoidance,  and a Total  QoL score.  
Excellent  documented  internal  consistency,  test-retest reliability  and convergent  validity.  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 11 
 
 Body  Weight, Image  and Self-esteem Evaluation  (B-WISE®) : scale  designed  to capture  and quantify  
weight satisfaction, ability  to control  food intake, self -esteem and  other the psychosocial  consequences  of 
weight  gain,  scored  on a 3-point  Likert scale  from 1 (never) -3 (all the time), Cronbach’s  α=0.79.    
 
Caregiver  Strain  Questionnaire -Short  Form  7 (CGSQ -SF7) : Routine  assessment  of objective  and 
subjective  internalized  caregiver  strain,  scored  on a 5-point  Likert scale  from  1 (not at all)-5 (very  much  a 
problem),  with good validity  and reliability.  
 
Laboratory Measures:  
Site staff will collect and report  any lab  results that are obtained as part of the patient ’s clinical care .  
Laboratory test s will be suggested according to clinical practice guidelines, but will not  be require d for 
patients enrolled in MOBILITY, with the exception of a pregnancy test for all girls who have reached  
menarch e and who are randomized to metformin.   Additionally, since patients receive their treatment at 
mental health treatment facilities throughout the country and MOBILITY is a pragmatic study, patients 
may have laboratory tests performed at any laboratory facilit y that they typically would  as part of their 
routine clinical care. We will collect the re sults of the laboratory te sts once they are available in  medical 
records. Therefore, we will not require CLIA certificates or other regulatory documents for each 
laboratory facility. Table 2 (at intervals that reflect standard clinical care) indicates the recommended lab 
measures according to practice guidelines.   
 
Other outcome measures :   
 
Patient Health Questionaire -9 (Item 9):152 Assesses current suicidality; 0 (not at all), 3 (nearly every day) 
scale.  
Zucker Hillside Side Effects Form:119,153 Assesses  intensity (1=not present, 4=severe) of adverse events in 
five domains  (behavioral, neurological, cardiovascular, autonomic, GI side effects) . Open ended AE 
(adverse event) questions  at every visit . 
 
STUDY SCHEDULE AND TREATMENT  
Since MOBILITY  is a pragmatic  study , we will collect the above information, when possible, and in 
conjunction with patients’ clinical visits. We will allow for data collection approximately monthly for the 
first three months, followed by every three months thereafter, for a  total duration of 24 months . However, 
these visit s and timeline are just guidelines . Data will be collected through information acquired during 
clinical visits. There is no minimum number of visits required for pa tients to continue  to participate in 
MOBILITY and have their data collected. However, sites should not schedule patient  appointments 
exclusively  to conduct study specific visits or procedures . Therefore, it is anticipated that not all study 
visits or procedures will be completed for every patient.  However, we will emphasize the 
importance of collecting Month 6 and 24 data since those are primary outcomes.  Labs tests that are 
recommended in the Schedule of Events are based upon standard clinical practice guideli nes, but will not 
be required for continuation in the study.  
 
Each site will have a copy of the MOBILITY Projected Visit Dates Spreadsheet (also found on the 
website:  MOBILITYstudy.org). The site coordinator will enter the patient’s baseline visit date w here 
indicated, and the recommended visit schedules will auto-populate.  However, once patients are 
randomized at baseline, MOBILITY is primarily an observational pragmatic study, therefore, data will be 
collected only at clinical appointments.  
 
Screening/Baseline  Procedures:  At screening and following informed consent/assent and review of initial 
study criteria, we will obtain demographic and clinical information as follows:  
 
Demographic  and Clinical  Characteristics : Site staff will record  patients’  date of birth, sex, type  of 
insurance,  contact information,  and prior type  and duration  of psychiatric  treatments. Patients  will report  
current  daily  nicotine  intake  (packs/day)  and whether they  currently  use other drugs  (checking  all that 
apply from  a list of common  drugs).  Data on treatments  and substance  use will also be collected  at six-
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 12 
 
 month  intervals.  
 
Screening  laboratory  tests recommended  include  renal  and hepatic  function  tests,  electrolytes, CBC and 
thyroid  stimulating  hormone  (TSH),  as per Table  2. However, we will collect any  results  of labs performed  
within  the last six months,  if available.  The only mandatory  test for screening will be  a pregnancy test in 
girls of menarche .  
 
Every attempt will be made to encourage clinicians to obtain laboratory testing prior to starting 
metformin, however, patients who have not had baseline labs will continue to be followed  in MOBILITY .    
 
Kiddie -SADS -Present and Lifetime  (K-SADS -PL 2013) :  After discussion  with our patient/parent partners  
and site clinicians,  we determined  that the appropriate  study  population  is all patients  who receive  a 
clinical  diagnosis  of a BSD,  as these  patients  will typically  receive  SGA treatment regardless  of whether 
they meet full  DSM  criteria.  However,  it was decided  that using  a structured  research  interview  would  
provide  an opportunity  to examine  concordance  of clinical  and research  diagnoses  and to assess  HTE  (i.e., 
do youth  with a research  diagnosis  respond  to MET  differently  than those  with only a clinical  diagnosis  
because  risk for overweight/obesity  and metabolic  disorder may  be higher for those  with a research  BSD  
diagnosis).  Therefore,  BSD  diagnoses  will be confirmed  with the mood  modules  of the K-SADS -PL, a 
semi-structured  diagnostic  interview with established  test-retest  reliability.128 
(Interviewers  will be trained  
by qualified personnel. Trained  staff at the  respective  coordinating  centers  who are not associated  with the 
clinical  sites will administer the interview  separately  to guardians  and patients , if > 12 years  old). Based  
on feedback  from  the clinical  sites,  we determined  that having  their staff administer the K-SAD S-PL 
might create  diagnostic  confusion, therefore,  we will develop  a mechanism  that clinicians  will be provided 
with the  K-SADS -PL diagnoses  after participants have reached Month 6 of study participation . 
 
 
Type  and duration  of current/prior  SGA  treatment  and weight  
gain during  SGA treatment : Prior  data suggest that the effect  
of MET  may depend  on the extent  of weight  gain during  SGA  
treatment prior to study  entry.   Site personnel  will document  
weight and  height prior to any SGA  treatment, specific  SGAs  
received  and duration  of treatment with  each (i.e., by  
obtaining  medical  records). For a priori  analyses  of potential  
heterogeneity  of treatment  effect (HTE),  we will then 
distinguish  SGA -naïve  patients  (no current  or prior  SGA  
treatment  as of baseline  visit)  versus  those  with any current or 
prior  SGA  treatment.  Within  the latter group, we will 
compute  change  in BMI z-score  from  the start of SGA  
treatment  until baseline  and perform  HTE  analyses  to 
determine  whether  MET  effectiveness  varies  based  on the 
duration  of SGA treatment  and/or amount of excess  (relative  
to normal  development)  weight  gained  during  treatment.  
 
Classification  system  for psychotropic  treatments : We anticipate  substantial  variation  in the specific  
psychotropic  medication  regimens  prescribed  at baseline,  and that these  treatments  will vary over time. 
SGAs  may be prescribed  singly  or in combination  at varying  doses, and concomitant treatment with  
antidepressants,  non-SGA  mood  stabilizers  (e.g.,  divalproex  and lithium)  and/or stimulants  (e.g., for the 
subset  of patients  with co-morbid  ADHD)  will also be common. For our a priori  analyses  of potential  
HTE depending  on pharmacologic  treatments  other  than MET, we have reduced  this large  set of options  to 
three  groups  based  on available  data regarding  their weight effects.  Our data will provide  considerable  
additional  observational  evidence  about the  impact of specific  regimens,  and we will conduct  detailed  
analyses  that may  suggest  useful  post-hoc alternative classifications.1,129  
Our survey  data indicate  that Table  1. Metformin  (MET)  Titration  
 <50kg  AM/PM  >50kg  AM/PM  
Week  1 0/500mg  0/500mg  
Week  2 0/500mg  0/500mg  
Week  3 500/500mg  500/500mg  
Week  4 500/500mg  500/500mg  
Week  5 500/1000mg  500/1000mg  
Week  6 500/1000mg  500/1000mg  
Week  7 500/1000mg  1000/1000mg  
Week  8 500/1000mg  1000/1000mg  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 13 
 
 risperidone,  aripiprazole,  and quetiapine will  be the three  most common  SGAs  prescribed.  
 
(1) Mild  to Moderate  Risk of Weight  Gain:  Monotherapy  with lurasidone,  ziprasidone,  or aripiprazole.  
 
(2) High  Risk of Weight  Gain : Monotherapy  with asenapine,  iloperidone, paliperidone,  quetiapine  or 
risperidone.  SGA -naïve  patients  receiving  monotherapy  with a group  (1) SGA and patients  prescribed  
divalproex  or lithium  plus a group  (1) SGA  will be assigned  to this group.  
 
(3) Severe  Risk of Weight Gain : Monotherapy  with clozapine  or olanzapine.  SGA -naïve  patients  
receiving  monotherapy  with a group  (2) SGA  and patients  prescribed  divalproex  or lithium  plus a group  
(2) SGA  will be assigned  to this group.   
 
Note  that we have not incorporated  dose effects  because  dose-dependent  weight  gain has not been 
consistently  demonstrated  for most SGAs.  We will examine  association  of dose and dose adjustments  with 
weight change  and other outcomes, though  exploratory  analyses  of such observational  relationships  will 
require  careful  consideration  of confounding  factors.  
 
(See Next Page)   
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 14 
 
 Table  2. Schedule  of Events.  
The Table of Events is an approximation for when routine clinic visits might occur. In order to adhere to 
the pragmatic nature of the study, data will only be collected during the patient’s regularly scheduled 
clinical visits and a p articipant should not be brought in exclusively to conduct study specific visits.   No 
specific study labs  will be m andated for study participation, with the exception noted above (i.e., 
pregnancy test)  The lab  tests noted in the Schedule of Events are suggested in accordance with clinical 
practice guidelines for patients receiving SGAs.    
  
 
Measures  Visit  (Approximate Months)  
SCREEN/  
BASELINE  1 2 3 6 9 12 15 18 21   24 
Demographics  & Clinical  
Characteristics  (P, Y) X           
Structured  Diagnostic  Assessment  (K-
SADS )a  (C) X           
Medication  List (C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Weight/Metabolic  
Body  Mass  Index  [height  and weight] 
(C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Recommended Metabolic  Labs  [insulin,  
lipid profile,  glucose, hemoglobin A1C]  
(C) Xb,d, e    X  X  X  X 
Treatment  Satisfaction  
Treatment  Acceptability  Questionnaire  
(Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Adherence  
Adapted  Adherence  Measure  (P & Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
International  Physical  Activity  
Questionnaire  (P & Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Nutrition, Satiety, and Appetite 
Measures (P & Y)  
 
 X X X X X X X X X X X 
MEMs  Cap/ SimpleMed  Pillbox   
Upload  [300 patient  subset]  (C)  X X X X X X X X X X 
Mood/Anxiety  
PROMISc Anxiety  Short  Form  (P & 
Y) X    X      X 
PROMISc Depression  Short  Form  (P 
& Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
PROMISc Anger  Short  Form  (P & Y) X    X      X 
Children’s Depression - 
Revised/Selected Items (C)  X    X      X 
Young  Mania Rating  Scale  (C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Clinical  Global  Impression -Severity  
(C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Quality  of Life (Weight  & General)  
Body  Weight,  Image  & Self-Esteem  
Evaluation,  B-WISE  (Y) X    X      X 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 15 
 
 "Sizing  Me Up"/"Sizing  Them  Up" (P 
& Y) X    X      X 
Height  Weight  Self for Viewpoint -
Items  5 & 6 (wt. acceptability)  (Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
PROMISc Pediatric  Peer 
Relationships - Short  Form  (P & Y) X    X      X 
PROMISc Global  Health  Scale  (P & 
Y) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Clinical  Global  Assessment  Scale  (C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Number  of School/Work  Days  Missed  
[past  30 days] (Y & P) 
 
 
 X X X X X X X X X X X 
Caregiver  Strain  Questionnaire  (P) X X X X X X X X X X X 
 Other recommended measures  
Vital  Signs  [blood  pressure,  heart  rate] 
(C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Other recommended laboratory 
measures :d,e thyroid , renal and liver 
panels, pregnancy  test, CBC, and 
Vitamin B12  (C) X 
    X      X 
Suicidality,  Patient  Health  
Questionnaire  (PHQ) -Item 9 (C) X X X X X X X X X X X 
Zucker  Hillside Side  Effects  Form  (C) X    X      X 
Total  Time/ Visit for Youth  
Questionsf (minutes)  15-20 5 5 5 15-20 5 7 5 7 5 15-
20 
Total  Time/ Visit for Caregiver  
Questionsf (minutes)  15-20 5 5 5 15-20 5 7 5 7 5 15-
20 
P= Caregiver ; Y= Youth,  C= Clinician.  Kiddie -SADS -Present and Lifetime -PL 2013 ;  
aKSADS  will be performed at any time point after enrollment.  
b Baseline fasting serum glucose is highly recommended, however, results within the past six months will be 
acceptable.   
cItems from the P ROMIS =Patient  Reported  Outcome  Measurement  Information  System;   
dAny labs completed within the past 6 months are acceptable except for pregnancy test ;  
At baseline a negative serum or urine pregnancy test is required in girls who have reached menarche prior to 
prescribing metformin.   
eLabs  are recommended, however these are not required to start or continue in the study.  
fClinician  and other  assessments  (e.g. labs, vitals)  are part of a routine  clinical  visit and therefore,  do not add time.  
 
Our population will be > 85%ile  BMI (weight of such 8- and 9 year-olds will likely be comparable  to an  
average  10-year-old child); 2) MET has  a favorable side  effect profile;  and 3) prior  reports  as well as the 
investigators’ previous  experiences  with the safe and well-tolerated use of MET  in patients > 8 years  
old.125 All patients will have a renal panel prior to starting MET  to evaluate  for renal impairment that 
would  preclude use  of MET.   
 
Participants  randomized  to treatment  with MET  will start at a recommended dose of 500 mg orally  at 
night  and slowly titrated  in 2-week  intervals  to ensure  that each  patient achieves  maximum  insulin -
sensitizing  effects  of the drug while  minimizing  the chance  of side effects  (see Table  1). We selected  50kg  
as the weight  at which  we felt comfortable  increasing  to a maximum total  daily  dose of 2000mg  (1000mg  
twice  daily). These  youth  will be at a low-end adult -comparable  weight.  We anticipate  that most  
participants  >10 years  old will be >50kg, which  is the 95%ile  for weight for 10-year-olds of both sexes.  
Children  <50kg, likely  those  patients  <10 years,  will have a reduced  maximum daily  dose of 1500mg.  If 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 16 
 
 patients  exhibit  untoward gastrointestinal  side effects  while  taking  MET, clinicians  will have the option  to 
switch  to an equivalent  dose of the once-daily  extended -release form  of MET,  which  may alleviate  side 
effects.126 If a patient  does not tolerate a specific  dose,  the clinician  will also have the option  of reducing  
that dose by 500mg/day to  a minimum recommended  daily  dose of 500mg  twice  daily.  At Week  8, the 
dose for the <50kg  group  may be titrated  to the maximum  of 2000mg/day (1000mg twice daily) if tolerated 
and strategy, in general, MET will be at steady -state target levels well before key outcomes are assessed at 
Month 6. We will also recommend that  MET be taken with food to minimize side effects. If a part icipant’s 
BMI percentile <5% (=underweight ) his/her treatment with MET will be discontinued . Although the risk of 
low vitamin B12 while taking MET is associated with age > 50 years and having type II diabetes, we will  
monitor B12 levels and a CBC throughout study participation .127 
 
Clinicians and patients must be willing to be randomized to either treatment arm . However , the clinician 
may choose to initiate or continue (for those on a subtherapeutic  dose) metformin at their clinical 
discretion regardless of randomization  following a recommended initial 3 month period of treatment . 
These patients’ data will be considered in a different analytic group regardless of randomization.   
 
Comparators:  Health y Lifestyle Intervention (LIFE): This healthy lifestyle intervention (LIFE) consists 
of introducing  participants and families to a healthy eating plan  and physical activity. Prior to study 
initiation, study site staff will participate in a live (or taped) training session from a dietician to become 
educated with LIFE. At baseline visit p atients and caregivers will watch a standardized video about LIFE  
that was developed by Dr. Siegel  and his group.  The video  explains the concept of a Traffic Light Plan 
(TLP) that is a classification system for food and activity (GREEN, YELLOW, RED) . This plan  
encourages participants to limit RED foods (high -calorie, low -nutrient) and RED activity (sedentary), 
replacing them w ith GREEN foods (low -calorie, high -nutrient) and GREEN activity (moderate -to-high 
intensity). Participants will also receive a Food Reference Guide and Activity Reference Guide, 
categorizing food and activities in the TLP framework  that was adapted  from th e Healthworks! Youth 
Fitness 101 program developed specifically for overweight and obese children by Dr. Robert Siegel . The 
baseline session will include a brief discussion of diet and physical activity instruction. At least 150 
minutes/week of physical ac tivity will be recommended.  A link to the  LIFE  video and all handouts  will 
be available on the study websites at www.mobilitystudy.org   and offers a standardized, home -based 
exercise component for patients. At follow -up visits , patients and car egivers will have the option to watch 
the video again, and s tudy staff will briefly reinforce nutritional guidance, remind participants about the 
need for 150 minutes of physical activity/week, and be available to answer a ny general questions on 
healthy lifestyle habits. Prior studies indicate that 33% of youth will decrease BMI with this LIFE 
intervention.67    
 
b. Data Analysis and Data Monitoring :  
Drs. Welge and Huang  will conduct and/or supervise and have final responsibility for all analyses. Drs. 
Modi and Carle will conduct and/or supervise portions of the analysis that fall under their specific areas 
of expertise. Under the direction of the senior statistical team, Dr. Mara, Mr. Blom and Ms. Liu will carry 
out portions of the programming and analysis, which will begin within 6 months of the start of the trial 
(see Milestones). Analysis of short -term data will be complete by month  68 (when the last patient will 
have been followed for six months), and analysis of the long -term data will be completed by month 69 
(when all 24 - month follow -up will be complete), which will allow graphical and tabular summaries and 
narrative interpretation of the results to be completed by  Month 72. No interim efficacy analyses or 
adaptive features are planned. Model fitting performed before all outcome data are available will be 
provisional, for the purpose of verifying code and making limited modeling decisions (e.g., determining 
from ear ly data whether parameters, such as residual variance or scale reliability, may vary among 
subgroups). The Data Management and Biostatistics Committee will receive regular updates on progress 
in completing the statistical analysis plan, discuss any additio nal or modified analyses, and report to the 
Steering Committee as necessary.   
 
Data Analyses:  MOBILITY will use REDCap154 for patient -reported outcomes. REDCap is a software  
toolset and workflow methodology for collection and management of clinical researc h data developed by 
Vanderbilt University, in collaboration with institutional partners including the University of Cincinnati 
Academic Health Center. This secure, flexible, web -based application provides: 1) an intuitive interface 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 17 
 
 for data entry and real time validation (e.g., automated data type and range checks); 2) HIPAA -compliant 
and 21 CFR Part 11 - ready audit trails for tracking data manipulation and exports; 3) record locking and 
electronic signature functions; 4) control of view/edit rights; 5) a t ool for reporting, monitoring and 
querying patient records; and 6) automated export to common statistical packages. REDCap is hosted on a 
network specially designed to support the rigorous security and compliance requirements of clinical 
research projects.   Administered by the CCHMC Division of Biomedical Informatics, this network 
features multiple firewalls and a central facility for managing hosted systems and users, creating another 
layer of access control and audit capability on top of what REDCap alrea dy provides (e.g., user access can 
be monitored and controlled at the network level without making any changes within REDCap itself). 
These capabilities are available to authorized network administrators and REDCap study owners only, 
and user access change s are documented by an audit trail.  The data management team will monitor the 
database throughout the study to assure that data are complete and accurate.  
 
 
Analyses of Specific Aims : Each specific aim involves assessment of domains that are hypothesized t o 
be affected by MET either directly or indirectly through other domains. Our approach to potential HTE 
distinguishes effect moderators from mediators of distal outcomes. Moderators include fixed patient 
characteristics and pre -treatment covariates values.  Mediators include variables that are hypothesized to 
be affected by MET treatment and that may in turn affect other outcomes. We will utilize  generali zed 
linear mixed models (GLMM), which allow  for outcomes  from a range of distributions and will include 
random effects  to account for unspecified causes of variation among sites and patients , and subgroup -
specific coefficients to assess HTE .  
 
The basic model for outcomes will be a GLMM with change from baseline to either 6 - or 24 - months as 
the dependent var iable. Independent variables will include fixed -effect terms for randomized treatment 
group (MET), baseline value of the outcome, and random site effects. For HTE analyses, a baseline value -
by-MET interaction (to assess HTE due to baseline status) will be included, and for particular domains 
additional continuous or categorical covariates and treatment -by-covariate interaction terms will be added 
to assess HTE. Outcomes within each domain will share the same set of HTE terms, specified in the 
Specific Aims.   Because the subgroups are in general correlated (e.g., duration of SGA treatment, weight 
gain history and psychotropic weight burden will be correlated with baseline BMI), we will include 
multiple first -order HTE terms simultaneously (to assess heterogen eity independently attributable to each 
moderator), but will also fit separate models for each term to gauge the impact of this correlation on our 
conclusions. Higher -order treatment -by-covariate interactions will not be included a priori, but will be 
explored with rigorous adjustment for multiple testing, using step -down testing (removing highest -order 
interaction terms first) or information criteria based on penalized likelihoods to guide model selection.   
 
Marginal Structural Modeling for Causal Inference:  SA1 concerns the overall and sub -group specific 
effects of MET on abrogation of weight gain (with changes in BMI z -score from baseline as outcomes) 
and metabolic health, particularly metabolic syndrome and its component criteria. BMI and adheren ce 
measures are obtained at all study visits, so our models for these measures will use all available 
observations by treating the longitudinal series of changes in these variables and SGA treatment as 
dynamically dependent on each other. We will use margi nal structural models156 to address this bi -
directional dependence, computing the probability of SGA treatment regimen change at each visit within 
weight gain treatment regimen groups and using appropriately normalized versions of the inverse of the 
probab ility as the stabilized weights.  
 
Adjustment of Self -Reported Adherence:  Adherence rates for self -report and MEMS (where available) 
will be calculated as number of treatments/day divided by number of prescribed daily treatments. 
Truncated MEMs adherence rates (maximum of 100%) will be used in analyses to reduce inflation as a 
result of overuse or extra openings due to prescription refills. This method has been used successfully in 
studies assessing electronic monitoring (EM) adherence.157,158 Self-reported adherence vastly 
underestimates adherence as measured by EM.159 While it  is not feasible to use EM for all patients and 
medications, we will use the statistical relationship between EM and self -reported adherence in a 
subsample of 300 patients (equal numbers per treatment group,  i.e., 100 for SGA  adherence  who are also 
taking MET, 100 for SGA adherence who are not taking MET, and 100  for MET  adherence, who are  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 18 
 
 randomly selected the 8 randomization strata) to estimate EM adherence from self -report in the remaining 
patients. We will regress EM adherence on self -reports, using sta ndard diagnostics to ensure that non -
linearity, heterogeneity of variance across the range of adherence, or subgroup -specific regression 
relationships are included as needed. Predictions that accurately reflect the residual uncertainty can then 
be generate d by multiple imputation, and the resulting complete -sample datasets will be used in primary 
analyses involving SGA adherence, with sensitivity assessed by parallel analyses us ing self -report 
directly.  
Data and Safety Monitoring plan : The Cincinnati site will provide an independent certified study data 
monitor who will visit each site prior to study initiation and approximately  every 6 months thereafter. The 
monitor will follow a monitoring plan that includes source data verifying and ensuring compliance w ith 
good clinical practices (GCPs), the IRB -approved protocol and other applicable regulatory guidelines, and 
will report any problems to the site PI and the other clinical staff members.  Additionally, adherence to 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, completion  of scheduled assessments, withdrawal/termination procedures, 
and maintenance of training and certification for all research personnel will be continuously monitored. 
The monitor will provide written recommendations following each visit to each site. All r eports will be 
reviewed by members of the Steering Committee.  
 
Safety and tolerability data will be monitored by an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), 
the study investigators,  and the CCHMC and NS/LIJ IRBs. The function of the DSMB is to prot ect the 
safety of the study participants. The DSMB members are: Tobias Gerhard, PhD, pharmacoepidemiologist 
with focus on SGA risks; Avraham Goldstein, adult diagnosed with BSD as an adolescent; Robert Parker , 
PhD, biostatistician;  Boris Birmaher, MD, child psychiatrist;  David Repaske, MD,  pediatric 
endocrinologist; and  Robert  Gard iner, parent of youth with BSD. Members will disclose and resolve any 
potential conflicts of interest prior to each meeting.  
 
At their initial meeting (pr ior to study initiation), the DSMB members will select a Chair, who will 
provide written meeting minutes and recommendations and will review the study protocol and consent 
forms for safety and validity. Biannually, they will evaluate whether recruitment go als are being met and 
monitor the occurrence of adverse events and early withdrawals or terminations. All serious adverse 
events will be reported to the site’s  IRB and the DSMB within 7 days of knowledge of occurrence  and 
will be followed until resolution,  permanent outcome of the event, or stabilization. The DSMB will 
provide recommendations based on this review (e.g., to terminate the study or recommend modifications, 
including additional safety or tolerability measures). Dr. DelBello, in conjunction with  the DSMB, will be 
responsible for ensuring that DSMB reports are filed with the IRBs and PCORI. The DSMB will also 
provide the investiga tor with a summary report that includes their recommendations. Adverse event 
reports will be collected systematically a t patient visits, any rated as severe will be documented and 
reported. All adverse events will be reviewed by the DSMB biannually  and reports will be sent to the 
FAC and Steering Committees . 
 
c. Data Storage and Confidentiality :  
Information will be obtain ed from clinical assessments and confidential HIPAA compliant online 
questionnaires that will be completed on the tablet. Access to activate tablets will be limited to study staff 
and password protected. Patient and their caregivers will confirm their iden tity by answering a personal 
security question at the end of each session. Specific materials obtained in the study will include patient 
and caregiver reports from behavioral, adherence, treatment satisfaction and QOL assessment tools.  
 
Other information, such as medical history and clinician symptom ratings also will be collected by site 
staff from clinician notes and/or medical records or directly entered into password protected online 
databases by the clinicians or patients/caregivers. The following samp les will be collected: urine in girls 
for a pregnancy test, if they confirm menarche . As recommended in  standard clinical practice an 8 -hour 
fasting blood draw for serum glucose, insulin, liver function tests, renal panel (including electrolytes), 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 19 
 
 TSH, HbA 1c, and lipid profiles. The results of pregnancy test will be given to parents of minors at the 
discretion of the clinician. Blood pressure, and anthropometrics including height, weight, BMI, and BMI 
%ile will be recorded.  
 
As with any study, there is a po tential risk of loss of confidentiality. Consistent with the Federal 
guidelines, all patients and guardians will be informed of the federally mandated reporting laws for child 
abuse and neglect, verbally and in the written consent form. Therefore, if abuse  or neglect is suspected the 
Department of Human Services will be called. Risks associated with this include embarrassment, legal 
consequences, and removal of the child from the parents’/legal guardians’ home.  
 
d. Setting : Assessments will be conducted at the participating  community -based private and public 
mental health treatment centers in the East Coast and Midwest Regions .  The participating site personnel 
will be made up of a real -world clinical trial team that includes members with varied training an d 
experience with appropriate support from a qualified physician and centralized study trial team.  Site staff 
who will be  obtaining informed consent, reviewing medication lists,  and collecting and assessing adverse 
events must complete Human Participants Protection and Good Clinical Practice (HPP and GCP) training 
prior to involvement in the study .  These essential study staff will be documented via a site specific 
delegation of authority (DOA) log . DOA logs will be reviewed by the study monitor at each si te visit to 
ensure that all new essential study staff have been added.  
 
e. Laboratory methods and facilities : Participants will be sent for blood work , at the clinician’s 
discretion , to any l aboratory facility.  No specific laboratory  test will be mandate d, as it is expected that 
laboratory procedures will take place in settings where everyday care happens, such as community clinics, 
hospitals and health systems.  It is recommended that clinicians adhere to practice guidelines and labs are 
ordered through the patient's medical practice by their clinicians.    
 
f. Estimated Period of Time to Complete the Study :  The following is a timeline for the 72-month 
period of the proposed study: Months 1 -2: Train study personnel; Months 3 -57: Recruit an average of 
approximately  1-2 patients/site/month from 40 sites over 54 months for a total sample size of 1800 
patients, we expect 25% of the sample recruited by M10 -11; 50% recruited by M30 ; 75% by M45 and the 
final patient recruited by M57 ; Months 34-68: Complete su bject participation, data entry, and analyses.  
Final analyses will be completed M70- after the last patients have completed 6 and 24 months of follow -
up. 
 
F. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
a. Description of Subjects  
We will recruit a total of 180 0 youth,  (approximately 900 each from ~20 Midwest sites  and ~20 East 
Coast  mental health treatment sites) to participate in the proposed patient -centered large pragmatic trial 
examining the effectiveness of MET and LIFE vs. LIFE alone. Subjects will be eligible  to enroll and 
randomize  if they are ages 8 -19 years old  (inclusive ) at the time of screening , overweight or obese (BMI 
> 85%), continuing or starting treatment with at least one SGA (i.e., olanzapine, clozapine, risperidone, 
quetiapin e, aripiprazole, zipr asidone, i loperidone, lurasidone, paliperidone, or asenapine) , have a clinical 
diagnosis of BSD (bipolar I or II disorder, cyclothymia, or bipolar or mood not otherwise specified , or 
other specified bipolar  or mood  disorder ) and are living at home with the ir caregivers . 
 
Based on feedback from our advisory board and our consultants including children and adolescents who 
are in state custody is essential so that our sample is not biased as SGA exposure in this population is 
extremely high, Therefore, we will  allow children and adolescents  who are under the custody of DHS  to 
enroll.  We will seek the approval of a legally authorized individual from the county (e.g. Hamilton or 
Butler ). This may be the county  caseworker or it may be their supervisor. It will NOT be the case 
manager from the private agency that is handling the placement. But, the private agency case manager 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 20 
 
 will know who the appointed county JFS social worker. The foster parent(s) will NOT have  the authority 
to authorize enrollment into a research study. We will  need the foster parent(s) ’ approval  to ensure that 
study visits will be attended and compliance with study requirements is manageable.  Consents may be 
faxed  for signature  to the legally authorized individual as specified from each  county.  A fully signed copy 
of the consents will be offered back to JFS after the consenting process occurs.       
 
For youth  who reside in Northern KY and are in the custody of the Cabinet for the Commonwealth of 
Kentucky, we will obtain  the permission of the assigned Cabinet Social Worker who is assigned to the 
individual. That person will determine if they have the authority to grant permission for participation or 
whether they need to  seek higher approval .  
 
For youth in the custody of New York City foster care, the investigator will submit a proposal along with 
our IRB approval and relevant consent forms to the Administration for Children’s Services  (ACS).  ACS 
will review, process, and approve the proposal. Once approved the proposal will go to the State Office of 
Children and Family Services  (OCFS) for their review and approval . 
 
b. Sample Size  
Eighteen hundred (1800) children  will participate in th e study. Each site will enroll up to 90 participant’s 
total or  1-2 participants/month for a total study enrollment period of 57 months (some sites completed 
regulatory requirements well into the recruitment period)  
 
c. Inclusion Criteria  
1. Inpatient  or outpatient age  8-19 years  inclusive ; participants must live with a  parent, guardian, or 
caregiver;  
2. Fluent in English;  
3. Diagnosed  or told by a clinician  that they have any of the following bipolar  spectrum  disorder s 
(BSD) : bipolar  I, bipolar  II, unspecified bipolar and related disorders , Disruptive Mood 
Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD), cyclothymic  disorder , other specified  bipolar and related 
disorders , as well as mood disorder not otherwise specified (if diagnosed in the past as per DSM -
IV);  
4. Body  mass  index >85%ile  for age and sex by standard  growth  charts;  
5. Received  a new or ongoing  prescription  for at least one SGA  (i.e., olanzapine, clozapine, 
risperidone, quetiapine , aripiprazole, ziprasidone, il operidone, lurasidone, paliperidone, 
brexpiprazole  or cariprazine ) that is not prescribed as a PRN medication ;   
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Patients will be excluded if they have had exposure to a total daily dose of MET 1000 mg bid for 
at least 2 weeks in the past 3 months ; 
2. Patients will be excluded if they could not tolerate MET during the recommended titration 
schedule outlined in the protocol ; 
3. Major  neurological  or medical  illnesses  that affect  weight  gain (e.g., unstable thyroid disease) or 
require a systemic medication that might impact weight or glucose regulation (e.g., diabetes 
mellitus [insulin], chronic renal failure [steroids]);  
4. If lab results are available in the last 6 months, then a fasting serum glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL on 2 
occasions prior to or during screening, indicating need for prompt treatment.  
5. If lab results are available in the last 6 months, then a serum creatinine ≥1.3 mg/dL on 2 
occasions during screening and/or follow -up, indicating potential impairment of renal functioning  
6. Pregnant or breast  feeding;  
7. Based on their clinician’s assessment, c hildren and caregivers who are unable to complete 
screening/baseline assessmen ts for any reason ; 
 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 21 
 
 If a patient does not have fasting glucose or renal lab  results within 6  months  prior to their baseline visit, 
then e very attempt will be made to obtain labs prior to starting metformin . However, patients wil l not be 
exclude d from the study if they are unable to get serum creatinine  or glucose . Renal dysfunction is 
extremely rare in otherwise healthy childre n and adolescents, and in a clinical setting renal panels are not 
typically done prior to starting metformin, unless there is a reason to suspect kidney disease.  
 
The initial rationale for requiring normal glucose prior to starting metformin was that pati ents who are 
hyperglycemic may need to r eceive metformin + LIFE rather than LIFE alone. However, if a patient does 
not have a normal glucose available prior to randomization, but meets all other study criteria , we will 
continue to collect data f rom the pat ient and administer the treatment to which they have been 
randomized , so that at a minimum they will receive LIFE. We will also strongly encourage their clinician 
to emphasize the importance of obtaining fasting glucose levels. If, however, lab results are  available in 
the last 6 months, patient with a fasting glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL on 2 occasions will be excluded and 
referred to their primary care clinician for prompt evaluation for Type II diabetes . Including these 
patients, rather than waiting until they get their glucose level checked , will ensure that at least the patient 
will receive LIFE while we encourage the clinician to engage the patient to get fasting metabolic labs. At 
any point in the stu dy of a patient has a fasting glucose > 126 mg/dL on 2 occasions , they will be 
immediately referred to their primary care physicians and possibly endocrinology.  
 
d. Intended Demographics  
We propose to recruit 1800 inpatient or outpatient youth (ages 8 -19 years, inclusive) who have a BMI ≥ 
85%ile (i.e., overweight or obese) and are prescribed SGAs as either ongoing or new treatment. There 
will be no barriers to inclusion based on sex, race, ethnicity or clinical status with the exception that 
otherwise eligible patients with current or prio r therapeutic MET exposure will be excluded. We 
anticipate equal recruitment by sex, and based on US census reports from the recruitment regions, 
approximately 25% non -White (20% African American/Black and 5% Asian) and 15% Hispanic youth. 
Because the diag nosis of BSD and the use of SGAs is more controversial in younger patients and there 
are little safety data regarding the use of MET in patients younger than 8 years old, we restrict our sample 
to 8-19 year olds.  
 
Process for consenting Spanish speaking caregivers : If it is determined that a caregiver cannot be properly 
consented in English, the caregiver will receive a consent document translated into Spanish. A qualified 
translator  will be present to answer any questions the care giver may have about the  study. A qualified 
translator can be a bilingual study staff member, or a certified translator. A  progress note will be written 
indicating a qualified translator  was present at time of consent . The progress note  will remain attached to 
the signed  consent form.   
 
e. Study Population S ource  
Participants will be recruited from  approximately  40 community -based mental health treatment centers, 
some of which have multiple locations .  
 
f. Recruitment Plans  
Because our study is a large pragma tic patient -centered trial, we have minimal eligibility requirements , 
which should facilitate the feasibility of recruitment. Each selected clinical site is a large mental health 
practice  that has more than 100 youth eligible for study participation. Therefore, we should have no 
difficulty reaching our proposed rate of recruitment of 1-2 patients/month/site at 40 sites and over the 
course of 57 months. In general, study visits will coincide with clinical visits, so we anticipate that 
retention will be at least as good as in our  prior naturalistic outcome studies (~90%) over 2 years . Each 
week study sites will send their screening logs to the lead site that identify potential patients and will 
collect ethnicity information.   
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 22 
 
  
We will create a study website that will have the address of www.mobilitystudy.org . This website will be 
used as a communication tool to post important study related material and information to 
committee/stakeho lder members, study sites, and patients enrolled in the study. A Login username and 
password will be required to view study specific material related to interventions, meeting material, and 
videos. There will be information about the study that will be ava ilable for the public to view, including 
information about the study, metformin, and bipolar spectrum disorders.  
 
We will have a study Twitter account for the MOBILITY study  that will be used to disseminate 
information about the study. This will not be us ed as a means of recruitment. We will use the handle 
name @MOBILITY_Trial, to communicate information about the study to likely followers, including 
clinicians, researchers, members of the media and study participants and their families. The account w ill 
not provide medical or health advice or recommendations. It will provide  background information about 
the study; background information about Metformin; and information about any publications or webinars 
related to the study. It could provide links to other  research that is published during the next 5 years 
related to Metformin, SGAs and bipolar disorder in adolescents. We anticipate posting one tweet per 
week. Tweets will be reviewed prior to publication by Melissa DelBello, MD, or a study -related 
personnel  designated  by her .  
 
G.  RISK TO SUBJECTS  
a. Level of Risk Description  
Potential risks from study participation include possible risks from MET treatments, and other risks 
associated with any study participation (e.g. loss of confidentiality and fatigue and frustration from 
repeated evaluations):  
 
Confidentiality:  As with any study, there is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Consistent with the 
Federa l guidelines, all patients and guardians will be informed of the federally mandated reporting laws 
for child abuse and neglect, verbally and in the written consent form. Therefore, if abuse or neglect is 
suspected the Department of Human Services will be c alled. Risks associated with this include 
embarrassment, legal consequences, and removal of the child from the parents’/legal guardians’ home.  
 
Healthy Lifestyle Intervention (LIFE):  There is little to no risk associated with LIFE, although patients 
may b ecome bored, fati gued or develop anxiety by the weight monitoring and recommendations. The 
exercises recommended may result in muscle soreness or strains, as there may be an increase in activity 
levels.  
 
MET:  All patients, guardians and clinicians will be  made aware that MET is not approved by the USFDA 
for the treatment of overweight or obese youth or for SGA -related weight gain. Risks associated with 
MET include: Common side effects (≥5%): diarrh ea, nausea, and vomiting. Less l ikely (<5%): abdominal 
pain/abdominal distension, constipation, dizziness, dysg uesia, dyspepsia, flatus, headache, and upper 
respiratory infection. Rare: Lactic acidosis, 47 cases out of 1 million patients taking MET. Very rare : 
Vitamin B12 deficiency. Clinicians will be educated th at youth who develop symptoms of lactic acidosis, 
such as hyperventilation, myalgia, malaise, and somnolence  should stop taking MET and notify their 
treating clinician immediately. Additionally, we will educate all study -related clinicians about the very 
rare side effect of Vitamin B12 deficiency and associated potential clinical manifestations of vitamin B12 
deficiency (i.e., peripheral neuropathy and pernicious anemia).   
 
Blood Draws:  Although blood draws are not required for participation in MOBILITY, they are highly 
encouraged in accordance with clinical practice guidelines. No study specific blood draws will be 
performed.  Risks of blood draws include discomfort and/or bruising at th e blood draw site. Less 
commonly, fainting, the formation of a small blood clot, swelling of the vein and surrounding tissue, 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 23 
 
 bleeding from the puncture site or infection may occur. Other potential risks include possible fatigue and 
frustration from repeat ed evaluations and the potential for additional weight gain, worsening of lipids, and 
increased insulin resistance. Since only patients prescribed SGAs as part of their clinical care will be 
approached for participation and no patient will be started on an  SGA for the purpose of the study, we do 
not consider other risks associated with SGA treatment as study specific risks. Additionally, patients may 
experience exacerbation of BSD symptoms during study participation.  
 
Protection Against Risks. The final protocol will be approved by the Steering and Family Advisory 
Committees , the CCHMC and NS/LIJ IRBs, and the study data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) 
prior to recruiting. Patients/parents will be clearly informed they are free to terminate p articipation at any 
point during study participation. Furthermore, to minimize risks associated with the study, all personnel 
will be thoroughly trained as previously described prior to having any contact with patients or data.  
 
Breach of confidentiality:  All data will be entered into electronic case report forms (eCRF) or directly into 
databases (e.g. patient/parent questionnaires) that are 21 CFR Part 11 and/or HIPAA compliant. We will 
train all study -related personnel to follow HIPAA regulations for res earch to ensure confidentiality of all 
data and that the rights of the patients/guardians are protected. All data will reside on password -protected 
computers, with only the investigators and key members of the research team having access. A variety of 
other measures will be taken to protect confidentiality, including: We will 1) assign and use a unique ID 
number to each patient to label all components of the protocol, instead of patient names, 2) restrict access 
to the key linking names and ID numbers to ke y staff and the PI at each site, 3) store of any paper with 
data at each site in a locked file cabinet, 4) if necessary, only send de -identified from clinical sites to the 
data coordinating site. Patients and caregivers will directly enter information rega rding adherence, 
treatment satisfaction, mood, anxiety, QoL, and drug and nicotine use, into the tablet where it will go 
directly to the study database. Therefore, there is little information that site staff will collect and most of it 
is part of a standar d clinical visit, so that the risk of loss of confidentiality is minimal.  
 
Subjects will be told that agents of the Academic Health Center’s IRB, study monitors, representatives 
from the USFDA or the study coordinating sites (UC/CCHMC or LIJ/NS), and membe rs of the DSMB 
will be allowed to inspect sections of their medical and research records related to this study, if requested. 
Site clinicians are federally mandated to report suspected abuse or neglect. However, we will encourage 
any such reports to be mad e with extreme confidentially to the Department of Human Services. Healthy 
Lifestyle Intervention (LIFE): All patients and families will receive LIFE education from a clinical site 
staff member. Dr. Seigel will ensure that all clinical site staff are adequ ately trained prior to initiating 
LIFE and will be available on an ongoing basis to all site staff that have questions about LIFE. The site 
staff will suggest that physical activity is spread over the course of 5 days (30 minutes/day) to achieve the 
recomm ended 150 hours/week, and not performed all at once to avoid muscle or other discomfort. The 
information that will be provided to the families outweighs the risks associated with LIFE. MET: 
Metformin is USFDA approved to treat youth with diabetes type 2, >  age 10. Additionally, there are 
significant safety data for MET down to age 8 years. However, since MET is not approved for the 
attenuation of weight gain in youth, we will submit a research IND to propose studying MET for this 
purpose and wait the requir ed 30 days before initiating the study. We will follow all appropriate FDA 
guidelines for IND submissions. Additionally, Dr. DelBello will be responsible for sending serious 
adverse events (SAEs) to the FDA, IRBs, and DSMB in a timely fashion in compliance  of IND and FDA 
guidelines.  
 
To further protect against the risks associated with metformin, patient, parent, and endocrinologist 
research team members will train clinical site staff prior to study initiation regarding the recommended 
MET dosing for the s tudy, how to discuss MET with patients and families, common and less common 
side effects, and strategies to mitigate side effects (e.g. decrease d ose and how to switch to MET -XR or  
take it with meals). This training will be taped and available online for a ny new clinician during the 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 24 
 
 course of the study. Our study endocrinologists (Drs. Crimmins and Speiser) will also be available 
throughout the study should any site clinicians have questions regarding MET use. We will also educate 
site clinicians that it is  part of standard of care to obtain labs prior to initiating MET. In particular, since 
MET is excreted by the kidneys, if a patient has creatinine ≥1.3 mg/dL on 2 occasions, they will be 
excluded from  study participation and referred to their primary care clinician.  Since lactic acidosis is a 
very rare side effect of MET and primarily occurs in elderly diabetic patients with significant renal 
insufficiency or congestive heart failure,165 we will inform clinicians of the risk and associated symptoms, 
but exp lain that we are excluding those most at risk and to our knowledge, that there have been no reports 
of lactic acidosis in youth. Additionally, we will encourage site clinicians to inform patients that 
excessive use of alcohol needs to be avoided as alcohol  potentiates the effects of metformin on lactate 
metabolism (patients may be users of alcohol) and metformin should be discontinued prior to any IV 
radiocontrast study or surgical procedure. Additionally, to guard against risk, if a patient has two 8-hour 
fasting glucose level s ≥ 126 mg/dL, they will be referred to their primary care clinician (and if at 
screening they will not be included in the study ), so that they may be evaluated for type II diabetes.  
 
Blood Draws: We will recommend that only trained a nd certified phlebotomists draw blood at a certified 
laboratory facility.  
 
Other potential risks: To guard against frustration and fatigue, questions and surveys have been carefully 
chosen by patients, parents, and stakeholders. However, when necessary, a ssessments can be divided to 
decrease the frustration and fatigue. In addition, research staff will be hired based on their research 
experience and work with children and adolescents. Lastly, patients and their parent(s)/legal guardian(s) 
will be advised t hat they do not have to participate in the study and that their participation is voluntary 
and refusal to participate will not impact their clinical care in any way. Their alternative to study 
participation is to continue to receive standard clinical care.  Additional weight gain or metabolic 
abnormalities: Patients in the study will be closely monitored for weight gain and metabolic 
abnormalities. Clinicians, parents, or patients can discontinue assigned study treatment at any point, but 
will still be monit ored for up to 24 month. If a patient continues to have substantial weight gain (> 10%) 
in the LIFE group, a clinician might decide to add MET to the treatment if clinically indicated. Likewise, 
if the patient is randomized to the MET + LIFE group and cont inues to have substantial weight (>10%) 
they will have the option to continue MET and/or add another treatment or switch the patient’s treatment 
for BSD, whichever is clinically indicated .  If a participant’s BMI percentile 5% (= underweight) his/her 
treatment with MET will be discontinued .  
 
Although the risk of low vitamin B12 while taking MET is associated with age > 50 years and having type II 
diabetes, we will encourage clinicians to monitor B12 levels and a CBC throughout study participation.127 We 
will educate all study -related clinicians about this potential side effect of metformin and the very rare 
clinical manifestations of MET -related vitamin B12 deficiency (i.e., peripheral neuropathy and pernicious 
anemia).  
 
All changes will be noted, how ever since this is a prag matic trial  we will not mandate specific study 
discontinuation criteria , even if data collection is missed at recommended times for study visits. The 
intervals between study data collection are just guidelines for the most common i ntervals between clinical 
visits. However, clinical visits may occur more or less frequently. Regardless, data will be collected from 
participants at clinical visits, when feasible, at a frequency of no more than recommended in the Schedule 
of Events (Tabl e 2).  W e will encourage clinicians to follow recommended guidelines for referrals and 
treat patients as clinically indicated. We will review guidelines at study initiation. For example, referrals 
to endocrine will be recommended for fasting glucose ≥12 6 mg/dL x 2, HbA1C ≥5.7%, or fasting insulin 
≥50 mcU/mL. Patients with LDL > 140 or triglycerides > 300 might be referred to a lipid clinic, or those 
with elevated liver enzymes ALT > 45, for a liver clinic for evaluation of non -alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NAS H). After a review of the literature and consulting  with experts in the NA SH field, we selected the 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 25 
 
 threshold for referral to liver clinic.  Abnormal ALT will be defined as approximately 2x the upper limit 
of normal of the NHANES -derived population -based U LN (>=22.1for girls, >=25.8 for males).166 
Although the cutoff would be higher for boys, for consistency we will use a single c ut-off of ALT>=45.   
Referral for hypertension will be recommended if blood pressure is > 95th % at 3 times or > 130/90. Drs. 
Crim mins and Speiser will facilitate referrals as clinically necessary to ensure patients safety.  
 
We will monitor all patient records and train all clinicians to ensure that if they note a laboratory value as 
clinically significant, they will need to specify  the recommended follow -up and outcome.  
 
Exacerbation of BSD is also a risk, however patients will be treated for BSD as clinical indicated and 
there are no restrictions on psychotropic medications use. Patients will be monitored closely by site 
clinician s who will use the YMRS to systematically assess manic symptoms and the PHQ -9 item #9, to 
assess current suicidality. Patients will remain in the study even if they require a change in treatment or 
psychiatric hospitalization. These events will be recorded  as psychiatric symptom burden outcomes.  
Patient s who become pregnant during the ir study participation will continue to be followed . We will 
encourage treating clinicians to discontinue metformin if it is being prescribed for study participation and 
to consult with the prescribing clinician prior to discontinuation, if it is prescribed by another clinician 
and for reasons unrelated to  the study.   
 
b. Anticipated Benefit Justifies the Risk - We believe the risks associated with study participation are 
minimal . Despite patients being randomized to LIFE + MET or LIFE along, this is a pragmatic 
observational study and there are minimal st udy specific procedures associated with participation. 
Additionally, patients will remain in the study and data will be collected regardless of whether they 
switch treatment arms or miss visits , although all of this information will be recorded . Youth with  BSD 
taking SGAs receive low rates of basic metabolic monitoring and even lower rates of intervention for 
being overweight or obese, even though weight gain is the side effect of SGAs that causes them the most 
concern and is a common reason for poor adhere nce. Participation may increase their likelihood of 
receiving state -of-the art monitoring and intervention/prevention for weight gain, obesity, and metabolic 
disorders. Potential benefits also include the chance to contribute to a scientific investigation which may 
benefit other patients like themselves in the future. The study will benefit society as a whole by 
potentially providing clinicians with a new means to optimize efficacy, minimize risk for adverse 
reactions, and ultimately achieve better quality of life for patients treated with SGAs. We may also gain a 
better understanding of MET’s effects on anthropomorphic measurements as well as glucose and lipid 
metabolism, which may ultimately improve our ability to prevent and/or manage the longer -term effe cts 
of SGA. Overall, the risks associated with this study are minimal and subjects may receive direct benefit 
from participation. Therefore, in the opinion of the research team, including patient, parent, and other 
stakeholders, the benefits of this study outweigh the risks.  
 
In addition, the  benefits of this pragmatic trial to society, as well as to individual patients, such as gaining 
important information about his/her mental and physical health status and receiving healthy lifestyle 
intervention and MET , far outweigh its minimal risks involved. This patient -centered study will enhance 
our understanding of the effectiveness in a community setting of LIFE and MET to abrogate weight gain 
and its patient -reported complications, such as poor adherence, treatm ent satisfaction, QoL and 
psychiatric symptoms burden in obese or overweight youth with BSD who are treated with SGAs. In 
summary, this study will provide critical information to address an important public health concern in a 
highly vulnerable population.  
 
c. Anticipated Benefit as Favorable as Alternative Approaches  – An alternative to study participation 
is not participating and receiving standard of care treatment as directed by a physician of that participant’s 
choosing.  Participation may increase their likelihood of receiving state -of-the art monitoring and 
intervention/prevention for weight gain, obesity, and metabolic disorders associated with SGAs.  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 26 
 
  
H. PAYMENT  
Patients and their caregiver will each be paid $25 for visits at Screening, month 6, a nd month 24 for their 
time and effort. Also, they each will each be paid $10 for visits at month 1, 2, 3, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 21. 
This totals to $155 for the patient and $155 for the caregiver.  
 
I. SUBJECT COSTS  
Patients are expected to provide for  the costs of  clinical care (e.g., hospitalization costs) through standard 
health care payment procedures. Subjects will have no costs associated with research participation.  
 
K. LITERATURE CITED  
1. De Hert M, Detraux  J, van Winkel R, Yu  W, Correll  CU. Metabolic  and cardiovascular  adverse  
effects  associated  with antipsychotic  drugs. Nat Rev Endocrinol.  2012;8(2):114 -126. 
2. De Hert M, Vancampfort D,  Correll  CU, Mercken  V, Peuskens  J, Sweers K, van Winkel R, 
Mitchell  AJ. Guidelines  for screening  and monitoring  of cardiometabolic  risk in schizophrenia:  
systematic  evaluation.  Br J Psychiatry. 2011;199(2):99 -105. 
3. Fagiolini  A, Chengappa  KN, Soreca  I, Chang  J. Bipolar  disorder and  the metabolic  syndrome: 
causal  factors, psychiatric  outcomes  and economic  burden.  CNS Drugs. 2008;22(8):655 -669. 
4. Perlis  RH, Dennehy  EB, Miklowitz  DJ, DelBello MP, Ostacher M, Calabrese  JR, Ametrano  RM, 
Wisniewski  SR, Bowden  CL, Thase  ME, Nierenberg  AA, Sachs  G. Retrospective  age at onset of 
bipolar  disorder  and outcome  during  two-year follow -up: results  from the STEP -BD study.  
Bipolar  Disord.  2009;11(4):391 -400. 
5. Perlis  RH, Miyahara  S, Marangell  LB, Wisniewski  SR, Ostacher M, DelBello  MP, Bowden  CL, 
Sachs  GS, Nierenberg  AA, Investigators  S-B. Long -term implications  of early  onset  in bipolar 
disorder:  data from the first 1000  participants  in the systematic  treatment  enhancement  program  
for bipolar disorder  (STEP -BD). Biol Psychiatry.  2004;55(9):875 -881. 
6. Merikangas  KR, Cui L, Kattan  G, Carlson  GA, Youngstrom  EA, Angst  J. Mania  with and without  
depression  in a community  sample  of US adolescents. Arch  Gen Psychiatry.  2012;69(9):943 -951. 
7. Lewinsohn  PM, Klein  DN, Seeley  JR. Bipolar  disorders  in a community  sample  of older 
adolescents:  prevalence,  phenomenology,  comorbidity,  and course. J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  
Psychiatry.  1995;34(4):454 -463. 
8. Van Meter  AR, Henry DB, West  AE. What  goes up must come  down:  the burden  of bipolar  
depression  in youth.  J Affect  Disord.  2013;150(3):1048 -1054.  
9. Berry  EA, Heaton  PT, Kelton  CM. National  estimates  of the inpatient  burden  of pediatric  bipolar  
disorder  in the United  States. J Ment  Health  Policy  Econ. 2011;14(3):115 -123. 
10. Birmaher B, Axelson  D, Goldstein  B, Strober  M, Gill MK, Hunt  J, Houck  P, Ha W, Iyengar S, 
Kim E, Yen S, Hower  H, Esposito -Smythers  C, Goldstein  T, Ryan  N, Keller  M. Four-year 
longitudinal  course  of children  and adolescents  with bipolar  spectrum disorders:  the Course  and 
Outcome  of Bipolar  Youth  (COBY) study. Am J Psychiatry.  2009;166(7):795 -804. 
11. Freeman  AJ, Youngstrom  EA, Michalak  E, Siegel  R, Meyers  OI, Findling  RL. Quality  of life in 
pediatric  bipolar  disorder.  Pediatrics.  2009;123(3):e446 -452. 
12. Goldstein  BI, Birmaher  B, Axelson  DA, Goldstein  TR, Esposito -Smythers  C, Strober MA, Hunt  J, 
Leonard  H, Gill MK, Iyengar  S, Grimm C,  Yang  M, Ryan  ND, Keller  MB. Preliminary  findings  
regarding  overweight  and obesity  in pediatric  bipolar  disorder. J Clin Psychiatry.  
2008;69(12):1953 -1959.  
13. Patel  NC, Hariparsad  M, Matias -Akthar  M, Sorter  MT, Barzman  DH, Morrison  JA, Stanford  KE, 
Strakowski  SM, DelBello  MP. Body  mass  indexes  and lipid profiles  in hospitalized  children  and 
adolescents  exposed  to atypical  antipsychotics.  J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  
2007;17(3):303 -311. 
14. Jerrell  JM, McIntyre  RS, Tripathi  A. Childhood  treatment  with psychotropic  medication  and 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 27 
 
 development  of comorbid  medical  conditions  in adolescent -onset  bipolar  disorder.  Hum  
Psychopharmacol.  2011;26(7):451 -459. 
15. Goldstein  BI, Kemp  DE, Soczynska  JK, McIntyre  RS. Inflammation  and the phenomenology,  
pathophysiology,  comorbidity,  and treatment of bipolar  disorder: a systematic  review  of the 
literature.  J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70(8):1078 -1090.  
16. Fagiolini  A, Frank  E, Scott JA,  Turkin  S, Kupfer DJ. Metabolic  syndrome  in bipolar  disorder:  
findings  from the Bipolar  Disorder Center  for Pennsylvanians.  Bipolar  Disord. 2005;7(5):424 -
430. 
17. Wang  PW, Sachs  GS, Zarate  CA, Marangell  LB, Calabrese  JR, Goldberg  JF, Sagduyu  K, 
Miyahara  S, Ketter  TA. Overweight  and obesity  in bipolar  disorders.  J Psychiatr  Res. 
2006;40 (8):762 -764. 
18. Calkin  C, van de Velde  C, Ruzickova  M, Slaney  C, Garnham  J, Hajek T, O'Donovan  C, Alda  M. 
Can body  mass  index  help predict  outcome  in patients  with bipolar  disorder?  Bipolar  Disord.  
2009;11(6):650 -656. 
19. Goldstein  BI, Liu  SM, Schaffer  A, Sala  R, Blanco  C. Obesity  and the three -year longitudinal  
course  of bipolar  disorder.  Bipolar Disord.  2013;15(3):284 -293. 
20. Pfeifer JC, Kowatch  RA, DelBello  MP. Pharmacotherapy  of bipolar disorder  in children  and 
adolescents: recent progress. CNS Drugs.  2010;24 (7):575 -593. 
21. Olsen  BT, Ganocy  SJ, Bitter  SM, Findling  RL, Case  M, Chang  K, Tohen  M, DelBello  MP. 
Health -related  quality  of life as measured  by the child  health  questionnaire  in adolescents  with 
bipolar  disorder treated  with olanzapine.  Compr  Psychiatry.  2012;53(7):1000 -1005.  
22. Stewart  M, DelBello  MP, Versavel  M, Keller  D. Psychosocial  functioning  and health -related  
quality  of life in children  and adolescents  treated  with open -label  ziprasidone  for bipolar  mania,  
schizophrenia,  or schizoaffective  disorder.  J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  2009;19(6):635 -
640. 
23. Correll  CU, Sheridan  EM, DelBello  MP. Antipsychotic  and mood  stabilizer  efficacy  and 
tolerability  in pediatric  and adult  patients  with bipolar I mania:  a comparative  analysis  of acute, 
randomized,  placebo - controlled  trials. Bipolar Disord.  2010;12(2):116 -141. 
24. Dove  D, Warren Z, McPheeters  ML, Taylor  JL, Sathe  NA, Veenstra -VanderWeele  J. Medications  
for adolescents  and young  adults  with autism spectrum  disorders:  a systematic  review.  Pediatrics.  
2012 ;130(4):717 -726. 
25. Schimmelmann  BG, Schmidt  SJ, Carbon  M, Correll  CU. Treatment  of adolescents  with early -
onset  schizophrenia  spectrum disorders: in  search  of a rational,  evidence -informed  approach.  Curr 
Opin  Psychiatry.  2013;26(2):219 -230. 
26. Olfson  M, Crystal  S, Huang  C, Gerhard  T. Trends  in antipsychotic  drug use by very young,  
privately  insured  children. J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry. 2010;49(1):13 -23. 
27. Olfson  M, Blanco  C, Liu L, Moreno  C, Laje  G. National  trends  in the outpatient  treatment of 
children  and adolescents  with antipsychotic  drugs. Arch  Gen Psychiatry.  2006;63(6):679 -685. 
28. Olfson  M, Blanco  C, Liu SM, Wang S, Correll  CU. National  trends  in the office -based  treatment  
of children,  adolescents, and adults  with antipsychotics.  Arch  Gen Psychiatry.  2012;69(12):1247 -
1256.  
29. Pavuluri  MN, Henry  DB, Findling  RL, Parnes  S, Carbray  JA, Mohammed  T, Janicak  PG, 
Sweeney JA. Double -blind  randomized  trial of risperidone  versus  divalproex  in pediatric  bipolar  
disorder.  Bipolar  Disord.  2010;12(6):593 -605. 
30. DelBello  MP, Kowatch  RA, Adler  CM, Stanford KE, Welge  JA, Barzman  DH, Nelson  E, 
Strakowski  SM. A double -blind  randomized  pilot study  comparing  quetiapine  and divalproex  for 
adolescent mania. J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry. 2006;45(3):305 -313. 
31. Geller  B, Luby  JL, Joshi  P, Wagner  KD, Emslie  G, Walkup  JT, Axelson  DA, Bolhofner  K, Robb  
A, Wolf  DV, Riddle  MA, Birmaher  B, Nusrat  N, Ryan  ND, Vitiello  B, Tillman  R, Lavori  P. A 
randomized  controlled  trial of risperidone,  lithium,  or divalproex  sodium for initial  treatment  of 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 28 
 
 bipolar I disorder,  manic  or mixed  phase,  in children  and adolescents.  Arch  Gen Psychiatry.  
2012;69(5):515 -528. 
32. Correll  CU. Weight  gain and metabolic  effects  of mood  stabilizers  and antipsychotics  in pediatric  
bipolar  disorder: a systematic  review  and pooled  analysis  of short -term trials.  J Am Acad  Child  
Adolesc  Psychiatry.  2007;46(6):687 -700. 
33. Newcomer  JW. Comparing  the safety  and efficacy  of atypical  antipsychotics  in psychiatric  
patients  with comorbid  medical  illnesses.  J Clin Psychiatry.  2009;70  Suppl  3:30-36. 
34. Newcomer  JW, Hennekens  CH. Severe  mental  illness  and risk of cardiovascular  disease.  JAMA.  
2007;298(15):1794 -1796.  
35. Correll  CU, Frederickson  AM, Kane  JM, Manu  P. Equally  increased  risk for metabolic  syndrome  
in patients  with bipolar  disorder and schizophrenia  treated  with second -generation  antipsychotics. 
Bipolar  Disord.  2008;10(7):788 -797. 
36. Klein  DJ, Cottingham  EM, Sorter M, Barton  BA, Morrison  JA. A randomized,  double -blind, 
placebo - controlled  trial of metformin  treatment  of weight  gain associated  with initiation  of 
atypical  antipsychotic  therapy  in children  and adolescents. Am J Psychiatry.  2006;163(12):2072 -
2079.  
37. Correll  CU, Penzner  JB, Parikh  UH, Mughal  T, Javed  T, Carbon  M, Malhotra  AK. Recognizing  
and monitoring  adverse  events  of second -generation  antipsychotics  in children  and adolescents. 
Child  Adolesc  Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2006;15(1):177 -206. 
38. Correll  CU, Manu  P, Olshanskiy  V, Napolitano  B, Kane  JM, Malhotra  AK. Cardiometabolic  risk 
of second -generation  antipsychotic  medications  during  first-time use in children  and adolescents. 
JAMA.  2009;302(16):1765 -1773.  
39. Correll  CU, Sikich  L, Reeves  G, Riddle  M. Metformin  for antipsychotic -related  weight  gain and 
metabolic  abnormalities: when,  for whom,  and for how long? Am J Psychiatry.  2013 ;170(9):947 -
952. 
40. Benoit  SC, McQuade  JA, Clegg  DJ, Xu M, Rushing  PA, Woods  SC, Seeley  RJ. Altered  feeding  
responses  in mice  with targeted  disruption  of the dopamine -3 receptor  gene.  Behav  Neurosci.  
2003;117(1):46 -54. 
41. Davidson  TL, Kanoski  SE, Chan  K, Clegg  DJ, Benoit  SC, Jarrard  LE. Hippocampal  lesions  impair  
retention  of discriminative  responding  based  on energy  state cues.  Behav  Neurosci.  
2010;124(1):97 - 105. 
42. Allison  DB, Mentore  JL, Heo M, Chandler  LP, Cappelleri  JC, Infante  MC, Weiden  PJ. 
Antipsychotic - induced  weight gain: a comprehensive  research  synthesis.  Am J Psychiatry. 
1999;156(11):1686 -1696.  
43. Correll  CU, Frederickson  AM, Kane  JM, Manu  P. Does  antipsychotic  polypharmacy  increase  the 
risk for metabolic  syndrome?  Schizophr  Res. 2007;89(1 -3):91 -100. 
44. Martinez -Ortega  JM, Funes -Godoy  S, Diaz -Atienza  F, Gutierrez -Rojas  L, Perez -Costillas  L, 
Gurpegui  M. Weight gain and increase  of body  mass  index  among  children  and adolescents  
treated  with antipsychotics:  a critical  review.  Eur Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry. 2013;22(8):457 -479. 
45. Klein  DJ, Saldana  SN. Review:  metformin  is effective  at attenuating  the metabolic  risks associated  
with use of atypical  antipsychotics. Evid Based  Ment  Health.  2011;14(2):55.  
46. Shin L, Bregman  H, Frazier  J, Noyes  N. An overview  of obesity  in children  with psychiatric  
disorders  taking  atypical  antipsychotics. Harv  Rev Psychiatry. 2008;16(2):69 -79. 
47. Simon  V, van Winkel R, De Hert M. Are weight  gain and metabolic  side effects  of atypical  
antipsychotics  dose dependent?  A literature  review.  J Clin Psychiatry.  2009;70(7):1041 -1050.  
48. Whitaker RC,  Wright  JA, Pepe  MS, Seidel  KD, Dietz  WH.  Predicting  obesity  in young  adulthood  
from  childhood  and parental  obesity.  N Engl J Med.  1997;337(13):869 -873. 
49. Keeshin  BR, Luebbe  AM, Strawn  JR, Saldana  SN, Wehry  AM, DelBello  MP. Sexual  abuse  is 
associated  with obese  children  and adolescents  admitted  for psychiatric  hospitalization.  J Pediatr.  
2013;163(1):154 -159 e151.  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 29 
 
 50. Correll  CU. Novel  Antipsychotic -Induced  Weight  Gain  and Metabolic  Abnormalities  in Youth. 
American  Academy  of Child  and Adolescent  Psychiatry  Scientific  Proceedings.  2005;32:32.  
51. Barnes  TR, Paton  C, Cavanagh  MR, Hancock  E, Taylor  DM, Health  UKPOfM.  A UK audit  of 
screening  for the metabolic  side effects  of antipsychotics  in community  patients.  Schizophr  Bull.  
2007;33(6):1397 - 1403.  
52. Must  A, Anderson  SE. Effects  of obesity  on morbidity  in children  and adolescents.  Nutr Clin 
Care.  2003;6(1):4 -12. 
53. Must  A, Strauss  RS. Risks  and consequences  of childhood  and adolescent  obesity. Int J Obes  Relat  
Metab  Disord. 1999;23  Suppl  2:S2-11. 
54. Nathan  BM, Moran  A. Metabolic  complications  of obesity  in childhood  and adolescence: more  
than just diabetes.  Curr Opin  Endocrinol  Diabetes  Obes.  2008;15(1):21 -29. 
55. Lieberman  JA, Stroup  TS, McEvoy  JP, Swartz  MS, Rosenheck  RA, Perkins  DO, Keefe  RS, Davis  
SM, Davis  CE, Lebowitz  BD, Severe  J, Hsiao  JK, Clinical  Antipsychotic  Trials  of Intervention  
Effectiveness  I. Effectiveness  of antipsychotic  drugs  in patients with  chronic  schizophrenia. N 
Engl J Med.  2005;353(12):1209 -1223.  
56. Naber  D, Lambert M. The CATIE  and CUtLASS  studies  in schizophrenia: results  and implications  
for clinicians.  CNS Drugs. 2009;23(8):649 -659. 
57. Pogge  DL, Singer MB, Harvey  PD. Rates  and predictors  of adherence  with atypical  antipsychotic  
medication: a follow -up study  of adolescent  inpatients. J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  
2005;15(6):901 -912. 
58. Chiang  YL, Klainin -Yobas  P, Ignacio  J, Chng  CM. The impact of antipsychotic  side effects  on 
attitudes  towards  medication  in people  with schizophrenia  and related  disorders. J Clin Nurs.  
2011;20(15 - 16):2172 -2182.  
59. DelBello  MP, Hanseman  D, Adler CM, Fleck  DE, Strakowski  SM. Twelve -month  outcome  of 
adolescents  with bipolar disorder following  first hospitalization  for a manic  or mixed  episode.  Am 
J Psychiatry.  2007 ;164(4):582 -590. 
60. Kafantaris  V. Treatment of bipolar  disorder in  children  and adolescents.  J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  
Psychiatry.  1995;34(6):732 -741. 
61. Sporn  AL, Bobb  AJ, Gogtay  N, Stevens  H, Greenstein  DK, Clasen  LS, Tossell  JW, Nugent  T, 
Gochman  PA, Sharp  WS, Mattai  A, Lenane  MC, Yanovski  JA, Rapoport  JL. Hormonal  correlates  
of clozapine -induced  weight gain  in psychotic  children:  an exploratory  study.  J Am Acad  Child  
Adolesc  Psychiatry.  2005;44(9):925 -933. 
62. Goldstein  TR, Goldstein  BI, Mantz  MB, Bailey  B, Douaihy  A. A brief motivational  intervention  
for preventing  medication -associated  weight  gain among  youth  with bipolar disorder: treatment  
development  and case report.  J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol. 2011;21(3):275 -280. 
63. Virk S, Schwartz  TL, Jindal  S, Nihalani  N, Jones  N. Psychiatric  medication  induced  obesity: an  
aetiologic  review.  Obes  Rev. 2004;5(3):167 -170. 
64. Maayan  L, Correll  CU. Management of antipsychotic -related  weight  gain. Expert Rev  Neurother.  
2010;10(7):1175 -1200.  
65. Gierisch  JM, Nieuwsma JA, Bradford  DW,  Wilder  CM, Mann -Wrobel  MC, McBroom  AJ, 
Hasselblad  V, Williams  JW, Jr. Pharmacologic  and behavioral  interventions  to improve  
cardiovascular  risk factors  in adults  with serious  mental  illness:  a systematic  review  and meta -
analysis.  J Clin Psychiatry.  2014;75(5):e424 -440. 
66. Reeves  GM, Keeton  C, Correll  CU, Johnson  JL, Hamer  RM, Sikich  L, Hazzard  L, Alderman  C, 
Scheer  A, Mabe  M, Kapoor  S, Sheridan  E, Borner  I, Bussell  K, Pirmohamed  S, Bethea  TC, 
Chekuri  R, Gottfried  R, Reinblatt SP,  Santana  E, Riddle  MA. Improving  metabolic  parameters  of 
antipsychotic  child   treatment (IMPACT) study:  rationale, design, and methods.  Child  Adolesc  
Psychiatry  Ment  Health.  2013;7(1):31.  
67. Siegel  RM, Neidhard  MS, Kirk S. A comparison  of low glycemic  index  and staged  portion -
controlled  diets in improving  BMI of obese  children  in a pediatric  weight  management  program. 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 30 
 
 Clin Pediatr  (Phila).  2011;50(5):459 -461. 
68. Wilfley  DE, Kass  AE, Kolko  RP. Counseling  and behavior  change  in pediatric  obesity.  Pediatr  
Clin North  Am. 2011 ;58(6):1403 -1424, x. 
69. Flodmark  CE, Marcus  C, Britton  M. Interventions  to prevent  obesity  in children  and adolescents:  a 
systematic  literature  review.  Int J Obes  (Lond).  2006;30(4):579 -589. 
70. Summerbell  CD, Waters  E, Edmunds  LD, Kelly  S, Brown  T, Campbell  KJ. Interventions  for 
preventing  obesity  in children.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev. 2005(3):CD001871.  
71. Alvarez -Jimenez  M, Hetrick  SE, Gonzalez -Blanch  C, Gleeson  JF, McGorry  PD. Non-
pharmacological  management  of antipsychotic -induced  weight  gain:  systematic  review  and meta -
analysis  of randomised  controlled  trials.  Br J Psychiatry.  2008;193(2):101 -107. 
72. Alvarez -Jimenez  M, Martinez -Garcia  O, Perez -Iglesias  R, Ramirez  ML, Vazquez -Barquero  JL, 
Crespo - Facorro  B. Prevention  of Antipsychotic -Induced  Weight  Gain  with Early  Behavioural  
Intervention  in First-Episode  Psychosis:  2-Year Results  of a Randomized  Controlled  Trial.  
Schizophr  Res. 2010;116(1):16 -19. 
73. Lowe  T, Lubos  E. Effectiveness  of weight management interventions  for people  with serious  
mental  illness  who receive  treatment with  atypical  antipsychotic  medications.  A literature  review.  
J Psychiatr  Ment  Health  Nurs. 2008;15(10):857 -863. 
74. Faulkner  G, Soundy  AA, Lloyd  K. Schizophrenia  and weight management: a systematic  review  of 
interventions  to control  weight.  Acta Psychiatr Scand.  2003;108(5):324 -332. 
75. Alvarez -Jimenez  M, Gonzalez -Blanch  C, Vazquez -Barquero  JL, Perez -Iglesias  R, Martinez -
Garcia  O, Perez -Pardal  T, Ramirez -Bonilla  ML, Crespo -Facorro  B. Attenuation  of antipsychotic -
induced  weight  gain with early  behavioral  intervention  in drug-naive  first-episode  psychosis  
patients: A randomized  controlled  trial. J Clin Psychiatry.  2006;67(8):1253 -1260.  
76. AMA.  Expert  Committee  Recommendations  on the Assessment,  Prevention  and Treatment of 
Child  and Adolescent Overweight  and Obesity.  2007;  
http://wwwamaassnorg/ama1/pub/upload/mm/433/ped_obesity_recspdf.  
77. Kim SF, Huang  AS, Snowman  AM, Teuscher C,  Snyder  SH. From the Cover:  Antipsych otic drug- 
induced  weight gain mediated  by histamine  H1 receptor -linked  activation  of hypothalamic  AMP -
kinase.  Proc  Natl Acad  Sci U S A. 2007;104(9):3456 -3459.  
78. Aviles -Santa  L, Sinding  J, Raskin  P. Effects  of metformin  in patients  with poorly controlled,  
insulin - treated  type 2 diabetes  mellitus.  A randomized,  double -blind,  placebo -controlled  trial. 
Ann Intern  Med.  1999;131(3):182 -188. 
79. Paolisso  G, Amato  L, Eccellente  R, Gambardella  A, Tagliamonte  MR, Varricchio  G, Carella  C, 
Giugliano  D, D'Onofrio  F. Effect of metformin  on food intake  in obese  subjects. Eur J Clin Invest.  
1998;28(6):441 -446. 
80. McDonagh  MS, Selph  S, Ozpinar  A, Foley  C. Systematic  review  of the benefits  and risks of 
metformin  in treating  obesity  in children  aged 18 years  and younger. JAMA  Pediatr.  
2014;168(2):178 -184. 
81. Brufani  C, Crino  A, Fintini  D, Patera  PI, Cappa  M, Manco  M. Systematic  review  of metformin  use 
in obese  nondiabetic  children  and adolescents. Horm  Res Paediatr.  2013;80(2):78 -85. 
82. Park MH, Kinra  S, Ward  KJ, White B, Viner RM. Metformin  for obesity  in children  and 
adolescents:  a systematic  review.  Diabetes  Care. 2009;32(9):1743 -1745.  
83. Kay JP, Alemzadeh  R, Langley  G, D'Angelo  L, Smith  P, Holshouser  S. Beneficial  effects  of 
metformin  in normoglycemic  morbidly  obese  adolescents. Metabolism.  2001;50(12):1457 -1461.  
84. Srinivasan  S, Ambler GR,  Baur LA,  Garnett SP, Tepsa  M, Yap F, Ward  GM, Cowell  CT. 
Randomized,  controlled  trial of metformin  for obesity  and insulin  resistance  in children  and 
adolescents:  improvement  in body  composition  and fasting  insulin. J Clin Endocrinol  Metab. 
2006;91(6):2074 -2080.  
85. Freemark  M, Bursey  D. The effects  of metformin  on body  mass  index  and glucose  tolerance  in 
obese  adolescents  with fasting  hyperinsulinemia  and a family  history  of type 2 diabetes. 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 31 
 
 Pediatrics.  2001;107(4):E55.  
86. Morrison  JA, Cottingham EM, Barton  BA. Metformin for weight  loss in pediatric  patients  taking  
psychotropic  drugs. Am J Psychiatry.  2002;159(4):655 -657. 
87. Ijff DM, Aldenkamp  AP. Cognitive  side-effects  of antiepileptic  drugs  in children. Handb  Clin 
Neurol.  2013;111:707 -718. 
88. Fiedorowicz  JG, Miller  DD, Bishop  JR, Calarge  CA, Ellingrod  VL, Haynes  WG.  Systematic  
Review  and Meta -analysis  of Pharmacological  Interventions  for Weight Gain  from  
Antipsychotics  and Mood  Stabilizers.  Curr  Psychiatry  Rev. 2012;8(1):25 -36. 
89. Ehret  M, Goethe  J, Lanosa  M, Coleman  CI. The effect  of metformin  on anthropometrics  and 
insulin  resistance  in patients  receiving  atypical  antipsychotic  agents: a meta -analysis.  J Clin 
Psychiatry.  2010;71(10):1286 -1292.  
90. Maayan  L, Vakhrusheva  J, Correll  CU. Effectiveness  of medications  used to attenuate  
antipsychotic - related  weight  gain and metabolic  abnormalities: a systematic  review  and meta -
analysis.  Neuropsychopharmacology.  2010;35(7):1520 -1530.  
91. Bjorkhem -Bergman  L, Asplund  AB, Lindh  JD. Metformin  for weight reduction  in non-diabetic  
patients  on antipsychotic  drugs:  a systematic  review  and meta -analysis.  J Psychopharmacol. 
2011;25(3):299 -305. 
92. Das C, Mendez G, Jagasia  S, Labbate  LA. Second -generation  antipsychotic  use in schizophrenia  
and associated  weight  gain:  a critical  review  and meta -analysis  of behavioral  and pharmacologic  
treatments.  Ann Clin Psychiatry.  2012;24(3):225 -239. 
93. Mizuno  Y, Suzuki  T, Nakagawa  A, Yoshida  K, Mimura  M, Fleischhacker WW,  Uchida  H. 
Pharmacological  Strategies  to Counteract Antipsychotic -Induced  Weight  Gain  and Metabolic  
Adverse  Effects  in Schizophrenia:  A Systematic  Review  and Meta -analysis.  Schizophr  Bull.  
2014;40(6):1385 - 1403.  
94. Jarskog  LF, Hamer  RM, Catellier  DJ, Stewart  DD, Lavange  L, Ray N, Golden  LH, Lieberman  JA, 
Stroup  TS, Investigators  M. Metformin  for weight loss  and metabolic  control  in overweight 
outpatients  with schizophrenia  and schizoaffective  disorder.  Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(9):1032 -
1040.  
95. Wu RR, Zhao  JP, Jin H, Shao  P, Fang  MS, Guo XF, He YQ, Liu  YJ, Chen  JD, Li  LH. Lifestyle  
intervention  and metformin  for treatment of antipsychotic -induced  weight gain:  a randomized  
controlled  trial. JAMA.  2008;299(2):185 -193. 
96. Wang  M, Tong  JH, Zhu G, Liang  GM, Yan HF, Wang XZ. Metformin  for treatment  of 
antipsychotic - induced  weight gain: a randomized,  placebo -controlled  study.  Schizophr  Res. 
2012;138(1):54 -57. 
97. Wu RR, Zhao  JP, Guo XF, He YQ, Fang  MS, Guo WB, Chen  JD, Li LH. Metformin  addition  
attenuates  olanzapine -induced  weight gain in drug-naive  first-episode  schizophrenia  patients: a 
double -blind,  placebo -controlled  study. Am J Psychiatry.  2008;165(3):352 -358. 
98. Findling  RL, Cavus I, Pappadopulos  E, Vanderburg  DG, Schwartz  JH, Gundapaneni  BK, DelBello  
MP. Efficacy,  long-term safety,  and tolerability  of ziprasidone  in children  and adolescents  with 
bipolar  disorder.  J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol. 2013;23(8):545 -557. 
99. Findling  RL, Correll  CU, Nyilas  M, Forbes  RA, McQuade  RD, Jin  N, Ivanova  S, Mankoski  R, 
Carson  WH,  Carlson  GA. Aripiprazole  for the treatment  of pediatric  bipolar  I disorder: a 30-week, 
randomized,  placebo -controlled  study. Bipolar  Disord. 2013;15(2):138 -149. 
100. Findling  RL, Pathak  S, Earley  WR, Liu S, DelBello  MP. Efficacy  and safety of extended -release  
quetiapine  fumarate  in youth  with bipolar  depression:  an 8 week, double -blind,  placebo -controlled  
trial. J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol. 2014;24(6):325 -335. 
101. Miklowitz  DJ, Schneck  CD, George  EL, Taylor  DO, Sugar CA,  Birmaher  B, Kowatch  RA, 
DelBello  MP, Axelson  DA. Pharmacotherapy  and family -focused  treatment  for adolescents  with 
bipolar I and II disorders: a 2-year randomized  trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171(6):658 -667. 
102. Pathak  S, Findling  RL, Earley  WR, Acevedo  LD, Stankowski  J, Delbello  MP. Efficacy  and safety  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 32 
 
 of quetiapine  in children  and adolescents  with mania  associated  with bipolar  I disorder:  a 3-week, 
double - blind,  placebo -controlled  trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(1):e100 -109. 
103. Chang  K, Delbello  M, Chu WJ, Garrett A,  Kelley  R, Mills  N, Howe  M, Bryan  H, Adler C, 
Eliassen  J, Spielman  D, Strakowski  SM. Neurometabolite  effects  of response  to quetiapine  and 
placebo  in adolescents  with bipolar depression. J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  
2012;22(4):261 -268. 
104. Haas  M, Delbello  MP, Pandina  G, Kushner  S, Van Hove  I, Augustyns  I, Quiroz  J, Kusumakar V.  
Risperidone  for the treatment  of acute  mania  in children  and adolescents  with bipolar  disorder: a 
randomized,  double -blind,  placebo -controlled  study.  Bipolar  Disord.  2009;11(7):687 -700. 
105. DelBello  MP, Chang  K, Welge  JA, Adler  CM, Rana  M, Howe  M, Bryan  H, Vogel  D, Sampang  S, 
Delgado  SV, Sorter M, Strakowski  SM. A double -blind,  placebo -controlled  pilot study  of 
quetiapine  for depressed  adolescents  with bipolar  disorder.  Bipolar  Disord. 2009;11(5):483 -493. 
106. DelBello  MP, Versavel  M, Ice K, Keller  D, Miceli  J. Tolerability  of oral ziprasidone  in children  
and adolescents  with bipolar mania, schizophrenia,  or schizoaffective  disorder. J Child  Adolesc  
Psychopharmacol.  2008;18(5):491 -499. 
107. Delbello  MP, Schwiers  ML, Rosenberg  HL, Strakowski  SM. A double -blind,  randomized,  
placebo - controlled  study  of quetiapine  as adjunctive  treatment  for adolescent mania.  J Am Acad  
Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry.  2002;41(10):1216 -1223.  
108. Tohen  M, Kryzhanovskaya  L, Carlson  G, Delbello  M, Wozniak  J, Kowatch  R, Wagner  K, 
Findling  R, Lin  D, Robertson -Plouch  C, Xu W, Dittmann  RW, Biederman  J. Olanzapine  versus  
placebo  in the treatment  of adolescents  with bipolar mania.  Am J Psychiatry.  2007;164(10):1547 -
1556.  
109. Rademacher J, DelBello  MP, Adler  C, Stanford  K, Strakowski  SM. Health -related  quality  of life in 
adolescents  with bipolar I disorder. J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  2007;17(1):97 -103. 
110. Barzman  DH, DelBello  MP, Adler  CM, Stanford  KE, Strakowski  SM. The efficacy  and 
tolerability  of quetiapine  versus  divalproex  for the treatment of impulsivity  and reactive  
aggression  in adolescents  with co-occurring  bipolar disorder  and disruptive  behavior  disorder(s). J 
Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  2006;16(6):665 -670. 
111. Barzman  DH, DelBello  MP, Kowatch  RA, Gernert B,  Fleck  DE, Pathak  S, Rappaport  K, Delgado  
SV, Campbell  P, Strakowski  SM. The effectiveness  and tolerability  of aripiprazole for pediatric  
bipolar  disorders: a retrospective  chart review.  J Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  
2004;14 (4):593 -600. 
112. Strakowski  SM, Johnson  JL, Delbello  MP, Hamer RM,  Green  AI, Tohen  M, Lieberman  JA, Glick  
I, Patel  JK, Group  HR. Quality  of life during  treatment with  haloperidol  or olanzapine  in the year 
following  a first psychotic  episode.  Schizophr  Res. 2005;78(2 -3):161 -169. 
113. Toteja  N, Gallego  JA, Saito  E, Gerhard  T, Winterstein  A, Olfson  M, Correll  CU. Prevalence  and 
correlates  of antipsychotic  polypharmacy  in children  and adolescents  receiving  antipsychotic  
treatment.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol.  2014;17 (7):1095 -1105.  
114. Nielsen  J, Kane  JM, Correll  CU. Real-world  effectiveness  of clozapine  in patients  with bipolar  
disorder:  results  from  a 2-year mirror -image  study.  Bipolar Disord.  2012;14(8):863 -869. 
115. Raebel  MA, Penfold  R, McMahon  AW,  Reichman  M, Shetterly  S, Goodrich  G, Andrade  S, 
Correll  CU, Gerhard  T. Adherence  to Guidelines  for Glucose  Assessment  in Starting  Second -
Generation  Antipsychotics.  Pediatrics.  2014.  
116. Centorrino  F, Mark  TL, Talamo  A, Oh K, Chang  J. Health  and economic  burden  of metabolic  
comorbidity  among  individuals  with bipolar  disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol.  2009;29(6):595 -
600. 
117. Christian  R, Saavedra  L, Gaynes  BN, Sheitman  B, Wines  RCM,  Jonas  DE, Viswanathan  M, Ellis 
AR, Woodell  C, Carey  TS. Future  Research  Needs  for First - and Second -Generation  
Antipsychotics  for Children  and Young  Adults . Rockville  (MD)2012.  
118. Crowley  MJ, McCrory  DC, Chatterjee  R, Gierisch  JM, Myers  ER, Schmit  KM, Coeytaux  RR, 
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 33 
 
 Correll  CU, Kendrick  AS, Sanders  GD. Prioritization  of research  addressing  antipsychotics  for 
adolescents  and young  adults  with bipolar  disorder.  Ann Intern  Med.  2014;160(7):492 -498. 
119. Penzner  JB, Dudas  M, Saito  E, Olshanskiy  V, Parikh  UH, Kapoor S, Chekuri  R, Gadaleta  D, 
Avedon  J, Sheridan  EM, Randell  J, Malhotra  AK, Kane  JM, Correll  CU. Lack  of effect  of 
stimulant combination  with second -generation  antipsychotics  on weight  gain, metabolic  changes, 
prolactin  levels,  and sedation  in youth  with clinically  relevant  aggression  or oppositionality.  J 
Child  Adolesc  Psychopharmacol.  2009;19(5):563 -573. 
120. Stephens  JR, Heffner  JL, Adler CM, Blom TJ, Anthenelli  RM, Fleck  DE, Welge JA, Strakowski  
SM, DelBello  MP. Risk and protective  factors  associated  with substance  use disorders  in 
adolescents  with first-episode  mania.  J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry.  2014;53(7):771 -779. 
121. Herranz  Barbero  A, Lopez de Mesa  MR, Azcona  San Julian  C. Influence  of Overweight  on the 
Health - Related  Quality  of Life in Adolescents.  An Pediatr (Barc).  2014.  
122. Thorpe  KE, Zwarenstein  M, Oxman  AD, Treweek  S, Furberg  CD, Altman  DG, Tunis  S, Bergel  E, 
Harvey  I, Magid  DJ, Chalkidou  K. A pragmatic -explanatory  continuum indicator summary  
(PRECIS): a tool to help trial designers.  CMAJ.  2009;180(10):E47 -57. 
123. Barlow  SE, Expert  C. Expert committee  recommendations  regarding  the prevention,  assessment,  
and treatment  of child  and adolescent  overweight  and obesity:  summary  report. Pediatrics.  
2007;120  Suppl  4:S164 -192. 
124. Epstein  L, Squires  S. The Stoplight  Diet for  Children:  An Eight -Week  Program  for Parents  and 
Children.  1st ed: Little  Brown  & Co; 1988.  
125. Lavine  JE, Schwimmer  JB, Van Natta  ML, Molleston  JP, Murray  KF, Rosenthal  P, Abrams  SH, 
Scheimann  AO, Sanyal  AJ, Chalasani  N, Tonascia  J, Unalp  A, Clark  JM, Brunt  EM, Kleiner  DE, 
Hoofnagle  JH, Robuck  PR, Nonalcoholic  Steatohepatitis  Clinical  Research  N. Effect of vitamin  E 
or metformin  for treatment  of nonalcoholic  fatty liver disease  in children  and adolescents: the 
TONIC  randomized  controlled  trial. JAMA.  2011;305(16):1659 -1668.  
126. Blonde  L, Dailey  GE, Jabbour  SA, Reasner CA,  Mills  DJ. Gastrointestinal  tolerability  of 
extended - release  metformin  tablets  compared  to immediate -release  metformin  tablets: results  of a 
retrospective  cohort study. Curr Med  Res Opin. 2004;20(4):565 -572. 
127. Haeusler  S, Parry -Strong  A, Krebs JD. The prevalence  of low vitamin  B12 status  in people  with 
type 2 diabetes  receiving  metformin  therapy  in New Zealand --a clinical  audit.  N Z Med J. 
2014;127(1404):8 -16. 
128. Shaffer D, Fisher P, Lucas  CP, Dulcan  MK, Schwab -Stone  ME. NIMH  Diagnostic  Interview  
Schedule  for Children  Version  IV (NIMH  DISC -IV): description,  differences  from  previous  
versions,  and reliability  of some  common  diagnoses.  J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry. 
2000;39(1):28 -38. 
129. De Hert M, Dobbelaere  M, Sheridan  EM, Cohen  D, Correll  CU. Metabolic  and endocrine  adverse  
effects  of second -generation  antipsychotics  in children  and adolescents:  A systematic  review  of 
randomized,  placebo  controlled  trials  and guidelines  for clinical  practice.  Eur Psychiatry.  
2011;26(3):144 -158. 
130. Ford ES, Giles  WH,  Dietz  WH.  Prevalence  of the metabolic  syndrome  among  US adults: findings  
from  the third National  Health  and Nutrition  Examination  Survey.  JAMA.  2002;287(3):356 -359. 
131. Grundy  SM, Cleeman  JI, Daniels  SR, Donato  KA, Eckel  RH, Franklin  BA, Gordon  DJ, Krauss  
RM, Savage  PJ, Smith  SC, Jr., Spertus  JA, Costa  F, American  Heart A, National  Heart L, Blood  I. 
Diagnosis  and management of the metabolic  syndrome: an  American  Heart Association/National  
Heart,  Lung,  and Blood  Institute  Scientific  Statement.  Circulation.  2005;112(17):2735 -2752.  
132. Correll  CU, Robinson  DG, Schooler  NR, Brunette  MF, Mueser  KT, Rosenheck  RA, Marcy  P, 
Addington  J, Estroff SE, Robinson  J, Penn  DL, Azrin  S, Goldstein  A, Severe  J, Heinssen  R, Kane  
JM. Cardiometabolic  Risk in Patients  With  First-Episode  Schizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders: 
Baseline  Results  From the RAISE -ETP Study. JAMA  Psychiatry. 2014.  
133. Cook  S, Weitzman M, Auinger P, Nguyen  M, Dietz  WH.  Prevalence  of a metabolic  syndrome  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 34 
 
 phenotype  in adolescents: findings  from  the third National  Health  and Nutrition  Examination  
Survey,  1988 -1994.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med.  2003;157(8):  821-827. 
134. Modi  AC, Rausch  JR, Glauser TA.  Patterns  of nonadherence  to antiepileptic  drug therapy  in 
children  with newly  diagnosed  epilepsy.  JAMA.  2011;305 (16):1669 -1676.  
135. Modi  AC, Wu YP, Rausch  JR, Peaugh  JL, Glauser TA. Antiepileptic  Drug  Non-Adherence  
Predicts  Pediatric  Epilepsy  Seizure  Outcomes. Neurology.  in press.  
136. Modi  AC, Zeller  MH, Xanthakos  SA, Jenkins  TM, Inge TH. Adherence  to vitamin  
supplementation  following  adolescent bariatric  surgery.  Obesity  (Silver  Spring).  2013;21(3):E190 -
195. 
137. Quittner  AL, Espelage  DL, Ievers -Landis  CE, Drotar D.  Measuring  Adherence  to Medical  
Treatments  in Childhood  Chronic  Illness:  Considering  Multiple  Methods  and Sources  of 
Information.  Journal  of Clinical  Psychology  in Medical  Settings. 2000;7:41 -54. 
138. Rand  CS. "I Took  the Medicine  Like You Told Me Doctor": Self Report  of Adherence  with 
Medical  Regimens. In: Stone  A, Tukkan  JS, Bachrael  CM, Jobe JB, Kurtzman  HJ, Cain VS, eds. 
The Science  of Self-Report . Mahway,  NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates; 2000:257 -276. 
139. Rapoff  MA. Adherence  to Pediatric  Medical  Regimens.  New York, NY:  Kluwer  
Academic/Plenum  Publishers;  1999.  
140. Craig  CL, Marshall  AL, Sjostrom M, Bauman  AE, Booth  ML, Ainsworth  BE, Pratt  M, Ekelund  U, 
Yngve  A, Sallis  JF, Oja  P. International  physical  activity  questionnaire: 12 -country  reliability  and 
validity.  Med Sci Sports  Exerc. 2003;35(8):1381 -1395.  
141. Irwin  DE, Stucky  B, Langer  MM,  Thissen  D, Dewitt  EM, Lai JS, Varni  JW, Yeatts  K, DeWalt 
DA. An item response  analysis  of the pediatric  PROMIS  anxiety  and depressive  symptoms  scales. 
Qual  Life Res. 2010;19(4):595 -607. 
142. Irwin  DE, Stucky  BD, Langer  MM,  Thissen  D, DeWitt EM, Lai JS, Yeatts  KB, Varni  JW, DeWalt 
DA. PROMIS  Pediatric  Anger Scale:  an item response  theory  analysis.  Qual  Life Res. 
2012;21(4):697 -706. 
143. Berk  M, Ng F, Dodd  S, Callaly  T, Campbell  S, Bernardo  M, Trauer T. The validity  of the CGI 
severity  and improvement  scales  as measures  of clinical  effectiveness  suitable  for routine  clinical  
use. J Eval Clin Pract. 2008;14(6):979 -983. 
144. Young  RC, Biggs  JT, Ziegler VE,  Meyer  DA. A rating  scale  for mania: reliability,  validity  and 
sensitivity.  Br J Psychiatry. 1978;133:429 -435. 
145. Forrest  CB, Bevans  KB, Pratiwadi  R, Moon  J, Teneralli  RE, Minton  JM, Tucker  CA. 
Development of the PROMIS  (R) pediatric  global  health  (PGH -7) measure.  Qual  Life Res. 
2014;23(4):1221 -1231.  
146. Dewalt  DA, Thissen  D, Stucky  BD, Langer  MM,  Morgan  Dewitt  E, Irwin  DE, Lai JS, Yeatts  KB, 
Gross  HE, Taylor  O, Varni  JW. PROMIS  Pediatric  Peer Relationships  Scale:  development  of a 
peer relationships  item bank  as part of social  health  measurement.  Health  Psychol.  
2013;32(10):1093 -1103.  
147. Zeller  MH, Modi  AC. Development  and initial  validation  of an obesity -specific  quality -of-life 
measure  for children:  sizing  me up. Obesity  (Silver  Spring).  2009;17(6):1171 -1177.  
148. Modi  AC, Zeller  MH. Validation  of a parent -proxy,  obesity -specific  quality -of-life measure: sizing  
them  up. Obesity  (Silver Spring). 2008 ;16(12):2624 -2633.  
149. Awad  AG, Voruganti  LN. Body  weight,  image  and self-esteem  evaluation  questionnaire: 
development  and validation  of a new scale.  Schizophr  Res. 2004;70(1):63 -67. 
150. Brannan  AM, Athay  MM,  de Andrade  AR. Measurement Quality  of the Caregiver  Strain  
Questionnaire - Short  Form  7 (CGSQ -SF7). Adm Policy  Ment  Health.  2012;39(1 -2):51 -59. 
151. Brannan  AM, Heflinger  CA, Bickman  L. The Caregiver  Strain  Questionnaire:  Measuring  the 
Impact  on the Family  of Living  with a Child  with Serious  Emotional  Disturbance.  Journal  of 
Emotional  and Behavioral  Disorders.  1997;5:212 -222. 
152. Lowe  B, Kroenke  K, Herzog W, Grafe  K. Measuring  depression  outcome  with a brief self-report  
 
 
Protocol Version# 9.0 Dated: AUGUST 14, 2018  Page 35 
 
 instrument:  sensitivity  to change  of the Patient  Health  Questionnaire  (PHQ -9). J Affect  Disord.  
2004;81(1):61 -66. 
153. Guy W. Guy W. ECDEU  Assessment  Manual  for Psychopharmacology.  Rockville,  MD1976.  
154. Harris  PA, Taylor  R, Thielke  R, Payne  J, Gonzalez  N, Conde  JG. Research  electronic  data capture  
(REDCap) --a metadata -driven  methodology  and workflow  process  for providing  translational  
research  informatics  support. J Biomed Inform.  2009;42(2):377 -381. 
155. Rubin  DB. Inference  and Missing  Data. Biometrika.  1976;63(3):581 -592. 
156. Robins  JM, Hernan  MA, Brumback  B. Marginal  structural  models  and causal  inference  in 
epidemiology.  Epidemiology.  2000;11(5):550 -560. 
157. Cramer  JA, Glassman  M, Rienzi  V. The relationship  between  poor medication        compliance  
and seizures.   Epilepsy Behav. 200;3(4):  338-342. 
158. Jones  RM, Butler JA,  Thomas  VA, Peveler  RC, Prevett  M. Adherence  to treatment  in patients  with 
epilepsy:  associations  with seizure  control  and illness  beliefs. Seizure.  2006;15(7):504 -508. 
159. Byerly  MJ, Thompson  A, Carmody  T, Bugno  R, Erwin  T, Kashner M, Rush  AJ. Validity  of 
electronically  monitored  medication  adherence  and conventional  adherence  measures  in 
schizophrenia.  Psychiatr  Serv. 2007;58:844 -847. 
160. Rogers  EM. Diffusion  of Innovations.  Glencoe:  Free Press;  1962.  
161. Ajzen  I. The Theory  of Planned  Behavior.  Organizational  Behavior  and Human  Decision  
Processes. 1991;50:179 -211. 
162. Parrinello  MC. Prevention  of metabolic  syndrome  from  atypical  antipsychotic  medications: 
applying  Rogers' diffusion  of innovations  model  in clinical  practice.  J Psychosoc  Nurs  Ment 
Health  Serv.  2012;50(12):36 -44. 
163. Bouza  C, Lopez -Cuadrado  T, Gutierrez -Torres  LF, Amate  J. Efficacy  and safety  of metformin  for 
treatment  of overweight  and obesity  in adolescents: an  updated  systematic  review  and meta -
analysis.  Obes  Facts.  2012;5:753 -765. 
164. Kendall  D, Vail A, Amin R, Barrett T,  Dimitri  P, Ivison  F, Kibirige  M, Mathew  V, Matyka  K, 
McGovern  A, Stirling  H, Tetlow  L, Wales  J, Wright  N, Clayton  P, Hall C. Metformin  in obese  
children  and adolescents:  the MOCA  trial. J Clin Endocrinol  Metab. 2013;98(1):322 -329. 
165. Scheen  AJ, Paquot N. Metformin  revisited:  a critical  review  of the benefit -risk balance  in at-risk 
patients  with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes  Metab. 2013;39 :179-190. 
166. Schwimmer et al. SAFETY study: alanine aminotransferase cutoff values are set too high for 
reliable detection of pediatric chronic liver disease.  Gastroenterology . April 2010 . 
167. Carnell S , Wardle J . Measuring behavioural susceptibility to obesity: validation of the child 
eating behaviour questionnaire. Appetite . 48:104 -113, 2007.  
168. de Lauzon B1, Romon M , Deschamps V , Lafay L , Borys JM , Karlsson J , Ducimetière P , Charles 
MA; Fleurbaix Laventie Ville Sante Study Group . The Three -Factor Eating Questionnaire -R18 is 
able to distinguish among different eating patterns in a general population. J Nutr.  
2004;134:2372 -2380.  
 