Protocol  and Statistical  Analysis  Plan 
 
Title:  Effect  of the DentalVibe  injections  system  on pain  during  local  anesthesia  injections  in children 
(0661 -17-FB) 
 
PI: Jennifer  Marshall,  DDS  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Approved   01-11-2018                                   
Summary  
The purpose of this study is to compare self -reported pain scale measurements using the Wong -Baker 
FACES pain rating scale from an experimental group (local anesthesia injection with DentalVibe system) 
and a control  group  (traditional  local  anesthesia  injection  with  DentalVibe  system  turned  off) in children. 
Eligibility: Children age 5 -11 years old who require local anesthesia for bilateral dental treatment at 
UNMC pediatric dental clinic. Children must understand and speak English. Interventions and 
evalua tions: Each patient will have two separate restorative appointments where the DentalVibe will be 
used during local anesthetic injections. One appointment the DentalVibe will be turned on and one 
appointment the DentalVibe will be turned off. After each inj ection the child will be shown the Wong 
Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale and asked to pick a face associated with their level of hurt during the 
injection. Follow -up: All children will be followed up with any necessary recommended dental  
treatment.  
 
Purpose,  Background  and Rationale  
The purpose  of this study  is to compare  self-reported  pain  scale  measurements  using  the 
Wong -Baker FACES pain rating scale from an experimental group (local anesthesia injection with 
DentalVibe  system)  and a control  group  (traditio nal local  anesthesia  injection  with  DentalVibe  system 
turned off) in children.  
 
An important aspect of behavior guidance in pediatric dentistry is the control of pain during 
dental  procedures.  There  can be anxiety  and discomfort  associated  with  some  dental  procedures.  
Anxious  patients  feel more  pain  than  less anxious  patients.1 Dental  procedures  can be carried  out more 
effectively if a child is not in pain. The use of local anesthetic is generally indicated when teeth require 
restorative  treatment  or extraction.  Dental  injection  is the dental  procedure  that produces  the greatest 
negative response in children.2 If a child experiences pain during a dental procedure, their future as 
cooperative dental patients may be damaged.3 Children who have traumatic dental experiences are 
more likely to avoid the dentist as an adult.4,5 
 
Different techniques have been proposed to decrease pain and anxiety during local anesthetic 
administration.  Distraction  by use of audiovisual  glasses  have  been  shown  to reduce  the pain  associated 
with the injection of local anesthesia.6 Another study showed cooling the injection site before local 
anesthetic injections reduced pain perceived by pediatric patients.7 The Wand, a computer delivery 
system that provides precise injection flow rate, can provide less painful injections when compared to 
the conventional local anesthesia in pediatric patients.8 
 
According  to the Gate  theory,  proposed  by Wall  & Melzack  in 1965,  pain  can be reduced  by 
activation of nerve fibers that conduct non -noxio us stimuli.9,10 Vibration stimulus can 
decrease pain during dental local anesthetic administration.11,12 Numerous devices have 
been developed to cause stimulation of the mechanoreceptors during injections to reduce 
pain.  
 
The Vibraject  is a device  that attaches  to a traditional  dental  syringe  and transfers  vibrating 
stimulus to the needle. In the study by Roeber, the VibraJect did not provide any benefit 
over a conventional approach to anesthesia injections  in children. This may have  been due 
to the vibrati ons targeting the wrong location. 13,14 The Gate Theory suggests pain can be 
blocked by pressure or vibration to the surrounding tissue but not necessarily the exact 
same tissue where the nociceptive stimulus is directed. In contrast, the DentalVibe target s 
tissues surrounding the injection site, so it might produce better pain relief.  
More recently the DentalVibe has been proposed to reduce pain during local anesthetic 
administration. The device is handheld and delivers vibration to the tissues a round the 
injection site. This device can replace the dental mirror or operator’s finger to acts as a  
check and/or lip retractor. The DentalVibe allows for no changes in the traditional local 
anesthetic  injection  technique,  patient  position  and time  involved.  In the study  by Ching,  the 
use of the DentalVibe injection system significantly reduced pain associated with  infiltration 
injections of local anesthesia in adolescents.15 Studies of its use in children have had mixed 
results.16-17 The study by Ra slan & Masri did not show significant reduction in pain with use 
of the DentalVibe. This study was conducted on subjects in a similar age group but only 
subjects with positive or absolute positive on the Fankl behavior rating scale were included. 
This rais es the question of  the influence of the DentalVibe on subjects with various levels of 
cooperation.18 
 
This study will be a systematic replication of the study by Ching. The population will be 
younger  and subjects  will not be excluded  for poor  behavior.  The purpose  of this study  is to 
compare self -reported pain scale measurements from an experimental group (local 
anesthesia injection with DentalVibe) and a control group (traditional local anesthesia 
injection with DentalVibe system turned off) in children ag es 5-11. 
 
Subjects  
The justification for the inclusion of children in this research is that typically children experience 
discomfort  during  local  anesthetic  administration  during  dental  appointments. 30  subjects  between  ages 
5-11 should be an adequate number of subjects to complete the research. A power analysis will be 
performed to verify the total number of subjects needed to complete the research in order to achieve 
the scientific objectives of the study.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  
The specific  inclusion  criteria  are children  between  the ages  of 5-11 who  require  dental  treatment  that 
requires bilateral local anesthesia on the maxilla or mandible. Subject must understand and speak 
English.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  
The specific exclu sion criteria are that no children with the presence of medically or developmentally 
compromising conditions (autism, cerebral palsy, moderate/severe asthma); history of chronic disease 
(seizure disorder, cardiac disorder, hematological disease, endocrine disorder, liver disease, renal 
disease)  and currently  taking  medication  which  contraindicated  the use of local  anesthesia.  Non-english 
speakers will also be excluded. Subjects who require oral sedation or general anesthesia for treatment 
due to behavior or  medical history will be excluded.  
 
Methods  
This study  will be a systematic  replication  of the Ching  study.  The differences  will be: 
Age range of the subjects  
Subjects  will not exclude  subjects  with  negative  Frankl  behavior  ratings  
All subjects  will receive  nitrous  during  both  restorative  appointment  due to the age of the subjects.  
 
Administration  of nitrous  oxide  is commonly  practiced  in pediatric  dentistry  with  patients  of this  age 
group.  From  McDonald  & Avery  (2016)  eighty -five percent  pediatric  dentist  use inhalation  of nitrous  
oxide  and oxygen.  It is used  to reduce  anxiety,  produce  analgesia,  and enhance  effective  communication 
between a patient and health care provider.  
 
Up to 50 children between the ages of 5 -11 years will participate in this randomized, controlled, split - 
mouth  study.  There  will be no gender  restrictions  used  in this study.  Participants  will be recruited  from  a 
continuous sample of patient seen at the UNMC pediatric dental clinic and will be selected based on 
their need for dental treatment. Each child will have 2 separate dental appointments. Written consent 
will be obtained from parent or guardian prior to fi rst restorative appointment. Verbal consent will be 
obtained prior to second restorative appointment. Dr. Marshall will be the provider for every patient.  
The same dental assistant will be used for each appointment. All treatment will be completed in the 
same  private  quiet  room.  Both  Dr. Marshall  and the dental  assistant  will wear  the same  color  scrubs  and 
black lab jackets during all appointments. One appointment patient will receive local anesthetic dental 
injection with the DentalVibe turned on and at on e appointment the child will receive local anesthetic 
dental  injection  with  the DentalVibe  off. Used  strictly  as a check/lip  retractor.  The child  will be randomly 
assigned via a random number generator to either the DentalVibe on or off during the initial 
appointment. During the DentalVibe turned on appointment, the DentalVibe will be introduced to each 
child to make him/her familiar with the vibration sensation. All patients will receive 5 mins of O2, then 
N2O will be titrated up to 50%N2O/50%O2.  
 
When app ointment is complete the child will receive 5 mins of 100% O2. At both restorative 
appointment a cotton tip applicator with 20% Benzocaine topical anesthetic gel (Patterson) will be 
administered for 1 min. 2% Lidocaine HCl with 1:100,000epinepherine (Patte rson Dental) will then be 
deposited  using  a medium -length  (0.4mm)  with  27-guage  short  needles.  Local  anesthetic  injections  will 
be referred to as sleepy juice. Buccal and lingual infiltration will perform on the maxilla. Mandibular 
blocks will be performed on the mandible. One cartridge of local anesthetic will be used at each 
appointment. After administration, patient will be  shown the Wong Baker FACES pain rating scale and 
asked to rate the amount of discomfort experienced during the injection by pointing to the face or 
number.  
The following  manuscript  will be used:  
Each  face  represents  a person  who  has no hurt,  or some  hurt,  or a lot of hurt. 
Face 0 doesn’t hurt at all.  
Face 2 hurts just a little bit. 
Face  4 hurts  a little  bit more. 
Face 6 hurts even more.  
Face  8 hurts  a whole  lot. 
Face 10  hurts  as much  as you can imagine,  although  you dont  have  to be  crying  to have  this worst  pain. 
Touch the face of the hurt you felt when I gave you the sleepy juice.  
 
After  child  has rated  pain  Dr. Marshall  will continue  with  restorative  treatment.  The same process  will 
be followed at the second appointment. Appointments will be scheduled  3-4 weeks apart.  
 
The statistical  methods  to analyze  the data  will likely  be a combination  of measures  of 
central tendency, descriptive stats, t -tests and correlations using SPSS version 2.2.  
 
Risk 
Potential risks are minimal. There is considered to be no more risk to a child beyond what is normally 
associated with local anesthetic injections. All potential participants will still require dental treatment 
requiring  bilateral  local  anesthetic  administration  in the dental  clinic.  The only  change  in procedure  for 
consenting individuals will using the DentalVibe injections system to aid in local anesthetic 
administration.  The DentalVibe  system  acts as a cheek  and/or  lip retrac tor which  is often  performed 
with the dental mirror or operator’s fingers. Dr. Marshall will monitor the subject's behavior by 
observation. This will help ensure the safety of the subjects.  
 
Monitoring/Auditing/Analysis  
Dr. Houser  will conduct  procedural  checks  in which  the dentist  (PI) implementing  the procedures  will be 
monitored to ensure appropriate consent is obtained and treatment protocol is being followed. The 
procedural fidelity checks will occur weekly.  
 
Dr. Jennifer Marshall will perform ongoing data and safety analysis. She will administer the local 
anesthetic  with  the DentalVibe  injections  system  and present  the Wong -Baker  FACES  pain  rating  scale  to 
the children after local administration.  
 
Data  analysi s will occur  every  time  a child  is administered  anesthetic.  Data  analysis  will 
occur when the child is asked to evaluate his/her own pain rating.  
 
Benefits  
The potential  benefits  to the subject  that may  reasonably  be expected  from  participation  in the research 
is that less pain may be felt during local anesthesia injection. Potential benefits to society include the 
possibility of identification of an effective device to reduce pain during local anesthetic injections in 
children. This could lead to bette r behavior and more positive experiences in the dental clinic.  
 
Recruitment  
All subjects will be new or existing patients of the UNMC pediatric dental clinic. Research staff will have 
ethical access to potential subjects because Dr. Marshall has a clinical  relationship with the potential 
subjects.  Participants  will be recruited  from  a continuous  sample  of patients  who are  scheduled  for new 
patient or recall appointments at the UNMC Pediatric Dental Clinic. The children's parent or guardian 
will be informed  of the research.  If parent/guardian  chooses  to have  their child  participate,  the research 
will be further explained. A treatment appointment will then be made with Dr. Marshall. If the 
parent/guardian chooses not to have their child participate, a treatmen t appointment will still be 
scheduled with Dr. Marshall or one of the other providers.  
 
Informed  Consent  
The location where informed consent will be obtained in the consultation room located in the UNMC 
pediatric dental clinic. The environment will be conducive to discussion. The consultation room is a 
private and quiet room located behind closed doors. Dr. M arshall will be the  only person involved in the 
process of consenting the parent or guardian about their child's participation in this study. Her 
responsibility  will be to properly inform  the parent  or guardian  about  the research.  Approximately  10-15 
minutes will be allotted to the process of consent. The process of consent for parents or guardians who 
are likely to be more vulnerable to coercion or undue influence may include but are not limited to 
appointment of a subject advocate , involvement of the subject's family or friends, counselors or other 
confidants, reading the consent to the parents or guardians, and use of teaching aids. Dr. Marshall will 
question the parents or guardian concerning his.her understanding of all the elem ents of informed 
consent. At the second treatment appointment Dr. Marshall will get verbal consent for the child to 
continue to participate in the study before starting the appointment. During the  appointment when the 
DentalVibe injection system is turned on, the DentalVibe will be introduced to each child to make  
him/her  familiar  with  the vibration  sensation  prior  to use  during  local  anesthetic  injections.  Tell-show -do 
will be used as a behavior guidance technique during all dental appointments.  
 
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Van Wijk  A. Hoogstraten  J. Anxiety  and pain  during  dental  injections.  J. Dent  2009;37:700 -4. 
2. McDonald RE, Avery DR, Dean JA. Local anesthesia and pain control for the child and adolescent. In: 
McDonald  RE, Avery  DR, Dean  JA, eds. Dentistry  for the Child  and Adolescent.  10th  ed. St. Louis,  MO:  CV 
Mosby Inc; 2016: 274.  
3. Milgrom  P,Vignesha  H, Weinstein  P. Adolescent  dental  fear and control:  Prevalence  and theoretical 
implications. Behav Res Ther 1992;30:367 -73 
4. Berggen  U, Meynert  G. Dental fear and avoidance:  causes,  symptoms,  and consequences.  J Am Dent 
Assoc 1984;109:247 -51 
5. Vika  M, Skaret,  RaadalM,  Ost LG, Kvale  G. Fear  of blood,  injury,  and injections  and its relationship  to 
dental anxiety and probability of avoiding dental treatment among 18 -year -olds in Norway. Int J 
Paediatr Dent 2008;18;163 -9. 
6. El-Sharkawi  HF, El-Housseiny  AA, Aly AM. Effectiveness  of new  distraction  technique  on pain 
associated with injections of local anesthesia for children. Pediatr Dent 2012;34:35 -8. 
7. Ghaderi  F, Banakar  S, Rostami  S. Effect  of pre-cooling  injection  site on pain  perception  in pediatric 
dentistry: A randomized clinical trial. Dent Res J 2013;10:790 -794.  
8. Garret -Bernardin A, et al. Pain ex perience and behavior management in pediatric dentistry: a 
comparison  between  traditional  local  anesthesia  and the wand  computerized delivery  system.  Pain  Res 
Manag 2017.  
9. Dickenson  AH. Gate  control  theory  of pain  stands  the test of time.  Br J Anaesth  2002;88:755 -7. 
10.Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: A new theory. Science 1965;150:971 -9. 
11. Nanitsos  E, Vartuli  R, Forte A,  Dennison  PJ, Peck  CC. The effect  of vibration  on pain  during  local 
anaesthesia injections. Aust Dent J 2009;54:94 -100.  
12. Hutchins  HS Jr, Young  FA, Lackland  DT, Fishburne  CP. The effectiveness  of topical anesthesia  and 
vibrations in alleviating the pain of oral injections. Anesth Prog 1997;44:87 -9. 
13. Roeber  B, Wallace  DP, Rother  V, Salama  F, Allen  KD. Evaluation  of the effects  of the VibraJect 
attachment on pain in children receiving local anesthesia. Pediatr Dent 2011;33:46 -50. 
14. Saijo M,  Ito E,  Ichinohe  T, Kaneko  Y. Lack  of pain  reduction  by a vibrating  local  anesthetic  attachment: 
a pilot study. Anesth Prog 2005;52:62 -4. 
15. Ching  D., Finkelman  M., Loo C. Effect  of the DentalVibe  injections  system  on pain  during local 
anesthesia injections in adolescent patients. Pediatr Dent 2014;36:51 -5. 
16. Elbay M, Sermet Elbay U, Yildirim S, Ugurluel C, Kaya C, Baydemir C. Comparison of injection pain 
caused  by the DentalVibe  Injection  System  versus  a traditional  syringe  for inferior  alveolar  nerve  block 
anaeathesia in paediatric patients. Eur J Paediatr Dent 2015; 16:123 -8. 
17. Sermet  E, Elbay  M, Yildirim S,  Kaya  E, Kaya  C, Ugurluel  C, Baydemir  C. Evaluation  of the  injections  pain 
with the use of DentalVibe injection system during supraperiosteal anaesthesia in children: a  
randomized clinical trial. Int J Paediatr Dent 2016;26:336 -45. 
18. Raslan N, Masri R. A randomized clinical trial to compare pain levels during three types of or al 
anesthetic  injections  and the effect  of Dentalvibe  on injection  pain  in children.  Int J Paediatr  Dent  2017.  
19. Wong  DL, Baker  CM. Pain  in children:  comparison  of assessment  scales.  Pediatr  Nurs 1988  14(1):9 -17. 
20. Garra  G, Singer  AJ, Taira  BR, Choban  J, Cardoz  H, Chisena  E, THode  HC Jr. Validation  of the Wong - 
Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale in pediatric emergency department patients. Acad Emerg Med 
2010;17;50 -4. 
21. Garra  G, Singer  AJ, Domingo  A, Thode  HC Jr. The Wong -Baker  FACES  scale  measures  pain,  not fear. 
Pediatr Emerg Care 2013;29:17 -20. 