On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 1 of 6
Effective 10/01/2006w
COMIRB ProtocolPROTOCOL #: 13-2104
Version Date: 8-12-13
(Use  Protocol Manager on the COMIRB 
Website)
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW BOARD
CAMPUS BOX F-490    
TELEPHONE:  303-724-1055  Fax:  303-724-0990
Project Title: Quantifying Drug Adherence and Drug Exposure to Antiretroviral Medicine
Principal Investigator:  Jose R. Castillo-Mancilla,  MD
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific  Aims: 
Sustained antiretroviral exposure is required to achieve  virologic suppression in HIV-
infected patients.  The dominant factor impacting long-term drug exposure is adherence. Sub-
optimal adherence is problematic and clinically significant for  both  HIV treatment and prevention, 
and over-exposure to antiretrovirals may result in  biochemical and clinical  toxicities. Few 
informative measures of  drug exposure and adherence have  been developed, and no gold 
standard measure is available in clinical practice. 
Tenofovir (TFV),  one of the main antiretrovirals  for the treatment of HIV  infection, has 
distinctive advantageous characteristics to monitor adherence  and exposure.  The activity  of TFV 
depends on the intracellular concentration of tenofovir diphosphate (TFV-DP), which accumulates 
in higher concentrations (1.3  fold) with a longer half-life  (~17 days) in red blood  cells (RBC)  vs. 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells  (PBMC). These unique pharmacological  features  make RBC 
TFV-DP a promising  and accurate indicator  of cumulative  drug exposure,  particularly to quantify  
cumulative dosing. RBC are easily obtained in large  numbers and can be stored for  prolonged 
periods as dried blood spots (DBS).  In this application we propose to evaluate  DBS for the 
quantification of  cumulative RBC TFV-DP  drug  exposure  in HIV-negative and HIV-infected  patients.
Our main hypotheses are that:  1) RBC levels of TFV-DP are an accurate  and precise  
measure of long term drug exposure in  HIV-infected individuals, and;  2) Exposure thresholds will 
be predictive of poor adherence and virologic failure  in HIV  infected patients. To test these 
hypotheses we propose the following specific aim:
Aim 1: To characterize  the association of TFV-DP levels in DBS with viral suppression and 
toxicity in HIV-infected patients.
II. Background and Significance: 
Sustained and  durable ARV exposure is critical  to achieve  viral suppression in HIV-infected 
patients and to  prevent transmission to HIV-negative individuals. Drug exposure is directly  related 
to host factors; however,  the dominant factor  impacting  long-term drug  exposure is adherence. 
Modern regimens are more  forgiving  to lower levels of  adherence, likely  due to their higher potency  
and more  favorable pharmacokinetics. However,  adherence  remains the major predictor of HIV 
outcomes. A major challenge to  the adherence  field has been  the lack of an accurate and objective 
assessment tool that can be utilized in  everyday clinical practice. TFV is a nucleotide that is 
phosphorylated to TFV-DP in RBC. Our group has discovered that TFV-DP persists with a 17-day 
half-life in these cells. Tenofovir is the most commonly  prescribed antiretroviral in the US with a 
very favorable safety profile and availability  in co-formulations.  Therefore, adherence monitoring for 
TFV would apply to the majority of HIV-infected patients.  TFV disposition is impacted by various 
host-related factors such as  gender, age, body weight and  pharmacogenomics, but insufficient data 
are available  to consider  a dose modification  based on these factors. 
COMIRB
APPROVED
21-Aug-2013
On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 2 of 6
Effective 10/01/2006The presence of TFV-DP in RBC  suggests that DBS are an ideal matrix  for TFV-DP 
testing. DBS have been historically used for neonatal screening of inborn errors of metabolism and 
are widely used for HIV diagnosis and viral load monitoring. The efficacy of DBS  for the 
measurement of drug  concentrations has become a topic of great interest given the  many potential 
advantages it has over PBMC, RBC, whole blood and plasma sampling (i.e. less cumbersome 
storage and transportation,  substantial cost  reduction and less variability). DBS samples can be 
stored for  prolonged periods  of time and can be shipped  without special biohazard precautions for  
analysis in a centralized laboratory. To date, few published studies have shown a  direct correlation 
in ARV  plasma drug and DBS. Our group has successfully quantified  TFV and TFV-DP in DBS  and 
we have also  demonstrated that TFV-DP has a long half-life in DBS, reflecting RBC.  However, no 
studies have  evaluated whether TFV and TFV-DP levels  in DBS  can be used to measure drug 
exposure and  drug adherence in the clinical setting, and thus  this approach will be assessed in this  
proposal.
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:  
Our laboratory recently evaluated the single-dose  pharmacokinetics of TFV and TFV-DP in 
plasma, PBMC  and RBC and identified  that TFV-DP has a  long half-life  and exhibits different PK 
characteristics in  RBC vs. PBMC. A follow-up study determined that the TFV-DP half life in RBC 
was 17  (15-19)  days vs. 4  (3-5) days in PBMC and the predicted  steady  state levels  in RBC were 
130 fmol/106 cells, which was ~1.3-fold above  that in PBMC.  This study also showed  that TFV-DP 
in RBC  accumulates  approximately  25-fold and remains detectable for at least 30 days after  drug 
discontinuation. Furthermore,  we confirmed  that there is very  strong correlation  between  TFV and 
TFV-DP RBC  and DBS levels  and we found a tendency towards lower concentrations in HIV-
negative vs. HIV-infected subjects, which  suggests  that different DBS thresholds may exist  among 
these individuals. Lastly, we  evaluated the feasibility and relevance of measuring TFV-DP in DBS  
in HIV-infected women on long-term  HAART. In this analysis, we compared  TFV-DP DBS  levels  
with pharmacy  refills and found that  it was inversely  correlated  with increasing number of days  
between pharmacy refills  and that HIV viremia was  associated  with the lowest TFV-DP in DBS.   
 
IV. Research Methods
A.Outcome Measure(s):   
Our primary  objectives through  this study are to evaluate TFV and TFV-DP in RBC/DBS as 
a potential measure  of drug adherence  and exposure in the clinical setting  and the association of 
DBS TFV-DP with viral suppression, adherence and toxicity  in HIV-infected individuals.
B.Description  of Population to be Enrolled:   Study Design and Research Methods  
Subjects
Aim 3 is an observational, 48-week prospective cohort of HIV-infected individuals treated  
with TFV  in which we  will compare DBS TFV-DP levels in virologically suppressed vs. non-
suppressed individuals  and evaluate the utility of this measure as  a predictor of virologic failure.  
Our sample analysis has calculated a sample  of 1,200 patients to achieve  the desired power for  
our analysis. Viral suppression will be defined as an HIV VL <200 copies/ml.  To accomplish our  
study, we will  approach  all patients actively taking TFV who  present to the Infectious  Diseases 
Group Practice (IDGP) at University of  Colorado Hospital for their regular follow-up appointment 
and will have  HIV-related blood drawn (i.e. CBC, chemistry, CD4 count  and HIV VL) as ordered by 
their healthcare provider. Once a patient has consented and is enrolled in the study, we will draw 
blood at each  subsequent  visit to our clinic for a period of 48  weeks (we  anticipate an average of 3 
visits per patient in  a 48-week period).  Recruitment will continue until we have reached our targeted 
enrollment. Potential study subjects will be identified via the daily  IDGP schedule and the 
healthcare provider  for those subjects will be asked for permission to approach the patient while at 
the clinic. At the time  of enrollment all individuals will  also  undergo  pertinent  questions  on 
demographics and medication history and provide consent that will allow the PI to contact their 
On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 3 of 6
Effective 10/01/2006pharmacy to obtain history  on refills to antiretrovirals. At every visit (including initial visit),  
individuals will also be evaluated for self-reported adherence  using a visual analog scale.  
Inclusion criteria:
1.HIV-infected males  and females, ages 18 years and older, who  are taking any TFV-based 
regimen and  who  will have  blood drawn  as part of their clinic visit.
2.Able and  willing to  give  informed  consent.
Exclusion criteria:
1.Individuals not taking a  TFV-based regimen.
2.Inability to give informed consent.
3.Pregnancy.
4.Refusal to participate.
Process of Informed Consent
Consent will be obtained in a  quiet, private setting (e.g.,  outpatient clinic room) by  trained 
study personnel.  Potential subjects will be asked if they feel comfortable. They will be given time to 
read the  consent, answer questions, and consider whether  or not to be involved  in the study.  
Comprehension and autonomy  will be assessed by asking questions about  the study and 
assessing their responses. Potential  subjects will be told that their participation is  voluntary,  and 
that participation  in this study (or election not to participate)  will not affect their care in any way. A 
signed copy  of the consent and will  be provided to the subjects. Consent will be obtained prior  to 
any research  procedures being performed.  
Sample Collection
We will collect  up to  30 mL of blood through venipuncture from individuals who are already 
having blood  drawn  as ordered by  their  healthcare provider while  at the IDGP. In addition,  a subset  
of 30  individuals will have  5 drops of blood obtained through  finger stick using  a lancet. Blood will 
be collected in EDTA tubes  and will  be immediately transported  to the Colorado Antiviral 
Pharmacology Laboratory  (Directed  by co-investigator  Dr. Peter Anderson), where  samples for  
DBS will  be processed and  stored at -20oC until  analysis using  liquid chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS). 
We are also  asking subjects  to sign a separate addendum consent  that would allow us  to 
obtain blood to isolate human genomic DNA. This would allow  us to investigate  relationships 
between genetics  and drug levels, should there be a rationale such  as abnormally high  or low drug 
levels or unusual or exaggerated medication responses are encountered. We are only interested in 
genes which encode  enzymes  or transporters  responsible for  the metabolism  or transport  of anti-
infective drugs.  As examples, we  have interest in genes which encode  for drug efflux transporters, 
cytochrome P 450 enzymes,  or glucuronosyl transferase enzymes. We are not interested  in genes 
that determine parentage  or susceptibility to a disease.  
Participants will  be compensated $10.00 every time they agree to a blood  draw.
C.Description,  Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:
Risks
There are  no medication-associated risks for the participants who will be enrolled in this  
study because we plan  to enroll HIV-infected individuals who are already receiving  antiretroviral 
therapy (under the care of  their healthcare provider)  and are taking TFV as part of their regular 
antiretroviral regimen.  
On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 4 of 6
Effective 10/01/2006There are  risks associated  with venipuncture and lancet finger stick,  but are limited to pain, 
bruising and, rarely,  superficial phlebitis. However, these risks are not inherent only to the study as 
these individuals will be already undergoing  blood draw as  recommended by  their healthcare 
provider. The study personnel will take all necessary measures and adequate  care to prevent and 
minimize these risks  or correct them  should any of them arise. Universal precautions will be used 
as recommended by the Center for Disease Control  (CDC), the National Institutes of Health and 
the University of Colorado-Anschutz Medical Campus, including the appropriate  disposal of 
needles and  human wastes. These  precautions will  be carefully exercised by the study personnel  
to prevent the accidental transmission of HIV (or other  viruses). Stored DBS cards will be properly  
labeled, handled  and disposed according to  the universal  standard blood and body fluid 
precautions as recommended by the CDC.
Additional risks include the potential for personal participant information  to become public 
through failure of  confidentiality.  Every effort will  be made to maintain the confidentiality of patient  
study records  and all  individuals  working on the project will be informed of the need to maintain 
strict confidentiality at  all times.  To ensure this, we will collect patient’s information on a  case report 
form that includes  only  a subject’s  unique study identification number (PID) and not their name. 
The “link”  between  a subject’s name and PID  will be kept in a separate case  report  form.  All 
research records will be kept in  a locked  office or laboratory  in our research group. Randomly 
assigned PIDs  will not indicate whether or not a subject has an infectious  disease.
If a subject agrees  to provide blood for future genetic testing,  there are risks associated  
with this including possible discrimination or compromised insurability.  We will take steps to 
minimize these  risks.  As noted, we  are not looking  at genes that determine parentage or 
susceptibility to a  disease  and the analyzed  samples  will not  be coded with any identifiable 
information, only  a subject’s unique PID. These samples  would  be kept in restricted-access at the 
Colorado Antiviral Pharmacology  Laboratory.  As part of our study,  genetic analysis  in a subset of 
these samples  will be performed at The DNA  Resources Core (DNARC) of the Vanderbilt 
University Center  for Human Genetics Research (CHGR) under the supervision of Dr. David Haas.
Data Collection Tools
Data will be collected on case report forms (CRFs). With the exception of the demographic 
CRF, CRFs will contain PID numbers  instead of patient identifiers.  
D.Potential Scientific Problems:  
We do not anticipate problems with investigating the pharmacokinetics of the antiretrovirals 
analyzed. However, as  this is a hypothesis  driven  study, we may face problems identifying  
correlates of drug levels and clinical  outcomes.
E.Data Analysis Plan:  
Data collected during the  course  of this study may be assembled  electronically  for analysis. 
Some examples of the analysis  include:
 Comparison  of TFV-DP  levels  in DBS in  HIV-infected  patients  with viral suppression vs.  
virologic failure.
 Correlation  of TFV-DP  in DBS with adherence and drug toxicity.
 Efficacy  of TFV-DP in DBS as  a predictor  of virologic failure.
Appropriate parametric statistical tests, with log transformation  of the data as necessary, will be 
used for analyses.  
Data Management  and Security 
Patient identifiers will not be stored electronically  for this study. Datasets  assembled for this 
study will include  only the unique PID and relevant demographic  information  (race, age, sex, etc.), 
relevant clinical data  and antiviral drug concentration results. Electronic data  will be stored on our 
laboratory server which has limited access (members of our  CAVP research team  only and SOP IT 
specialists) and is backed-up nightly. Paper records for this  study (consent,  HIPAA, CRFs) will be 
On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 5 of 6
Effective 10/01/2006stored in a locked office or our entrance-restricted laboratory. Data will be destroyed  per the 
timelines specified  in HIPAA regulations.  
Data Safety and Monitoring
Dr. Jose R. Castillo-Mancilla  will assess adherence to the protocol procedures. All adverse 
events related to subject’s  participation  in this protocol will be reported to Dr. Jose  R. Castillo-
Mancilla, who will keep track of their frequency and report any serious adverse  events or 
unexpected problems to COMIRB according  to standard procedures. Dr. Jose R. Castillo-Mancilla 
will also  provide medical oversight for the study.  He will be notified of all  study-related adverse 
events and  will ensure  appropriate medical  management (i.e., follow-up  visits, additional  laboratory 
tests, referral to  primary care  provider, etc.). 
F.Summarize  Knowledge to be Gained:   
Drug exposure to antiretrovirals is mainly driven by drug adherence, which is a strong 
predictor of HIV treatment efficacy. Measuring adherence has proven to be difficult  and there is no 
gold standard measure of  drug exposure  and drug adherence in clinical practice. The proposed 
research will develop a  new pharmacologic approach to quantify drug  exposure and adherence, 
which could lead to more  efficacious HIV  treatment and prevention strategies.
G.References:
1.Castillo-Mancilla, JR, Zheng  JH, Rower JE, Meditz A, Gardner  EM, Predhome J, et al. 
Tenofovir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir-diphosphate in dried blood spots for determining 
recent and cumulative drug exposure. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2012  Oct 10. [Epub 
ahead of print].
2.Gardner EM, Burman WJ,  Maravi  ME, Davidson  AJ. Durability of adherence  to 
antiretroviral therapy  on initial and subsequent regimens. AIDS Patient  Care STDS. 
2006;20:628-36.
3.Gardner EM, Burman WJ,  Steiner JF, Anderson PL,  Bangsberg DR. Antiretroviral  
medication adherence and  the development of  class-specific antiretroviral resistance. 
AIDS. 2009;23:1035-46.
4.Gandhi M,  Ameli N, Bacchetti P, Anastos K, Gange SJ, Minkoff H, et al. Atazanavir 
concentration in hair  is the strongest predictor of  outcomes on antiretroviral therapy.  Clin 
Infect Dis. 2011;52:1267-75.
5.Gerber JG, Acosta EP. Therapeutic drug monitoring in the treatment  of HIV-infection. J 
Clin Virol. 2003;27:117-28.
6.Durand-Gasselin L,  Da Silva D, Benech H, Pruvost A, Grassi J. Evidence and possible 
consequences of the phosphorylation of nucleoside  reverse transcriptase inhibitors  in 
human red blood cells. Antimicrob  Agents Chemother. 2007;51:2105-11.
7.Anderson PL, Kiser JJ, Gardner EM, Rower  JE, Meditz A, Grant RM. Pharmacological 
considerations for tenofovir and emtricitabine  to prevent HIV  infection.  J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2011;66:240-50.
8.Johannessen  A. Dried blood spots in HIV monitoring: applications  in resource-limited 
settings. Bioanalysis.  2010;2:1893-908.
9.Rottinghaus EK, Ugbena  R, Diallo K, Bassey O, Azeez A, Devos J, et al. Dried  blood spot 
specimens are  a suitable  alternative sample  type for HIV-1 viral load  measurement and 
drug resistance genotyping in patients  receiving first-line antiretroviral  therapy. Clin Infect  
Dis. 2012  ;54:1187-95.
10.Kromdijk W, Mulder JW,  Rosing H, Smit PM, Beijnen  JH, Huitema AD. Use of dried blood 
spots for the determination of plasma  concentrations  of nevirapine and efavirenz. J 
Antimicrob Chemother.  2012;67:1211-6.
11.ter Heine  R, Mulder  JW, van Gorp EC, Wagenaar JF,  Beijnen JH, Huitema AD. Clinical  
evaluation of the determination of plasma concentrations of darunavir,  etravirine, raltegravir  
and ritonavir in dried blood spot samples. Bioanalysis.  2011;3:1093-7.
On the  Web at http://comirbweb.uchsc.edu
COMIRB Application for Protocol Review (F-???, Revision ???) Page 6 of 6
Effective 10/01/200612.Van Schooneveld T, Swindells S, Nelson SR, Robbins BL,  Moore R, Fletcher CV.  Clinical 
evaluation of a  dried blood  spot assay for atazanavir. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2010;54:4124-8.
13.Meesters RJ, van Kampen JJ, Reedijk  ML, Scheuer RD, Dekker LJ, Burger DM, et al. 
Ultrafast and highthroughput mass spectrometric assay for  therapeutic drug monitoring of 
antiretroviral drugs in pediatric HIV-1 infection applying  dried blood spots. Anal Bioanal 
Chem. 2010;398:319-28.
14.ter Heine  R, Hillebrand  MJ, Rosing  H, van Gorp EC, Mulder JW, Beijnen JH, et al. 
Quantification of the HIV-integrase inhibitor raltegravir  and detection of its main  metabolite 
in human plasma, dried blood spots and peripheral  blood mononuclear cell lysate by  
means of high-performance liquid  chromatography tandem  mass spectrometry.  J Pharm 
Biomed Anal.  2009;49:451-8.
15.ter Heine  R, Rosing H, van Gorp EC, Mulder  JW, Beijnen JH, Huitema AD. Quantification  
of etravirine (TMC125)  in plasma, dried blood spots and peripheral  blood  mononuclear cell 
lysate by liquid chromatography tandem  mass  spectrometry. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 
2009;49:393-400.
16.ter Heine  R, Rosing H, van Gorp EC, Mulder  JW, van der Steeg  WA, Beijnen  JH, et al. 
Quantification of protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase  inhibitors in 
dried blood  spots  by liquid chromatography-triple quadrupole mass spectrometry.  J 
Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed  Life Sci. 2008;867:205-12.
17.Koal T, Burhenne  H, Römling R, Svoboda M, Resch K, Kaever  V. Quantification of 
antiretroviral drugs in dried blood spot samples by  means of liquid chromatography/tandem 
mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2005;19:2995-3001.
18.Bushman LR, Kiser JJ, Rower JE, Klein B, Zheng JH, Ray ML,  et al. Determination  of 
nucleoside analog  mono-,  di-, and tri-phosphates in  cellular matrix  by solid  phase 
extraction and ultra-sensitive LC-MS/MS detection. J Pharm  Biomed Anal. 2011;56:390-
401.
19.Anderson PL, Meditz  A, Kiser J, Zheng J-H, Predhomme J, Gardner E, et al. Single-dose 
Pharmacokinetic Profile of Intracellular TFV-DP and FTC-TP in HIV- Volunteers. In: 
Abstracts of the  Eighteenth Conference  on Retroviruses  and Opportunistic Infections,  
Boston, 2011. Abstract #  641.
20.Shipping Guidelines for  Dried-Blood Spot Specimens. Centers  for Diseases Control and 
Prevention. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/labstandards/pdf/nsqap/Bloodspot_Transportation_Guidelines.pdf. 
Accessed 11 December 2012.
21.Giordano TP, Guzman D,  Clark R, Charlebois ED, Bangsberg DR. Measuring adherence  
to antiretroviral therapy  in a diverse population  using  a visual analogue scale. HIV  Clin 
Trials. 2004;5:74-9.
22.Grossberg R, Zhang Y, Gross R. A time-to-prescription-refill  measure of antiretroviral 
adherence predicted changes in viral  load in HIV. J Clin  Epidemiol. 2004;57:1107-10.