 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  GCC # 1202 
 
Tumor Bed Dose Delivery using a Breast Specific Rad iosurgery Device, 
The GammaPod TM :  A Clinical Feasibility Study 
 
 
 
A Study of the Breast Oncology Program of the  
University of Maryland, Marlene and Stewart Greeneb aum Cancer Center 
22 S. Greene St., Baltimore MD  21201 
 
 
Principal Investigator: Elizabeth Nichols, M.D. 
22 S. Greene Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201 
Radiation Oncology, University of Maryland 
410-328-2328 
 
____________________________________   ____________ ______ 
P. I. Signature        Date 
  
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  Co-Investigators: 
Emily Bellavance, M.D.    Jon Olsen, M.D., Ph.D 
Surgical Oncology, University of MD  Surgical Oncol ogy, University of MD 
410-328-7320      410-328-7320 
Nancy Kennedy, R.N., B.S.N.   Susan Kesmodel, M.D. 
Research Associate, University of MD  Surgical Onco logy, University of MD 
410-328-6080      410-328-7320 
Katherine Tkaczuk, M.D.    Christina Campassi, M.D.  
Medical Oncology, University of MD  Radiology, Univ ersity of MD 
410-328-2703      410-328-3477 
Søren M. Bentzen, MSc, PhD, DMSc  Paula Rosenblatt,  M.D.  
Professor, Director of Biostatistics   Medical Onco logy, University of MD 
University of MD 
410-706-8506      410-328-2703 
Bahiyyah K. Jackson, MS 
Research Coordinator, University Of MD 
410-328-6080 
  
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  TABLE of CONTENTS 
 
1.  Introduction ...................................... ................................................... ..................... 4  
1.1.  Innovative methods to deliver radiation to the tumo r bed ................................... 6  
1.2.  Study rationale ................................... ................................................... ............. 8  
1.3.  Schema/procedure .................................. ................................................... ...... 10  
2.  Objectives ........................................ ................................................... ................... 14  
2.1.  End points ........................................ ................................................... ............. 14  
3.  Patient Selection Criteria: ....................... ................................................... ............. 15  
3.1.  Eligibility criteria .............................. ................................................... .............. 15  
3.2.  Ineligibility criteria ............................ ................................................... .............. 16  
4.  Registration ...................................... ................................................... ................... 16  
5.  Radiation Therapy Protocol ........................ ................................................... ......... 17  
5.1.  CT simulation for planning whole breast irradiation  .......................................... 17  
5.2.  CT-based treatment planning for the GammaPod treatm ent ........................... 17  
5.3.  Target volumes for TB boost ....................... ................................................... .. 18  
5.4.  Treatment planning for tumor bed boost ............ .............................................. 19  
5.5.  Institutional guidelines for whole breast irradiati on treatment planning ............ 20  
6.  Surgical Resection ................................ ................................................... .............. 22  
7.  Adjuvant Systemic Therapy ......................... ................................................... ....... 23  
8.  Pathology ......................................... ................................................... ................... 23  
9.  Patient Assessments ............................... ................................................... ............ 23  
9.1.  Study parameters .................................. ................................................... ........ 23  
9.2.  Adverse event reporting ........................... ................................................... ..... 24  
10.  Statistical Considerations ........................ ................................................... ......... 25  
10.1.  Objectives ........................................ ................................................... .......... 25  
10.2.  Trial design ...................................... ................................................... .......... 26  
11.  Potential Risks/Discomfort ........................ ................................................... ........ 27  
12.  Potential Benefits ................................ ................................................... ............. 28  
13.  Cost/Payments ..................................... ................................................... ............ 28  
14.  References and GammaPod Bibliography .............. ............................................ 29  
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  1. Introduction 
Breast conserving therapy (BCT), consisting of surg ical lumpectomy followed by whole breast 
radiation therapy has become the standard of care f or treating early-stage breast cancers. In 
comparison with mastectomy, BCT demonstrated simila r outcomes with superior cosmesis and 
reduced psychological and emotional trauma based on  multiple randomized trials(1-4). At the time 
of the lumpectomy, the surgeon removes the tumor an d a surrounding rim of normal tissue 
(margin), typically leaving surgical clips to help designate the resection cavity or tumor bed (TB) 
for the radiation oncologist(5, 6).  The current st andard of radiation therapy for breast cancer is to  
deliver treatment to the whole breast to 45-50.4Gy in 25 to 28 treatments Monday through Friday. 
Following whole breast radiation, a ‘boost’ is deli vered to the TB in order to deliver 60 – 66Gy to 
the tumor bed. Two prospective trials have demonstr ated a statistically significant reduction in 
local failures with the addition of a boost of 10Gy (in 4 fractions @ 2.5 Gy per fraction) or 16 Gy 
in 8 fractions @ 2 Gy per fraction), respectively(7 , 8).   
Boost treatments can be delivered through a variety  of techniques(9, 10) including a single electron 
field (used for superficial tumor beds) or multiple  photon fields (2 or 3 fields typically) for tumors  
that are deep to the skin (usually > 3 cm). With th e use of CT simulation to guide the delivery of 
the boost, the need for deep TB coverage has become  more apparent and now most patients receive 
photons for the boost portion of their therapy beca use the use of electrons often misses part of the 
tumor bed (figure 1a). However, when photon beams a re used, in comparison to electrons, more 
generous margins posterior to the surgical cavity a re required to account for daily set up error and 
respiratory motion which is not necessary for a sin gle en face electron field. Furthermore, there 
are only limited directions along which the radiati on can be directed to the TB, and as a result, 
large volumes of normal breast tissue receive a sub stantial fraction of the prescription dose (figure 
1b) which can lead to internal scarring (fibrosis) and poor cosmesis(8, 11, 12). The largest clinical 
series evaluating this issue demonstrated increased  fibrosis and worse cosmetic outcome using 
photons(13). The clinical target volume for the boo st is the TB, while an additional 1-1.5 cm 
margin of normal breast tissue is added isocentrica lly to account for daily set-up error and 
respiratory motion to define a planning target volu me.  Typically the boost is delivered after the 
whole breast portion of treatment, however, in vari ous cases this sequence can be changed.  For 
example, if significant skin breakdown occurs durin g the whole breast radiation phase, 
investigators can stop the whole breast radiation t herapy and change to deliver dose only to the TB 
while allowing time for the rest of the breast to h eal.  This allows a continuous course of therapy 
to the highest risk of subclinical disease (i.e. th e tumor bed). 
Hypofractionation, or delivery of greater than stan dard 1.8 - 2 Gy fraction sizes per day, is a 
method of shortening overall treatment time in brea st cancer. Historically, standard fraction sizes 
of 1.8-2.0 Gy for whole breast irradiation (WBI) we re based primarily on studies examining 
squamous cell cancers from cervix and head and neck  regions. The smaller fraction sizes 
exploited a biological differential in squamous cel l cancer fractionation sensitivity versus normal 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  tissue fractionation sensitivity. This allowed rela tive sparing of surrounding normal tissue from 
low dose per fraction. However, investigators from the United Kingdom hypothesized that the 
fractionation sensitivity for adenocarcinoma of the  breast is close to that of the normal breast 
tissue. Therefore, with increasing fraction size a sufficiently large reduction of total dose could 
be implemented to keep late toxicity constant witho ut reducing the probability of tumor 
control[14,15]. 
In 2010, the Ontario Clinical Oncology Group publis hed updated findings from a randomized 
trial with 12-year median follow-up showing that a 3-week hypofractionated WBI schedule 
yielded similar cancer control and breast cosmetic outcomes to a 5-week conventional WBI 
schedule[16,17]. These findings reinforced the body  of evidence supporting shorter radiation 
treatment schedules from three prior randomized tri als (the United Kingdom’s Standardization of 
Breast Radiotherapy (START-A and START-B) and the R oyal Marsden Hospital/Gloucester 
Oncology Center trials)[18-21]. 
In 2011, the American Society for Radiation Oncolog y practice guidelines endorsed 
hypofractionated WBI as “equally effective for in-b reast tumor control and comparable in long- 
term side effects” with conventional whole breast r adiation for patients with early-stage breast 
cancer who were (1) over age 50, (2) pathologic sta ge T1 or T2N0, (3) chemotherapy naive, and  
(4) radiation dose heterogeneity higher or lower th an 7% of prescription dose[22]. The guidelines 
also permitted hypofractionated radiation for other  patients with early-stage breast cancer, stating 
that “this guideline should not be interpreted to p rohibit or oppose the use of hypofractionated 
whole breast radiation for patients not meeting all  the criteria”.   In 2013, the Choosing Wisely 
initiative, aimed at reducing health care costs, en couraged physicians and patients undergoing 
breast conservation therapy to discuss the duration  of whole breast radiotherapy[23].   
In our clinic, the utilization of hypofractionated radiotherapy has increased substantially 
especially since the NCI sponsored co-operative gro up trial RTOG 10-05 has closed (February 
2014), which was a prospective phase III trial test ing hypofractionation using a more 
sophisticated radiation therapy approach.  Conventi onal fractionation is generally offered to 
patients with high grade tumors (ER/PR/Her2-neu neg ative AND any ER/PR status with Her 2 
neu positive) and patients whose anatomy dictates a  radiation dose heterogeneity. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
   
 
1.1. Innovative methods to deliver radiation to the  tumor bed 
Over the last decade, several more sophisticated ap proaches(24-28) have been developed to deliver 
radiation to just a part of the breast including br achytherapy (i.e. MammositeTM) and various 
intraoperative approaches using either electron bea m or low energy x-rays to deliver a single dose 
in the operating room.  These techniques were devel oped to treat select patients with partial breast 
irradiation, but initially were tested in combinati on with whole breast radiation to deliver the 
additional radiotherapy to the TB through the novel  approach.  One of the recent methods is named 
targeted intraoperative radiotherapy (TARGIT)(29).  TARGIT utilizes low energy photons intra-
operatively to deliver radiotherapy to the tumor be d immediately after the surgical excision of the 
tumor (prior to being awakened from anesthesia).  R adiation therapy is delivered with a single 
delivery of 20Gy prescribed to the surface of the e xcision cavity with a rapid dose falloff where 
tissue1 cm deep from the surface of the excision ca vity receives between 5 to 7Gy.  After the dose 
is delivered, the device is removed and surgical cl osure is completed.  One of the major downsides 
to this intraoperative approach is that the surgica l margins cannot be assessed at the time of 
surgery; subsequently 15-20% were found to have adv erse histologic features requiring the 
addition of whole breast radiation(29). Patients wh o received whole breast radiation received 45-
50Gy in 25 fractions.  When this approach was initi ally tested, whole breast radiation was always 
delivered following the boost.  Based on the largest series with long t erm follow up (median follow- 
 
Figure 1. (A) A typical treatment plan using superficial elec trons that 
would under dose the deep portion of the TB (outlin e in red) which was 
estimated clinically prior to the common use of CT scans.  (B) Photon 
plans are more commonly used as the target is shown  to be deep, but 
requires a more generous margin posteriorly due to respiratory motion 
which is not an issue with en face electron fields.   This unfortunately 
delivers more moderate and high dose radiation to t he surrounding 
normal breast and potentially to the normal lung as  well. 
 

 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  up of 60.5 months), the 5-year local recurrence rat e was less than 2%(30). Similarly, investigators 
have used intraoperative electrons prior to whole b reast radiation.  Long-term local control rates 
and cosmesis appear similar to or better than more conventional techniques.  Doses of 9 to 10 Gy 
in a single treatment in the operating room were de livered typically using 9 MeV electrons 
prescribed to the 90% isodose line. Lemanski(31) et . al. described no grade 3 side effects in 50 
patients treated with this approach, but did have a  12% risk of grade 2 subcutaneous fibrosis which 
is similar to large series using conventional boost  techniques26.  In Europe, based on short follow 
up, there has not been a difference in local contro l or cosmesis between intraoperative radiotherapy 
and conventional electrons from EORTC 22881/10882(8 ). 
All of the these treatment techniques described abo ve have the down side of being invasive (i.e. 
brachytherapy) requiring a second procedure to plac e the device prior to treatment or lengthening 
the time under anesthesia (i.e. intraoperative radi ation) by at least 30 – 60 minutes.  Additionally 
due to these factors, sophisticated dosimetric eval uation ensuring appropriate dose coverage 
cannot be performed due to a variety of technique a nd logistical factors. 
Faculty members at the University of Maryland, Balt imore invented a method and device for 
delivering stereotactic radiotherapy specifically f or breast cancer(32).  By licensing the technology 
from University of Maryland and collaborating with the PI and his research team, Xcision Medical 
Systems, LLC has developed a new breast specific st ereotactic radiotherapy machine, the 
GammaPodTM, with the support of an NIH SBIR grant. Based on stereotactic radiosurgery 
principles, this new device is capable of deliverin g focused radiation to the target while sparing 
the surrounding normal tissues and structures(32, 3 3).  The advantages include:  (1) it is completely 
non-invasive in comparison to other technologies (i .e. Mammosite™ or equivalent devices) 
currently used for high dose radiation delivery to the breast as described above, (2) the vacuum 
assisted breast immobilization device has been desi gned to have improved accuracy and 
reproducibility, allowing a reduction in the set-up  error to less than 3 mm(34). The initial breast 
immobilization device was tested on an in-house pro tocol (GCC0727) at the Marlene and Stewart 
Greenebaum Cancer Center, where the accuracy and co mfort was demonstrated although a 
substantial percentage of the breast immobilization  devices became dislodged requiring 
improvements. A new version of the breast immobiliz ation device was designed and is now being 
tested on GCC1047 confirming its accuracy and repro ducibility. This study is ongoing and data 
have been used to validate the planned treatment ma rgins for the proposed study GCC1202. Based 
on the 12 patients for whom data has been analyzed,  the reproducibility of target position within 
the cup remains <3 mm The patient is treated in the  prone position, similar to positioning for 
stereotactic breast biopsy or MR imaging of the bre ast, thus minimizing the effect of breathing 
motion. In deciding on a treatment margin to accoun t for overall positional uncertainty, mechanical 
accuracy of the patient couch (relative to the beam  isocenter) must be taken into account in addition 
to the accuracy of target positioning within the cu p. We have conservatively added another 2 mm 
to the margin to account for couch uncertainties. T his is based on a measured couch position 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  uncertainty within 1 mm. Subsequently, we propose t o use a setup margin of 5 mm. (4) This device 
uses 36 non-coplanar 60Co sources that rotate durin g treatment to form 36 non-coplanar arcs, 
producing a dose distribution similar to that of th e Gamma KnifeTM for intracranial targets which 
is substantially more conformal than the 3 field ap proach which is a standard practice for TB boost 
(see figure 1B). 
This study proposes to proceed to a 1st in human cl inical feasibility study by delivering a single 
moderate dose to the TB using the GammaPodTM   on a  day shortly before whole breast 
radiotherapy.  The FDA has requested this clinical demonstration of the device with an IDE prior 
to obtaining FDA marketing clearance via the 510k m echanism. The goal of the study, as proposed 
by the FDA, was to demonstrate that a treatment cou ld be delivered. The clinical trial protocol for 
phantom studies to validate the device’s accuracy h as been discussed with the FDA. Therefore, 
the primary end point of this study is simply feasi bility and patient safety.  We will also evaluate 
overall patient comfort and dosimetric accuracy thr ough patient-specific phantom measurements 
conducted before the treatment delivery. 
 
1.2. Study rationale 
In this study, we plan to deliver a 8 Gy TB boost u sing the GammaPod TM  system followed by a 
conventional (50Gy in 25 fractions) or hypofraction ated (40Gy in 15 fractions) course of whole 
breast radiation.  The clinical target volume recei ving 8 Gy will be the surgical cavity as defined 
by the surgical clips and post-surgical changes + 5  mm. The planning target volume will add 5 mm 
to the clinical target volume to account for geomet ric uncertainties. The current standard of care 
in our clinic when delivering a conventional course  of whole breast radiation is to deliver between 
60 and 66 Gy to the tumor bed when negative margins  are achieved, with the initial ~45-50Gy 
delivered to the whole breast and the 10-16Gy TB bo ost delivered in 5-8 fractions. The current 
standard of care in our clinic when delivering a hy pofractionated course of whole breast radiation 
is to deliver between 50 and 52 Gy to the tumor bed  when negative margins are achieved, with the 
initial ~40-42.5Gy delivered to the whole breast in 15 or 16 fractions respectively followed 10Gy 
TB boost delivered in 4 or 5 fractions (total 20). The clinical target volume for the TB boost in this  
study is quite similar to conventional TB boost. Th e only difference is that the PTV margin is 
smaller in this study (5mm instead of 10mm) due to the reduced set up uncertainties with the breast 
cup immobilization and localization devices. The cu rrent institutional standard is covering the TB 
+ 15 mm dosimetric margin. Since our reproducibilit y is improved by 5 mm with the aid of the 
breast immobilization cup, the TB + 10 mm dosimetri c margin will be used on this study. Using 
the radiobiological equivalent dose (BED) formula, {BED = nD(1 + D/( α/β))}, the 8 Gy single 
fraction dose is equivalent to 16 Gy delivered in 8  fractions.  Wherein the BED formula, n is the 
number of fractions, D is the dose per fraction and  α/β is estimated to be between 3 and 4(35). On 
this study, we will deliver either 40 Gy in fifteen  (15) fractions (hypofractionated) or 50Gy in 
twenty-five (25) fractions (conventional) to the wh ole breast following a single 8 Gy boost using 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  the GammaPod. The summed dose to the boost region w ill be radiobiologically equivalent to a 
total dose of 52 (hypofractionated) or 66Gy (conven tional). 
The safety and feasibility of delivering the boost dose to the tumor bed using a single fraction 
external beam is supported by past clinical trials.   Besides the use of electrons and external beam 
from a linear accelerator, intracavitary balloons a nd intraoperative x-rays and electron beams have 
also been used to deliver a TB boost.  In the TARGI T trial, a single dose of 20Gy is delivered to 
the TB using the Intrabeam™ device while the dose d rops to between 5 and 7 Gy 1 cm into the 
normal breast.  With long term follow up (median fo llow-up of 60.5 months), the 5-year local 
recurrence rate was less than 2 %(20). In the large st intraoperative electron experience, 
investigators delivered 9 to 10 Gy in a single treatment prior  to whole breast radiation using 9 
MeV electrons(31).  Long-term local control rates a nd cosmesis appear similar to or better than 
more conventional techniques (36).  In this propose d study, we plan to deliver 8Gy to the TB rather 
than 20Gy with low energy x-rays or 9-10 Gy with el ectrons before whole breast irradiation, based 
on 1) there is no benefit of dose escalation over t he biological equivalent dose of 16 Gy at 2 Gy 
per fraction(26) which is equal to 8 Gy in 1 fracti on and 2) known increased side effects with 
higher doses to the tumor bed(8, 36).  We believe t hat the proposed dose should be similarly 
tolerated as observed in these trials, since the vo lume of normal breast irradiated is similar using a  
lower dose.  In addition, this treatment will simil arly shorten treatment by 1 to 1 ½ weeks by 
replacing the 8 treatments to the TB.  
Since the breast immobilization device is secured t o the patient’s breast under a mild negative 
pressure, we believe that delivering the boost prio r to the whole breast irradiation may minimize 
the risk of discomfort because patients occasionall y experience breast tenderness at the end of a 
conventional course of whole breast radiation thera py. Based on our two IRB-approved setup 
reproducibility studies (GCC1047 and GCC0727) testi ng the breast immobilization device, only 
one patient had more than minimal irritation of the  skin caused by wearing of the cup system, with 
the development of several blisters on the breast w hich resolved with conservative management 
over two weeks.  The investigators believe this was  related to an improper fit of the breast cup 
related to volume loss from her prior surgery and f ibrosis from her prior whole breast radiation.  
In this study, patients will not have had prior rad iotherapy so the breast will be more pliable and 
less skin reaction is expected. 
The primary objectives of the study are to investig ate whether: 
1.  Treatment plans satisfy the dosimetric criteria of target coverage as described in section 
5.5.4. Treatment plan quality is judged on percenta ge coverage of the target volume by the 
prescription dose level, as well as maximum target dose and minimum target dose as percentages 
of the prescription dose. 
2.  The treatment procedure can be carried out safely i n terms of patient comfort and 
compliance. However, as part of this study the pati ent‘s comfort will be noted along with any 
observations relative to skin irritation from the c up system or the use of the Hollister Medical 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  Adhesive spray during the treatment. The adhesive s pray has been previously used during the 
reproducibility studies where CT scans were perform ed exposing each patient to about 2 cGy over 
two scans, with no adverse effects noted on follow- up. Nevertheless, though the effect of the 
radiation on the adhesive spray, as well as the fla nge and cup materials, is not known or expected 
to be a concern, each patient’s skin, and the mater ials themselves are to be examined following 
treatment for any indication of potential risks. 
 
1.3. Schema/procedure 
The general treatment sequence is shown in the flow  chart below.  After lumpectomy and sentinel 
node biopsy, the patient may or may not be recommen ded for adjuvant chemotherapy.  If 
chemotherapy is recommended, radiation therapy will  start within 6-8 weeks from completion of 
chemotherapy.  If chemotherapy is not recommended o r performed prior to surgery, radiation 
therapy will start within 6-8 weeks following surge ry.  Rather than delivering the tumor bed boost 
at the end of the whole breast radiation, we will d eliver the tumor bed boost dose of 8 Gy in a 
single treatment using the GammaPod before whole br east radiation.  The clinical target volume 
for the single treatment is the tumor bed (defined as the surgical cavity including surgical clips and  
any surgical changes) plus a 5 mm uniform margin. A  further 5 mm uniform expansion in all 
directions will be added to the clinical target vol ume to make the planning target volume. This 5 
mm margin is based on our setup reproducibility stu dy with the current patient loader and breast cup 
system (GCC1047), as well as conservatively taking into account mechanical uncertainty of couch 
positioning. Twelve patients have contributed data to the setup reproducibility analysis (see the Pre-
Clinical Tests section, Tab 3). The reproducibility of target location within the c up to within two 
standard deviations of the mean (95% confidence lim it) has been found to be 2.9 mm.  
 
After the single fraction GammaPod treatment, stand ard whole breast radiation therapy 
delivering 50 Gy in 25 treatments or 40 Gy in 15 tr eatments will be administered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chemotherapy 
as necessary 
per standard 
of care  8 Gy in 1 
fraction 
to 
TB + 10 mm  Partial 
Mastectomy 
and Sentinel 
lymph node 
assessment 
 
 
Whole Breast 
Radiation 
 

 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  Patients will first be simulated in the supine or p rone position in preparation for whole breast 
radiation without the breast immobilization device.   If the surgical cavity is clearly visible and the  
TB volume is less than 25% of the whole breast volu me, the patient will be a candidate for single 
fraction GammaPod boost (this study) and considered  for treatment on study.  The patients will be 
approached after the simulation and offered the stu dy if they otherwise meet the eligibility criteria.   
Otherwise, patients will be off the study and be tr eated with the standard of care, i.e, start with 25  
fractions of whole breast irradiation followed with  5-8 fractions of TB boost.  If patients agree for 
treatment on study and sign informed consent, they will be set up to undergo a second CT 
simulation in the prone position with the vacuum-as sisted breast immobilization device in place 
followed  by the TB boost treatment using the Gamma Pod system on a day prior to whole breast 
irradiation (more details below).   
 
For delivering the tumor bed boost dose with the Ga mmaPod, the patient will first be fitted with 
the breast immobilization cup using silicone insert s and silicone adhesives as necessary to obtain 
an adequate seal.  The negative pressure applied on  the cup will be set to -150mmHg based on 
experience from our setup reproducibility studies u sing earlier and current versions of the cup 
system (IRB approved studies GCC0727 and GCC1047 re spectively). In GCC0727, pressure 
settings between -100 mmHg and -175 mmHg were tried , with -150 mmHg being used most 
commonly. In GCC1047, a pressure of -150 mmHg has b een consistently used for all patients, and 
found to be well tolerated and effective. Consequen tly, we have decided to use this value for all pati ents 
in the proposed clinical use study GCC1202.   For context, a typical breast pump for a nursing female 
generates a peak pressure of about -250 mmHg.  Once  the negative pressure is established on the 
breast tissue, the patient will receive a CT scan w earing the vacuum-assisted breast cup that locks 
onto the GammaPod imaging table.  The breast cup an d imaging table is show in Figure 2 below. 
Note the pink silicone flange on the cup to provide  a seal onto the patient’s chest. The imaging 
table allows the affected breast with the breast cu p on to be locked into the opening of the table 
surface while the patient is in the upright positio n.  The step of the table is adjustable, so that 
patients of different heights can have their affect ed breast placed through the opening on the table.  
The treatment table has the same surface shape, ste p adjustment, and rotating mechanism as the 
imaging table to ensure that imaging and treatment have the same patient setup geometry. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
   
Figure 2. a) The revised breast cup assembly and b)  the patient imaging couch that rotates from 
near vertical to horizontal for imaging and treatme nt c)  
 
Regarding ensuring that adequate pressure in mainta ined throughout the procedure, there are 
multiple safeguards as outlined here: 
(i)  During the period that the patient is not being sca nned or treated, a therapist will be 
accompanying the patient and monitoring the pump’s pressure gauge. In addition to the 
gauge there is an LED light that indicates a curren t drop in pressure to below -100 mmHg  
and also a “latch” LED that comes on when a drop in pressure occurs and st ays lit even if 
pressure is restored . The conservative value of -100 mmHg was chosen as  an alert and 
interlock (see iii below) threshold with the ration ale that a value within the range observed 
to fully immobilize the skin of the breast provided  optimum patient safety. At any time 
after CT scanning and prior to treatment, if on exa mination of the latch LED a 
pressure drop to below -100 mmHg has occurred, the procedure will be halted and 
the physician will order a repeated imaging study a nd if already planned the patient 
will be re-planned.  
(ii)  During CT scanning, the pressure gauge and indicato r lights will be visible via the CT 
room’s video camera. Scanning can be halted in the event of a pressure loss. 
(iii)  During GammaPod treatment, in addition to video mon itoring, a pressure monitoring cable 
from the pump provides an interlock that shuts off the radiation in the event of a pressure 
drop below -100 mmHg.  
 
It should be noted that the pump is continually on throughout the procedure and can maintain 
pressure even in the event of small air leaks in th e seal between the flange and skin.  While the 
patient is lying prone for scanning or treatment, t heir weight further reinforces the seal between 
the cup flange and chest. The routine use of a bioc ompatible medical adhesive (Hollister 7730 

 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  Medical Adhesive Spray, as used for an ostomy – see  Figure 3 of Pre-Clinical Tests Section, Tab 
3) further helps to establish and maintain a good s eal. During the reproducibility studies, 
significant pressure loss has never been observed d uring CT scanning while the patient was lying 
prone in the treatment position.  A photograph of t he pump, with pressure gauge indicating -150 
mmHg is shown in Figure 4 of the Pre-Clinical Tests  Section. During treatment, a cable from the 
pump enables interlocking of the radiation delivery  in the event of a preset pressure drop (to -100 
mmHg).  
 
Both the CT simulator and the GammaPod unit are wit hin the Department of Radiation Oncology.  
A typical breast CT simulation takes 10-15 minutes.   After the CT scan, the images will be 
transferred to the treatment planning system, which  is specifically designed by Xcision for the 
GammaPod system.  It uses inverse planning principl es to optimize a dynamic path of the focal 
spot to paint the prescribed dose distribution.  On  the treatment planning system, the target volume 
will be delineated by the prescribing physician.  T hey can also delineate critical organs and 
structures and set a dose limit to them. The typica l time required for target delineation is 10-15 
minutes.  After target delineation, a GammaPod trea tment plan will be optimized based on the 
dose prescriptions and dose limitations.  Plan opti mization takes less than 2 minutes including the 
final dose calculation. 
 
The treatment plan will be reviewed and approved by  the prescribing physician and physicist  
before being sent to the GammaPod system for delive ry.  For a plan to be acceptable, the 8Gy 
isodose line must cover 95% of the PTV (tumor bed p lus  10 mm margin), and must be at least 
5mm from the breast skin surface.  The minimum PTV dose must be greater than 7.2Gy, i.e., a 
maximum of 10% cold spot is allowed if 95% of PTV i s getting 8Gy or more. The maximum PTV 
dose must be less than 9.6Gy, i.e., a maximum of 20 % hot spot is allowed.  For the boost PTV, 
these dose uniformity measures are significantly le ss as compared to other boost techniques such 
as MammoSite or Intrabeam, where the hot spot can b e over 100% greater than the prescribed dose 
and encompasses the entire surgical cavity, and has  not been associated with poor cosmetic 
results(29, 37-39). 
 
As the treatment plan is being developed, the patie nt will be escorted or transported to the 
GammaPod treatment room with the breast cup in plac e and the vacuum seal maintained.  After 
the treatment plan is transferred to the GammaPod c ontrol console, the patient will then be set up 
on the treatment table in the same geometry and man ner as for CT imaging.  The optimized 
treatment plan will then be delivered by the GammaP od system.  For a spherical target size of 5 
cm in diameter, the treatment would take about 12 m inutes. For a 3 cm target, the treatment time 
is less than 3 minutes. We expect that the total ti me from wearing the breast cup for CT simulation 
to the completion of treatment is less than 75 minu tes. 
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  At the conclusion of the treatment, the patients wi ll be asked about the comfort of the cup system 
and procedure, and their skin will be checked for a ny signs of irritation from the breast 
immobilization system or the use of the medical adh esive spray during radiation treatment. The 
cup and flange will also be visually checked for an y apparent effects. 
 
At the time of conventional radiotherapy simulation , it will be determined whether or not the 
patient is an eligible candidate for GammaPod boost  treatment. Whether or not the patient receives 
GammaPod treatment, her whole breast irradiation wi ll start up to 7-8 days after the day of 
conventional radiotherapy simulation.  This time is  needed for physician contours, treatment 
planning by our dosimetry team, physician plan appr oval and physics plan approval (typically 4 
working days) and also allowing for standard practi ce of beginning a course of whole breast 
irradiation on a Monday. This timeline is purely a function of workflow rather than 
clinical/radiobiological considerations. The CT ima ges acquired with the patient in the supine 
position during simulation will be used for treatme nt planning.  Whole breast treatments are 
devised according to our departmental guidelines. G ammaPod patients will return on a single day 
prior to their conventional treatment to be CT scan ned in the prone orientation and treated with 
GammaPod. It is possible that GammaPod simulation a nd treatment will be on the same day as 
conventional radiotherapy simulation, depending on schedules and patient availability. The timing 
of GammaPod boost treatment relative to conventiona l radiotherapy whole breast treatment does 
not affect the whole breast radiotherapy dose presc ription. This is consistent with current clinical 
practice concerning boost dose delivery, whether pr e (i.e. intraoperative radiotherapy) or post (i.e. 
external beam radiotherapy or brachytherapy) whole breast radiotherapy.  Beginning on the day of 
GammaPod treatment, patients will be evaluated week ly for acute toxicities, as is our clinic’s 
standard practice. 
 
2. Objectives 
The primary study objective is to demonstrate the f easibility and safety of delivering a tumor bed 
boost dose using the GammaPod TM  stereotactic system for patients undergoing breast  conserving 
therapy. Efficacy is not among the objectives of th is study. 
 
2.1. End points 
2.1.1. Primary Endpoint 
Demonstration of the feasibility and safety of deli vering a radiation treatment using the 
GammaPodTM for patients undergoing breast conservin g therapy ensuring coverage of the 
target volume with appropriate dose homogeneity and  conformity as defined in the study. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  2.1.2. Secondary Endpoints 
•• •• The evaluation of overall patient comfort in the Ga mmaPodTM procedure. 
•• •• The evaluation of acute toxicity during and up to 1  month after GammaPodTM TB 
boost. 
•• •• The evaluation of long-term toxicity at one year to  assess the presence of subcutaneous 
fibrosis, and fat necrosis.  
•• •• The evaluation of the use of Hollister Medical Adhe sive spray for sealing the cup flange 
during radiation therapy and its effects, if any, o n the patient’s skin 
 
3. Patient Selection Criteria: 
3.1. Eligibility criteria 
•• •• The patient must sign consent for study participati on. 
•• •• The patient must be female and have a diagnosis of an invasive or non-invasive 
breast cancer that was treated surgically by a part ial mastectomy. 
•• •• The patient must be deemed an appropriate candidate  for breast conserving therapy 
(i.e. not pregnant, never had radiation to the trea ted breast, breast size would allow 
adequate cosmesis after volume loss from partial ma stectomy).  
•• •• Patients with involved lymph nodes are candidates f or the study as long as regional 
nodal radiation is not required by the treating phy sician. 
•• •• Surgical margins are negative for invasive or non-i nvasive breast cancer. 
•• •• The greatest dimension of the tumor is less than 4c m before surgery. 
•• •• The volume of the TB CTV is less than 25% of the wh ole breast PTV which is a 
criteria used for partial breast alone trials (NSAB P B-39). 
•• •• Multifocal disease is allowed if it was removed by a single lumpectomy resection 
and the patient remained a candidate for breast con servation. 
•• •• Age 60 years and older.  
•• •• Women of childbearing potential must use an effecti ve contraceptive method such 
as condom/diaphragm and spermicidal foam, intrauter ine device (IUD), or 
prescription birth control pills . A negative pregnancy test must be obtained prior to  
study enrollment or waiver signed.  
•• •• The surgical cavity is clearly visible on CT images .  
•• •• The patient must weigh less than 150Kg (330lb), whi ch is the limit of the imaging 
couch.  
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  •• •• The patient must be less than 6’6” in height.  
•• •• The patient must feel comfortable in the prone posi tion.  
 
3.2. Ineligibility criteria 
•• •• Patients with proven multi-centric carcinoma (tumor s in different quadrants of the 
breast or tumor separated by at least 4 cm).  
•• •• Prior radiation therapy above the umbilicus 
•• •• Unable to fit into the immobilization breast cup wi th an adequate seal 
•• •• Male gender. 
•• •• Patient cannot comfortably be set up in the prone p osition (i.e. physical disability) 
•• •• Unable to fit into the breast immobilization device  due to breast size or other 
anatomical reason. 
•• •• Mastectomy is the surgery performed. 
•• •• Patient has received prior radiotherapy to the invo lved breast. 
•• •• Regional nodal irradiation is part of the treatment  plan. 
•• •• Tumor bed is less than 5 mm from the skin surface.  
•• •• Patients with skin involvement, regardless of tumor  size.  
•• •• Patients with connective tissue disorders specifica lly systemic lupus erythematosis, 
scleroderma, or dermatomyositis.  
•• •• Patients with psychiatric or addictive disorders th at would preclude obtaining 
informed consent.  
•• •• Patients who are pregnant or lactating due to poten tial exposure of the fetus to RT 
and unknown effects of RT to lactating females.  
 
4. Registration 
•• •• Consent for enrollment onto protocol will be perfor med by principal investigator or member 
of research team. 
•• •• Patients can only be registered after eligibility c riteria are met following the conventional 
supine CT simulation which may occur the day of the  simulation or within a few days such 
that GammaPod treatment could be planned prior to w hole breast radiotherapy. The 
conventional supine or prone CT simulation used for  whole breast radiotherapy is performed 
approximately 7-10 days prior to starting whole bre ast radiotherapy. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  •• •• Once a patient is registered, a case number will be  assigned to the patient. 
 
5. Radiation Therapy Protocol 
5.1. CT simulation for planning whole breast irradi ation  
The patient will undergo a conventional CT simulati on in supine or prone position without 
the breast immobilization cup.  The purpose of the CT simulation is-two-fold: 1) we will see 
if the TB volume can be accurately delineated and i f the TB volume is too large for 
GammaPod boost; and 2) the CT images are used for p lanning the patient’s whole breast 
irradiation.  If, after viewing the CT images and t he patient is deemed a study candidate and 
consents, they will receive a second CT-sim and the  GammaPod TB boost treatment on the 
same day as described below. 
5.2. CT-based treatment planning for the GammaPod t reatment 
•• •• Patients will be simulated in the prone position us ing a breast immobilization cup 
supplied by Xcision.  Depending on the fit of the c up, supplemental silicone fillers and 
supplemental silicone adhesive are used to improve fit and seal of the cup. The cup 
consists of two layers with an air space in between .  A small negative pressure (fixed 
at -150 mmHg and not adjustable) is applied between  the 2 layers to immobilize the 
breast inside the cups.  
•• •• The reproducibility of the breast immobilization cu p decreases outside the confines of 
the cup (Figure 3), such that if any “tumor bed” cl ip is above the rim of the cup, the 
patient will not receive treatment with the GammaPo d and will be treated off study 
using departmental standard treatment.  
•• •• The CT will start at the thyroid notch and extend b elow the infra-mammary fold 
(including the entire lung) with a slice thickness of 1.0 mm through the breast  
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
   
Figure 3. For a patient to be included in the study , all clips need to be below the 
yellow line demarcated as top of the breast immobil ization cup. The image shown 
here represents a patient ineligible for the study,  as would any patient where any 
clip is above the line. 
 
5.3. Target volumes for TB boost 
The following structures will be outlined on all CT  slices: the clinical target volume (CTV) 
and the planning target volumes (PTV).  
5.3.1. Clinical Target Volume (CTV) 
The CTV will be the tumor bed which is the combinat ion of the surgical changes (surgical 
cavity) and surgical clips in the surgical bed + 5 mm. This margin incorporates the extent 
of anatomy that is considered to be required clinic ally to be covered by the prescribed dose. 
 
5.3.2. Planning Target Volume (PTV) 
•• •• The PTV will provide a margin around the CTV to com pensate for uncertainty in 
treatment set up as determined by GCC1047.  This st udy indicates that uncertainty 
of target position within the stereotactic coordina te system is within 3 mm to two 
standard deviations. A further 2 mm margin will be used for this study to capture 
any residual uncertainty due to respiratory motion of the breast and any uncertainty 
in the positioning of the stereotactic coordinate s ystem relative to the beams. 

 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  •• •• The PTV expansion will be defined as a uniform 5 mm  expansion of CTV. 
•• •• The PTV will be limited to 5 mm from the skin surfa ce and 0 mm from the 
pectoralis muscle posteriorly. 
 
5.4. Treatment planning for tumor bed boost 
The PTV will be used as the target for treatment pl anning 
5.4.1. Dose prescription and delivery 
The PTV will receive 8 Gy in 1 fraction. 
5.4.2. Dose limitations for normal tissues. 
•• •• The dose at the skin surface must be less than 95% of the prescription dose.   
•• •• The dose at 1 cm from the PTV should be less than 3 0% of the prescription dose.   
•• •• The chest wall will receive less than the prescript ion dose. 
•• •• No rib should receive more than 75% of the prescrip tion dose. 
•• •• The maximum dose to lung should be no more than 2.5 Gy.  This limit is slightly 
less than the single fraction dose given in hypofra ctionated whole breast irradiation 
(3.3Gy in START trial(18)  and 2.66Gy in Ontario tr ial(16)). 
•• •• The maximum dose to the heart should be no more tha n 2.5Gy.  This limit is slightly 
less than the single fraction dose given in hypofra ctionated whole breast irradiation 
(3.3Gy in START trial and 2.66Gy in Ontario trial).  
5.4.3. Criteria for judging deviations from plan 
•• •• No deviation (acceptable):  100% prescription isodo se surface covers at least 95% 
of the PTV.  Maximum dose to the PTV should not exc eed prescription dose by 
>20%.  Minimum dose to the PTV should not be lower than 7.6Gy (below the 
prescription dose by 5%).  All specified critical n ormal tissue DVH limits as 
described in 5.4.3 have been met. As compared with TB boosts with FDA approved 
brachytherapy techniques and intraoperative treatme nts, which are associated with 
dose “hot spots” of 100% - 400%, a 20% dose inhomog eneity within the TB PTV 
should be acceptable. 
•• •• Minor deviation but acceptable:  95% prescription i sodose surface covers between 
95% and 100% of the PTV.  No portion of the PTV rec eives <93% of the 
prescription dose.  Maximum dose to PTV exceeds pre scription dose by >20% but 
<30%.  All specified critical normal tissue DVH lim its fall within 5% of the 
guidelines. 
•• •• Major deviations (unacceptable): 95% isodose surfac e covers < 95% of the PTV. 
A portion of PTV receives < 93% of prescription iso center dose. Maximum dose to 
PTV exceeds prescription dose by >30%.  Any critica l normal tissue DVH limit 
exceeds 5% of the specified value. 
•• •• If a major deviation is required for treatment deli very, then the Gamma Pod 
treatment will not be delivered and the patient wil l be taken off study. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  •• •• Treatment delivery will not be performed if the sea l of the breast cup is lost or 
pressure falls below a pre-determined value followi ng the CT simulation. Such an 
event will be recorded. 
•• •• If the cup pressure drops to below 100 mmHg, which is signified by an alarm on 
the pump, the physician will do the following: 
 If it occurs before the simulation CT scan, continu ation with the study should 
proceed once pressure is reestablished. 
 If pressure loss occurs following the simulation CT  scan and before treatment, 
the CT simulation will need to be repeated to ensur e the reproducibility of target 
position between CT scanning and treatment.  The ev ent will be recorded and 
the treating physician will decide whether to proce ed with GammaPod 
treatment or treat the patient conventionally off s tudy. 
•• •• Treatment delivery will not be performed if the bre ast cup cannot be locked into 
the treatment table. Such an event will be recorded . 
•• •• Treatment delivery will not be performed if the pat ient feels uncomfortable 
following the placement of the breast cup. Such an event will be recorded. 
5.5. Institutional guidelines for whole breast irra diation treatment 
planning 
5.5.1. Whole breast RT target volumes  
5.5.1.1. Gross Tumor Volume (GTV)  
No GTV  
5.5.1.2. Clinical Target Volume (CTV)  
•• •• Tumor bed is delineated by identifying post-operati ve seroma and associated 
surgical clips + 5 mm 
•• •• Whole breast PTV will be determined following the t angents placed/finalized by 
the treating physician, by subtracting 5 mm from th e block edge, skin and the 
lung/rib/intercostal muscle interface.  See Figure 4. 
•• •• Tumor bed coverage in the whole breast radiation: T he tumor bed CTV is expanded 
by 15 mm in all directions (anatomically constraine d by skin and not the chest wall).  
The block edge of the tangent will be at least 15 m m to ensure dose coverage of the 
tumor bed CTV 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
   
 
 
Figure 4.  Steps to generate whole breast PTV (A)Th e purple line represents the 50% isodose line 
which is used to create volume. (B) The red line re presents the 50% volume subtracting 5 mm 
from the skin and 1 cm superiorly and inferiorly.(C ) The blue line subtracts the lung + 5 mm. 
 

 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  5.5.2. Dose prescription 
The dose delivered to the whole breast PTV for pati ents in the study will be 50 Gy in 25 
fractions OR 40 Gy in 15 fractions with the dose pr escribed to the ICRU reference point. 
5.5.3. Treatment delivery technique 
•• •• 3-D conformal RT with control points is the standar d (40), with the maximum of 4 
control points. 
•• •• Hybrid inverse planned IMRT will be attempted(41), if:  
 Whole breast V105 >75 cc in conventional fractionat ed plan or V105 > 50 cc 
in hypofractionated 3D plan 
 Whole breast Dmax> 110% 
 95% of the Tumor bed PTV cannot be covered by 95% o f the prescription dose  
 95% of the Tumor bed CTV cannot be covered by 95% o f prescription dose 
•• •• Hybrid plan will be used in preference to 3D confor mal RT with control points, if 
hot spots are decreased by 20% as measured by the a bsolute volume of V105 (i.e. 
if V105in forward plan is 100 cc, hybrid plan has t o reduce to 80 cc or less)as they 
decrease fibrosis and acute skin toxicity (41-43) o r coverage is improved by 20%  
5.5.4. Dose-volume analysis for the whole breast 
•• •• 95% of the Whole breast PTV receives >95% of prescr ibed dose 
•• •• 95% of the Tumor bed CTV receives > 95% prescribed dose 
•• •• 95% of the Tumor bed PTV receives > 95% prescribed dose  
5.5.5. Dose-volume analysis for normal structures 
•• •• Normal structures(22), unfortunately there is no cl ear DVH criteria that predicts 
increased side effects – values chosen were arbitra ry based on clinical practice 
•• •• Ipsilateral lung: V20 < 20%  
•• •• Heart: V30 < 5%, mean heart dose <5Gy 
5.5.6. Timing 
Treatment to the whole breast will begin within 7-8  days from the tumor bed boost 
(GammaPodTM) treatment unless an adverse event occu rred from the GammaPod 
treatment. 
 
 
6. Surgical Resection  
•• •• Lumpectomy and lymph node sampling or dissection sh ould be performed 
according to institutional standard of care. 
•• •• Surgical clips to delineate the surgical bed is the  standard of care of our referring 
surgeons. 
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  7. Adjuvant Systemic Therapy 
•• •• Chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy may be given p re-operatively or post-
operatively according to standard of care and will be recorded. 
•• •• Hormonal therapy, if used, will be delivered concur rently and recorded. 
 
8. Pathology 
Pathology assessment of the lumpectomy and lymph no de assessment will follow current 
standard of care. 
 
9. Patient Assessments 
9.1. Study parameters 
 
Assessment  Pre- 
Entry  During 
Radiation  At 6 
weeks e At 6 
months e At 1 
year e 
H&P, Breast 
Exam  X  X X X d 
Weight  X   X X d 
Bra cup size  X   X      X 
Disease status  X  X X X d 
Mammograms  X   Xf X c 
Toxicity  
Photographs  
Xa X b 
Xa X b X b 
Xa X b 
Xa 
a. Photographs will be obtained prior to GammaPod t reatment, following the removal of the 
breast immobilization device after the treatment is  delivered, on the day whole breast radiation 
starts and on the last day of treatment as well as at their 6 and 12 month follow up. 
b. Patients will be seen on day of GammaPod treatme nt and following GammaPod treatment on 
day of 1 st  whole breast treatment, then weekly during whole b reast radiation and all toxicity will 
be recorded at each of the time points or more ofte n as clinically indicated. 
 
c. Yearly thereafter  
 
d. Clinical examination and disease status assessme nt at 6-month intervals for the first 3 years,  
and yearly thereafter  
 
e. Time points are from the start of radiation ther apy  
 
f. Mammogram 6 months after radiation therapy, then  yearly thereafter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  9.2. Adverse event reporting 
9.2.1. Anticipated toxicities 
•• •• Fatigue is the anticipated systemic reaction to rad iation treatment. 
•• •• Skin irritation, erythema and desquamation may also  occur. 
•• •• Breast edema, tenderness, and myositis are potentia l acute side effects. 
•• •• Long-term complications may include radiation pneum onitis, rib fractures, cardiac 
complications, and wound healing complications.  Al though the additional risk 
from this single treatment should be minimal in com parison to the whole breast 
radiation. 
•• •• Patients will be seen on day of GammaPod treatment and following GammaPod 
treatment on day of 1st whole breast treatment, the n weekly during whole breast 
radiation and side effects will be recorded at each  of the time points. 
9.2.2. Toxicity reporting 
Acute radiation effects will be evaluated and score d using the NCI CTCAE v. 4.0. A copy 
of the CTC version can be downloaded from the CTEP homepage (http:ctep.info.nih.gov). 
Please note that this study will not be using separ ate toxicity scales for acute and late 
radiation effects.  All acute effects and late effe cts that occur within one year will be 
recorded in ONCORE.  Data and safety monitoring wil l be reported to the in-house data 
safety monitoring board bi-annually. 
9.2.3. Photographs to evaluate toxicity 
•• •• Digital images of the breast will be taken prior to  GammaPod treatment, following 
the removal of the breast immobilization device aft er the treatment is delivered, on 
the day whole breast radiation starts and on the la st day of treatment as well as at 
their 6 and 12 month follow up. 
•• •• All images will exclude the patient’s face. 
•• •• The first image will be a close up of the ipsilater al breast undergoing planned 
therapy in a straight frontal view with both arms e levated above the patient’s head. 
•• •• The second image will be a close up of the ipsilate ral breast undergoing planned 
therapy in a straight frontal view with both hands on the patient’s hips. 
•• •• The third image will be a straight frontal view enc ompassing both the patient’s 
breasts with the patient’s hands on her hips. 
9.2.4. Life-threatening and grade 4 events 
All life-threatening events (events, which in view of the investigator, place the patient at 
immediate risk of death from the reaction) or Grade  4 events that are definitely, possibly, 
or probably related to protocol treatment using rad iation therapy will be reported according 
to IRB reporting policy.  Every Severe Adverse Even t (SAE) will be reported on FDA 3500 
A (MedWatch Form). 
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  9.2.5. Fatal events (Grade 5) 
All deaths with the attribution of definitely, poss ibly, or probably related to protocol 
radiation therapy must be reported according to IRB  reporting policy.  Every Severe 
Adverse Event (SAE) will be reported on FDA 3500 A (MedWatch Form). All deaths 
during and within 30 days of completion of protocol  radiation therapy, regardless of 
attribution, must be reported according to IRB repo rting policy.  Every Severe Adverse 
Event (SAE) will be reported on FDA 3500 A (MedWatc h Form)  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/medwatch/ . 
 
If the event is more than 30 days from completion o f radiation treatment, but is felt to be 
definitely, possibly, or probably resulting from pr otocol radiation therapy, this event must be 
reported according to IRB reporting policy.  Every Severe Adverse Event (SAE) will be 
reported on FDA 3500 A (MedWatch Form). 
 
10. Statistical Considerations 
10.1. Objectives 
The primary objective is to demonstrate the feasibi lity and safety of delivering a tumor bed 
boost dose using the GammaPod stereotactic system f or patients undergoing breast 
conserving therapy.  Primary feasibility endpoints will include an estimate of reproducibility 
of the radiation technique.  Reproducibility will b e assessed on the basis of radiation therapy 
being scored as acceptable, marginally acceptable, or unacceptable using the criteria 
described in Section 5.4.3.  The proportion of pati ents eligible for a GammaPod TB boost 
will be based on clinical and pathological findings .  Secondary safety endpoints will include 
the number and type of serious adverse device-relat ed events, the incidence of acute radiation.  
Acute toxicity will be assessed using the NCI CTCAE  v4.0 criteria.  Toxicities will be 
defined as acute if they occur within one month of protocol therapy. TB boost is not 
experimental. Delivering a single large dose to the  TB is also not new.  Based on previous 
intracavitary, intraoperative TB irradiations with 20 to 21 Gy(30, 44-46), we do not expect 
elevated significant late side effects.  To reitera te, this study will treat only to 8 Gy as 
opposed to 20 to 21 Gy and is treating a similar vo lume as other intraoperative experiences 
where thousands of patients have been treated. Subs equently, the late toxicity profile will 
not be part of the statistical evaluation in this f easibility study. However, toxicity will be 
reviewed at 12 months after the completion of the r adiation therapy and the data will be 
captured. Acute effects may be related to placement  of the immobilization device but since 
it is placed prior to the whole breast radiation, t he one month post whole breast radiation 
endpoint is appropriate.  
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  10.2. Trial design 
Sample size for the trial is based on a primary end point of quality of the radiation dose 
distribution. As described above, the GammaPod dose  will be scored as acceptable, 
acceptable but with a minor deviation, or unaccepta ble using the criteria described in Section 
5.5.4. All eligible patients will be included in th e analysis. If a treatment plan is graded as 
unacceptable, the treatment will be aborted and the  GammaPod boost will not be delivered. 
The patient will in that case be treated with a con ventional boost following whole breast 
radiation (i.e. 16 Gy in 8 fractions using electron s or photons with conventional linear 
accelerator). The optimal two-stage trial design by  Simon will be used(47). This tests the 
null hypothesis that, for a population of patients,  the true proportion of patients for whom 
the GammaPod treatment planning system is able to g enerate an acceptable dose distribution 
is less than or equal to 60% (a chosen value signif ying that the device has significant clinical 
utility if the null hypothesis is false). Given onl y a limited sample size in the study, the 
proportion of patients in the study for whom treatm ent plans must be acceptable for the null 
hypothesis to be found false (to a low uncertainty)  must in fact be considerably higher than 
60% (see below).  Specifically, the number of accep table plans and the total number of plans 
must be such that there is a certain low probabilit y (chosen here as less than 5%) that the 
device will be found acceptable in the trial when i n fact it would be acceptable for less than 
60% of patients in a very large population of patie nts. That is, there is only a 5% chance that 
the device will be found to have significant utilit y when in fact it does not. In the design, 
there is also an alternative hypothesis that the tr ue proportion of patients with an acceptable 
dose distribution is greater than or equal to 90%. Again, the required total number of patients 
in the study and the number for whom plans are acce ptable must be sufficient for there to be 
a certain low probability (chosen as less than 10%)  that the null hypothesis is found to be 
true when in fact the alternative hypothesis is tru e.  That is, there is only a 10% chance that 
the device will be found to not have significant ut ility when in fact it has high utility. 
Furthermore, the Simon Two Stage design allows for the trial to be aborted if after plans 
have been generated for a subset of the total numbe r of patients (stage 1) the number of 
acceptable plans is below a certain number. Using t ables for Simon Two Stage design, an 
appropriate design has been determined to be the fo llowing: 
 After evaluating the device on 8 patients in the f irst stage, the trial will be terminated and 
the device rejected if the dose distribution is acc eptable for only 5 or less patients. If the trial 
goes on to the second stage, a total of 17 patients  will be studied. If the total number of 
patients for whom the dose distribution is acceptab le is less than or equal to 13 the device 
will be rejected. If the null hypothesis is in fact  true, there is a 4.4% probability of falsely 
concluding that it is false (the target for this va lue was 5% in designing the trial). This is the 
probability of falsely concluding that the true pro portion of patients with an acceptable dose 
distribution is greater than 60% when in fact it is  less than or equal to 60%. On the other 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  hand, if the alternative hypothesis is true, there is a 9.5% probability of falsely concluding 
that the null hypothesis is true (the target for th is value was 10%). This is the probability of 
falsely concluding that the proportion of patients with an acceptable dose distribution is less 
than or equal to 60% when in fact the true proporti on is at least 90%. This scheme gives a 
power of 90.5% (1–9.5%: the probability of concludi ng correctly that the null hypothesis is 
false when the alternative hypothesis is true). The  probability of early termination after stage 
1 if the null hypothesis is true is equal to 68% (e arly termination occurs if 5 or fewer patients 
are acceptable after stage 1) and the expected samp le size for this trial is 10.8 accounting for 
the probability of early termination. 
 
11. Potential Risks/Discomfort  
GammaPod is a new radiation treatment device that h as not been used on patients before.  
Although there has been extensive pre-clinical test ing with phantoms, it is still possible 
that the GammaPod treatment deviates from the inten ded in geometry and dosimetry.  
Patients may not be able to tolerate the breast imm obilization cups due to the negative 
pressure and the duration of treatment in the prone  position.  
 
To minimize the dosimetric discrepancy, the physici st co-investigator must perform a hand 
calculation to verify the treatment time is within 5% to the treatment time calculated by the 
treatment planning system before the treatment can be started.  The total treatment time is 
a function of the target volume, the prescribed dos e and the dose rate.  
   t ≈ PTV*D p/ḊVf 
where t is beam on time, PTV is the planning target  volume, D p is the prescription dose to 
the PTV, Ḋ is the dose rate on the day of treatment, and V f if the focal spot volume at the 
50% isodose surface.   
 
The maximum dose to lung and heart should be less t han 2.5Gy.  This limit is slightly less 
than the single fraction dose given in hypofraction ated whole breast irradiation (2.66 Gy 
in Ontario trial(16),  and 3.3Gy in UK START trial( 18). 
 
To minimize the geometric error, the tumor location  relative to the breast cup will be 
displayed on the treatment control console after th e plan is transferred to the treatment 
control console.  The envelope containing all movem ents of the radiation focal point of the 
GammaPod during the entire treatment will also be d isplayed against the target.  The 
envelope of the focal spots should generally confor m to the target volume and a visual 
verification must be confirmed before the treatment  can be started. 
 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  The primary goal of the study is to assess the feas ibility of using GammaPod to deliver 
high doses of focal radiation to the target in huma n breast.  Patient tolerance to the breast 
cup and adhesive during radiation treatment, and to  the prone setup, is part of the evaluation.  
Because we have evaluated the breast cup and prone setup in an earlier study and all 
subjects tolerated it well, the likelihood of intol erable discomfort or irritation is very small.  
Nevertheless, if 2 of the first 5 patients or more than 1/3 of the subjects thereafter complain 
about either the breast cup or the prone treatment setup, the study will be suspended until 
patient comfort is further improved. 
 
12. Potential Benefits 
The characteristics of the GammaPod dose delivery a llow the GammaPod to deliver a focal 
radiation dose with a fast dose fall-off away from the target.  It is this ability of lower dose 
spillage to the normal breast tissue and surroundin g organs such as the lung and the heart 
that makes it possible to deliver an equivalent bio logical dose to the tumor bed in a single 
treatment as the conventional boost treatment that takes 8 treatments to complete.  
Therefore, the direct benefit to the subjects enrol led in the study is the shortening of the 
treatment duration by one and 1/2 week. If such dos e delivery is proven feasible, the 
implications on the management of early-stage breas t cancer are far more important.  
Currently in the US, more than 90% of the breast ca ncer patients who choose breast 
conservation therapy receive 33 radiation treatment s that last 7 weeks.  Such a protracted 
regimen significantly worsens the quality of life f or these patients and increases health care 
costs. 
 
13. Cost/Payments 
 
The radiation treatment delivery using the GammaPod  is considered experimental.  The 
Department of Radiation Oncology will not charge th e patient or her insurance company 
for the associated costs.  The participant and/or t heir health plan/insurance company will 
need to pay for some or all of the costs of treatin g the cancer in this study.   
The whole breast radiation therapy subsequent to th e GammaPod single fraction tumor bed 
boost is not experimental but standard of care.  Th e hospital will bill the patient/payer as 
with conventional radiation therapy. 
 
No payment will be given to the patients for partic ipating in this feasibility study. 
  
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  14. References and GammaPod Bibliography 
 
1. Kemeny MM, Wellisch DK, Schain WS. Psychosocial outcome in a randomized surgical trial for treatmen t 
of primary breast cancer. Cancer. 1988 Sep 15;62(6) :1231-7. 
2. Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, Davies C, Elphinst one P, Evans E, et al. Effects of radiotherapy and of 
differences in the extent of surgery for early brea st cancer on local recurrence and 15-year survival:  an overview of 
the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005 Dec 17;366(9503 ):2087-106. 
3. Christian MC, McCabe MS, Korn EL, Abrams JS, Kap lan RS, Friedman MA. The National Cancer 
Institute audit of the National Surgical Adjuvant B reast and Bowel Project Protocol B-06. N Engl J Med . 1995 Nov 
30;333(22):1469-74. 
4. Fisher B, Bauer M, Margolese R, Poisson R, Pilch  Y, Redmond C, et al. Five-year results of a random ized 
clinical trial comparing total mastectomy and segme ntal mastectomy with or without radiation in the tr eatment of 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1985 Mar 14;312(11):66 5-73. 
5. Bates AT, Swift CL, Kwa W, Moravan V, Aquino-Par sons C. A computed tomography-based protocol vs 
conventional clinical mark-up for breast electron b oost. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2007 Jun;19(5):34 9-55. 
6. Fein DA, Fowble BL, Hanlon AL, Hoffman JP, Sigur dson ER, Eisenberg BL. Does the placement of 
surgical clips within the excision cavity influence  local control for patients treated with breast-con serving surgery 
and irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996  Mar 15;34(5):1009-17. 
7. Romestaing P, Lehingue Y, Carrie C, Coquard R, M ontbarbon X, Ardiet JM, et al. Role of a 10-Gy boos t 
in the conservative treatment of early breast cance r: results of a randomized clinical trial in Lyon, France. J Clin 
Oncol. 1997 Mar;15(3):963-8. 
8. Poortmans PM, Collette L, Bartelink H, Struikman s H, Van den Bogaert WF, Fourquet A, et al. The 
addition of a boost dose on the primary tumour bed after lumpectomy in breast conserving treatment for  breast 
cancer. A summary of the results of EORTC 22881-108 82 "boost versus no boost" trial. Cancer Radiother.  2008 
Nov;12(6-7):565-70. 
9. Frazier RC, Kestin LL, Kini V, Martinez AA, Chen  PY, Baglan KL, et al. Impact of boost technique on  
outcome in early-stage breast cancer patients treat ed with breast-conserving therapy. Am J Clin Oncol.  2001 
Feb;24(1):26-32. 
10. Knauerhase H, Strietzel M, Gerber B, Reimer T, Fietkau R. Tumor location, interval between surgery  and 
radiotherapy, and boost technique influence local c ontrol after breast-conserving surgery and radiatio n: retrospective 
analysis of monoinstitutional long-term results. In t J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008 Nov 15;72(4):1048- 55. 
11. Collette S, Collette L, Budiharto T, Horiot JC,  Poortmans PM, Struikmans H, et al. Predictors of t he risk of 
fibrosis at 10 years after breast conserving therap y for early breast cancer: a study based on the EOR TC Trial 22881-
10882 'boost versus no boost'. Eur J Cancer. 2008 N ov;44(17):2587-99. 
12. Taylor ME, Perez CA, Halverson KJ, Kuske RR, Ph ilpott GW, Garcia DM, et al. Factors influencing 
cosmetic results after conservation therapy for bre ast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1995 Feb 15;31(4):753-
64. 
13. Murphy C, Anderson PR, Li T, Bleicher RJ, Sigur dson ER, Goldstein LJ, et al. Impact of the radiati on 
boost on outcomes after breast-conserving surgery a nd radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.  Sep 1; 81(1):69-76. 
14.  Yarnold J, Bentzen SM, Coles C, Haviland J. Hy pofractionated whole-breast radiotherapy for women with 
early breast cancer: myths and realities. Int J Rad iat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011; 79(1): 1-9.  
15.  Bentzen SM, Yarnold J. A Toast to the Silver A nniversary of Clinical Oncology: A Quarter of a Cen tury of 
Advances in Evidence-based Radiation Dose Fractiona tion. Clin Oncol. 2014; 26(10): 599-601.  
16.  Whelan TJ, Pignol JP, Levine MN,etal. Long-term res ults of hypofractionated radiation therapy for brea st 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;362 (6):513-520. 
17.  Whelan T, MacKenzie R , Julian J ,et al. Randomized  trial of breast irradiation schedules after lumpec tomy 
for women with lymph node-negative breast cancer. J  Natl Cancer Inst. 2002;94(15):1143-1150. 
18.  Bentzen SM, Agrawal RK,Aird EG, etal; START Trialis ts’ Group. The UK Standardisation of Breast 
Radiotherapy (START) Trial A of radiotherapy hypofr actionation for treatment of early breast cancer: a  randomised 
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008;9 (4):331-341. 
19.  Bentzen SM, Agrawal RK, Aird EG, et al; START Tria lists’ Group. The UK Standardisation of Breast 
Radiotherapy (START) Trial B of radiotherapy hypofr actionation for treatment of early breast cancer: a  randomised 
trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9618): 1098-1107. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  20.  Owen JR, Ashton A, Bliss JM, et al. Effect of radio therapy fraction size on tumour control in patients  with 
early-stage breast cancer after local tumour excisi on: long-term results of a randomised trial. Lancet  Oncol. 
2006;7(6):467-471. 
21.  Yarnold J, Ashton A, Bliss J,et al. Fractionation s ensitivity and dose response of late adverse effect s in the 
breast after radiotherapy for early breast cancer: long-term results of a randomised trial. Radiother Oncol. 
2005;75(1):9-17. 
22.  Smith BD, Bentzen SM, Correa CR, etal. Fractionatio n for whole breast irradiation: an American Society  for 
Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) evidence-based guideline . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(1):59-68. 
23.  ASTRO releases list of five radiation oncology tre atments to question as part of national Choosing Wi sely 
campaign. http://www.choosingwisely.org /astro-rele ases-list-of-five-radiation-oncology -treatments-to -question-as-
part-of-national -choosing-wisely-campaign. Accesse d August 8, 2014. 
24. Formenti SC, Truong MT, Goldberg JD, Mukhi V, R osenstein B, Roses D, et al. Prone accelerated part ial 
breast irradiation after breast-conserving surgery:  preliminary clinical results and dose-volume histo gram analysis. 
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004 Oct 1;60(2):493- 504. 
25. Nichols EM, Dhople AA, Mohiuddin MM, Flannery T W, Yu CX, Regine WF. Comparative analysis of the 
post-lumpectomy target volume versus the use of pre -lumpectomy tumor volume for early-stage breast can cer: 
implications for the future. Int J Radiat Oncol Bio l Phys.  May 1;77(1):197-202. 
26. NSABP B-39, RTOG 0413: A Randomized Phase III S tudy of conventional whole breast irradiation versu s 
partial breast irradiation for women with stage 0, I, or II breast cancer. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 200 6 
Oct;4(10):719-21. 
27. Vaidya JS, Baum M, Tobias JS, Morgan S, D'Souza  D. The novel technique of delivering targeted 
intraoperative radiotherapy (Targit) for early brea st cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2002 Jun;28(4):447-54.  
28. Lemanski C, Azria D, Gourgon-Bourgade S, Gutows ki M, Rouanet P, Saint-Aubert B, et al. Intraoperat ive 
radiotherapy in early-stage breast cancer: results of the montpellier phase II trial. Int J Radiat Onc ol Biol Phys.  Mar 
1;76(3):698-703. 
29. Vaidya JS, Joseph DJ, Tobias JS, Bulsara M, Wen z F, Saunders C, et al. Targeted intraoperative 
radiotherapy versus whole breast radiotherapy for b reast cancer (TARGIT-A trial): an international, pr ospective, 
randomised, non-inferiority phase 3 trial. Lancet.  Jul 10;376(9735):91-102. 
30. Vaidya JS, Baum M, Tobias JS, Wenz F, Massarut S, Keshtgar M, et al. Long-term results of targeted  
intraoperative radiotherapy (Targit) boost during b reast-conserving surgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol P hys.  Nov 
15;81(4):1091-7. 
31. Lemanski C, Azria D, Thezenas S, Gutowski M, Sa int-Aubert B, Rouanet P, et al. Intraoperative 
radiotherapy given as a boost for early breast canc er: long-term clinical and cosmetic results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys. 2006 Apr 1;64(5):1410-5. 
32. Xinsheng Cedric Yu YSY, William F. Regine, inve ntor Method and equipment for image guided 
stereotactic radiosurgery of breast cancer. US. 201 0. 
33. Mutaf YD ea. Dosimetric advantage of SBRT in pa rtial breast irradiation using a novel breast speci fic 
stereotactic radiosurgery system – A comparative an alysis. .  European Society for Radiotherapy and On cology; 
2011 May 8-12; London, United Kingdom; 2011. 
34. Feigenberg SJ Yu X, Regine WF. Development of a  Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) System 
Dedicated to the Treatment of Early Stage Breast Ca ncer: The Gammapod International Journal of Radiati on 
Oncology, Biology, Physics 2010;78(3):S208. 
35. Qi XS, White J, Li XA. Is alpha/beta for breast  cancer really low? Radiother Oncol.  Aug;100(2):28 2-8. 
36. Poortmans PM, Collette L, Horiot JC, Van den Bo gaert WF, Fourquet A, Kuten A, et al. Impact of the  
boost dose of 10 Gy versus 26 Gy in patients with e arly stage breast cancer after a microscopically in complete 
lumpectomy: 10-year results of the randomised EORTC  boost trial. Radiother Oncol. 2009 Jan;90(1):80-5.  
37. Goyal S, Khan AJ, Vicini F, Beitsch PD, Lyden M , Keisch M, et al. Factors associated with optimal 
cosmetic results at 36 months in patients treated w ith accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) o n the American 
Society of Breast Surgeons (ASBrS) MammoSite Breast  Brachytherapy Registry Trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009  
Sep;16(9):2450-8. 
38. Khan AJ, Vicini F, Beitsch P, Haffty B, Quiet C , Keleher A, et al. Local control, toxicity, and co smesis in 
women younger than 50 enrolled onto the American So ciety of Breast Surgeons MammoSite Radiation Therap y 
System registry trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009 Jun;16( 6):1612-8. 
 
 
 
 
Version2.3 (Mod#15_07April2017)   
  39. Dragun AE, Harper JL, Jenrette JM, Sinha D, Col e DJ. Predictors of cosmetic outcome following 
MammoSite breast brachytherapy: a single-institutio n experience of 100 patients with two years of foll ow-up. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007 Jun 1;68(2):354-8. 
40. Descovich M, Fowble B, Bevan A, Schechter N, Pa rk C, Xia P. Comparison between hybrid direct apert ure 
optimized intensity-modulated radiotherapy and forw ard planning intensity-modulated radiotherapy for w hole breast 
irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.  Jan 1;7 6(1):91-9. 
41. Donovan E, Bleakley N, Denholm E, Evans P, Goth ard L, Hanson J, et al. Randomised trial of standar d 2D 
radiotherapy (RT) versus intensity modulated radiot herapy (IMRT) in patients prescribed breast radioth erapy. 
Radiother Oncol. 2007 Mar;82(3):254-64. 
42. Pignol JP, Olivotto I, Rakovitch E, Gardner S, Sixel K, Beckham W, et al. A multicenter randomized  trial 
of breast intensity-modulated radiation therapy to reduce acute radiation dermatitis. J Clin Oncol. 20 08 May 
1;26(13):2085-92. 
43. Barnett GC, Wilkinson J, Moody AM, Wilson CB, S harma R, Klager S, et al. A randomised controlled t rial 
of forward-planned radiotherapy (IMRT) for early br east cancer: baseline characteristics and dosimetry  results. 
Radiother Oncol. 2009 Jul;92(1):34-41. 
44. Veronesi U, Orecchia R, Luini A, Galimberti V, Zurrida S, Intra M, et al. Intraoperative radiother apy 
during breast conserving surgery: a study on 1,822 cases treated with electrons. Breast Cancer Res Tre at.  
Nov;124(1):141-51. 
45. Leonardi MC, Ivaldi GB, Santoro L, Lazzari R, F errari A, Morra A, et al. Long-term side effects an d 
cosmetic outcome in a pool of breast cancer patient s treated with intraoperative radiotherapy with ele ctrons as sole 
treatment. Tumori.  May-Jun;98(3):324-30. 
46. Luini A, Orecchia R, Gatti G, Intra M, Ciocca M , Galimberti V, et al. The pilot trial on intraoper ative 
radiotherapy with electrons (ELIOT): update on the results. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Sep;93(1):55 -9. 
47. Simon R. Optimal two-stage designs for phase II  clinical trials. Control Clin Trials. 1989 Mar; 10 (1):1-10 
 
 
GammaPod Bibliography 
 
1. C. Yu et al., GammaPod—A new device dedicated fo r stereotactic radiotherapy of breast cancer . 
Med. Phys. , 40 (5) (2013) 
 
2. Y. Mutaf et al., Dosimetric and geometric evalua tion of a novel stereotactic radiotherapy device fo r 
breast cancer: The GammaPod™. Med. Phys ., 40 (4) (2013) 
 
3. J. Öden et al., Dosimetric comparison between in tra-cavitary breast brachytherapy techniques for 
accelerated partial breast irradiation and a novel stereotactic radiotherapy device for breast cancer:  
GammaPod™ Phys. Med. Biol . 58 (2013) 
 