Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 1 of 15   A pilot randomized crossover trial of cleaning indoor air to reduce acute 
exacerbations of COPD (CARE) study  
 
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  Daniel Croft MD,  MPH1 
Coinvestigators:  David Rich Sc.D3; Anthony Pietropaoli MD, MPH1; Daniel  
Lachant DO1; Mark Frampton MD1; Mark Utell1,4; Phil 
Hopke PhD3; Kelly Thevenet -Morrison3; Sally Thurston 
PhD5 
Study  coordinator:  Carl Johnston, PhD6 Amy  Rovitelli1 
 
1. Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University  of 
Rochester  
2. Division  of Infectious  Disease.  University  of Rochester  Medical  Center,  Rochester, 
New York 
3. Department  of Public  Health  Sciences,  University  of Rochester  Medical  Center, 
Rochester, New  York 
4. Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, New  York 
5. Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of  Rochester, 
Rochester, New  York 
6. Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester, Rochester, New  York 
 
 
Corresponding PI:  
Daniel P. Croft MD, MPH 
University of Rochester Medical Center 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Division 601 Elmwood Avenue Box 692  
Rochester, NY 14642  
Phone: 585 275 4161 Fax: 585 271 1171  
Email:  daniel_croft@urmc.rochester.edu
 
 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 2 of 15   1. Purpose of the  Study : 
Given the importance of indoor air pollution as a contributor to acute exacerbations of 
COPD (AECOPD), we will study the health impact of reducing indoor air pollution in patients with COPD using high- efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration units.  
 
Specifically we will explore whether 2 months of hom e air cleaning with the 
HEPAirX® air filtration system in the living room and bedroom of each subject’s home results in:  
 
1. Improved functional status measured  by: 
a. St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)  and 
b. Daily step counts (measured by Fitbit
® wearable sensor)  
 
2. Reduced levels of systemic inflammation,  
a. Plasma C -reactive protein (CRP) levels as a biomarker  
 
3. Reduced risk for  AECOPD  
a. Using healthcare encounter  data 
 
2. Background:  
B.1. COPD and Indoor air pollution:  Descriptions, sources, and health effects of 
indoor air pollution have been summarized previously.(Weschler 2011; Zhang and Smith 2003) PM 10 
(particles  <10 µm), PM 2.5 (particles  <2.5 µm), ultrafine  particles  (particles  <0.1 µm; UFP) 
as well as gaseous pollutants including carbon monoxide (CO), volatile organic compounds (VOC), and ozone (O
3), among many other pollutants, are found  indoors.  
All of these particulate and gaseous pollutants are either emitted from an indoor source (e.g. cooking, other open flames, or leaks in the home heating system), are secondary products of pollutants emitted indoors, or directly infiltrate from outside.
(Li and Hopke 1991) 
While all these pollutants can contribute to AECOPD, the size of the particle pollutants (PM
10, PM 2.5 and UFP) determines how deep in the respiratory tract particles can 
penetrate, with PM 10 depositing in the trachea causing, PM 2.5 reaching the alveoli and 
UFP entering the systemic circulation.(Pope and Dockery 2006) 
Both filtration of particles (e.g. PM 10, PM 2.5, and UFP) and ventilation with outdoor air to 
reduce gaseous pollutant concentrations have been shown to improve human health and functional status.
(Fisk and Brunner 2012; Fisk 2013; Seppanen and Fisk 2004) The HEPAirX filtration 
and ventilation device is a trademarked, patented (U.S. Patent # 7,802,443), U.S. FDA approved Class II medical re- circulating air cleaner, built by Air Innovations, Inc. (North 
Syracuse, NY). We have previously shown it to be proficient in reducing levels of 
several gaseous pollutants (via ventilation) and PM (vi a filtration); (see Preliminary 
evidence section for a full description of the HEPAirX).  
 
B.2. Indoor air pollution and inflammation:  Both local (pulmonary) and systemic 
inflammation play key roles in airways diseases such as COPD. We and others have extensivel y assessed airway inflammation during air pollution studies 
(Huang et al. 2012; AP 
Pietropaoli et al. 2004; Zuurbier et al. 2011) and in COPD patients specifically have shown airway 
inflammation following increases in air pollution concentration over the previous  
days.(Adamkiewicz et al. 2004; A Pietropaoli et al. 2004) Air pollution also appears to induce systemic  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 3 of 15   inflammation. (Brook et al. 2010; Croft et al. 2017) Plasma C -reactive protein (CRP) is a 
measure of systemic inflammation , and  is an acute phase protein known to increase 
in the hours and days following an inflammatory stimulus. Persistently increased CRP 
after an AECOPD has been previously associated with an increased risk for recurrent AECOPD 
(Perera et al. 2007) and increased mortality from COPD.(Leuzzi et al. 2017) While the 
clinical significance of reducing CRP levels in COPD patients following AECOPD is not established, decreased systemic inflammation related to decreased levels of indoor air pollution is expected to lower the risk for recurrent  AECOPD.  
 
B.3. Impaired functional status:  Pulmonary and systemic inflammation contribute 
to the characteristic findings of AECOPD including increased respiratory symptoms of cough, sputum production, dyspnea and reduced functional status (defined as an inability to perform daily activities, fulfill usual roles, and maintain well - 
being).
(Perera et al. 2007; Society 2013) The St. Georges Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) is an 
established, clinically relevant measure of respiratory symptoms,  activity level, and 
impacts on daily life, and is a measure of functional status regularly used and validated in COPD patient populations.
(Jones et al. 1992) The questionnaire is a fixed format 50 item 
survey completed by the study subject asking questions in three parts: 1) levels of symptomatology including frequency (over the course of a week) of wheezing, cough, sputum production, and breathlessness, including the duration of episodes of wheeze and breathlessness, 2) physical activities (e.g. housework) that may be caused or are limited by breathlessness, and 3) impacts of these symptoms (e.g. employment, inhaler/medication needs, panic, disturbances of daily life, etc.). It is a self -assessment 
of respiratory symptoms and functional status, and provides a quantification of the impacts of airflow limitation on health and well -being. Previously, in a study of severe 
COPD patients, increased indoor residential PM
2.5 concentrations were associated with 
impaired functional status measured by the SGRQ.(Osman et al.  2007) 
Consumer level wearable sensors are increasingly being used in clinical trials for mobility and functional status outcomes.
(Izmailova et al. 2017) We will use a Fitbit® brand step 
counter as a secondary measure of functional status, due to its  superior performance to 
other devices in an observational study examining patients’ movement after AECOPD.
(Prieto -Centurion et al. 2016) 
 
C. Significance, Impact and Anticipated  Outcomes  
This pilot study is significant and likely to have a high impact on URMC and its clinical 
treatment of COPD patients for several reasons. First, if we show that indoor air cleaning improves functional status, reduces systemic inflammation as well as the number of AECOPD encounters, we will provide an easy to use, relatively inexpensive treatment option that URMC and other medical facilities can use to protect their COPD patients against air pollution mediated health effects and hospital re-admissions. Second, having fewer hospital re- admissions for these COPD patients would reduce 
the treatment expenses of medical facilities such as the URMC providing their clinical care. Given the need of the URMC and other medical facilities to reduce their risk - 
adjusted 30- day COPD hospital re- admission rate to <20% or else face financial 
penalties from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), this study is particularly timely. Third, if we find that indoor air cleaning protects COPD patients from AECOPD and/or improves their functional status, then a larger NIH funded study  to 
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 4 of 15   confirm these findings, investigate pathophysiologic mechanisms, and examine whether 
specific components of pollutant mixtures are driving any health response(s) will be 
warranted.  
However, if we find that air cleaning using the HEPAirX does not reduce AECOPD and/or improve functional status in these COPD patients, then other in- home strategies 
to reduce COPD patients’ exposures to indoor air pollution may need to be investigated. For example, more comprehensive whole home filtration and air  cleaning 
systems (which arguably would be much more expensive than the 2 air cleaners/home we will study here) could be installed in the homes of COPD patients to protect them from indoor air pollution exposure. Other options for these COPD patients upon initial 
hospital discharge may also need to be considered, including social work assistance to consider different residential locations in areas with lower levels of indoor and outdoor air pollutants and second hand smoke exposure.  
 
D. HEPAirX Air Cleaning System. The second 
generation HEPAirX integrated energy recovery ventilator and air cleaner ( Figure 1 ) improves on older 
and other current devices through combined high- efficiency f iltration (reduced particles) and ventilation 
(reduced gaseous pollutants). It is a trademarked, patented (U.S. Patent # 7,802,443), U.S. FDA approved Class II medical re- circulating air cleaner, 
built by Air Innovations, Inc. (North Syracuse, NY) to provi de improved indoor air quality in the bedrooms of 
asthmatic children. The device is being used in the current study in the FDA -approved manner. Units to be 
used in the proposed study have a 99.97% efficient filter for particles 0.3 µm in size. The device provides  a 
clean air delivery rate (CADR) of 9 per hour with 1.8 of them being outdoor air. Using the 
initial version of this system, mounted in bedroom windows, we reduced PM 10, CO, 
CO 2, and VOC concentrations in the bedrooms, decreased pulmonary inflammation, 
and improved pulmonary function in pediatric asthma patients .(Xu et al. 2009) Using the 
second- generation units we again substantially improved air quality in bedrooms  (CO:  
-55%, VOC: - 59% and PM10: -54%) with the HEPAirX  system in full operation (unit 
on) compared to the placebo mode (unit on, but no filtration or ventilation). In this 
study, a placebo mode was added to the HEPAirX to provide only recirculation (without filtration or ventilation using outdoor air) and temperature control of the room air. This 
same placebo mode of the second generation device, which allows a comparison of health effects associated with air filtration and ventilation and the expected pollutant reductions will be used in our proposed  study.  
The HEPAirX device fits into a standard double hung window (Figure 2) and provides the 
heating or cooling required to maintain a constant, comfortable room temperature. A built - 
in air -to-air heat exchanger captures the energy in the exhaust air to pre- cond ition the 
incoming outside air. Please see the letter from Michael Wetzel (CEO: Air Innovations; Manufacturer of HEPAirX) for his support of this study, and the provision of 20 HEPAirX air cleaning devices at no cost other than the HEPA filters used during  the study.  
Figure 1. HEPAirX i ntegrated energy 
recovery ventilator and air cleaner 
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 5 of 15    
3.1. Study Population . We will recruit a total of 20 adult (≥18 years of age) men and 
women with severe COPD (forced expiratory volume (FEV1) < 50%), who live in Monroe 
County (New York), have completed pulmonary rehabilitation for over 1 month, and have suffered from an AECOPD in the past year.  
 
Number of Subjects:  
We will enroll a total of 20 patients in our study who have completed pulmonary rehabilitation in Monroe County, New York.  
 
Gender of Subjects: There are no restrictions on gender for this study with approximately 
60% of subjects expected to be female.  
 
Age of Subjects: All adults over the age of 18 will be included in the study with the 
average age of subjects enrolled expected to be around 65 years old.  
 
Racial and et hnic origin: There are no restrictions on race/ethnicity for participation in the 
study. We anticipate enrollment demographics in the study will be similar to our clinic population, of which 85% of patients are white, 10% African American, and 5% from other groups.  
 
Inclusion criteria: We will prospectively recruit a total of 20 adult (≥18 years of age) men 
and women with severe COPD (FEV1 < 50%), who live in Monroe County, have completed pulmonary rehabilitation (over 1 month since completion), and have su ffered from an 
AECOPD in the past year. Subjects must have standard sized windows in their bedroom and living room amenable to installation of the HEPAirX
® device. All subjects must also 
expect to sleep each night of the 4 months (2 months of Period 1, and 2 months of period  
2) in either their bedroom or living room for at least 6 hours/night, and not use other air filtering devices during the study.  
 
Exclusion criteria: Exclusion criteria include subjects who are under age 18 and do not 
meet the inclusion criteria as defined above. Exclusion criteria include subjects under age 18, those who were smoking at the time of their prior COPD exacerbation, current smokers, those who live with an active smoker, homes with wood burning appliances, patients on chronic  systemic corticosteroids (>3 months continuous use in past 1 months), 
those who are planning to move in the next 12 months, those with an occupation that has a high pollutant exposure (e.g. professional drivers), those who already have a home air filtration device(other than basic furnace filter) and those who do not meet the inclusion criteria as defined above.  
 
Vulnerable subjects: We do not plan to enroll vulnerable subjects.  
 
Discussion of subject population: We plan to enroll patients who have disease severe 
enough that an intervention of indoor air quality may benefit their health in a perceivable (Aims 1 -3) way. This population is also more mobile than a homebound population making 
it safer/less disruptive to travel for blood draws at the University.  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 6 of 15   4. Subject ID, Recruitment and  Consent:  
We will enroll eligible patients (severe COPD and exacerbation history) who have 
completed the University of Rochester Pulmonary Rehabilitation program over 1 month prior to enrollment into  our study.  Contact will be made by telephone to determine their 
level of interest by the PI or coordinator of the study (Croft or Johnston). For those expressing a desire to participate during that phone call, potential subjects will be scheduled to come in to review  the study in more detail.  Once the study has been 
reviewed with the subject in detail and all of their questions have been answered, written informed consent will be obtained by a study team member before the study procedures begin. All subjects will hav e capacity to consent for themselves. Subjects will be provided 
with a copy of the signed consent form for their records. Please see attached consent form for full  details.  
 
 
 
   
 
5. Study  Activities  
 
Summary of Project Methods and Study Procedures  
We propose a double- blind, randomized crossover trial (both study participant and 
clinical staff are blinded to randomized group) to assess whether 2 months of bedroom and 
living room air cleaning, in the homes of COPD patients with AECOPD in the past year, improves functional status, lowers systemic inflammation, and decreases the risk for 
AECOPD when compared to a 2 month period using a ‘sham filter’ (i.e. placebo mode  

Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 7 of 15   described above). Descriptions of our study population, protocol and statist ical analyses 
are provided below.  
E.1. Study Population. We will recruit a total of 20 adult (≥18 years of age) men and 
women with severe COPD (FEV1 < 50%), who live in Rochester, NY, have completed 
pulmonary rehabilitation, and have suffered from an AECOP D in the past year. E.2. Health 
Outcomes . Our primary endpoints  will be the symptom score from the St. George’s 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ; marker of functional status) described above in Section  
B.3 and the average daily count of steps taken using a Fitbit® brand wearable sensor (Aim 
1). Our secondary endpoints  are Plasma CRP measurements (Aim 2) and healthcare 
contacts for AECOPD (Aim 3). The subjects will wear the Fitbit® watch around their wrist 
during  waking hours,  which  will automatically  collect  the daily count  of steps  and report  this 
electronically to the research team via a secure account (Described below). The subjects will travel to the URMC lab at the specified time (described below) to have their plasma CRP  drawn.  
E.3. Study Protocol . We will condu ct a randomized, blinded, crossover trial, where 
each of the 20 total subjects will be randomly assigned to Group A (Period 1 = 8 weeks of 
filtration/ventilation mode, 3 week washout period, Period 2 = 8 weeks of placebo mode 
[device runs but no filtration/ventilation]) or Group B (Period 1 = 8 weeks of placebo mode, 
3 week washout period, Period 2 = 8 weeks of filtration/ventilation mode). Subjects will be 
blinded to which group they are randomly assigned, and only staff installing and monitoring the HEPAi rX device and air pollution monitoring equipment, and not staff collecting or 
analyzing health outcomes, will know the assigned group. In the placebo mode of operation, the HEPAirX unit operates in exactly the same way (i.e. will look and sound the same), but it does not filter air to remove particles or have outdoor air exchanges to reduce 
gaseous pollutants. With 20 HEPAirX machines available and 2 required per subject, the timing of enrollment will be split into 2 groups of 10 patients (Two 19 week  periods).  
After getting informed consent from each study participant, we will schedule the 1st 
home visit within 2 weeks. Once consent to participate in the study has been obtained, we will provide subjects with:  
• Five simple indoor air quality monitors which the subject will plug into an electrical 
outlet and set on a tabletop in a low traffic area of their living room and bedroom.  
• Subjects will also be given a Fitbit
® activity tracker at this time, which will be worn on 
their wrist during waking  hours.  
• Subjects will also be given a smartphone to use for syncing the Fitbit  watch 
(charged every 4 days as  well).  
Period 1: (First 8 week intervention: Either filtering/ventilation mode or sham mode): Subjects will visit the main URMC lab to have plasma CRP drawn (Blood Draw 1 of 4, 
perform a 6 minute walk test with their Fit Bit and wearable sensors.  Study staff will then 
visit the subject’s home, check on the indoor air quality pollution monitors, and install and 
turn the HEPAirX
® devices “On” to start Period 1 ( Visit 1 ). At this time (Visit 1) the subjects 
will complete the SGRQ (survey 1 of 5) . Washout Period: After 8 weeks of either filtration 
or placebo operation, the subject will have another blood draw for CRP at our URMC lab 
(2 of 4), perform a 6 minute walk test with their Fit Bit and wearable sensors  and study 
staff will return ( Visit  
2) to turn off the two devices for a 3 week Washout period. A SGRQ will also be 
administered at this time (Survey 2 of 5). This 3 week period was included to ensure that the Pre- filtering Period 2 health measurements are not impacted by the Period 1
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 8 of 15   filtration/ventilation. While previous studies suggest a 1 week  washout is adequate for PM 
and other pollutant levels to return to baseline levels, we chose a 3 week washout period to 
ensure that the subjects’ functional status will also return to baseline levels.  
Period 2: (Second 8 week intervention): After the washout period, the subject will again 
have drawn at our URMC lab (Blood Draw 3 of 4), perform a 6 minute walk test with their 
Fit Bit and wearable sensors  and they will complete another SGRQ (Survey 3 of 5). Study 
staff will then return to the subject’s home ( Visit 3 ) to change the HEPAirX® device to the 
appropriate setting depending on the subjects’ Group (A or B).  
After 8 weeks of operation, staff will return to the subject’s home (Visit 4) to retrieve the 
HEPAirX® device, Fitbit® activity tracker, smartphone and air quality monitor. At this time, 
another SGRQ will be administered (Survey 4 of 5) and the subject will also submit their final blood sample for CR P (Blood Draw 4 of 4), perform a 6 minute walk test with their Fit 
Bit and wearable sensors. The subject will complete their final survey (Survey 5 of 5) three months after Visit 4 (week 31), concluding the study.  
Each subject will receive a total of $620 in personal checks (over the course of the study) to offset electricity costs to run the HEPAirX
®  and costs for travel to URMC for blood 
draws. Checks will be given at each home visit for the portions of the study completed at 
that time point. Leftover blood from CRP analysis will be stored for the duration of the study 
and banked for future analysis, which will include the possibility for genetic analysis (See 
Blood collection section below for details). During the two eight week blocks, we will check in by phone 4 weeks into the study to make sure no problems have arisen and will be 
available to visit the home as needed during this  period.  
To keep the subject blinded with regard to mode of the HEPAirX
® during Periods 1 and 
2 (i.e. Filtration mode or Placebo mode), the device will be sealed to prevent the subject from opening it. Further, with or without the filter, there are no differences in temperature control, air flow (device still conducts 9 air changes per hour, recirculating indoor air without fil tering or ventilating with outside air), or noise. Subjects will keep the device 
running constantly during both 8 week intervention periods, with temperature being the one variable the subject can control. We can determine its usage using an elapsed time m eter 
on each unit. Subjects will keep a time- activity diary, particularly noting when cooking or 
cleaning occurs and when they are in the bedroom. This diary will also include instances of when patients feel symptoms of upper or lower respiratory infection (sinus congestion, 
runny nose, cough, increased sputum  production)  
PROTOCOL (METHODS AND PROCEDURES)  
We will record patient information from the medical record into a secure database after the patient has given written informed consent.  
1) Blood Collection:  Blood will be collected from a peripheral vein at the URMC lab 
(10mL total) using their standard technique to assess (1) plasma for CRP measurements (5ml) at the aforementioned intervals and 2) separate tube (5ml) of blood will be drawn for storage and may  be used for genetic analysis. This 
blood will be stored (banked) for future analysis under a separate RSRB protocol  
(#00004357).  
 
2) Home Activity Monitoring:  We will ask participants to wear a wristband step 
counter (FitBit®; Wavelet health, Mountain View, Ca) while at home which will 
measure continuous activity in the form of steps. It will also collect data on heart  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 9 of 15   rate which will also be a proxy for activity. Participants will be dispensed a 
wristband (and charger) to wear at home for the entire study period. This Fitbit® 
will be synced to our secure tablet computer at the home visit intervals and we 
will access the data on the secure web- based portal. We will manage the 
accounts for each Fitbit®, but the subjects will have temporary access  to the 
accounts. Subjects will be provided with a smartphone which will have only Wi - 
Fi capabilities and the Fitbit app installed. Subjects will sync their Fitbit with this device on a weekly basis. In this case, the wristband uploads the data to the app  
through blue tooth technology and ultimately onto a secure HIPAA compliant cloud. Subjects will be given the charging cord and instructed to charge the Fitbit
® 
device every 7 days. When the study is complete, the FitBit® and smartphone will 
be collected at the final home visit. If the patient is not able to coordinate this data collection, we will help them sync their watch during home visits and will be available to help as needed through the study.  
 
3) Home air quality  monitoring 
The simple corded air quality monitors (for particles and CO 2, provided once 
consent has been obtained, will be placed in the subjects’ home and will take continuous measurements over the course of the study. This will be checked at the midpoint of the study and collected at the conclusion of the study. The monitors, will be sent to AirViz so they can extract the anonymized raw data from the air quality monitors and review the information captured to ensure data quality. Once QA review is complete, the data will be forwarded to us for our research analysis at the end of the study. AirViz Inc. will not receive any information that identifies the subjects, nor will they take part in analyzing or interpreting the results of the air quality data. Furthermore, after removal from subject ho mes, the 
filters from the HEPAirX
® devices will be retained (not discarded) and will be used 
in a future analysis with links retained to subject ID and current study  outcomes.  
 
4) Clinical Data Collection. The patients will receive standard of care diagnostic  
testing and treatment throughout the period of the study. We will collect  relevant data to the evaluation and ongoing management of COPD into a secure, web-based data portal. We will maintain identifying information so that we could later add to the database as new diagnostic testing or new insights relevant to old diagnostic testing become available.  
 
5) Subject Withdrawals : This is described to the participant in the consent form. 
Subjects can withdraw at any point in the trial. If the subject withdraws pr ior to the 
installation of the air quality monitor, they will be replaced by another participant.  
 
6) Additional community resources: If agreeable, patients will be able to consent to 
having their name released to our partners in Community Health who will contact them to consider whether they are eligible to participate in the Rochester Healthy Homes  Partnership,  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 10 of 15    
6. Risks and  Benefits: 
Risks: This study is minimal risk, as we are simply implementing an intervention that will 
clean the indoor air of  our subjects. The blood draws will impose a small amount of 
physical pain to the subject. The activity monitor is a noninvasive device worn around the 
wrist. The SGRQ should have minimal risk for psychological stress. For the outcome of measuring exacerbations, we will be using already existing information on these patients located in the medical record. There is a small risk of loss of confidentiality and a small risk of loss of privacy due to our accessing of your identifiable information including lab w ork 
and our entry into your home for installation of the indoor air cleaners.   Please see our data storage and confidentiality plan for our methods to protect against these potential losses of confidentiality and privacy. Having an indoor air cleaner may expose the subjects to the stress of thinking of the dangers of indoor air  quality  
 
Benefits: There will be at most a transient benefit to the individual subjects. 
Compensation  
 
Payment to Subjects  
Each subject will receive a total of $580  in the form o f a check to offset electricity costs to 
run the HEPAirX and travel for blood draws.  
 
1. Compensation for driving to the lab (using a compensation of $0.565 per mile with a uniform estimate of 30 miles travel for each of  4 CRP):  $ 80 per study 
subject  
2. Comp ensation for scheduled home visits: $25 per visit = $100 per study  subject  
3. Compensation for energy costs: $400 for  study  = $400 per study subject 
Total compensation per  subject  = $580 
 
 
Costs to Subjects  
There is a possible risk that the energy costs from the use of HEPAirX device will exceed the energy cost estimated by our technical team. To help protect subjects from this additional cost, we will have subjects submit their prior month’s utility bill to help with estimation. We will be able to provide reasonable additional compensation to the subjects.  
 
7. Data Storage and  Confidentiality:  
 
Any confidential and private data will be protected and stored in a separate dataset at the University of Rochester in specified and protected locations (protected institutional SMDNAS drive of Dr. Daniel Croft), distinct from the main analysis dataset. The data from the air quality monitoring device within the home will only be collected at the end of each of 
the two periods (whether filter or placebo). At the end of the study, these air quality data will be aggregated and sent to the analyst Kelly Thevenet -Morrison study in a blinded 
fashion. Similarly the Fitbit monitoring data will be downloaded from the devices at leas t at 
the end of each period (though patients will be syncing data throughout the study every 4 days). The Fitbit username and password will be managed by the investigators (Daniel Croft, Carl Johnston and Sanjna Prasad). For blinding purposes, the identify ing information 
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 11 of 15   indicating the order of intervention will be located in a separate password protected file and 
will be managed by Kelly Thevenet -Morrison. Other than files with personal health 
information which will be password protected on the secure SMDNAS drive of the Principal 
Investigator Dr. Daniel Croft with access granted to, Dr. David Rich, Mrs. Kelly Thevenet - 
Morrison (analyst/programmer), Dr. Carl Johnston, Sanjna Prasad, Amy Rovitelli and Dr.  
Philip Hopke only. Also, we will utili ze the date/time of any possible hospital admission 
and/or date/time of emergency department evaluation for COPD exacerbations to use in matching specific date/times of air pollution measurements. Identifying information will be retained for future analyses. 
 
8. Data  Analysis:  
 
E.4. Statistical Analysis. We will generate descriptive statistics for each subject, 
indoor air pollutant concentrations during each filtering/placebo mode session, and our main outcomes in Aim 1- Aim 3 (Aim 1: SGRQ symptom score and average daily step 
count; Aim 2: plasma level of CRP; Aim 3: number of healthcare encounters for  AECOPD), 
comparing the change in each between the filtration and placebo groups. Given the crossover design, each subject will serve as their own control. Our statistical analyses are described below.  
We will fit a random effects ANOVA model regressing the 8- week (Post -filtering SGRQ 
score (Aim 1) against the Pre- filtering SGRQ score, period (‘Period 1’ versus ‘Period 2’), 
and filtering mode (‘filter/ventilation mode’ versus ‘placebo mode’). If necessary, we will transform both post -filtering and pre- filtering SGRQ score to better satisfy model 
assumptions. Subjects will contribute two observations to the analysis and subjects will be included as random effects, recogniz ing correlations due to repeated measures on the 
same subject. Filtering mode will test whether the ‘filtration/ventilation mode’ produced a significant effect on subsequent SGRQ score than the ‘placebo mode’. Next, the final survey 3 months after the 19 week intervention period concludes will be compared to survey 4 to explore the duration of observed changes. We expect that in view of the “washout period” between Period 1 and Period 2, there will be no carry -over of the effect of 
the intervention in Period 1 on the results for Period 2. Including period in the model allows us to assess the plausibility of this assumption. This same analysis used for Aim 1 will also be used for Aim 2, plasma CRP.  
We will repeat the random effects ANOVA model, regressing the 8 week in Fitbit® 
measured average daily step count (Aim 1) (Post -filtering average daily step count) against 
the Pre- filtering average daily step count, period and filtering mode. Specifically the 
intervals selected for this analysis will be the week pri or to Phase 1 compared to the final 
week of Phase 1 and the final week of the washout period compared with the final week of Phase 2. Indoor PM2.5 concentration will be analyzed similarly with the ANOVA model and will also use these same time intervals. We  will repeat the random effects ANOVA model 
for average resting heart rate at the same time intervals.  
 
For Aim 3, the number of healthcare encounters for AECOPD, we will fit a Poisson 
regression of the number of COPD exacerbations in 8 weeks as a function of filtering mode 
(Filtering versus Placebo) and period. Should there be very few healthcare encounters, instead we will use a logistic regression to model whether there were any healthcare encounters. This model will allow us to evaluate the impact of fi ltering model on healthcare  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 12 of 15   encounters, while adjusting for period (e.g. Group A (Filtration followed by Placebo) or 
Group B (Placebo followed by Filtration) to determine if the order of intervention affected 
the outcome). Next we will compar e healthcare encounters for AECOPD at the 3 month 
follow up period with Phase 2 outcomes in a similar way. Since this is a pilot study, power calculations are not provided, and effect estimates from the regression analyses described above will be used as preliminary data in an application for a larger, adequately powered R01 funded study.  
 
Post hoc analyses:  
1. Autonomic function: In addition to average resting heart rate, we will determine if  the 
data are robust enough to calculate heart rate variability.  
2. Genetic response: As mentioned, the stored blood may be used in a future analysis on the genetic response to air pollution related to respiratory  outcomes  
3. Particle Chemistry: The particles on the filters will be analyzed in the future for composition and potentially even included in cell exposure studies to determine the 
mechanistic impact of the pollutants.  
 
SAFETY AND REPORTABLE EVENTS  
Adverse Event Definition  
An adverse event is any symptom, sign, illness, or experience, which develops or worsens during the course of the study, whether or not the event is considered related to study 
drug.  
 
Serious Adverse Event  
A serious adverse event is defined as any adverse medical experience that results in any of the following outcomes:  
• death;  
• is life-threatening;  
• requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing  hospitalization;  
• results in persistent or significant  disability/incapacity;  
• is a congenital anomaly/birth defect;  or 
• requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment or 
damage.  
 
Recording Adverse Events  
At each subject visit the site study staff will assess adverse events by recording all voluntary complaints of the subject and by assessment of clinical and laboratory features. At each study visit, the subject should be questioned directly regarding the occurrence of any adverse experience since his/her last visit.  
 
While the subject is enrolled in the study, all adverse events, whether observed by the Investigator, elicited from or volunteered by the subject, should be documented. Each adverse event will include a brief description of the experience, the date of onset, the date of resolution, the duration and type of experience, the severity, and the relationship to any of the study procedures or devices, contributing factors, and any action taken with respect to the study procedures.  
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 13 of 15    
Responsibilities for Reporting Serious Adverse Events  
The Investigator will record all serious adverse experiences that occur during the study 
period in the appropriate source documents and/or AE log as applicable from the time of signing consent to final study visit. The Investigator will also comply with regulations and RSRB policy regarding the reporting of adverse events.  
 
 
9. References:  
 
1. Adamkiewicz G, Ebelt S, Syring M, Sl ater J, Speizer FE, Schwartz J, et al. 2004. 
Association between air pollution exposure and exhaled nitric oxide in an elderly population. Thorax  59:204- 209. 
2. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA, 3rd, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez -Roux AV,  et 
al. 2010. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: An update to the scientific statement from the american heart association. Circulation 121:2331- 2378.  
3. Croft DP, Cameron SJ, Morrell CN, Lowenstein CJ, Ling F, Zareba W, et al.  2017. 
Associations between ambient wood smoke and other particulate pollutants and biomarkers of systemic inflammation, coagulation and thrombosis in cardiac patients. Environ Res  154:352- 361. 
4. Fisk WB, Brunner G. 2012. Changing ventilation rates in u.S.  Offices: Implications 
for health, work performance, energy, and associated economics. Building and Environment  47:368- 372. 
5. Fisk WJ. 2013. Health benefits of particle filtration. Indoor air  23:357 -368. 
6. Huang W, Wang G, Lu SE, Kipen H, Wang Y, Hu M, et al. 2012. Inflammatory and oxidative stress responses of healthy young adults to changes in air quality during the beijing olympics. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 186:1150- 1159.  
7. Izmailova ES, Wagner JA, Perakslis  ED. 2017. Wearable devices in clinical trials: 
Hype and hypothesis. Clinical Pharmacology &  Therapeutics.  
8. Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM, Littlejohns P. 1992. A self -complete measure 
of health status for chronic airflow limitation. The st. George's res piratory 
questionnaire. Am Rev Respir Dis  145:1321- 1327.  
9. Leuzzi G, Galeone C, Taverna F, Suatoni P, Morelli D, Pastorino U. 2017. C- 
reactive protein level predicts mortality in copd: A systematic review and meta - 
analysis. Eur Respir Rev  26. 
10. Li CS, Hopke PK. 1991. Efficacy of air cleaning systems in controlling indoor  radon 
decay products. Health Phys  61:785- 797. 
11. Osman LM, Douglas JG, Garden C, Reglitz K, Lyon J, Gordon S, et al. 2007. Indoor air quality in homes of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  176:465- 472. 
12. Perera WR, Hurst JR, Wilkinson TM, Sapsford RJ, Mullerova H, Donaldson GC, et al. 2007. Inflammatory changes, recovery and recurrence at copd exacerbation.  Eur 
Respir J  29:527- 534. 
13. Pietropaoli A, Frampton  MW, Oberdorster G, Cox C, Huang L- S, Marder V, et al. 
2004. 
Blood markers of coagulation and inflammation in healthy human subjects  exposed 
to carbon ultrafine particles. In: Effects of air contaminants on the respiratory tract  - 
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 14 of 15   interpretat ions from molecular to meta analysis, (Heinrich U, ed). Stuttgart, 
Germany:NIS Monographs, Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, 181- 194. 
14. Pietropaoli AP, Frampton MW, Hyde RW, Morrow PE, Oberdorster G, Cox C, et  al. 
2004. Pulmonary function, diffusing capacity, and inflammation in healthy and 
asthmatic subjects exposed to ultrafine particles. Inhal Toxicol 16 Suppl  1:59- 72. 
15. Pope CA, 3rd, Dockery DW. 2006. Health effects of fine particulate air pollution: 
Lines that connect. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 56:709 - 
742. 
16. Prieto -Centurion V, Bracken N, Norwick L, Zaidi F, Mutso AA, Morken V, et al. 2016. 
Can commercially available pedometers be used for physical activity monitoring in patients with  copd following exacerbations? Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Diseases: Journal of the COPD Foundation 3:636- 642. 
17. Seppanen OA, Fisk WJ. 2004. Summary of human responses to ventilation. Indoor Air 14 Suppl  7:102- 118. 
18. Society AT. 2013. Functional status. Avai lable:  http://qol.thoracic.org/sections/key -
 
concepts/functional -status.html  2013]. 
19. Weschler CJ. 2011. Chemistry in indoor environments: 20 years of research.  Indoor 
Air 21:205- 218. 
20. Xu Y, Raja S, Ferro AR, Jaques PA, Hopke PK, Gressani C, et al. 2009. Effectiveness of hvac/hepa unit on iaq and asthmatic children’s health. Building  and 
Environment  45:330- 337. 
21. Zhang J, Smith KR. 2003. Indoor air pollution: A global health concern. Br Med Bull 68:209- 225. 
22. Zuurbier M, Hoek G, Oldenwening M, Meliefste K, van den Hazel P, Brunekreef B. 2011. Respiratory effects of commuters' exposure to air pollution in traffic. 
Epidemiology  22:219- 227. 
Version Date: 18Dec2019  Page 15 of 15   Appendix: Data collection form  
Study Number 
Sex 
Age Race Ethnicity  
Home Address  
Comorbidities (OSA, sinus, DM, CHF, COPD, CRF) Smoking  
Vaccines  
FEV1 Forced expiratory volume FVC Forced vital capacity 
FEV1/FVC ratio  
DLCO (diffusion capacity) TLC (total lung capacity) Inhalers  
Inhaled steroid use 
Systemic steroid use 
Chronic Azithromycin Use 
 
Number of hospitalizations in past year Home O2 use (in Liters)  
CPAP/BiPAP use at night Statin use  
Sympt oms (i.e. Cough, shortness of breath)  
 
SGRQ baseline SGRQ Period 1 end SGRQ Period 2 start SGRQ Period 2 end  
SGRQ 3 months from the end of period 2  
 
CRP at baseline  
CRP Period 1 Week 1 CRP Period 1 end CRP Period 2 start CRP Period 2 week CRP Period 2 end  
 
Exacerbation count end of period 2 Time to exacerbation  
Exacerbation count at 3 months from period 2 