 1  
 
This document  was prepared by the  investigators  to provide supplemental protocol and statistical 
methods  details regarding  the randomized clinical trial registered under Study Registry ID: [REMOVED].  
 
History of Modifications  
Modification on Oct 1, 2013: To assure that Best Practices were implemented, a decision was made to 
have study staff make initial and follow -up referrals of all trial participants in the Best Practices and 
Best Practices +Financial Incentives conditions to  the Vermont Quitline rather than train referring 
physicians to make those referrals.  
 
Modification on August 15, 2019: In light of evolving guidance on the risk -benefits of breastfeeding 
among women continuing to smoke, we decided to expand our analyses o f breastfeeding to also 
include the percent breastfeeding while sustaining smoking abstinence.   
 
Modification on January 23, 2020:  We replaced proposed low -birth weight as a birth outcome with 
small -for-gestational -age (<10th percentile) deliveries to reduce potential confounding with differences 
in gestational age based on information provided in the 2020 U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Smoking Cessation: A Report of the Surgeon General . U.S. Department of Healt h and 
Human Services, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office of Smoking and Health, 2020.  
 
Modification on September 1, 2021.  In completing the cost -effectiveness analys es we made updates to 
reflect guidelines and data sources published since our protocol was originally reviewed by funders 
 2 and local IRB in 2013.  Our final analyses follow recommendations published in 2016 from the Second 
U.S. Panel on Cost -Effectiveness in Heal th and Medicine (Neumann et al. Cost-effectiveness in Health 
and Medicine, 2nd edition.  New York: Oxford University Press. 2017).  They state that cost -
effectiveness analyses should include a provider and/or public payer perspective to better inform 
produc ers and payers about the intervention’s costs of adoption.  In updating our data sources, we 
incorporated methods used in the only other cost -effectiveness analysis in the peer -reviewed literature 
on the use of abstinence -contingent financial incentives wi th pregnant women who smoke (Boyd et al. 
Are financial incentives cost -effective to support smoking cessation during pregnancy. Addiction . 
2016; 1111(2): 360 -70).  More specifically, we adopted their method of translating smoking abstinence 
into QALY gains , which permits QALYs to be derived directly from data available in the trial based 
on “absolute difference percent” (ADP) (see Stapleton JA, West R. A direct method and ICER tables 
for the estimation of the cost -effectiveness of smoking cessation interven tions in general populations: 
applications to a new cystine trial and other examples. Nicotine Tob Res . 2012. 14(4): 463 -71).  
 
The protocol information provided below is what the local Institutional Review Board approved  for 
this randomized clinical trial  comparing Best Practices, Best Practices +Financial Incentives, and 
Never Smokers .   
 
  
 3 Table of Contents  
Content          Page Number  
 
Project Summary :……………………………….. ………………………………………….……4  
Research Design and Methods :……………………………………………………………….. .....6 
Statistical Methods :………………………………………………………………… …………… 13 
Protection of Human Subjects :………………………………………………………………… ...19 
References:……………………………………………………………………………………….. 26 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 4 Project Summary  
Smoking during pregnancy is the leading preventable cause of poor pregnancy outcomes in the U.S. 
Most  pregnant smokers continue smoking through pregnancy producing serious immediate and longer -
term adverse  health consequences for the infant. Smoking during pregnancy is highly associated with 
economic  disadvantage and a substantive contributor to health disparities.  Efficacious interventions are 
available, but cessation rates are low (< 15%) and improvements in birth  outcomes often modest or 
absent. Current treatments usually entail relativ ely brief, low -cost interventions  (e.g., pregnancy -
specific  quitlines). There is broad consensus that more effective interventions are sorely  needed. We 
have developed a novel behavioral  economic  intervention in which women earn financial  incentives 
contin gent on smoking abstinence. In a meta -analysis  of treatments for smoking during pregnancy,  
effect sizes achieved with financial incentives were severalfold  larger than those achieved with lower  
intensity  approaches or medications. The intervention also appears to improve birth outcomes and 
increase  breastfeeding duration. While highly promising, further research is needed in at least three 
areas. (1) The  evidence on birth outcomes and breastfeeding is from studies that combined data acr oss 
trials rather than a  single prospective trial, (2) whether the intervention produces other postpartum 
improvements in health has not  been investigated, and (3) the overall cost  effectiveness  of this 
approach has not been examined.  To examine these unan swered questions, we are proposing a 
randomized, controlled clinical trial  comparing the efficacy and cost  effectiveness through one -year 
postpartum of current best practices for  smoking  cessation  during pregnancy vs. best practices plus 
financial incentiv es among 230 pregnant,  Medicaid recipients. We will also include a third condition of 
115 pregnant nonsmokers  matched to the  smokers on sociodemographic  and health conditions to 
compare the extent to which the treatments reduce  the burden of smoking and to  estimate how much 
more might be accomplished by further improvements in this  incentives intervention without 
exceeding cost  effectiveness.  We hypothesize that best practices plus financial  incentives will be more 
effective than best practices alone, that the incentives intervention will be cost effective,  and that while 
 5 adding the incentives reduces a greater proportion of the health and economic burden of  smoking than 
best practices alone, more can be done while remaining cost effective.  Overall, the prop osed study has 
the potential to substantially advance knowledge on cost -effective smoking cessation for pregnant 
women. Importantly, because of the strong association between smoking during pregnancy and 
economic disadvantage, the proposed study also has t he potential to contribute new knowledge 
relevant to reducing the serious challenges of health disparities.  
  
 6 Research Design and Methods  
We propos ed a parallel groups design involving three study conditions. Across two of the conditions  
we will employ a conventional randomized, controlled clinical trial research design comparing 
outcomes  between two treatment approaches to smoking cessation during pre gnancy. The third 
condition will represent  a group of women who are biochemically -verified  nonsmokers  and matched to 
women in the smoking  cessation conditions on characteristics that may influence health and health -
care-utilization  outcomes.  
Participants  
Study participants will be 345 pregnant Medicaid recipients > 18 yrs of age who will be recruited from  
obstetric practices and the WIC office located in the greater Burlington, VT area using procedures 
developed in  our prior trials (e.g., Heil et al., 2008;  Higgins et al., 2004b). As noted above, 230 of 
these women will be  smokers and 115 nonsmokers  recruited from the same clinics. Pregnant women 
attending their first prenatal  visit will be identified from the appointment schedules. The practices’ 
receptioni sts will request that women  complete a brief self -administered  smoking  screening  form 
containing a multiple -choice  question on smoking  status that has been validated to enhance accurate 
reporting (Mullen et al., 1991). Women who endorse  smoking in the 7 da ys prior to screening will be 
invited for an intake assessment that will provide a more  thorough determination of study eligibility. 
For inclusion in the cessation trial, women must report being  smokers at the time that they learned of 
the current pregnanc y, report smoking in the 7 days prior to the first  prenatal care visit, be confirmed 
as a smoker by urine cotinine testing, be < 25 weeks pregnant, reside in the  county in which the clinic 
is located, speak English, and plan on remaining in the geographica l area through  12-months  
postpartum. Two hundred and thirty eligible smokers who agree to participate and provide written  
informed consent will be randomly assigned to one of the two treatment conditions described below.  
Women who endorse no smoking in the 7 days prior to screening will be similarly invited for the same  
detailed assessment and biochemical verification of smoking status. To be eligible they must report 
 7 being  nonsmokers at the time they learned of the current pregnancy, report no smoking i n the past 6 
month, and  report smoking < 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, the conventional definition of a never 
smoker (Pomerleau et  al., 2004). Recruiting never  smokers  will substantially reduce the likelihood of 
women in this condition  converting to sm oker status during the study. They must also meet other study 
inclusion criteria listed above  and will be frequency matched to women in the two smoker conditions 
on the following characteristics that may  influence outcomes: (1) maternal education (% < 12 y ears), 
(2) pre -pregnancy  body mass index (% > 25, % >  30), (3) parity (% primigravida), (4) age (% < 20 
yrs), (5) comorbidities  (% diabetic, % hypertensive), and (6)  recreational use of cocaine/opioids in past 
12 months (% reporting yes). Initially, the di stributions of these  characteristics will be based on our 
previous trials but where necessary adjustments will be made as smokers  are enrolled into the proposed 
trial. Because women will be recruited at the start of their prenatal care, we will  not yet kno w infant 
sex and thus will not be able to balance across conditions on that characteristic. We  anticipate 
comparable distribution of infant sex across study conditions, but will include it as a covariate in  
analyses of birth and infant health outcomes if i t differs significantly across study conditions.  
Treatment Conditions  
Best Practices Alone.  The 2008 Clinical Practice Guidelines for smoking cessation recommends that  
pregnant smokers should be provided with the 5As (Fiore et al., 2008). To ensure that re ferring 
obstetric  practices in the proposed recruitment area are acquainted with the 5As, our staff will conduct 
office -based  training sessions with all referring practices prior to the start of study recruitment and at 
least once annually  throughout the c ourse of the study using training procedures developed previously 
by our research team and  utilized in our prior studies. Practitioners will be trained to implement the 
following steps: (1) Ask about  smoking status starting at first prenatal care visit; (2 ) Advise those who 
endorse smoking about the potential  harm of smoking to mother and fetus and recommend quitting; (3) 
Assess the willingness of smokers to make  a quit attempt during pregnancy; (4) Assist those willing to 
make a quit attempt by helping to establish a quit  plan, by referring them to the Vermont pregnancy -
 8 specific  quit line described below and offering assistance  with making the initial contact from the 
office, and by providing each woman with a copy of the pregnancy -tailored  self-help guide “Need 
Help Putting Out That Cigarette?”, distributed by the American College of  Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists; (5) Arrange for follow -up contacts on smoking at each subsequent prenatal  care visit. 
They will refer women to the Vermont pregnancy -specific quitline,  operated by Free & Clear, which  
provides eight proactive telephone counseling calls during the antepartum period, with one prior to a 
quit date,  two within the first week of quitting, and the final antepartum call just before the woman’s 
delivery date. Two  additional counseling calls are made during the postpartum period. Calls average 
about 10 min in length. The  quitline  makes five attempts to reach the woman within a 3 -day period for 
each scheduled telephone  counseling session. We will obta in permission from women to request from 
Free & Clear the number of  telephone counseling sessions completed by each woman during the 
course of the study.  
Best Practices + Financial Incentives.  Women assigned to this condition will receive the same 5As  
intervention from providers plus the incentives intervention described above that will be delivered by 
project  staff. Briefly, women report to our smoking -cessation  clinic or have a research assistant meet 
them at a  location convenient for them according to a predetermined schedule. At these visits, the 
women can earn  points recorded on vouchers contingent on biochemically -verified  abstinence from 
recent smoking. Abstinence  will be assessed for five consecutive days in week 1, decreasing to twice 
weekly in week  2 where it remains for  the next 7 weeks, then decreasing to once weekly for 4 weeks, 
and then to every other week until delivery.  During the postpartum period, abstinence monitoring will 
be weekly for 4 weeks and then every other week  through 12 weeks pos tpartum at which point the 
voucher program will be discontinued. The monetary value of  vouchers will be kept as they were in 
our prior trials for women who report smoking < 10 cigs/day at study  intake assessment, with the 
initial negative test specimen wor th 5 points at a value of $1.25 per point ($6.25).  Each consecutive 
negative test specimen increments the number of points earned by 1 such that the 2nd consecutive 
 9 negative specimen is worth 6 points ($7.50), the 3rd negative specimen 7 points ($8.75), th e 4th 
specimen 8 points ($10.00), etc. Voucher value continues to escalate upward based on consecutive 
negative  test results until it plateaus at a maximal value of $45. A reset contingency is used wherein a 
positive test or  failure to submit a specimen for a scheduled test resets the number of points earned 
back to the initial 5 points.  This reset component of the schedule protects against relapse once an initial 
period of abstinence has been  achieved (Roll & Higgins, 2000). Two consecutive nega tive tests 
following a reset returns the number of points  earned back to the value that they were at prior to the 
positive test result. In the postpartum period, voucher  value is set at a flat $45/negative test (36 points) 
independent of how much abstinenc e was achieved  antepartum. A positive test result or failure to 
submit a scheduled specimen lowers the voucher value to 5  points ($6.25), but two consecutive 
negative tests returns voucher value back to $45 in the postpartum period.  Total possible earnings  for a 
woman who participated in the voucher program for 32 weeks antepartum  (duration varies depending 
on where in the pregnancy a woman enters prenatal care) and 12 -weeks  postpartum and sustained 
abstinence throughout is $1,225 ($865 antepartum & $360 po stpartum). For women  who report 
smoking > 10 cigs/day at the study intake assessment the schedule described above will be  identical 
except that voucher value will be increased 2 -fold at each step such that maximal total earnings =  
$2,450 ($1,730 antepartum  & $720 postpartum). Because vouchers are only paid out when women are  
abstinent, we project mean payouts of $613 and $1,226 across 9 months or approximately $2.27/day 
and $4.54 /day across the lower and higher voucher values. Women will not be informed of  our criteria 
for determining who receives higher value incentives. We have conducted prior trials with differing 
voucher values  among substance abusers without difficulty by explaining that interventions are 
individualized just as  medications dosages ofte n are (Higgins et al., 2007a). We anticipate being able 
to do so in the proposed  study. Regarding use of pharmacotherapies, our practice is to explain to 
women the risks and benefits of  using them but recommend against their use because they have not yet 
been shown to be effective among  pregnant women and may interfere with the opportunity to earn 
 10 vouchers through cross reactivity with urine  cotinine testing. We will monitor use of all such products 
so that their use could be considered as a potential  covar iate in the data analysis. There has been 
minimal use in our prior trials (< 1%).  
Never-smokers  condition.  Women in this condition will be assessed at the study intake assessment,  
second prenatal care visit, at 28 -weeks  gestation, and then 2 -, 4-, 8-, 12-, 24-, and 48 -weeks  
postpartum using  the battery outlined below. As described further below, they will also participate in 
the sonographic serial  measures of fetal growth at 30 and 34 weeks and receive monthly postpartum 
calls from staff to monitor infant  health and health care utilization. There will be no other contact with 
them.  
Assessments  
At the first prenatal visit all participants will complete an assessment addressing six areas: (1) 
Sociodemographics:  age, yrs of education, race/ethnicity, marital s tatus, and health insurance status. 
(2) Medical/pregnancy history: height/weight, self -reported  pre-pregnancy  weight, weeks pregnant, 
history of  complications in prior pregnancies; unstable medical problems (e.g., preeclampsia)  in 
current pregnancy; and  use of medications, alcohol, and caffeine. (3) Smoking history: age started 
smoking, average number of  cigarettes smoked per day now and immediately before this pregnancy, 
time to first cigarette in the morning,  number of previous quit attempts, number of ot her smokers in the 
household, nicotine dependence/tolerance  (Fagerstrom & Schneider, 1989), and nicotine withdrawal 
(Hughes & Hatsukami, 1986). Smoking Timeline  Follow -back interviews will be conducted (Brown et 
al., 1998) to characterize daily smoking rat es since  learning of the current pregnancy. (4) Smoking 
attitudes: motivation to stop, confidence in ability to stop,  intention to quit before the baby is born, 
intention to remain abstinent after the baby is born, and measures of  perceived stress. (5) Bio chemical 
verification of smoking status: breath CO and urine cotinine levels. (6)  Mental health/executive 
function: lifetime history of depression, general psychiatric symptoms (Brief Symptom  Inventory, 
Derogatis, 1993), current depressive symptoms (BDI, Beck & Beck, 1972), discounting of delayed  
 11 hypothetical monetary rewards (Johnson & Bickel, 2002). Appropriately modified versions of this 
battery will  be completed again at the second prenatal care visit and 28 -weeks  gestation, and then 2 -, 
4-, 8-, 12-, 24-, and 48-weeks  postpartum.  We will also assess breastfeeding, including initiation, 
duration, and different levels of breastfeeding (e.g.,  exclusive, predominate, any). All women will 
complete the Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire to examine  associa tions between breastfeeding and 
maternal/infant bonding (Brockington et al., 2001). Breastfeeding is  associated with significant 
improvements in a wide range of maternal and infant health outcomes, but there  have been few 
opportunities to examine experimen tally altered rates of breastfeeding due to the absence of  ethical 
methods to manipulate them (Ip et al., 2007). The proposed study may provide an opportunity to do so  
by altering smoking status, which in turn impacts breastfeeding duration (Higgins et al. , 2010b). These  
assessments will be conducted with all subjects independent of smoking status or treatment condition.  
Women will receive $50 per assessment independent of smoking status.  We also plan to assess health 
outcomes and health care utilization fo r use in the cost -effectiveness  analysis. Permission will be 
requested of all women to review maternal and infant health care records through  one-year postpartum 
and to telephone mothers monthly during postpartum to review infant health and health  care vis its. 
Project staff will review records by obtaining faxed copies or visiting the offices of local  
providers/pharmacies at the time of each of the regularly scheduled assessments. We will track the 
incidence  of smoking -related  pregnancy complications, deliv ery complications, and maternal and 
infant health outcomes  during the 1st year postpartum (all illnesses requiring a visit to a healthcare 
professional). Infant outcomes will  include birth outcomes (mean birth weight, % low birth weight 
deliveries (< 2500 g), mean gestational length,  % premature deliveries (< 37 weeks), incidence of 
NICU admissions and mean length of stay, and health  outcomes through one year postpartum 
(respiratory distress syndrome, upper and lower respiratory infections,  otitis media, sudden infant 
death syndrome, and other infant death). We will track all maternal prenatal and  postpartum health care 
utilization including pharmacy use through one -year postpartum and infant utilization  through one -
 12 year postnatal. Greater than 99% of women in our trials deliver at our university teaching hospital  and 
with maternal permission we will have access to all delivery and infant care records related to the 
delivery.  Over the past 10 years 100% of women in our trials have provided permission  to review 
maternal and infant  medical records. We have used this system to obtain the birth outcomes data 
described above and will now  extend that timeframe through the 1st year postpartum. We did not 
anticipate reviewing medical billings in our  earlier s tudies and thus did not request permission. 
However, we anticipate no difficulty obtaining consent to  review the cost data. Our staff has strong 
working relationships with local primary care clinicians, which will  facilitate the logistics of our staff 
coordinating with them to review records.  
Biochemical Verification of Abstinence  
Breath and urine specimens will be collected at each clinic visit. Breath CO levels will be analyzed 
using a  breath CO Monitor. Readings < 6 ppm will indicate abstinence during we ek 1. Beginning in 
week 2,  abstinence will be verified using onsite urine cotinine (< 80 ng/ml) analyzed with an Enzyme 
Multiplied  Immunoassay Test (EMIT). Smoking -status  classifications based on EMIT urine -cotinine  
levels using a cutoff  of < 80 ng/ml are in > 98% agreement with those made by gas chromatography 
mass spectroscopy using a  cut-point of 12.5 or 25 ng/ml (Higgins et al., 2007b). Urine and breath 
specimens will be collected at each of  the follow -up assessments and analyzed similarly. Specimens 
collected at the end -of-pregnancy,  and 12  & 24-week  postpartum assessments will be sent to an outside 
laboratory for confirmation testing.  
Monitoring Fetal/Infant Health  
Fetal Growth . We will compare the growth profiles for each of the fetal parameters measured across  
study conditions. This includes abdominal circumference, head circumference, femur length, estimated 
fetal weight and mid -thigh lean body and fat areas. We will also characterize birth weight between 
conditions  employing birth we ight percentiles (Bernstein et al., 1994; 1996; Fry, 2002). We have 
developed ultrasound  techniques that are capable of distinguishing and quantifying specific fetal body 
 13 compartments with focus on  the lean body and fat mass compartments (Bernstein et al.,  1991; 1997; 
2000). We will use this ultrasound  technology to examine participants at 30 and 34 weeks of 
pregnancy to estimate changes in overall fetal  growth and body composition. We will estimate fetal 
weight according to the method of Hadlock et al (198 5) employing head circumference, femur length 
and abdominal circumference. We will estimate fetal peripheral  muscle and fat areas according to the 
methods we have developed (Bernstein et al., 1991; 1997; 2000) and  are now used broadly (Galan, 
2001; Padoan,  2004; Larciprete et al., 2003). Infant Growth.  Infant growth  measures will also be 
obtained at 6 and 12 months. Weight will be obtained through the use of an electronic  scale and length 
measurements will employ a measuring board that employs the tonic nec k reflex for accurate  
assessment of infant length, thereby estimating ponderal index (Rohrer 1921, Walther & Ramaekers, 
1982).  At 6 and 12 months we will also measure skinfold  thickness at 5 sites (triceps, subscapular, 
flank, anterior  thigh and abdominal wall) (Bernstein 1991, 1997) to estimate subcutaneous fat stores. 
At 12 months only we  will conduct an assessment of infant body composition using whole body dual 
x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).  
Statistical Methods  
Study conditions will be compared on baselin e demographics and other characteristics using analysis 
of variance for continuous variables and chi -square  tests for categorical variables. If a specific 
characteristic  differs significantly across study conditions and is predictive of outcome, it will be  
considered as a potential  covariate in subsequent analyses. Analyses of treatment effects on smoking 
status will be limited to smokers  randomized to the two treatment conditions. We will adhere to an 
intent -to-treat approach (Armitage, 1983)  wherein all w omen randomized to the study conditions will 
be included in the analyses independent of early  dropout, noncompliance, etc., with the exception of  
excluding women for abortion/fetal demise as is convention  in this research area. Cochran  Mantel  
Haenszel  tests (CMH)  will be performed for comparisons of the two  treatment conditions on point -
prevalence  smoking abstinence at end -of-pregnancy  and 6 -months  postpartum  assessments with 
 14 referring clinic as a stratification variable. The Breslow -Day Test will be used to examine the  
homogeneity of treatment effects across referring clinics. Comparisons of point -prevalence  abstinence 
rates  between treatment condi tions across all assessments through one -year postpartum will be 
analyzed using  mixed model repeated measures for categorical data based on generalized estimating 
equations (GEE)  utilizing a logistic link function (SAS: PROC GENMOD, SAS Institute, Cary, NC ). 
We will include women from  the nonsmoker  condition in analyses of fetal growth, birth outcomes, and 
breastfeeding and other postpartum  outcomes. Comparisons of treatment conditions on dichotomous 
outcomes (e.g. % low birth weight, %  preterm, % NICU admi ssions, % breastfeeding, % medical 
treatment in first year) will parallel categorical  analyses for point prevalence abstinence using PROC 
GENMOD to adjust for strata (referring clinics) and  potential covariate effects. Analysis of covariance 
will be used t o compare study conditions on mean birth  weight adjusting for variables known to predict 
birth weight (i.e., maternal prepregnancy  BMI, parity, and sex),  mean gestational age at delivery, and 
frequency measures of medical illnesses. Statistical analyses of  fetal growth outcomes (i.e. estimated 
fetal weight, fetal lean area, fat area, femur length and head circumference)  will be based on linear 
growth models with slope and intercept as random effects (SAS PROC MIXED). This  methodology 
allows for the within -subjects  ultrasound assessments not to be at identical timepoints  across  subjects. 
Study condition will be considered a fixed factor with fetus nested within study condition. Two -way 
analyses of covariance will also be used for analyzing effects of study co ndition and referring clinic on 
DEXA  body composition measures at 12 months. Additional subject  level  covariates will include 
maternal pre -pregnancy  body  mass  index, maternal age  and fetal gender. Analyses of infant growth 
will parallel those used  to examine fetal growth. Repeated measures analyses of variance will be used 
to test for differences between  study conditions in skinfold  thickness obtained during infant 1st year of 
life and continuous measures of  medical illnesses. Significance will be based on alpha = .05 for all 
analyses.  
 
 15 Sample Size Justification  
Sample size was determined to have sufficient power to detect differences between study conditions  
corresponding to our p rimary hypotheses regarding point prevalence smoking  abstinence  at late 
pregnancy  and 24weekpostpartum assessments, fetal growth, birth weight, and breastfeeding. 
Estimates of abstinence  were based on our prior trials where 7 -day point -prevalence  abstinenc e in the 
incentives vs. control conditions  were 34% vs. 7% at the late -pregnancy  assessment and 14% vs. 1% at 
24weeks  postpartum assessment,  respectively (Higgins et al., 2010a). We estimated that the proposed 
increase in the value of the incentives  used w ith heavier smokers will increase late -pregnancy  
abstinence rate to approximately 50% in the incentives  condition while the best practices alone 
condition is estimated at <10%. Assuming a decline in abstinence of  approximately 20% from late -
pregnancy  to the 24 -week  postpartum assessment as we saw in our prior trials,  we estimate abstinence 
rates of approximately 30% vs. < 5% at 24weeks  postpartum in the best practices  plus incentives vs. 
best practices alone conditions, respectively. The proposed sample s ize of 115 per study  condition will 
result in greater than 90% power to detect a difference between the two treatment conditions in  
abstinence rates of 50% vs. 10% at late -pregnancy  or 30% vs. 5% at 24weeks  postpartum assessments 
using  a chi -square  test. T he proposed sample size is also expected to be more than sufficient for 
examining  differences between study conditions in fetal growth, birth weight, and breastfeeding 
outcomes. The proposed  sample size after considering noncompliance  in completing schedul ed 
ultrasounds is estimated to have power  of 80% for detecting a mean growth difference of 23 g/wk in 
estimated fetal weight between any two conditions  based on our estimated pooled within  group  
SD=49.7. This difference is slightly more than half the diffe rence  observed between the incentive and 
control condition in our 2008 study (Heil et al, 2008) and represents a  conservative expected 
difference. With respect to mean birth weight, power is estimated to be 80% to detect a  difference of 
approximately 200 g  between any two study conditions assuming a pooled SD=550, which aligns  well 
with treatment effects in our study combining results across prior trials (Higgins et al., 2010a) where 
 16 mean  birth weights were 3295.6 + 588 g vs. 3093.6 + 603 g in the incentive s and control conditions, 
respectively and  with our estimate of a mean birth weight of 3595.6 + 404 g in the nonsmoker  
condition. For this estimate of  the mean birth weight that might be expected in the nonsmoker 
condition, we examined birth weights in a s ample (n = 88) of women followed in our clinic who were 
smokers at the time that they learned of the current pregnancy but quit prior to entering prenatal care 
(i.e., spontaneous quitters) and were continuously abstinent through the remainder of antepartum . We 
are estimating breastfeeding rates of 50% and 30% in the incentives condition and 17% and 13% in the 
best practices alone condition at 12 and 24 weeks postpartum, based on our prior study results (Higgins 
et al., 2010b) and our planned use of higher v alue vouchers with heavier smokers in the proposed 
study. Again using the same group of spontaneous quitters but restricting it to women who remained 
abstinent through 24 -weeks postpartum (n=32), the estimated percent breastfeeding at 12 - and 24 -
weeks post partum was 70% and 48%. Using chi -square tests, we will have over 80% power to detect 
differences in rates between any two of the three study conditions at the two assessments. Power 
calculations were done using a two -sided significance level of .05.  
Econo mic Evaluation  
Cost analysis.  We will conduct an economic evaluation from the societal perspective including both 
cost-effectiveness and cost -benefit analyses (Drummond et al., 2005). The outcome measures in this 
trial were described above, with antepartum  abstinence being primary and the related outcomes of 
longer -term abstinence, birth outcomes, and health and health care utilization in the 1st year 
postpartum important as well. Each of these outcomes can be viewed from the perspective of 
incremental cost  effectiveness (e.g., the incremental cost to produce an additional abstinent mother at 
final antepartum assessment). We hypothesize that the best practices plus incentives intervention will 
be cost -effective (i.e., dominant) as compared to the best practi ces alone condition. To determine the 
cost of each intervention, we will employ the Brief Drug Abuse Treatment Cost Analysis Program 
(Brief DATCAP; French et al., 2004; French, 2010), which has been widely used in the area of 
 17 substance abuse, including pro jects utilizing incentives (Knealing et al., 2008). The direct and indirect 
economic cost of treatment will be derived by allocating fixed costs based upon the proportion of time 
or space utilized by the programs (e.g., treatment facility costs), as well a s costs that vary by patient 
engagement and smoking status (e.g., drug tests, quitline staff time, incentives). The total cost per 
treatment episode will be individual specific and will include the opportunity cost of the patient’s time 
while in treatment (Salomé et al., 2003; French 2005). The time period of the cost analysis will span 
from intake to discontinuation or completion of the program. However, since the duration of treatment 
will vary according to where in the pregnancy a woman enters the study,  the economic cost per person 
per week will also be calculated. The cost of all research -specific resources consumed will be excluded 
from the evaluation. All costs and benefits will be expressed in a common dollar year without the need 
for discounting. Es timated treatment costs will be combined with the maternal and infant health 
outcomes outlined above to conduct the economic evaluation. Cost -effectiveness analysis (CEA). CEA 
will be conducted wherein the average (mean) difference in treatment costs acros s the two 
interventions will be divided by the average (mean) difference in each outcome to derive incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs). Statistical significance of these ICERs will be determined 
probabilistically by employing nonparametric bootst rapped standard errors (Drummond et al. 2005). 
Priority will be given to comparing ratios on key birth outcome measures and NICU admissions. 
Additionally, a special form of CEA, cost -utility analysis (CUA), will be performed. Based upon 
smoking status from  the quit date through one year postpartum, the number of quality -adjusted life 
years (QALYs) gained by the mother —as measured by the proportion of time spent in ‘smoking’ 
and/or ‘nonsmoking’ status —will be derived using QALY weights recommended in the ext ant 
literature (e.g., Cromwell et al., 1997; Flack et al., 2007). Women still abstinent at 1year postpartum 
will be treated as long -term quitters. QALYs gained by the infant will be calculated using QALY 
weights recommended in the literature (Taylor et al. , 200 9). The incremental cost per QALY gained 
 18 between the two modalities will be calculated and compared for mothers and infants separately and 
also summed across mother -infant dyads.  
Cost -benefit analysis (CBA). CBA can often be especially useful by allowing consideration of 
multiple, often very different, outcomes. CBA yields two specific evaluation metrics, which are both 
placed in monetary terms, the benefit -cost ratio and the net benefit, that can be compared across health 
programs and economic sectors. We will conduct a partial CBA from a societal perspective for the 
intake through 12month postpartum period. Total health care costs for the mother and infant will be 
measured using the ‘allowed’ amounts extracte d from administrative insurance claims data collected 
from health care providers. Adding smoking cessation treatment costs to health care costs will yield the 
total economic cost of care for a mother/infant dyad for the specified time period. Given 
randomi zation, the mean difference across the treatment arms (the average net benefit) will be 
attributed to intervention effectiveness. Cost benefit ratios also will be calculated and compared across 
the two treatment conditions for statistically significant dif ferences. Sensitivity analysis. A multiway 
sensitivity analysis will assess the levels to which our incremental cost effectiveness ratios (ICERs) are 
robust to changes in component assumptions and costs. For example, while a theoretical 100% quit 
rate may never reach the low cost of treating the group of nonsmokers in our third condition, we can 
explore the maximum threshold of incentive required to maximize health benefits with respect to their 
costs one year postpartum. More within a realistic target, a 5 0% quit rate, for example, may be cost 
effective under all exploratory ranges of incentive compensation. The sensitivity analysis will therefore 
explore changes to assumptions over a broad range.  
  
 19 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
1. RISKS TO THE SUBJECTS  
 
a. Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design  
Participants will be 345 women seeking prenatal care at participating clinics who are insured by 
Medicaid. 230  women who endorse being smokers at the time that they learned of the current 
pregnancy w ill be informed that  they might be eligible for a study on cigarette smoking cessation and 
birth outcomes while 115 women who  endorse being nonsmokers will be informed that they might be 
eligible for a study on birth outcomes. Both will  be offered the oppo rtunity to participate in further 
screening to determine study eligibility.  
For inclusion in the smoking cessation component, women must report being smokers at the 
time that they  learned of the current pregnancy, report smoking in the 7 days prior to the first prenatal 
care visit and have that  confirmed by urine toxicology testing, be 18 years of age or older, be < 25 
weeks pregnant, reside in the  county in which the clinic is located and immediately surrounding areas, 
speak English, plan on remaining in  the geographical area through the pregnancy and 12 -months  
postpartum, and provide written informed  consent to participate. Failure to meet the aforementioned 
criteria, incarceration, untreated psychosis, current  treatment with buprenorphine/methadone for op ioid 
dependence, and refusal to participate will be reasons for  exclusion.  
For inclusion in the nonsmoker  component of the study, women must meet the same inclusion 
and exclusion  criteria listed above with the exception of smoking status where they must re port being 
nonsmokers at the time  they learned of the current pregnancy, report no smoking in past 6 months, not 
even a puff, test negative in a  urine -cotinine  test for current smoking, and report smoking < 100 
cigarettes in their lifetime. Nonsmokers  will also be matched to women in the smoker conditions on 
the following characteristics that may influence  treatment outcome (educational attainment, 
 20 prepregnancy BMI, parity, chronological age, comorbidities  (i.e., diabetes, hypertension), and use of 
cocaine/opioids and thus could be excluded from study participation based  on not aligning with our 
need to keep the conditions comparable on these characteristics.  No participants will be excluded 
based on race or ethnicity. All study participants w ill complete informed  consent. Smokers who 
consent to study participation will be randomly assigned to one of two treatment  conditions: (1) Best 
practices for smoking cessation during pregnancy involving the 5 As and referral to  
pregnancy -specific  telephon e quitline  counseling and self -help cessation materials or (2) Best practices 
for smoking cessation during pregnancy plus financial Incentives delivered contingent on smoking 
abstinence.  Nonsmokers  who consent to study participation will complete the same assessments as the 
smokers, but  none of the smoking -cessation  aspects of the study.  
b. Sources of Materials  
The research materials to be obtained include interviews, questionnaires, urine and breath 
specimens to verify  smoking status, and medical records t o assess birth and maternal and infant health 
outcomes through one -year postpartum.  
c. Potential Risks  
(a) A potential risk to all subjects in the proposed studies is that an unauthorized person would 
obtain access  to the information contained in their stu dy files. (b) There is the risk that some subjects 
may misuse vouchers  or the money provided for completing the baseline and follow -up assessments. 
(c) Women in the financial -incentives condition could be enticed to use over the counter smoking 
cessation p harmacotherapies in order to  obtain incentives, which have not been approved for use with 
pregnant women.  
2. ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent  
All participants will provide written informed consent after having a face-to-face discussion of 
the research with  PI, Co -I or research staff designated and trained to represent the PI/Co -I in this 
 21 function. That discussion is  conducted in a private setting and permits the prospective participants 
ample opportunity to raise questions  and seek clarifications regarding the research. Later that day, the 
participant will take a consent form quiz to  ensure she understands the critical elements of what she 
agreed to do (e.g. randomized to experimental or  contro l condition, study is voluntary and can 
withdraw at any time). Incorrect answers will be carefully reviewed  with the participant and the quiz 
will be readministered  until all questions are answered correctly.  
We operate in full compliance with HIPAA regula tions. All participants in the present study 
will receive a  HIPAA authorization form upon entry into treatment and are fully informed regarding 
their rights with respect to  the release of personal health information. We will comply with the new 
regulations  for protection of pregnant  women in research (effective December 13, 2001). Further, as 
mandated by NIH, all personnel funded by this  project will complete the NIH required course on 
Human Subjects Research Training.  
b. Protection Against Risk  
We take the  following actions to protect against the potential risks noted above: (a) All study 
files will be stored  in locked filing cabinets. All study participants receive a participant identification 
code that is used in place of  their name in all study data file s. The key that connects participant names 
with identification codes is kept in a  locked file and stored separately from the data files. (b) Study 
computers will be password protected and  encrypted. (c) All voucher purchases must be approved in 
advance by project staff who retain veto power. If  in the judgment of project staff there is a risk that 
the money obtained by completing the assessments might be  misused, vouchers will be substituted for 
cash. Misuse of vouchers has not been a problem in our prior t rials with this population. (d) Regarding 
pharmacotherapies, we inform women about the risks/benefits of over -the-counter  pharmacotherapies, 
inform them that the use of nicotine replacement therapies will limit their ability to  earn incentives, 
and make a recommendation that smoking cessation pharmacotherapies not be used. We  have had no 
problems during the prior trials related to women using pharmacotherapies for smoking cessation.  
 22 3. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE SUBJECTS AND 
OTHERS  
Among the smokers, we believe that the aforementioned risks are reasonable in relation to the 
anticipated  benefits to the mother and fetus/neonate of treatment for smoking during pregnancy.  There 
is a reasonable likelihood that women assigned to the Best Pr actices alone condition will not achieve  
outcomes as good as those assigned to the Best practices plus financial -Incentives condition. 
Nevertheless,  all women will receive treatment that meets Best Practices as outlined in the 2008 
Clinical Practice Guidelines  on Treating Tobacco (Fiore et al., 2008). To the extent that either 
intervention promotes smoking cessation,  there is likely to be benefits to both mother and fetus/infant 
in terms of improved growth and birth outcomes.  Any improvements  in birth outcomes should also 
provide benefits to society in terms of lowered medical costs  for infant care and improved child 
outcomes.  
Among the nonsmokers,  we feel that the risks are justified by the potential to contribute new 
knowledge wit h the poten tial to enhance understanding of the adverse effects of smoking and provide 
insights into how much  more might be invested into improving smoking -cessation  interventions 
without exceeding cost -effectiveness.  Although this study is considered high -risk by de finition (i.e., 
pregnant population), the potential benefits are  substantial in terms of our scientific understanding of 
the effectiveness of treating smoking cessation among  pregnant smokers and for increasing knowledge 
regarding the impact of smoking ces sation on birth outcomes  and maternal and infant health outcomes. 
Overall, the risk/benefit ratio appears highly favorable.  
 
4. IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
Smoking during pregnancy is the leading preventable cause of poor pregnancy outcomes in  the 
U.S. Despite  72 controlled trials involving more than 25,000 women, quit rates achieved with existing 
interventions are low  (often < 15%). In addition, no intervention has reported significant main effects 
 23 of treatment on birth outcomes  for more than 25 years. The proposed study will continue research on 
the efficacy of a novel smoking -cessation  intervention, voucher -based  financial incentives, which has 
demonstrated promising effects on  smoking abstinence rates and fetal/infant outcomes in at least fo ur 
prior efficacy trials. The proposed trial will  thoroughly contrast the effectiveness, especially the cost -
effectiveness,  of adding financial incentives to current  Best Practices compared to offering Best 
Practices alone in terms of increasing antepartum  and postpartum  smoking abstinence and improving 
birth outcomes, breastfeeding, and other maternal and infant health  outcomes during the 1st year of 
life. The proposed study has the potential to be pivotal to the development,  testing, and eventual 
dissemin ation of this incentives -based  treatment approach and will contribute new and  important 
scientific knowledge about how to effectively treat smoking during pregnancy and postpartum and  the 
maternal, infant health, and economic benefits of doing so.  
5. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
Our overall monitoring plan consists of ongoing, close monitoring of data and safety issues by 
the PI, Co -Investigators,  and other project staff and prompt reporting of any adverse events (AEs) or 
serious adverse  events (SAE s) to the institutional review board at the appropriate site and/or NIH, as 
suggested by Notice OD00038.  We provide more detail below regarding particular areas recommended 
by Notice OD00038.  
Patient eligibility and status . All recruitment will be managed by trained research staff under 
the supervision  of the PI using specialized forms and procedures. All information collected will be 
reviewed by the research  staff, PI, or designated representatives, who will determine participant 
eligibility, contact them about scheduling  and completing an intake assessment where appropriate. 
Eligible women will provide written informed  consent. The status of all active participants will be 
reviewed weekly at staff meetings between the PI, Co -Investigators  and trained suppo rt staff.  Rigorous 
data management/quality assurance. Study data will come from participant screening and intake  
 24 sessions, periodic assessments, urine and breath specimen collections, and medical and pharmacy 
records.  
Study data collection will be primaril y with paper questionnaires that will be manually double -
entered  into computers for analysis. Similar to prior and ongoing studies, we will create Excel 
databases for entry and  coding of all data collected. All data will be independently coded by trained 
research staff. The two coded  data sets at each site will be compared against each other for agreement 
and discrepancies will be resolved  and corrected using source materials at each site. Once each month, 
current compared data sets will be  delivered electr onically to the University of Vermont 
Bioinformatics Facility where they will again be reviewed  for accuracy. Any apparent errors will be 
resolved and corrected under supervision of the biostatistician and  using source materials. The 
biostatistician and PI  will discuss any problems at weekly data meetings.  Auditing procedures. Review 
of any problems related to quality of data collection, transmission or analyses  and of any AEs and 
SAEs that occurred during the past week will occur at weekly research staff m eetings.  Interim analyses 
of data will be conducted when half the subjects have been entered or at other times based  on the 
discretion of the PI and biostatistician.  
Reporting mechanisms of AEs and SAEs to the UVM IRB and Funding Agency . In the 
proposed st udy, we will use the FDA's definition of AEs and SAEs. AEs and SAEs will be assessed at 
each subject visit by a trained staff member and copies of all reports noting AEs and SAEs will be kept 
in a central file as well as in the individual subject's chart. AEs will be discussed at the weekly research 
staff meetings. Any SAE will be brought to the attention of the PI or a Co -Investigator as soon as 
possible and not longer than 24 hours. Any AE or SAE that is both unexpected and related to study 
participation will be reported to the IRB within 7 days of the event. That IRB will make a 
determination as to whether additional reporting requirements are needed. IRB actions will be reported 
to the funding agency by the PI no less than annually and more frequently as  recommended by the 
local IRB. Any SAEs will be summarized in the yearly Progress Reports to the funding agency, 
 25 including a review of frequency and severity. All SAEs will be followed through ongoing consultation 
with the physician caring for the patient until they resolve, result in death, or stabilize and are not 
expected to improve.  
 
  
 26 REFERENCES  
Adams, K.A., Melvin, C.L., Raskind -Hood, C., Joski, P.J., & Galactionova , E. (2011).  Infant delivery costs 
related to maternal smoking: an update.  Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 13 , 627 -637.   
 
Armitage, P. (1983).  Exclusions, losses to follow -up, and withdrawals in clinical trials.  In S.H. Shapiro & T.A. 
Lewis (Eds.), Clini cal trials: Issues and approaches  (pp. 99 -113).  New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.    
 
Bada, H.S., Das, A., Bauer, C.R., Shankaran, S., Lester, B.M., Gard, C.C., et al. (2005).  Low birth weight and 
reterm births: etiologic fraction attributable to prenatal dr ug exposure.  J. Perinatol., 25 , 631 -637.   
 
Bailey, B.A., McCook, J.G., Hodge, A., & McGrady, L.  (2011).  Infant birth outcomes among substance 
using women: why quitting smoking during pregnancy is just as important as quitting illicit drug use.  
Materna l Child Health J, epub ahead of print.   
 
Ballard, P., & Radley, A.  (2009).  Give it up for baby: A smoking cessation intervention for pregnant 
women in Scotland. Cases in Public Health Communication & Marketing  (3:147 -160).  Available from: 
www.casesjour nal.org/volume3  
 
Beck, A.T., & Beck, R.W. (1972). Screening depressed patients in family practice: A rapid technique.  Postgrad 
Med, 52, 81-5.   
 
Bernstein IM, Horbar J, Badger G, Golan A, Ohlsson A, for the Vermont Oxford Neonatal Network 
"Morbidity and Mortality in Growth Restricted Very Low Birth Weight Newborns" Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2000;182:198 -206. 
 
 27 Bernstein, I.M., Mongeon, J.A., Badger, G.J., Solomon, L., Heil, S.H., & Higgins, S.T. (2005). Maternal 
smoking and its association with birth weight. Obstet Gynecol , 106, 986 -91. 
 
Bernstein, I.M., Plociennik, K., Stahle, S., Badger, G.J, & Secker -Walker R. (2000). The impact of maternal 
smoking on fetal growth and body composition.  Am J Obstet Gynecol , 183 , 883 -7. 
 
Bernstein IM, Reed K, Gabbe SG. "Intrau terine Growth Restriction" in Obstetrics: Normal and Problem 
Pregnancies (eds.) Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL. Churchill Livingston, Fourth Edition, Philadelphia, PA 
2001:869 -891. 
 
Bickel, W.K., Miller, M.L., Yi, R., Kowal, B.P., Lindquist, D.M., & Pitco ck, J.A.  (2007).  Behavioral and 
neuroeconomics of drug addiction: Competing neural systems and temporal discounting processes.  Drug 
Alcohol Depend , 90, S85 -91. 
 
Brown, R.A., Burgess, E.S., Sales, S.D., Whitley, J.A., Evans, D.M., & Miller, I.W.  (1998).  Reliability and 
validity of a smoking timeline follow -back interview.  Psychol Addict Behav, 12 , 101-12. 
 
Burstyn, I., Kapur, N., & Cherry, N.M.  (2010).  Substan ce use of pregnant women and early neonatal morbidity: 
where to focus intervention?  Can J Public Health, 101 , 149 -153.  
 
Cnattingius, S. (2004) The epidemiology of smoking during pregnancy: Smoking prevalence, maternal 
characteristics, and pregnancy outco mes.  Nic Tob Res , 6 S2, S125 -40.   
 
Cohen, G., Jeffery H., Lagercrantz, H., Katz -Salamon, M. (2010).  Long -term reprogramming of cardiovascular 
function in infants of active smokers.  Hypertension , 55, 722 -728.   
 28  
Cromwell, J., Bartosch, W.J., Fiore, M.C. , Hasselblad, V., & Baker, T.  (1997).  Cost -effectiveness of the clinical 
practice recommendations in the ACPR guideline for smoking cessation. Agency for Health Care Policy and 
Research.  JAMA, 278 , 1759 -1766.    
 
Derogatis, L.R. (1993).  Brief symptom in ventory .  Minneapolis, MN:  National Computer Systems, Inc.  
 
Dietz, P.M., Adams, M.M., Kendrick, J.S., & Mathis, M.P.  (1998).  Completeness of ascertainment of prenatal 
smoking using birth certificates and confidential questionnaires: variations by matern al attributes and infant 
bierth weight.  PRAMS Working Group. Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System.  Am J Epidemiol 
,148, 1048 -1054.   
 
Dietz, P.M., England, L.J., Shapiro -Mendoza, C.K., Tong, V.T., Farr, S.L., & Callaghan, W.M. (2010).  Infant 
morb idity and mortality attributable to prenatal smoking in the U.S.  Am J Prev Med, 39 , 45-52.   
 
Donatelle, R.J., Prows, S.L., Champeau, D., & Hudson, D. (2000).  Randomized controlled trial using social 
support and financial incentives for high risk pregnan t smokers: Significant Other Supporter (SOS) Program.  
Tob Control , 9 S3, III67 -9.   
 
Drummond, M.F., Sculpher, M.J., Torrance, G.W., O’Brien, B.J., & Stoddart, G.L. (2005).  Methods for the 
economic evaluation of health care programmes, 3rd edition . Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
 
Ershoff, D.H., Mullan, P.D., & Quinn, V.P. (1989).  A randomized trial of serialized self -help smoking cessation 
program for pregnant women in an HMO.  Am J Public Health , 79, 182 -7. 
 
 29 Ershoff, D.H., Quinn, V.P. , Mullen, P.D., & Lairson, D.R. (1990).  Pregnancy and medical costs outcomes of a 
self-help prenatal smoking cessation program in a HMO.  Public Health Reports , 105, 340 -347.   
 
Fagerstrom, K.O., & Schneider, N.G. (1989).  Measuring nicotine dependence: A  review of the Fagerstrom 
tolerance questionnaire.  J Behav Med , 12, 159 -82. 
 
Flack, S., Taylor, M., & Trueman , P. (2007).  Cost -effectiveness of interventions for smoking cessation.  Report 
to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/pdf/WorkplaceInterventionsPromoteSmokingCessationEconomicReport1.p
df  (9/29/2011).    
 
Filion, K., Abenhaim, H., Mottillo, S., Joseph, L., Gervais, A., O’Loughlin, J. et al.  (2011).  Th e effect of 
smoking cessation counseling in pregnant women: a meta -analysis of randomized conrolled trials.  BJOG , (epub 
ahead of print).   
 
Fiore, M.C., Jaén, C.R., Baker, T.B., et al.  A clinical practice guideline for treating tobacco use and 
dependence : 2008 update: A U.S. public health service report. Am J Prev Med , 35, 158 -176.   
 
Floyd, R.L., Belodoff, B., Sidhu, J., Schulkin, J., Ebrahim, S.H., & Sokol, R.J.   (2001).  A survey of 
obstetrician -gynecologists on their patients' use of tobacco and other  drugs during pregnancy.   Prenatal 
and Neonatal Medicine, 6 , 201 -207. 
 
 
French, M.T., Roebuck, M.C., & McLellan, T.A. (2004).  Cost estimation when times and resources are 
limited: the brief DATCAP.  J Subst Treat, 27 , 187 -193.   
 30  
French, M.T., & Drummond,  M. (2005).  A research agenda for economic evaluation of substance abuse 
services.  J. Subst Abuse Treat, 29 , 125 -137.  
 
French, M.T., Popovici, I., & Tapsell, L. (2010).  The economic costs of substance abuse treatment: 
updated estimates and cost bands f or program assessment and reimbursement.  J Subst Abuse Treat, 35 , 
462-469.   
 
Gaalema , D.E., Higgins, S.T., Bradstreet, M.P., Heil, S.H., & Bernstein, I.M. (2011).  Using NicAlert 
strips to verify smoking status among pregnant smokers.  Drug Alcohol Depend . (epub ahead of print).  
 
Greenland, S. (1993).  Additive risk versus additive relat ive risk models.  Epidemiology , 4, 32-36. 
 
Guerrero -Preston, R., Goldman, L.R., Brebi -Mieville, P., Ili_Gangas, C., Lebron, C., Witter, F.R., Apelberg, 
B.J., Hernandez -Roystacher, M., Jaffe, A., Halden, R.U., & Sidransky, D. (2010).  Global DNA 
hypomethyla tion is associated with in utero exposure to cotinine and perfluorinated alkyl compounds.  
Epigenetics, 5 , 539 -546.   
 
Hackshaw, A., & Kirkwood, A. (2011).  Interpreting and reporting clinical trials with results of borderline 
significance.  BMJ, 343 , e-pub ahead of print  
 
Heil, S.H., Higgins, S.T., Mongeon, J.A., Badger, G.J., & Bernstein, I.M. (2006).  Characterizing nicotine 
withdrawal in pregnant cigarette smokers.  Exp Clin Psychopharmacol , 14, 165 -170. 
 
 31 Heil, S.H., Higgins, S.T., Bernstein, I.M., Solomon, L.J., Rogers, R.E., Thomas, C.S., Badger, G.J., & Lynch, 
M.E.  (2008).  Effects of voucher -based incentives on abstinence from cigarette smoking and fetal growth among 
pregnant women.  Addiction , 103, 1009-18.   
 
Heil, S.H., Linares Scott, T., & Higgins, S.T.  (2009).  An overview of principles of effective treatment of 
substance use disorders and their potential application to pregnant cigarette smokers.  Drug Alcohol Depend , 
104 (Suppl. 1) , S106 -14. 
 
Heil, S.H., Yoon, J.H. & Higgins, S.T., (2008).  Pregnant and Postpartum Women.  In S.T. Higgins, K. 
Silverman, & S.H. Heil (Eds.), Contingency management in substance abuse treatment  (pp. 182 -201). New 
York, NY: The Guilford Press.  
 
Higgins, S.T., Bernstei n, I.M. , Washio, Y., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Skelly, J.M., Higgins, T.M., & 
Solomon, L.J. (2010a).  Effects of smoking cessation with voucher -based contingency management on 
birth outcomes. Addiction.  {epub ahead of print] NIHMSID # 207216  
 
Higgins, S.T . & Chilcoat, H.D.  (2009).  Women and smoking: An interdisciplinary examination of 
socioeconomic influences.  Drug Alcohol Depend , 104 (Suppl. 1) , S1-5. 
 
Higgins, S.T., Delaney, D.D., Budney, A.J., Bickel, W.K., Hughes, J.R., Foerg, F. & Fenwick, J. (1991 ).  A 
behavioral approach to achieving initial cocaine abstinence.  Am J Psychiatry , 148, 1218 -24. 
  
Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Dantona, R., Donhan, R., Matthews, M., & Badger, G.J. (2007a).  Effects of varying 
the monetary value of voucher -based incentive s on abstinence achieved during and following treatment among 
cocaine -dependent outpatients.  Addiction, 102 , 271 -281.   
 32  
Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Mongeon , J.A., Solomon, L.J., McHale, L., & Bernstein, I.M. (2007b).  
Biochemical verification of smoking status in pregnant and recently postpartum women.  Exp Clin 
Psychopharmacol , 15, 58-66. 
 
Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Skelly, J.M., Solomon, L.J. , & Bernstein, I.M.  (2009).  Educational 
disadvantage and cigarette smoking during pregnancy.  Drug Alcohol Depend , 104 (Suppl. 1) , S100 -05. 
 
Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Dumeer, A.M., Thomas, C.S., Solomon, L.J., Bernstein, I.M. (2006). Smoking status 
in the initial weeks of quitting as a predictor of smoking -cessation outcomes in pregnant women. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence , 85, 138 -141.  PMID:  16720082.  
 
Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Solomon, L.J., Bernstein, I.M., Lussier, J.P., Abel, R.L., Lynch, M.E., & Badger, G.J. 
(2004).  A pilot study on voucher -based incentives to promote abstinence from cigarette smoking during 
pregnancy and postpartum.  Nic Tob Res , 6, 1015 -20.   
 
Higgins, T.M., Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Skelly, J.M., Bernstein, I.M., Solomon, L.J., Washio, Y. 
& Preston, A.M. (2010b). Effects of cigarette smoking cessation on breastfeeding duration. Nic Tob Res . PMID: 
20339141 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher)  
 
Higgins, S.T., Silverman, K. & Heil, S.H. (Eds.). (2008). Contingency management in substance abuse 
treatment . New York, NY: The Guilford Press.  
 
Hjalmarson, A.I.M., Hahn, L., & Svanberg, B. (1991).  Stopping smoking in pregnan cy: effect of a self -
help manual in controlled trial.  British Journal of Obstetrics and Gyneacology, 98, 260-264.   
 33  
Hughes, J.R., & Hatsukami, D.K. (1986). Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal.  Arch Gen Psychiatry , 
43, 289 -94. 
 
Institute of Medicine .  (2009).  Initial national priorities for comparative effectiveness research: brief report .  
Washington, DC:  National Academies Press.   
 
Ip, S., Chung, M., Raman, G., Chew, P., Magula, N., DeVine, D., et al. (2007).  Breastfeeding and maternal and 
infant health outcomes in developed countries.  Evid Rep Technol Assessment (full report), 153 , 1-186.   
 
Johnson, M.W., & Bickel, W.K. (2002).  Within -subject comparison of real and hypothetical money rewards in 
delay discounting.  Journal of the Experimental  Analysis of Behavior , 77, 129 -146.   
 
Kandel, D.B., Griesler, P.C., & Schaffran, C. (2009).  Educational attainment and smoking among women: risk 
factors and consequences for offspring. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, S24 -33.   
 
Kornhauser, M., & Schneiderma n, R. (2010).  How plans can improve outcomes and cut costs for preterm infant 
care.  Managed Care, http://www.managedcaremag.com/archives/1001/1001.preterm.html.   (searched 
9/29/2011)  
 
Knealing, T.W., Roebuck, M.C., Wong, C.J., & Silverman, K. (2008).  E conomic costs of the therapeutic 
workplace intervention added to methadone maintenance.  J Subst Abuse Treat, 34 , 326 -332.   
 
Linares Scott, T.J., Heil, S.H., Higgins, S.T., Badger, G.J., & Bernstein, I.M.  (2009).  Depressive symptoms 
predict smoking stat us among pregnant women.  Addict Behav , 34, 705 -8. 
 34  
Lumley, J., Chamberlain, C., Dowswell , T., Oliver, S., Oakley, L., & Watson, L.  (2009).  Interventions for 
promoting smoking cessation during pregnancy.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . Jul 8;(3):CD001055  
 
Lussier, J.P., Heil, S.H., Mongeon , J.A., Badger, G.J., & Higgins, S.T. (2006).  A meta -analysis of voucher -
based reinforcement therapy for substance use disorders.  Addiction , 101, 192 -203. 
 
Melvin, C.L., & Gaffney, C.A. (2004).  Treating nicotine use and dependence of pregnant and parent ing 
smokers: An update .  Nic Tob Res , 6 S2, S107 -124.    
 
Miles, D.R., Lanni, S., Jansson, L., & Svikis, D.  (2006).  Smoking and illicit drug use during pregnancy: impact 
on neonatal outcome.  J Reprod Med,, 51 , 567 -572.    
 
Miller, D.P., Villa, K.F., Hog ue, S.L., Sivapathasundaram, D.  (2001).  Birth and first -year costs for mothers 
and infants attributable to maternal smoking.  Nic & Tob Res, 3 , 25-35.   
 
Mundt, M.P., French, M.T., Roebuck, M.C., Manwell, L.B., & Barry, K.L. (2005).  Brief physician advi ce for 
problem drinking among older adults: an economic analysis of costs and benefits.  J Stud Alcohol, 66 , 389 -394.  
 
Mullen, P.D., Carbonari, J.P., Tabak, E.R., & Glenday, M.C.  (1991).  Improving disclosure of smoking by 
pregnant women.  Am J Obstet Gy necol , 165, 409 -13.  
 
Oncken, C.A., Kranzler, H.R. (2009).  What do we know about the role of pharmacotherapy for smoking 
cessation before or during pregnancy.  Nic Tob Res , 11, 1265 -1273.   
 
 35 Patten, C.A., Smith, C.M., Brockman, T.A., Decker, P.A., Hughes,  C.A., Nadeau, A.M., et al. (2011).  
Support -person promotion of a smoking quitline: a randomized controlled trial.  Am J Prev Med, 41 , 17-
23.   
 
Reeves, S., & Bernstein, I.M.  (2008).  Optimal growth modeling.  Semin Perinatol , 32, 148 -53. 
 
Roebuck, M.S.,  French, M.T., & McLellan, A.T. (2003).  DATStats: results from 85 studies using the Drug 
Abuse Treatment Cost Analysis Program.  J Subst Abuse Treat, 25 , 51-57.   
 
Roebuck, M.C., & Liberman, J.N. (2009).  Impact of pharmacy benefit design on prescription drug utilization: 
a fixed effects analysis of plan sponsor data.  Health Serv Res, 44, 988-1009 .   
 
Roebuck, M.C., Liberman, J.N., Gemmill -Toyama, M., & Brennan, T.A. (2011).  Medication adherence leads 
to lower health care use and costs despite increased drug spending.  Health Aff (Millwood), 30, 91-99.   
 
Rogers, J.M. (2009).  Tobacco and pregnancy.  Reproductive Toxicology, 28 , 152 -160.   
 
Roll, J.M., & Higgins, S.T. (2000).  A within -subject comparison of three different schedules of reinforcement 
of drug abstinence using cigarette smoking as an exemplar.  Drug Alcohol Depend , 58, 103 -9. . 
 
SAS Institute Inc. (1985).  SAS User’s guide: Stat istics, version 5 edition. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc.  
 
Salome, H.J., French, M.T., Miller, M., McLellan, A.T. (2003). Estimating the client costs of addiction 
treatment: first findings from the client DATCAP.  Drug Alcohol Dependence, 71 , 195 -206.   
 
 36 Schiffman, S., Scharf, D.M., Shadel, W.G., Gwaltney, C.J., Dang, Q., Paton, S.M., & Clark, D.B. (2006).  
Analyzing milestones in smoking cessation: illustration in a nicotine patch trial in adult smokers.  J Consult Clin 
Psychol, 74 , 276 -285.   
 
Sigmon, S.C.,  Lamb, R.J., & Dallery, J. (2008).  Tobacco.  In S.T. Higgins, K. Silverman, & S.H. Heil (Eds.), 
Contingency management in substance abuse treatment, pp 99 -119.  New York, NY: The Guilford Press.   
 
Silverman, K.. Chutaupe, M.A., Bigelow, G.E., Stitzer, M. L. (1999).   Voucher -based reinforcement of cocaine 
abstinence in treatment -resistant methadone patients: effects of reinforcement magnitude.  
Psychopharmacology, 146,  128-138.   
 
Silverman, K., Svikis, D., Robles, E., Stitzer, M.L., & Bigelow, G.E. (2001) .  A reinforcement -based therapeutic 
workplace for the treatment of drug abuse: six -month abstinence outcomes.  Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 9 , 14-23.   
  
Solomon, L.J., Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Mongeon, J.A., & Bernstein, I.M.  (2006).  Psychological 
symptoms following smoking cessation in pregnant smokers.  J Behav Med , 29, 151 -60. 
 
Solomon, L.J., Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Th omas, C.S., & Bernstein, I.M.  (2007). Predictors of 
postpartum relapse to smoking.  Drug Alcohol Depend , 90, 224 -7. 
 
Solomon, L.J. & Flynn, B. S. (2005).   Telephone support for pregnant women who want to stop smoking.  
Health Promot Pract, 6 , 105 -108.   
 
 37 Svikis, D.S., Golden, A.S., Huggins, G.R., Pickens, R.W., McCaul, M.E., Velez, M.L., Rosendale, C.T. et al. 
(1997).  Cost effectveness of treatment for drug -abusing pregnant women.  Drug Alcohol Depend.  45 , 105 -113.   
 
Taylor, M. (2009).  Economic analys is of interventions for smoking cessation aimed at pregnant women.  
Supplementary report to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedi a/live/13023/49421/49421.pdf   (9/29/2011).   
 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2008).  Smoking prevalence among women of reproductive 
age—United States, 2006. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Review 57 (31), 849-852.   
 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010).  Tobacco use and pregnancy: Home. 
http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/tobaccoUsePregnancy/index.htm.  
 
Volpp , K.G., & Das, A. (2009). Comparative effectiveness —thinking beyond medication A versus medication 
B.  N Engl J Med, 361 , 331 -333.   
 
Windsor, R.A., Lowe, J.B., Perkins, L.L., Smith -Yoder, D., Artz, L., Crawford, M., Amburgy, K., & Boyd, N.R. 
(1993).  Heal th education for pregnant smokers: Its behavioral impact and cost benefit. Am J Public Health , 83, 
201-6.   
 
Windsor, R.A., Cutter, G., Morris, J., Reese, Y., Manzella, B., Bartlett, E.E., Samuelson, C., & Spanos, C. 
(1985).  The effectiveness of smoking c essation methods for smokers in public health maternity clinics: A 
randomized trial.  Am J Public Health , 75, 1389 -92.    
 
 38 Yanagawa, T., Fujii, Y., & Mastuoka, J. (1994).  Generalized Mantel -Haaenszel procedures for 2 X J tables. 
Environ Health Perspect , 102(suppl 8) , 57-60. 
 
Yoon, J.H., Higgins, S.T., Heil, S.H., Sugarbaker, R.J., Thomas, C.S., & Badger, G.J.  (2007).  Delay 
discounting predicts postpartum relapse to cigarette smoking among pregnant women.  Exp Clin 
Psychopharmacol , 15, 176 -86. 
 
 
 
 