 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the e ffect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients In 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
Confidential  
 
 Page 1 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Pilot study to assess the e ffect of Providing Intermittent Positive Air way 
Pressure  in COPD  Patients in order  to Reliev e Their Exer tion Related 
Shortness of Breath  
 
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
  
   
REVISION:   Rev 2.0, 10/05 /2017  
 
SPONSOR:    Respironics, Inc., a Philips Company  
(“Philips Respironics”)  
    1740  Golden Mile Highway  
    Monroeville, PA 15146  
1-(724) -387-7500  
http://www.respironics.com/  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:    This protocol, its conte nts and the information relating to it are the 
proprietary prope rty of Philips Respironics.  All information is to be kept 
confidential.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 2 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS:  
 
DOCUMENT CONTROL PAG E ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  3 
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES ……… ….…………………………………………………………………... 4 
STUDY MONITORS ……… ………………………………………………………………………………….. 4 
PROTOCOL APPROVALS  
INVESTIGATOR STATEMENT….. ……………………………… …………………... …………………………… ...5 
PROTOCOL REVISIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  6 
PROTOCO L 
BACKGROUND SIGNIFICANCE.. …………………………………………………………………………………………… ..7 
STUDY AIM AND  OBJECTIVES ……………………………………………………………………………………………. 10 
STUDY DESIGN …………………………………… …………………………… …………………………………………… 10 
STUDY DEVICES …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… …9 
SUBJECT SELEC TION ………………………………………………………………………………………………………... 10 
INCLUSION / EXCLUSION CRITERIA : ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 11 
STUDY PROCEDURE S……………… ………………………………………………………………………………… …..…12 
STATISTICAL AND ANAL YTICAL PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  14 
RISK AND DISCO MFORTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  15 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  16 
MONITORING AND QUALI TY ASSURANCE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 17 
APPENDIX A……………………………………………………………………………………...…… ……………………… 20 
APPENDIX B…………………… ……………………………………………………………… ………………………. .……. 21 
APPENDIX C…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...22  
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 3 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 DOCUMENT CONTROL PAGE  
 
Study Name  
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway Pressure in COPD Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their Exertion Related Shortness of Breath  
 
Protocol Number  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 
Protocol Version  
2.0 
 
Version Date  
Oct 05 , 2017 
 
Author(s)  
Chuck Cain,  Manager, Clinical Research  
Parul Nisha, Scientific Writer , Clinical Research  
Jeff Jasko, Clinic al Data Manager, Data Management and Biostatistics  
 
Sponsor  
Philips Respironics . 
1740 Golden Mile Highway  
Monroeville, PA 15146  
Phone: 1 -800-387-7500  
http://www.respironics.com  
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 4 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES  
 
William Sims, MD  
Pittsburgh Pulmonary Associate s, LTD                                                        
1200 Brooks Lane, Suite 130  
Jefferson Hills, PA. 15025  
 
 
Alan Cropp , MD  
Pulmonary Rehabilitation Associates  
925 Trailwood Drive  
Youngstown, Ohio 44512  
 
 
Study Monitor(s)      
                                                              
Chuck Cain                                                                          
Manager, Clinical Research                                                               
Philips                                                                                  
1010 Murry Ridge Lane              
Murrysville, PA 15668              
Tel:  724 -733-5835                                                                                                                                
Mobile: 412 -657-1814                                                                                                                  
E-mail:  chuck.cain@philips.com                                                         
 
 
Ketah Doty , RN, BSN, OCN  
Senior Clinical Research Associate  
1010 Murry Ridge Lane  
Murrysville, PA 15668  
Phone: 724 -387-7921  
Mobile:  412-738-6281  
E-mail: ketah.doty@philips.com  
            
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 5 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
Investigator Agreement  
 
As Investigator of the study titled  “Pilot Study Assess ing the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive 
Airway Pressure in COPD Patients in Order to Reliev e Their Exertion Related Shortness of Breath .” (the 
“Study”), I agree to:  
 
(i) conduct the Study in accordance with: this Investigator Agreement; the Study’s Protocol as approved 
by the Institutional Review Board (IRB ) (the “Protocol”); all applicable laws and regulations; and any 
IRB or FDA conditions of approval;   
(ii) await I RB approval for the Protocol before obtaining informed consents;  
(iii) ensure that all requirements for informed consent are met and not let any subject participate in the 
Study before obtaining that subject’s informed consent;  
(iv) not make modifications  to the Protocol as supplied to me by Philips Respironics, Inc. (the 
“Sponsor”), without first obtaining the written approval of the Sponsor;  
(v) provide the Sponsor with accurate financial information as required by FDA regulations;  
(vi) supervise all te sting of investigational devices that involves any Study subject;  
(vii) maintain Study documentation for the period of time as required by FDA regulations; and  
(viii) supply to the Sponsor, as part of this Investigator Agreement, my curriculum vitae.  
 
 
INVESTIGATOR       
 
Signature: ____________________________________________________________  
 
Printed Name: ________________________________________________________  
   
Date:           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 6 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
PROTOCOL REVISIONS  
 
Rev 
Level   
Changes Made for  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN  
Date   
Contributors  
2.0  Updates to make study visit 
language consistent  
 Update I/E to exclude pregnant 
subjects, specify short -acting  
 Update study procedures to indicate 
pregnancy screening, information 
collection, and randomization  
 Update risk sectio n with fetus CT 
scan risk language  
 Updated formatting  
 10/05 /2017  C. Cain, P. Nisha, K. 
Doty, J. Hughes  
1.0  Updated Study Procedures to obtain 
a CT Scan if not available in recent 
medical history  
 Update to include CT Scan risk 
language  
 Updated study monit ors and 
investigator first name  08/01/2017  C. Cain, P.Nisha  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0 Original Draft  03/01/2017  C. Cain, P.Nisha, J.Jasko  
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 7 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
 
 
BACKGROUND SIGNIFICA NCE  
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a condition associated with expiratory airflow 
limitat ion leading  to dynamic hyperinflation and an increase in Functional Residual Capacity (FRC) (the 
amount of air left in the patients lungs at the end of a normal exhalation ) as well as an increased Residual 
Volume (RV) (the amount of air left in the patient ’s lungs at the end of a forced exhalation ). Such 
increa se in functional residual capacity can in turn lead to increased work of breathing and dyspnea.   
 
Dyspnea in COPD  
Impairment of lung function (usually measured as FEV 1) is one of the common guideline s for defining 
the severity of COPD. Forced Expiratory Volume 1 (FEV 1) is the amount  of air forcibly exhaled during 
the first second of a forced expiratory maneuver . It is by far the most frequently used index for assessing 
airway obstruction.  Dyspnea symptoms (perceived shortness of breath) also contribute to the severity of 
the disease and are the basis of treatment. Breathlessness and exercise intolerance are the most common 
symptoms in chronic obstructive lung disease , and they can present in all sever ity stages either at rest or 
under conditions of exertion and exercise. These symptoms also progress as the disease advances, which 
leads to inactivity and muscle deconditioning.  This can continue in a cycle leading to further inactivity, 
social isolation  and fear of dyspnea. Finally, given that exercise is a r ecommendation in patients with 
COPD, dyspnea can interfere with the best treatment regimen.  
 
In GOLD COPD, classifications are used to describe the severity of the obstruction or airflow limitation.  
The worse a person's airflow limitation is, the lower their FEV 1. As COPD progresses, FEV 1 tends to 
decline. GOLD COPD staging uses four categories of severity for COPD, based on the value of FEV 1 30 
 
 
Stage I  Mild COPD  FEV 1 ≥ 80% normal  
Stage II  Moderat e COPD  FEV 1 50-79% normal  
Stage III  Severe COPD  FEV 1 30-49% normal  
Stage IV  Very Severe COPD  FEV 1 < 30% normal, or < 50% 
normal with chronic respiratory 
failure present  
 
 
Physical Exertion and Exercise in COPD  
COPD is associated with a considerable burd en of disease, even affecting many things that are 
fundamental to everyday life  such as the ability to breathe, talk, walk, sleep, or work.  A telephone  survey 
of patients with COPD living in  North America and in Europe documented the frequen cy of 
breathles sness with daily activities  of 3,265 participants with a diagnosis of COPD . According to this 
questionnaire, one -fifth of the patients reported that they were br eathless even when just sitting or lying 
still and 24% when talking. On e-third said they were b reathless when doing light housework or while 
getting washed or dressed, and nea rly 70% were short of breath when walking up a flight of stairs 1, 2. 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 8 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 Pathophysiological factors known to contribute to exertional dyspnea in COPD patients include increased 
intrinsic mechanical loading of inspiratory muscles (PEEPi), inspiratory muscle we akness, and increased  
ventilatory demand relative to capacity, gas exchange abnormalities, dynamic airway compression, 
cardiovascular factors, and any combination of the above.  3, 4 In addition to lung function, peripheral 
muscle force is also an important  determinant of exercise capacity in COPD.  By gaining muscle mass 
and strength through exercise training, there would be an improvement in peripheral muscle function, 
which co uld be a reasonable therapeutic target for patients with COPD.  
Well -designed  exercise training programs are essential for patients with COPD to achieve a physiological 
training effect.  Substantial improvements in exercise tolerance and overall improvement s in disease can 
be obtained as a result of properly designed exercise training  programs.  The improvements of exercise 
tolerance have been found to be linked with physiological changes, such as improved muscle function 
and altered breathing pattern (highe r tidal volume) and lower breathing frequency that leads to a reduced 
dead space to tidal volume ratio and thus to a lower ventilatory requirement for exercise. 5, 6   
 
In order to enhance exercise training programs, patients with COPD need to feel relief from their 
breathlessness.  Treatments to reduce airflow obstruction and/or dyn amic hyperinflation include pursed 
lip breathing (PLB) 7, 8, anti-inflammatory  drugs 9, breathing  helium -oxygen mixtures 10, 11  
bronchodilators , 9, 11   placement of endobronch ial valves 12, 13, and lung volume reduction surgery 14, 15.  
Different reports have shown that the administration of continuous positive pressure (CPAP) or pressure 
support ventilation (PSV) by mechanical non-invasive ventilation (NIV) devices, can improv e exercise 
tolerance and breathlessness in stable COPD patients. It is believed  that increased respiratory muscle 
effort, associated with high ventilatory demand relative to respiratory muscle capacity, may contribute to 
dyspnea in many patients with chron ic respiratory disease.  There have been multiple studies that have 
evaluated t he effect of NIV on dyspnea but only a few studies have considered dyspnea  as an endpoint 
measure.  
A systematic study of COPD patients in pulmonary rehabilitation found that sh ort-term administration of 
NIV during exercise training significantly improve d dyspnea and exercise endurance16.  This was also 
supported by a compiled review of 15 studies suggesting that NIV support during exercise may acutely 
reduce exertional dyspnea a nd improve exercise endurance in patients with COPD18. Another study 
compared t wo different  levels  of inspiratory pressure support  – 5 and 10 cm H 2O, and found statistically 
significant and large improvements in exercise performance and dyspnea relief using pressure support of 
10 cm H 2O as compared to that  of 5 cm H 2O17. Two studies examining long -term nocturnal use of NIV in 
patients with severe COPD reported significant improvements in dyspnea ratings 19, 20. It has also been 
studied that the use of NIV a s well as CPAP during exercise decreases dyspnea and increases exercise 
tolerance 21, 22 which may facilitate patients’ participation in pulmonary rehabilitation.  
Although there has been research involving the benefit of providing NIV during exercise to i ncrease 
tolerance overall, there is little research specifically looking at shortening dyspnea recovery times 
associated with exercise. Additionally, NIV is usually applied via a face mask and devices need t o be 
connected to a power source thus limiting th e portability of the therapy. In the comparative pressure 
support study referenced above17, the application of NIV was very  similar to the use case of the 
VitaBreath  (Study device) via a mouthpiece interface, but with critical additional benefits of indepe ndent 
usage by patients and being portable.  Open mouthpiece ventilation is also emerging as a  useful technique 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 9 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 that may prevent further deterioration of gas exchange in COPD patients with mild to moderate acidosis, 
similar to traditional NIV delivered by a nasal mask23. 
 
We hypothesize that  providing intermittent non -invasive positive pressure therapy (a form of NIV or 
PAP) with a handheld device to COPD patients immediately after exertion can relieve their dyspnea , and 
consequently  allow them to be more a ctive .  This hypothesis will be tested by  comparing the distance 
walked by COPD patients with the help of VitaBreath  device versus Purse d Lip Br eathing as measured 
by a modified 6 -Minute Walk Test (6MWT).   
 
The modified 6MWT  will be  a variation of the sta ndard 6MWT32,29 where the participant will be stopped 
at the 3 minute mark to use the study device as intervention or controlled conditions for 30 seconds. 
Following this 30 seconds pause, the participant will continue with the remaining 3 minutes of the 
6MWT.  The distance walked by the participant for the entire 6 minutes will be recorded  along with 
independent distances walked during the first and second 3 minute halves.  
 
Although this product  may have some anticipated benefit in the Pulmonary Rehab (PR ) setting, this study 
is not intending to be directly associated with a PR program.  Use of a similar environment may be 
coincidental and only to facilitate operational execution in a safe and monitored environment for the 
study.   
 
 
STUDY INTERVENTIONS   
 
VitaBreath  (Investigational)  
 
The Philips Respironics investigational device VitaBreath  is a handheld, battery powered,  intermittent 
positive airway pressure device that is non -invasive, and provides positive airway pressure (PAP) of 18 
cm H 2O during inspi ration and 8 cm H 2O on expiration , thus creating 10 cm H 2O of pressure support . 
Pressure support is defined as the difference between inhalation pressure and exhalation pressure.   The 
study device is intended as an adjunct therapy to relieve shortness of b reath in COPD patients who 
experience exertion -related dyspnea to allow them to be more active . The air is delivered to the 
patient via a mouthpiece on the device.   
 
The VitaBreath is not intended to replace participant’s bronchodilators, anti -inflammator y medicines, 
and/or supplemental oxygen.  It is not intended to replace pulmonary rehabilitation as well.   
 
The VitaBreath device is designed for non -continuous use only and typical device use is expected to be 
for 2 -3 minutes. The device should only be ope rated for less than 10 minutes at a time . After such time, 
the device should be turned off for at least 30 minutes.  
 
Participa nts will be instructed that the  device is intended to provi de effective relief of dyspnea.  It will be 
further communicated to the m that the device may or may not help them recover from shortness of 
breath.   
 
The VitaBreath device is intended to relieve exertion -related shortness of breath in COPD patients.  For 
the majority of patients, this would occur as a result of activities of daily living, such as retrieving the 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 10 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 mail or climbing stairs.  Although patients may use the device when partic ipating in an exercise program 
that is not the primary intended use of the device . 
 
Pursed Lip Breathing (Control condition ) 
Pursed lip breathing  (PLB) is the standard of care  and will be use d as the control  condition  comparator.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
 
This will be laboratory -based study  with a 2-arm, randomized, controlled, crossover  design  where the 
partic ipants will be tested with the investigational de vice VitaBreath  and control condition ( PLB) in a 
random order.  
 
STUDY AIM  
 
The aim of this study is to evaluate  that intermittent positive airway pressure therapy given to COPD 
patients with the VitaBreath device will relieve their exertional dyspnea  allowing them to walk further in  
a modified 6MWT.   
 
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
The primary objective will be to compare the distance walked in 6 minutes by COPD participants using  
Pursed Lip Breathing  (PLB) versus an  intermittent positive airway pr essure handheld device, VitaBreath .  
 
Primary Efficacy Endpoint:  Distance walked as measured by modified 6MWT  evaluated during the 
Study Intervention Visit  
 
 
Primary Hypothesis  
 
Participants will walk further during the modified 6 -Minute Walk Test when using VitaBreath  compar ed 
to pursed -lip breathing  at the Study Intervention Visit .   
 
 
SUBJECT SELECTION / ENROLLMENT  
 
Participants will b e identified by investigators at each site. Following IRB approval and after obtaining 
written informed consent, participants found to possib ly meet criteria for participation will be screened to 
determine their eligibility.  The inclusion and exclusion criteria of this study are listed below.  
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 11 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 Participants with a diagnosis of COPD who experience shortness of breath may be eligible for 
particip ation in this study  
 
Sample Size  
 
This will be a 20 patient pilot study to provide a power analysis for the Pivotal IDE protocol . The 
previous engineering clinical study included three treatment conditions, whereas the planned pivotal 
design will only have  two conditions, VitaBreath and pursed -lip breathing.  This pilot study will test this 
new trial design.  
 
  
 
Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria:  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
All participants:  
 Age ≥ 40 
 Ability to provide consent  
 COPD diagnosis  
 FEV 1 <55 and  ≥ 25 percent  of predicted 
value  
 Perceived Shortness of Breath via the 
Modified Medical Research Counsel 
Dyspnea questionnaire (rating of 2 or 
greater)  (Appendix B)  
 Able to follow directions  
 Able to tolerate mild physical activity  
 Pursed Lip Breathing as standard of care  
 No e vidence of bullous lung disease ( with 
any bullae  greater than 3cm  in diameter ) 
as confirmed by a CT scan within the past 
one year.  All participants:  
 Subjects who are acute ly ill, medically 
complicated or who are medically unstable as 
determined by the investigator.  
 Suffering from COPD exacerbation at time of 
enrollment or 60 days prior  
 Subjects who are not currently prescribed 
oxygen and manifest oxygen desaturat ion 
below 8 8% on the screening 6MWT  
 Subjects with heart disease  or neuromuscular 
disease.  
 Subject s who are not prescribed short -acting 
bronchodilator  medication  
 Patients who have experienced recent 
barotrauma or pneumothorax  
 Unstable angina or Myocardial Infarction  
during past month  
 Uncontrolled Hyper tension  (systolic blood 
pressure of >180mmHg and a diastolic 
>100mmHg)  
 Heart Rate >120 at rest  
 Subjects who have trouble coordinating their 
breathing  with the device during the device 
training, or cannot tolerate the devi ce 
mouthpiece resulting in leaks from the nasal 
cavity  
 Women  of child -bearing potential (WOCP) 
who are pregnant, breast -feeding, or planning 
pregnancy during the course of the study.  
(WOCP  must have  a negative pregnancy test 
at every visit)  
  
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 12 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
 
Pregnancy  Screening  
All women of child bearing potential, (defined as any woman, unless surgically sterile or 
postmenopausal for at least 1 year) must be instructed to contact the Investigator immediately 
if they suspect they might be pregnant while participating i n this study. If a participant 
becomes pregnant, she will be discontinued from the study.  Pregnancy urine tests of WOCP 
will be completed at each visit prior to CT scan or usage of the VitaBreath study device.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
The study will be explained  to the potential participant and sufficient time provided to the subject  to ask 
questions regarding the study. Study related procedures will commence only after the informed consent is 
signed by the subject . This is a multi (2 or 3)  visit study a s part of  which , participants wi ll be asked to 
complete in -lab six minute walk tests .  
 
Screening Visit /s 1 and 2  - Screening and Randomization   
 
Recruited  participants will be asked to report to the clinical site where consenting and screening related 
procedures w ill take place.  After consenting , subject eligibility will be evaluated  and the following will 
be collected, demographics, anthropometri c measurements, concomitant medication s, vital signs and 
medical history review at Screening Visit 1. WOCP will complet e a pregnancy urine test at Screening 
Visit 1 prior to any CT scan.  
The rest of the screening procedures may commence if a recent CT scan  (in the past year)  of the 
participant is available  and confirms eligibility . If the study participant has not had a CT  scan within  the 
past year, they will be scheduled for one by study staff. The participants will be asked to return for 
Screening Visit 2 once the CT scan revie w confirms their eligibility .  
If a Screening Visit 2 is required, WOCP will complete a pregnanc y urine test prior to any usage of the 
VitaBreath study device  at Screening Visit 2 . 
 
Upon confirmation of their CT scan review  at either Screening Visit  1 or if needed, Screening Visit 2, 
participants will undergo the remaining  screening procedures to ass ess study eligibility: spirometry , 6 
minute walk test ( Standard 6MWT)29, 32 , device training/acclimation, and a dyspnea rating assessment 
(Modified Medic al Research Counsel - Appendix B)34.  
 
Participants will be asked to take their short -acting bronchodi lator medication 15 minutes prior to start of 
the 6MWT . 
 
The participant’s medical history will include an assessment of their medication use , smoking history , 
and how often they rely on their rescue medication ( at rest and with exertion ). Any participatio n in a 
Rehab ilitation Program  will be captured as well.  
 
Participants will be allowed to begin exercise asses sments 15 minutes after their bronchodilator 
administration. Concomitant medication and any adverse events will be recorded . The Participants 
oxyg en level will be monitored during the standard 6MWT by c ontinuous finger pulse oximetry. If the 
participant is not currently prescribed and using supplemental oxygen and their oxygen level is 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 13 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 consistently ≤ 88% during the test, the test will be stopped and  the participant will be excluded. If the 
partic ipant is currently prescribed and using supplemental oxygen during the test and their oxygen level 
consistently falls ≤ 88%, supplemental oxygen will be titrated during the test by trained study staff until 
their oxygen level persistently is at 90% or higher  during the test . Oxygen equipment will be available at 
the sites.  
 
We will follow the American Thoracic Society Statement Guidelines for the Six -Minute Walk Test 
which include the following criteria for im mediately stopping a 6MWT: Intolerable dyspnea, leg cramps, 
staggering, diaphoresis, and pale or ashen appearance .  
 
Device Training  
 
Participants will be asked to train on the VitaBreath device to practice breathing with it.  The purpose of 
this training p eriod is to get the participant acclimated to the device  prior to using it during the modified 
6MWTs at  the Study Intervention  Visit . If the participants have trouble coordinating with the device or 
cannot tolerate the mouthpiece resulting in leaks from th e nasal cavity, they will be excluded from the 
study.  
 
All participants will also be asked to practice pursed lip breathing with proper instruction and training by 
site staff.   
 
Randomization  
 
If the participant qualifies for the study, their device usage order ( VitaBreath  or control condition / pursed 
lip breathing ) will be randomized  using a permuted -block randomization sequence  at the study 
intervention visit . Each participant will complete two modified 6MWTs during  the Study Intervention  
Visit , one with each therapy in a randomized order .  The randomization will be stratified within each site.  
 
Sites will use a randomization schedule  in order to randomize the patient s.  
 
The Study Intervention Visit w ill be scheduled within 5±2 business day period  of Screening Visit/s .  
 
Study Intervention Visit  – Modified 6MWT   
  
During the study intervention visit, the participants will first complete the Chronic Respiratory 
Questionnaire (CRQ)33- initial (CRQ) (Appendix C).  This survey will be completed  by participant s 
before they use the device during the modified 6MWT. The response to this questionnaire will serve as a 
baseline measurement.  
 
At the Study Intervention Visit, WOCP will complete a pregnancy urine test prior to any usage of the 
VitaBreath study device.  
 
 Participants will be asked to practice breathing again with the VitaBreath device to get acclimated prior 
to using it during the modified 6MWTs at the Study Intervention Visit . Such use will be for a maximum 
time of 5 – 10 minutes . The coordinator will al so remind the participant to p ractice  Pursed Lip Breathing. 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 14 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 The participants will be asked to wait 30 minutes after using the device to wash -out any effects of 
training with the device  before starting the 6MWT . 
   
The coordinator will assess AEs or medicat ion changes since the last visit . Resting Heart Rate and Blood 
pressure will be checked before the 6MWTs.  
 
Participants will be asked to take their short acting bronchodilator medication a fter the device training, 
but only before the first walk test . Parti cipants will be allowed to begin asses sments 15 minutes after their 
bronchodilator administration. Concomitant medication and any adverse events will be assessed.  If 
additional uses of the bronchodilator are required by participants during the in lab study , that use will be 
recorded / documented. Participant’s b lood oxime try levels will be monitored via pulse oximeter  at all 
times .  
 
A medically t rained clinician  will be present during the tes t in case of adverse events.  
 
Participant s will be asked to perf orm two 6MWT assessments on  the Study Intervention  Visit. Borg 
assessments will be made prior to the start of each test.  
 
For one of the tests, participants will be give n the VitaBreath  device and the other test wil l be with 
control condition , where the p atients will be instructed to use pursed lip breathing.  The order of the se two  
tests will be randomized.  
 
Test Procedure  
 
In order to standardize the participant use of the devices, at the 3 minute mark the test will be stopped for 
30 seconds. During this 30 second pause, study participants will be instructed to use  the study device in 
order to help them recover from being short of breath. For the test where participants are randomized to 
not use a device, they will be instructed to use the pursed lip breat hing technique to help them recover 
during the 30 second duration. After the 30 second pause, the participants BORG assessment will be 
made and then they will be instructed to complete the remaining 3 minutes of the walk test.  At the end of 
the test, part icipants will be asked to sit down and their Borg assessment will be made every 30 seconds 
until they reach their baseline Borg.  
 
Participants will be required to rest  at least 30 minutes between tests . 
 
 
Statistical and Analytical Plan  
 
Descriptive Data  
Descriptive data tables will be provided for all variables of interest.  Continuous data will be presented by 
mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum observation.  Data will be presented in the 
untransformed and transformed format (if applica ble) for each continuous variable.  Categorical data will 
be presented as frequencies and percentages.  
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 15 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
Analysis Populations  
The endpoint will only be analyzed among completed cases in this pilot study.  
 
Primary Effectiveness Analysis  
The data from this trial will be evaluated to determine whether they meet the assumptions of parametric 
methods.  The distance walked during the modified 6MWT will be compared between VitaBreath  and 
pursed -lip breathing, using either a paired t -test or the nonparametric Wilc oxon Signed Ranks test, 
depending on the distribution of the data.  The significance level will be a two -sided alpha of 0.0 5. 
 
 
Safety Analysis  
 
The incidence of adverse events will be tabulated in the descriptive statistics and compared between the 
treatm ent conditions.  
 
Subject Accountability and Missing Data  
 
It is expected that the number of subjects who will withdraw early from this pilot study will be small. The 
number and proportion of subjects eligible for and compliant with the final examination wi ll be 
presented.  Subjects who withdraw from the study will be tabulated with the reasons for the withdrawal.  
The endpoint will only be analyzed among completed cases in this pilot study, and therefore data will not 
be imputed for missing values . 
 
Interim  Analysis  
 
There is no interim analysis planned for this study.  
 
 
Statistical Software  
The statistical analyses will be done using SAS, SPSS, StatXact, or Systat.  Each of these software 
packages provides special features that will be exploited to provide a comprehensive analysis with 
excellent graphics support.  
 
RISK AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
The FDA has determined that this study is significant risk due to the target patient population. VitaBreath 
is intended  to be an adjunct therapy for COPD participants to utili ze for  relief of  their dyspnea  after 
exertion that can consequently allow them to be more active. VitaBreath delivers intermittent non -
invasive positive pressur e (PAP) therapy  that provides positive airway pressure of 18 cm H2 O during 
inspi ration  (IPAP)  and 8 cm H 2O on expiration  (EPAP),  with a handheld device to  COPD participants.  
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 16 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 We believe that although there may be discomforts associated with the use of this device , all of the study 
devices have been tested to  help ensure safety.  Should the equipment not perform as designed, 
ventilation could incr ease or decrease more than desired. This effect could be uncomfortable. The 
participant can easily remove the device should it become uncomfortable or make breathing difficult. 
Other potential side effects may  include ear discomfort, and ga stric distension (aerophagia), all of which 
are quite uncommon, but generally cited side effects of PAP therapy.   
 
The EPAP and IPAP pressures delivered by VitaBreath may predispose COPD participants with recent 
barotrauma, p neumothorax or a history of bullous lung disease  (large bullae greater than 3cm in 
diameter)  to greater risk. Therefore, these participants will be excluded from the study ; per the inclusion 
criteria, patients must have n o evidence of bullous lung disease (with any bullae greater than 3cm in 
diameter ) as confirmed by a CT scan within the past one year . Additionally, severe COPD participants 
with <25% predicted FEV1 will also be excluded from the study.  
 
Computed Tomography (CT) imaging uses ionizing radiat ion to generate images of the body  but is 
conducted in the COPD population to provide detailed information regarding advancement and severity 
of the disease state. A CT scan  has risks associated with ionizing radiation exposure that could include 
potential  damage to DNA and a small increase in the possibility that a person will develop cancer later in 
life.35 CT associated  risks are increased for a fetus that is exposed to CT scans. Therefore p regnant 
women will be  excluded from participating in the study.  If a CT scan detects an incidental finding, the 
investigator may direct the participant to seek further health assessments through standard of care 
pathways .  
 
Although the  occurrence  rates for barotrauma and pneumothorax are not well defined,  should they occur 
at a rate greater tha n two occurrences,  we will suspend the study  for evaluation . If any other SAE occurs, 
we will critically evaluate it and decide continuance of the study accordingly. Death possibly related to 
the use of this product is unexpected , but we will stop the study if one Severe Unanticipated Device 
Related Adverse Event occurs.  
 
The clinical study design involve exercise testing.  Exercise testing can have moderate and severe risks. 
Moderate risks can include falling, muscle soreness or joint injury, low oxygen levels and low blood 
pressure.  In other comorbidities common with the COPD population, risks associated with exercise may 
include dizziness, arrhythmias, chest pain, heart attack, syncope and possibly death. All  exercise testing 
will be done in a controlled lab environment with at least two medically trained professionals available.  
Participants are required to use their bronchodilators before exercise testings. Participants’ oxygen levels 
will be checked and monitored before, duri ng, and after the exercise test ing.  American Thoracic Society 
Statement Guidelines for the Six -Minute Walk Test include the following criteria for immediately 
stopping a 6MWT: Intolerable dyspnea, leg cramps, staggering, diaphoresis, and pale or ashen 
appearance .  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Although participation in this trial will not result in any direct benefit to the subject, they will be 
contributing to generalizable data that will help improve device design and function.  
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 17 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
This clinical study will be monitored by Philips Respironics Inc. (Sponsor) in compliance with the Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) for clinical research; namely, 21 CFR Parts 50, 54, 56 and 812 and others 
as applicable.   The purpose of such monitoring is t o assure that the study remains in compliance with the 
approved protocol, investigator agreement and regulatory requirements, and to resolve any issues that 
arise during the conduct of the study.   The monitoring process includes initial site qualification,  periodic 
visits to the site, and a final visit to the site once the study is complete.   Monitoring visits are scheduled 
periodically throughout the conduct of the study to assure compliance with the investigational plan, and 
to verify the completeness and  accuracy of study data.   Monitoring also aids in identifying any research -
related problems for the sponsor and/or investigator to correct.   The Sponsor will conduct monitoring 
visits with appropriately trained clinical research professionals . 
 
Monitoring will be conducted by the sponsor to assure adherence to the protocol, Institutional Review 
Board requirements, and reporting and investigation of serious adverse events.   The site investigator will 
evaluate and classify events.   An adverse event (AE) is a situation in which the participant experiences 
illness or injury not addressed in the device labeling, research proto col, or research consent form.  All 
AEs will be recorded on the AE log provided in the site binder.  
 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is an ad verse event:  
 Resulting in death, or  
 Resulting in a serious deterioration in the health of the subject that:  
o Results in a life -threatening illness or injury,  
o Results in a permanent impairment of a body structure or body function,  
o Requires inpatient hospital ization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, or  
o Results in medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment of a body 
structure or body function.  
 
Participants will report any AEs or SAEs to the research staff (i.e., investigators a nd study coordinators) 
in the course of scheduled and non -scheduled participant contacts (i.e., clinic visits, phone calls, and 
emails).   All events will be reported to the sponsor by the research staff; however, all SAEs must be 
reported to the sponsor wi thin 24 hours of discovering the occurrence of the SAE.   The research staff is 
required to complete and submit the sponsor’s standard SAE form detailing the event.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Rennard S, Decramer M, Calverly PM, Pride NB, Soriano JB, Vermeire PA, Vestb o J. The 
impact of COPD in North America and Europe in 2000: the subjects’ perspective of the 
Confronting COPD International Survey. Eur Respir J 2002;20:799 –805. 
2. O'Donnell DE , Banzett RB , Carrieri -Kohlman V , Casaburi R , Davenport PW , Gandevia SC , 
Gelb AF , Mahler DA , Webb KA . Pathophysiology of dyspnea in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a roundtable. Proc Am Thorac Soc.  2007 May;4(2):145 -68. 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 18 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 3. Rossi A, Polese G, Brandi G, Conti G. Intrinsic positive end -expiratory pressure (PEEPi).  
Intensive Care Med  1995; 21: 522 -536. 
4. O’Donnell DE. Exertional  breathlessness in chronic respiratory disease. In; DA Mahler, ed. 
Dyspnea. New York, Dekker, 1998; pp. 97 -147. 
5. Casaburi R., Porszasz J. Burns MR, Carithers ER, Chang RSY, Cooper CB. Physiological 
benefits of exercise training in rehabilitation of severe C OPD patients. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1997; 155: 1541 -1551.  
6. Casaburi R. Mechanisms of reduced ventilatory requirement as a result of exercise training.  
Eur Respir Rev  1995; 5: 15, 42 -46. 
7. Gosselink R. Breathing Techniques in patients with chronic obstruc tive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Chron Respir Dis. 2004 ; 1:163 -172. 
8. Sahijua J, de Marchie M, Grassino A. Effects of imposed pursed -lips breathing on respiratory 
mechanics and dyspnea at rest and during exercise in COPD. Ches 2005; 128:640 -650. 
9. Grimes GC, Man ning JL, Patel P, et al. Medications for COPD: a review of effectiveness. Am 
Fam Physician. 2007 ; 76:1141 -1148.  
10. Eves ND, Pertersen SR, Haykowsky MJ, et al. Helium -Hyperoxia, exercise, and respiratory 
mechanics in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A ra ndomized crossover trial. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2006; 173:865 -870. 
11. Rice KL, Kunisaki KM, Niewoehner DE. Role of tiotropium in the treatment of COPD. Int J 
Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2:95 -105. 
12. Hopkinson NS, Toma TP, Hansell DM, et al. Effect of br onchoscopic lung volume reduction 
on dynamic hyperinflation and exercise in emphysema. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005; 
171-:453-460. 
13. Wan IY, Toma TP, Geddes DM, et al. Bronchoscopic lung volume reduction for end -stage 
emphysema: report on the first 98 pat ients. Chest. 2006; 129:518 -526. 
14. Bendit JO, Wood DE, McCool FD, et al. Changes in breathing and ventilator muscle 
recruitment patterns induced by lun g volume reduction surgery. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
1997 ; 155:279 -284. 
15. Lederer DJ, Thomashow BM, Ginsbur g ME, et al. Lung volume reduction surgery for 
pulmonary emphysema: Improvement in body mass index, airflow obstruction,  dyspnea, and 
exercise capacity index after 1 year. J Thorac CArdiovasc Surg. 2007 ; 133:1434 -1438.  
16. ZuWallack, R. The Roles of Bronchodil ators, Supplemental Oxygen and Ventilatory 
Assistance in the Pulmonary Rehabilitation of Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease. Resp Care 2008; 53(9): 1190 -1195.  
17. Van’t Hul A, Gosselink R, Hollander P, et al.  Training with inspiratory pressur e support in 
patients with severe COPD.   Eur Respir J 2006; 27:65 -72. 
18. Van’t Hul A, A. Kawakkel G. Gosslink R. J. The acute effects of noninvasive ventilatory 
support during exercise on exercise endurance and dyspnea in patients with chronic 
obstructive pu lmonary disease: a systematic review.  Cardiopulm Rehabil  2002; 22(4): 290 -7 
 
19. Cassanova C, Celi BR, Tost L, Soriano E, Abreu J, Velasco V, Santolaria F. Long -Term 
controlled trial of nocturnal nasal positive pressure ventilation in patients with severe COP D. 
Chest 2000;118:1582 -1590.  
20. Clini E, Sturani C, Rossi A, Viaggi S, Corrado A, Donner CF, Ambrosinao N. The Italian 
multicenter study on noninvasive ventilation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients. Eur Respir J 2002.  
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 19 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 21. Borel J -C, Verges S, Pepi n J-L, Vivodtzev I, Levy P, Wuyam B. Home exercise training with 
non-invasive ventilation in thoracic restrictive respiratory disorders: a randomized study. 
Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2009 ; 167:168 -173. 
22. Keilty SE, Ponte J, Fleming TA, Moxham J. Effect of ins piratory pressure support on exercise 
tolerance and breathlessness in patients with severe stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Thorax 1994 ; 49:990 -994. 
23. Nicolini, A., Santo M., Ferrari -Bravo M. and  Barlascini C. Open -Mouthpiece Ventilation 
Versus  Nasal Mask Ventilation in Subjects With COPD Exacerbation and Mild to Moderate 
Acidosis: A Randomized Trial . Respir Care.  2014 Dec;59(12):1825 -31 
24. Revill SM, Morgan MD, Sing h SJ, Williams J, Hardman AE. The endurance shuttle walk: a 
new field test for the assessment of endurance capacity in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Thorax 1999;54:213 –222. 
25.  Borg G. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Exer  1982;14:377–381 
26.  Hareendran A, Leidy N, Monz B et al  Proposing a standardized method for evaluating 
patient report of the intensity of dyspnea during exercise testing in COPD International 
Journal of COPD 2012:7 345 –355 
27. Borg G. A category scale with ratio properties for intermodal and interindividual 
comparisons. In: Geissler HG, Petzol P, editors. Psychophysical Judgement and the Process 
of Perception . Proceedings of the 22nd International Congress of Psychology. Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands: North Holland P ublishing Co; 1980:25 –34. 
28. American Thoracic Society/American Coll ege of Chest Physicians. ATS/ACCP statement on 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Am J Respir Crit Care med. 2003;167(2): 211 -277. 
29. ATS Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary  Function Laboratories. ATS 
statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2002;166(1):111 -117. 
30. http://www.goldcopd.org . August 2015  
 
31. Holland  AE et al., An official European Respirator y Society/American Thoracic Society 
technical standard: field walking tests in chronic respiratory disease. Eur Respir J.  2014; 
44(6):1428 -46 
32. Williams  JE; Singh  SJ; Sewell  L; Guyatt  GH; Morgan  MD. Development of a self -reported 
Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire (CRQ -SR). Thorax.  2001; 56(12):954 -9  
33. Launois, C., Barbe, C., Bertin, E., Nardi, J., Perotin, J. -M., Dury, S.,Deslee, G. (2012) . The 
modified Medical Research Council scale for the assessment of dyspnea in daily living in 
obesity: a pilot study. BMC Pulmonary Medicine, 12  
34. Westert GP, Lagoe RJ, Keskimaki I, Leyland A, Murphy M. An international study of 
hospital readmissions and re lated utilization in Europe and the USA. Health policy 
(Amsterdam, Netherlands). 2002 Sep;61(3):269 -78. PubMed PMID: 12098520. Epub 
2002/07/06. eng.  
35. Center for Devices and Radiological Health. "Medical X -ray Imaging." U S Food and Drug 
Administration Home Page. Center for Devices and Radiological Health, n.d. Web. 16 June 
2017. <https://www.fda.gov/Radiation -
EmittingProducts/RadiationEmittingProductsandProcedures/MedicalImaging/MedicalX -
Rays/default.htm#benefitsrisks>.  
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 20 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
 36. Jencks SF, Williams MV, Coleman EA. Re hospitalizations among patients in the Medicare 
fee-for-service program. The New England journal of medicine. 2009 Apr 2;360(14):1418 -28. 
PubMed PMID: 19339721. Epub 2009/04/03. eng.  
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 21 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
Appendix A 
MODIFIED BORG SCALE                
 Please grade your level of Shortness of Breath  using this scale  
 
 
0      Nothing at all  
0.5     Very, very slight (just noticeable)  
1      Very slight  
2      Slight  
3      Moderate  
4      Somewhat severe  
5 Severe  
    6  
7      Very severe  
8 
9      Very, very severe (almost maxim al 
10 Maximal  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 22 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
 
Appendix B   
 
 
Modified MRC Dyspnea Scale  
0 Breathless only with strenuous exercise  
1 Short of breath when hurrying on the level or walking up a slight hill  
2 Slower than most people of the same age on the level because of brea thlessness 
or have to stop for breath when walking at my own pace on the level  
3 Stop for breath after walking about 100 meters or after a few minutes at my own 
pace on the level  
4 Too breathless to leave the house or I am breathless when dressing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study to Assess the Effect of Providing Intermittent Positive Airway  Pressure  in COPD  Patients in 
Order to Relieve Their  Exer tion Related Shortness of Breath  
HRC -17007 -VBIDEPILOT -PN 
 Page 23 of 23 Rev 2.0, Oct 05 , 2017  
  
 
APPENDIX G  
 
 
Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire - Initial  
 
 
CRQ-SR initial.pdf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 