STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2 INTRODUCTION 7
2.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE 7
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO S UBJECTS 8
3 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS 8
3.1 OBJECTIVES , HYPOTHESES ,AND ESTIMANDS 8
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 11
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 11
3.4 ADDITIONAL EFFICACY ENDPOINTS 11
3.5 PHARMACOKINETIC ENDPOINTS 12
3.6 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 12
3.7 PATIENT REPORTED OUTCOMES 12
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 13
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 13
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 13
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 14
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 14
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 17
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND T HERAPY 18
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT T HERAPY 19
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 20
5.6 FOLLOW -UP AFTER SUBJECT DISCONTI NUATION OF STUDY DRUG OR FROM S TUDY 21
5.7 STUDY DRUG 21
5.8 RANDOMIZATION/D RUG ASSIGNMENT 22
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 23
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 23
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 23
Page 2 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF S AMPLE SIZE 27
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 27
7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 27
7.3 HANDLING POTENTIAL INTERCURRENT E VENTS FOR THE PRIMARY AND KEY SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 27
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 27
7.5 PHARMACOKINETIC ANALYSIS 28
7.6 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 29
7.7 OVERALL TYPE I ERROR CONTROL 29
7.8 SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 30
8 ETHICS 30
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 30
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 30
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 31
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 31
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 31
11 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 31
12 REFERENCES 31
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. HYPOTHESES FOR THE PRIMARY AND THE KEY SECONDARY E FFICACY ENDPOINTS 9
TABLE 2. SUMMARY OF THE ESTIM AND ATTRIBUTES OF TH E PRIMARY AND THE KE Y SECONDARY 
EFFICACY ENDPOINTS 10
TABLE 3. STUDY DRUG IDENTIFICATION 22
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMA 13
Page 3 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 33
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 35
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 36
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 37
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 42
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 44
Page 4 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted ?
The decline of near vision is common among older adults. In 2005, 1.044 billion people globally were 
estimated to have presbyopia, and prevalence is expected to increase to 1.782 billion by 2050 .1  Both 
nonsurgical and surgical methods for the correction of presbyopia are available. Traditional nonsurgical 
methods of refractive correction for presbyopia include the use of dedicated reading spectacles, bifocal 
or varifocal spectacles, and monovision or multifocal contact lenses. A number of surgical techniques 
are als o used for the treatment of presbyopia, which include monovision photorefractive keratectomy 
(PRK) or laser -assisted in situ keratomilieusis (LASIK) , conductive keratoplasty, intraocular lenses, and 
corneal inlays. However, for each of the existing techno logies mentioned above, visual quality is 
reduced at 1 or more viewing distances (near, intermediate, or distance), and each comes with its own 
unique safety risks and associated complications. For example, bifocals and progressive lenses (e .g., 
reading glasses, contacts) produce optical aberrations and can increase the risk of falls .2,3  Multifocal 
optics reduce image quality uniformly at all viewing distances. For surgical technologies, surgical risks, 
the need for repositioning and explantation, and/or regression of effect have limited their widespread 
adopt ion.4-6  Thus, there remains a need for a noninvasive, reversible, pharmacological treatment for 
presbyopia.
Pilocarpine is a muscarinic receptor agonist that mimics the actions of the parasympathetic 
neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, on smooth muscle. This causes 2 effects that enhance near vision: 
1)contraction of the iris sphincter muscle, resulting in pupil constriction (miosis); reducing the pupil size 
has long been recognized as an effective way to increase the useful depth of focus, in part by reducin g 
peripheral aberrations7, and 2) c ontraction of the ciliary muscle, resulting in central lens steepening and 
lens accommodation (focusing from distance to near ).8
Pilocarpine ophthalmic so lutions are currently used for the reduction of elevated intraocular pressure 
(IOP) in patients with open -angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension, management of acute angle -closure 
glaucoma, prevention of postoperative elevated IOP associated with laser surg ery, and induction of
miosis.9  Currently the use of pilocarpine ophthalmic solution is limited by the commonly experienced 
adverse event (AE) of temporal and periorbital headache (i.e., brow ache), which is believed to be due to 
the rapidity of the ciliary muscle contraction.10  However, AbbVie (formerly Allergan) has established an 
acceptable safety profile of AGN -190584 in 3 Phase 2 clinical studies (Studies 199201 -007, 199201 -009, 
and 199201 -010) and 2 Phase 3 studies (1883 -301-013 and 1883 -302-013). This is likely because the 
posology of pilocarpine evaluated for the treatment of presbyopia to date is of lower concentration 
(0.5% to 1.5%) and less frequently administered (once to twice daily) than for the treatment of 
glaucoma (1.0% to 4.0% administer ed up to 4 times daily). As a result, discontinuation rates for all 
clinical studies were generally low and safety parameters were not clinically significant between subjects 
who received AGN -190584 compared to subjects who received vehicle or a combinati on therapy. The 
majority of AEs reported in any treatment group were mild to moderate in severity. More detailed 
information regarding clinical safety findings, clinical efficacy findings, chemistry, and pharmacology is 
provided in the Investigator's Bro chure (IB) .
Page 7 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
Currently available approaches to presbyopia correction include nonsurgical options (spectacles or 
contact lenses) and surgical options (PRK or LASIK, conductive keratoplasty, intraocular lenses, or 
corneal inlays ).Each approach has its own risk -benefit ratio. Because the risk -benefit ratio with 
nonsurgical options is generally lower than that of surgical procedures, both historical and 
contemporary practice has been to attempt nonsurgical or pharmacological tre atment before resorting 
to more invasive alternatives. Although the use of spectacles and contact lenses to correct presbyopia is 
widespread, this approach has limitations.
Multifocal spectacles impair depth perception and edge -contrast sensitivity at cri tical distances for 
detecting obstacles in the environment3, and multifocal lenses have a corridor of nondistorted vision.  
For the se reasons, older people are more than twice as likely to fall when wearing multifocal spectacles, 
and many subjects have difficulty adjusting to using them .2,3  As a result, AbbVie is developing a 
noninvasive, reversible, pharmacological treatment for presbyopia.
More detailed information about the known and expected benefits and risks and reasonably expected 
AEs of AGN -190584 may be found in the IB.
Considering the Coronavirus Disease -2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, the benefits and risks to subjects 
participating in this study have been evaluated. Based on the limited information to date, n o additional 
risk to study subjects is anticipated with the use of AGN -190584; however, the risk of study activity 
participation should be evaluated by the investigator.
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives , Hypotheses , and Estimands
Objectives
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of 
AGN -190584 when administered bilaterally, twice daily for 14 days in subjects with presbyopia.
Hypotheses
The clinical hypotheses are that AGN -190584 ophthalmi c solution dosed bilaterally, twice daily (Hour 0 
and Hour 6) for 14 days will demonstrate a significant improvement in distance -corrected near visual 
acuity (DCNVA) over vehicle after the second dose, and AGN -190584 ophthalmic solution dosed 
bilaterally, twice daily for 14 days will demonstrate an acceptable safety and tolerability profile.
Page 8 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Hypotheses for the Primary and the Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoints
Hypothesis Efficacy Endpoints
H1Primary: The proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same 
refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
H2Key Secondary: The proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in photopic, 
high -contrast, binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in photopic CDVA 
with the same refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
DCNVA = distance -corrected near visual acuity ; CDVA = corrected distance visual acuity
Estimands
Estimand attributes are described in Table 2. 
Page 9 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 2. Summary of the Estimand Attributes of the Primary and the Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoints
Estimand LabelAttributes of the Estimand
Treatment Endpoint PopulationHandling of 
Intercurrent Events Statistical Summary
Estimand for the 
primary endpointAGN -190584 
or vehicleThe proportion of subjects 
gaining 3 lines or more in 
mesopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no 
more than 5 -letter loss in 
mesopic CDVA with the 
same refractive correction 
at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours 
after the second dose)ITT The composite 
strategy will be 
applied to handle 
the intercurrent 
events. Missing 
data will be 
regarded as a 
nonresponder for 
the primary 
endpoint.The difference and the corresponding 95% 
confidence interval in the proportion of subjects 
gaining 3 lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in 
mesop ic CDVA with the same refractive correction
at Day 14, Hour 9 between AGN -190584 and 
vehicle.
Estimand for the key 
secondary endpointAGN -190584 
or vehicleThe proportion of subjects 
gaining 3 lines or more in 
photopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no 
more than 5 -letter loss in 
photopic CDVA with the 
same refractive correction 
at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours 
after the second dose)ITT The composite 
strategy will be 
applied to handle 
the intercurrent 
events. Missing 
data will be 
regarded as a 
nonres ponder for 
the key secondary 
endpoint.The difference and the corresponding 95% 
confidence interval in the proportion of subjects 
gaining 3 lines or more in photopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no more than 5- letter loss in 
photopic CDVA with the same refractive correction
at Day 14, Hour 9 between AGN -190584 and 
vehicle. 
DCNVA = distance -corrected near visual acuity; CDVA = corrected distance visual acuity; ITT = intent to treat
Page 10 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same refractive correction at 
Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose).
3.3 Secondary Endpoints
Key Secondary Endpoint
1.Proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in photopic, high -contrast, binocular DCNVA with 
no more than 5 -letter loss in photopic CDVA with the same refractive correction at Day 14, 
Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
Supportive Secondary Endpoints
1.Proportion of subjects gaining 2 lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, binocular DCNVA with 
no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same refractive correction at Day 14, 
Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
2.Proportion of subjects achieving 20/40 or better in mesopic, high -contrast, binocular DCNVA 
with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same refractive correction at Day 14, 
Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
3.4 Additional Efficacy Endpoints
1.Change fro m baseline in mesopic Near Vision Presbyopia Task -based Questionnaire (NVPTQ) 
Performance score at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
2.Change from baseline in Presbyopia Impact and Coping Questionnaire (PICQ) Coping score at 
Day 14, Hour 3 
3.Chan ge from baseline in Visual Function Assessment application (VFA app) at Day 14, Hour 9 
(3hours after the second dose) 
Change from baseline in average number of blinks per minute 
Change from baseline in median working distance (centimeters)
Change from b aseline in median magnification level (%) from the original size
Change from baseline in reading speed (words per minute)
Change from baseline in median contrast level (%) based on the original value
Page 11 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.5 Pharmacokinetic Endpoints
Blood samples for the quantit ation of AGN -190584 in subject 's plasma will be collected from 
approximately 10% of enrolled subjects at selected sites.
3.6 Safety Endpoints
The safety measurements will include AE, vital signs (blood pressure and heart rate), mesopic and 
photopic, high -contrast, binocular CDVA, IOP, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, manifest refraction, dilated 
fundoscopic examination, post dose tolerability assessment, drop comfort questionnaire, and pregna ncy 
test.
3.7 Patient Reported Outcomes
Patient -reported outcome (PRO) questionnaires are administered in this study. The VFA app should be 
administered as well.
At screening, subjects will answer questions on vision functioning and health -related quality of life using 
the NEI VFQ- 25, including the near vision subscale items (Questions A3 to A5) from the Appendix of 
Optional Additional Questions.
Subjects will also complete the Ocular Surface Disease Index ( OSDI )at screening, which assesses 
symptoms of ocular irritation and their impact on vision -related functioning.
Each subject will also perform 4 paper -based near vision reading tasks under mesopic conditions.
Subjects will subsequently rate their vision -related reading ability and satisfaction with their vision -
related reading ability by completing the NVPTQ.
Subjects will also answer questions assessing the impact of presbyopia on their life and need for 
compen satory coping mechanisms using the PICQ .
Subjects will also answer single -item questions on their overall global impression of status ( PGIS ) and 
their overall global impression of change ( PGIC ). 
After study drug administration, subjects will complete the Drop Comfort Questionnaire to evaluate 
comfort of the study drug after administration.
Finally, the VFA app will be used to assess the subject 's ability to read on electronic devices.
For questionnaires completed on an electronic platform, if technical iss ues prevent the questionnaire 
from being completed, responses can be written down on source documents (preferably a paper copy of 
the questionnaire if available) and entered when the electronic platform is available .
Page 12 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a Phase 3, multicenter, double -masked, parallel -group, vehicle -controlled study in subjects with 
presbyopia. Subjects will receive AGN -190584 or vehicle dosed twice daily, bilaterally, for 14 days. 
Approximately 200 subjects with presbyopia will be enrolled at approximately 20 sites in the United 
States.
The study consists of the following visits: screening (Days -30 to -1), Day 1 (baseline), Day 7 ( ±2 days), 
and Day 14 ( ± 2 days). A study schema is shown in Figure 1. Subjects will receive either AGN -190584 or 
vehicle dosed twice daily, bilaterally, for 14 days beginning on Day 1. On nonvisit days, subjects will be 
instructed to instill one drop of the dispensed study drug in each eye twice daily, with each dose 
administered 6 hours apart. On visit days, study drug will be instilled bilaterally by designated site 
personnel at Hour 0 (8 AM ±1 hour) and Hour 6 (time measured 6 hours from the time of completion of 
the Hour 0 study drug administration). Study procedures on visit days are provided in the Activity 
Schedule ( Appendix D) and further guidance regarding study procedures are located in the Operations 
Manual ( Appendix F). 
Adult subjects 40 to 55 years of age with objective and subjective evidence of presbyopia will be 
enrolled. See Section 5for information regarding eligibility criteria.
Figure 1. Study Schema
At selected sites, blood will be collected for pharmacokinetic ( PK)on Days 1 an d 14 at Hours 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 3, 6 [pre -dose], 6.25, 
6.5, 7, 9, 12
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
A vehicle control group is a recognized comparative evaluator of safety and efficacy in clinical trials.
Page 13 of 113abbvie 
Screening 
-30 to -1 
!visit # : 1 2 3 AGN-190584 BID OU, n: 100 --, l_! Vehicle BID OU, n= 100 
[Hour (,ID 1, 3, @ 7, 9 
0 Dosing Timepoints, done 
in office during visits 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical , PK, and clinical procedures will be used in this study. All efficacy and safety -related 
measurements in this study are commonly used for assessing presbyopia. All clinical procedures in this 
study are standard and generally accepte d.
Suitability of Subject Population
The study population will include male and female adults 40 to 55 years of age with objective and 
subjective evidence of presbyopia. Subjects with any evidence of ocular conditions that could affect the 
safety of the s ubject or interpretation of efficacy parameters will not be enrolled.
Selection of Doses in the Study
The dose selection in this study is based on modeling and the analysis of safety and efficacy data from 
Phase 2 Studies 1991201 -007, 199201 -009, 199201 -010 and Phase 3 Studies 1883 -301-013 and 
1883 -302-013. AGN -190584 (pilocarpine hydrochloride) 1.25% is expected to be efficacious with an 
acceptable safety profile.
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study. Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1.Subjects must voluntarily sign and date an informed consent, approved by an independent 
ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or 
study -specific procedures.
Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
2.Adult male or female, 40 to 55 years of age inclusive at the time of the screening visit
3.Are willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
Disease/Condition Activity
4.Subject meets the following ocular conditions:
Subjective complaints of poor near vision that impact activities of daily living, as defined by 
at least a moderate impact (score ≥ 3) on at least 1 question on the NEI VFQ -25 Questions 5 
to 7 in the main questionnaire or Near Vision Subscale, Questions A3 to A5 in the Ap pendix 
of Optional Additional Questions, at the screening visit
Best cycloplegic distance correction at screening in the range of spherical -4.00 D to +1.00 D 
inclusively and cylinder ≤ ±2.00 D with photopic, high -contrast binocular CDVA of 20/25 or 
bette r at the screening and baseline visits
Page 14 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Photopic, high -contrast binocular CDVA of 20/32 or better by habitual monofocal correction 
(either spectacles or contact lenses), or willing to wear new monofocal correction spectacles 
to achieve photopic, high- contr ast CDVA of 20/32 or better during the study
Mesopic, high -contrast binocular DCNVA of 20/40 (J3) to 20/100 (J10) at the screening and 
baseline visits
Photopic, high -contrast, near visual acuity correctable to 20/40 (J3+) or better in each eye at 
the scr eening visit
Mesopic pupil diameter < 8.0 mm in both eyes at the screening visit
5.Subject does notmeet any of the following ocular conditions:
Severe dry eye disease (defined as total corneal staining ≥grade 3 on the 5 -point Oxford 
scale and an OSDI score of > 33) at the screening visit
Corneal abnormalities (including keratoconus, corneal scar, Fuchs 'endothelial dystrophy, 
guttata, or edema) in either eye that are likely to interfere with visual acuity
Narrow iridocorneal angles (Shaffer grade ≤ 2 or lower on gonioscopy examination), history 
of angle -closure glaucoma, or previous iridotomy
History of iris trauma, Adie 's tonic pupil, abnormal pupil shape in either eye, or anisocoria 
> 1 mm between pupils under mesopic conditions at the screening visit
Lens opacity in either eye that is determined to cause significant disturbance of the central 
visual axis on screening biomicroscopy
Diagnosis of any type of glaucoma or ocular hypertension
Bifocal or multifocal spectacles or contact lenses for habitual correction. Subjects willing to 
wear study -provided monofocal correction (either spectacles or contact lenses) during the 
study can be enrolle d.
Had cataract surgery, phakic intraocular lens surgery, corneal inlay surgery, radial 
keratotomy, or any intraocular surgery. However, subjects with history of PRK or LASIK with 
CDVA meeting inclusion criteria will be allowed to enroll.
Presence of an y ocular condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, could affect the 
safety of the subject or interpretation of efficacy parameters (e .g., uveitis, retinal 
detachment)
Concurrent use of temporary or permanent punctal plugs or history of punctal cautery in 
one or both eyes
Subject History
6.No history ofthe following:
Uncontrolled systemic disease
Any clinical condition or previous surgery that might affect the absorption, distribution, 
biotransformation, or excretion of AGN -190584
Page 15 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.A condition or a situation that, in the investigator 's opinion, may put the subject at 
significant risk, may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with 
thesubject 's participation in the study
Abnormal or clinically significant resul ts according to the investigator or designee, on 
physical/ophthalmic examination or medical history
clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within the last 
6 months
clinically significant medical conditions/disease stat eor any other reason that the 
investigator determines would interfere with the subject's participation in this study or 
would make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive the study drug
allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drug (and its 
excipients) and/or other products in the same class (cholinergic agonist)
7.Noknown active severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2)infection. If 
asubject has signs/symptoms suggestive of SARS- CoV-2 infection, the subject must have a 
negative molecular (e.g., polymerase chain reaction [PCR] ) test result. Subjects who do not 
meet SARS -CoV-2 infection eligibility criteria must be screen failed, and may only rescreen after 
they meet the following SA RS-CoV-2 infection viral clearance criterion:
8.At least 14 days since the first PCR test result have elapsed in anasymptomatic subject or 14 
days since recovery, defined as resolution of fever without use of antipyretics and improvement 
in sym ptoms
Contraception
9.For all females of childbearing potential; a negative urine pregnancy test at the screening visit 
and at baseline prior to the first dose of study drug
10.Female subjects of childbearing potential must practice at least 1 protocol -specified method 
of birth control, that is effective from Study Day 1 through study exit. Female subjects of 
nonchildbearing potential do not need to use birth control.
11.Female who is not pregnant orbreastfeeding, and is not considering becoming pregnant or 
donating eggs during the study or for approximately 30days after the last dose of study drug.
Concomitant Medications
12.Subject must not use any medications that may have a substantial effect on visual f unction 
or the optical properties of the eye (defined in Section 5.3)at least 2 weeks prior to the first 
dose of study drug, Day 1.
13.Subject must not use any ocular medications other than the study drug or medications 
administered to conduct study procedures atthe screening and Day1 (baseline) visit 
14.Subject must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 da ys or 
5 half -lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug, becurrently 
enrolled in another clinical study, orhave been previously enrolled in this study.
Page 16 of 113
QJ ·-
D a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.15.Subject must not have enrolled in the Phase 3 AGN -190584 Studies 1883 -301-013 or 
1883 -302-013.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females, Non childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered 
of nonchildbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
1.Premenopausal female with permanent sterility or permanent infertility due to one of the 
following:
Permanent st erility due to a hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, bilateral 
oophorectomy
Nonsurgical permanent infertility due to Mullerian agenesis, androgen insensitivity, or 
gonadal dysgenesis; investigator discretion should be applied to determining study entry 
for these individuals.
2.Postmenopausal female
Age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an alternative medical 
cause
Females, of Childbearing Potential
Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy while taking study drug(s) and for 
at least 30 days after the last dose of study drug.
Females must commit to one of the following methods of birth control:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal, injectable) associated wit h inhibition of ovulation -initiated at 
least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a 
hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure)
Intrauterine device
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system
Vasectomized partner (provided the partner has received medical confirmatio n of the 
surgical success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the trial subject)
Practice true abstinence, defined as: refraining from heterosexual intercourse when this 
is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (perio dic abstinence 
Page 17 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.[e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post -ovulation methods] and withdrawal are 
not acceptable)
Progestogen -only oral hormonal contraception, where inhibition of ovulation is not the 
primary mode of action, initiated at least 30 days p rior to Study Day 1
Male or female condom with or without spermicide
Cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide
A combination of male condom with cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide 
(double -barrier method)
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
During th e study, the following are prohibited.
Use of medications that may have a substantial effect on visual function or the optical 
properties of the eye is prohibited 2 weeks prior to the Day 1 visit and during the study:
Systemic medications with potential oc ular side effects, including topiramate, 
hydroxychloroquine, ethambutol, phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors (sildenafil, vardenafil, 
tadalafil), or tamoxifen
Ophthalmic, systemic, or intranasal anticholinergics and α -adrenergic receptor agonists with 
potential pupillary or accommodative effects, including oxymetazoline, tetrahydrozoline, 
phenylephrine, naphazoline, cyclopentolate, atropine
Cholinergic agonists such as pilocarpine, carbachol, and aceclidine
Alpha adrenergic antagonists including phentolamine mes ylate
Tricyclic antidepressants
Use of systemic antihistamines (including those used in over -the-counter (OTC) cold and flu 
preparations) is prohibited within 3 days prior to a study visit and on visit days.
Use of selective serotonin and serotonin -norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs and SNRIs) is 
not prohibited if dosage is consistent for at least 30 days prior to randomization and throughout 
the study.
Use of ocular medications other than the study drug or medications administered to conduct 
study p rocedures is prohibited from the screening visit until study exit. 
The decision to administer a prohibited medication/treatment will be made with the safety of the study 
subject as the primary consideration. When possible, AbbVie should be notified before the prohibited 
medication/treatment is administered.
Page 18 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including OTC or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or herbal 
supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of enrollment or re ceives during the study must be 
recorded through study exit.
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the AbbVie emergency 
contact. Information regarding potential drug interactions with AGN -190584 can be located in the 
AGN -190584 IB.
Subjects must be able to safely discontinue any prohibited medications as described in the Eligibility 
Criteria (Section 5.1) and Prohibi ted Medications and Therapy (Section 5.3).Subjects must be consented 
for the study prior to discontinuing any prohibited medications for the purpos e of meeting study 
eligibility.
COVID -19 Pandemic -related Vaccination Guidance
Given the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic, selected vaccines (e.g., messenger ribonucleic acid , 
nonreplicating viral vector, protein subunit, etc.) to prevent SARS -CoV-2 infection may be administered 
during screening or the treatment period, as long as components of the vaccine are not contraindicated.
The decision to receive a locally available vaccine should be based on local guidance and an individual 
discussion between the treating physician and the subject.
The potential impact of AGN -190584 on SARS -CoV-2 vaccination is unknown. Therefore, study drug 
should be administered as follows:
The first dose of AGN -190584, when possible, is preferred to be given at least ± 14days from the
final SARS- CoV-2 vaccine administration.
Note: The above guidance applies to all SARS- CoV-2 vaccine doses given as part of the complete 
vaccination course.
These recommendations may be subject to change based on the evolving knowledge around the use of 
SARS -CoV-2 vaccines in subjects with presbyopia and as more data are collected in real- world scenarios 
and clinical trials.
Any SARS -CoV-2 vaccine information must be documented on the COVID -19 vaccine electronic case 
report form . Refer to the Operations Manual for instructions on reporting any AEsassociated with the 
COVID -19 vaccine.
Page 19 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
A subject may voluntarily withdraw or be withdrawn from the study at any time for reasons including, 
but not limited to, the following:
Clinically significant AEs, which rule out continuation of the study drug, as determined by the 
investigator or the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
The subject req uests withdrawal from the study.
Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug and continuation of 
the study drug would place the subject at risk.
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages and continuation of the stu dy drug would 
place the subject at risk.
The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
Subject is significantly noncompliant with study procedures, which would put the subject at risk 
for continued participation in the trial.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status. At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site. The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns. If AbbVie terminates the study for 
safety reasons, AbbVie will prom ptly notify the investigator.
COVID -19 Pandemic -related Acceptable Protocol Modification
During the COVID -19 pandemic, it has been necessary to employ mitigation strategies to enable the 
investigator to ensure subject safety and continuity of care. Accept able mitigation strategies are 
identified and included in the Operations Manual in Appendix F.
The investigator should contact the sponsor medical contact before discontinuing a subject from the 
study for a reason other than described in the protocol to ensure all acceptable mitigation steps have 
been explored.
Interruption/Discontinuation of Study Drug Due to COVID- 19 Infection
During the study drug do sing period, a subject with confirmed (viral test positive) or suspected 
COVID -19 infection will be discontinued. Follow subsequent protocol Section 5.6for subjects who 
discontinue study drug.
Page 20 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.6 Follow -Up After Subject Discontinuation of Study Drug or from 
Study
Subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug treatment will be encouraged to stay in the study for 
safety assessments, unless subjects have decided to discontinue the study participation entirely 
(withdrawal of informed consent). Subjects should be advised on the continued scientific importance of 
their data even if they discontinue treatment with study drug early.
If a subject prematurely di scontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the Premature Discontinuation visit should be completed as soon as possible, 
preferably within 2 weeks.
5.7 Study Drug
AGN -190584 or matching vehicle manufactured by AbbVie will be administered bilaterally twice daily 
beginning on Day 1 (Baseline) and should be taken at approximately the same time each day (6 hours 
apart). On the day before office visits, the study drug must be administered no less than 12 hours 
before the scheduled visit time. The study site personnel will document compliance and any missed 
doses should be reported to the investigator by the subject.
The subject will be instructed to return all drug cont ainers (even if empty) to the study site personnel at 
each study visit. 
AbbVie will provide study drug for AGN- 190584 or matching vehicle. AbbVie -provided study drug should 
not be substituted or alternately sourced unless otherwise directed by AbbVie.
AGN-190584 and matching vehicle will be packaged in bottles with quantities sufficient to accommodate 
the study design. Each kit will be labeled per local requirements and this label must remain affixed to 
the kit. Upon receipt, study drug should be stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure 
location. Each kit will contain a unique kit number. This kit number is assigned to a subject via 
interactive response technology (IRT) and encodes the appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the 
subject' s corresponding study visit. Site staff will complete all blank spaces on the label before 
dispensing to subjects. Study drug will only be used for the conduct of this study.
Page 21 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 3. Study Drug Identification
Invest igational Product Investigation alProduct Vehicle
Investigational product name AGN -190584 Vehicle
Active ingredient Pilocarpine HCl 1.25% Not applicable
Mode/Route of administration 
(ROA)Topical eyedrop Topical eyedrop
Formulation Pilocarpine HCl 1.25% Ophthalmic 
Solution (011430X)
Lot T1484
Manufactured at Allergan Sales, 
LLCOxymetazoline HCl and Pilocarpine 
HCl Placebo Ophthalmic Solution 
(11258X)
Lot T1469
Manufactured at Allergan Sales, 
LLC
Dosage form Topical eyedrop Topical eyedrop
Dose and units 1 drop in each eye twice daily 1 drop in each eye twice daily
Drug preparation/packaging Study drug will be provided in 
sterile, 5 mL bottles in a carton. 
Each bottle & carton will be labeled 
as required per country 
requirement.Study drug will be provided in 
sterile, 5 mL bottles in a carton. 
Each bottle & carton will be labeled 
as required per country 
requirement.
Masking Masked Masked
Frequency of administration Twice daily to each eye, 6 hours 
apartTwice daily to each eye, 6 hours 
apart
Volume of study drug 3.5 mL per bottle 3.5 mL per bottle
Storage conditions In a refrigerator, refrigerated: 2°C 
to 8°CIn a refrigerator, refrigerated: 2°C 
to 8°C
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification numb er by the IRT at the screening visit .For 
subjects who rescreen, a new screening number will be assigned by the IRT. The IRT will assign a 
randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment group assignment according to the 
randomization sched ule.
Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive either AGN -190584 or vehicle dosed twice daily, in 
each eye, for 14 days.
Randomization will be further stratified by the following stratification factors:
Age group: ≤ 50 years and > 50 years 
Baseline binocular mesopic DCNVA severity: 20/63 or better, and worse than 20/63; with a 
maximum of 50% enrolled subjects with baseline binocular mesopic DCNVA of 20/63 or better 
Page 22 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Iris color: brown and nonbrown
Emmetrope status: emmetrope and nonemmetrope; with a maximum of 25% enrolled subjects 
with nonemmetrope. A subject will be considered as emmetrope if both eyes of the subject 
satisfy the 2 criteria: 1) -0.5D to +0.75D in sphere, inclusively; and 2) ≤ 0.75D in Cylinder.
All AbbVie personnel with dir ect oversight of the conduct and management of the study (with the 
exception of the AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team), the investigator, study site personnel, and the 
subject will remain masked to each subject's treatment throughout the study. To mainta in the masking, 
the AGN- 190584 and vehicle containers provided for the study will be identical in appearance. The IRT 
will provide access to unmasking subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not al low intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects. The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations. If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including those that may be due to the COVID -19 pandem ic), 
the investigator is responsible for notifying the IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges defici encies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device. Complaints associated with any component of this investigational 
product must be report ed to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device damage or not 
working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event. Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Page 23 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events : AGN -190584
An AEis defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relation ship with 
this treatment. An AEcan therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is c onsidered causally related to the use of the 
product.
Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
"special situations" such as accidental or intentional overdose, medication error, occupational o r 
accidental exposure, off- label use, drug abuse, drug misuse, or drug withdrawal, all which must be 
reported whether associated with an AEor not. Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is 
considered an AE. Worsening in severity of a repor ted AEshould be reported as a new AE.Changes in 
vital signs are considered to be AEsonly if they result in discontinuation from the study, necessitate 
therapeutic medical drug, and/or if the investigator considers them to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical evidence of AEson a routine basis throughout the 
study. All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AEif the 
surgery/ procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and/or the surgery/procedure has 
been pre -planned prior to study entry. However, if the pre -existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly 
during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition 
for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance or contract research organization (as appropriate) as a 
Serious adverse event (SAE) within 24 hours of the site being made aware of the SAE (refer to 
Section 4.3 of the Operations Manual for reporting details and contact information):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject
Life-threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical drug had not been taken. 
This does not include an event that would h ave been fatal if it had 
occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay. This does not include 
an eme rgency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss
Page 24 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substa ntially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject. Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., spr ained ankle).
Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Drug to Prevent Serious 
OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization but, based on 
medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical drug to prevent any of the outcomes listed above 
(i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, prolongation 
of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or significant 
disability/inca pacity). Additionally, any elective or spontaneous 
abortion or stillbirth is considered an important medical event along 
with any suspected transmission of an infectious agent via a 
medicinal product if no other serious criterion is applicable. 
Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient 
hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug 
abuse.
All adverse events , whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject ,will be collected from 
the time of study drug administration through study exit, unless spontaneously report after study exit . 
In addition, study procedure -related serious and nonserious adverse events will be collected from the 
time the subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
The following definitions will be used for serious adverse reaction (SAR) and suspected unexpected 
serious adverse reaction (SUSAR):
SAR Defined as all no xious and unintended responses to an investigational medicinal 
product ( IMP)related to any dose administered that result in an SAE as defined 
above
SUSAR Refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where a causal 
relationship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the sponsor 
or the investigator, is unexpected (not listed in the applicable reference safety 
information), and meets one of the above serious criteria
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local 
requirements.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Page 25 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following adverse events of special interest will be monitored during the study:
Headache
Visual disturbance
Subjects reporting a headache AE (including any AE related to headache or migraine) will be provided 
thesupplemental headache AE assessment form tofurther assess the headac he AE and grade the 
degree of severity.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigators will rate the severity of each AEas mild, moderate, or severe.
The investigator will use the following definitions to rate the severity of eac h AE:
Mild The adverse event is transient and easily tolerated by the subject.
Moderate The adverse event causes the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject's 
usual activities.
Severe The adverse event causes considerable interference with the subj ect's usual 
activities and may be incapacitating or life threatening.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AEto the use of study 
drug:
Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site 
becomes aware of the pregnancy. Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be 
discontinued (Section 5.5).If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject or in the partner of a study subject, 
information regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or congenital anomaly is 
consid ered an SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the 
event.
Page 26 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on p rimary and key secondary analyses. 
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described in the statistical analysis plan 
(SAP).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The intent to treat (ITT) population will consist of all randomized subjects. Subjects will be summarized 
according to the randomized study drug.
The safety population will consist of all subjects who received at least 1 administration of study drug.
Subjects will be summarized according to the study drug actually received.
The PK population will consist of all subjects with evaluable plasma concentrations of AGN- 190584.
7.3 Handling Potential Intercurrent Events for the Primary and Key 
Secondary Endpoints
The following methods will be used to address potential intercurrent events for both the primary and 
key secondary endpoints:
Subjects who prematurely discontinued study drug before the Day 14 visit will be considered as 
nonresponders. 
Subjects who die before assessment of the endpoint will be considered as n onresponders for 
the endpoint .
Subjects who are lost to follow -up and are missing data for the endpoint will be considered as 
nonresponders for theendpoint. 
Missing data will be regarded as a nonresponder, for both the primary and key secondary endpoint s.
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
The efficacy analyses will be conducted on the ITT population based on treatment as randomized. 
Baseline for efficacy is defined as the last nonmissing efficacy assessment before the first dose of study 
drug or randomi zation if no study drug is given. All statistical tests will be 2 -sided at a significance level 
of 0.05. All confidence intervals (CIs) will be 2 -sided 95%.
Summary and Analysis of the Primary Endpoint
The proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more i n mesopic, high -contrast, binocular DCNVA with no 
more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 will be 
Page 27 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.summarized by treatment group using the ITT population. As presented in the estimand for the primary 
efficacy endpoint in Section 3.1, the composite strategy will be used to handle the intercurrent events. 
Subjects with intercurrent events prior to Day 14 Hour 9 will be considered as nonresponders for the 
primary efficacy endpoint. Subjects who have missing data for the primary efficacy endpoint will be 
categorized as nonresponders in the primary efficacy analysis.
The comparison of the proportions between AGN -190584 and Vehicle will be made using the Pearson 's 
chi-square test. The treatment difference will be provided with a 2 -sided 95% CI using the normal 
approximation based on the pooled variance without continuity correction. 
Summary and Analysis of Secondary E ndpoint s
Summary and Analysis of Key Secondary Endpoint
Similar as for the primary endpoint, the proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in photopic, high-
contrast, binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in photopic CDVA with the same refractive 
correction at Day 14, Hour 9 will be summarized by treatment group using the ITT population. As 
presented in the estimand for the key secondary efficacy endpoint in Section 3.1, the composite strategy 
will be used to handle the intercurrent events. Subjects with intercurrent events prior to Day 14 Hour 9 
will be considered as nonresponders for the key secondary efficacy endpoint. Subjects who have 
missing data for the key secondary efficacy endpoint will be categorized as nonresponders in the key 
secondary efficacy analysis.
The comparison ofthe proportions between AGN -190584 and vehicle will be made using the Pearson 's 
chi-square test. The treatment difference will be provided with a 2-sided 95% CIusing the normal 
approximation based on pooled variance without continuity correction.
Summary and Analysis of Supportive Secondary Endpoint s
The supportive secondary endpoints will be analyzed using the same method as described in the analysis 
of the efficacy endpoints will be described in the SAP.
Subgroup Analysis for Efficacy
The primary and key secondary endpoints will be summarized by age group, sex, race, ethnicity, baseline 
binocular DCNVA severity, iris color, and emmetropes status.
7.5 Pharmacokinetic Analysis
Pharmacokinetic Parameters
Plasma PK parameters following the first and second doses on Day 1 and Day 14 will be calculated 
separate lyusing standard Phoenix WinNonlin equations . PK parameters calculated after the first and 
second dose on Day 1 will include area under the concentration versus time curve from 0 to the end of 
the dosing interval ( AUC 0-tau),maximum observed concentration ( Cmax), and time to maximum observed 
concentration ( Tmax). Additionally, theobserved concentration at the end of the dosing interval (Ctrough ), 
and peak -to-trough ratio will be calculated after the first dose on Day 1 . 
Page 28 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Steady -state PK para meters calculated after the first and second dose on Day 14 will include AUC 0-tau,ss, 
Cmax,ss , and Tmax,ss .Additionally, C trough,ss and peak -to-trough ratio will be calculated after the first dose on 
Day 14. Systemic accumulation will be assessed by calculating the accumulation index (AI) for AUC and 
Cmaxon Day 14 .
Additional PK parameters may be calculated , as necessary.
AUC 0-tauwill be calculated by using the linear -log trapezoidal rule.
Statistical Analyses of Pharmacokinetic Data
Details of th e statistical analyses of PK data will be described in the PKanalysis plan finalized before 
database lock.
7.6 Statistical Analyses for Safety
The safety analysis will be performed using the safety population; and subjects are assigned to a 
treatment group based on the treatment actually received, regardless of the treatment randomized.  
An AE will be considered a treatment -emergent adverse even t (TEAE) if the AE began or worsened 
(increased in severity or became serious) on or after the date of the first dose of study drug.
An AE will be considered a treatment -emergent SAE if it is a TEAE that additionally meets any SAE 
criteria.
The number an d percentage of subjects with TEAEs during the study will be tabulated by system organ 
class and preferred term and by system organ class, preferred term, and severity.
If more than one AE is coded to the same preferred term for the same subject, the subje ct will be 
counted only once for that preferred term using the greatest severity and strictest causality for the 
summarizations by severity and by relationship to study drug.
Summary tables will be provided for subjects with SAEs and subjects with AEs lead ing to discontinuation
of study drug . Listings of all AEs, SAEs, and AEs leading to discontinuation of study drug by subject will 
be presented.
Adverse events of special interest will be summarized by treatment group and the details will be 
described in t he SAP.
Detailed methods for the analysis of other safety variables will be described in the SAP.
7.7 Overall Type I Error Control
A fixed sequence testing procedure will be applied to control the overall familywise Type I error rate at 
α = 0.05 for the primar y and secondary hypotheses sequentially. The hypotheses for primary endpoint 
and the secondary endpoints will be tested in a sequential order:
Page 29 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.H1 Primary :The proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, 
binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same refractive 
correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
H2: Key Secondary: The proportion of subjects gaining 3 lines or more in photopic, high -
contrast, binocular DCNVA with no mo re than 5 -letter loss in photopic CDVA with the same 
refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
H3Supportive Secondary :The proportion of subjects gaining 2 lines or more in mesopic, high -
contrast, binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same 
refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)   
H4Supportive Secondary :The proportion of subjects achieving 20/40 or better in mesopic, 
high- contrast, binocular DCNVA with n o more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic CDVA with the same 
refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose)
If at any step a test fails, the test procedure will stop and no further hypotheses will be tested.
7.8 Sample Size Determination
The sample size calculation was considered for the primary efficacy endpoint, the response of gaining 
3lines or more in mesopic, high -contrast, binocular DCNVA with no more than 5 -letter loss in mesopic 
CDVA with the same refractive correction at Day 14, Hour 9 (3 hours after the second dose).
Assuming a responder rate of 25% in the AGN -190584 group and 7% in the vehicle group, and 5% 
dropout rate, a sample size of 100 subjects per study drug group will provide greater than 90% power 
using chi -square test at a 2 -sided significance level of 5%.
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board (IEC/IRB) for review and 
approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed consent form(s) must be obtained before any 
subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB 
before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be 
IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International C ouncil 
for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH ) guidelines, 
applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that 
Page 30 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.   Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in 
Appendix B.
In the event a significant disaster/crisis (e.g., epidemic/pandemic, natural dis aster, conflict/combat) 
occurs leading to difficulties in performing protocol -specified procedures, AbbVie may engage with 
study site personnel in efforts to ensure the safety of subjects, maintain protocol compliance, and 
minimize risks to the integrity of the study while trying to best manage subject continuity of care.  This 
may include alternative methods for assessments (e.g., phone contacts or virtual site visits), alternative 
locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local lab instead of a centra l lab), and shipping investigational 
product and/or supplies direct to subjects to ensure continuity of treatment where allowed.  In all cases, 
these alternative measures must be allowed by local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC.
8.3 Subject Confidentialit y
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investi gator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently a pproved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits i n order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is de fined as the date of the last subject 's last visit.
12 REFERENCES
1. Holden BA, Fricke TR, Ho SM, et al. Global vision impairment due to uncorrected presbyopia. 
Arch Ophthalmol. 2008;126(12):1731 -9.
Page 31 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2. Johnson L, Buckley JG, Scally AJ, et al. Multifocal spectacles increase variability in toe clearance 
and risk of tripping in the elderly. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007;48(4):1466 -71.
3. Lord SR, Dayhew J, Howland A. Multifocal glasses impair edge -contrast sensitivity and depth 
perception an d increase the risk of falls in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50(11):1760 -6.
4. Moshirfar M, Desautels JD, Wallace RT, et al. Comparison of FDA safety and efficacy data for 
KAMRA and Raindrop corneal inlays. Int J Ophthalmol. 2017;10(9):1446 -51.
5. Ruiz LA, Cepeda LM, Fuentes VC. Intrastromal correction of presbyopia using a femtosecond 
laser system. J Refract Surg. 2009;25(10):847 -54.
6. Tomita M. Advances in Implantation Over the Years. Changes in technique have a direct 
correlation with decreases in a corneal inlay’s removal rate. Cataract Refract Surg Today. 
2015(June):67 -8.
7. Tucker J, Charman WN. The depth -of-focus of the human eye for Snellen letters. Am J Optom 
Physiol Opt. 1975;52(1):3 -21.
8. Garcia -Lazaro S, Ferrer -Blasco T, Radhakrishnan H, et al. Visual function through 4 contact lens -
based pinhole systems for presbyopia. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2012;38(5):858 -65.
9. Pilocarpine hydrochloride ophthalmic solution 1%, 2%, and 4%. Fort Worth, TX; Alcon 
Laboratories, Inc., 2011.
10. Tsai CJ, Forbes, M. Medical Management of Glaucoma. 3 ed. West Islip, New York: Professional 
Communications, Inc; 2009.
Page 32 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIO NS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
AE adverse event
AI accumulation index
AUC area under the plasma concentration -time curve
AUC0 -tau area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to the end of the dosing 
interval
AUC0 -tau,ss area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to the end of the dosing 
interval, steady state
BID twice daily
CDVA corrected distance visual acuity
CI confidence interval
Cmax maximum observed plasma concentration
Cmax,ss maximum observed plasma concentration, steady state
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease -2019
Ctrough observed plasma concentration at the end of the dosing interval
Ctrough,ss observed plasma concentration at the end of the dosing interval, steady state
DCNVA distance -corrected near visual acuity
GCP Good Clinical Practice
IB Investigator's Brochure
ICH International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals 
for Human Use
IEC Independent Ethics C ommittee
IMP investigational medicinal product
IRB Institutional Review Board
IOP intraocular pressure
IRT interactive response technology
ITT intent to treat
LASIK laser -assisted in situ keratomilieusis
NEI VFQ -25 25 -item National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire
NVPTQ Near Vision Presbyopia Task -based Questionnaire
OSDI Ocular Surface Disease Index
OTC over -the-counter
PCR polymerase chain reaction
Page 33 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.PGIC global impression of change
PGIS global impression of status
PICQ Presbyopia Impact and Coping Questionnaire
PK pharmacokinetic(s)
PRK photorefractive keratectomy
PRO patient -reported outcome
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SAR serious adverse reaction
SARS -CoV-2 s evere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions
TEAE treatment -emergent adverse event
Tmax time to maximum observed concentration
Tmax,ss time to maximum observed concentration, steady state
VFA app Visual Function Assessment application
Page 34 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M21 -195:  A Phase 3, Multicenter, Double -masked, Randomized, Vehicle -controlled, Parallel-
group Study Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy of BID Dosing of AGN -190584 in Subjects with Presbyopia
Protocol Date:  21October 2021
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for H armonisation 
of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and 
local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator 
Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being u sed for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investig ation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and em ployees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reportin g promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 35 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Senior Manager, Clinical Trial Clinical Program Development
Associate Director, Medical Writ ing Medical Writing
Therapeutic Area -Medical Director Clinical Development
Statistics Therapeutic Area Head Statistics 
Director Statistics
VP, Non -Clinical and Translational 
ScienceNon -Clinical and Translational 
Sciences
Page 36 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities across the study. The individual activities are described 
in detail in the Operations Manual .
Page 37 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.h. 5 to 10 minutes in mesopic conditions.
i. If asubject loses ≥ 1 line (≥ 5 letters) of CDVA or DCNVA compared with Hour 0 of the same study visit at Hour 1 after dosing, a manifest refraction should be repeated under 
the same lighting conditions.
j. Conducted with subject 's best distance correction. CDVA to be measured binocularly. Pupil diameter must be measured in each individual eye.
k. Conducted with subject 's best distance correction. DCNVA to be measured binocularly. Pupil diameter must be measured in each individual eye.   
l. Conducted withsubject 's best distance correction
m. Conducted with subject 's best distance correction. Half-eye style trial frames with full field trial lenses only.
n. Distance, photopic. Minimum 30 -minute wait after administration of dilating drops.
o. Investigator should note if the pupil dilated normally. Minimum 30- minute wait after administration of dilating drops.
p. Blood collection for PK at selected sites (on Days 1 and 14 at Hours 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 3, 6 [pre -dose], 6.25, 6.5, 7, 9, and 12).  Col lection windows of ± 5 minutes should be used for 
Hours 0.25, 0.5, 6.25, and 6.5; and collection windows of ± 15 minutes should be used for all other blood collection timepoin ts.  Predose samples must be drawn within 
15minutes of the dosing time.
q. Hour 0 starts after study drug administration. Second dose should be applied within 15minutes after Hour 6.   Site staff will administer study drug during study visits. Subjects 
will administer the study drug at home in between visits.
r. Conducted 5 to 10 m inutes post- dosing. Only those who reported ocular discomfort symptom(s) will be further queried on the severity and duration of each symptom.
Page 41 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions 
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 17June 2021
The purpose of this version is to make minor clarifications throughout the protocol and incorporate the 
following protocol updates and modifications:
Title Page – Study emergency contact and protocol version number were updated.
Synopsis –Postdose tolerability was added as a safety assessment (an inadvertent omission in 
the original protocol) and updated synopsis date .
Section 3.1–Estimands (Table 2) updated for completeness. 
Section 3.4–Detail was added to the additional efficacy endpoints for clarity.
Section 3.6– Postdose tolerability was added as a safety measure (an inadvertent omission in 
the original protocol) .
Section 3.7– Instructions were added for cases of technical issues interfering with digital 
questionnaires completion .
Section 5.1(Disease/Condition Activity) – Minor changes were made to the inclusion criteria as 
follows: timing of when cycloplegic distance correction criterion must be met (at screening) was 
added, and requirements for photopic, high -contrast, near visual acuity were clarified ( this 
criterion applies to each eye separately, not both eyes) .
Section 5.2– Minor correction s were made related to contraception requirements for 
postmenopausal females.
Section 7.2–PK population was added (an inadvertent omission in the original protocol) .
Sect ion 7.5–PK analysis language clarified and updated to align with the current wording in the 
PK analysis plan
Section 7.6– Planned summaries for AEs leading to discontinuation were corrected (AEs leading 
to discontinuation of study drug will be summarized and listed, not AEs leading to study 
discontinuation).
Appendix C–Protocol signatories were updated.
Appendix D–Collection windows for hourly assessments were clarified , theorder of 
assessments was updated (the order that assessments are listed in the table now indicates the 
suggested order) .  A footnote was added for OSDI and detail was added to the NEI VFQ -25 
footnote to indicate that th esemeasure sshould be completed on paper . Footnote "p"
(previously "e") was put in correct order and applied to all PK timepoints for clarification ; other 
footnotes were renumbered appropriately.
Appendix E–A summary of changes made to the original protocol was added.
Page 42 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Appendix F– The Operations Manual was updated as follows: study emergency contact and SAE 
reporting email were updated, clarifications about paper vs. electronic assessments and 
potential technical glitches wereadded, inclusion criteria were updated per changes made in 
Section 5.1, clarifying detail srelated to the DCNVA assessment, NVPTQ administration, and 
Supplemental Headache -AE Assessment were added , SAE reporting information was updated , 
an OSDI scoring appendix w as added, timing of Hours 7 and 9 in relation to the second dose was 
clarified (i.e., 1 and 3 hours after the second dose, respectively), and other minor corrections 
and clarifications were made .
Page 43 of 113abbvie 

STUDY M21 -195  |  Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F.OPERATIONS MANUAL
Page 44 of 113abbvie 

p. 2 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1CONTACTS
Sponsor/
Emergency 
Medical Contact MD
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Ro ad
North Chicago , IL60064
EMERGENCY 24 hour Number:
+1 (973) 784 -6402Mobile:
Email:
Safety Concerns Ophthalmology Safety Team
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064Toll Free: +1 (833) 942 -2226
Email:
SafetyManagement_ Ophthalmology @abbvie.com
SAE Reporting 
outside of EDC Email:
IR-Clinical- SAE@ abbvie .comFax: +1 (714) 796 -9504
Back- up: +1 (714) 246 -5295
Page 46 of 113abbvie 

p. 3 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 CONTACTS 2
2 PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT 6
2.1 INDIVIDUAL TREATMENT PERIOD VISIT ACTIVITIES 6
3 STUDY PROCEDURES 10
3.1 STUDY SUBJECT INFORMATION AND INFORMED CONSENT 10
3.2 MEDICAL AND OPHTHALMIC HISTORY 11
3.3 ADVERSE EVENT ASSESSMENT 11
3.4 DROP COMFORT Q UESTIONNAIRE 11
3.5 POST-DOSE TOLERABILITY ASSESSMENT 11
3.6 PATIENT -REPORTED OUTCOMES 11
3.7 VITAL SIGNS 17
3.8 CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 17
3.9 LIGHTING CONDITIONS AND DISTANCE SPECIFICATIONS FOR EXAMINATIONS 18
3.10 PUPILLARY REACTION TO L IGHT 20
3.11 DETERMINATION OF DOMINANT EYE 21
3.12 MANIFEST REFRACTION 21
3.13 REPEATED MANIFEST REFRACTION 25
3.14 CYCLOPLEGIC REFRACTION 25
3.15 VISUAL ACUITY MEASURES 26
3.16 DISTANCE -CORRECTED N EAR VISUAL A CUITY (DCNVA) 28
3.17 PUPIL DIAMETER 29
3.18 SLIT-LAMP BIOMICROSCOPY 31
3.19 FLUORESCEIN CORNEAL STAINING 33
3.20 IOP 34
3.21 GONIOSCOPY 34
3.22 DILATED FUNDOSCOPIC EXAMINATION 35
3.23 PHARMACOKINETICS SAMPLING (SELECTED SITES ONLY) 36
3.24 DISPENSE STUDY DRUG 37
3.25 SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY 38
Page 47 of 113abbvie 

p. 4 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.26 UNSCHEDULED VISITS 38
4 SAFETY MANUAL 38
4.1 METHODS AND T IMING OF SAFETY A SSESSMENT 38
4.2 REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS AND INTERCURRENT ILLNESSES 39
5 COUNTRY -SPECIFIC REQ UIREMENTS 41
5.1 SUSAR REPORTING 41
6 STUDY DRUG AND SUPPL IES 41
6.1 STUDY SUPPLIES 41
6.2 TREATMENTS ADMINISTERED 42
6.3 PACKAGING AND LABELING 42
6.4 SHIPMENT OF STUDY DRUG 44
6.5 METHOD OF A SSIGNING SUBJECTS TO T REATMENT GROUPS 45
6.6 SELECTION AND TIMING OF DOSE FOR EACH S UBJECT 46
7 APPENDICES 47
7.1 STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS 47
7.2 VFA APP INSTRUCTIONS 49
7.3 OCULAR SURFACE DISEASE INDEX SCORING 64
7.4 VISUAL ACUITY CHARTS USED FOR EACH V ISUAL ACUITY MEASURE 66
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. PRO CATEGORIES AND TESTING CONDITIONS 12
TABLE 2. QUICK REFERENCE FOR PROCEDURES AND PERFO RMANCE SPECIFICATION S 18
TABLE 3. TEXT CHOICE SELECTIO N GUIDE FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE 62
TABLE 4. TEXT CHOICE SELECTIO N GUIDE FOR SPANISH LANGUAGE 63
TABLE 5. SCREENING VISIT VISU AL ACUITY CHARTS 66
TABLE 6. DAY 1 (BASELINE), DA Y 7 (VISIT 2), AND DAY 14 (EXIT/VIS IT 3) VISUAL ACUITY CHARTS 67
Page 48 of 113abbvie 

p. 5 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. LIGHT METER 19
FIGURE 2. VISUAL ACUITY CHART USE 23
FIGURE 3. PUPILLOMETER ALIGNME NT A ND EYECUP POSITIONIN G 30
FIGURE 4. ADVERSE EVENT AND SE RIOUS ADVERSE EVENT COLLECTION SCHEMA 38
FIGURE 5. VISUAL ANALOG SCALE 40
FIGURE 6. AGN -190584 BOTTLE AN D CARTON 43
Page 49 of 113abbvie 

p. 6 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT
Study visits may be impacted due to the Coronavirus Disease -2019 (COVID -19)pandemic . This may 
include changes such as phone or virtual visits, visits at alternative locations, or changes in the visit 
frequency and timing of study procedures, among othe rs. Additional details are provided in the 
subsequent section . Every effort should be made to ensure the safety of subjects and site staff, while 
maintaining the integrity of the study . If visits cannot be conducted onsite due to travel restrictions or 
other pandemic -related reasons, follow the updates below on how to proceed.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
During the COVID -19 pandemic, if it is not possible for all study procedures to be performed as specified 
due to travel restrictions or other reasons, the following modifications are allowed:
Study visits and/or activities should be performed as scheduled whenever possible . If it is not 
possible to do so due to the pandemic, reschedule the visit within the visit window if possible .  
2.1 Individual Treatment Period Visit Activities
This section presents a list of activities performed during each visit, organized by visit . The dot pattern 
on the upper right indicates the place of the visit in the overall Treatment Period Activ ity Schedule.
Activities are grouped by category (Interview, Exam, etc.) . Further information about each activity is 
provided in Section 3.
Page 50 of 113abbvie 

p. 11 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.subject's medical record . An entry must also be made in the subject's dated source documents to 
confirm that informed consent was obtained prior to any study -related procedures and that the subject 
received a signed copy.
Information regarding benefits for subjects and information regarding provisions for treating and/or 
compensating subjects who are harmed because of participation in the study can be found in the 
informed consent form.
Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, it is possible that additional protocol modifications not outlined in this 
protocol may become necessary . If this situation arises, in addition to the study informed consent, 
additional verbal consent may be obtained prior to these adaptations or substantial changes in study 
conduct in accordance with local regulations.
3.2 Medical and Ophthalmic History
A complete medical history including demographics, history of tobacco, alcohol, and drug use will be 
taken at screening . The subject's medical history will be updated at the Study Day 1 visit . This updated 
medical history will serve as the baseline for clinical assessment . Any abnormal findings from screening 
assessments should be captured as medical history.
3.3 Adverse Event Assessment
Please refer to Section 4.1.
3.4 Drop Comfort Questionnaire
The questionnaire should be administered to the subject s immedia tely after drop instillation . The 
Subject Evaluation of Drop Comfort single -item question should be assessed immediately.
For questionnaires completed on an electronic platform, if technical issues prevent the questionnaire 
from being completed, responses can be written down on source documents (preferably a paper copy of 
the questionnaire if available) and entered when the electronic platform is available .
3.5 Post -Dose Tolerability Assessment
Five to ten minutes after administration of the study drug during the study visit, you should ask the 
subject how they are feeling about the eyedrops as indicated in the post -dose tolerability assessment 
guidance document .
3.6 Patient -Reported Outcomes
Subjects willbe asked to complete patient -reported outcome s(PRO) questionnaire s. Subjects should be 
instructed to follow the instructions provided with the instrument and to provide the best possible 
response to each item . Site personnel shall not provide interpretation to subjects other than 
encouragement to complete the tasks. S ubjects who are functionally unable to read any of the 
Page 55 of 113abbvie 

p. 13 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.** These questionnaires should beanswered under normal room lighting, which would likely   meet the photopic cutoff of 
>251 lux specified in the study p rotocol . For simplicity, photopic isused todefine lighting conditions for these
questionnaires.
*** Detailed instructions for theVFA app areprovided in Section 7.2.
Note: The OSDI and NEI VFQ- 25 questionnaires will be on paper. All other questionnaires will be administered on an 
electronic platform (i.e., cellphone or tablet) .  The VFA app is administered on an iPhone provided by the site.   For 
questionnaires completed on an electronic platform, if technical issues prevent the questionnaire from being 
completed, responses can be written down on source documents (preferably a paper copy of the questionnaire if 
available) and entered when the electronic platform is available .  Please contact your clinical research associate to 
obtain a paper copy of the questionnaire if needed .
The PRO instrument sshould be comple ted prior to drug administration on Day 1 ,and prior to any 
discussion of Adverse event (AE) or any review of laboratory findings.
General Considerations
1.The questionnaires should be completed in an area that is quiet and has adequate privacy.
2.Make the subject as comfortable as possible and reassure the subject that his or her answers 
are confidential and will not impact the type of medical care he or she receive s.
3.Attempt to administer the questionnaire to the subject privately.
4.The study site personnel sh ould choose the correct visit number for the questionnaires to 
correspond to the visit day/schedule before administering the questionnaire (e.g., Visit 1 , 
Day 1).
5.When the questionnaires are finished, thank the subject for participating.
6.Questionnaires for a visit should not be completed after the subject has left the investigator 's 
office on that visit day (e.g., questionnaires for Visit 1 should not be completed at any other 
time than at Visit 1).
Visual Function Assessment application (VFA app)
The VFA app should be administered per the schedule specified in Table 1. Detailed instructions on the 
VFA app areprovided in Section 7.2. Of note, this measure should be administered under photopic 
conditions, with best distance correction . Only half eye style trial frames with full field trial lenses are 
permitted for best d istance correction while administering the VFA app.
OSDI 
The OSDI (Ocular Surface Disease Index) consists of 12 questions, graded on a 5 -point scale from All of 
the Time (4) to None of the Time (0). The subject will complete the OSDI .
The OSDI is scored using the formula: (sum of scores x 25)/number of questions answered.
1.Add the subtotals from questions 1 -5, 6-9, and 10 -12 to get the total score.
2.Multiply this total by 25.
Page 57 of 113abbvie 

p. 14 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.Divide this number by the number of questions answered (i .e., those questions that were scored 
on the 4 -to-0 scale, not counting those marked 'N/A') to get the subject 's OSDI score.
4.You can also use the worksheet that AbbVie provided to calculate the OSDI score.
Sites will transcribe the subject 'sresponses on the paper OSDI questionnaire into the electronic data 
capture ( EDC).
Administration of the NEI VFQ -25
1.Subject s should answer this questionnaire using their habitual distance correction.
2.Explain that they will be asked a series of questions, a nd this is a necessary and important part 
of the clinical study in which they are participating.
3.The questionnaire process may take up to 25 minutes ,including time to review study 
instructions . However, this time may vary from subject to subject and from visit to visit . Please 
allow sufficient time to complete the questionnaires.
4.The instructions for the VFQ -25 advise the subject to answer the questions as if he or she is
wearing his or her glasses or contacts without near correction . The purpose of thi s study is to 
assess subject s'difficulty with near vision when the subject isnot wearing glasses or contacts 
with near correction . As a result, before administration of the VFQ -25 begins (i.e., before the 
initial instructions are read to the subject ), please advise subject sthat for this study they are to 
interpret the instructions as referring to glasses or contacts they need for seeing objects at a 
distance (if required), not their reading glasses or bifocals.
5.The VFQ -25,including all questions from the Appendix of Optional Additional Questions ,will be 
administered by site personnel who have received documented training . However, particular 
items of interest for confirming inclusion criteria only include the near vision subscale (items 5 -
7) and the near vision questions from the Appendix of Optional Additional Questions (items A3 -
A5). Responses to all VFQ -25 items will be used in psychometric validation analyses of the VFA 
app.
During the NEI VFQ -25Questionnaire Admin istration
1.Read the instructions on the questionnaires to the subject .
2.After reading the instructions to the subject , make sure that the subject understands the 
instructions (including the fact that any references to glasses or contacts should be interprete d 
as referring to distance correction only –if required); and is ready to begin the questionnaire.
3.Read each question slowly, exactly as worded, followed by the appropriate answer choices (if 
applicable), and mark the answer choice for the subject .
4.Repeat questions and answer choices as needed ;do not rephrase the question.
5.Do not "lead "the subject to a particular answer . Allow the subject to respond how he or she
feels. If the subject is unsure how to answer, explain that there are no right or wrong answers 
and ask him or her to answer to the best of his or her ability.
Page 58 of 113abbvie 

p. 15 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.If the subject wants to change his or her answer to a question after the site has marked an 
answer choice, study site personnel can mark a different response and add a note to indicate 
the final answer .
7.Continue to move the interview forward . Do not get "stuck "on a particular question.
8.Reassure the subject sthroughout the interview that they are doing well, as appropriate.
Checking the Questionnaire
Study site personnel should check t he following before the subject leaves the site:
1.In order to be eligible for the study, the subject must: have a score ≥ 3 on at least one item from 
either the VFQ -25 Near Vision Subscale (items 5 -7) or from the Appendix of Optional Additional 
Questions (A 3-A5) (i.e. ,a score of ≥ 3 on at least one out of these six questions) . If the subject
does not have a score of 3 or above for at least one of these six items (items 5 -7 or A3 -5), the 
subject is not eligible to participate in the study.
2.If a subject communicates information regarding AEsduring the course of the interview, assure 
that these are documented appropriately.
Sites will transcribe the responses on the paper NEI VFQ-25 questionnaire into the EDC.
Subject Self-Administration of the Single -Item Subject Global Impression of Change, Single- Item 
Subject Global Impression of Status , and Presbyopia Impact and Coping Questionnaire
Instruct the subject to read the instructions at the top of the page carefully befo re answering the 
question.
Single Item PGIC Questionnaire
Subjects will be asked to complete a single -item questionnaire asking about their impression of the 
study medication 's effect on their near vision . Subject s should answer this questionnaire under 
photopic conditions using their best distance correction.
Single Item PGIS Questionnaire
Subjects will be asked to complete a single -item questionnaire asking about their impression of their 
problems seeing up close over the past 7 days . Subject s should answer this questionnaire under 
photopic conditions using their best distance correction.
Presbyopia Impact and Coping Questionnaire
This questionnaire includes 14 questions about the degree to which subject s were impacted by their 
difficulty seei ng up close; or engaged in coping behaviors during the previous 7 days . Subject s should 
answer this questionnaire using their habitual distance correction.
Near Vision Presbyopia Task- Based Questionnaire
The Near Vision Presbyopia Task -Based Questionnaire (NVPTQ) includes 12 questions on 4 paper -based 
reading tasks (book, newspaper, menu, nutrition label) . Subject s will be asked to read a text passage, 
Page 59 of 113abbvie 

p. 16 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.and answer 3 questions about their ability to read, whether they squinted while reading, and 
satisfactio n with their ability to read. After a subject has completed the task, the study staff should 
proceed with the next task (i.e ., ask the subject to read the next text passage and answer the 3 
questions) . Subject s should read text passages and answer questions under mesopic conditions, using 
their best distance correction.
Lighting Conditions 
Subject s should read text passages and answer questions under mesopic conditions, using their best 
distance correction . Please see definition of mesopic lighting (Section 3.9) for other efficacy measures.
Task Preparation
1.Each of the four reading task examples (book, newspaper, menu, nutrition label) should be 
stacked upon a lectern facing the subject , in the following order:
a.Paragraph from a book
b.Newspaper article
c.Menu
d.Nutrition Label
2.The lectern should be set so that the task examples are perpendicular to the table and so that 
the examples are at the subject 's eye level. Do not adjust the lectern once the subject s have 
begun reading the tasks.
3.Subject s should be given a different task example each time they are asked to c omplete the 
NVPTQ (i.e., at each visit). For instance, subject s should be given tasks labelled "Example A1, A2, 
etc."during their first assessment. At their next assessment, subject s should be given tasks 
labeled "Example B1, B2, etc. ", and so on. Revi ew the NVPTQ in Mesopic Conditions Worksheet 
history to ensure that subject s are not receiving the same task example during the course of the 
trial. Record the task example numbers for this assessment.
Subject Preparation
1.Seat the subject so that the distance between the subject 's eyes and the lectern is 40 cm. 
Ensure that the subject does not move his/her head significantly during the time he/she is
reading the tasks.
2.Use the NVPTQ in Mesopic Conditions Worksheet provided to confirm proper setup of tasks 
(i.e., ensure tasks are on the lectern, and are in the correct order)
3.Provide the NVPTQ to the subject . It may be helpful to provide the questionnaire on a fixed 
surface to minimize time spent re -adjusting the subject position between tasks. 
4.Instru ct the subject to read the NVPTQ instructions.
5.Before administering the reading tasks, remind the subject of the following:
a.Remember to read the text for each of the reading samples. You can read the tasks out loud 
or to yourself.
Page 60 of 113abbvie 

p. 17 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.b.Do not move the reading material closer to or farther away from yourself.
c.Do not adjust the location of where you are sitting or lean forward.
6.Provide the subject with Task #1 (Book).
7.After the subject has finished reading Task #1, instruct the subject to read and complete the 
questionnaire items pertaining to Task #1 (items 1 -3 in the task -oriented questionnaire).
(IMPORTANT: Before giving the questions to the patient, adjust the brightness on the device to 
the lowest possible setting.)
8.After completion of the Task #1 questions, provide the subject with Task #2 questions. Repeat 
steps 6 and 7 for Tasks #2 -4.
Subject Vision Correction for Tasks
Subject s should read text passages and answer questions under mesopic conditions, using their best 
distance correction . Subject s are required to read the tasks on their own . Study staff are not permitted 
to provide assistance for the reading tasks . Subject s are not allowed to use their reading glasses, or any 
other form of near -vision correction, while reading the text passages or ans wering the questions . If the 
subject is unable to read the questionnaire after performing the tasks, site personnel may read the 
questionnaire to the subject and record their answers . Please note -site personnel are NOT allowed to 
assist subject s with r eading the actual task examples, they may ONLY assist with the questionnaire 
about the task examples.
Once a subject requires interviewer assistance with the task -related questionnaire, the questionnaire 
must be interviewer administered (preferably by the same interviewer) at all subsequent assessments 
for the remainder of the study.
3.7 Vital Signs
Vital sign determinations of systolic and diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate will be obtained at visits 
as specified in Section 2.1. Blood pressure and pulse rate should be measured after the subject has 
been sitting for at least 5minutes.
3.8 Clinical Laboratory Tests
Pregnancy Tests (Urine)
Pregnancy testing should not be performed for postmenopausal women.
A urine pregnancy test will be performed at screening, Day 1, and Day 14 (or upon confinement in each 
period) for all female subjects of childbearing potential . More frequent pregnancy tests can be
performed throughout the study at the investigator's discretion or if required per local/country 
requirements.
If the baseline urine pregnancy test is negative, then dosing with study drug may begin.
Page 61 of 113abbvie 

p. 19of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Light Meter
The light meter provided by A bbVie should be used to measure room illumination at the target . Before 
taking any measurement, make sure the power switch is turned to the "on"position, and the range 
switch is turned to the "2000 position," as shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Light Meter
When measuring room illumination/lighting conditions: 
1.Remove the light sensor cover .
2.Position the light sensor in the middle of the (mounted) distance VA chart with the sensor facing 
outward to the room .
a.Chart should either be mounted on the wall or on a stable stand.
3.Adjust room lighting until light meter reading achieves the mesopic or photopic range required. 
4.Lighting conditions on the distance VA chart confirms lighting for VA assessments associated 
regardless of distance ;
a.i.e., if mesopic lighting has been confirmed and mesopic VA measurements are being 
performed, lighting does not need to be checked from distance → intermediate → near and 
vice versa .
5.Upon changing lighting conditions, lighting should be re -checked (as per steps 1 to 4) prior to 
performing the associated procedures (e .g., change from mesopic to photopic) .
Page 63 of 113abbvie 

p. 20 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.a.For mesopic procedures, subject s should be dark adapted at least 5 -10 minutes prior to the 
start of procedures, once lighting conditions are confirmed .
3.10 Pupillary Reaction to Ligh t
The 'swinging light test 'is used to measure pupillary reaction to light . It is a means of detecting 
differences between the two eyes and how they respond to a light shone in one eye at a time . This test 
can be conducted under either photopic or mesopic conditions (it is easier to see under mesopic 
conditions). 
In a normal swinging light test, the pupils of both eyes will constrict equally regardless of which eye is 
stimulated by the light . In an abnormal test, there is less pupil constriction in the eye with retinal or 
optic nerve disease. 
Procedure:
Using a bright torch which can be focused to give a narrow, even beam of light . Perform the following: 
Ask the subject to focus on a distant obj ect, such as a Snellen chart or a picture . This is to 
prevent the near -pupil response (pupil constriction when moving focus from distance to near) .
While performing the test, take care not to get in the way of the fixation target.
Move the whole torch de liberately from side to side so that the beam of light is directed directly 
into each eye . Do not swing the beam from side to side around a central axis (e .g., by holding it 
in front of the person's nose), as this can also stimulate the near response.
Keep the light source at the same distance from each eye to ensure that the light stimulus is 
equally bright in both.
Keep the beam of light steadily on the first eye for at least 3 seconds . This allows the pupil size 
to stabilize . Note whether the pupil of the eye being illuminated reacts briskly and constricts 
fully to the light . Also note what happens to the pupil of the other eye: does it also constrict 
briskly?
Move the light quickly to shine in the other eye . Again, hold the light steady for 3 sec onds . 
Note whether the pupil being illuminated stays the same size, or whether it gets bigger . Note 
also what happens to the other eye.
Repeat the test, observing what happens to the pupils of OUwhen one eye and then the other 
eye is illuminated.
Judge whether the subject 's pupillary reaction to light is normal or abnormal . Enter into the 
source document and eCRF.
Page 64 of 113abbvie 

p. 21 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.11 Determination of Dominant Eye
1.Participants will be asked to extend their arms out in front of them at eye level, with their palms 
facing aw ay, fingers together and facing upward.
2.With hands together, a small window will be formed by overlapping their thumbs and 
overlapping their fingers. 
3.Participants will select a small object at least 10 feet in front of them and look at it with both 
eyes through the view window in their hands.
While remaining focused on the object, participants will close the OD and open the OS, taking care not 
to move the position of the hands, and take note of whether the image remains visible. If the image 
remains vi sible, the OS is the dominant eye. If the image is no longer visible, the OD is the dominant 
eye. This will be confirmed by closing the OS and opening the OD, taking care not to move the position 
of the hands, and taking note of whether the image remains visible.
3.12 Manifest Refraction
Manifest refraction should be conducted at the Screening visit under mesopic and photopic light 
conditions, for both distance and near (this is considered the "baseline manifest refraction "). Manifest 
refraction can be condu cted per the site 's standard clinical practice or following the procedures 
instructed below . The investigator may choose any appropriate method to conduct manifest refraction, 
including a phoropter, trial frames with loose lenses inserted . The prescripti ons obtained from the 
manifest refraction conducted at the Screening visit (for mesopic and photopic distance, if not the same) 
will be used as the best distance correction during the study visits for:
Corrected Distance Visual Acuity (CDVA) and Distance -Corrected Near Visual Acuity (DCNVA)
Some PRO measures under each lighting condition 
Note: If the subject 's habitual monofocal distance correction is the same as the manifest refractions 
under both mesopic and photopic conditions, then their habitual cor rection can be used for the 
procedures above.
Page 65 of 113abbvie 

p. 22 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.A repeat manifest refraction should be done under the same lighting condition in subject s who lose 
≥ 1line (defined as 5 or more letters) at Hour 1 in either eye in CDVA or DCNVA compared with Hour 0 
of the same visit . The repeated manifest refraction should be conducted with the same method as at 
the screening visit. The results of the repeated manifest refraction need to be recorded in the source 
document and entered into EDC.
Determine Subject' s Approxim ate Refraction
Prior to manifest refraction, measure the subject 's current distance spectacles (habitual correction) with 
a lensometer, or perform autorefraction if the subject does not wear distance spectacles. This 
measurement will be the starting point for refracting the subject on the phoropter. 
New monofocal correction:
If subject 's habitual distance correction (1) is insufficient to achieve distance visual acuity of 20/32 or 
better, or (2) are not monofocal lenses (i .e., if they are bifocal or progressive), then the study site should 
provide new, monofocal distance correction spectacles to achieve a corrected distance vision of 20/32 
or better. 
This new monofocal distance correction or subject 's own habitual correction may be used for distance -
corrected visual acuity measures (i .e., in place of trial frames or phoropter) if they have the same 
prescription as their best correction under the corresponding lighting condition (e .g., some subject s may 
not tolerate best correction as habitual correction, but a new Rx may still get them to qualify at 20/32 or 
better –these subject s may not use their new Rx for visual acuity testing) . However, if the subject 's best 
distance correction is different between mesopic and photopic conditions, a trial frame is still needed 
for the condition that the new monofocal distance correction or subject 's own habitual correction is 
different from the best distanc ecorrection.
Manifest Refra ction
Manifest refraction is performed for distance (4 m) and near (40 cm), under both mesopic and photopic 
conditions. 
To start, the subject 's current distance spectacles are measured with a lensometer; if no spectacles are 
worn, auto refraction is done . One of these measurements is used as the beginning approximate 
refraction. 
The investigator may use any appropriate method to conduct the manifest refraction, including 
phoropter, trial frames with loose lenses inserted, or loose lenses. The A bbVie -provided distance and 
near visual acuity charts should be used for each measure.
The distance and near visual acuity charts provided by AbbVie have three blocks of letters –one each for 
right eye (OD) , left eye (OS) , and OU ( Figure 2). Please use the appropriate letters for distance and near 
measures. N ote that only OD and OS blocks will be used for manifest refraction.
Note: In the rare case i f a subject 's best correcte dvision is 20/63 or worse, subject s should read the 
central OU section because there are no corresponding letters for OD or OS on the charts.  If both OD 
and OS are 20/63 or worse, use a different chart to avoid memorizing . For vision better than 20/63, the 
subject should read the OD or OS sections of the chart as usual .  
Page 66 of 113abbvie 

p. 23 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 2. Visual Acuity Chart Use
Manifest refraction should be done in the following order, beginning with the OD (OS occluded):
1.Enter approximate refraction (from Determine Subject's Approximate Refraction ) into the 
phoropter.
2.Determine SPHERE power:
a.With subject looking at the smallest legible line on the appropriate VA chart (near/distance), 
add +0.25 spherical lens.
i.Ask the subject , is it "Better, worse, or is there no change? "
If BETTER or NO CHANGE:
Replace the +0.25 spherical lens with one with an additional +0.25 D . Check VA again, 
and repeat the process until adding +0.25 D makes the subject 's VA worse. 
If WORSE:
Add a lens that is 0.25 D more minus or less plus than the previous lens . If this improves 
VA, even by one letter, continue to repeat the process until there is no more 
improvement in VA. 
ii.Re-challenge with +0.25 sphere until the subject responds that the +0.25 sphere makes 
their VA worse . The final sphere is the most plus or least minus lens that achieves the 
best VA.
3.Determine CYLINDER power and axis:
Page 67 of 113abbvie 
0 H 
V K 
+ 
.A. For OS .A. For OU .A. For OD 

p. 24 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.NOTE: The following description is for minus cylinder . Adjust accordingly for plus cylinder 
refraction by replacing the negative axis (red) with the positive axis (white) in the instructions 
for cylinder axis below.
Ask the subject to look at a line on the visual acuity chart, which is one line larger than the 
smallest line the subject can read . Ask the subject to focus on a round letter such as "C," "G," or 
"O" if one is present.
a.IF CYLINDER WAS NOT PRESENT in the initial approximate refraction: 
i.Place the cross- cylinder with the negative axis (red) first at 90 °, then at 180 °, then 45 °
and 135 °. If the subject states that the vision is improved at any one of these four axis 
positions, place cylindrical lens power in the refractor at the preferred axis and proceed 
to refine the axis . If the subject prefers none of the four positions, skip the re fining 
cylinder power step.
IF CYLINDER WAS PRESENT in the initial approximate refraction: 
ii.Position the cross -cylinder first with the negative axis 45 °to the right of the cylinder 
axis (position one), and secondly with the negative axis at 45 °to the lef t of the cylinder 
axis (position two) . Flip the crossed cylinder and ask, which position improves the 
vision (position one or position two?).
b.If subject responds that NEITHER POSITION IS BETTER and if this was the first test of the 
axis position, move the axis of the cylinder 15 °to the right or left and repeat.
If the subject PREFERS ONE POSITION TO THE OTHER , rotate the cylinder axis toward the 
preferred axis of the cross- cylinder. (If the subject states that one position of the cross -cylinder 
is no better than the other position, proceed to refining cylinder power).
4.Refine CYLINDER power:
a.Ask the subject to look at the lowest line on the visual acuity chart that can be read.
b.Align the cross -cylinder first with the positive axis and then with the negative axis coincident 
with the cylinder axis . Ask the subject which is better.
c.If the subject prefers the positive (white) axis coincident with the cylinder axis, decrease the 
minus power of the cylinde r by 0.25 diopter.
d.If a subject indicates a change that would introduce positive cylinder power, remove all 
cylinder power and continue testing for negative cylinder power at an axis 90 °away from 
the previous axis. 
e.If the subject prefers the negative (re d) axis coincident with the cylinder axis, increase the 
cylinder power by -0.25 diopters and retest. 
f.For each 0.50 diopter change in cylinder power, adjust the sphere by 0.25 diopters of the 
opposite power.
5.End the refraction :
a.End the refraction by chall enging with +0.25 spherical power and adjust the sphere until the 
subject responds that the additional positive sphere makes the vision worse.
Page 68 of 113abbvie 

p. 25 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.b.Record the lens correction obtained in this refraction for the OD on the appropriate form.
c.Record the visual acui ty in Snellen Equivalents as the lowest line read with two, one ,or no 
misses.
d.REPEAT the entire refraction process for the OS.
Note: When determining whether refraction meets entry criteria, either plus OR minus 
cylinder notation may be used.
6.Near Refraction :
a.Best near add should be used when conduct ingnear manifest refraction , including the near 
VAmeasurement .  The recorded near prescription should also include the near add. Both 
best near refraction and near add need to be captured and entered into EDC. 
b.Inclusion criterion 7 "Photopic, high -contrast, near visual acuity correctable to 20/40 (J3+) or 
better in each eye at the screening visit "references the near VA measured by the near 
refraction. 
Note :
• When determining whether refraction meets entry criteria, either plus OR minus 
cylinder notation may be used . Sites do not need to convert the sign when entering 
the data into the source worksheet of EDC. 
3.13 Repeated Manifest Refraction
A repeat manifest refraction should be done under the same lighting condition in subject s who lose 
≥ 1line (defined as 5 or more letters) in either eye in CDVA or DCNVA at Hour 1 compared with Hour 0 
of the same visit . The investigator should choose the same method to conduct the repeat manifest 
refraction as at the screening visit . The results of the repeat manifest refraction must be recorded in the 
source doc ument and entered into EDC ;however ,this new refraction is NOT used for the rest of the 
study . The original correction from the screening manifest refraction should continue to be used.
3.14 Cycloplegic Refraction
Cycloplegic refraction is used to confirm the manifest refraction and to determine emmetrope status . It 
is performed using distance VA charts, under pho topic conditions, after subject s are dilated using 
1%tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine . Refraction is to be performed a minimum of 30 minutes after 
administration of dilating drops.
When determining whether refraction meets entry criteria, either plus O R minus cylinder notation may 
be used , and considered for each eye individually.
Example: An emmetrope may meet criteria in plus cylinder notation for one eye and minus cylinder 
notation in the other ;however ,if one eye in either notation does not meet e mmetrope criteria, the 
subject would be a nonemmetrope .
Page 69 of 113abbvie 

p. 26 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.If a subject 's cycloplegic refraction vision is 20/63 or worse, the subject should read the central OU 
section because there are no corresponding letters for OD or OS on the charts.  For vision better than 
20/63, the subject should read the OD or OS sections of the chart as usual .  
3.15 Visual Acuity Measures
General Considerations for all VA Measures
Sites should use a consistent evaluator to conduct all visual acuity measures . If a consistent evaluator is 
not possible, an overlap between two evaluators is required . This is a long and fatiguing study that 
involves multiple VA measur ements at multiple timepoints . It is important for all evaluators to 
consistently allow subject s to take time to blink and consistently encourage them to try their best to 
read at each measurement across all timepoints at all study visits. 
For all VA measures, start with the lowest line the subject can read and move to the next line below if 
3or more letters are read correc tly. The Snellen equivalent is calculated as the last line when 3 or more 
letters are read correctly— that is, if only 0, 1, or 2 letters on a line can be read, do not proceed to the 
next line . The number of letters calculation should include all letters read correctly , including the letters 
on the line when 1 or 2 letters were read.  T he VA score should be the last line on which 3 or more were 
read correctly. 
Use of Screening Manifest Refraction
Visual acuity measurements for CDVA and DCNVA are performed OU using the subject 's best distance
correction based on the screening manifest refraction results per lighting condition: 
If screening (photopic/mesopic) manifest refraction requires correction, trial frames/lenses or 
phoropter (or new monofocal correction or habitual correction IF appropriate -see Section 3.12 )
should be used to provide correction .
Results from screening should be used to provide the correction throughout the trial ;the 
screening best -corrected vision performed under (mesopic/photopic) conditions will be used 
post s creening for 
mesopic results for mesopic VA measurements
photopic results for photopic VA measurements
If no correction is needed, the VA measurements should be completed without the trial lenses/frames .
Chart Usage
AbbVie will provide multiple charts for each type of visual acuity measurement . Charts for each VA 
measurement are labeled with specific identifiers and use different letters . Each chart contains a unique 
identifying number that corresponds to a worksheet provided . The worksheet is to be used to capture 
the results of each VA evaluation.
To ensure proper VA measurement, different charts should be used at each timepoint and no charts 
should be used in successive VA measures. T his should prevent the memory effect . Please note that VA 
Page 70 of 113abbvie 

p. 27 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.work sheets labeled 'mesopic 'and 'photopic' can refer to the same chart . When rotating different 
worksheets ensure rotation extends into both mesopic and photopic worksheets. 
The worksheets provided by AbbVie are labeled the same way as the corresponding cha rts. Section 7.3
contains tables of which VA charts should be used for each VA measure, according to timepoint and 
lighting conditions . Please refer to these tables for the preferred chart rotations to minimize learning 
effects . It may help to print this appendix for reference.
Corrected Distance Visual Acuity (CDVA)
1.CDVA is performed with the best distance correction determined by the screening manifest 
refraction under the corresponding lighting conditions .
2.Trial frames and trial lenses or phoropter (or new monofocal correction or habitual correction IF 
appropriate –see Section 3.12 ) should be used if correction is needed per the manifest 
refraction results . If no correction is needed, complete the CDVA without the trial frames or 
phoropter. 
3.AbbVie will provide 3 double -sided distance charts labeled 23214 -1 (Front and Back), 23214 -2 
(Front and Back), and 23214 -3 (Front and Bac k), found at the bottom right -hand corner of the 
front side . Charts are similar, only differing in letters.
a.Site should refer to Section 7.3on which chart should be used at each timepoint .
b.Use the corresponding CDVA worksheet based on the chart selected.
4.The chart should be mounted on the wall or stable stand (eg, lectern) that is 4 meters away 
from the subject 's eyes and at approximately eye level to the average height of the seated 
subject .
5.Conduct the CDVA measurement OU:
6.Ask the subject to:
a.Read the lowest line vis ible starting with the middle of the chart .
b.If read correctly, count the number of letters and proceed to the next line noting letters 
correct per line, until 2 or fewer letters can be read correctly on that line, then stop .
c.VA score (Snellen equivalent) is the lowest line on which 3 or more letters are read 
correctly. (Note: it is possible that there is more than one line of 3 or 4 correctly read 
letters; always record the lowest line as the VA score) .
d.Use the provided worksheet to calculate the number of letters read in the precedi ng lines 
and record the associated VA score (Snellen equivalent).
7.CDVA measured under mesopic and photopic conditions as per protocol timepoints
8.The number of letters, VA score ,and chart number will be entered into the eCRF for OU. 
Identify the letters on the worksheet read correctly to enable you to score and verify the result 
(e.g., by crossing out incorrect letters) .
Page 71 of 113abbvie 

p. 28 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.16 Distance -Corrected Near Visual Acuity (DCNVA) 
1.DCNVA is performed with the best distance correction determined by the screening manife st 
refraction under the corresponding lighting conditions .
2.Trial frames and trial lenses or phoropter (or new monofocal correction or habitual correction IF 
appropriate –see Section 3.12 ) should be used if correction is needed per the manifest 
refraction results . If no correction is needed, complete the DCNVA without the trial frames or 
phoropter. 
3.AbbV ie will provide 8 near charts that are labeled as 23213 -1(Front and Back), 23213 -2 (Front 
and Back), 23213 -3(Front and Back), and 23213 -4 (Front and Back), found at the bottom 
right -hand corner of the front side . All charts have the same settings and only differ in letters.
a.Site should refer to Section 7.3on which chart should be used at each timepoint .
b.Use the corresponding DCNVA worksheet based on the chart selected. 
4.The chart should be mounted on a lectern or held by the subject or site staff. Use the attached 
string to keep 40 cm from the chart by aligning the end of the string to the lateral canthus of the 
subject 's OS. 
5.For the measurement OU ask the subject to:
a.Read the lowest line visible starting with the middle of the chart .
b.If read correctly, count the number of letters and proceed to the next line ,noting letters 
correct per line, until 2 or fewer letters can be read correctly on that line, then stop .
c.VA score (Snellen equivalent) is the lowest line on which 3 or more letters are read 
correctly. (Note: It is possible that there ismore than one line of 3 or 4 correctly read 
letters; always record the lowest line as the VA score) .
d.Use the provided worksheet to calculate the number of letters read in the preceding lines 
and record the associated VA score (Snellen equivalent) .
6.DCNVA needs to be measured under both mesopic and photopic conditions in the order 
specified and at the timepoints listed in the protocol. 
7.The number of letters, VA score ,and c hart number will be entered into the eCRF for OU.
Note :
Mesopic DCNVA is repeated 3 times at the screening visit for practice. Please reference 
Section 7.3for the charts that should be used .Evaluators should consistently allow subjects 
to take time to blink and consistently encourage them to try their best to read at each 
measurement.   The results of the three measurements are expected to be the same or very 
similar, and at least one of the three should meet the inclusion criteria on mesopic DCNVA. 
Please enter the last qualifying score into EDC.
Per inclusion criteri on3 (bullet 4), Mesopic, high -contrast DCNVA has to be 20/40 (J3) to 
20/100 (J10) at the screening and baseline visits. 
Page 72 of 113abbvie 

p. 29 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.17 Pupil Diameter
The pupil diameter will be measured at the timepoints listed in the study protocol.
Pupil Diameter
AbbVie will provide a NeurOptics VIP -300 unilateral pupil lometer to perform all pupil diameter 
measurements per protocol timepoints . The provided pupil lometer is housed in a protective hard -shell 
case that includes the following:
Pupillometer
Lithium -ion battery
Two opaque rubber eyecups 
Medical grade power supply for the charging station
The charging station
Measuring Pupil Diameter
Pupil diameters should be measured with the provided pupil lometer for distance/near VA and under 
mesopic/photopic conditions, per eye . The following VA charts should be utilized: 
Near pupil diameter: 40 cm (near) visual acuity chart
Distance pupil diameter: 4 meter (distance) visual acuity chart. 
Note: Pupillometer Use 
From the home screen, select 'settings '(the gear icon), and select LIGHTS OFF mode.
MUST BE in LIGHTS OFF mode NOT in "variable "mode (the current mode will be displayed)
While measuring pupil size in 1 eye, the fellow eye should remain open and focused on the appropriate 
distance or near vision chart . Pupil measurements will be measured over 2 seconds and the readings 
recorded . Ensure that the pupillometer eyecup does not cover the subject 's eye, as sufficient ambient 
light is necessary for an accurate measurement . Holding the pupillometer so that approximately 
1-2inches separates the subject 's eye from the eyecup should allow sufficient ambient light entry.
Subject Preparation
1.With any spectacles removed, instruct the subject to focus at the target distance with the eye 
that is not being tested.
2.Ask the subject to keep his/her head straight and both eyes wide open during both targeting 
and measurement . In some cases ,if targeting becomes a problem, it may be necessary to 
gently hold the subject 's eye open with your finger.
3.The operator should position the instrument at a right angle to the subject 's axis of vision and 
any tilting of the instrument should be minimized (See Figure 3below) . When taking the 
Page 73 of 113abbvie 

p. 30of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.measurement, remember not to cover the subject 's eye with the eyecup, so as to allow for 
sufficient ambient light to enter. 
4.It may be helpful for the operator to be at the same level as the subject when performing the 
scan to minimize tilting. If necessary, both subject and operator can sit down faci ng each other 
during targeting and measurement. (See Figure 3below).
5.The pupillometer should not be used without the eyecup positioned correctly ( see Figure 3
below) . The eyecup has a tab in the rim that fits into the indentation in the lens shield of the 
pupillometer . Position the tab in the eyecup rim into the indent in the lens shield and press into 
place . The tabs on either side of the lens shield should also snap into holes on either side of the 
eyecup.
Figure 3. Pupillometer Alignment and Eye cup Positioning
Pupil Measurement
1.From the main screen, select settings icon (nut and bolt) and then the top left "eye"icon to 
toggle between " Light off "and "Variable " mode. M easurements must be performed using the 
LIGHT OFF MODE. 
2.Position the pupillometer in front of the i ntended eye (do not cover the eye, hold to allow 
ambient light to enter), and ensure the subject is focused at the appropriate target (near or 
distance) with his/her other eye. 
3.Press and hold either the ODor OS button until the eye is centered on the tou chscreen and the 
display shows a circle around the pupil . Once the circle appears (green for OD and yellow for 
OS), release the button, holding the pupillometer in place for approximately 2 seconds, making 
sure the subject maintains an open eye position. 
4.When the pupil measurement is complete, pupil data are analyzed, and results are displayed . If 
the measurement was affected by a tracking problem (e .g., excessive blinks), results are 
reported as NA. 
5.Repeat this process for the other eye. 
6.From the resu lts page, you may select the Video icon to view playback of the scan . Records can 
also be deleted using the Delete icon. 
Page 74 of 113abbvie 
Good alignment: 
Ulhng ml 
mlzed . P00t al gnm nL 
d ce Ulted. POOtal 
HVk:e 

p. 31 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.All measurements will be recorded in the source worksheet and the eCRF, rounded to the 
nearest tenth . Printouts of pupil values do n ot need to be saved as long as values are recorded 
in the source . Please refer to the NeurOptics VIP -300 Pupillometer Instruction Manual for more 
detailed operating instructions.
3.18 Slit-lamp Biomicroscopy
Biomicroscopic examinations should be performed using a slit -lamp . The examinations will include 
evaluation of the condition of the eyelids, conjunctiva, cornea, anterior chamber, and iris/pupil.
Eyelid/Eyelid Margins/Lashes:
Edema
  0 (None) = No edema
+0.5 (Trace) = Localized, minimal (trace) swelling
+1 (Mild) = Localized, mild swelling
+2 (Moderate) = Diffuse, moderate swelling
+3 (Severe) = Diffuse, severe swelling
Erythema
  0 (None) = No erythema
+0.5 (Trace) = Localized, minimal (trace), flush reddish color 
+1 (Mild) = Localized, mild, flush reddish color
+2 (Moderate) = Diffuse reddish color encompassing the entire lid margin
+3 (Severe) = Deep diffuse reddish color of lid margins and superior and/or inferior 
eyelid
Crusting :
  0 (None)
+0.5 (Trace)
+1 (Mild)
+2 (Moderate)
+3 (Severe)
Page 75 of 113abbvie 

p. 32 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Conjunctiva (Bulbar):
Hyperemia
  0 (None) = No hyperemia
+0.5 (Trace) = Minimal (trace) flush, reddish color
+1 (Mild) = Mild flush, reddish color
+2 (Moderate) = Bright red color
+3 (Severe) = Deep, bright, diffuse redness
Edema
  0 (None) = No edema
+0.5 (Trace) = Localized, minimal (trace) swelling
+1 (Mild) = Localized, mild swelling
+2 (Moderate) = Diffuse, moderate swelling
+3 (Severe) = Diffuse, severe swelling
Note: Subconjunctival hemorrhage, discharge, blanching, follicles, pterygium encroaching on visual axis, pterygium not 
encroaching on visual axis are graded as 0,+ 0.5, +1, +2, +3 .
Conjunctiva (Palpebral):
Hyperemia
  0 (None) = No hyperemia
+0.5 (Trace) = Minimal (trace) flush, reddish color
+1 (Mild) = Mild flush, reddish color
+2 (Moderate) = Bright red color
+3 (Severe) = Deep, bright, diffuse redness
Edema
  0 (None) = No edema
+0.5 (Trace) = Localized, minimal (trace) swelling
+1 (Mild) = Localized, mild swelling
+2 (Moderate) = Diffuse, moderate swelling
+3 (Severe) = Diffuse, severe swelling
Note: Subconjunctival hemorrhage, discharge, blanching, follicles, pterygium encroaching on visual axis, pterygium not 
encroaching on visual axis are graded as 0, + 0.5, +1, +2, +3.
Page 76 of 113abbvie 

p. 33 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Cornea:
Edema
  0 (None) = No edema
+0.5 (Trace) = Localized, minimal (trace) epithelial haze
+1 (Mild) = Dull glass appearance of epithelium that may include fine localized microcystic 
changes
+2 (Moderate) = Dull glass appearance of the epithelium with large number of cystic changes 
with or without stromal edema
+3 (Severe) = Epithelial bullae and/or stromal edema, localized or diffuse, with or without 
stromal striae
Superficial Punctate Keratopathy
0 = No superficial punctate keratopathy
+0.5 = Trace
+1 = Mild
+2 = Moderate
+3 = Severe
Note: Punctate epithelial staining, Filaments, Infiltrates, Edema, Cornea Gutatta, Endothelial Pigment, Keratic Precipitates, 
Neovascularization, Opacity(ies), Stromal Haze are graded 0, + 0.5, +1, +2, +3.
Anterior Chamber:
Cells, Flare, Anterior Synechiae, Hypopyon, Hyphema will be graded as0,+ 0.5, +1, +2, +3, +4.
Iris/Pupil:
Rubeosis Iridis, anterior chamber angle involved, Rubeosis Iridis, anterior chamber not involved, 
Afferent Pupillary Defect, Posterior Synechiae, Transillumination Defects, Pseudoexfoliative Material, 
Peripheral Iridectomy, Laser Peripheral Iridotomy will be evaluated with no grading.
3.19 Fluorescein Corneal Staining
The corneal staining should be graded 2 minutes after instillation of the sodium fluorescein.  
Examination will be performed with the slit lamp at approximately 10X magnification.  Evaluate the 
entire cornea for staining using the supplied yellow barrier filter placed directly in front of the objective 
lens of slit lamp . The slit lamp 's cobalt blue filter must be used to illuminate the cornea.  Corneal 
fluorescein staining must be evaluated at the 2-minute timepoint.  Refer to the Oxford Scheme outlined 
in the laminated chart provided to grade the staining.
Page 77 of 113abbvie 

p. 34 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.20 IOP
Intraocular pressure (IOP) should be measured after the biomicroscopic exam is completed and prior to 
pupil dilation . Measurements should be taken using a Goldmann applanation tonometer affixed to a 
slit-lamp with the participant seated . The participant and slit -lamp should be adjusted so that the 
participant 's head is firmly positioned on the chin rest and against the forehead rest without leaning 
forward or straining . Tight fitting neckwear should be loosened . Both eyes will be tested, with the right 
eye preceding the left eye . The measurer will look through the binocular viewer of the slit lamp at low 
power . The tension knob will be preset at a low -pressure value (4 to 6 mm Hg) . The measurer will 
follow the image of the fluorescein -stained semicircles while slowly rotating the tension knob until the 
inner borders of the fluorescein rings touch each other at the midpoint of their pulsation in response to 
the cardiac cycle . When this image is reached, the measurer will take his/her fin gers off the tension 
knob and record the IOP reading along with the date and time of day .
3.21 Gonioscopy
Gonioscopy will be performed to assess the iridocorneal (anterior chamber) angle.  You may use your 
preferred indirect gonioscopy lens (e.g., Posner, Zeis s 4-mirror lens, etc.) .  When gonioscopic 
photography is being performed you should use the appropriate gonioscopic lens for the photography.
General steps to performing gonioscopy:
Room lig hts should be turned off dur ingthe exa mination. All participants should be examined in 
thesameroom with the sameslit lamp if possible to do so, and with consist ent lighting 
conditions.
Perform the angleassessme nt und erhigh mag nification.
With the participant comfortable at the slit lamp, wet the corneal surface of your lens with an 
artificial tear or lubricating solution and place your gonioscopy lens on the participant 's eye.
Direct a bright, narrow light beam away from the pupil to avoid inducing miosis.
Have the participant maintain their gaze in the primary position while you examine the 
iridocorneal angle.
Minimize tilting the lens; only minor movement of the lens is permissible . Otherwise, the angle 
findings may be distorted and a closed or narrow angle may appear open.  Do not apply 
pressure that may caus e indentation.  The presence of corneal striations is an indication that 
the cornea is being indented.
Examine the iridocorneal angle for peripheral anterior synechiae and other angle pathology.
Page 78 of 113abbvie 

p. 35 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.22 Dilated Fundoscopic Examination
The fundus assessments shou ld be conducted through a dilated pupil (using 1% tropicamide) . The 
examinations will include evaluation of the lens, vitreous, fundus, and optic nerve . The C/D ratio will be 
assessed . The investigator should note if the pupil dilated normally.
Lens:
Lens Assessment:
Use biomicroscopic examination, indirect lenses, direct/indirect ophthalmoscopy, etc ., as appropriate, 
to visualize.
Lens Status:
The lens should be evaluated for pathology . If pathology is present, it will be described.
Cataract Assessme nt:
Under dilated examination, the presence and severity of nuclear, cortical, and posterior subcapsular 
cataract lens opacities should be evaluated . Capsular bag should also be evaluated.  At the first dilated 
examination, each type of cataract, if prese nt, will be graded using the scale below . At the last follow -up 
dilated examination, each type of cataract will be assessed for change from baseline and if changed, the 
current severity will be graded using the scale below:
0 = None
+1 = Mild
+2 = Mode rate
+3 = Severe
Vitreous:
The vitreous should be evaluated for pathology. If pathology is present, it will be described. It will be 
noted if the condition is not evaluable .  Cells, Vitreous Haze, Vitreous Hemorrhage and Posterior 
Vitreous Detachment should be graded the s everity grades: +0.5, +1, +2, +3, +4, not evaluable, not 
applicable ).
Fundus :
The fundus (posterior pole; periphery, when dilated) will be evaluated for pathology . If pathology is 
present, it should be described . It will be noted if the condition is not evaluable.
Macula :
The macula will be evaluated for any of the following pathology: intraretinal fluid, subretinal fluid,
intraretinal hemorrhage, subretinal hemorrhage, rhegmatogenous detachment, tractional detachment, 
pigment epithelial detachment.  
Page 79 of 113abbvie 

p. 36 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Retina Periphery :
The retina periphery will be evaluated for any of the following pathology and the approximate clock 
location:
Retinal hemorrhage, retinal tear, rhegmatogenous retinal detachment macula center attached, 
rhegmatogeno us retinal detachment macula center detached, tractional retinal detachment macula 
center attached, tractional retinal detachment macula center detached, and exudative retinal
detachment macula center attached, exudative retinal detachment macula center detached, other 
retinal detachment, round (atrophic) retinal hole , lattice degeneration.
Optic Nerve :
The optic nerve should be evaluated for pathology . If pathology is present, it will be described along 
with approximate clock location . It will be noted if the condition is not evaluable.
C/D Ratio :
C/D ratio should be reported using a 0.0 to 1.0 scale . It will be noted if the condition is not evaluable.
3.23 Pharmacokinetics Sampling (Selected Sites Only)
Pharmacokinetic (PK) samples for quantification of A GN-190584 in plasma will be collected at selected 
sites in approximately 10% of all enrolled subjects. Please refer to the Central Laboratory Manual for 
full collection, processing, and shipping information for pharmacokinetic blood samples.
Blood Pharmacokinetic Sampling Procedure
A qualified phlebotomist will collect 5 mL of each subject 's blood via an indwelling catheter or 
venipuncture from either arm into one 6 mL vacutainer tube containing dipotassium 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid as an anti coagulant.
Plasma samples of approximately 2.5 mL will be separated from each blood sample collected for 
measurement of plasma concentrations of AGN -190584 as specified in the Protocol Activity 
Schedule (Appendix D).
Instructions for the collection and handling of biological samples will be provided by AbbVie.  
The actual date and time (24 -hour clock time) of each sample will be recorded.  Pharmacokinetic 
blood samples to determine pilocarpine concentrations should be drawn at the nominal times, 
relative to the dosing time, and the actual time of the blood draw must be recorded in the 
source documents and Electronic case report form (eCRF).  Samples taken outside the allowable 
time window will be noted as protocol deviations, and the reason for deviation mus t be 
recorded in the source documents and eCRFs.  Predose samples must be drawn within 15 
minutes of the dosing time.
Study center staff will record the atomic clock times of all blood draws for each participant and 
will label vacutainer and polypropylene tubes with a coded label that corresponds to the 
participant number and blood draw time.  The central lab will supply the coded labels, 
Page 80 of 113abbvie 

p. 37 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.vacutainers, and polypropylene tubes.  The study center will be responsible for all other 
supplies.
Samples will be used to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of pilocarpine.  Each plasma sample will 
be divided into 2 aliquots (1 each for primary and backup PK samples).  Samples collected for 
analyses of pilocarpine plasma concentration may also be used to evaluate safety or eff icacy 
aspects related to concerns arising during or after the study. 
Drug concentration information that would unmask the study will not be reported to investigative sites 
or blinded personnel until the study has been unmasked.
Bioanalytical representati ves will be unmasked for PK sample bioanalysis during the conduct of the 
study .  The unmasking of bioanalytical representatives is to be carried out in a secure manner following 
AbbVie 's standard operating procedure (SOP) .  Extreme care and diligence will be taken to ensure no 
other individuals outside the bioanalytical team will be unblinded.
Blood Volume Collected per Participant
Approximately 10% of participants at selected sites
Pharmacokinetic blood samples: 110 mL (22 blood samples, 5 mL each)
Within 30 minutes from the time of the blood draw, blood samples must be centrifuged at no less than 
2000 g for 15 minutes at approximately 4°C .  After centrifugation, the plasma samples will be harvested 
and aliquoted into two approximately 1.25 mL samples in cr yovials (one primary and one backup) .  The 
samples should be placed on wet ice immediately after aliquoting and transferred to a –20°C freezer 
within one hour of processing to plasma.
Study center staff will send plasma samples to the central lab for stora ge at the end of each period .  
Before shipment and on the day of shipment, the sponsor and the central lab will be notified by email as 
to the time and method of shipment .  Primary and backup samples will be shipped to the central lab in 
separate shipments on separate days.
Pharmacokinetic Sample Bioanalysis
Plasma concentrations of AGN -190584 in plasma will be determined using validated liquid 
chromatography -tandem mass spectrometry methods.
3.24 Dispense Study Drug
Study drug will be dispensed to subjects beg inning at Day 1 and as specified in Section 2.1. The first 
dose of study drug will be administered after all other Day 1 procedures are completed . At the visits 
specified in Section 2.1, the site personnel will review returned study drug kits, and empty study drug 
packaging to verify drug accountability .
Each site will be responsible for maintaining drug accountability recor ds including product description, 
manufacturer, and lot numbers for all noninvestigational product (IP) dispensed by the site.
Page 81 of 113abbvie 

p. 38of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.25 Subject Withdrawal from theStudy
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary re ason for 
discontinuation of study drug or study participation . The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate eCRF page . However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new 
treatments or therapeutic modalities that the inve stigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's 
condition. F ollowing discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be treated in accordance with the 
investigator's best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether the subject decides to continue 
participation in the study.
3.26 Unscheduled Visits
An Unscheduled Visit should be performed when the subject comes in for a medical visit for evaluation 
and assessment . During Unscheduled Visits, ocular examinations may be performed at the 
investigator's discreti on.
Visits for dispensing new study drug in case of temperature excursion, loss ,or damage are not 
considered Unscheduled Visit s.
4SAFETY MANUAL
4.1 Methods and Timing of Safety Assessment
All adverse events, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject , will be collected from 
the time of study drug administration through study exit, unless spontaneously report after study exit.  
In addition, study procedure -related serious and nonserious adverse events will be collected from the 
time the subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
Figure 4. Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event Collection Schema
AE = adverse event; SAE = serious adverse event
Note: Spontaneous report only after study exit .
Page 82 of 113abbvie 
on ent 
Signed tudy Procedure-
Related AE and 
ou eriou 
tudyDm g 
Strut and ou enou 
Elicited a11dlor Spo11ta11 eo11s~ Reported 
Srudy Exit 

p. 40of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Supplemental Headache AE Assessment
Whenever a headache AEis reported after the initial dosing at Day 1, the subject should be immediately 
followed up with a supplemental headache AE assessment form to further assess the headache.  The 
supplemental headache AEassessment form contains three visual analog scales (VAS) that the subject 
will complete to grade the overall severity , the temporal severity (if applicable) ,and the supraorbital 
severity (if applicable) .  The subjects will be asked to make a vertical mark along each horizontal 100 mm 
long VAS, ranging from No Pain on the left to Worst Possible Pain on the right. 
Figure 5. Visual Analog Scale
The evaluator should also ask the subject the additional questions on the headache AEassessment form.  
If aheadache started after administration of both the first and second dose sof study drug , then the se 
additional questions should be answered about whichever headache had worse outcomes .  For 
example, "How long after taking the study drug did the headache/migraine start ?"should reflect 
whichever headache had the quickest onset ,and "How long did the headache/migraine last? (if 
intermittent, approximately how long did each event last )"should reflect whichever headache had the 
longest dur ation.
The evaluator should measure the distance from the end of the line to the mark that the subject made
with a ruler and record the length on the supplemental headache assessment worksheet.  
If a headache is classified as intermittent or recurrent with the same causality and severity, then one 
supplemental headache AE assessment form should be used. If the subject experience smultiple 
headache swith different causality orseverity, then each headache should have its own supplemental 
headache AE assessment form.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
Supplemental study CRFs should be completed in the event of COVID -19-related missed/virtual visits, 
study drug interruptions or discontinuations, or AEs(including capture of specific signs/symptoms of 
infection and testing results).
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2)infections should be captured as AEs. If 
the event meets the criteria for a SAE, then follow the SAE reporting directions per the protocol and 
above . The following COVID -19-related supplemental eCRFs should be completed (for both serious and 
nonserious events):
COVID-1 9 Supplemental Signs/Symptoms
COVID- 19 Status Form
Page 84 of 113abbvie 
No pain 
Distance to measure 

p. 41 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.If a subject has a confirmed or suspected SARS -CoV-2 infection and study drug was interrupted, the 
investigator should contact the sponsor emergency medical contact listed above before reintroducing 
study drug.
Reactions known to be associated with the SARS- CoV-2 vaccine should be reported as AEs. Ifthe event 
meets the criteria for a nSAE, then follow the SAE reporting directions . All AEsassociated with the SARS -
CoV-2 vaccine will be linked to the vaccine on the COVID -19 Vaccine eCRF .
5COUNTRY- SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
5.1 SUSAR Reporting
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local 
guidelines and Appendix A of the Investigator Brochure will serve as the Reference safety information .
6STUDY DRUG AND SUPPLIES
6.1 Study Supplies
AbbVie will supply the following:
Unilateral pupillometer
Pupillary distance ruler
Distance and near visual acuity charts
Light meters
Oxford scale
Yellow barrier filter for corneal fluorescein staining (if needed)
Sodium fluorescein DET strips (if needed)
Lectern
Paper OSD Iand NEIVFQ-25questionnaires
Tablet for electronic questionnaires
An iPhone with a screen size of 4.7 to 5.8 inches diagonally for the VFA app. T he following 
iPhone models meet this specification: iPhone 6s, iPhone 6s Plus, iPhone 7, iPhone 7 Plus, 
iPhone 8, iPhone 8 Plus, iPhone X, iPhone Xs, iPhone 11 Pro, iPhone 12 Mini, and second -
generation iPhone SE (introduced in 2020) . AbbVie must choose only one model and use across 
all sites . Subject s will not take the iPhone home, as the VFA app is only administered at site 
visits, using the site -provided iPhone.
Laboratory supplies for pharmacokinetic samples for selected sites. 
Page 85 of 113abbvie 

p. 42 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigator will supply the following:
Dilating eyedrops (1.0% tropicamide ophthalmic solution and 2.5% phenylephrine ophthalmic 
solution)
Artificial tears/lubricating solution for gonioscopy
Topical anesthetic (0.5% proparacaine ophthalmic solution)
Occluder
Urine pregnancy test kits
Stopwatch
Ruler/tape measure to measure 4 -meter lane
Internet connection (high -speed con nection for eCRF completion) equipment for all other 
examinations and measures
Subject s who wear bifocal or multifocal spectacles or contact lenses will be provided with a pair of 
monofocal spectacles with the same or improved distance correction (20/32 o r better) as their new 
habitual correction . Subject s whose distance habitual corrections are worse than 20/32 will also be 
provided with a pair of new spectacles with improved distance correction (20/32 or better). S ubject s 
are required to wear the newly provided spectacles for at least 7 days before Day 1 and during the 
study, and no bifocal or multifocal or old habitual correction lenses should be used . Either monofocal 
spectacles or contact lenses can be worn between study visits, but only spectacles can be worn on the 
study visit days . Reading glasses are allowed between visits when needed.
6.2 Treatments Administered
The study drug ( AGN -190584 ) will be dispensed and administered in the form of eyedrops at designated
study visits by site personnel . On nonvisit days, s ubjects will be instructed to take the study drug as 
described in Section 5.7 of the protocol.
AGN -190584 will be administered in both eyes twice daily in the morning and the afternoon . On the day 
before office visits, the study drug should notbe administ ered less than 1 2hours before the scheduled 
visit time.
Study drug can only be dispensed to subjects enrolled in the study through the IRT system . At the end 
of the Treatment Period or at the Premature D/C visit, the site will contact the IRT system to provide 
visit date information and study drug return information for each kit.
6.3 Packaging and Labeling
As this is a double -masked study, AGN -190584 and vehicle will be supplied in identically appearing 
bottles and cartons (Figure 6).
Page 86 of 113abbvie 

p. 43of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 6. AGN -190584 Bottle and Carton
1 carton = 1 kit 
Each kit/carton 
Labeled Carton :  Site to complete blank spaces on the carton label
Contains one (1) sterile 5 mL bottle with a 3.5 mL fill
Affixed label that corresponds to the outer carton/kit label 
IRT will assign one (1) kit/carton per dispensing .
Subject s will be dispensed a carton (1 kit) of IP upon completion of all Day 1 proced ures. S ubject s 
should keep the bottle in the outer carton and must bring all used and unused kit(s)for on -site visits as 
these will be used to perform on -site administration. 
All used and unused IP MUST BE returned by the subject to the site at study co mpletion ;IP should be 
destroyed onsite per site SOPs or return to depot .
Page 87 of 113abbvie 
Ophthalmlc SOI.-, or Vehicle 
:•, Stt:rlle 
Kit# : XXXXXXX 
Lot # : LL-LLLLLL 
Subject # : ______ _ 
Date Dispensed: ____ _ AbbVle, North Chicago , IL 60064 USA 
M21-195 
AGN 190584 Pilo HCI 1.25% Ophthalmic Solutio n or Vehicle 
3.5 ml / Bottle For Topical Ophtha lmlc Use Only 
Admin ister as directed by your Investigato r. 
Store between 2°c to s0c (36°F to 46°F ). 
Keep out of the reach of children. Keep bottle In outer carton. Sterile 
Caut ion: New Drug -Limited by United States law to lnvestigational use. 

p. 44 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.4 Shipment of Study Drug
Shipments will be shipped in preconditioned shippers (no temperature monitors will be included) , 
including packing list and study intervention . Upon receipt of the shipment the site should 
confirm /verify the shipment contents against the packing list: 
Site # / PI name 
Kit numbers
Quantity of kits 
Condition of kits 
Expiry (if applicable) 
Lot No. 
The original packing list should be filed in the site ISF . Any discrepancies should be reported to the 
assigned site monitor .
IP Shipment – Temperature Monitoring
No temperature monitors will be included with shipments because the shippers that the study drugs are 
sent in will be prequalified shippers that will m aintain the temperature between 2 °C and 8 °C. 
Registering Shipments (Consignments) into I RT
Each shipment of IP has a corresponding consignment assignment asnoted on the packing list . These 
consignments must be registered into the EndPoint IRT system immediately upon receipt .
Storage and Disposition of Study Drug
The IPsare for investigational use only and are to be used only within the context of this study . The 
study drug supplied for this study must be maintained under adequate security and stored under the 
conditions specified on the label until dispensed for subject use or destroyed on site as appropriate.
Excursion Reporting
Physically set aside affected study intervention under labeled storage conditions , then e nter the 
temperature excursion into ATEMS ; ATEMS will automatically provide an assessment and show the new 
study intervention status . 
Page 88 of 113abbvie 

p. 45 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.5 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups
Subject s will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio into the following treatment groups: 
Treatment Dosing Schedul e
AGN -190584 1.25%
1 drop OU, twice daily, 6 hours apart for 14 days
Vehicle
Stratification is based on the following factors at either screening or Baseline/Day 1: 
Age at Screening  ≤50 years 
 >50 yearsScreening 
Binocular Meso pic DCNVA Severity  20/63 or Better (≤ 50%)
 Worse than 20/63Baseline/Day 1
Iris color  Brown 
 Non brownScreening 
Emmetrope status*  Emmetrope 
 Non emmetrope (≤25%) Screening
*Emmetrope status is confirmed via screening cycloplegic refraction .  See Section 3.14 for details.
If correction for each eye iswithin sphere range of -0.50 D to +0.75 D inclusive and ≤ 0.75 D in Cylinder , 
the subject is considered an emmetrope . If one or both eyes are out of the range, the subject should be 
considered a nonemmetrope. 
Note :Refractions may be transcribed in plus or minus cylinder notation to determine whether 
inclusion criteria and/or emmetrope definitions are met .
At the screening visit, all subjects will be assigned a unique subject number using the IRT . For subjects 
who do not meet the study selection criteria, the site personnel must contact the IRT system and 
identify the subject as a screen fai lure.
Sites are to enter required information into I RTeither in real time or shortly after a reportable event to 
ensure timely reporting of the overall study status . Interactive response technology will provide the 
subject identification number per conse nted subject ;this number will identify the subject throughout 
the course of the trial. Contact information and user guidelines for IRT use will be provided to each site.
Interactive response technology will control the stratification for the trial. Once a strat umcap has been 
reached ,no additional subject s can be enrolled ;therefore ,screening entries of age, iris color, and 
emmetrope status will determine the general stratification, which is confirmed on Baseline/Day 1with 
the entry of the 1 -hour D CNVA, OU . Once a stratum has been filled no additional subject s meeting 
those stratum factors can be randomized/enrolled . Therefore, sites must review the screening entries 
prior to Baseline/Day 1 to ensure proper stratification (with corresponding docum entation), updating 
Page 89 of 113abbvie 

p. 46 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.IRTentries if needed . Upon randomization these factors cannot be updated and will affect the stratum 
population.
*NOTE -ERRORS IN ENTERING THE STRAT UM GROUP IN I RTMAY IMPACT THE RANDOMIZATION OF THE 
SUBJECT AND DATA ANALYSIS . PLEASE ENSURE THAT THE ASSIGNED STRAT UM GROUP YOU SELECTED 
IN IRTIS ACCURATE BEFORE PROCEEDING IN THE SYSTEM . AFTER YOU PROCEED, YOU CANNOT CHANGE 
THE STRAT UM GROUP .
6.6 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
Baseline/Day 1
Upon randomization in I RT, site staff should perform the following prior to administration/dispensing to 
ensure per kit/carton: 
Verify against carton/kits pulled against assigned carton/kits via I RTprintout 
Verify carton/kit label against affixed bottle label 
Any discrepancies should be reported to the site monitor upon identification .
Baseline/Day 1 IP administration: Upon completion of all Hour 0 procedures (immediately after VAS if 
applicable ) and prior to the tolerability assessment/drop comfort questionnaire, site staff will administer 
one (1) drop in each eye with one of the two (2) drop bottles at 8AM ±1 hour and no sooner than
6hours +15 minutes after the first administration.
Site staff will demonstrate the IP administration to educate the subject about the at -home dosing 
procedures. The site will review the subject instructions for at -home and in -office study visit 
administration, IP storage/transport , andany warnings . Printed subject dosing instructions should be 
provided with theIP when dispensed prior to the end of the visit, with any subject education noted 
within source.
Study Visits: IP Administration/Compliance
On visit days site staff will administer IP at Hour 0 in a similar fashion to Baseline/Day 1 at 8AM ± 1 hour 
and again 6 hours after the first adm inistration within + 15 minutes .
Subject s are to bring all used and unused IP for study visits, returning all by the end of their 
participation . On-site administration will occur with the IP dispensed during the Baseline/Day 1 visit 
that is returned . Therefore, subject s should be instructed to bring all used and unused IP for study visits . 
At the conclusion of participation all IP dispensed (used and unused) must be returned to the site for
destruction.
Subject s should not self -administer IP prior to the visit on the visit day, and should provide staff the 
approximate time of their last self -administration (last self -administration should occur no sooner on 
the day before a study visit than 1 2hours prior to the ir scheduled visit time) . During study visits, site 
staff should discuss compliance with daily IP administration and assess reasons for not administering for 
safety and/or re -education needs ,documenting discussion accordingly.
Page 90 of 113abbvie 

p. 47 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7Appendices
7.1 STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
AE adverse event
BID twice daily
CDVA corrected distance visual acuity
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease -2019
CRF case report form
DCNVA distance -corrected near v isual a cuity
EC Ethics Committee
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
IL interleukin
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
IOP intraocular pressure
IP investigational product
IRT interactive response technology
N/A not applicable
NEI VFQ -25 25 -item National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire
NVPTQ Near Vision Presbyopia Task -Based Questionnaire
OD right eye
OS left eye
OSDI Ocular Surface Disease Index
OU both eyes
PD premature discontinuation
PGIC patient global impression of change
PGIS global impression of status
PICQ Presbyopia Impact and Coping Questionnaire
PK pharmacokinetic
PRO patient -reported outcome
SAE serious adverse event
SARS -CoV-2 s evere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Page 91 of 113abbvie 

p. 48 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.SE study eye
SOP standard operating procedure
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions
VAS visual analog scales
VFA app Visual Function Assessment application
Page 92 of 113abbvie 

p. 49 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 VFA App Instructions
Background
The VFA app is a custom -developed iOS application that will be used in clinic, in the presence of a 
clinician, to assess a clinical trial subject's ability to read on electronic devices. 
Subjects are asked to read a prespecified text passage on an iPhone . The app will capture coping 
behaviors adopted by user sto help them read better (e.g., blinking, squinting, screen tilt), as well as 
metrics on their reading performance (e.g., reading speed).
No videos or images are stored permanently within the app, on the device ,or transm itted to any 
external storage.
Conditions for Use
iPhone Specification
Sites should be provided one or more iPhones, depending on the expected maximum number of 
subject s per a site visit.
A single device needs to be chosen from the candidates provided belo w and used across all sites:
An iPhone with a screen size of 4.7 to 5.8 inches diagonally . The following iPhone models meet this 
specification: iPhone 6s, iPhone 6s Plus, iPhone 7, iPhone 7 Plus, iPhone 8, iPhone 8 Plus, iPhone X, 
iPhone Xs, iPhone 11 Pro , iPhone 12 Mini, and second -generation iPhone SE (introduced in 2020)
Subject s will not take the iPhone home, as the VFA app is only administered at site visits, using the 
site-provided iPhone.
Light Setting and Correction 
VFA should be administered under photopic condition s, with the subject 's best distance correction . No 
near -vision correction is allowed.
Only half -eye style trial frames or full -field trial lenses can be used for best distance correction while 
subjects are performing the VFA task . Other forms of correction would interfere with thecamera 's 
ability to detect subject s'faces.
Page 93 of 113abbvie 

p. 50of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Instructions for Downloading the VFA App on iPhone
Before providing sites with iPhones, AbbVie should download the VFA app on each device.
The unique device IDs of the phones need to be e -mailed to  –this further 
adds to the app security . AMicrosoft's App Center link for the app will be provided for it to be 
downloaded. You will be asked to select your preferred language the first t ime you open the app.
Page 94 of 113abbvie 
'1 App Center 
Latest release 
Version 1.03 (1) 
ar 26, 2021 at 16:40 
217 MB Sign In 

p. 51of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Detailed Instructions
Study Site Personnel: Screens 1 to 3
Screen 1: Site login Login using provided unique site username and password . If 
lost please email 
Choose between English or Spanish language, depending on 
subject preference
Page 95 of 113abbvie 
temp 
Login 
Change Language 
Lost Password? 

p. 52of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 2: Subject identification 
and pupillary distance settingEnter the subject ID
Select a text passage based on subject ID and visit 
number, per the table provided in the Text Choice 
Selection Guides below . This is to make sure that each 
subject is assigned a different text passage at each visit 
(to avoid the learning bias), and text passages are 
distributed evenly across subjects and visits. 
E.g., for Subject 6, fo r Visit 1 select text 4.
Measure the subject 's pupillary distance and adjust the 
PD dial accordingly .
Page 96 of 113abbvie 
Logou t Home 
q Subject 10: 
study subject ID 
Text Selec tion Pupill ary 
Distance 
Stan reading test 
'ID' IDRA 
w e r t y u 
a s d g h 
z X C V b n 
123 @ 0 space IDEALLY 
D p 
k 
m <El 
fOttJm 1,,y_._,. -
Pai-ID 
1_1,.,.__t.on PD 
k#ll1--..q ,_ 
qwa t v u lo p 
P upil Centre to P1.lpil Cerr e 
lnmm 

p. 53of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 3: Subject instructions Read the instructions on screen 3 to the subject clearly, 
and press continue. 
Then hand the smartphone to the subject .
Page 97 of 113abbvie 
Introduct ion 
Aspa,1or • • a that 
you use this artide 
and 31"1SV/Cf 
about the he words 
in tho ande them. 
wantto bi to 
the words s you read. 
You will have the opportunity before you 
beg n reading to adjust the size nd 
contrast ( ol t t You 
can also ts o the text 
whloyou ¥tide . 
You can M'ligate tlvough th s app nd 
us the touchscr en th w y you 
normaly do your sma,tphone . 
I« )'OU r q.iestJ0n 
about the alticle, the app wit ask you to 
two mul ple-chooot lions 
about your abllty to road tho t 

p. 54of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Subject : Screens 4 to 13
Screen 4: Screen manipulation 
detailsAsk the subject to read theinstructions and press 
continue to progress.
Page 98 of 113abbvie 
( Pago 2/S 
Instructions 
On tho noxt n, you w II bo gi n 
bit of samplo toxt that you c.in adju t 
to ppe r tho way you want the text of 
the rtlc to ppe r. 
To chango lhe to 
size, pinch to zoom 
on your smartphono 
set n. 
To the text 
dark r, move tho 
Contra slider I 
the bottom of tho 
to~ tlg 
your linger on 
Yl)l.w touchscreento 
SCfoll up nd down. 
Pie se mak the text only as big a.nd 
as dark as you need tor ad 
comfortably . In o~ words, 
s ndmg 
canbefo, it 
With no problem. 
You may adJUStmon s to tho IOX1 ol 
the iclo any ume. 

p. 55of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 5: Initial size/contrast setting Explain to the subject that he/she can pinch to 
change size and move theslider to change contrast. 
Ask him/her to take a moment to apply these 
adjustments if needed . Remind him/her to make text 
only as dark and large as he/she need sto read it 
easily.
Screen 6: Phone orientation: The subject must hold the smartphone so the screen 
is directed towards his/her face –if not, a tone will 
bleep . Atone during the task will warn him/her that 
the phone position needs to be adjusted.
If the face is not detected once he/she isholding the 
phone in the right position, the operator should 
check the lighting level and that the lens angle in the 
trial frame is not causing reflections.
Page 99 of 113abbvie 
I 
( Page3/8 
Adjust Text Size and Cont rast 
Adjust the size of the text below ("Can 
you read this?") using pinch to zoom on 
your touchscreen . 
Make the text only as large as you need 
to read it easily . 
Can you read this? 
Adjust the contr ast (darkness) of the 
text by moving the slider to the left or 
nght. 
Make the text only as dark as you need 
to read it easily. 
. 
( Page3 /6 
Center your face 
Please keep the screen directed at your 
face throughout the test. 
K] 
At the start of the test you will hear an 
audible tone to signify that the test is 
collecting data. If you hear a tone after 
this then the device is not able to 
recognise your face. Please return your 
face to the middle of the screen . 

p. 56of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 7: Confirmation of being 
ready to start readingThe subject clicks "OK"when ready to start reading 
the text passage.
Screen 8: Reading task The subject reads silently, scrolling to the 
bottom of the screen and pressing 
"Finished" once he/she hasread all the 
text.
He/she can adjust the text size and 
contrast at any time as practiced.
Page 100 of 113abbvie 
Ready to begin reading? 
Press OK and read the article silently 
to yourself. 
When you are finished , press the 
"FINISHED" button ---
Henr i Matisse 
One ol lhe mos, Imponan1 
artists of the 1wentielh 
cenlury was Frenchman Henn 
Matisse . He led an art 
movement called post-
Impressionism and was one of 
the fIrs1 famous collage artists 
Throughout his career . 
Matisse experimented with 
different colors, art lonms, and 
mediums. He did not follow 
the established rules of art-
he created his own. 
. . . . Matisse was a man with a 
mischievous personality and 
keen sense of humor-
character istics that are 
reflected in his artwork. As a 
master of color , he brought a 
special joyfulness and a 
childlike perspective to his art. 
When Matisse died in 1954 , 
he left a part of himself behind 
for all future generations to 
enjoy . -

p. 57of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 9: Reading completion 
confirmationConfirmation that reading has been completed
Screen 10: Question on text 
comprehensionThe subject answers a simple true/false question 
about the text he/she hasread –click the box to 
tick.
Page 101 of 113abbvie 
Page 6/6 
Please answer the following question 
about the article you just read. 
1. True or false : Matisse is considered 
the founder of a new style of art that 
uses bold colors and shapes . 
True D 
False D 
*''* 

p. 58of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 11: Question on ability to 
read the textThe subject answers two questions about the 
subject 's ability to read the article –click the box to 
tick.
Screen 12: Answer review and 
confirmationThis screen gives subject s the opportunity to 
confirm/change response sbefore submitting them. 
Explain to subject s that once they click the 'Confirm '
button, they cannot go back and change responses.
Page 102 of 113abbvie 
( Page 5/6 
' Please answer the following questions 
about your ability to read the text. 
2. How would you rate your ability to 
read the text in the article? 
I could not read any of the text 
due to prob lems seeing up close 
Poor 
Fair 
Good 
Very Good 
Excellent 
3. How satis fied are you with your 
( Page B/8 
Confirm Answe rs 
Please take a moment to review your 
answers . Once you confirm your answers, 
you cannot change th em anymore. 
1. True or false: Resea rchers are cenain 
that the stone tablet is an ancient map. 
False 
2. How would you rate your ability to read 
the text in the article? 
Fair 
3. How satisfied are you with your ability 
to read the text in the article? 
Neither satisfied nor dissatisfi ed 
Conhrm 
Back 

p. 59of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Screen 13: Task completion 
confirmationAt this point, the subject should hand the phone 
back to the study site personnel. 
Page 103 of 113abbvie 

p. 60of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Study Site Personnel: Screens 14, 15
Screen 14: Video processing This screen represents a short delay while face video is 
processed and features extracted – the video is not 
saved.
Press ' OK'to continue.
Screen 15: Summary report Results are displayed and automatically 
saved and transmitted to the Cloud. 
If the Wi -Fi fails, the data will 
automatically be transmitted when the 
phone is next in contact with a Wi -Fi 
connection.
Page 104 of 113abbvie 
RaulUSummlly 
Ourat,cn. 87s 
-,ng<l)Md 3~SWP,., 
Yldeodau 57-3% 
No oftlilr, o ,_,.,.,,..,, ..... 001 
Mean 811 0..-ata'I.Nn s o.., ..... 'A Sep"'""'- 469% 
Mein .,..,., 366cm 
di>t..-.:e 355cm 
MM d<slMlce 38.1 cm -..a..._. 365cm ,,...,,_,, 136 -.,,.,...,,,38 
Mein cont I 0 33 
,_.,contr 0.33 
Mean11Ct01•11....,•:26s 
OJMl re 4/4 ""5 tel 
G,ophs Bink • '""' 
01) True 
02)E•-
031 Yery .. llSI_, 

p. 61 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Handling Wi -Fi Connectivity Issues During the VFA App Administration
Wi-Fi issue while data is being transferred to the cloud -based storage
Every app on iOS has local storage called an app sandbox . No other app or even the user can get into 
this app sandb ox, onlythe app itself . This is a fundamental feature of the iOS operating system, and 
why it isso secure . The data get temporarily stored in the app's sandbox if the app does not have an 
internet connection, and will try again periodically ;we call th is secure 'Caching .' If the internet 
connection resumes and a response from the server is received the data get sent and cleared from the 
cache or successful lysubmi tted . The app can only access the specific user's cache if the user is logged 
in. So once the connection is resolved, the site study personnel need to log in to the app again for data 
to be transferred to the cloud storage.
Wi-Fi issue at some point before subjects complete the task
The app will continue as normal once connection is restored . Any data that can 'tbe sent will be stored 
in the cache, waiting for two things, one for internet connection, and two for the right authenticated 
user to be logged in before sending again . So once the connection is resolved, the site study personnel 
shou ldlog in to the app again, and the subject can complete the task.
Page 105 of 113abbvie 

p. 62 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Text Choice Selection Guides
Table 3. Text Choice Selection Guide for English Language
SUBJECT ID* Visit 1 Text No. Visit 2 Text No. Visit 3 Text No.
1 EN 1 EN 2 EN 5
2 EN 5 EN 4 EN 1
3 EN 3 EN 4 EN 2
4 EN 2 EN 1 EN 3
5 EN 5 EN 1 EN 4
6 EN 4 EN 3 EN 5
7 EN 2 EN 3 EN 1
8 EN 1 EN 5 EN 2
9 EN 4 EN 5 EN 3
10 EN 3 EN 2 EN 4
11 EN 1 EN 3 EN 4
12 EN 2 EN 4 EN 5
13 EN 3 EN 5 EN 1
14 EN 4 EN 1 EN 2
15 EN 5 EN 2 EN3
* This column should be filled with unique study subject IDs at each site.
Page 106 of 113abbvie 

p. 63 of 67
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M21 -195 Version 2.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 4. Text Choice Selection Guide for Spanish Language
SUBJECT ID* Visit 1 Text No. Visit 2 Text No. Visit 3 Text No.
1 SP 1 SP 2 SP 5
2 SP 5 SP 4 SP1
3 SP 3 SP 4 SP 2
4 SP 2 SP 1 SP 3
5 SP 5 SP 1 SP 4
6 SP 4 SP 3 SP 5
7 SP 2 SP 3 SP 1
8 SP 1 SP 5 SP 2
9 SP 4 SP 5 SP 3
10 SP 3 SP 2 SP 4
11 SP 1 SP 3 SP 4
12 SP 2 SP 4 SP 5
13 SP 3 SP 5 SP 1
14 SP 4 SP 1 SP 2
15 SP 5 SP 2 SP 3
* This column should be filled with unique study subject IDs at each site.
Page 107 of 113abbvie 
