 
Title Research Project: Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Single -
Dose Crossover Study Examining the Effects of Sublingual 
Riluzole (BHV- 0223) on Public Speaking in Social Anxiety 
Disorder 
Principal Investigator: Michael H. Bloch, MD  
HIC# 1605017768 
Date of Approval: 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018 
NTC03017508   
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
YALE  UNIVERSITY
HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
Application to Involve  Human Subjects in Biomedical  Research 
100 FR1 (2015-2)
SECTION I:  ADMINISTRATIVE  INFORMATION
Title of Research Project:
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Single-Dose Crossover Study Examining the Effects of Sublingual  
Riluzole (BHV-0223) on Public Speaking in Social  Anxiety Disorder
Principal  Investigator: Michael  Bloch MD, MS Yale Academic Appointment: Assistant  Professor
Department: Yale  Child Study Center
Campus Address: 230 S. Frontage Rd. NIHB  205
Campus Phone:
(203)745-9921Fax:
(203) 737-5104Pager: E-mail: Michael.bloch@yale.edu
Protocol  Correspondent Name  & Address (if  different  than PI):
Angeli  Landeros-Weisenberger
Campus Phone:
(203)785-7683Fax:
(203)737-5104E-mail:
Angeli.landeros@yale.edu
Yale Cancer  Center CTO  Protocol  Correspondent Name  & Address (if  applicable ):
Campus Phone: Fax: E-mail:
Business Manager:
Campus Phone : Fax : E-mail
tment:
Investigator Interests:
Does the principal  investigator, or do any research personnel  who are  responsible for the design, 
conduct  or reporting of this project  or any of their  family members (spouse  or dependent  child) 
have an incentive or interest, financial  or otherwise, that  may affect  the protection of the human 
subjects involved in this project, the  scientific objectivity of the research or its integrity?  Note:  
The Principal  Investigator (Project  Director), upon consideration of the individual’s role andFaculty Advisor:(required if PI is a student, 
resident, fellow or other trainee) NA
Campus Address:
Campus Phone: Fax: Pager: E-mail:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018degree of independence  in carrying out the work, will  determine who is responsible for the 
design, conduct, or  reporting  of the research.
See Disclosures and Management  of Personal  Interests in Human Research  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/policies/index.html#COI
 Yes  No
Do you or does anyone on the research team who is determined by you to be responsible for the 
design, conduct or  reporting  of this research have  any patent (sole right  to make, use or sell an 
invention) or copyright  (exclusive rights to an original  work) interests related to this research 
protocol?
 Yes  No
If yes to either question above, list names of the investigator or responsible  person:
The Yale  University Principal  Investigator, all Yale University co-investigators, and all Yale 
University individuals who are responsible for the design, conduct  or reporting of research must  
have a current  financial  disclosure form on file with the University’s Conflict  of Interest  Office. 
Yale New  Haven Hospital  personnel  who are listed as co-investigators on a protocol  with a Yale 
University Principal  Investigator must  also have a current  financial  disclosure form  on file with 
the University’s Conflict  of Interest  Office. If this has not been done, the  individual(s) should  
follow this link to the  COI Office Website to complete the form:  http://www.yale.edu/coi/
NOTE:  The requirement  for maintaining a current  disclosure form  on file with the University’s 
Conflict  of Interest  Office  extends primarily to Yale  University and Yale-New Haven Hospital  
personnel.  Whether or  not they are required to maintain a disclosure form with the  
University’s Conflict of Interest Office, all investigators and individuals deemed otherwise  
responsible by the PI who are listed on the protocol  are required to disclose to the  PI any 
interests that are specific to this protocol.
SECTION II: G ENERAL  INFORMATION
1.Performing Organizations:  Identify the hospital, in-patient  or outpatient  facility, school or 
other agency  that will serve  as the location of the research. Choose all  that apply:
a.Internal  Location[s] of the Study:
Magnetic  Resonance  Research Center Yale University PET  Center
(MR-TAC) YCCI/Church Street  Research Unit  (CSRU) 
Yale Cancer Center/Clinical  Trials Office  (CTO) YCCI/Hospital  Research Unit  (HRU)
Yale Cancer Center/Smilow YCCI/Keck Laboratories
Yale-New Haven Hospital Yale-New Haven Hospital—Saint  Raphael  Campus 
Cancer Data  Repository/Tumor Registry
Specify Other  Yale  Location:  Yale  Child Study Center
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018b.External  Location[s]:
APT Foundation, Inc. Haskins Laboratories 
Connecticut  
Mental  Health Center John B. Pierce  Laboratory, Inc.
Clinical  Neuroscience Research Unit  (CNRU) Veterans Affairs Hospital, West Haven 
Other Locations, Specify: International  Research Site
(Specify location(s)):
c.Additional  Required Documents (check all that apply): N/A
*YCCI-Scientific  and Safety Committee (YCCI-SSC) Approval  Date:
*Pediatric Protocol  Review Committee (PPRC) Approval  Date:
*YCC  Protocol  Review Committee (YRC-PRC) Approval  Date:
*Dept. of Veterans Affairs, West Haven VA HSS Approval  Date:
*Radioactive Drug Research Committee (RDRC) Approval  Date:  
YNHH-Radiation 
Safety  Committee (YNHH-RSC) Approval  Date:  
Yale University RSC (YU-RSC) Approval  Date:  
Magnetic Resonance Research Center PRC (MRRC-PRC)     Approval  Date:
*Nursing Research Committee Approval  Date:
YSM/YNHH Cancer Data  Repository (CaDR) Approval  Date:  
Dept. of Lab Medicine  request  for services or specimens form
Imaging on  YNHH Diagnostic Radiology equipment request  form (YDRCTO request) found 
at http://radiology.yale.edu/research/ClinTrials.aspx)
*Approval  from  these committees is required before final  HIC approval  is granted. See instructions 
for documents required for initial submission and approval  of the  protocol. Allow sufficient  time for 
these requests. Check with the oversight  body for their time requirements.
2.Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all  
follow-up and data  analysis activities. Two years.
3.Research Type/Phase: (Check all that apply)
a.Study Type
Single Center Study  
Multi-Center Study
Does the Yale  PI serve as the PI of the  multi-site study?  Yes No 
Coordinating Center/Data Management
Other:
b.Study Phase N/A
Pilot Phase  I Phase  II Phase  III Phase  IV 
Other (Specify)
4.Area of Research: (Check all  that apply)  Note that  these are overlapping definitions and 
more than one category may apply to your research protocol. Definitions for the following 
can be found in the  instructions section 4c:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Clinical  Research:  Patient-Oriented Clinical  Research:  Outcomes and 
Clinical  Research:  Epidemiologic and Behavioral Health Services 
Translational  Research #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”) Interdisciplinary Research 
Translational  Research #2 (“Bedside-to-Community”) Community-Based Research
5.Is this study a clinical  trial?  Yes No
NOTE the  current  ICMJE (International  Committee of Medical  Journal  Editors) definition of a 
clinical  trial: “any research study that prospectively assigns human participants or groups of humans 
to one or more health-related interventions to evaluate the effects on health outcomes.” Health-related 
interventions include any intervention used to modify a biomedical  or health-related outcome  (for 
example, drugs, surgical  procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, dietary interventions, and 
process-of-care changes). Health outcomes include any biomedical  or health-related measures 
obtained in patients or participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events”
If yes, where is it registered?
Clinical  Trials.gov registry 
Other (Specify )
Registration of clinical  trials at their initiation is required by  the FDA, NIH  and by the ICMJE.
If this study  is registered on clinicaltrials.gov, there is new  language in the consent  form  and compound 
authorization that should be  used.
For more information on registering clinical  trials, including whether your trial must be  
registered, see the YCCI webpage, http://ycci.yale.edu/researchers/ors/registerstudy.aspx 
or contact  YCCI at 203.785.3482)
6.Does the Clinical  Trials Agreement  (CTA) require  compliance  with ICH GCP (E6)?  
Yes No
7. Will  this study have a billable service?  A billable service is defined as any  service rendered to 
a study subject  that, if he/she was not on a study, would normally generate a bill from either 
Yale-New  Haven Hospital or Yale Medical  Group to the patient  or the patient’s insurer. The 
service may or may not be  performed by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by  
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital  or Yale Medical  Group (examples include 
x-rays, MRIs, CT scans, specimens sent  to central labs, or specimens sent  to pathology). Notes:
1.There is no distinction made whether the service  is paid for by the subject  or their insurance  
(Standard of Care) or by  the study’s funding mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally  
includes new  services or orders placed in EPIC  for research subjects.
Yes No
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical  research 
management  system, for Epic to appropriately route research related charges. Please contact  
oncore.support@yale.edu
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/20188.. Are there  any procedures involved in this protocol  that will be performed at  YNHH or one of
its affiliated entities?   Yes No _X If Yes, please answer questions a through c  and note
instructions below.  If  No, proceed to Section III.
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that  you will  
perform?
b.Will  you be using  any new equipment  or equipment that  you have not used in the  past for 
this procedure?
c.Will  a novel  approach using  existing equipment  be applied?
If you answered “no” to question 8a, or "yes" to question 8b or c, please  contact  the YNHH 
Department  of Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before  commencing with your 
research protocol.
Please note  that if this protocol  includes Yale-New Haven Hospital  patients, including patients at  
the HRU, the Principal  Investigator and any co-investigators who are physicians or mid-level  
practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, psychologists and speech pathologists) who may have direct 
patient  contact  with patients on YNHH  premises must  have medical  staff appointment  and 
appropriate clinical  privileges at YNHH. If  you are uncertain whether the  study  personnel  meet  
the criteria, please telephone the Physician Services Department  at 203-688-2615. By signing  
this protocol  as a PI, you attest  that you and any co-investigator who  may have patient  contact  
has a medical staff appointment  and appropriate clinical  privileges at YNHH .
SECTION III:  FUNDING , RESEARCH  TEAM  AND TRAINING
1.Funding Source: Indicate all  of the  funding source(s) for this study. Check all  boxes that  apply. 
Provide information regarding the external  funding source.  This information should include  
identification of the agency/sponsor, the funding mechanism  (grant  or contract), and whether 
the award is pending or has been awarded. Provide  the M/C# and Agency name (if grant- 
funded).  If the  funding source  associated with a protocol is “pending” at  the time of the 
protocol  submission to the HIC  (as is the case for most NIH submissions), the PI should note 
“Pending” in the  appropriate section of the  protocol application, provide the M/C# and 
Agency name (if grant-funded) and further note  that University (departmental) funds support  
the research (until  such time that  an award is made).
PI Title  of  Grant Name  of  Funding Source Funding Funding Mechanism
Michael  H. 
Bloch, MD MSSublingual  Riluzole 
for the Social  
Anxiety DisorderBiohaven Pharmaceuticals
PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
PFederal
State
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For
rofit
OtherIGrant-M#
Contract# 
Contract  
Pending
Investigator/Department  
nitiated
Sponsor Initiated 
Other, 
Specify:
IRB Review fees are  charged for projects funded by Industry or Other For-Profit  Sponsors. 
Provide the Name and Address of the Sponsor Representative to whom  the invoice should be 
sent.  Note: the  PI’s home department will  be billed if this information is not provided.
Send IRB Review Fee  Invoice  To:
Name:  Kimberly Gentile VP, Clinical Operations
Company:  Biohaven Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Address:  234 Church Street,  Suite #304 
New Haven CT 06510
Tel. 860-690-9543
2.Research Team:  List  all members of the research team. Indicate under  the affiliation column whether 
the investigators or study personnel  are part of the Yale faculty or staff, or part of the faculty or staff  
from  a collaborating institution, or  are not formally affiliated with any institution. ALL  members of 
the research team MUST complete Human Subject Protection Training (HSPT) and Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Training before they may be listed on the  
protocol. See NOTE  below.
Name Affiliation: Yale/Other  
Institution 
(Identify)NetID
Principal  Investigator Michael  H Bloch Yale Mhb32
Role:Co-Investigator Christopher Pittenger Yale PITT
Role:Co-Investigator Angeli  Landeros-W. Yale Al495
Role:Co-Investigator Jerome Taylor Jht28
Role: Study Personnel Baris Olten, MD Yale BO222
Role:Study Personnel Jessica A. Johnson Yale Jaj62
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018NOTE: The  HIC will  remove from the protocol  any personnel  who have not completed required training. 
A personnel  protocol  amendment will need to be submitted when training is completed.
SECTION IV:
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR/F ACULTY ADVISOR/  DEPARTMENT  CHAIR AGREEMENT
As the principal  investigator  of this research project, I certify that:
The  information provided in this application is complete  and accurate.
I assume  full responsibility for the protection of human subjects and  the proper conduct  of the 
research.
Subject  safety will  be of paramount  concern, and every effort  will be made  to protect  subjects’ 
rights and welfare.
The  research will  be performed according to ethical  principles and in compliance  with all  federal, 
state and local  laws, as well as institutional  regulations and  policies regarding the  protection of 
human subjects.
All  members of the  research team will be kept  apprised of research goals.
I will obtain approval  for this research study and any subsequent  revisions prior to my initiating the 
study or any change  and I will obtain continuing approval  of this study prior to the  expiration date  
of any approval  period.
I will report  to the HIC  any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated problems involving risk to 
participants.
I am in compliance  with the  requirements set  by the  University and qualify to serve  as the  
principal  investigator of this project  or have  acquired the  appropriate  approval  from  the 
Dean’s Office  or Office  of the  Provost, or the  Human Subject  Protection Administrator at 
Yale-New Haven Hospital, or have  a faculty advisor.
I  will identify a qualified successor should I cease my role  as principal  investigator and facilitate  a 
smooth transfer of investigator responsibilities.
PI Name  (PRINT) and Signature Date
As the faculty advisor  of this research project, I certify that:
The  information provided in this application is complete  and accurate.
This project  has scientific  value  and merit  and that the student  or trainee  investigator has the  necessary 
resources to complete  the project  and achieve  the aims.
I  will train the  student  investigator in matters of appropriate  research compliance, protection of human 
subjects and proper conduct  of research.
The research will be performed according to ethical  principles and in compliance  with all  federal, state  and 
local  laws, as well  as institutional  regulations and policies regarding the  protection of human subjects.
The student  investigator will obtain approval  for this research study  and any subsequent  revisions prior to 
initiating the study or revision and will obtain continuing approval  prior to the expiration of any approval  
period.
The student  investigator will  report  to  the HIC  any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated 
problems involving risk to participants.
I  am in compliance  with the  requirements set  forth by the University and  qualify to serve  as the faculty 
advisor of this project.
I  assume  all of the  roles and responsibilities of a Principal  Investigator even though the student  may be 
called a PI.
Advisor Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Department Chair’s Assurance Statement
Do you know of any real  or apparent  institutional  conflict  of interest  (e.g., Yale ownership of a 
sponsoring company, patents, licensure) associated with this research project?
Yes (provide  a description of that  interest  in a separate letter  addressed to  the HIC.) 
No
As Chair, do  you have  any real or apparent  protocol-specific conflict  of interest  between yourself and 
the sponsor of the research project, or its competitor or any interest  in any intervention and/or method  
tested in the project  that might  compromise this research project?
Yes (provide  a description of that  interest  in a separate letter  addressed to the HIC) 
No
I assure the  HIC that the principal  investigator and all  members of the research team  are qualified by 
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation in the conduct  of this research 
trial. I also assure that the  principal  investigator has departmental  support  and sufficient  resources to  
conduct  this trial  appropriately.
Chair Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
Department
YNHH  Human Subjects Protection Administrator Assurance  Statement
Required when the  study is conducted solely at YNHH by YNHH  health care providers.
As Human Subject  Protection Administrator (HSPA) for YNHH, I certify that:
I have  read a copy  of the protocol  and approve it being conducted at  YNHH.
I agree to notify the IRB  if I am aware of any real  or apparent  institutional  conflict  of interest.
The principal  investigator of this study is qualified to serve as P.I. and has the support  of the hospital 
for this research project.
YNHH HSPA Name  (PRINT) and Signature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018SECTION V: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement of  Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested. 
The goal of the current  proposal is to examine the acute anxiolytic effects  of BHV-0223 
on subjects with social anxiety disorder performing an anxiety-provoking speech  task.
2.Background: Describe the  background information that  led to the plan for this project. 
Provide references to support the expectation of obtaining useful  scientific  data.
Social Anxiety Disorder  is common and causes significant  impairment.
First-line treatments for  Social Anxiety Disorder are only partially effective.  
Many SAD patients experience little or inadequate symptom relief  with 
available treatments.
Riluzole is a  glutamate modulating agent  that would potentially target  a new 
mechanism to treat  anxiety.
Riluzole has  been shown to reduce anxiety in adults Major Depression,  
Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder.
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) affects approximately 12.1%  of all Americans and 
is defined as a “marked and persistent  fear of  one or more social situations,” causing 
impairment  and distress (1).  SAD typically impairs academic achievement,  work 
productivity,  social relationships,  and results in a significantly poorer quality of life(2).
SAD is associated with subsequent  development  of depression,  alcoholism,  and 
cardiovascular disease (1-3).
Roughly one-third to one-half  of patients with generalized SAD  do not experience 
significant  clinical benefit  from current  evidence-based treatments,  such as 
pharmacotherapy with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) or venlafaxine and 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) (4-7).  Failure of anxiety relief  in patients with SAD is 
a source of  substantial morbidity,  distress,  and decreases in quality of life.
Several pharmacological treatments are utilized on an as-needed basis because 
of their short-term,  potent  anti-anxiolytic effects.  These  pharmacological agents include 
benzodiazepines (which target  the gamma-aminobutyric acid-A  receptor (GABA-A) and 
beta-blockers (beta adrenergic receptor antagonists) (8,  9). Although,  benzodiazepines 
are quite effective at reducing anxiety over the short  term (10) in specific situations (e.g. 
flying on an airplane),  their side-effects and tolerability currently limit their usefulness in 
many situations (e.g. performance or public-speaking anxiety) (8,  9).  Benzodiazepine 
use is associated with impaired short-term concentration,  decreased alertness and 
psychomotor impairment  (9, 11).  Chronic benzodiazepine use is further associated with 
physiologic dependence,  rebound anxiety on discontinuation and, possibly even 
interference with the efficacy of CBT (one of  the first-line treatments for anxiety) (9,  11). 
Beta-blockers,  on the other hand,  are effective at acutely reducing the peripheral 
physical symptoms of anxiety (e.g. heart  palpitations,  tremors etc.) but  have no effect  on
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018the cognitive or  emotional symptoms of anxiety (9, 10, 12-15).   Novel pharmacological 
treatments are needed to improve patient  outcomes with SAD,  both chronically to 
reduce symptoms and acutely to reduce impairment  during situations where symptoms 
are most  likely to be impairing (e.g.  public speaking or performance anxiety).
Riluzole is a  glutamate-modulating agent  that is FDA-approved for the treatment  
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.   Riluzole has been documented at physiologically 
realistic drug concentrations to (1) inhibit  certain voltage-gated sodium channels 
reducing glutamate release and (2) enhance astrocytic uptake of extracellular 
glutamate.  Several uncontrolled trials have suggested the efficacy of riluzole for 
reducing anxiety symptoms in adults with Generalized Anxiety Disorder,  Obsessive- 
Compulsive Disorder and Major Depression (16-20).  An 8-week,  open-label,  fixed- 
dose, trial of 18 adults with GAD given riluzole (100mg/day) demonstrated a significant  
improvement  over time with riluzole treatment  (17).  Sixty-seven percent  of adults with 
GAD responded to riluzole treatment  (defined as a greater than 50% decrease in HAM-
A) and  44% of subjects had a remission of  anxiety symptoms after riluzole treatment  
(HAM-A<8) (17).   No double-blind,  placebo-controlled trials of  riluzole have been 
conducted in the treatment  of patients with primary anxiety disorders.   Riluzole is quite 
well tolerated in psychiatric and ALS  population,  with nausea and sedation being the 
most common side effects.  Elevation of liver function tests is a common occurrence with 
chronic riluzole administration and necessitates periodic monitoring but has been 
without  clinical consequences in psychiatric trials with riluzole to date.
Biohaven Pharmaceuticals recently developed BHV-0223,  which is a sublingual 
form of  riluzole,  being investigated for
 the treatment  of ALS.  BHV-0223 has several 
advantages over the currently available riluzole formulation in that it (1) avoids first-pass 
metabolism,  thereby reducing overall drug burden to the liver and (2) has produced 
subjective reports of relaxing effects when administered to healthy subjects.
3.Research Plan: Summarize  the study design and research procedures using non-technical  
language that  can be readily understood by someone outside  the discipline. Be sure to 
distinguish between standard of care vs. research procedures when applicable, and 
include any flowcharts of visits specifying their  individual  times and lengths. Describe  
the setting in which the  research will  take place.
We are proposing a crossover trial in which 20  adults with Social Anxiety 
Disorder with the primary outcome being anxiety on the impromptu speech 
task.
Each  subject  will be  given BHV-0223 (or placebo) under double-blind 
conditions 1-hour before performing the impromptu speech task on 2 
separate study days.
There will be  a 2 to 10 day washout  period between study days.
There will be  a final Follow-up visit 2 to 10 days later to do blood work and 
complete physical exam.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Overview:
We propose conducting a  double-blind,  placebo controlled crossover study 
examining the effects of BHV-0223 on public speaking anxiety.   Twenty subjects with 
DSM-5 defined social anxiety disorder and clinically significant  public speaking anxiety 
on the Impromptu Speech Task will be enrolled in a challenge study.   Subjects will be  
given BHV-0223 (or placebo) under double-blind crossover conditions 1 hour prior to 
performing each of  2 impromptu speech tasks.  The two study days involving BHV-0223 
(or placebo) administration and impromptu speech task will be separated by 2 to 10 
days to  allow for medication washout.  There will be a final follow-up visit 2 to 10 days 
later to perform a complete Physical exam and do follow-up liver function testing and a 
Complete Blood Count.  Our primary outcome will examine BHV-0223’s effects 
(compared to placebo) on self-rated anxiety during the impromptu speech task.  We will 
also collect  physiological measures of anxiety,  clinician-rated measures of anxiety,  and 
measures of speech performance as secondary outcomes.
Screening:
A baseline screening assessment  to determine study eligibility,  clinical ratings,  
and
 physical health will be conducted at least  one week prior to the challenge study.
Medical Assessments
During the  screening visit,  vital signs (BP, HR: supine,  standing X 2-3 min),  
physical exam (including a comprehensive exam of the oral cavity see Appendix 1), and 
clinical laboratory tests (i.e. CBC with differential,  complete metabolic panel (CMP) 
(including electrolytes,  LFTs, BUN,  creatinine and glucose),  TFTs, urine drug screen,  
and routine urinalysis) will be completed.  A pregnancy test will be given to all females of 
childbearing age enrolled in the study prior to participating in the study sessions.  We will 
also perform a visual inspection of the mouth cavity to assess local tolerability before 
and 1 hour after administering study medication on each study day (please see 
appendix document  for further details).
Psychiatric Assessments
The SCID (Structured Clinical Interview for  DSM disorders) on the screening day 
to verify presence of social anxiety disorder and the absence of  other psychiatric 
conditions (psychotic disorders,  current  substance abuse/dependence etc.).  The 
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS) will be administered to determine that public 
speaking anxiety symptoms are significant  enough for inclusion in the trial. The LSAS  is 
a rating scale that  assesses SAD severity (21) and a 5-item subscale rates public 
speaking fear (22).  Psychiatric rating scales examining the severity of  anxiety (Hamilton 
Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A  (23)) and depressive symptoms Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale (HAM-D) (24) will also be administered.  Per FDA  guidelines,  suicidal 
ideation and behavior will be monitored using the C-SSRS(25) at  screening and on 
every visit day.
Intervention:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Subjects will be  given BHV-0223 35mg or placebo in a random order as assigned 
through the CMHC pharmacy with a 2 to 10 day separation between task days.
Randomization will be  performed by the CMHC pharmacy.   The identity of the 
treatments will be concealed by the use of  study drugs that are identical in packaging,  
labeling,  schedule of  administration and appearance.  Placebo and study drug will be 
prepared in a like fashion in the CMHC pharmacy.  Unblinding of  a specific patient’s 
randomization assignment  will only occur during the study in the case of specific patient  
emergencies.
BHV-0223 is a sublingual,  oral-disintegrating tablet  containing 35mg of riluzole 
drug substance.  BHV-0223 35mg tablets have shown bioequivalence to
 riluzole 50mg 
administered orally (please see PIND 128411 for further details).   The half-life of BHV- 
0223 is just under 8 hours.   Riluzole is a member of  the benzothiazole class of  
medications.  Chemically,  its molecular formula is C 8 H 5 F 3 N 2 OS and its molecular 
weight  is 234.2.  The efficacy of riluzole in the treatment  of ALS was established in two 
well-controlled studies.  Patients randomized to treatment  with riluzole showed longer 
time to tracheoctomy or death compared to those treated with placebo.  The 
recommended dose of  riluzole in the treatment  of ALS is 50mg taken every 12 hours (at 
least  an hour before,  or two hours after,  a meal to  avoid food-related decreases in 
bioavailability).  Riluzole’s mechanism of  action in the treatment  of ALS  is unknown but 
thought  to be due to its down-modulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission.
The most  commonly observed adverse reactions of riluzole,  dosed at 
100mg/day,  in placebo-controlled trials were asthenia (19.2%),  nausea (16.3%),  
dizziness (3.9%),  decreased lung function (10.2%),  diarrhea (2.9%),  abdominal pain 
(5.1%),  pneumonia,  vomiting (4.2%),  vertigo (1.9%),  oral paresthesia,  anorexia (3.2%),  
and somnolence (1.9%).   In a study with approximately 4,000 patients given riluzole for 
ALS, three cases of neutropenia were reported within the first two months of treatment.
Rarely,  jaundice is a side effect  as  well.  Riluzole has also been found to cause 
elevations in serum aminotransferase even in patients without  a history of liver disease.  
Experience with riluzole in 800 patients with ALS demonstrated that approximately 50% 
of riluzole treated patients experienced at least  one ALT/SGPT  level above the upper 
limit of normal,  8% had elevations >3x upper limit  of normal (ULN),  and 2% >5x ULN.  
BHV-0223 may have reduced overall drug burden on the liver as the sublingual 
formulation avoids first-pass metabolism.
Subjects will be  asked to come back 2 to 10 days after the second task day to 
perform a complete Physical Exam, Visual examination of  the oral cavity,  Vital signs 
(BP, HR: supine,  standing X 2-3 min),  Complete Blood count  and Liver function test.
Assessments
Impromptu Speech Behavioral Assessment  Test
The impromptu speech BAT  will be  performed 1 hour after the subject  receives 
study medication as outlined in the table below (26-28).  Participants will be asked to 
speak about  pre-determined topics for 10 minutes to a small audience of research staff
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018(27). Patients with more severe social anxiety symptoms are often not  able to speak for  
the full 10 minutes and have shorter speech lengths when compared to those with less 
severe social anxiety symptoms (26-28). VAS-anxiety,  State-Trait  Anxiety Inventory 
and the Self-Statement  during Speech Test  (SSPS) (28) will be assessed before and 
after the speech.  The Local Tolerability Assessment  (Appendix 1) will be  performed at 
screening,  baseline,  1 hour after receiving the study medication and before discharge.
The Table below shows the  assessment  schedule for participants enrolling in the trial.
Challenge  DAY 12-10  day 
washout  
period Challenge  DAY 2 2-10  days
Measure Screening Baseline 0 1h 2h 3h Baseline 0 1h 2h 3hFollow  
up visit
Local   Tolerability  Assessment X X X X X X X
Impromptu Speech  Task X X
VAS-anxiety X X X X X X X X X X X
VAS-speech  performance X X
SSPS X X X X
STAI X X X X
DSST X X X X
Immediate and Delayed  Word Recall X X X X
Clinicial-rated  VAS-anxiety X X
Clinician rated VAS-speech  performance X X
LSAS X X X
SCID X
C-SSRS X X X
Physical Exam  with  Vital  signs (BP, HR: 
supine, standing X 2-3 min) and Visual  
exam of the oral cavity X X X X X X
Blood  test X X
Urine  Test X X X
EKG X
STUDY  MEDICATION  ADMINISTRATION X X
The rating scales utilized in the  trial are detailed in the table below.   Ratings will 
be conducted by raters that are blinded to treatment  assignment  and will not be present  
during medication administration.
RATING SCALES:
1)Visual Analog Scale (VAS) of  Anxiety States:  The VAS includes scales for 
anxiety,  drowsiness,  high,  irritability,  anger,  and sadness.  These  scales are 100 
mm lines marked by participants at a point  corresponding to the apparent  
intensity of the feeling state (0=none,  to 100=most  ever) (29).   We will also use 
clinician-rated visual analogue scales to measure subject  anxiety and speech 
performance during the Impromptu Speech Task.
2)Self-Statement  During Public Speaking Scale (SSPS):  The SSPS  is a rating 
scale used to measure cognitions that occurred during a speech (28).
3)State-Trait  Anxiety Inventory (STAI):  The STAI  is a standardized rating scale of 
trait and state anxiety (30).
4)Digit Symbol Substitution Task (DSST):  Digit Symbol Substitution Tasks requires 
the subject  to match symbols with their corresponding digit.  It consists of 9 digit  
symbols matched with their corresponding numerical digit.   Subjects are asked to 
match as many number-symbol pairs within a 90 second time limit. Performance
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018of the DSST  has  been demonstrated to be impaired by acute  treatment  with 
benzodiazepines (31).
5)Immediate and Delayed Word  Recall Test – In this task,  a list of 10 words will be  
repeated 3 times to subjects at a pace of 1 word every 2 seconds.   Immediately 
after presentation of the list and 5 minutes later subjects will be asked to recite as 
many of the words as they can from memory.   Performance on this task has been 
demonstrated to be impaired by acute treatment  with benzodiazepines (31).
6) Local  Tolerability Assessment:  Systematized oral cavity inspection checklist  
(Appendix 1).
7)Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) – Assessment  of suicidal 
ideation and behavior in clinical and research settings(25)
Statistical  Analyses
Assuming that  there are no ordering or period effects in the trial,  we will use  a paired 
t-test  to compare ratings of anxiety during the impromptu speech task after BHV-0223 
vs. placebo treatment.   Given a sample size of 20 subjects,  assuming a one-sided 
α=0.1,  we would have 80% power to detect  a treatment  effect  size=0.5 or greater.   As a 
comparison previous studies of benzodiazepines have demonstrated an effect  size of at 
least  0.9 on similar speech paradigms (32).  Our primary measure will be the VAS- 
anxiety after the impromptu speech task (BHV-0223 compared to placebo).   As 
additional secondary measures we will collect (1) subject  ratings of  speech 
performance,  self-statements during public speaking (SSPS) and specific anxiety 
symptoms during speech (STAI);  (2) clinical ratings of speech performance;  (3) duration 
of speech;  (4) assessments of cognition – (DSST  and 15 word recall) and 5) side- 
effects.
4.Genetic Testing   N/A
A.Describe
i. the  types of future  research to be conducted using the materials, specifying if  
immortalization of cell  lines, whole exome  or genome sequencing, genome  wide  
association studies, or animal studies are planned
ii. the  plan for the collection of material  or the conditions under which material  will 
be received
iii. the  types of information about  the donor/individual  contributors that  will be 
entered into a database
iv. the  methods to uphold confidentiality
B.What  are the  conditions or procedures for sharing of materials and/or distributing for 
future research projects?
C. Is widespread sharing of materials planned?
D.When  and under what conditions will  materials be stripped of all  identifiers?
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials at  any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers 
that connect  them  to their materials?
i.How will  requests to withdraw materials be handled (e.g., material  no longer 
identified:  that is, anonymized) or material  destroyed)?
F.Describe the  provisions for protection of participant privacy
G.Describe the  methods for the security of storage  and sharing of materials
5.Subject Population: Provide  a detailed description of the  types of human subjects who will  
be recruited into this study.
20 subjects who meet  DSM-5 criteria for  Social Anxiety Disorder and have a baseline 
LSAS public speaking subscale score>6 will be recruited through the Yale Child Study 
Center.  We have experience recruiting subjects with social anxiety disorder through a 
trial examining the effects of ketamine for social anxiety disorder.
6.Subject classification: Check off all  classifications of subjects that  will be specifically 
recruited for enrollment  in the  research project. Will subjects who may require additional  
safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the  study?  If so, identify the population of 
subjects requiring special  safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.
Children Healthy Fetal  material, placenta, or dead fetus 
Non-English Speaking Prisoners Economically disadvantaged persons 
Decisionally Impaired Employees Pregnant  women and/or fetuses
Yale Students Females of childbearing potential
NOTE:  Is this research proposal designed to enroll children who are  wards of the  state as 
potential  subjects? Yes No (If yes, see Instructions section VII #4 for further 
requirements)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/20187.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What are  the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or 
exclusion?
PATIENTS  WITH SOCIAL ANXIETY  DISORDER:
Inclusion Criteria:
1)Male or
 female (post-menopausal,  surgically sterile,  or negative pregnancy test at 
screening and agreement  to utilize an established birth control,  including complete 
abstinence,  during the testing period) between the age of  18 and 65 yrs.
2)Meet  DSM-5 criteria for social anxiety disorder by structured clinical interview (SCID) 
and have a LSAS  public speaking subscale score >6.
3)Stable psychiatric medications.  Patients must  have had stable doses of  all 
psychiatric medications for  the month prior to treatment  and have been on stable 
doses of SSRI  and antidepressants for at least  1 month prior to study enrollment.  
As needed benzodiazepine use will be permitted as long as subjects refrain from 
using benzodiazepines for the 48 hours prior to the study.
4)Medically and neurologically healthy on the basis of physical examination,  SMAC-20 
(including LFT’s, TFT’s),  VDRL,  CBC w/ diff, urinalysis,  urine toxicology,  EKG, and 
medical history.  Individuals with stable medical problems that do not  have CNS  
effects or interfere with medications administered (e.g.,  oral hypoglycemics) may be 
included if their medications have not been adjusted in the month prior to entry;
5)Urine toxicology screen negative for drug of  abuse.
6)Able to provide written informed consent  according to the Yale Human Investigation 
Committee (HIC) guidelines.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Exclusion Criteria:
1.Positive pregnancy test
2.Breastfeeding females
3.History of substance abuse disorder (ETOH,  cocaine,  opiates,  PCP) within 
the last 6 months or positive urine toxicology on screening (within the 
previous 6 months).
4.History of pervasive developmental disorder or psychotic disorder by DSM-IV- 
TR criteria.
5.Presence of dentures,  braces,  piercings at the time of dosing,  or any physical 
findings in the mouth or tongue that, in the opinion of  the Principal 
Investigator,  would be likely to interfere with successful completion of the 
dosing procedure.
6.Subjects with a medical condition that might  interfere with the physiological 
absorption and motility (ie, gastric bypass,  duodenectomy) or
 gastric bands.
7.Subjects with any  clinically significant  abnormality or abnormal laboratory test 
results.
8.Subject  has  a current  diagnosis of viral hepatitis (HBsAG  or HVC) or a history 
of liver disease.
9.Subject  has  significant  history of seizure disorder other than a single 
childhood febrile seizure (eg. Epilepsy)
10.Subjects using any drugs known to induce or  inhibit  CYP 1A2 metabolism 
(examples of inducers:  rifampin,  carbamazepine,  etc.; examples of inhibitors:  
fluvoxamine,  ciprofloxacin,  fluoroquinolones,  etc.) within 30 days prior to the 
first study drug administration.
11.Subject  with a history of allergic reactions to riluzole or other  related drugs.
12.Subject  has  a history of anaphylaxis,  a documented hypersensitivity reaction,  
or a clinically important  reaction to any drug.
13.Subject  has  received another investigational drug or device within the 30 days 
(90 days for biologics) prior to the first dosing or is currently participating in an 
investigational study involving no drug administration.
14.Subject  with clinically significant  electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities 
(QTcF
 >450 msec) or vital sign abnormalities (systolic blood pressure lower 
than 90 or over 140 mmHg,  diastolic blood pressure lower than 50 or over 90 
mmHg,  or heart  rate less than 50 or over 100 bpm) at Screening or Baseline 
(Day -1).
15.Any  reason which,  in the opinion of  the Principal Investigator,  would prevent  
the subject  from participating in the study.
8.How will  eligibility be  determined, and by whom?
Screening:  After an initial telephone contact  to rule out obvious exclusions from the  
study protocol,  potential participants will be scheduled for a screening visit  at the  Yale 
Child Study Center.  A member of  our research team will discuss all aspects  of this 
research:  its purpose,  the procedures that will be performed,  any/all risks of the 
procedures,  possible benefits,  and possible alternative treatments.  All patients will also
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018be informed that the  standard of care for patients with SAD who have failed the first line 
treatments [SSRI,  SNRI  (or alternative SSRI),  and CBT]  is a trial of a monoamine 
oxidase inhibitor (MAOI),  not Riluzole (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
2013).  The research team will discuss the  inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study.  
If patients are considered eligible according to study criteria and if they agree to enroll in 
the study,  they will sign the consent  forms and schedule a time to go to the CNRU for 
screening visit  2.
Screening visit  2  will occur on the CNRU (may be done directly after Screening Visit  1 
if convenient  for the participant),  and medical assessments (physical exam,  EKG,  blood 
draw,  and urinalysis),  and a battery of psychiatric rating scales will be performed,  as 
indicated in Table1 (excluding the SCID which is done during screening visit  1). We will 
also contact  the subject’s primary care provider or treating provider to confirm their 
psychiatric history and SAD diagnosis after receiving a signed release form from the 
subject.
9.Risks: Describe the  reasonably  foreseeable  risks, including risks to subject  privacy, 
discomforts, or inconveniences associated with subjects participating in the research.
The risks in this study include:
1)drug side effects of riluzole
2)worsening of  symptoms
3)blood sampling
4)ratings
5)unanticipated side effects
Drug  side effects
BHV-0223 (riluzole) is  a member of the benzothiazole class of medications.  
Chemically,  its molecular formula is C 8 H 5 F 3 N 2 OS and its molecular weight  is 234.2.  
The efficacy of riluzole in the treatment  of ALS was established in two, well-controlled 
studies.  Patients randomized to treatment  with riluzole showed longer delay to 
tracheostomy or death compared to those treated with placebo.  The recommended dose 
of riluzole in the treatment  of ALS is 50mg taken every 12 hours (at least  an hour before,  
or two hours after,  a meal to avoid food-related decreases in bioavailability).  Riluzole’s 
mechanism of action in the treatment  of ALS is unknown but thought  to be due to its 
blockade of glutamatergic neurotransmission.
The most  commonly observed adverse reactions of riluzole,  dosed at 100mg/day,  
in placebo-controlled trials were asthenia (19.2%),  nausea (16.3%),  dizziness (3.9%),  
decreased lung function (10.2%),  diarrhea (2.9%),  abdominal pain (5.1%),  pneumonia,  
vomiting (4.2%),  vertigo (1.9%),  oral paresthesia,  anorexia (3.2%),  and somnolence 
(1.9%).  In a study with approximately 4,000 patients given riluzole for ALS, three cases 
of neutropenia were reported within the first two months of treatment.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Rarely,  jaundice is a side effect  as  well. Riluzole has also been found to cause 
elevations in serum aminotransferase even in patients without  a history of liver disease.  
Experience with riluzole in 800 patients with ALS demonstrated that approximately 50% 
of riluzole treated patients experienced at least  one ALT/SGPT  level above the upper limit 
of normal,  8% had elevations >3x upper limit  of normal (ULN),  and 2% >5x ULN.
A single non-ALS  patient  with epilepsy treated with concomitant  carbamazepine 
and
 Phenobarbital experienced marked,  rapid elevations of liver enzyme with jaundice 
four months after starting riluzole that returned to normal seven weeks after treatment  
discontinuation.
Riluzole’s effect  on liver functioning warrants monitoring of serum LFT levels every 
month during the first 3 months of treatment,  every 3 months during the remainder of the 
first year,  and periodically thereafter (PDR).  Serum LFT levels should be evaluated more 
frequently in patients who develop elevations.  Maximum increases in serum ALT usually 
occurred within 3 months after the start of riluzole therapy and were usually transient  
when <5x ULN.  In trials,  if ALT levels were <5 x ULN,  treatment  continued and ALT levels 
usually returned to below 2X ULN within 2-6 months.  Treatment  in studies was 
discontinued if ALT levels exceeded 5x ULN.
Riluzole is contraindicated in patients with a history of  severe hypersensitivity 
reactions to riluzole or any of the tablet  components.  Riluzole should be prescribed with 
caution in patients with current  evidence or history of abnormal liver function.  Baseline 
elevations of several LFTs (especially bilirubin) should preclude the use of riluzole.  
Riluzole should be used with caution in elderly patients whose hepatic or renal functions 
may be compromised due to age. Females and Japanese patients may possess a lower 
metabolic capacity to eliminate riluzole compared to males and Caucasian populations.  
BHV-0223 may have reduced overall drug burden on the liver as the sublingual 
formulation avoids first-pass metabolism.
Patients should be  instructed to report  any febrile illness to their physicians.  
Patients should also be warned about  the potential for dizziness,  vertigo,  or somnolence 
and advised not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient  experience 
on riluzole to gauge whether or not it effects their mental or motor abilities.  Patients 
treated with riluzole should be discouraged from drinking excessive amounts of alcohol 
as it may increase the risk of  serious hepatotoxicity.
Worsening  of symptoms
Since Riluzole or  placebo is added to the patients’ current  medications,  the risk of 
symptoms worsening in this study is not significantly greater in this clinical trial than it 
would be if the patient’s medications were changed as part of standard clinical care.  
Furthermore,  the acute effects of study medications should dissipate within 8 hours of 
taking the single dose of medication.  The only additional risks in this study are potential 
adverse effects of riluzole.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Blood  sampling
As a result  of their participation in these studies,  subjects will have more blood drawn 
than would be the case in usual clinical practice.  Approximately three (3) tablespoons of  
blood will be drawn during the study.  Subjects will be instructed to refrain from donating 
blood or participating in research involving blood  donation during the study and for the 8 
weeks following the study.  Blood sampling may cause pain,  bruising and infection.  Some 
subjects may faint during blood sampling.
Ratings and Speech  Task
Patients may  find the battery of behavioral ratings tedious.  Additionally,  the subjects 
are likely to find the speech task anxiety provoking.  Subjects may (and often do) 
discontinue the speech task at any point  if they feel excessively uncomfortable.  We have 
used this speech tasks in previous task without  significant  adverse events.
Unanticipated side effects
Although riluzole is an  approved drug for the treatment  of ALS,  its use in patients with 
SAD might  be associated with unforeseen risks such as worsening of existing symptoms 
or emergence of new symptoms.  All medications can be associated with allergic 
reactions.  Any clinical trial involves risks and side effects that cannot  be predicted.  
Subjects will be told of any important  new information that might  affect  their decision to 
continue in the study.  In addition,  the HIC will be notified regularly of any new information 
about  the safety of the study medication.
10.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner  in which the  above-mentioned risks will  be 
minimized.
Conducting the  medication administration under supervision of research staff will 
allow closer monitoring for detecting symptom changes or adverse effects.  A 
psychiatrist  on site will be always emergently available to subjects participating in the 
study to deal with any unanticipated issues that arise.  Records will be maintained 
according to FDA Good Clinical Practice guidelines to insure protection of confidentiality 
and security of records.
Drug  Side Effects:
Subjects will be  closely monitored for any side effects by a study doctor and research 
assistant  throughout  the medication challenges.  Additionally,  subjects will be screened 
using physical exam and laboratory assessments to identify any medical conditions that
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018may put  subjects at increased risk. All female subjects of child bearing age will be 
tested for pregnancy prior to enrollment  and if positive excluded from the study.
Blood  Sampling:
Experienced clinical research staff will perform blood draws using good  clinical 
technique to minimize associated risks.
Ratings and Speech  Tasks:
There is minimal risk associated with the questionnaires,  clinical assessments and 
speech task.   Clinical research staff will exercise  sensitivity when conducting ratings 
and assessments.  A study specific MD will be emergently available on site on testing 
days,  should unanticipated issues arise.
11.Data and Safety Monitoring Plan: Include  an appropriate Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based on the investigator’s risk assessment  stated below. (Note:  the HIC  will make  
the final  determination of the risk to subjects.) For more information, see the Instructions, 
page 24.
a. What  is the  investigator’s assessment  of the  overall risk level  for subjects 
participating in this study?
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment  of the overall risk 
level  for the children participating in this study?
c. Include an appropriate Data  and Safety  Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-templates/biomedical.html   for
i.Minimal  risk
ii.Greater than minimal
Moderate Risk DSMP
1.Personnel  responsible for the safety review  and its frequency:
The principal investigator will be responsible for monitoring the data,  assuring protocol 
compliance,  and conducting the
 safety reviews at the specified frequency which must 
be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months (including when re-approval of  the 
protocol is sought).   During the review process,  the principal investigator (monitor) will 
evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged,  require 
modification/amendment,  or close to enrollment.  Either the principal investigator or the 
IRB have the authority to stop or suspend the study or require modifications.
2.The risks associated  with  the current study are deemed  moderate for the 
following  reasons: (choose those that apply)
1.We do not view the  risks associated with the sublingual riluzole as minimal.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/20182.Given the  now established safety and validity of the current  dose of  riluzole in our 
prior work,  we do not view the proposed studies as high risk.
Although we have assessed the  proposed study as one of moderate risk, the potential 
exists for  anticipated and/or unanticipated adverse events,  serious or otherwise,  to 
occur since it is not possible to predict  with certainty the absolute risk in any given 
individual or in advance of first-hand experience with the proposed study methods.
Therefore,  we provide a  plan for monitoring the data and safety of the proposed study 
as follows:
3.Attribution  of Adverse Events:
Adverse events will be  monitored for each subject  participating in the study and 
attributed to the study procedures / design by the principal investigator (Michael H. 
Bloch,  MD) according to the following categories:
a.) Definite:  Adverse event  is clearly related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
b.)
 Probable:  Adverse event  is likely related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
c.) Possible:  Adverse event  may be related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
d.) Unlikely:  Adverse event  is likely not to be related to the investigational
procedures(s)/agent(s).
e.) Unrelated:  Adverse event  is clearly not related to  investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s).
4.Plan  for Grading  Adverse Events:
The following scale will be  used in grading the severity of adverse events noted during 
the study:
1.Mild adverse event
2.Moderate adverse event
3.Severe
5.Plan  for Determining  Seriousness of Adverse Events: 
Serious Adverse Events:
In addition to  grading the adverse event,  the PI will determine whether the adverse 
event  meets the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event  (SAE).   An adverse event  is 
considered serious if it:
1.is life-threatening OR
2.results in in-patient  hospitalization or  prolongation of  existing hospitalization OR
3.results in persistent  or  significant  disability or incapacity OR
4.results in a congenital anomaly or  birth defect  OR
5.results in death OR
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/20186.based upon appropriate medical judgment,  may jeopardize the  subject’s health 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent  one of the other 
outcomes listed in this definition,  OR
7.adversely affects the risk/benefit  ratio of the study
An adverse event  may  be graded as severe but still not meet  the criteria for a Serious 
Adverse Event.  Similarly,  an adverse event  may be graded as moderate but still meet  
the criteria for an SAE.  It is important  for the PI to consider the grade of the event  as 
well as its “seriousness” when determining whether reporting to the IRB  is necessary.
6.Plan  for reporting  Reportable Adverse Events and other unanticipated  
problems involving  risks to subjects or others to the IRB
The principal investigator will report  the following types of events to the IRB: a) adverse 
events that are serious or life-threatening AND unanticipated (or anticipated but 
occurring with a greater frequency than expected) AND possibly,  probably or definitely 
related to the drug/device/intervention;  and b) other unanticipated problems involving 
risks to subjects or others.
These adverse events or  unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others 
will be reported to the IRB in accordance with IRB Policy 710, using the appropriate 
forms found on the website.
7.Plan  for reporting  adverse events to co-investigators on the study,  as 
appropriate the protocol’s research  monitor(s),  and funding  
and regulatory 
agencies,  and regulatory and decision-making  bodies.
For the  current  study,  the following individuals,  funding,  and/or regulatory 
agencies will be notified (choose those that  apply):
xAll Co-Investigators listed on the protocol.
xFood and  Drug Administration
The principal investigator (Michael H. Bloch,  MD) will conduct a review of all adverse 
events upon completion of every study subject.  The principal investigator will evaluate 
the frequency and severity of the adverse events and determine if modifications to the 
protocol or consent  form are required.
d. For multi-site studies for which the  Yale PI serves as the lead investigator:  N/A
i.How will  adverse  events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or 
others be  reported, reviewed and managed?
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018ii. What  provisions are in place for management  of interim results?
iii. What  will  the multi-site process be for protocol  modifications?
12. Statistical  Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that  support  the study design.
Assuming that  there are no ordering or period effects in the trial,  we will use a paired 
t-test  to compare ratings of anxiety during the impromptu speech task after BHV-0223 
vs. placebo treatment.   Given a sample size of 20 subjects,  assuming α=0.05,  we 
would have 80% power to detect  a treatment  effect  size=0.58 or greater.  As a
comparison previous studies of benzodiazepines have demonstrated an  effect  size of at 
least  0.9 on similar speech paradigms (32).  Our primary measure will be the VAS- 
anxiety after the impromptu speech task (BHV-0223 compared to placebo).   As 
additional secondary measures we will collect (1) subject  ratings of  speech 
performance,  self-statements during public speaking (SSPS) and specific anxiety 
symptoms during speech (STAI);  (2) clinical ratings of speech performance;  (3) duration 
of speech;  (4) assessments of cognition – (DSST  and 15 word recall) and 5) side- 
effects.
We additionally take  an interim examination of the efficacy data at the trial after 
10 subjects to evaluate the initial side-effects of the compound and to examine initial 
efficacy.  We would consider a treatment  effect  size of less than 0 (BHV-0223 worsen 
anxiety during the impromptu speech task compared to placebo) as a rationale to stop 
the trial early.
SECTION VI: RESEARCH  INVOLVING  DRUGS, B IOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS, P LACEBOS AND
D
EVICES
If this section (or one  of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, state N/A and delete the rest  of the 
section.
A. DRUGS, BIOLOGICS and RADIOTRACERS
1.Identification of Drug, Biologic or Radiotracer: What is (are) the name(s) of the drug(s) 
biologic(s) or radiotracer(s) being  used?  Identify whether FDA approval  has been granted and for 
what  indication(s).
BHV-0223 (riluzole) is a member of the benzothiazole class of medications.  Chemically,  
its molecular formula is C 8 H
 5 F 3 N 2 OS and its molecular weight  is 234.2.  Riluzole is 
FDA approved for the treatment  of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).  The mode of  action of  
this compound is unknown.  Its pharmacological properties include the following,  some of  
which may be related to its effect:  1) an inhibitory effect on glutamate release,  2) inactivation 
of voltage-dependent  sodium channels,  and 3) ability to interfere with intracellular events that  
follow transmitter binding at excitatory amino acid receptors.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018All protocols which utilize a drug, biologic or radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by, the FDA, 
or a radiotracer regulated by the RDRC, must provide the following information:
a.What  is the Investigational  New Drug (IND) number assigned by the FDA?  IND # 130224
b.Who  holds the  IND?   Michael  H. Bloch,  MD MS
c. All  protocols which utilize a radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by the FDA must 
provide the IND number:   
Alternatively, use of the  investigational  radiotracer may be under RDRC/RSC  oversight:  (check 
if appropriate) 
For all  investigational  radiotracers, attach a  copy of the RDRC/RSC  application (for 
radioisotopes used in the  PET Center, PET Center personnel  may complete this step)
Go to http://rsc.med.yale.edu/login.asp?url=myApps.asp.  When you have logged in,  complete  
the application and attach a copy to this submission.
Alternatively, an exemption from IND filing requirements may be  sought for a  clinical  
investigation of a  drug product that  is lawfully marketed in the United States. If there  is no IND and 
an exemption is being sought, review the following categories and complete  the category  that applies 
(and delete the inapplicable categories):
Exempt Category 1
The clinical  investigation of a  drug product that  is lawfully marketed in the United States can be 
exempt from  IND regulations if  all of the following are yes:
i.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report to the FDA as a well-controlled study  in support 
of a new indication for  use or to be used to support any  other significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug. Yes No
ii.The drug that  is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the  investigation is NOT to support a significant  change in the advertising for the 
product. Yes No
iii.The investigation does NOT involve a route of administration or dosage level  or use in populations 
or other factor that  significantly increases the  risks (or decreases the acceptability  of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product. Yes No
iv.The investigation will be  conducted in compliance  with the requirements for institutional  (HIC) 
review and with the requirements for informed consent  of the FDA regulations (21 CFR  Part 50 
and 21 CFR  Part 56).      Yes       No
v.The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and  
charging for investigational  drugs. Yes No
2.Background Information: Provide a  description of previous human use, known risks, and data  
addressing dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration, and any other factors that  might  
influence risks. If this is the first  time this drug is  being administered to humans, include relevant  
data on animal  models.
The clinical safety profile of riluzole has been described in the  US Prescribing 
Information on its use in ALS.  This safety information is excerpted herein.  Additionally,
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018literature reports on the use  of riluzole in ALS,  psychiatric disorders and other 
indications are summarized.
While the majority of  this data  is based on chronic administration of  riluzole 
tablets at a total oral dose of 100 mg/day,  the proposed development  plan for BHV-0223 
targets a sublingual dose that is approximately 30% lower (70 mg/day) but is expected 
to achieve exposures bioequivalent  to that  associated with the RILUTEK  dose approved 
for use in ALS.  The available safety data on chronic administration of  riluzole at a total 
daily dose of 50 mg shows a more favorable safety profile than the recommended daily 
dose of  100 mg (i.e.,  50 mg PO BID) – particularly with respect  to impact  on liver 
enzyme tests. Therefore,  with a lessened overall drug burden for BHV-0223 (70 mg per 
day) compared to RILUTEK  (100 mg per day),  safety is expected similar or better for 
BHV-0223 compared to RILUTEK.
Overall,  riluzole tablets have been well tolerated in populations with ALS and 
diverse neuropsychiatric conditions that include Major Depressive Disorder (MDD),  
Obsessive- Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD).  In 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing a 100 mg daily dose of  riluzole with 
placebo,  no AEs occurred at rates greater than 5% and twice that of placebo.  The AEs 
occurring greater than 5% and at least  2% more than placebo included asthenia (18% 
vs 12% placebo) and nausea (14% vs 9%). These two AEs showed trends for a dose 
response(33).
The published literature on  the use of riluzole tablets in psychiatric disorders,  
while generally comprising of case-series,  is consistent  with this tolerability profile.  Lab 
abnormalities associated with riluzole consist  of elevated transaminases that  typically 
are below 5x upper  limit of normal (ULN) and often resolve while on treatment  
(Bensimon and Doble 2004).  Experience with incidents of alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) increasing >5xULN are limited,  insofar as the USPI  recommends immediate drug 
discontinuation.  Effects on transaminases show a dose response (33). Importantly,  total 
daily doses of 50 mg were not associated with increased rates of marked ALT 
elevations (>5xULN) compared to placebo (1.3% vs 2.1%, respectively) and such 
occurrences had a later onset than placebo (median 254 vs 219 days).  Total daily 
doses of 100 mg and 200 mg had greater rates of marked ALT elevations than placebo 
and the median occurrence was within 60 days.
Experience from Published  Reports
The PubMed database was searched for available reports on clinical use  of 
riluzole in patients (e.g.,  case-series,  randomized trials).  The search strategy included 
crossing riluzole (as a title or abstract  word) with either report  type (clinical trial) or “trial” 
(abstract).  The publications are summarized in Appendix B. The cumulative data are 
consistent  with the current  USPI  and are described in the following sections.
Clinical reports document  the use  of riluzole in populations with ALS,  Huntington 
Disease,  Spinal Cord Injury (SCI),  ataxias,  Fragile X Syndrome,  Spinal Muscular 
Atrophy,  Multiple Sclerosis,  neuropathic pain,  Multiple System Atrophy,  Parkinson 
Disease and Irritable Bowel Syndrome.  With regards to ALS studies that are not 
reflected in the USPI,  the Early Access Programme (34) described the open-label 
experience of 7,916 patients with ALS who were prescribed riluzole tablets for an 
average duration of  202 days.  Tolerability was consistent  with the USPI.  The rate of
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018ALT increases of > 3xULN and >5xULN was 3.7%  and  0.7% respectively – rates that 
were lower than observed in the randomized controlled trials.  The lab abnormalities in 
studies on other disorders revealed no novel signals compared to the studies described 
in the USPI;  elevations in LFTs were noted.  In the study on Huntington Disease (35), 
one subject  demonstrated a reversible elevation of
ALT >5xULN after  being dosed with 200 mg/day.  In the population with acute SCI  
(treated with riluzole within 12 hours of traumatic injury and on a back-drop of other 
common interventions like high-dose steroids),  higher reversible elevations in LFTs  
were also observed;  however,  higher rates of abnormalities were noted prior to 
intervention (9 – 37%) and many of these patients were on medication regimens with 
hepatotoxic potential– thus complicating interpretation of the safety reports from this 
study.
As is suggested from the summary of published data (Appendix B)  on the safety 
profile of riluzole to treat not only ALS, but also certain mood,  anxiety and behavioral 
conditions,  the adverse event  profile recorded in these patients does not  appear to be 
different  either in nature,  severity or frequency,  to those listed in the currently FDA 
approved USPI  for RILUTEK.
Dose Relationship  to Safety  and Tolerability
Study 301 described in (33) is the only randomized controlled trial that included 
doses of riluzole less than 100 mg/day and, hence,  provides data relevant  to exposures 
expected for the BHV-0223 program.  In this study,  959 patients with ALS were 
randomized to up to 18 months of treatment  with either placebo,  50 mg/day riluzole 
(dosed 25 mg PO BID),  100 mg/day riluzole (dosed 50 mg PO  BID) and 200 mg/day 
riluzole (dosed 100 mg PO BID).  Tolerability as reflected in the most  common AEs were 
dose dependent  for asthenia,  nausea,  vomiting,  vertigo,  somnolence and paresthesias.
Rate of selected  AEs by dose
Summary graphic from  Bensimon & Doble 2004 (Bensimon and Doble 2004)
Effects on  hepatic lab parameters also demonstrate a dose dependent  pattern.  
The rate of marked ALT  elevations (≥5xULN) were lower in the 50 mg daily dose group 
(1.3%) than the placebo (2.1%),  100 mg daily dose group (3.8%) or 200 mg daily dose 
group (3.3%).  Mean time to onset  of marked ALT  elevation distinguished placebo (219
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018days) and  the 50 mg daily dose group (255 days) from the 100 mg (51 days) and 200 
mg (42 days) daily dose groups.  This pattern suggests a potential threshold 
phenomenon for impact  on transaminases.
Dose relationship  of rate of ALT effects
Summary graphics from  Bensimon & Doble 2004 (36). The left panel indicates the proportion of 
study subjects  demonstrating ALT elevations by dose.  The right panel indicates the mean time to first 
observation of any ALT ≥ 5xULN.
The USPI  provides a  warning on Liver Injury for riluzole and proscribes specific 
monitoring of  liver chemistries.  Lab abnormalities associated with riluzole consist  of 
elevated transaminases.  These elevations are typically below 5xULN and  often resolve 
while on treatment  (36). Experience with incidents of ALT increasing >5xULN are 
limited,  insofar as the USPI  recommends immediate drug discontinuation.  A dose- 
response is seen for elevations in transaminases within the available documentation on 
riluzole (33). Total daily doses of 50 mg were not associated with increased rates of 
marked ALT elevations (>5xULN) compared  to placebo (1.3% vs 2.1%,  respectively) 
and such occurrences had a later onset  than placebo (median 254 vs 219  days).  Total 
daily doses of 100 mg and 200 mg had greater rates of marked ALT elevations than 
placebo and the median occurrence was within 60 days.  This pattern of  adverse hepatic 
effects is consistent  with observations that drugs associated with doses of  at least  50
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018mg per  day have a significantly greater propensity for liver injury and the associated 
incidents of liver injury are more serious (37).
While few  cases of markedly elevated transaminases have been cited in the 
literature in association with elevated total bilirubin (38-40) (as well as the USPI),  the 
outcomes in these cases were non-fatal and noted to be readily resolving.  Further,  
interpretation of  these cases is confounded by limited details and complicating factors.  
For example,  the case cited in the USPI  involves a subject  with epilepsy treated with 
riluzole at doses up to 250 mg/day and who was on multiple concomitant  medications 
(e.g.,  phenobarbital and carbamazepine) and who also had mildly elevated alkaline 
phosphatase and gamma-GT  levels at baseline (Details noted in RILUTEK  SBA).
In the course of the clinical development  program for  BHV-0223,  the Sponsor 
intends to  adhere to laboratory monitoring guidelines for LFTs that  are described in the 
USPI  for all subjects on chronic dosing.  In addition,  a complete baseline examination  
will assess predisposition for hepatic illness (e.g.,  hepatitis serologies,  baseline 
abnormalities,  concomitant  medications,  alcohol usage).  We would welcome any advice 
that the Review Division would be prepared to offer in regard to additional assessments.
Safety Data from the Phase 1  Study BHV223-101
There were no  drug-related SAEs reported in BHV-223-001.  Additionally,  no 
patients discontinued treatment  due to drug-related AEs.  BHV-0223 had good mouth 
palatability with expected mild and transient  oral paresthesias.  The vast majority of 
subjects rated the oral parathesias as mild and not bothersome,  with few patients 
considering the numbness to  be “somewhat” bothersome.  The PI deemed all cases of 
paresthesias as mild.  All cases of oral parathesias were transient  and resolved.  Overall,  
the preliminary results suggest  that the SL formulation of  riluzole is well tolerated and 
associated with mild,  transient  and not bothersome oral paresthesias.  The Sponsor 
believes that  the potential safety benefits on hepatic function,  ease of administration for 
patients with dysphagia and potential to avoid the negative food effect  associated with 
the generic tablet  formulation outweigh any mild and transient  oral numbness 
associated with the API.
FDA-approved  Labeling
The current  FDA-approved labeling for  riluzole includes three Warnings:
• Liver injury (causing elevated levels of liver enzymes serum transaminase 
[ALT/SGPT];  [AST/SGOT],  bilirubin,  and/or gamma-glutamate transferase [GGT]  
levels).  Experience in almost 800 ALS patients indicates that about  50% of riluzole- 
treated patients will experience at least  one ALT/SGPT  level above the upper limit  of 
normal,  about  8% will have elevations >  3 × ULN,  and about  2% of patients will have 
elevations > 5 × ULN.
• Neutropenia (causing one  portion of your white blood cell test results are 
considered abnormal,  and this can make you more prone to infections).  Among 
approximately 4000 patients given riluzole for ALS, there were three cases of marked 
neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count  less than 500/mm3),  all seen within the first 2 
months of riluzole treatment.
• Interstitial lung disease (causing dry cough and/or difficulty breathing).  Cases of 
interstitial lung disease (see ADVERSE  REACTIONS) have been reported in patients
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018treated with riluzole,  some  of them severe;  upon further investigation,  many of these 
cases were hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Additionally,  per the Riluzole label,  Riluzole has been shown to  impaired fertility when 
administered to male and female rats prior to and during mating at an oral dose of  15 
mg/kg or 1.5 times the maximum daily dose on a mg/m2 basis.
3.Source: a) Identify the  source  of the drug or biologic to be  used.
BHV-0223 will be  obtained from the CMHC pharmacy and supplied by Biohaven 
Pharmaceutical Inc.
b) Is the  drug provided free of charge to subjects? Yes No 
If yes, by whom?
Biohaven Pharmaceutical Inc.
4.Storage, Preparation and Use: Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability  information, 
and for parenteral  products, method of sterilization and method of testing sterility and 
pyrogenicity.
Check applicable  Investigational  Drug Service utilized:
YNHH  IDS Yale Cancer Center
CMHC Pharmacy West Haven VA
PET  Center None
Other:
Note: If  the YNHH IDS (or comparable service at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be  utilized, explain in 
detail  how the PI will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.
5.Use of  Placebo: Not applicable  to this research project
If use  of  a placebo is planned, provide a justification which addresses the  following:
a.Describe the  safety  and efficacy of other available  therapies. If there  are no other 
available therapies, state  this.
Several pharmacological treatments are utilized on an as-needed basis because 
of their short-term,  potent  anti-anxiolytic effects.  These  pharmacological agents include 
benzodiazepines (which target  the gamma-aminobutyric acid-A  receptor (GABA-A) and 
beta-blockers (beta adrenergic receptor antagonists)(8,  9).  Although,  benzodiazepines 
are quite effective at reducing anxiety over the short  term (12) in specific situations (e.g. 
flying on an airplane),  their side-effects and tolerability currently limit their usefulness in 
many situations (e.g. performance or public-speaking anxiety)(9,  10).  Benzodiazepine 
use is associated with impaired short-term concentration,  decreased alertness and 
psychomotor impairment  (9, 11).  Chronic benzodiazepine use is further associated with 
physiologic dependence,  rebound anxiety on discontinuation and, possibly even 
interference with the efficacy of CBT (one of  the first-line treatments for anxiety) (9,  11). 
Beta-blockers,  on the other hand,  are effective at acutely reducing the peripheral
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018physical symptoms of anxiety (e.g. heart  palpitations,  tremors etc.) but  have no effect  on 
the cognitive or emotional symptoms of anxiety (9, 10, 12-15).   Novel pharmacological 
treatments are needed to improve patient  outcomes with SAD,  both chronically to 
reduce symptoms and acutely to reduce impairment  during situations where symptoms 
are most  likely to be impairing (e.g.  public speaking or performance anxiety).   A placebo 
is given on a single-study day in addition to the subject’s regular medications in order to 
provide an adequate comparison condition to assess BHV-0223’s efficacy.
b. State the  maximum  total  length of time a participant may receive placebo while on the study.
Placebo will be  given for 1 dose.
c. Address the greatest  potential harm  that may come  to a participant  as a result of receiving 
placebo.
Since Placebo is added to  the patients’ current  medications,  the risk of symptoms 
worsening when patients are receiving placebo in this study is not significantly greater in 
this clinical trial than it would be if the patients had not  received the placebo and 
continued their current  medication.
d. Describe the  procedures that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo.
If a patient  has  worsening of symptoms,  the patient  will be  offered inpatient  or 
outpatient  therapy and/or additional pharmacological treatments as clinically indicated.
6.Use of  Controlled Substances:
Will this research project  involve the use of controlled substances in human subjects?
Yes No  See HIC  Application Instructions to view  controlled substance listings.
If yes, is the use of the  controlled substance considered:
Therapeutic:  The use of the controlled substance, within the context of the research, has the 
potential  to benefit  the research participant.
Non-Therapeutic:  Note, the use of a controlled substance in a non-therapeutic research study  
involving human subjects may require that the investigator obtain a Laboratory Research License. 
Examples include  controlled substances used for basic  imaging, observation or biochemical  
studies or other non-therapeutic purposes. See  Instructions for further information.
7.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure Not applicable to this project
Are subjects provided the opportunity  to continue  to receive the study drug(s) after the study has 
ended?
Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under which continued access to study drug(s) may apply  
as well  as conditions for termination of such access.
No If no,  explain why this is acceptable.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Study participants cannot  be given study  drug at  study completion in the absence 
of an approved open-label study as recommend by the FDA in response to an initial IND 
request.  This is a proof-of-concept  study to determine if sublingual riluzole is helpful on a 
single time basis for speech anxiety.
B. DEVICES
1. Are there  any investigational  devices used or investigational  procedures performed at  Yale- 
New Haven Hospital  (YNHH) (e.g., in the YNHH Operating Room or  YNHH Heart  and 
Vascular Center)?   ☐Yes   ☒No If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements:
a.A  YNHH New Product/Trial  Request  Form  must be completed via EPIC:  Pull  down the  
Tools tab in the EPIC Banner, Click on Lawson, Click on “Add new” under the New 
Technology Request Summary and fill out the  forms requested including the “Initial  
Request Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary, “ and attach any other pertinent 
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;  and
e.   Your request  must be reviewed and approved in writing by the appropriate  YNHH 
committee before  patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive the investigational  device  
or investigational  procedure.
2. What  is the name of the device to be studied in this protocol?  
Has this device been FDA approved? Yes No
If yes, state for what  indication.
3.Background Information: Provide a  description of previous human use, known risks, and 
any other  factors that  might  influence risks. If this is the first  time this device is being used in 
humans, include relevant  data on animal  models.
4.Source:
a) Identify the  source of the device to be  used.
b)Is the  device provided free of charge to subjects? Yes No
5.  What  is the PI’s assessment  of risk level  (significant  or non-significant) associated with the 
use of the device?
Significant Risk (SR) Device Study: A study of a device that presents a potential for serious 
risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a participant and 1) is intended as an implant;  2) is used in  
supporting or sustaining human life;  or otherwise  prevents impairment  of human health;  3) is of 
substantial  importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating or treating disease, or otherwise prevents
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018impairment  of human health; or 4) otherwise presents a potential  for serious risk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of a  participant.
Significant  Risk Devices require  an Investigational  Device Exemption (IDE) issued by the FDA. 
What is the IDE number assigned by the FDA?
Did the  FDA approve this  IDE  as Category A (experimental/investigational) or as Category B
(non-experimental/investigational)?  
Who
 holds the  IDE?
Non-Significant Risk (NSR) Device Study: A study of a device that does not meet  the 
definition for a  significant  risk device and does not present  a potential  for serious risk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of participants.  Note that  if the HIC concurs with this determination, an IDE  is 
not required.
6.Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE: There are abbreviated requirements for an IDE  and 
there also are exemptions to the requirement  for an IDE. See the criteria in the HIC  
Application Instructions, Section VI.B.4 at  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/resources/docs/100FR1aHICProtocol_Application_Instructions5-   
25-11.pdf to  determine if these pertain to this study.
Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE  – If criteria set  forth in the HIC  Application Instructions 
are met, copy  and paste the completed relevant  section from  the Instructions into this application.
7. Investigational  device accountability:
a. State how  the PI, or named designee, ensures that  an investigational  device  is used only in 
accordance with the  research protocol approved by the  HIC, and maintains control  of the 
investigational  device  as follows:
Maintains appropriate  records, including receipt  of shipment, inventory  at the 
site, dispensation or use by each participant, and final disposition and/or the return of the 
investigational  device  (or other disposal  if applicable):
Documents pertinent  information assigned to the  investigational  device  (e.g., date, quantity, batch 
or serial  number, expiration date if applicable, and unique code number):
Stores the investigational  device according  to the manufacturer's recommendations with respect  to 
temperature, humidity, lighting, and other environmental  considerations:
Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance  with applicable  
regulatory requirements:
Distributes the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol:
SECTION VII: RECRUITMENT /CONSENT  AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES
1.Targeted Enrollment: Give the  number of subjects:
a. targeted for enrollment  at Yale for this protocol 20
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018b.If this  is a multi-site study, give the total  number of subjects targeted across all  
sites 
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach copies of any recruitment  materials that  will be used.
Flyers Internet/Web Postings Radio
Posters Mass E-mail  Solicitation Telephone
Letter Departmental/Center Website Television
Medical  Record Review
Departmental/Center NewslettersDepartmental/Center Research Boards
Web-Based Clinical  Trial RegistriesNewspaper
YCCI Recruitment  database Clinicaltrials.gov Registry (do not send materials to HIC)
Other (describe):
3.Recruitment Procedures:
a. Describe how  potential  subjects will  be identified.
Patients with Social Anxiety Disorder in the  Yale Center for Anxiety and Mood Disorders 
Clinic will be recruited for this study.  Additionally, some subjects will respond to  the contact  
phone number on the clinicaltrials.gov trial listing,  flyers, or postings on the departmental 
website/YCCI  recruitment  database.  We will also reach out to local providers and leaders of  
local social anxiety groups by letter to inform them of our study.   Lastly,  we will recruit subjects 
from a list of subjects who expressed interest and/or participated in a trial examining ketamine 
for Social Anxiety Disorder.
b. Describe how  potential  subjects are  contacted.
Clinicians will be informed about the opportunity and asked to inform their patients about  
the
 opportunity if  appropriate.  Potential subjects interested in the trial will initiate first contact  
with the study recruitment  coordinator or another member of the research team.
c.Who  is recruiting potential subjects?
Co-investigators Angeli Landeros-Weisenberger and Jerome Taylor, MD will inform 
clinicians at the clinic about  the opportunity and may ask patients directly if  they are seeing the 
patients clinically.
4.Screening Procedures
a.Will  email  or telephone correspondence be  used to screen potential subjects for 
eligibility prior to the potential subject  coming to the research office? Yes No
b.If yes, identify  below all health information to be collected as part of screening  and 
check off any of the following HIPAA identifiers to be  collected and retained by the 
research team during this screening process.
HEALTH INFORMATION  TO BE COLLECTED:
A brief psychiatric and medical history will be collected during telephone screening 
including Axis I
 diagnoses,  medical and neurologic diagnoses,  as well as recent  
medication and psychotherapy changes.  All information will be stored in locked 
cabinets/password protected computer in an office that is locked.  Information that will
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018breach subject  confidentiality will not  be shared.  Rather,  data will only be released upon 
written consent  of the subject  and will be available for review by the Yale human 
Investigation Committee.  We will hold paper files for seven years at which point  they will 
be destroyed.
HIPAA identifiers:
Names
All geographic  subdivisions smaller than a  State, including:  street  address, city, county,  precinct, zip codes and their 
equivalent  geocodes, except  for the initial  three digits of a zip code if, according to the current  publicly-available data from  
the Bureau of the Census:  (1) the geographic  unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same  three  initial  digits contains  
more  than 20,000 people, and (2) the initial  three digits of a zip code for all such geographic  units containing 20,000 or fewer  
people is changed to 000.
Telephone  numbers  
Fax numbers
E-mail  addresses
Social  Security numbers  
Medical record  numbers
Health plan  beneficiary numbers  
Account  numbers
All elements of dates  (except  year) for dates  related to an individual, including:  birth date, admission date, discharge  
date, date of death, all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative  of such age, except that such ages  
and elements may be aggregated into a single  category of age 90 or older
Certificate/license  numbers
Vehicle  identifiers and serial  numbers, including license  plate  numbers  
Device  identifiers and serial  numbers
Web Universal  Resource  Locators (URLs)  
Internet  Protocol (IP) address numbers
Biometric  identifiers, including finger and  voice  prints   
Full face photographic  images  and any  comparable images
Any other  unique  identifying numbers, characteristics, or codes
5.Assessment of  Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team  have a direct  existing clinical  
relationship with any  potential subject?
Yes, all subjects
Yes, some of the  subjects  
No
If yes, describe the nature  of this relationship.
Some of the subjects might  be recruited from the outpatient  service at the Yale Child 
Study Center.   Dr. Bloch and Dr. Taylor currently work as providers in the clinic.   Subjects will 
be informed that participation or lack of participation in this study will not affect  the clinical 
care they receive at the clinic.
6.Request for  waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When requesting a waiver  of HIPAA Authorization 
for either the entire study, or for recruitment  purposes only. Note:  if you are  collecting PHI as part of 
a phone or email screen, you must request  a HIPAA waiver for recruitment  purposes.)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Choose one:
□For entire  study
☒ For recruitment  purposes only
□For inclusion of non-English speaking  subject if short  form  is being used
i.Describe  why it  would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for 
use/disclosure of this data;
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be 
impracticable to obtain the subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this  
data;
We are requesting a waiver of HIPAA  authorization for  recruitment  purposes 
only.  Subjects will be initially recruited through clinicians at  Yale Child Study Center and 
the clinicaltrials.gov registry.  We will need to use PHI such as name,  telephone number 
and email addresses to schedule initial screening interviews.  It would be impractical to 
coordinate initial subject  enrollment  and recruitment  without  this data.
Signed authorization is impractical because initial screening of  patients recruited 
through clinicaltrials.gov or clinician referral may occur over the telephone or email.
By signing this protocol  application, the investigator assures that the protected 
health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been requested will not 
be reused or disclosed to any person or  entity other than those listed in this 
application, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of this research 
study, or as specifically approved for use in another  study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale 
HIPAA-Covered entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by subject  
name, purpose, date, recipients, and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be  
forwarded to the  Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.
7.Required HIPAA Authorization: If the research involves the creation, use or disclosure of 
protected health information (PHI), separate subject authorization is required under the  
HIPAA Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the  following forms are being  provided:
Compound Consent  and Authorization form  
HIPAA Research Authorization Form
8.Consent Personnel: List  the  names of all  members of the research team who will  be obtaining 
consent/assent.
Michael H. Bloch MD, MS 
Christopher Pittenger MD,  PhD  
Jerome Taylor MD
Angeli Landeros-Weisenberger MD 
Jessica A.
 Johnson,  BS
Baris Olten,  MD
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/20189.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent  will 
be obtained, including parental  permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure  
subjects’ independent  decision-making.
•The research team (PI, his designee or  research coordinator) will explain the study to 
the patient.
•Understanding of  the  study will be tested using a brief questionnaire (see consent  form)  
of the key elements of the study.
•Every attempt  will be  made to include spouses,  significant  others,  and family in the 
consent  process.
•The research team will discuss the patient’s participation in the  study with the patient’s 
psychiatric primary clinician.  The clinician’s opinion about  the patient’s participation and 
ability to provide informed consent  will be documented.
Subject  will be  given a copy of the signed consent  form
10.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the 
personnel  obtaining consent will  assess the potential  subject’s ability and capacity to consent  to the 
research being  proposed.
Protocol does not involve subjects with limited decision making capacity
11.Documentation of Consent/Assent: Specify  the documents that  will be used during the 
consent/assent  process. Copies of all  documents should be  appended to the protocol, in the same  
format  that they will be given to subjects.
Adult  consent  form.
12.Non-English Speaking Subjects: Explain  provisions in place to ensure  comprehension for 
research involving non-English speaking  subjects. If enrollment  of these subjects is anticipated, 
translated copies of all  consent materials must be submitted for approval  prior to use.
Protocol does not involve non-English speaking subjects.
12(a) As a  limited alternative to the above requirement, will  you use the short form* for 
consenting process if you unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual interested 
in study  participation and the translation of the long form is not possible  prior to intended 
enrollment?
YES ☐ NO ☒
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short  form  translated into the  same  
language, then the  full consent form  should be translated into that  language  for use  the next time 
a subject  speaking that language is to be enrolled.
Several  translated short  form templates are  found on our website
at: http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-templates/biomedical.html. If the  translation of the short  
form  is not available on our website, then the  translated short  form  needs to be  submitted to the 
IRB office for approval  via amendment  prior to enrolling the subject. Please  review  the 
guidance and presentation on use of the short form  available on the HRPP website.
If using a short form without a translated HIPAA Research Authorization Form, please  
request a HIPAA waiver in the section above.
13.Consent Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC  may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or  
a full  waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will  request  either a waiver of consent, 
or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete the appropriate section below.
Not Requesting a consent waiver  
Requesting a waiver of signed consent 
Requesting a full  waiver of consent
A.Waiver of signed consent: (Verbal  consent  from subjects will  be obtained. If PHI is 
collected, information in this section must match Section VII, Question 6)
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for Recruitment/Screening only
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please  address the following:
a.Would  the signed consent form  be the only record linking the subject  and the research?
Yes No
b. Does a  breach of confidentiality  constitute the  principal  risk to subjects?  
Yes No
OR
c. Does the research activity  pose greater than minimal  risk?
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted. Please note:  
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal  risk research activity
No
AND
d. Does the research include any activities that  would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for the Entire  Study (Note that  an information 
sheet  may be required.)
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please  address the following:
a.Would  the signed consent form  be the only record linking the subject  and the research?  
Yes No
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018b. Does a  breach of confidentiality  constitute the  principal  risk to subjects?  
Yes No
OR
c. Does the research pose  greater than minimal  risk? Yes If you answered yes, stop. A 
waiver cannot  be granted. No
AND
d. Does the research include any activities that  would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
B. Full  waiver of consent: (No consent  from  subjects will  be obtained for the activity.)
Requesting a waiver of consent for  Recruitment/Screening only
a. Does the research activity  pose greater than minimal  risk to subjects?
Yes If  you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted. Please note:  
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal  risk research activity
No
b.Will  the waiver adversely affect  subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
c.Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without  the waiver?
d. Where appropriate, how will  pertinent  information be  returned to, or shared with 
subjects at  a later date?
Requesting a full  waiver of consent for  the Entire  Study (Note: If PHI is 
collected, information here  must match Section VII, question 6.)
If requesting a full  waiver of consent, please  address the following:
a. Does the research pose  greater than minimal  risk to subjects?  
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.
No
b.Will  the waiver adversely affect  subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
c.Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without  the waiver?
d. Where appropriate, how will  pertinent  information be  returned to, or shared with 
subjects at  a later date?
SECTION VIII: P ROTECTION OF  RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
Confidentiality & Security of Data:
a. What  protected health information (medical  information along with the  HIPAA identifiers) 
about  subjects will  be collected and used for the research?
PHI about  subjects will include name,  age, diagnosis,  medical record data,  results 
of physical examination including EKG  information,  laboratory tests,  psychiatric rating 
scores,  and performance on psychiatric tests (impromptu speech and
 attention bias 
tests).  The urine toxicology results will be placed in the research study record.  The subject
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018will have a  medical record at CMHC.  Since the baseline urine toxicology and lab results 
will be collected during a visit at CMHC,  the results of this test will become part of the 
CMHC medical  record.  This will be disclosed to the subject  in the consent  form and the 
investigator has obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality to protect  all sensitive information 
connected with this study.
b. How will  the research data be collected, recorded and stored?
All study  ratings completed during study  visits,  histories obtained at screening and 
medical records pertaining to study procedures are secured in locked files and stored on 
password-protected computers.  Since this is an investigator-initiated study,  the PI and 
study team will develop Clinical Research Forms (CRFs) for this study.  These forms will 
be labeled with a unique random study code that cannot  identify the patient.  The key 
linking the code to the subject’s identifiable information will be kept in an electronic excel 
file which is kept in a password protected file, on a password protected computer on the 
secure Yale server.  A paper copy of this “master file” will be kept in a locked file cabinet  
as noted above.  This master file will be kept separately from any coded data so that the 
identity of the participant  will not be disclosed.  Information which is required to be part of 
the medical record will be filed into the CMHC medical record.  If a medical record has not 
been created,  one will be created with this visit. The results of the medical and psychiatric 
evaluations conducted as part of this research will be available to clinicians caring for the 
subject  unless the participant  requests otherwise.  The Yale Human Investigation 
Committee may review records of this research.  In the case of published reports of this 
study,  the identities of all participants will be protected.
c. How will  the digital  data be  stored? CD DVD Flash Drive Portable Hard 
Drive Secured Server Laptop Computer Desktop Computer Other
d.What  methods and procedures will  be used to safeguard the  confidentiality and security of 
the identifiable  study data and the storage media  indicated above  during  and after the subject’s 
participation in the study?
All of the information obtained from subjects in this research study will be  locked 
clinic files or on a password protected server to insure confidentiality.  Also,  the methods 
utilized include storing identified data separately from that which need not be identified,  
storing medical records according to CMHC policy,  and utilizing a secure server.
Do all portable devices contain encryption software? Yes No
If no, see http://hipaa.yale.edu/guidance/policy.html
e.What  will be done  with the data when the research is completed?  Are there  plans to destroy  
the identifiable  data?  If yes, describe  how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If 
no, describe how the  data  and/or identifiers will  be secured.
Data will be  kept in a locked filing cabinet  whose access is only obtainable by study 
personnel and electronic clinical data will be kept on a password protected server.  The PI 
will  also  conduct   periodic  assessments  to  ensure  that  confidentiality  provisions
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018established at the onset  of the study are maintained throughout  the study and  during data 
analysis.  Additionally,  all staff involved in the handling of subject  data are/or will be trained 
on the requirements of HIPAA  Privacy Rule and Human Subject  Protection.  If the PI 
should leave Yale,  the PI will collaborate with his Department  Chair and Faculty Advisor 
to ensure that  proper and continued protection of individually identifiable information and 
protected health information continues.
After a  period of five years these files will be destroyed by ITS approved methods 
or de-identified to protect  subject  confidentiality.  All identifiable data will be destroyed by 
Dr. Bloch when the research is completed.  Paper  will be shredded via the confidential 
CMHC bins and all electronic files will be deleted or edited so that  there is no identifiable 
information.
Impromptu speeches will be  videotaped during the study.  The subject  has the right 
to request  a copy of the video after the whole trial is completed,  however,  they will not 
have the right to edit the videos.  The videotapes can be destroyed at any point  in time 
upon request  by the subject,  otherwise,  they will be kept for 5 years.  After that time they 
will be destroyed or de-identified.
f.Who  will  have access to the protected health information (such as the research sponsor, the 
investigator, the research staff, all  research monitors, FDA, Yale Cancer Center Data  and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC), SSC, etc.)?  (please distinguish between PHI and de-identified 
data)
In addition to  study  investigators,  members of the HIC, the study sponsor,  and 
the FDA may have access to  study data.
g.If appropriate, has a Certificate  of  Confidentiality  been obtained?
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been obtained to protect  the drug toxicology 
results.  Where
 possible,  information will be destroyed that may link the subject  to illicit 
drug use. Since a CMHC chart  will need  to be created for these subjects by virtue of their 
visit to the site, there is a concern that these results could be traced back to the subject.  
Subjects who test positive on the toxicology test will not be able to participate in this 
protocol.  Subjects will be encouraged to seek treatment  for their substance use, as 
appropriate.
h. Are  any  of the study procedures likely  to yield information subject  to mandatory reporting 
requirements?  (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable  diseases;  parent  interview -incidents 
of child abuse, elderly abuse,  etc.). Please  verify to whom  such instances will need to  be reported.
Although considered unlikely to be  encountered,  limits to confidentiality such as 
mandatory reporting requirements for abuse of children or the elderly will be complied 
with.
SECTION IX: P OTENTIAL  BENEFITS
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018Potential  Benefits: Identify any benefits that  may be reasonably expected to result  from  the 
research, either to the  subject(s) or to society at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a 
benefit  in this context of the risk benefit  assessment.)
There may be  no direct  benefit  from a subject’s participation in this study.  The 
potential benefits to society of these investigations are considerable.  SAD continues to 
be a major public health problem with tragic cost to  the individual,  the family,  and the 
community.  The present  study may improve our understanding of  SAD by providing a 
pharmacologic rationale for developing novel treatments.
SECTION X: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND E CONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
1. Alternatives: What  other alternatives are  available to the study subjects outside of the research?
The subject  may  discuss other non-research treatments for SAD with their 
practitioner or remain on their current  standard of care regiment.  This will include a 
discussion of  pharmacologic,  psychosocial,  and somatic treatments.
2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that  will be 
made to subjects, the amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this 
compensation.
Participants will be  paid $50.00 for the screening visit;  $100  for each of the study 
challenge days and $50 for the follow-up visit; for a total of $300.00 cash upon 
completion of  the study.   We will be able to reimburse up to $200.00 in travel  and lodging if 
you are traveling  from  greater than 50 miles distance, receipts will  be required to issue 
reimbursement  checks.
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the subject’s costs 
associated with participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that 
will be provided at  no cost to subjects.
The study drugs and  all medical procedures in this research study will be provided free 
of charge to the participants.  There are no charges for the study visits,  including the 
cost of parking on challenge days and transportation and lodging up to $200 for 
subjects traveling from a greater than 50 miles distance.
4. In  Case of Injury: This section is required for any  research involving  more than minimal  risk.
a. Will  medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs?  If a physical  injury or 
illness occurs as a direct  result  of participation in this study, study physicians and nursing 
personnel  will be provided emergency  medical  care and ensure  that research participants receive  
prompt  evaluation and medical  treatment  as necessary. In severe  cases this  may involve a 
transfer to Yale-New Haven Hospital  emergency room. The cost  of treatment  for any such injury
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018or illness will not be paid for through the  study and will  be the responsibility of the research 
participant.
a. Where and from  whom  may treatment  be obtained?
In the event  of a  significant  medical emergency the participant  will be transported 
to Yale New Haven Hospital.  Should there be adverse psychiatric effects as a result  of 
the study they will receive either inpatient  treatment  on the CNRU at CMHC or as an 
outpatient  from the Yale Child Study Center.
b. Are there  any limits to the treatment  being provided?
In the unlikely event  that any psychiatric care more  intensive than regular clinic 
visits and a couple of  nights of observation on the CNRU is required as a direct  result  of 
participation in this study,  study personnel will provide emergent  care and stabilization.  
Longer observation on the CNRU and more frequent  clinic visits,  if necessary in the 
short  term may also be provided.  If longer-term psychiatric care is required,  beyond 
what  is normally provided by a research clinic,  then study personnel will provide 
referrals and otherwise endeavor to assist  participants in arranging such care.
c.Who  will  pay for this treatment?
Since this is an  investigator initiated study,  the study’s investigators will provide 
additional short-term inpatient  hospitalization that  is needed to provide emergent  care 
and stabilization following any adverse psychiatric events.  Longer-term psychiatric care 
to alleviate a participant’s symptoms below their severity when entering the study or 
medical treatments provided at other facilities will be billed to the participant  or the 
participant’s insurance company.  Participants do not give up any of their legal rights by 
signing the consent  forms.
d. How will  the medical  treatment  be accessed by subjects?
As part of the study protocol,  participants will be  systematically asked about  any 
adverse events they experience and their SAD symptom severity by study  personnel.  
They will also be instructed to inform study personnel if they  believe they have suffered 
an adverse event  or worsening of  their SAD symptoms as a result  of the protocol.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018APPENDIX  1
Local  Tolerability Assessment
A local  tolerability assessment  will be performed at  baseline and 1 hour after study medication 
administration on study days 1 and 2. Any alteration of the appearance of the tongue, palate  and 
buccal  mucosa space will  be recorded. Oral  tolerability assessment  will include:
Any history  of dysphagia  (difficulty swallowing), dysgeusia  (the distortion of the sense of taste) 
or burning, stinging  or tingling sensation of the  mouth.
Systematic examination of the oral  cavity  for any signs of erythema, swelling or ulceration 
(ulcers which are white, small, punched out lesions of epithelial  surfaces of the mouth) of the  
mucosa.
Also check for stomatitis (inflammation and infection of the oral  mucosa), gingivitis 
(inflammation of the  gums leading to erythema, swelling and bleeding), xerostomia (a dry 
mouth) or staining of mucosa.
•Areas to be inspected:
-Right  palate  area
-Left palate  area
-Right  sublingual  area
-Left sublingual  area
-Right  upper buccal  area
-Right  lower buccal  area
-Left upper buccal  area
-Left lower buccal  area
•Severity Grading Scale : 
Grade 0: Normal  mucosa
Grade 1 : Localized mucosal  erythema  and/or irritation without  ulceration
Grade 2 : Generalized erythema  and/or irritation and induration without  ulceration
Grade 3 : Ulceration, with or without  any other combination of signs.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018

APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018References
1. Kessler D, Peters TJ, Lee L, Parr S. Social  class and access to specialist  palliative care  
services. Palliative medicine. 2005;19(2):105-10.
2. Lipsitz  JD,  Schneier FR. Social  phobia. Epidemiology  and cost  of illness. 
Pharmacoeconomics. 2000;18(1):23-32.
3. Kessler RC. The impairments caused by social  phobia in the general  population:  
implications for intervention. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica Supplementum. 2003(417):19-27.
4. Davidson JR. Use of benzodiazepines in social  anxiety  disorder, generalized anxiety 
disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder. The Journal of clinical  psychiatry. 2004;65 Suppl 
5:29-33.
5. Blomhoff S,  Spetalen S, Jacobsen MB, Malt  UF. Phobic anxiety  changes the function of 
brain-gut  axis in irritable bowel  syndrome. Psychosomatic medicine. 2001;63(6):959-65.
6. Baldwin DS, Nair RV. Escitalopram  in the  treatment  of generalized anxiety  disorder. 
Expert  review of neurotherapeutics. 2005;5(4):443-9.
7. Baldwin DS, Anderson IM, Nutt  DJ, Bandelow B, Bond A, Davidson JR, et  al. Evidence- 
based guidelines for the pharmacological  treatment  of anxiety disorders:  recommendations from  
the British Association for Psychopharmacology. J Psychopharmacol. 2005;19(6):567-96.
8. Davidson JR. Pharmacotherapy of social anxiety disorder:  what  does the evidence tell  us? 
The Journal of clinical  psychiatry. 2006;67 Suppl 12:20-6.
9. Farach FJ,  Pruitt  LD, Jun JJ, Jerud AB, Zoellner LA, Roy-Byrne PP. Pharmacological  
treatment  of anxiety disorders:  current  treatments and future directions. Journal  of anxiety 
disorders. 2012;26(8):833-43.
10. Davidson JR, Potts N, Richichi  E, Krishnan R, Ford SM, Smith R, et  al. Treatment  of 
social  phobia with clonazepam  and placebo. Journal of clinical  psychopharmacology. 
1993;13(6):423-8.
11. Lader M.  Benzodiazepines revisited--will  we ever  learn?  Addiction. 2011;106(12):2086- 
109.
12. Elman MJ, Sugar J, Fiscella R, Deutsch TA, Noth J, Nyberg M, et  al. The effect  of 
propranolol  versus placebo on resident  surgical  performance. Transactions of the American 
Ophthalmological  Society. 1998;96:283-91;  discussion 91-4.
13. Drew PJ,  Barnes JN, Evans SJ. The effect  of acute beta-adrenoceptor blockade on 
examination performance. British journal  of clinical  pharmacology. 1985;19(6):783-6.
14. Liu HH, Milgrom  P, Fiset  L. Effect  of a beta-adrenergic blocking  agent on dental  anxiety. 
Journal of dental  research. 1991;70(9):1306-8.
15. Mealy  K, Ngeh N, Gillen P, Fitzpatrick G, Keane  FB, Tanner  A. Propranolol  reduces the 
anxiety associated with day case surgery. The European journal  of surgery = Acta  chirurgica. 
1996;162(1):11-4.
16. Coric V, Taskiran S, Pittenger C, Wasylink S, Mathalon DH, Valentine G, et  al. Riluzole 
augmentation in treatment-resistant  obsessive-compulsive disorder:  an open-label  trial. 
Biological  psychiatry. 2005;58(5):424-8.
17. Mathew SJ,  Amiel  JM, Coplan JD, Fitterling HA, Sackeim  HA, Gorman JM. Open-label  
trial of riluzole in generalized anxiety  disorder. The American journal  of psychiatry. 
2005;162(12):2379-81.
18. Pittenger C, Coric V, Banasr M, Bloch M, Krystal  JH, Sanacora G. Riluzole in the 
treatment  of mood and anxiety disorders. CNS drugs. 2008;22(9):761-86.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/201819. Sanacora  G, Kendell  SF, Levin Y, Simen AA, Fenton LR, Coric V, et  al. Preliminary 
evidence of riluzole efficacy in antidepressant-treated patients with residual  depressive  
symptoms. Biological  psychiatry. 2007;61(6):822-5.
20. Zarate CA, Manji HK. Riluzole in psychiatry:  a systematic review of the literature. 
Expert  opinion on drug metabolism  & toxicology. 2008;4(9):1223-34.
21. Liebowitz  MR. Social  phobia. Modern problems of pharmacopsychiatry. 1987;22:141- 
73.
22. Baker SL, Heinrichs N, Kim  HJ, Hofmann SG. The liebowitz  social  anxiety scale as a  
self-report  instrument:  a preliminary psychometric analysis. Behaviour research and therapy. 
2002;40(6):701-15.
23. Hamilton M. Diagnosis and rating of anxiety. Br J Psychiatry. 1969;3(Special Issue):76- 
9.
24. Williams  JB. A structured interview guide for the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. 
Archives of general  psychiatry. 1988;45(8):742-7.
25. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent  DA, Yershova  KV, Oquendo MA, et  al. The  
Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale:  initial  validity and internal  consistency findings from  
three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. The American journal  of psychiatry. 
2011;168(12):1266-77.
26. Ries BJ, McNeil  DW, Boone ML, Turk CL, Carter LE, Heimberg RG. Assessment  of 
contemporary social phobia verbal  report  instruments. Behaviour research and therapy. 
1998;36(10):983-94.
27. Beidel  DCTSMJRGCMR. Assessment  of social  phobia:  Reliability of an impromptu 
speech task. ANXDIS</cja:jid> Journal of Anxiety Disorders. 1989;3(3):149-58.
28. Hofmann SG, Dibartolo PM. An instrument  to assess self-statements during  public  
speaking:  scale development and preliminary psychometric properties. Behavior therapy. 
2000;31(3):499-515.
29. Aitken RC. Measurement  of feelings using visual  analogue scales. Proceedings of the  
Royal  Society of Medicine. 1969;62(10):989-93.
30. Spielberger CD, Gorsuch, J.S., Lushene, R., Vagg, P.R., Jacobs, G.A. Manual for the 
State-Trait  Anxiety  Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:  Consulting Psychologists Press;  1983.
31. de  Visser SJ, van der Post JP, de Waal  PP, Cornet  F, Cohen AF, van Gerven JM. 
Biomarkers for the effects of benzodiazepines in healthy volunteers. British journal  of clinical  
pharmacology. 2003;55(1):39-50.
32. McNair DM, Frankenthaler LM, Czerlinsky T, White  TW, Sasson S, Fisher S. Simulated 
public speaking as a model of clinical  anxiety. Psychopharmacology. 1982;77(1):7-10.
33. Lacomblez  L, Bensimon G, Leigh PN, Guillet  P, Powe  L, Durrleman S, et  al. A  
confirmatory dose-ranging study of riluzole  in ALS. ALS/Riluzole Study Group-II. Neurology. 
1996;47(6 Suppl 4):S242-50.
34. Debove C,  Zeisser P, Salzman PM, Powe LK, Truffinet  P. The Rilutek (riluzole) Global  
Early Access Programme:  an open-label  safety  evaluation in the treatment  of amyotrophic lateral  
sclerosis. Amyotrophic lateral  sclerosis and other motor  neuron disorders : official  publication of 
the World Federation of Neurology, Research Group on Motor Neuron Diseases. 2001;2(3):153- 
8.
35. Huntington G. On chorea. George  Huntington, M.D. The Journal of neuropsychiatry and 
clinical  neurosciences. 2003;15(1):109-12.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/28/2017 VALID THROUGH 7/26/201836. Bensimon G, Doble A. The tolerability of riluzole in the treatment  of patients with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Expert  opinion on drug safety. 2004;3(6):525-34.
37. Lammert  C, Einarsson S, Saha C, Niklasson A, Bjornsson E, Chalasani  N. Relationship 
between daily dose of oral medications and idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury:  search for 
signals. Hepatology. 2008;47(6):2003-9.
38. Castells M, Boyce J. Transfer of peanut allergy by a liver allograft. The New England 
journal  of medicine. 1998;338(3):202-3.
39. Remy  AJ, Camu W, Ramos J, Blanc P, Larrey D. Acute hepatitis after riluzole 
administration. Journal of hepatology. 1999;30(3):527-30.
40. Henderson RD, McCombe PA. Riluzole: a glimmer of hope  in the treatment of motor 
neurone disease. The Medical journal  of Australia. 2005;183(3):164;  author reply -5.