 Clinical Trial of Manganese- Enhanced MRI (MEMRI) to Assess Peri -
Infarct Injury  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 December 21, 201 8 
 
Version 5.0, December 21, 20 18 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclos e or use except as authorized in writing by the study sponsor  CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE:    Clinical Trial phase 1 -2 of Manganese -Enhanced MRIto Assess Myocardial Injury 
and Predict Future Cardiovascular Events (MEMRI -CARE)  
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 5. 
 
  
  
Study Product:  EVP 1001 -1 (See MoreTM) 
  
IND Number:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended:  (1) 06/30/2015  
Amended:  (2) 10/14/2016  
Amended:  (3) 12/19/2016  
Amended:  (4) 03/21/2017  
Amended : (5) 12/21/2018  
  

 
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
 
 
AA       atrial arrhythmia  
ACMA        Arterial Cardiomyopathy arrhythmia  
AE adverse event  
AMBMC  autologous mononuclear bone marrow cells  
BMC  bone marrow cell  
BSC  biologic safety cabinet  
COA  Certificate of Analysis  
CABG  coronary artery bypass graft  
CAD  
CCTRN  coronary artery disease  
Cardiovascular Cell Therapy Research Network  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CFU-F  colony forming units – fibroblasts  
CK-MB 
CMR  
CNR  
 
 
CPL  
CPQCL  creatinine kinase – myocardial band  
Cardiac MRI  
contrast to noise ratio  
cell processing lab  
Cell Processing Quality Control Lab  
CRO  contract research organization  
CSCs  
CVE cardiac stem cells  
cardiovascular events  
DAPI  4'-6-Diamidino -2-phenylindole  
DCM  
DEMRI  dilated cardiomyopathy  
delayed enhanced MRI  
DMSO  dimethyl sulfoxide  
DSMB  
EB Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
Evans Blue dye  
EF  ejection fraction  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
EPC  endothelial progenitor cells  
ESR  
EVP expedited safety report  
EVP 1001 -1 injectable contrast agent  
FBS  fetal bovine serum  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FEV1  forced expiratory volume in 1 second  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
G-CSF  
GMP  
hAMSC  granulocyte colony stimulating factor  
Good Manufacturing Practice  
Human autologous mesenchymal stem cells  
HARP  Harmonic Phase  
BMC  
HF  human bone marrow cell  
heart failure  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability  
Act  
HSA  human serum albumin  
HSC  hematopoietic stem cell  
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page iii 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  HTLV  human T -cell lymphotropic virus  
ICAM  intracellular adhesion molecule  
ICD  implantable cardioverter -defibrillator  
ICF  Informed consent form  
ICH  International Conference on Harmonisation of  
Technical Re -quirements of Pharmaceuticals  
for Human Use  
ICM  Ischemic Cardiomyopathy  
IDM 
IIR 
IR  
ISCI  Infectious Disease Markers  
Intra infarct regions  
Ischemia reperfusion  
Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute  
 (University of Miami)  
IEC  institutional ethics committee  
IND  Investigational New Drug application  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
I.V.  Intravenous  
KDR  VEGF receptor -2  
LAD  left anterior descending artery  
LV  left ventricular  
LVAD  left ventricular assist device  
MACE  major adverse cardiac events  
MEM  
MEMRI  minimum essential medium  
 Manganese enhanced MRI  
MHC  major histocompatibility complex  
MI  myocardial infarction  
MLHF  
MN  Minnesota Living with Heart Failure  
manganese  
MR  magnetic resonance  
MRI  magnetic resonance imaging  
MSC  
NICM  mesenchymal stem cell (human)  
 non-ischemic cardiomyopathy  
NYHA  New York Heart Association  
PBS  
PIR 
PK phosphate buffered saline  
Peri-infarct region  
Pharmacokinetics  
QA  quality assurance  
QC  quality control  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SCCT  Specialized Center for Cell -Based Therapy  
SCF  stem cell factor  
SDF-1  stromal cell derived factor 1  
SOP  
SDCC  
SNR  standard operating procedures  
Stanford Data Coordinating Center  
Signal to noise ratio  
SW  
TEM  
TESPI  Stroke Work  
Tissue Electron Microscopy  
Transendocardial Study Product Injection  
TTC  triphenyltetrazolium chloride  
TI Inversion time  
 
  
 
U.S.  United States  
  VEGF  
Peak VO2  peak oxygen consumption  
WBC  White blood count  
 peak oxygen consumption  
 White blood count  
  vascular endothelial growth factor  
peak oxygen consumption  
white blood count  
 
  
 
 
 
 
[Insert short name of protocol here]   page 1 
Version 4 
Version 5.0, December 21, 20 18 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclos e or use except as authorized in writing by the study sponsor  Study Summary  
Title Clinical Trial of Manganese -Enhanced MRI MEMRIto Assess Peri -Infarct 
Injury  
Short Title  MEMRI -DEMRI  
Protocol Number  28508    
Phase  Clinical study phase 2 
Methodology  Open Label  
Study Duration  i.  Screening - approx imately  1-2 hours including H&P , blood  work and EKG.   
ii.  Active participation - MRI study itself is approx imately  1.5 hr per exam.  
iii. A nalysis of participant data takes approx imately  1 hr per exam with an   
additional 0.5  hr per patient for tallying clinical outcomes and AEs.  
iv. Total time estimated 3 days per patient. We expect the  study to take 
approximately 12 months.  
 
Study Center(s)  Single  
Objectives  This is a first -in-human clinical translation of manganese -enhanced MRI 
(MEMRI) to assess the peri -infarct injury in patients with severe ischemic  
cardiomyopathy (ICM), non -ischem ic cardiomyopathy (NICM)  and atrial 
fIbrillation  
Number of Subjects  50 
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria    Patients wiith ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy with an EF less than or 
equal to 50 or  
patients with paroxysmal or persistent  atrial fibrilla tion  
 who are at least 18 and less than 80 years of age. Only males and non -pregnant 
females to be included.  
Study Product, Dose, 
Route, Regimen  EVP 1001 -1 (SeeMoreTM) Injectable  
Manufacturer:  University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals  
IND #  
Dosage:  0.28 ml/kg  
 
Duration of 
administration  Intravenous injectable given slowly over appro ximatel y one (1) minute  
Reference therapy  Gadolinium  
Statistical Methodology  Student’s t -test to assess for significant difference between MEMRI and DEMRI; 
Pearson Correl ation to assess for relationship between MEMRI and signal and 
cardiac function/clinical outcome  
 

1 Introduction  
 
This document is a protocol for a human clinical research study. This study is to be conducted according to US and 
international standards of G ood Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 and International Conference on Harmonization 
guidelines), applicable government regulations and institutional research policies and procedures.  
1.1 Background  
 This is a first -in-human clinical translation of manga nese -enhanced MRI (MEMRI ) to assess the peri -infarct injury in 
patients with  patients wiith ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy with an EF less than or equal to 50 or  
patients with paroxysmal or persistent  atrial fibrillation   
 and those who received  stem ce ll therapy for these indications . The PI recently obtained an approval for an 
Investigational New Drug (IND # ) to conduct a  clinical trial of MEMRI contrast agent                                                                                                            
(EVP1001 -1, Eagle Vision, Downingtown, PA ). Funding of this proposal will enable a clinical trial of  120 patients with 
ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy with an EF less than or equal to 50 or  
patients with paroxysmal or persistent  atrial fibrillation  to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sequential acquisition of 
MEMRI and delayed -enhanced MRI (DEMRI ) for precise tissue characterization of the peri -infarct region (PIR). This 
novel technique designed to integrate the biology of the v iable cardiomyocytes with the anatomy of the scar will predict 
future cardiovascular events (CVE), in  this highly morbid patient population. ICM and NICM are  the primary etiology of 
advanced heart failure (HF) while ACM  is a frequent sequel a of HF. Today,  HF is  the leading diagnosis of hospital 
admission in the US. Our studies have confirmed a direct association between the presence of PIR and the occurrence 
of atrial  and ventricular  arrhythmia and remodeling, resulting in high morbidity and mortality in a dvanced HF. PIR has 
been recognized as an important substrate to trigger atrial and ventricular arrhythmias  and stem cells may provide an 
alternative therapy for PIR .  Studies employing DEMRI has identified atrial scar as the potential cause of atrial 
arrhythmia.   This proposal contains novel hypotheses well -grounded on the following 2 innovations: (1) MEMRI  for 
management of HF . An alternative approach is to employ manganese (Mn2+ ), which targets the viable myocardium. 
Mn2+ is specific to the L -type calci um channels and complements the non - viable scar delineated by DEMRI. The dual  
MEMRI -DEMRI approach will, therefore, identify the viable and, potentially, salvageable cardiomyocytes outside the 
core infarct zone but inside the PIR. Our recently published s tudy demonstrated that an overlap of DEMRI and MEMRI 
signal denoted a significant number of live cardiomyocytes (MEMRI -positive ) within the non -viable (DEMRI - positive ) 
region. This innovation will profoundly impact the  clinical management of the advanced HF patients  and AA patients 
including atrial fibrillation . EVP1001 -1 allows highly effective intracellular targeting of viable cardiomyocytes with high 
level of safety and unique magnetic properties. (2) Assessment of therapeutic response using MEMRI. EVP1 001-1 is 
rapidly transported , intra-cellularly , to mitochondria rich tissue such as heart, liver, and kidney, demonstrating significant 
enhancement indicative of cell metabolism and viability.  High dose clinical safety studies of SeeMoreTM with safety 
index of 45 -90 correspond more favorably than the widely used clinical imaging agents (10-20 for iodinated X -ray 
products and 20 -60 for gadolinium ). This specific, non -perfusion dependent distribution due to active intracellular uptake 
is one of the key attri butes that offers real-time assessment of therapeutic response,  using  cardiac cellular imaging. A 
clinical safety trial in 6 patients have demonstrated negligible uptake in the intra -infarct region (IIR), reduced uptake in 
the PIR, and significantly higher  uptake in the normal tissue to generate positive signal. In this trial, the mean  LVEF was 
32±?4%. The DEMRI vs. MEMRI (scar/myocardial volume ) demonstrated significantly higher measurement of the scar 
by DEMRI in all patients (39±11%* vs. 16 ±3%, *p<0.01 ) These data indicate 2  important findings: 1 ) significant over -
estimation of the scar by DEMRI and 2 ) quantitative difference of the scar volume between MEMRI and DEMRI 
delineates the PIR. This precise characterization allows  accurate assessment of the effi cacy of novel therapeutic agents 
in restoring the PIR at both cellular and tissue levels. EVP1001 -1 is a new manganese (Mn)-based intravenous imaging 
agent being developed to enhance magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). While Mn has long been known to have 
desirable magnetic and kinetic properties for MRI, use in humans was not initially possible due to cardiovascular 
depression and electrocardiogram  (ECG ) changes, including prolongation of PR and QTc intervals, associated with 
intravenous administration. Chel ation of Mn, as had been done with gadolinium for use with MRI, provided relevant 
safety, but sacrificed desirable magnetic and kinetic properties.   EVP1001 -1 provides Mn in a form that maintains the 
desired magnetic and kinetic properties while overcoming  the cardiovascular toxicity of Mn. EVP1001 is taken up into 
heart cells (primarily via addition of calcium to avoid cardiotoxic effects; please refer to patent listed below ). The 
potential to distinguish healthy heart tissue from unhealthy heart tissue ba sed on a specific sustained pattern of 
enhancement provides a basis for  evaluating the performance of EVP1001 -1 in heart patients. MRI offers benefits over 
other imaging technologies. Relative to radioactive nuclear imaging procedures, MRI is 3 - dimensiona l, provides good 
soft tissue discrimination, and is of high spatial and temporal resolution. These features have been reported to identify 
smaller defects (e.g., subendocardial infarcts ) and match angiographic results more closely than other modalities suc h 
as SPECT. It may be possible to enhance the utility of MRI for heart disease further through the use of an imaging 
agent that is specifically taken up into heart cells.   EVP1001 -1 is the only cardiac -specific agent being developed for this 
purpose. Unlik e nuclear perfusion agents, EVP1001 -1 is not radioactive and does not require special handling, 
shielding, transport or storage. In addition, the specific pattern of enhancement achieved in the heart muscle persists 

[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 3 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  over time, offering potential benefits o ver the nonspecific extracellular agents currently available for MRI or X -ray/CT 
procedures. This feature allows full use of the high resolution of MRI, since there is not a trade -off of high spatial 
resolution for temporal (first-pass ) resolution. It is a nticipated that the features offered  by EVP1001 -1 along with the high 
resolution, three -dimensional attributes of MRI will result in higher accuracy than is available with other current 
modalities in practice, including stress echocardiograms, cardiac MRI using gadolinium contrast and nuclear studies 
such as SPECT and PET. This will be evaluated in this study and serve as the basis for pivotal registration studies.  All 
components of EVP1001 -1 are USP and are approved for use as drugs in man, orally and/or intravenously. A summary 
of the Phase I safety and PK (pharmacokinetics ) study are provided below.  The Phase I study evaluated the safety and 
tolerance of EVP1001 -1 in humans, with special emphasis on cardiovascular safety, and assessed its PK profile.  
Overall, EVP1001 -1 was found to be safe at all doses. There were no serious adverse events (SAE) or any events 
requiring medical treatment. Of special importance, no signs of cardiac depression were reported. In addition, there was 
no observation of prolong ation of the QTc or PR intervals or other ECG -changes that had previously been reported in 
animals for Mn. There were no changes in hematology, serum biochemistry (including liver function tests ), coagulation 
parameters nor in temperature, respiratory rate  or blood oxygen levels. Transient increases in HR and BP were seen. 
These, for the most part, reflected transient changes within the  normal reference range. There was no obvious dose -
relationship for these responses, although their duration and magnitude were greater for the 5 -minute than for the 1 - 
minute dose administrations.   Other AEs were reported, almost all which were regarded as of mild or moderate 
intensity. Almost all events occurred during or immediately after dosing and resolved within minutes.   Over 83 % of the 
AEs occurred during dosing and over 93 % occurred within one minute of  dosing. Nearly one -third of all events resolved 
within one minute from dosing, over 80 % within 5 minutes, and 94 % resolved within 1 hour. The most frequent types of 
AEs were injection -associated discomforts (warmth, flushing, cold, pressure,  injection site changes, increased HR/BP ), 
gastrointestinal disturbances (discomforts, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea ), lacrimation and headache.   Although 
gastrointestinal disturbances, such as nausea and occasional vomiting, resolved rapidly without treatment, these 
bothersome events may be avoidable through the use of a standard anti -emetic. This proved to be beneficial in humans 
and also in high -dose animal studies.   The PK profile ref lected that known for Mn in humans (based on reported 
radiotracer Mn studies ), with a primary blood half -life under 1 minute, and less than 1 % of the dose remained in the 
blood by 30 minutes after dosing.  The performance of EVP1001 -1 was as expected based on information that was in 
the Investigators' Brochure.  Lastly, please refer to US Patent #5,980,863 regarding further details of EVP1001 -1 
contrast ingredients.  
1.2 Investigational Agent  
 
Using aseptic technique, transfer via syringe 10 mL of 10% Calcium Glu conate, USP and 30 mL of Sterile Water for Injection 
to a vial containing EVP 103.  Shake gently to dissolve the powder.  This prepares 40 mL of Drug.  Drug should be used 
promptly (within 1 to 2 hours) following preparation.  The calculated osmolality of Drug is 0.27 (nearly isomolar), and the pH 
is slightly acidic to neutral (5.5 to 7.0).  
 
The proper dose should be specified in the protocol on a “per kilogram body weight” basis and must be given slowly over 
approximately one (1) minute intravenously.  Thi s same administration rate applies to flushing residual drug in connecting 
tubing/injection port.  
 
Dilutents and drug project should be inspected to assure that a clear solution is present.  Should any precipitate or 
undissolved material remain in the vial , the vial should be gently warmed and shaken gently to dissolve any visible material 
prior to either dilution or administration . 
 
 
 
1.3 Preclinical Data  
A reliable porcine ischemia reperfusion (IR) injury model has been developed in our lab based on 46 swine with myocardial 
injury created by balloon occlusion of the LAD. Subsequent validation of the peri -infarct region (PIR) and intra -infarct regions 
(IIR) was performed using a novel in situ  double -staining method with 1% Evans blue dye (EB) and 1% 2,3,5 -
triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC)  solution. While DEMRI is the gold -standard in identifying the non -viable myocardium, it 
does not allow direct  measurement of myocardial viability. In fact, DEMRI is known to overestimate the area of non -viable 
scar due to the  non-specific gadolinium distribution and the kinetics of T1 signal in vivo . MEMRI signal, on the other hand, 
is generated from the specific Mn2+ uptake by the viable, active cardiomyocytes. This recognition led to the development of 
our novel dual MEMRI -DEMRI contrast technique designed to enable rapid assessment of both the biology of viable 
myocardium and the anatomy of the nonviable scar, optimizing the evaluation of the heterogeneous PIR. In a porcine IR 
model, the injured but viable cardiomyocytes in the PIR was identified  in vivo . While MEMRI and DEMRI infarct volumes 
correlated with the ex-vivo TTC stain infarct volume, MEMRI infarct (defect) volume percentage was significantly lower than 
DEMRI. The majority of the discrepancy was found in the PIR po sitive for both MEMRI signal (viable) and DEMRI signal 
(non-viable). These regions displayed lower SNR by MEMRI than remote zones, and lower SNR by DEMRI than core infarct 
zones, indicating heterogeneity and significant population of viable cardiomyocytes with intact Ca2+-channel function 
(MEMRI positive) surrounded by large amounts of surrounding necrotic tissue (DEMRI positive). This tissue heterogeneity 
was validated by both in situ  double stain (EB/TTC) and tissue electron microscopy (TEM), which showed  EB-negative/TTC -
red area of PIR in the transmural DEMRI region. In addition, TEM demonstrated preserved cellular ultrastructure in the PIR 
and the non -viable ultrastructure in the intra -infarct region (IIR). TEM exhibited significantly different scores am ong the cells 
in the remote region, IIR, and PIR (inter -observer agreement 0.79, p<0.05). S ignificant difference in the structural integrity 
of PIR generated the following score: remote (4.7±0.3), intra -infarct (1.2±0.2), and PIR (3.1±0.4*, *p<0.05).   
 
In both sub -acute and chronic porcine ischemia -reperfusion injury (IR) models, MEMRI demonstrated a consistent 
anteroseptal infarct pattern from the mid -LAD IR injury ).  MEMRI of the hAMSC group revealed discrete foci of high contrast -
to-noise ratio (CNR) within infarct and peri -infarct zones, which were absent in control group. These hyperintense foci 
increased in CNR over the 3 -week and 6 -week time course after cell delivery in comparison to the control group. To confirm 
the specificity of the positive MEMR I signal for hAMSC engraftment, the hAMSCs for one sub -acute and one chronic IR 
swine were modified with injection of ~20% herpes simplex virus -thymidine kinase (HSV -tk) PET reporter gene (PET -RG) 
transduced hAMSCs. Serial cardiac PET -CT scans (day 0, day 7, and day 21 or 38 after injection) were then performed 
using a specific 9 -[4-[F]fluoro -3-(hydroxymethyl) butyl] guanine (F -FHBG) radioisotope, which are phosphorylated and 
retained only by the viable cells expressing PET -RG. At each time point, apical PE T signal co -localized with the site of cell 
injection and MEMRI signal.  Quantitative assessment of PET activity from these regions indicated significantly higher 
radiotracer uptake compared to surrounding myocardium by approximately 25 -fold.  When plotted  according to the AHA 16 -
segment model, the integrated MEMRI and PET signal within each segment showed a significant linear correlation in both 
the sub -acute and chronic IR models. The increased MEMRI CNR tracked the survival of hAMSCs longitudinally, sugg esting 
that the hAMSCs engrafted in vivo  up to 6 weeks .  
 
1.4 Clinical Data to Date  
This is a clinical translation of manganese -enhanced MRI (MEMRI) to assess the peri -infarct injury in patients with severe 
ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM). The PI recently obtain ed an approval for an Investigational New Drug (IND # ) to 
conduct a clinical trial of MEMRI contrast agent (SeeMoreTM, Eagle Vision, Downingtown, PA). He has already completed 
initial pilot study of safety in 6 patients and found no adverse event. F unding of this proposal will enable a clinical trial of  60 
patients with severe ICM , NICM  and atrial arrhythmia (AA) and those undergoing stem cell therapy to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of sequential acquisition of MEMRI and delayed -enhanced MRI (DE MRI) for precise tracking of stem cell 
engraftment and tissue characterization of the peri -infarct region (PIR). This novel technique designed to integrate the 
biology of the stem cells delivered into the myocardium and their regional effects on myocardia viability will elucidate the 
mechanism underlying clinical outcome in this highly morbid patient population. ICM is the primary etiology of advanced 
heart failure (HF), the leading diagnosis of hospital admission in the US. Our studies have confirmed a dir ect association 
between the presence of PIR and the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmia and LV remodeling, resulting in high morbidity 
and mortality in advanced HF. PIR has been recognized as an important substrate to trigger ventricular arrhythmias and 
clinical trials have demonstrated that the revascularization of the PIR result in lower incidence of CVE. In order to reliably  
evaluate the role of the PIR, we conducted 3 published clinical studies employing DEMRI, the current gold standard, to 
assess myoc ardial injury. These studies confirmed that the presence of ischemia, scar, and/or tissue heterogeneity in the 
PIR predicted future CVE. Although transmurality of DEMRI scar is used to predict functional recovery and improved survival 
after revascularizati on, DEMRI does not evaluate direct myocardial viability due to its nonspecific distribution within the 
extracellular space. The majority of the discrepancy lies within the heterogeneous PIR, resulting in overestimation of the 
non-viable infarct. To date, t here is no established imaging strategy to identify the viable and, potentially, salvageable 
cardiomyocytes within the PIR. In order to address these issues, this proposal contains novel hypotheses well -grounded on 
the following 2 innovations:  1) MEMRI for  management of HF. An alternative approach is to employ manganese (Mn2+), which targets 
the viable myocardium. Mn2+ is specific to the L -type calcium channels and complements the non - viable scar delineated by DEMRI. The 
dual MEMRI -DEMRI approach will, the refore, identify the viable and, potentially, salvageable cardiomyocytes outside the core infarct 
zone but inside the PIR. Our recently published study demonstrated that an overlap of DEMRI and MEMRI signal denoted a signif icant 
number of live cardiomyocyt es (MEMRI -positive) within the non -viable (DEMRI - positive) region. This innovation will profoundly impact 
the clinical management of the advanced HF patients and AA patients including atrial fibrillation. EVP1001 -1 allows highly effective 
intracellular ta rgeting of viable cardiomyocytes with high level of safety and unique magnetic properties.  2) Assessment of therapeutic 

[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 5 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  response using MEMRI. EVP1001 -1 is rapidly transported, intra -cellularly, to mitochondria rich tissue such as heart, liver, and kidney, 
demonstrating significant enhancement indicative of cell metabolism and viability.  High dose clinical safety studies of SeeM oreTM with 
safety index of 45 -90 correspond more favorably than the widely used clinical imaging agents (10 -20 for iodinated X -ray products and 20 -
60 for gadolinium). This specific, non -perfusion dependent distribution due to active intracellular uptake is one of the key attributes that 
offers real -time assessment of therapeutic response, using cardiac cellular imaging. A clinical saf ety trial in 6 patients have demonstrated 
negligible uptake in the intra -infarct region (IIR), reduced uptake in the PIR, and significantly higher uptake in the normal tissue to generate 
positive signal. In this trial, the mean LVEF was 32±?4 %. The DEMRI v s. MEMRI (scar/myocardial volume) demonstrated significantly 
higher measurement of the scar by DEMRI in all patients (39±11 %* vs. 16±3 %, *p<0.01) . 
 
EVP is novel manganese (Mn) -based intravenous imaging agent being developed to enhance magnetic resonance im aging 
(MRI). While Mn has long been known to have desirable magnetic and kinetic properties for MRI, use in humans was not 
initially possible due to cardiovascular depression and electrocardiogram (ECG) changes, including prolongation of PR and 
QTc interva ls, associated with intravenous administration. Chelation of Mn, as had been done with gadolinium for use with 
MRI, provided relevant safety, but sacrificed desirable magnetic and kinetic properties. EVP provides Mn in a form that 
maintains the desired mag netic and kinetic properties while overcoming the cardiovascular toxicity of Mn. EVP is taken up 
into heart cells (primarily via addition of calcium to avoid cardiotoxic effects; please refer to patent listed below). The p otential 
to distinguish healthy he art tissue from unhealthy heart tissue based on a specific sustained pattern of enhancement 
provides a basis for evaluating the performance of EVP in heart patients. MRI offers benefits over other imaging 
technologies. Relative to radioactive nuclear imagi ng procedures, MRI is 3 -dimensional, provides good soft tissue 
discrimination, and is of high spatial and temporal resolution. These features have been reported to identify smaller defects  
(e.g., sub -endocardial infarcts) and match angiographic results mor e closely than other modalities such as SPECT . It may 
be possible to enhance the utility of MRI for heart disease further through the use of an imaging agent that is specifically 
taken up into heart cells. EVP is the only cardiac -specific agent being devel oped for this purpose. Unlike nuclear perfusion 
agents, EVP is not radioactive and does not require special handling, shielding, transport or storage. In addition, the speci fic 
pattern of enhancement achieved in the heart muscle persists over time, offerin g potential benefits over the nonspecific 
extracellular agents currently available for MRI or X -ray/CT procedures. This feature allows full use of the high resolution of 
MRI since there is no trade -off of high spatial resolution for temporal (first -pass) r esolution. It is anticipated that the features 
offered by EVP along with the high resolution, three dimensional attributes of MRI will result in higher accuracy than is 
available with other current modalities in practice, including stress echocardiograms, cardiac MRI using gadolinium contrast 
and nuclear studies such as SPECT and PET. This will be evaluated in this study and serve as the basis for pivotal studies  
for routine clinical application .  
 
All components of EVP are USP and are approved for use as d rugs in man, orally and/or intravenously. A summary of the 
Phase I safety and PK (pharmacokinetics) study are provided below.  
  
The Phase I study evaluated the safety and tolerance of EVP in humans, with special emphasis on cardiovascular safety, 
and asses sed its PK profile. Overall, EVP was found to be safe at all doses. There were no serious adverse events (SAE) 
or any events requiring medical treatment. Of special importance, no signs of cardiac depression were reported. In addition, 
there was no observa tion of prolongation of the QTc or PR intervals or other ECG -changes that had previously been reported 
in animals for Mn. There were no changes in hematology, serum biochemistry (including liver function tests), coagulation 
parameters nor in temperature, r espiratory rate or blood oxygen levels.    
 
Transient increases in HR and BP were seen. These, for the most part, reflected transient changes within the normal 
reference range. There was no obvious dose -relationship for these responses, although their durat ion and magnitude were 
greater for the 5 -minute than for the 1 -minute dose administrations.  
   
Other AEs were reported, almost all which were regarded as of mild or moderate intensity. Almost all events occurred during 
or immediately after dosing and reso lved within minutes. Over 83% of the AEs occurred during dosing and over 93% 
occurred within one minute of dosing. Nearly one -third of all events resolved within one minute from dosing, over 80% within 
5 minutes, and 94% resolved within ½ hour. The most fr equent types of AEs were injection -associated discomforts (warmth, 
flushing, cold, pressure, injection site changes), increased HR/BP, gastrointestinal disturbances (discomforts, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea), lacrimation and headache. Although gastrointesti nal disturbances, such as nausea and occasional 
vomiting, resolved rapidly without treatment, these bothersome events may be avoidable through the use of a standard anti -
emetic. This proved to be beneficial in humans and also in high -dose animal studies.  
 
The PK profile reflected what was  known for Mn in humans (based on reported radiotracer Mn studies), with a primary blood 
half-life under 1 minute, and less than 1% of the dose remained in the blood by 30 minutes after dosing. The performance 
of EVP was a s expected based on information that was in the Investigators' Brochure. Lastly, please refer to US Patent 
#5,980,863 regarding further details of EVP contrast ingredients.  
1.5 Dose Rationale and Risk/Benefits  
The safety and tolerance of EVP1001 -1 has been ev aluated in healthy volunteers, in various preclinical 
models and in patients with a known myocardial infarction. The doses to be tested in this study  
demonstrated high safety factors in animal studies and were well  tolerated in human studies to date. There  
have been no life -threatening or other  unexpected AEs. There have been no clinically meaningful changes 
in hematology, clinical chemistry or coagulation profile, including liver function tests. Regarding the ECG, 
there were no consistent drug -related chan ges in QT or ST segment or prolongation of the PR interval. 
Importantly, no cardiac depression has been observed. Results in heart patients to date were  similar to 
those in normal volunteers with no meaningful changes in blood or urine parameters and AEs t hat occur at 
the time of dosing and resolve in less than 5 minutes whose nature is that of discomforts, transient vital sign 
changes.  
2 Study Objectives  
This is a first -in-human clinical trial of combined manganese -enhanced MRI (MEMRI ) and delayed -
enhanced MR I(DEMRI ) to determine reliable detection and clinical significance of peri -infarct  injury  in both 
the ventricles and atria. An IND approval was obtained to utilize EVP1001 -1 to assess peri -infarct injury in 
patients with ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy atrial fibrillation  and those who undergo stem cell therapy 
for these indications . In preparation for a Phase I/II clinical trial, an initial safety study of 6 patients has 
been completed and no adverse event s were observed. This proposal will enable a cl inical trial of 50 
patients to evaluate the safety and efficacy of MEMRI -DEMRI to characterize peri -infarct injury.  
 
Primary Objective  
Specific Aim 1 evaluates the efficacy of MEMRI -DEMRI to characterize the peri -infarct injury  in the  
ventricles and atria. 
 
Secondary Objective  
Specific Aim 2 is a clinical follow -up to determine the occu rrence of cardiovascular events ..  To evaluate the 
safety and efficacy of MEMRI -DEMRI to characterize peri -infarct injury , in the ventricles and atria , through an 
innovative approach, integrating direct biological evaluation of myocardial viability and anatomical  delineation 
of scar.  
 
3 Study Design  
3.1 General Design  
Prior to entry into this study, all subjects will sign an Informed Consent and will  then  
undergo a  physical assess ment  including medical history, details regarding their cardiac 
history, prescription and over -the-counter drug review, , vital signs, electrocardiogram 
(ECG ), evaluation of the major organ systems, hematology, serum chemistries . In addition, 
female subjec ts will undergo a serum pregnancy test.  
 
Starting 30 minutes before the cardiac MRI scan (CMR ), the subjects will take  16 mg s of 
ondansetron by mouth. CMR imaging will subsequently take place and then EVP1001 -1 will 
then be administered approximately 15 m inutes into the scan for contrast enhanced images. 
EVP1001 -1 will be administered intravenously over approximately one minute. The subjects 
will each receive 0.28 mL/kg of EVP 1001 -1.  All subjects will be monitored closely from before 
ondansetron administ ration until their discharge from the imaging  center. Following MEMRI, 
delayed -enhanced MRI (DEMRI )is performed using 0.2mmol/kg  gandolinium . We will compare 
the two different contrast enhanced images (EVP1001 -1 vs Gadolinium ) in determining the 
viable, per i-infarct, and intra -infarct myocardial tissue.  
 
To ensure a high -quality image, i f the participant heart rate is greater than 65 bpm and regular 
rhythm, metoprolol  will be given.  If the HR is 65 and irregular, met opolol will be given if there 
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 7 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  are no cont raindications (see table 1 below)  
 
Beta Blocker Administration Protocol  
 
PROTOCOL  PARAMETER(s)  ACTION(s)  
Assess whether -blockers are necessary  If pulse is < 65 bpm and regular or if pulse 
is < 60  
bpm and irregular  
 
If pulse is > 65 bpm or if pulse is > 60 bpm 
and 
irregular  
 A -blocker is not given  
 
 
 
Screen for contraindications for giving -
blocker  
Screen for contraind ications for -
blockers  If any of the following conditions exist:  
Heart rate, < 60 bpm  
Systolic blood pressure, < 100 mm Hg  
Decompensated cardiac failure  
Allergy to -blocker  
Asthma or COPD on 2-agonist inhaler  
Active bronchospasm  
Second - or third -degree atrioventricular 
block  
 
If the above conditions are absent  A -blocker is not given  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oral metoprolol is given  
Administer metoprolol  If giving oral metoprolol,  One 50 -mg dose of metoprolol is given 
orally and patient is  
monitored over 1 hr, during whi ch heart 
rate is checked every  
15 min. If heart rate remains elevated, 
perform practice  
breath -hold If heart rate still remains 
elevated, give IV  
metoprolol  
 If giving IV metoprolol  Two 2.5 -mg doses of metoprolol are given 
5 min apart; then, two  
doses of 5 mg each are given 5 min apart. 
Total maximum dose,  
15 mg. Blood pressure and heart rate are 
checked before each  
IV dose  
Administer postprocedure care  If only one dose of oral metoprolol is given  No monitoring necessary, patient can 
leave department afte r 
study 
 If IV metoprolol is given  The patient is observed for 30 min  
 If heart rate drops to < 45 bpm  Consideration is given to administering 
atropine  
 If bronchospasm occurs  A -agonist inhaler is given  
Note —bpm = beats per minute, COPD = chronic obs tructive pulmonary disease.  
 
 
Parameters to be Measured:  
 
A standard physical assessment  will be performed on the day of imaging (approximately 1 - 
hour post dosing ). Body temperature and respiration rate will be measured within 24 hours 
prior to dosing an d at approximately 1 - and 2 -hours post dose. A standard 12 -lead EKG will be 
performed both before and after the MR study to assure no significant EKG changes have 
occurred. Patient's hemodynamics will also be serially monitored. A baseline BP and HR will 
be performed before beginning the study. After EVP1001 -1 contrast infusion, BP and HR will 
be measured every 2 minutes until 10 minutes post EVP1001 -1 contrast infusion after which 
point a BP and HR will be measured every 5 minutes until the conclusion of t he MEMRI and 
every 10 minutes until the conclusion of DEMRI study. There will be a 5 -minute post 
administration observation interval outside the scanner. The  patient will also have continuous 
EKG monitoring during this time. After the study, the patient wi ll have another standard 12 -lead 
EKG performed to compare with the pre -MRI 12 -lead EKG. The patient's symptoms will be 
reassessed 1 hour after infusion of the EVP1001 -1 contrast. A differential and serum chemistry 
profile  (with liver function test ) will be  performed within a month prior to administration of 
EVP1001 -1 and within 24 hours post EVP1001 -1.  Adverse events (AEs) and discomforts will 
be recorded until discharge from the imaging center. At the 24 hour follow -up, the subject will 
be evaluated by te lephone to determine if any AEs occurred from the time the subject left the 
imaging center. The subjects will have a contact number to report any AEs or to ask questions. 
Any clinically relevant changes from baseline in vital signs, ECG rhythm, clinical ch emistries or 
physical condition and all AEs will be followed  until resolution or until the outcome is known. 
Injection -associated discomforts will be recorded during administration and until imaging is 
completed. Primary efficacy will be based on determini ng whether the heart is normal or 
abnormal and if abnormal whether there is an infarction, ischemia or both. This provides the 
basis for calculating sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and predictive values. In addition, the 
location, size, conspicuity and associated confidence for any disease will be recorded.  
 
The study will be stopped for any significant adverse cardiovascular event including 
cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, ventricular arrhythmia, ICD firing, congestive heart 
failure, hospita lization, or syncope.  All serious adverse events that require medical 
intervention and/or withdrawal of a patient will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours  if it 
meets the unanticipated problem reporting criteria.  
 
3.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
The key endpoin ts of this study include the assessment of safety, tolerance and efficacy of EVP1001 -1. 
Safety and tolerance will be evaluated based on the nature and extent of AEs and injection -associated 
discomforts and changes in laboratory parameters, vital signs and ECG after administration of EVP1001 -
1.  Effects, if any,  of EVP1001 -1 on QT/QTc intervals will be determined by comparing the intervals before 
and after EVP1001 -1 across the full HR range for each patient, including use of individual correction of 
QT by RR . All subjects who receive EVP1001 -1 will be included in the analyses. Pre - and post -dose results 
will be compared for vital signs, clinical laboratory parameters, ECG parameters and hemodynamic 
parameters  to identify individual changes from baseline and p otential systematic shifts. The presence or 
absence of infarcts and/or ischemic areas relative to the current clinical standard  (by echo and gadolinium -
based  cardiac MRI ) along with comparison to patient outcomes will  determine efficacy.  
3.3 Secondary Study E ndpoints  
In addition, location, size, conspicuity, confidence, wall motion deficits and related  diagnostic information will be assessed.  
. 
4 Subject Selection and Withdrawal  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
All subjects to be entered must:  
 
 be at least 18 years of age  and less than 80 years  
 if female, be non -pregnant as evidenced by a serum pregnancy test and using a medically -approved method of birth 
control, or post -menopausal or surgically sterile  
 provide written informed consent after having received oral and written i nformation about the study  
 patients with ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy with an EF less than or equal to 50 or  
patients with paroxysmal or persistent  atrial fibrillation   
 Have completed the MRI checklist and do not have exclusions to having an MRI  
  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 have a positive pregnancy test (females ) 
 received an investigational drug or device within 30 days prior to administration of EVP1001 -1 
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 9 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor   have known hypersensitivity to ondansetron or other selective serotonin 5HT3 receptor blockers  
 are tak ing a digitalis preparation or calcium channel blocker  within 30 days to MRI  
 Contraindication to receiving metoprolol  
 have a history of torsades or prolonged QT/QTc interval  (QTc > 470 msecs)  
 have NYHA Grade IV heart failure  or EF less than 25  
 have abnorma l liver function tests or a history of liver disease  (2 times  upper limits of normal ) 
 have stage 11  hypertension (Systolic Blood Pressure > 1 40 or Diastolic BP > 90 consistently at baseline ) 
 have abnormal baseline potassium or calcium (outside normal refer ence ranges)  
  hemoglobin less than 10 g/dl  
 
 Have a history of ventricular arrhythmia per stress test or monitoring  
 No recent cardiac intervention within 90 days (CABG, Valve, PTCA)  
 No recent CHF, MI or Angina within 60 days  
 Conduction disease (QRSd >120 ms ec or Sick Sinus Syndrome. ) 
 No cardiac implantable device  
 Weight not to exceed 300 kgs and/or   chest circumference .36cms  
  
 
4.3 Subject Recruitment and Screening  
This is an open -label, baseline -controlled study to be conducted. Adult male or non -pregnant fema le 
patients who have been referred for evaluation of cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrillation and patients who 
have received stem cell therapy related to  these indications  will be recruited. An initial cohort study of 6 
patients to conduct safety evaluation w as conducted before proceeding with  120 additional patients. In the 
initial cohort, a patient was dosed based on the Phase 1 and 2 clinical trial data evaluation completed by 
Eagle Vision Pharmaceutical, Inc. Subjects were excluded if they had received an  investigational device 
within 30 days prior to administration of EVP1001 -1; had a history of drug abuse or alcoholism; were taking 
a digitalis preparation; had a history of torsades; had NYHA Grade IV heart failure; had abnormal liver 
function tests or a history of liver disease; had uncontrolled hypertension; had abnormal calcium, potassium 
or hemoglobin values at baseline; if they develop a cardiac arrhythmia prior to or during either of the 
exercise  tests -- EVP1001 -1 was not administered. The same param eters will apply to the new group of 
subjects.  
 
5 Study Drug  
5.1 Description  
The acti ve ingredient is EVP 1 03 and is provided as a sterile, non-pyrogenic powde r in 50 ml vials. Please see 5.4 for  
preparation instructions  
5.2 Treatment Regimen  
The proper dose should  be specified in the protocol on a "per kilogram body weight" (0.28 ml/kg) basis and must be given 
slowly over approximated one (1) minute intravenously. This same administration rate applies to flushing residual drug in 
connecting  tubing/injection port. 
5.3 Method for Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
Not Applicable  
5.4 Preparation and Administration of Study Drug  
The active ingredient is EVP 103 and is provided as a sterile , non-pyrogenic powder in 50 m l vials. Prior to  
administration , Drug will be prepared as follows : Using aseptic technique , transfer via syringe 10 ml of 10 % Calcium 
Gluconate , USP and 30 m l of Sterile Water for  Injection to a vial containing EVP 103. Shake gently to dissolve the 
powder . This prepares 40 ml of Drug . Drug should  be used promp tly (within 1 to 2 hours) following preparation . The 
calculated osmolalit y of Drug is 0.27 (nearly isomo lar) and the pH is slightly acidic to neutral (5.5 to 7.0).  
 
Dilutents and drug product should be inspected to assure that a clear solution is present.  Should any precipitate or 
undissolved material remain in the vial, the vial should be gently warmed an shaken gently to dissolve any visible material 
prior to either dilution or administration  
5.5 Packaging  
Drug will be supplied as a non -pyrogenic powder in 50 ml vials.  
• Shipped in boxes of 30 vials each  
• Labeling : 
EVP 103: Sterile Lot No: 11211114  
CAUTION ; FOR INVESTIGATIONAL USE ONLY  
Contents: 1161umol of EVP 103  
Store at room temperature  
Stanford University Medical Center  
269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94 305 
Expiration: 0612019 Vial # 's: 0001 - 0030 
5.6 Blinding of Study Drug  
Not Applicable  
5.7 Receiving, Storage, Dispensing and Return  
5.7.1  Receipt of Drug Supplies  
Drug to be delivered via Federal Express  
 
Upon receipt of the of the study treatment supplies, an invento ry must be performed and a drug receipt log filled out and 
signed by the person accepting the shipment.  It is important that the designated study staff counts and verifies that the 
shipment contains all the items noted in the shipment inventory.  Any dama ged or unusable study drug in a given shipment 
(active drug or comparator) will be documented in the study files.  The investigator must notify study sponsor of any damaged  
or unusable study treatments that were supplied to the investigator’s site.  
5.7.2  Storage  
The investigational drug will be in our locked cabinet and only the necessary vials will be withdrawn at the time of the 
study.  They will be mixed by the administering physician in a sterile fashion.  
 
5.7.3  Dispensing of Study Drug  
Regular study drug reconcili ation will be performed to document drug assigned , drug consumed , and drug remaining . 
This reconci liation will be logged on the drug reconciliation form, and signe d and dated by the study team . 
5.7.4  Return or Destruction of Study Drug  
At the completion of the s tudy, there will be a final reconciliation of drug shipped, drug consumed, and drug remaining.  This 
reconciliation will be logged on the drug reconciliation form, signed and dated.  Any discrepancies noted will be investigate d, 
resolved, and documented.  
6 Study Procedures  
 
Please refer to #3 above  
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 11 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  7 Statistical Plan  
7.1 Sample Size Determination  
The total number of 0 patients will power this study adequately , however as we have extended the protocol to include the 
atrial fibrillation participants (and extra 60 pts ) the difficulty in imaging the atria, coupled with the thin atrial walls, means that 
we expect a difference in DEMRI volume  of 40 (+ or – 20) in participants with early disease and 60 (+ or – 20) in participants 
with advanced disease.  Accordingly, 60 pa rticipants will be needed for the additional cohort.  Our published pre -clinical 
study in 13 swine demonstrated the infarct volume percentage difference of 9% between MEMRI and DEMRI (p<0.001)17. 
This difference will enable significant delineation of the ch anges in the peri -infarct viability between the cell therapy and 
control arms. The preliminary porcine data presented above demonstrated a mean of 100% increase in the CNR of the peri -
infarct region and a mean of 50% decrease in the scar volume, suggesting  robust MEMRI signal detection of stem cell 
engraftment and increased peri -infarct viability17,98,99. Furthermore, the clinical trial in 6 ICM patients demonstrated 
significant difference in the infarct volume between MEMRI defect and DEMRI enhancement. Th is difference between 
MEMRI and DEMRI represents PIR assuring reliable detection of the PIR. Employing these data, in order to detect a mean 
difference of 20% in MEMRI signal of stem cell engraftment and MEMRI -DEMRI signal of peri -infarct viability with a standard 
deviation of 5%, the t -test sample size calculation in this study has 90% power at the alpha 0.05 significance level, assuming 
an equal variance between the two distributions.  
7.2 Statistical Methods  
Student’s t -test to compare MEMRI and DEMRI measure ment of the infarct and viable myocardium. Pearson’s correlation 
to generate any association between stem cell engraftment/peri -infarct viability and functional restoration and/or clinical 
outcome.  
 
7.3 Subject Population(s) for Analysis  
We expect  to enroll 60 patients with various cardiomyopathies including NICM, ICM, and ACM ( dilated cardiomyopathy , 
ischemic cardiomyopathy , and atrial cardiomyopathy) . Our goal is to demonstrate improved sensitivity and specificity 
of identifying viable myocardium and PIR in the ventricles and atria in various cardiac patients to help improve clinical 
management  
8 Safety and Adverse Events  
8.1 Definitions  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects or Others  
Any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following c riteria:  
 Unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency   (i.e. not described in study -related documents such as the IRB -
approved protocol or consent form, the investigators brochure, etc)  
 Related or possibly related to participation in the research  (i.e. po ssibly related means there is a reasonable 
possibility that the incident experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in the 
research)  
 Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm  (including physica l, psychological, 
economic, or social harm).  
 
Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity during the course 
of the study.  Inter -current illnesses or injuries should be regarded as ad verse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic 
procedures are considered to be adverse events if the abnormality:  
 results in study withdrawal  
 is associated with a serious adverse event  
 is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
 leads to additional treatm ent or to further diagnostic tests  
 is considered by the investigator to be of clinical significance  
 
Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE that is:  
 fatal 
 life-threatening  
 requires  or prolongs hospital stay  
 results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
 a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
 an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly of ma jor clinical significance. 
They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to prevent one of the other serious outcomes noted above.  
For example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did not result in in -patient hospitalization, or intensi ve treatment of 
bronchospasm in an emergency department would typically be considered serious.  
 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious should be regarded as non-serious adverse events .  
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
The stud y period during which adverse events must be reported is normally defined as the period from the initiation of any 
study procedures to the end of the study treatment follow -up.  For this study, the study treatment follow -up is defined as 30 
days following the last administration of study treatment.   
 
Pre-existing Condition  
A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting condition should be recorded as an 
adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition worsens during the study period.  
 
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study,  
any new clinically significant findings/abno rmalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be recorded and 
documented as an adverse event.   
 
Post -study Adverse Event  
All unresolved adverse events should be followed by the investigator until the events are resolved, the subject is l ost to 
follow -up, or the adverse event is otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled visit, the investigator should instruct each 
subject to report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably 
be related to participation in this study.  The investigator should notify the study sponsor of any death or adverse event 
occurring at any time after a subject has discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably be related to 
this study.  The sponsor should also be notified if the investigator should become aware of the development of cancer or of 
a congenital anomaly in a subsequently conceived offspring of a subject that has participated in this study.  
 
Abnormal Laboratory Values  
A clin ical laboratory abnormality should be documented as an adverse event if any one of the following  conditions is met:   
 The laboratory abnormality is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm the abnormality  
 The abnormality suggests a disease and/or o rgan toxicity  
 The abnormality is of a degree that requires active management; e.g. change of dose, discontinuation of the drug, 
more frequent follow -up assessments, further diagnostic investigation, etc.  
 
Hospitalization, Prolonged Hospitalization or Surge ry 
Any adverse event that results in hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization should be documented and reported as a 
serious adverse event unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition responsible for surgery shoul d 
be docum ented as an adverse event if the condition meets the criteria for and adverse event.   
 
Neither the condition, hospitalization, prolonged hospitalization, nor surgery are reported as an adverse event in the 
following circumstances:  
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 13 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor   Hospitalization or prolon ged hospitalization for diagnostic or elective surgical procedures for a preexisting condition.  
Surgery should not be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the purpose of the surgery was elective or 
diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful.  
 Hospi talization or prolonged hospitalization required to allow efficacy measurement for the study.  
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for therapy of the target disease of the study, unless it is a worsening or 
increase in frequency of hospital admissi ons as judged by the clinical investigator.  
8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
At each contact with the subject, the investigator must seek information on adverse events by specific questioning and, as 
appropriate, by examination.  Information on all adverse even ts should be recorded immediately in the source document, 
and also in the appropriate adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  All clearly related signs, symptoms, and 
abnormal diagnostic procedures results should recorded in the source documen t, though should be grouped under one 
diagnosis.  
 
All adverse events occurring during the study period must be recorded.  The clinical course of each event should be followed 
until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been determined that the study t reatment or participation is not the cause.  Serious 
adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up to determine the final outcome.  Any  
serious adverse event that occurs after the study period and is considered to  be possibly related to the study treatment or 
study participation should be recorded and reported immediately.  
 
As for intravenous injection of any investigational drug, competent personnel and emergency facilities must be available to 
address severe and possibly delayed reactions after administration of EVP1001 -1 or severe responses to the stress prior 
to EVP1001 -1 administration. Subjects will be observed for AEs starting with the pre -treatment (with ondansetron), during 
and for at least 1 hour after EVP 1001 -1 administration during which time emergency equipment will be readily available. 
AEs will be recorded until discharge from the imaging center. At the 24 -hour follow -up, the subject will be evaluated by 
telephone to determine if any AE occurred from t he time the subject left the imaging center. In addition, the subjects will 
have a contact number to report any AE or to ask questions. Any clinically relevant changes from baseline in vital signs, 
ECG rhythm, clinical chemistries or physical condition and  all AEs will be followed until resolution or until the outcome is 
known. AEs, if any, will be recorded on the CRF (case report form) along with the action(s) required, time of onset, duration , 
intensity, and outcome. A judgment will be made by the investi gator as to the causality of each event. If a subject has more 
than one incidence of a given AE, that AE with the greatest severity will be used for analyses. If a cluster of AEs are relat ed, 
a term describing the syndrome or overall adverse experience sho uld be captured.  
 
8.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems  
Investigators and the protocol sponsor must conform to the adverse event reporting timelines, formats and requirements of 
the various entities to which they are responsible, b ut at a minimum those events that must be reported are those that are:  
 related to study participation,  
 unexpected, and  
 serious or involve risks to subjects or others  
(see definitions, section 8.1).   
If the report is supplied as a narrative, the minimum necessary information to be provided at the time of the initial report 
includes:  
 Study identifier  
 Study Center  
 Subject number  
 A description of the event  
 Date of onset   Current status  
 Whether study treatment was discontinued  
 The reason why the event is class ified as serious  
 Investigator assessment of the association 
between the event and study treatment  
 
8.3.1  Investigator reporting: notifying the Stanford  IRB and Study Sponsor  
An initial cohort study of 6 patie nts was co nducted under protocol #24224 . The safety evaluations were conducted with  no 
adverse events before proceeding with the remaining  120 patients . In this initial cohort , a pat ient wil l be dosed  based on 
the Phase 1 and 2 clinical trial data eva luation completed by Eagle Vision Pharmaceut ical, Inc. Th e stopping  rule wi ll include 
any significant adverse cardiovascular event including cardiovascular death , myocardial infarctio n, ventricular arrhythmia , , 
congestive heart failure , hospitalizat ion, or syncope. All serio us adve rse events that require medica l intervention and/or 
withdrawal of a patient will be reported to the IRB within 24 hou rs. Any unexpected  fatal or life-threatening suspected 
adverse reactions w ill be reported to the FDA no later than 7 calen dar days after initial receipt of the informati on. Any 
serious, unexpected suspected adverse reactions , findings f rom other cl inical, anima l, or in-vitro studies that sugges t 
significant human risk , and a clinically importa nt increase in the rate of a serious suspected  adve rse reaction will be reported  
to the FDA and a ll investigators no later than 15 calendar days after determ ining that the information qualifies for rep orting 
[21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)]. An annual progress report wi ll be subm itted to the FDA as  required within 60 days of the anniversary 
of the date the IND went into effect.  
 
Copies of each report and documentation of IRB notification and receipt will be kept in the Clinical Investigator’s study fil e. 
 
Reporting Deaths :  more rapid reporting requirements  
Concerning deaths that occur during the  course of a research study, the following describes the more rapid reporting 
requirement of the Stanford  IRB for specific situations:  
 Report the event within 24 hours  when the death is unforeseen (unexpected) and indicates participants or others 
are at in creased risk of harm.  
 Report the event within 72 hours,  for all other deaths, regardless of whether the death is related to study participation.  
 
 
Other Reportable events:  
For clinical drug trials, the following events are also reportable to the Stanford  IRB: 
 Any adverse experience that, even without detailed analysis, represents a serious unexpected adverse event that is 
rare in the absence of drug exposure (such as agranulocytosis, hepatic necrosis, Stevens -Johnson syndrome).  
 Any adverse event that would cause the sponsor to modify the inv estigators brochure, protocol or  informed consent 
form, or would prompt other action by the IRB to assure protection of human subjects.  
 Information that indicates a change to the risks or potential benefits of the researc h, in terms of severity or frequency. 
For example:  
– An interim analysis indicates that participants have a lower rate of response to treatment than initially expected.  
– Safety monitoring indicates that a particular side effect is more severe, or more freque nt than initially expected.  
– A paper is published from another study that shows that an arm of your research study is of no therapeutic value.  
 Change in FDA safety labeling or withdrawal from marketing of a drug, device, or biologic used in a research proto col. 
 Breach of confidentiality  
 Change to the protocol taken without prior IRB review to eliminate apparent immediate hazard to a research 
participant.  
 Incarceration of a participant when the research was not previously approved under Subpart C and the inve stigator 
believes it is in the best interest of the subject to remain on the study.  
 Complaint of a participant when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or the complaint cannot be resolved by 
the research team.  
 Protocol violation (meaning an accidental  or unintentional deviation from the IRB approved protocol) that in the 
opinion of the investigator placed one or more participants at increased risk, or affects the rights or welfare of 
subjects.  
 
Reporting Process:  
Any study -related unanticipated problem  posing risk of harm to subjects or others, and any type of serious adverse event, 
must be reported to the study sponsor by telephone within 24 hours of the event.  To report such events, a Serious Adverse 
Event (SAE) form must be completed by the investig ator and faxed to the study sponsor within 24 hours.  The investigator 
will keep a copy of this SAE form on file at the study site.  Report serious adverse events by phone and facsimile to:  
 
Phillip C. Yang, MD  
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 15 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  Stanford University Medical Center  
Center for  Clinical Science Research (CCSR), 3115C  
650-498-8008  (phone)  
650-724-4034  (facsimile)  
 
Within the following 48 hours, the investigator must provide further information on the serious adverse event or the 
unanticipated problem in the form of a written narr ative.  This should include a copy of the completed Serious Adverse Event 
form, and any other diagnostic information that will assist the understanding of the event.  Significant new information on 
ongoing serious adverse events should be provided promptly  to the study sponsor  
 
8.3.2  Sponsor reporting: Notifying the FDA  
The study sponsor is required to report certain study events in an expedited fashion to the FDA.  These written notifications  
of adverse events are referred to as IND safety reports. The following  describes the safety reporting requirements by timeline 
for reporting and associated type of event:  
 
 Within 7 calendar days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug  
– unexpected,  
– fatal or life -threatening, and  
 
 Within 15 calendar  days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug,  
– unexpected, and  
– serious, but not fatal or life -threatening  
-or- 
– a previous adverse event that was not initially deemed reportable but is later found to fit the criteria for reporting  
(reporting within 15 calendar days from when event was deemed reportable).  
Any finding from tests in laboratory animals that:  
– suggest a significant risk for human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
 
Additional  reporting requirements  
Sponsors are also required to identify in IND safety reports all previous reports concerning similar adverse events and to 
analyze the significance of the current event in light of the previous reports.  
 
Reporting Process  
Adverse ev ents may be submitted on FDA Form 3500A or in a narrative format. If supplied as in a narrative format, the 
minimum information to be supplied is noted above at the beginning of section 8.3. The contact information for submitting 
IND safety reports is note d below:  
 
, M.S., MSDRA: Regulatory He alth Project Manager: Division of Medical Imaging Products Office of Drug  
Evaluation IV : Center for Drug Evaluation and Research : Food and Drug Administration  
10903 New Hampshire Avenue ,  : Silver Spring, MD 20993  
Phone :  ·Fax: : @fda .hhs.gov 
8.4 Stopping Rules  
Those patients meeting the exclusion criteria or those patients wishing to withdraw will be terminated from the study. This  
will not prohibit the p atient from receiving standard medical care outside the study. Should a serious adverse event  
occur, we will first and foremost stabilize the patient. Further administration of our contrast study will be stopped.  
Depending on the severity of the adverse ev ent, standard medical care will be provided including inpatient hospitalization  
if deemed necessary. Patient will be overseen directly by a physician at all times during the imaging exam to ensure 
appropriate medical care is always provided. Emergency medi cations will be present and up to date at all times.   

8.5 Medical Monitoring  
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the safety of the study at his/her site.  This safety monit oring 
will include careful assessment and appropriate repo rting of adverse events as noted above, as well as the construction 
and implementation of a site data and safety -monitoring plan (see section 9 Auditing, Monitoring and Inspecting).  Medical 
monitoring will include a regular assessment of the number and ty pe of serious adverse events.  
 
Relevant clinical data will be linked only to the unique code. Our data will be maintained in an electronic spreadsheet.  
The spreadsheet has a unique identifier for each participant. The computer which the spreadsheet is main tained on is  
encrypted. This computer is located in a locked office in the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine at Stanford  
University. De -identification of data and specimen will be handled by the study personnel responsible for collection of  
the specime n. Only the Protocol director has the key to the code. That is also on an electronic spreadsheet that is on an  
encrypted computer. The only data that is transferred is the coded data. This is transferred through secure email  
according to the Stanford Compu ting guidelines.  
9 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
9.1 Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the requirements of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regula tions require a signed subject authorization 
informing the subject of the following:  
 What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
 Who will have access to that information and why  
 Who will use or disclose that infor mation  
 The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, retains the ability  to 
use all information collected pri or to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization 
to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject i s 
alive) at the end of their scheduled  study period.  
9.2 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary 
for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in source documents.  Examples of these 
original documents, and data records include: hospital records, clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, 
subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from automated ins truments, copies 
or transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm  
or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical 
departments involved in the clinical trial.  
9.3 Case Report Forms  
The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for the study.  All data requested on the CRF 
must be recorded.  All missing data must be explained.  If a spac e on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was not 
done or the question was not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  All ent ries 
should be printed legibly in black ink.  If any entry error has been made, to correct such an error, draw a single straight line 
through the incorrect entry and enter the correct data above it.  All such changes must be initialed and dated.  DO NOT 
ERASE OR WHITE OUT ERRORS.  For clarification of illegible or uncertain entr ies, print the clarification above the item, 
then initial and date it.  
9.4 Records Retention  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to retain study essential documents for at least 2 years after the last approval of a  
marketing application in their country a nd until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in their country 
or at least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  
[MEMRI -DEMRI]   Page 17 
Version:  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of Stanford University.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by the study sp onsor  These documents should be retained for a longer  period if required by an agreement with the sponsor.  In such an instance, 
it is the responsibility of the sponsor to inform the investigator/institution as to when these documents no longer need to b e 
retained.  
 
10 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspectin g 
10.1 Study Monitoring Plan  
The investigator will allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities.  The Investigator will also ensure that the moni tor 
or other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given access to all the above noted study -related documents and study 
related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the monitoring visit.  
10.2 Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the EC/IR B, the sponsor, government 
regulatory bodies, and University compliance and quality assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g. source 
documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator will ensure t he capability 
for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by government regulatory authoritie s 
and applicabl e University compliance and quality assurance offices.  
11 Ethical Considerations  
This study is to be conducted according to US and international standards of Good Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 
and International Conference on Harmonization guideline s), applicable government regulations and Institutional research 
policies and procedures.  
 
This protocol and any amendments will be submitted to a properly constituted independent Ethics Committee (EC) or 
Institutional Review Board (IRB), in agreement with  local legal prescriptions, for formal approval of the study conduct.  The 
decision of the EC/IRB concerning the conduct of the study will be made in writing to the investigator and a copy of this 
decision will be provided to the sponsor before commencemen t of this study.  The investigator should provide a list of 
EC/IRB members and their affiliate to the sponsor.  
 
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient information for 
subjects to make an i nformed decision about their participation in this study.  See Attachment 1 for a copy of the Subject 
Informed Consent Form.  This consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by the EC/IRB for 
the study.  The formal consent of a subject, using the EC/IRB -approved consent form, must be obtained before that subject 
undergoes any study procedure.  The consent form  must be signed by the subject or legally acceptable surrogate, and the 
investigator -designated research professional obtaining the consent.  
12 Study Finances  
12.1 Funding Source  
Pending at this time  
12.2 Conflict of Interest  
Any investigator who has a conflict of int erest with this study (patent ownership, royalties, or financial gain greater than the 
minimum allowable by their institution, etc.) must have the conflict reviewed by a properly constituted Conflict of Interest 
Committee with a Committee -sanctioned confli ct management plan that has been reviewed and approved by the study 
sponsor prior to participation in this study.  All Stanford University investigators will follow the University conflict of interest 
policy.  
13 Publication Plan  
Neither the complete nor any p art of the results of the study carried out under this protocol, nor any of the information 
provided by the sponsor for the purposes of performing the study, will be published or passed on to any third party without 
the consent of the study sponsor.  Any i nvestigator involved with this study is obligated to provide the sponsor with complete 
test results and all data derived from the study.  
14 Attachments  
 Sample Consent Form  
 Study Procedures Flowchart/Table  
 Investigational New Drugs Pharmacy Policy  
 Specimen Pre paration And Handling  