 
 1RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
 
 
 Cognitive Recovery After Electroconvulsive Therapy and General Anesthesia 
 
Palanca BJA*, Maybrier HR, Mickle AM, Farber NB, Hogan RE, Tram mel ER, Spencer JW, Bohnenkamp DD, 
Wildes TS, Ching S, Lenze EJ, Basner M, Kelz MB, Avidan MS,  
RCC2 Research Collaborative at Washington University School of Medicine 
 This study has been scientifical ly reviewed and has been awarded funding for three years by the James S. 
McDonnell Foundation   Washington University School of Medicine 
Department of Anesthesiology 
660 S. Euclid Ave., Campus Box 8054 
St. Louis, MO. 63110 
Voice: (314) 362-1196 Fax: (314) 747-3977 
E-mail: palancab@wustl.edu  
            avidanm@anest.wustl.edu  
  
  
 
 
 
Version Date: 2.25.19 
 
 21.  STUDY SYNOPSIS 
 
Study Title 
  
Cognitive Recovery After Electroconvulsive Therapy and General Anesthesia 
 
  
 
Objectives  
1. Characterize the order and consistency in which cognitive fu nction recovers following 
treatments of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and ketamine gene ral anesthesia 
 2. Characterize the electroencephalography (EEG) changes during  recovery from ECT 
and ketamine anesthesia   
  
Study Period  Planned enrollment duration:  3 years 
Planned study duration:  3 weeks  
 
 Study Design 
  
Single academic center, prospective, longitudinal, observationa l 
Randomized, crossover, repeated measures 
Number of 
Patients Target enrollment:   15-20 patients  
 
 
Inclusion and Exclusion 
Criteria Inclusion Criteria:   
Treatment resistant unipolar or bipolar depression requiring outpatient ECT, planned right 
unilateral ECT stimulation, English speaking, 18 years of age a nd older, able to provide 
written informed consent. 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Known brain lesion or neurological illness that causes cognitiv e impairment, 
 
 3schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, blindness or deafness or motor impediments that 
may impair performance for cognitive testing battery, inadequat e ECT seizure duration 
with etomidate 
 
 
 
 
Measurements (1) Cognitive function (COGNITION battery) 
(2) Multichannel EEG 
(3) 3D-CAM (3D-Confusion Assessment Method) 
(4) Mood Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) 
(5) PROMIS-CAT (Computer Adaptive Testing) for depression (6) Scale of Suicidal Ideation 
(7) ECT Seizure duration 
(8) ECT electrical dose (9) Subjective assessment of whether ECT was performed 
(10) Quick Inventory of Depressi ve Symptomatology, Self-Report (16-Item), QIDS-SR1 
(11) Structural MRI 
  
  
Outcomes 
 (1) Cognitive recovery  
(2) Delta, theta, alpha, and beta EEG band power, functional connectivity, entropy, and 
phase lag measurements measures (3) Delirium 
(4) Mood 
(5) Depression (6) Suicidal ideation 
(7) Assessment of blinding quality 
(8) Satisfaction with ECT following involvement in study. 
 
  
 
 4 
2.  STUDY PROTOCOL  
2.1 Background, Significance, and Preliminary Data  
2.1.1 Seizures – Unique States for Probing the Return Conscious ness and Cognition 
The return of consciousness following reversible states of unre sponsiveness is relevant to 
neuroscience and clinical practice. Neural mechanisms underlying these processes appear to be distinct from those perturbed during loss of consciousness, with implications for anesthetic practice(Kelz, Sun et al. 2008) 
and sleep/wake disorders(Trotti 2016). While states incurred by  general anesthesia(Boveroux, 
Vanhaudenhuyse et al. 2010, Palanca 2015, Ranft, Golkowski et al. 2016) and sleep(Massimini, Ferrarelli et al. 
2007, Landsness, Crupi et al. 2009) have suggested neural subst rates necessary for sustaining 
consciousness(Koch, Massimini et al. 2016), the recovery from t hese depressed states of neural activity 
remains poorly characterized. Comparatively less is known regar ding the recovery from states of highly 
synchronized neural activity incurred through generalized seizures(Yu and Blumenfeld 2009, Englot, Yang et 
al. 2010). Characterizing the recovery of neural activity and c ognitive function following these states may 
provide a system to complement states of brain suppression give n that: 1) action potential synchronization is a 
fundamental mode of information processing in the cerebral cort ex distinct from the decrements in neuronal 
firing rates and 2) seizures arise from changes in the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic balance in different 
brain regions. 
The relationships of underlying electroencephalographic (EEG) a ctivity and the recovery from 
generalized seizures remain unclear is currently limited and challenging to investigate(So and Blume 2010). Generalized seizures are characterized by the loss of conscious ness coincident with ictal EEG spike-and-wave 
complexes, polyspike-and-wave complexes, and spikes(Hrachovy an d Frost 2006). External phenotypes, 
ranging from convulsions to immobile staring, likely depend on the precise disruption in sub-cortical arousal 
systems, cortical-subcortical interactions, or neocortical conn ectivity(Yu and Blumenfeld 2009, Englot, Yang et 
al. 2010, Blumenfeld 2012). Inter-individual heterogeneity amon g clinical seizures may arise from diverse 
structural or metabolic derangements. Moreover, seizures are ty pically sporadic, unpredictable in occurrence, 
and may vary in intensity and character, making them difficult to study systematically. Following the 
disappearance of epileptiform EEG signatures, the postictal per iod begins and culminates in a return of 
 
 5consciousness and cognitive function. There is little standardi zation of postictal clinical and behavior testing to 
facilitate objective comparison to EEG changes during the postictal period. Critical barriers to generating 
inferences from reproducible seizures may be addressed in the c ontext of electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT)(Fink 1979), where seizures are electrically induced under  safe controlled conditions. 
 
2.1.2 EEG Activity and Cognitive Dysfunction Following ECT 
The potential of EEG to inform clinicians on the future efficac y and side effects of ECT has not been 
fully realized. EEG is commonly monitored during ECT, a proven treatment for depression, bipolar illness, and 
psychosis(Lisanby 2007). Following the delivery of the ECT stim ulus charge, epileptiform activity in the bilateral 
fronto-mastoid EEG can complement the assessment of peripheral tonic-clonic muscle activity(Fink and 
Johnson 1982). Clinically relevant EEG measures beyond the leng th of seizure duration(Mayur 2006) have 
unclear clinical utility(Dinwiddie, Glick et al. 2012). Optimal ly, EEG markers would be available for predicting 
and refining ECT administration to balance efficacy and side effects that accrue over the course of therapy. 
Such advances in the field have not occurred since prior work e stablishing a relationship between cognitive 
performance and ECT stimulation parameters(Weiner, Rogers et al. 1986, Abrams 2002). This void may be due to the paucity of studies that have characterized EEG acros s widely distributed brain regions using either 
10-20 montages(Brumback and Staton 1982, Luber, Nobler et al. 2 000, Nobler, Luber et al. 2000, Zoldi, 
Krystal et al. 2000) or high-density EEG. The spatial resolutio n offered by high-density EEG is likely needed to 
associate cognitive an affective perturbations to specific EEG patterns. High-density scalp EEG has shown 
superiority over standard 10-20 montage recordings in guiding s urgical treatment for epileptic seizures 
(Brodbeck, Spinelli et al. 2011). Extension of this paradigm to the ECT setting may yield clinically relevant EEG 
markers for tailoring treatment at an individual patient level.  
During the ictal period, seeming stereotyped evolution EEG patt erns develop and resolve(Weiner 
1982), with proposed phases of activity(Brumback and Staton 198 2). Brief periods of EEG suppression or 
rhythmic bilateral 14-22 Hz oscillations may first emerge(Brumback and Staton 1982). Induction of bilateral 
poly-spike activity occurs, often with greater power on the side of the stimulation electrode in unilateral 
ECT(Brumback and Staton 1982, Gerst, Enderie et al. 1982). Spike/spike-and-wave complexes then occur, 
followed by termination within three minutes(Brumback and Stato n 1982, Weiner 1982). This ictal activity may 
 
 6be followed by postictal generalized EEG suppression, a marker associated with ECT therapeutic 
efficacy(Krystal and Weiner 1999, Mayur 2006, Azuma, Fujita et al. 2007) and with potential implications for 
understanding sudden unexpected death in epilepsy(Ryvlin, Nashe f et al. 2013, Bauer, Thijs et al. 2017). Delta 
waves (<4 Hz)(Weiner 1982) emerge that are gradually replaced b y theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), and beta 
(13-30 Hz) rhythms(Weiner 1982). The dynamics of these EEG changes may aid in our understanding of 
seizures in general and help to reveal the efficacy/side effects of ECT in the postictal period following future 
large-scale investigations. 
The continued resolution of postictal EEG changes may also corr elate with the cognitive impairments 
incurred immediately after individual sessions and progress ove r the course of ECT treatments. Perturbations 
in processed EEG measures persist even when individuals appear to be awake in the postictal period 
(Thimmaiah, Thirthalli et al. 2012, Soehle, Kayser et al. 2014) . Patients with greater suppression in processed 
EEG measures following ECT are more likely to experience prolon ged memory impairment(Koitabashi, Oyaizu 
et al. 2009). Specific EEG markers that can be linked to both u nderlying neurobiology and cognitive function 
have not been developed for the acute period after ECT. Beyond individual sessions, persistent slow theta and 
delta oscillations have been observed in the EEG(Volavka, Felds tein et al. 1972) and may resolve only weeks 
following the last session(Kolbeinsson and Petursson 1988, Sack eim, Luber et al. 1996). These markers that 
remain weeks after ECT sessions may be linked to either therape utic efficacy(Sackeim, Luber et al. 1996) or 
the extent of disorientation and retrograde amnesia(Sackeim, Luber et al. 2000). Definitive relationships remain speculative.  
 The return of cognitive function following individual ECT sess ions has not been fully characterized. 
Recent analyses have shed light on the incidence and persistence of cognitive side effects related to this 
procedure(Semkovska and McLoughlin 2010). Presumably, perturbat ions in attention, memory, and cognition 
during the postictal period have bearing on short- and long-ter m deficits in functionality as patients become 
rehabilitated into the community. Approximately 5-12% of patien ts experience postictal agitation and 
disorientation after ECT(Kranaster, Janke et al. 2012, Tzabazis , Schmitt et al. 2013) that may last 1-2 hours 
after ECT. Postictal agitation does not occur reproducibly in t he same patients following subsequent 
treatments(Fink 1993). Disorientation during the early posticta l recovery from ECT appears to decrease with 
number of sessions(Calev, Cohen et al. 1991). Interictal confus ion accumulates prior to successive ECT 
 
 7sessions(Calev, Cohen et al. 1991). Cognitive side effects may persist for 90 minutes following seizure 
termination(Perera, Luber et al. 2004). Cumulative treatments o f ECT may be associated with 
anterograde(Sobin, Sackeim et al. 1995) and retrograde amnesia(Nobler and Sackeim 2008), primarily 
following the entire course of an ECT regimen (Semkovska and Mc Loughlin 2010). The extent to which these 
forms of cognitive dysfunction contribute to missed work and ca regiver burden are not known. Given that each 
session of ECT requires the administration of general anesthesia during seizure induction, systematic study requires accounting for these potent neuromodulatory agents.  
 
2.1.3 Control for Anesthetic Exposure 
Elucidating cognitive recovery following seizures in the contex t of ECT requires a control to account for the 
effects of general anesthesia. This is because modern ECT is co nducted under general anesthesia and 
pharmacologic neuromuscular paralysis. Anesthetics with mechani sms invoking γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
A-type receptor agonism (e.g. etomidate) or NMDA-receptor antagonism (ketamine) are commonly used. Ketamine has received greater attention recently since subanest hetic doses of ketamine have shown efficacy 
in treating refractory depression(Mathew, Shah et al. 2012, Mat hews and Zarate 2013, Murrough, Iosifescu et 
al. 2013, Murrough, Perez et al. 2013). Relative to other anest hetics in use for ECT, ketamine may provide 
faster recovery from cognitive  impairment on the day of treatme nt(McDaniel, Sahota et al. 2006, MacPherson 
and Loo 2008) or additive benefits on ECT efficacy(MacPherson and Loo 2008). Thus, ketamine may be useful in a sham ECT condition to control for anesthetic  
 
2.2 Hypotheses and Aims 
We hypothesize that the reconstitution of cognitive function will markedly vary in rate and order, depending on 
the presence of seizures induced by electrical brain stimulatio n. Our specific aims include: (1) assess whether 
the time to return of responsiveness will be prolonged with ket amine + ECT compared with ketamine + sham 
ECT; (2) ascertain whether the time of restoration to baseline function in each cognitive domain will take longer 
after ketamine + ECT than after ketamine + sham ECT; (3) determ ine if postictal delirium is associated with 
delayed restoration of baseline function in all cognitive domains; and (4) determine whether the sequence of 
 
 8reconstitution of cognitive domains is similar to that occurring after an isoflurane general anesthetic; we also 
anticipate these cognitive disturbances  2.3 Design and Participants:  
2.3.1 Study Design 
 We propose over three years to randomize fifteen to twenty pat ients with refractory depression to one of three 
treatments in two consecutive w eeks of an ECT treatment cycle. Each patient will complete seven study visits. 
The first visit will be conducted during the dose-charge titration ECT treatment. Following the titration visit, 
there will be six separate experimental treatments per patient in two blocks of three, with a random sequence 
in each block (Figure 1). During these six visits, patients will be randomized to receive one of three treatments, 
all of which are likely to have efficacy in treating refractory  depression: 1) ketamine alone, 2) ketamine plus 
ECT, or 3) standard of care anesthetic plus ECT.   
 
Figure 1: Block randomized, repeated measures, crossover experimental design for reconstitution of 
consciousness and cognition following electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and general anesthesia. K, ketamine; E, etomidate, Rx, treatment.      
 

 
 92.3.2 Pre-Study Period: None 
 
2.3.3 Subject Screening, Enrollment, and Consent Process:  
Screening and informed consent will occur at Barnes-Jewish Hosp ital, following ECT referral by staff 
psychiatrists.   
 
2.3.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion criteria: Referral for ECT via right unilateral stimulation for treatment-resistant non-psychotic 
unipolar or bipolar depression, English-speaking, at least 18 years old, able to provide written informed consent.  
 
Exclusion criteria: Known brain lesion or neurologica l illness that causes cognitiv e impairment, 
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, blindness or deafness that may impair performance for cognitive 
testing battery, inadequate seizure duration with etomidate, defined at our institution as bilateral spike-and-wave complexes present for less than 10 seconds.  2.3.5 Study Involvement 
The randomized, crossover design of the study is powerful, as it will allow several within-patient comparisons, which will provide optimal efficiency to address the hypotheses . Specifically, the design will allow us to 
distinguish between the effect of ketamine anesthesia alone versus the combined effect of ketamine plus ECT. 
Recovery of consciousness after etomidate is generally rapid. T herefore, the etomidate plus ECT arm should 
yield additional insights into the contribution of seizures in the form of ECT to impaired consciousness and 
cognition and provides an additional comparator condition to th e ketamine + ECT arm. Intra-patient repetition 
of each of the three exposures over two weeks will help to esta blish the reproducible effect of each exposure 
on the outcomes of interest.   2.3.6 Randomization and Blinding  
 
 10A trained team member will use a computer-generated randomizati on algorithm among 18 potential 
combinations of initial cognitive task and order of study interventions. Random assignments will account for 
investigator-physician availabili ty for ketamine + sham ECT ses sions. The patient will be blind to the order of 
treatment condition. Study and c linician teams will be aware of the treatment arm at each session and maintain 
blinding by maintaining consistency of routine checks and monit oring before and after anesthetic induction. 
Thus, for all treatments sessions, patients will not be able to view the syringe during anesthetic induction. 
Furthermore, stimulation electrode and conducting gel will be placed on the scalp following loss and prior to 
return of consciousness. Post-anesthetic evaluation by anesthes iology, psychiatry, and nursing staff will be 
consistent across sessions. 
To maximize study rigor and reproducibility, investigators eval uating study measurements for data 
quality and development of analytical tools will be blinded to details of the treatment intervention, whenever 
possible(Nuzzo 2015).  
 2.3.7 Interventions 
  Each patient will be included for seven sessions. As with all  non-study patients, the first sessions 
consists of a dose-charge titration that is used to determine t he current required to induce the seizure. At 
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, etomidate is commonly used to induce ge neral anesthesia for this session. During 
four of the next six sessions, the patients will receive care that is currently within the standard of care for refractory depression, namely general anesthesia (standard of care or ketamine) plus ECT. In addition, during 
two sessions, patients will receive only general anesthesia wit h ketamine, which has now been shown to have 
efficacy in treating refractory depression. Apart from these treatments, patients will be monitored with full 
montage electroencephalography and will complete tests of cogni tion, mood and depression before and for 
approximately two hours following the general anesthesia (with or without ECT).  
 
2.3.8 Observations and Measurements Dose-Charge Titration Visit (Visit 1) 
During the titration visit, the study team will assess baseline  cognitive function and EEG prior to ECT, 
tolerability of cognitive testing and EEG recording. Patients will have baseline assessments, including a 
 
 11cognitive battery (COGNITION), continuous electroencephalography, 5 minutes of resting state EEG with eyes 
open and 5 minutes for eyes closed, depression testing (PROMIS-CAT) and mood assessment (Self-
Assessment Manikin), suicidal ideation (Scale of Suicidal Ideation)(Beck, Kovacs et al. 1979), and the 3D 
Confusion Assessment Method (3D-CAM) before the ECT therapy ses sion .ECT charge will be delivered via a 
Thymatron System IV (Somatics, LLC, Venice, FL, USA). Per ECT l aboratory procedures, stimulation 
parameters include current 0.9 amperes, pulse width of 0.3 mill iseconds, with escalating dosage: (5% total 
charge: 24.9 millicoulombs, 10 Hz stimulation, 4.6 second durat ion; 10% total charge: 50.8 millicoulombs, 20 
Hz stimulation, 4.65 second duration, 15% total charge: 75.6 mi llicoulombs, 20 Hz stimulation, 6.98 second 
duration). Subsequent planned ECT treatment is based on six-fol d increase in charge delivery. Thus, 
individuals without suitable seizure duration at projected 100%  charge will be withdrawn from the study.  
 Experimental Treatment Visits (Visit 2-7) 
 Baseline assessments will be performed at each session immediately prior to ECT and will include a cognitive battery (COGNITION), electroencephalography, depression testing  (PROMIS-CAT) and mood assessment 
(Self-Assessment Manikin), suicidal ideation (Scale of Suicidal  Ideation)(Beck, Kovacs et al. 1979), and the 3D 
Confusion Assessment Method (3D-CAM). Details regarding these a ssessments are provided as an appendix 
at the end of the protocol.  
 
During four of these six sessions, the patients will receive care that is currently within standard practice for 
ECT: general anesthesia (standard of care or ketamine), muscle paralysis (succinylcholine), and electrical 
stimulation. For the remaining two sessions, patients will unde rgo a ketamine general anesthetic without 
muscle paralysis or ECT stimulation.   High-density EEG, bilateral fronto-mastoid clinical EEG, and fu ll American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
monitoring will commence prior to the induction of general anes thesia. Prior to induction, audible squeeze toys 
will be placed in each hand of the patient, who will be instruc ted to follow serial commands to either “Squeeze 
your left hand twice” or “Squeeze your right hand twice.” Every 30 seconds, one of these commands will be played at random, to monitor loss and return of consciousness. Patients will be pre-oxygenated by mask and 
 
 12anesthesia will be induced with ketamine, approximately 2 mg/kg , or standard of care. Following bolus of the 
induction agent, loss of responsiveness and eyelash reflex will  be confirmed. Loss of consciousness will be 
recorded as the first time when a subject fails to correctly re spond to the command. Care adherent to the ASA 
guidelines will be performed regardless of treatment session. F or sessions with ECT, pre-stimulation 
hyperventilation and assisted ventilation will also be performe d. Central seizure duration will be assessed from 
bilateral fronto-mastoid EEG by the psychiatry team. Peripheral seizure duration will be determined through 
monitoring of tonic-clonic activity(Fink and Johnson 1982). During the sessions that subjects receive ECT, 
other drugs will also be administered according to current prac tice and as clinically indicated. The return of eye 
opening will be assessed every 30 seconds and defined for the i nitial time at which the patient opens his eyes 
to verbal command. The ability to extend the thumb to verbal command (“thumbs up”) will be assayed every 30 seconds. Return of responsiveness to auditory command will be defined as the first time at which the patient 
has squeeze his correct hand the number of times instructed via  auditory commands. At this time, defined as t 
= 0 minutes, the subject will begin a series of cognitive and b ehavioral assessments, which are repeated every 
30 minutes up to two hours after return of responsiveness. Pati ents will be permitted to take brief breaks to use 
the restroom and eat or drink, as necessary. At the conclusion of each treatment session, depression testing 
(PROMIS-CAT) and mood assessment (Self-Assessment Manikin) will be performed to assess for early improvements in mood. To assess blinding quality, the patient will be asked their impression of whether they received ECT that day. They will be discharged according to standard post-anesthesia care unit discharge 
criteria upon completing the last neurocognitive test battery. A study site coordinator will contact each subject 
within 24 hours of the study day to assess and document any adverse events. 
EEG and Video Acquisition  
 EEG will be collected during the dose-charge titration session  and during all treatment sessions to 
assess pre-ECT and pre-anesthetic baseline EEG recordings. An appropriately fitted 64-channel EEG 
Geodesics Sensor Net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc. Eugene, OR, US A) will be affixed to the scalp. Elefix 
electrode paste (Nihon Kohden America, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) w ill be injected to maintain conductivity to the 
silver/silver-chloride electrodes. Electrode impedances on each  channel will be optimized to be less than 100 
kOhms/channel, per manufacturer’s suggestions. Data (DC to 2000 Hz bandwidth 500 Hz sampling rate) will be acquired with a Net Amps 400 amplifier and Net Station versi on 5.0 and above (Electrical Geodesics, Inc. 
 
 13Eugene, OR, USA) via a Late 2012 Mac Pro Workstation (Apple Cup ertino, CA, USA). Whenever possible, 
video synchronized to EEG will be acquired using an Axis P3364L V network camera (Axis Communications, 
Lund, Sweden). 
 2.4.7.1 Outcomes (Further details on instruments are provided in appendices) Primary and Secondary Outcomes  
Primary outcomes include: the temporal recovery profiles for co gnitive task performance, as measured 
using the Cognition assessment battery (Basner, Savitt et al. 2015); times for the return of responsiveness to auditory command; and the presence of delirium, evaluated throu gh the 3-Minute Diagnostic Assessment for 
CAM-defined delirium (3D-CAM)(Marcantonio, Ngo et al. 2014). 
Secondary outcome measures based on the EEG will include defini tions of the seizures by standard 
techniques using both expert reader interpretation and quantitative techniques (Haider, Esteller et al. 2016). Central seizure duration will be visually determined by clinician evaluation of the frontal-mastoid bipolar EEG 
ictal complexes. Additional measures will be calculated from wi ndowed analyses of the high-density EEG: 
power spectral measures of the interval between anesthetic indu ction to delivery of ECT stimulus charge; the 
seizure envelope for 1-12 Hz EEG power; peak-to-peak amplitude,  calculated from the difference in maximum 
and minimum voltages within 300 millisecond time; periodicity o f epileptiform discharges; inter-hemispheric 
symmetry of seizure discharges; intra- and inter-hemispheric co herence. When possible, these measures and 
power spectral estimates will be derived different phase of the  ictal waveforms(Gerst, Enderie et al. 1982). The 
following postictal EEG measures will be assessed: duration of postictal EEG suppression; power spectral 
parameters flanking the return of responsiveness to verbal command; power spectral parameters from eyes 
open and closed epochs, including assessments of the posterior dominant rhythm. Spatiotemporal analyses 
will also focus on the propagation of EEG signatures during the  ictal and early postictal period. 
 2.4.7.2 Data Collection 
 
Outcomes, such as delirium assessments, will be entered into th e Washington University School of Medicine 
Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) application. The baseline medications will be collected from the 
electronic medical record. The anesthetic and recovery record will be retrieved from the hospital’s perioperative 
electronic medical record (Metavision by iMDsoft
®, Needham, MA). The cognitive assessments will be 
 
 14completed using the COGNITION cognitive battery designed at the  University of Pennsylvania(Basner, Savitt 
et al. 2015). The computer-based depression questionnaire will be completed through assessmentcenter.net 
developed by Northwestern Univer sity’s Department of Medical So cial Sciences. As standard care for tracking 
depression symptoms during an ECT course, treating psychiatry teams will administer the Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology, Self-Report (16-Item), QIDS-SR16(Rus h, Trivedi et al. 2003). To fully assess 
each patient’s treatment response to ECT, the research team wil l use the electronic, as well as paper, medical 
records to access and record the following information for each  treatment from the patients’ entire ECT 
treatment course at Barnes-Jewish Hospital: QIDS scores, reason for treatment (diagnosis), the method of 
ECT (right-unilateral, bilateral, or bifrontal), treatment numb er, date of treatment, any medications including 
doses, charge/treatment parameters, central and peripheral seiz ure duration, any adverse events from the 
sessions, and any clinical notes regarding treatment efficacy o r recovery from each procedure.  
 
2.4.7.3 Optional Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
In addition to the above procedures listed, patients will be gi ven the option to undergo non-contrast magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI data will better allow interpretation of the EEG signals in relation to 
structural brain anatomy. The MRI scan will take place followin g completion of the patient’s ECT treatment 
course at Barnes-Jewish Hospital. Structural MRI will be performed at the 10th floor West Pavilion Center for 
Clinical Imaging Research (CCIR). The MRI scan will use clinica l sequences and will be read by board-certified 
neuroradiologist. The reading and images with be placed in the electronic medical record. Significant incidental 
findings will be disclosed to the patient and his/her physician. The patient will decide s(he) on disclose of 
Incidental findings of unclear clinical significance.  Patients will be compensated $50 for their time. There will 
be no charge to the patient for the MRI scan. If patients are u nable to arrange transportation to/from Barnes-
Jewish Hospital for pre-treatment testing, the study team will provide patients with such transportation through 
cab vouchers.  
2.5. Analytical and Statistical Methods 
This is an exploratory study that seeks to track and characteri ze the reconstitution of consciousness and 
cognition following ECT coupled with general anesthesia. We hyp othesize that the pattern (sequence and time 
 
 15course) of reconstitution of consciousness and cognition following ECT with general anesthesia is different 
from general anesthesia alone. In particular, we propose that t he cognitive and electroencephalographic 
features following ECT will be similar to those seen during pos toperative delirium, which is a disorder of 
consciousness and cognition.  2.5.1 Statistical Analysis  
We will employ mixed-effects models to quantify trajectories of  cognitive recovery over time while addressing 
inter-subject variance and missing data. Linear models with app ropriate transformations will be used 
preferentially over non-linear models. Time and treatment inter vention group will be included as fixed effects 
while random effects will account for repeated measures provide d by each participant. Day of treatment 
relative to the dose-charge titration session will allow consid eration of cumulative effects of treatment order that 
may remain biased despite randomization. To address differences  in ECT-stimulation responsiveness, 
regression approaches will account for dose charge, central seizure duration, and age. Models will assess for 
the effects of treatment on the timing for the return of responsiveness to verbal command and the presence of 
delirium. Separate mixed-effects models will be generated to as sess task performance in a group of young 
healthy volunteers during the recovery from isoflurane general anesthesia (Maier, McKinstry-Wu et al. 2017).  
 
2.5.2 Primary Analyses: 
Recovery of Responsiveness: Given that the induction of general ized seizures by electrical stimulation may 
compound the recovery from general anesthesia, we expect that i nterval from loss to return of responsiveness 
following ketamine + ECT will be longer compared to the period for ketamine + sham ECT. We will determine 
the median and 95% confidence intervals for this measure in rel ation to the treatment intervention. 
Recovery of Cognition: Given that postictal suppression may be prolonged with ketamine than with 
etomidate(Hoyer, Kranaster et al. 2014), we hypothesize that the time needed for the return of cognition to baseline on individual sessions will be greatest for ketamine +  ECT, followed by etomidate + ECT, and 
ketamine + sham ECT. Separate mixed-effects models will be gene rated based on reaction time and accuracy. 
We will determine the time of convergence for 95% confidence in tervals for the marginal responses related to 
 
 16the three treatment groups. To determine the timing for the rec overy to baseline, we will determine the time 
when the same 95% confidence intervals include 0. 
Postictal Delirium and Cognitive Recovery: We expect the incidence of delirium (3D-CAM) to be associated 
with delayed restoration of baseline function in all cognitive domains. The magnitude and significance of this 
relationship will be determined from the mixed effects models for each cognitive test. 
Comparison of Cognitive Recovery After ECT and Isoflurane Gener al Anesthesia: We hypothesize that the 
time for recovery to baseline will be quicker for treatments in volving ECT compared to that for the recovery 
from isoflurane general anesthesia. Convergence for 95% confidence intervals will be compared between 
treatment groups. 
2.5.3 Secondary Analyses 
Recovery of Cognition: Principal measures of performance are based on preliminary data(Basner, Savitt et al. 
2015) of the Cognition test battery. Additional measures include: PVT response speed, DSST throughput, PVT 
lapses, VOLT duration and accuracy, AM duration and accuracy, and DSST errors. Cognition performance 
measures associated with lower effect sizes will also be assess ed. These include AM accuracy, VOLT 
accuracy, F2B reaction time, MPT accuracy, MPT duration, and F2B accuracy. Overall, we expect F2B, VOLT, and AMT to recover the slowest due to taxing of short-term memo ry after ketamine + ECT compared to 
ketamine + sham ECT. 
Recovery in the Spontaneous EEG: We will evaluate mixed-effects models to test the hypotheses that the 
predominance of frontal delta or theta power during passive eye s opening or occipital alpha power during eyes 
closed predict cognitive performance (Cognition scores) or deli rium (3D-CAM scores). We will also compare 
these EEG spectral measures across treatment sessions to evaluate the impact of anesthetic and ECT. 
Relationship of ECT Seizure Duration to Return of Responsiveness to Verbal Command: We expect that the 
length of ECT-induced seizures will correlate with the intervals from the loss of responsiveness to the return of 
responsiveness. 
Mood and Depression Severity: We expect improvement in these cl inical outcomes to be greatest with 
ketamine + ECT, followed by etomidate + ECT, and then ketamine + sham ECT. 
 
 17Treatment Satisfaction: We expect satisfaction to be greatest for ketamine + ECT, followed by ketamine + 
sham ECT, and then by etomidate + ECT. 
 
2.5.4 EEG Preprocessing and Analysis  
EEGLab will be used to assess for quality and the presence of m otion and eye movement 
artifact(Delorme and Makeig 2004). Data will undergo pre-processing with band-pass filtering from 0.1-50 Hz 
with 1st order Butterworth filters.  Frontal channels will be assessed for eye movement artifact. Reduction of 
severe eye movement artifacts will employ independent component  analysis approaches in EEGLab. The 
following analysis time epochs will be evaluated for secondary outcomes related to EEG activity: pre-ECT and 
post-ECT periods with either eyes open or eyes closed, the inte rval between anesthetic induction to and ECT 
stimulation, the period between stimulus delivery and cessation of ictal waveforms/spike-and-wave complexes, postictal period of EEG suppression and slowing, and both 5-min ute epochs flanking the return of 
responsiveness to verbal command. 
Spectral analysis will be performed using the Chronux Toolbox(M itra and Bokil 2008), including five 
tapers, time frequency bandwidth of 3, and 6-second non-overlapping time windows.  Total power and peak 
amplitude will be computed within the delta (0.5-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz) 
bands. Coherence and phase lag will be computed using the Chron ux toolbox. Global coherence(Cimenser, 
Purdon et al. 2011) and permutation entropy will be computed(Ba ndt and Pompe 2002). Quantitative measures 
will be derived from spectral and time-based analyses of the ictal EEG. These measures will evaluate seizure energy, periodicity, and symmetry, as well as propagation, and termination. 
In parallel to power spectral analysis, we will track the time- varying connectivity between the measured 
brain regions.  Data will be windowed into 5-10 second epochs w ithin which several cross-channel connectivity 
metrics will be computed.  These measures will include the Pear son correlation, directed entropy, and 
Shannon mutual information.  Thus, windows will manifest differ ent ‘networks’, each describing the association 
between channels (regions) according to its respective metric.  These networks will be clustered into a set of distinct motifs, or microstates, by using a k-means algorithm w ith least-squares error criterion.  Other methods 
to characterize the time-varying dynamics of the observed brain activity, including those based on network control theory, will also be considered. 
 
 18Visualization and analyses of epileptiform EEG activity will be performed using Net Station and Persyst 
software (Persyst, Solana Beach, CA, USA), following interpolat ion of bad channels and re-referencing to the 
average signal. EEG dipole source localization, inter-hemispheric generalization, and phase-reversals will be 
assessed by epilepsy board-certified neurologists. Seizures wil l be staged according to the previously 
described three components of electrical seizures induced by EC T (phase I with initial 14-22 Hz rhythmic beta 
activity, phase II with arrhythmic polyspike activity, and phase III with rhythmic 2.5-3.5 Hz. spike/polyspike activity(Gerst, Enderie et al. 1982). Additionally, expanding o n previous analyses of stationarity in epileptiform 
activity induced by ECT(Zoldi, Krystal et al. 2000), we will use high-density EEG to topographically map rhythmic sharp-wave discharges. To maintain rigor, evaluators w ill be blinded to the study intervention. 
 Structural MRI scans, including T1-weighted images will be use d for source localization using 
Brainstorm software. 
2.6. Sample Size 
We based our targeted enrollment on safety consideration for a ketamine general anesthetic, expected 
differences in the recovery patterns of different domains asses sed by the Cognition test battery, prior 
volunteer data with isoflurane emergence(Maier, McKinstry-Wu et  al. 2017). Sample size calculations are 
based on 1-way pairwise of ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) compari sons of 4 means (t = 0, 30, 60, and 90  
minutes). Expected effect sizes for differences in the modeled trajectories of cognitive function ranged from 
20-40 minutes. Standard deviations were expected to range between 20 and 40 minutes. Using conservative 
assumptions, we calculated a sample size of 24 subjects (effect  size, μ
A-μB, of 20 minutes; standard deviation, 
σ, of 20 minutes; two-sided alpha of 0.05; power of 80%). With liberal assumptions, we estimated a sample 
size of 12 participants (μ A-μB of 40 minutes; σ of 20 minutes; two-sided alpha of 0.05; power of 99%). With this 
range of estimates and expected attrition of participants, we t argeted for data collection from 15-20 
participants. 
  
2.7. Management of Intercurrent Events 2.7.1 Cross-over, repeated measures 
 
 19The study design has a built in cross-over, repeated measures to allow patients to serve as their own control 
and to experience each of the treatments twice.  2.7.2 Adverse Experiences and Premature Discontinuation 
The Washington University HRPO and the Data and Safety Monitori ng Committee (DSMC) oversee the study’s 
progression and adherence to protocol. Following each intervent ion, the principal investigators will affirm 
continued involvement or withdrawal based on patient tolerance and data quality. All adverse events will be reviewed by the DSMC and reported to HRPO, following the report ing policies and procedures, and followed 
until satisfactory resolution.  The description of the adverse experience will include the time of onset, duration, 
intensity, known etiology, relationship to the study, and any treatment required.  The trial steering committee will be responsible for all major decisions regarding changes t o the protocol. The committee will communicate 
these changes to HRPO and appropriate parties. . 
 
2.7.3 Potential Risks Interruption of clinical care:  While this is a theoretical risk, it is not envisaged that the  conduct of this study 
will interfere with clinical care.   
 
Discomfort related to EEG/EMG/EOG: Skin abrasions from scalp electrode placement or discomfort on  
removal of electrodes. 
 
Non-contrast MRI: Claustrophobia, anxiety, discomfort from headphones used to shi eld out noise, or hearing 
loss due to hammering noise are all potential risks of undergoing non-contrast MRI. Patients with tattoos may 
experience irritation, swelling, heating, or instances of primary or secondary burns in the area of the tattoo. Additionally, patients with devices such as a pacemaker, bone h ardware, or a device placed in their uterus may 
experience heating or movement o f the device, device malfunction, or damage to the tissue that surrounds the 
device. These risks are unlikely to be common or severe.  
 
 20Breach of Confidentiality:   Another potential risk of participating in this study is that confidential information 
about the participant may be accidentally disclosed. We will us e our best efforts to keep the information about 
participants secure, through de-identification of personal health information. We think the risk of accidental 
disclosure is very small.  2.8 Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks  
Interruption of clinical care:  The research team will be in open discussion with patients and nursing staff to 
ensure that there is no disruption in the patient’s clinical ca re, comfort, and recovery. 
 EEG/EMG/EOG:  Timing and manner of electrodes and adhesive removal will be based on patient’s comfort 
and convenience. Discomfort will be minimized based on the use of sticker/adhesive/gel electrodes and not needle electrodes.  
Confidentiality:   This will be maintained by assigning each participant a numbe r to be linked with data. Any 
protected health information of patient participants will be stored in a locked drawer within the locked office of the PI. Electronic protected health information will be stored on a password-protected server. 
 MRI Safety:  The patient will be thoroughly screened for MRI-incompatible i mplants. Scans may be performed 
following completion of the patient’s ECT treatment course at B arnes-Jewish Hospital. Scans will be performed 
within the hospital (10th floor CCIR).  
 
Research Conduct: Studies are conducted at Washington University School of Medic ine under the general 
supervision of a board-certified cardiac anesthesiologist who i s familiar with postoperative surgical care. 
Patients will be monitored during emergence and recovery from a nesthesia by the anesthetic and nursing staff 
in the ECT suite as per standard care. Additionally, research p ersonnel trained in good clinical practices will be 
present during the acquisition of data. Monitoring and safety will be according to the current clinical standard. 
Patient confidentiality will be maintained through de-identific ation of personal health information. Identity and 
 
 21linking information will be stored in a locked cabinet within the principal investigator’s office, which is locked 
outside of business hours. Electronic data will be password-enc rypted on secure servers. 
Patient satisfaction will be monitored throughout the study. Ke tamine may improve the efficacy of ECT and 
recovery of cognitive function following ECT. Patients may benefit from the additional EEG monitoring in the postictal period during which non-convulsive status epilepticus is rarely manifested. Patients will be withdrawn 
if discontinuation is in the best interest of the patient or if  the patient requests withdrawal or removal of 
treatment blinding. In the event that a patient’s condition significantly worsens and requires additional or different interventions from those allocated in the study, the patient will be released from the study and data 
collection will be discontinued. P articipants are given a satis faction survey to be returned by mail following the 
last study session(Sienaert, De Becker et al. 2005).   
Participant Satisfaction: During the follow-up phone call for the last study session, participants will be asked about their satisfaction in the study(Sienaert, De Becker et al . 2005).  
 
2.8.1 Adverse Event Reporting and Data and Safety Monitoring Pl an 
The investigators will monitor subjects for evidence of adverse events. All adverse events will be reported to 
the IRB following the IRB reporting policies and procedures and  followed until satisfactory resolution.   
 
3.  HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH 
 3.1 Protection of Human Subjects 
 
The study will be conducted with strict adherence to Washington  University Institutional Review Board protocol 
and consent form approval. An American Board of Anesthesiology board-certified and GCP-certified 
anesthesiologist with experience in conducting clinical studies  will lead the study. Safety and privacy of study 
participants will be safeguarded.  
 
 
 22Patient confidentiality will be maintained through de-identific ation of personal health information. Identity and 
linking information will be locked cabinet within the principal  investigator’s (PI) office, which is locked outside of 
business hours. Electronic data will be password encrypted on s ecure servers. 
3.1.1 Indemnity 
Washington University School of Medicine is responsible for any non-negligent damage incurred as a result of participating in the RCC II Trial. This indemnity is renewed on an annual basis. Washington University School 
of Medicine assures that it will continue renewal of the indemn ity for the duration of the trial.  
 
3.1.2 Ethics and Dissemination 
The trial investigators will be responsible for all major decisions regarding changes to the protocol. The committee will communicate these changes to the IRB and appropr iate parties. The final trial dataset is the 
property of the investigative team and shall not be shared with out permission from the principal investigator. 
Dissemination plans include presentations at local, national an d international scientific conferences.  Every 
effort will be made to publish results of the RCC II trial in a  peer-reviewed journal. Dissemination of results to 
study participants and their family members will be available u pon request. Updates and results of the study 
will be available to the public at clinicaltrials.gov. 
 
3.2 Sources of Materials
 
Patients will receive remuneration of $100 per session after th e titration visit (Visit 2-7), or $600 for completion 
of the study. Patients who undergo an MRI scan will receive an additional $50 for their time. There will be no cost for involvement.   3.3 Recruitment and Informed Consent 
 Screening and enrollment of subjects will occur according to the protocol-defined inclusion and exclusion 
criteria.  
  
 
 233.4 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Participant and Others 
This study will be the first to explore and elaborate how a seizure in the form of ECT (combined with an induction dose of intravenous anesthesia) impacts consciousness  and cognition following termination of the 
seizure. The time course and sequence of reconstitution of consciousness and cognition will also be clarified. 
This investigation will yield novel insights into an excitatory impairment of consciousness, which has not 
previously been studied with a controlled, experimental design.  
 
Candidates for ECT are refractory to multiple medical modalities. These patients may benefit from a greater 
understanding of the relationship between anesthetics and ECT on recovery of cognitive function and efficacy for depression treatment. 
 
This study may benefit the patient directly. Ketamine may improve the efficacy of ECT and recovery of cognitive function following ECT. The patient may benefit from the additional EEG monitoring in the post-ictal 
period during which non-convulsive status epilepticus is rarely manifested.   
 
3.5 Inclusion of Women
 
Efforts will be made to enroll patients regardless of gender. 
 
3.6 Inclusion of Minorities  
All studies in the Department of Anesthesiology encourage the participation of minorities in research.  
Our minority recruiting typically matches the demographic composition of the Washington University patient 
population (30% white, 60% Black, 6 % Hispanic, 4% Asian).  
 
3.7 Inclusion of Children  
No children will be enrolled in this study.  
  
 
 24Appendices:  
1. Study Day (each experimental treatment day Visit 2-Visit 7) 
Pre-Treatment: An appropriately fitted 64-channel (n=15-20 subjects) EEG headc ap (Electrical Geodesics, Inc. Eugene OR) 
will be affixed to the scalp. The actual placement of EEG elect rodes might vary, depending on the 
requirements for ECT. Electrical impedances on each channel will be confirmed to be under 
100kOhms/channel.  Subjects will complete a baseline round of n eurocognitive testing with ongoing EEG 
recordings, as well as 3D-CAM (3D-Confusion Assessment Method),  Self-Assessment Manikin, PROMIS-CAT 
(Patient Reported Outcomes Measur ement Information Systems - Co mputer Adaptive Testing) for depression, 
and the Scale of Suicidal Ideation (Table 1). During Treatment: 
Upon completion of the neurocognitive battery, the subjects will be pre-oxygenated by mask and anesthesia 
will be induced by either ketamine, 2 mg/kg or standard of care anesthetic, depending on group assignment. 
The induction agent will be slowly titrated until there is loss of responsiveness and eyelash reflex, which is 
current practice for ECT. During this time, an audio loop comma nd will be issued every 30 seconds asking the 
subject to randomly squeeze their left or right hand. Loss of c onsciousness (LOC) will be recorded as the first 
time when a subject fails to respond to two consecutive commands. Antiemetic prophylaxis will be administered as clinically indicated. During the sessions that subjects receive ECT, other drugs will also be 
administered according to current practice and as clinically indicated. ECT will be conducted according to 
current standard practice. EEG will be acquired after the ECT c harge has been delivered or continuously for 
non-ECT ketamine sessions. After the ECT has been concluded (or  after the induction dose of ketamine has 
been administered), the patient will remain in the treatment room for subsequent testing and EEG recording. 
Post-treatment: 
Recovery of consciousness (ROC) will be defined as the first ti me at which subjects correctly responded to two 
consecutive audio loop commands. At this time, defined as t = 0 minutes, the subject will begin the 
neurocognitive battery of tests followed by a brief resting per iod. Neurocognitive testing will be repeated at t= 
30, 60, and 90 minutes following emergence while the 3D-CAM wil l be completed at time 0 and every hour 
(Table 1) until the patient is scored negative for delirium.  Each battery of neurocognitive testing will take 
 
 25approximately 15-20 minutes to complete. During the rest period , EEG recording will occur with 5 minutes eyes 
open and 5 minutes eyes closed. At the 90 timepoint patients wi ll not only complete the COGNITION cognitive 
test but also the 3D-CAM (if positive for delirium at t=60, PRO MIS-CAT, Self-Assessment Manikin, and a 
questionnaire regarding patients’ subjectivity of whether they received ECT. Subjects will be permitted to take 
a brief break to use the restroom and eat or drink, as necessary. Subjects will be discharged according to 
standard post-anesthesia care unit discharge criteria upon completing the last neurocognitive test battery. A 
study site coordinator will contact each subject within 24 hour s of the study day to document any adverse 
events.  
Table 1: Assessment at Each Experimental ECT Treatment (Visit 2-Visit 7): 
Assessment  Baseline 
(Pre‐ECT)  Time 
0 Time 
30 Time 
60 Time 
90 
COGNITION 
Neurocognitive Testing  X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
3D-CAM - Delirium (3D-
Confusion Assessment 
Method) X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
PROMIS-CAT -
(Computer Adaptive 
Testing for depression)  X 
      X 
 
Mood Self-Assessment 
Manikin -  mood X           X 
Scale of Suicidal 
Ideation X            
Assessment for 
Blinding Quality      X 
 2. Description of Assessments: 
Neurocognitive testing (COGNITION battery) 
 This battery for individualized neurocognitive assessment of fa tigue has been tested in the context of sleep 
deprivation and is administered via a laptop. The effects of ECT and/or an induction dose of an intravenous general anesthetic (ketamine or etomidate) on all the tests below have not previously been well characterized. 
 
 26During administration, the order will be pseudorandomized, with a full complement given at each testing block. 
Additionally, the first test for each block will be repeated at the end to address temporal order within the block.  Motor Praxis Test (MPT) 
The motor praxis test (MPT) measures sensory motor speed and fl uidity. Participants are presented 
with a square box that, once clicked with a track pad mouse, shrinks and moves to a different location on the computer screen. Participants must click the box each time it r e-appears as rapidly as possible. It is expected 
that the accuracy for the MPT will be close to 100%. Therefore,  the standard score for this test is determined 
solely based on the speed at which the subject is able to click each square. Previous studies have shown that sensorimotor function performance declines with sleep deprivation. The Motor Praxis task allows for multiple 
measures of sensorimotor function in less than 1 minute.  
 
Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT) 
The psychomotor vigilance test (PVT) measures sustained attenti on by recording reaction time to visual 
stimuli that are presented at random intervals. During the PVT,  subjects are instructed to respond to a small 
red counter that appears at unpredictable intervals and reports time elapsed in milliseconds by clicking the 
space bar as soon as the counter appeared. This task is time li mited as any response time greater than 500 
milliseconds is recorded as a lapse or error of omission. The s tandard score for the PVT is based on response 
time and false starts. Originally, the PVT was designed for administration during 10-minute sessions. However, a shorter, modified PVT that remains sensitive to acute total sleep deprivation and chronic partial sleep deprivation was developed. Therefore, the PVT component of each neurocognitive battery in this study will be 
3 minutes in duration. An advantage of using this task is that PVT is unaffected by learning and aptitude.  
 
Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST) 
During the digit symbol substitution test, subjects are presented with a key showing ten symbols and a 
number (0-10) that correspond with each. Symbols are presented on the center of the screen one at a time, 
and the subject must type the corresponding number as quickly a s possible. This test measures complex 
scanning, visual tracking, attention, working memory, and visuo motor and visuospatial speed. The standard 
 
 27score for this task is determined by accuracy and speed, with a severe scoring penalty based on response 
time. While learning effects can be observed in healthy individ uals, individuals who chronically receive only 6 
hours of sleep do not improve in this task over time while indi viduals who chronically sleep less than 6 hours 
display decline in performance over time. Similarly, acutely sl eep deprived individuals display significantly 
decreased correct responses in this task.  
 
Fractal-2-Back (F2B)  
 The fractal-2-Back (N-back) test measures attention and workin g memory. Subjects are presented with 
images, one at a time, at a pre-set time interval and are asked  to press the space bar when the current image 
is identical to the image that was presented two images prior. This task requires temporary storage and 
manipulation of information and performance is evaluated based on accuracy, since the images are presented 
at predetermined time intervals. Previous studies have shown bo th that the fractal-2-back is sensitive to sleep 
inertia and that healthy individuals exhibit reduced accuracy i n this task following 24 hours of sleep deprivation.  
 
Visual object learning test (VOLT) 
The visual object learning test (VOLT) examines visual-spatial learning and memory. In this 
assessment, subjects are presented with a series of visual objects (shaded geometric shapes) consecutively at 
a pre-set time interval. Following this, the subject is present ed with a single visual object and asked to identify 
if this objected was presented during the learning period. The standard score for the VOLT is determined 
primarily based on accuracy; how ever, a penalty may be applied based on mean response time. Verbal 
learning suffers as a result of sleep deprivation. The VOLT was  designed to measure visual-spatial learning 
and memory analogously to verbal learning tests. Previous work reports that there is often a gender bias on measures of spatial learning, as men tend to perform better on spatial memory tests. However, the VOLT as 
developed by Glahn and colleagues reveals no differences between sexes. 
 
Abstract Matching (AM) 
Abstract matching (AM) examined abstraction and cognitive flexi bility. During the abstract matching task, 
participants are presented with a single colored geometric shap e as well as two sets of geometric shapes. 
 
 28They then must choose the set that the object completes. Following each selection, the subject is told whether 
their selection was correct or not are able to use this feedbac k to determine the implicit rules that govern this 
task. The standard score for this task is determined by accurac y with a penalty based on mean response time. 
Cognitive flexibility or “divergent” thinking is significantly impaired by sleep deprivation. The AM task version used in this study was chosen because it can be completed in less than 4 minutes as compared to previous 
versions, which required 15-20 minutes for completion.  
  
Delirium Assessment (3D-CAM) 
The 3D-CAM is a delirium assessment tool based on the full Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) interview. The 3D-CAM takes approximately 3 minutes to complete. In order for a patient to be positive for delirium they 
must present 3 of the 4 features including acute onset, inatten tion, altered level of conscious and/or 
disorganized thinking.  
 
 29 
 
 30 
 
 31 
 
 32 
 
 33 
 
 34 
 
 35Depression (PROMIS-CAT)  
The assessment of depressive symptoms using the PROMIS-CAT surv ey will be done separately from the 
routine clinical depression assessments that will be conducted by the psychiatrists who are caring for these 
patients. This is a computer-based questionnaire accessed throu gh REDCap. As standard care for tracking 
depression symptoms during an ECT course, treating psychiatry teams will administer the Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology, Self -Report (16-Item), QIDS-SR16(Rus h, Trivedi et al. 2003). 
 
Mood Assessment (Self-Assessment Manikin, SAM) This assessment has been used to assess mood and mood changes w ith ECT. The SAM is a brief, reliable 
scale that are sensitive to the treatment effects of ECT and th at are appropriate for patients with transient 
cognitive impairment(Bradley and Lang 1994). 
 
 
We will use show the scale to the patient and read the followin g script: 
 “This scale asks how you are feeling right now. It ranges from  a smile to a frown. This end of the scale 
(point)  means you feel completely happy , pleased, satisfied, contented , hopeful. The other end of the scale 
(point) means you feel completely unhappy, annoyed, unsatisfied, melanc holic, despaired, bored.  You can 
choose any of these points to describe how you feel right now. “ 
 The patient will then place a check mark in the box below the m anikin row that most accurately depicts his/her 
mood. 

 
 3 6 Sca le  o f  Su ic ida l  Idea t ion  
Th is  is  a  ra t ing  sca le  to  assess  the  sub jec t ive  de s i re  to  hu r t  onese l f .  We  w i l l  use  the  f i rs t  two  que s t ions  on ly  
(h t tp : / /www .psy -wo r ld .com /ss i_p r in t .h tm ) .  These  two  ques t ions  h ave  been  used  p re v ious ly  fo r  assess ing  
changes  in  su ic ida l  idea t ion  be fo re  and  a f te r  a  b r ie f  ke tam ine  in fus ion  fo r  ma jo r  dep ress ive  d iso rde r (Ba l la rd ,  
Ionescu  e t  a l .  2014 ) .  
I tem  Response  Po in ts  
1 .  W ish  to  l ive  mode ra te  to  s t rong  0  
 weak  1  
 none  2  
2 .  W ish  to  d ie  none  0  
 weak  1  
 mode ra te  to  s t rong  2  
 
Assessmen t  o f  B l ind ing  Qua l i ty  
A t  the  conc lus ion  o f  s tudy  sess ions  2 -7 ,  the  pa t ien t  w i l l  be  a s ked ,  “Do  you  fee l  tha t  you  rece ived  ECT  today?  
Was  ECT  pa in fu l? ”  
Assessmen t  o f  Pa t ien t  Sa t is fac t ion  
 
1 .  D i d  y o u  h a v e  a n y  s i d e  e f f e c t s  o r  p r o b l em s  a f t e r  r e c e i v i n g  t r e a t m en t s ?  P l e a s e  i n d i c a t e  a f t e r  w h i c h  t r e a tm en t  
th e s e  s id e  e f f e c t s  o c cu r r ed  ( ch e ck  a l l  th a t  app ly ) .  
 
1s t  2 nd  3 r d  4 t h  5 t h  6 t h  Y e s ,  b u t  
no t  su r e  
w h e n  
N au s e a          
Vom i t ing          
C o n f u s i o n          
B r u i s i n g  o r  t e n d e r n e s s  a t  IV  s i t e          
F e v e r          
H e a d a c h e          
W e a k n e s s          
M em o ry  lo s s          
A g i t a t i o n          
H a l lu c in a t io n s          
J aw  p a i n          
N igh tm a r e s          
 
 3 7 O t h e r : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _   
         
T h e  f o l l ow i n g  i t em s  r e f e r  t o  y o u r  e x p e r i e n c e  t h r o u g h o u t  t h e  e n t i r e  s t u d y .  P l e a s e  r a t e  h ow  w e l l  y o u  a g r e e  w i t h  
e a c h  s t a t em en t .  
 
  S t r o n g l y  
a g r e e  A g r e e   N e u t r a l   D i s a g r e e   S t r o n g l y  
d i s a g r e e  
2 .  I  w a s  s a t i s f i e d  w i t h  m y  c a r e .   
          
3 .  Ov e r a l l ,  I  f e l t  com f o r t a b l e  t h r o u g h o u t  t h e  s t u d y .  
          
4 .  I  l e a rn ed  ab ou t  con s c iou sn e s s  and  co gn i t ion  by  
p a r t i c ip a t ing .  
          
5 .  I  w a s  w e l l  c om p en s a t ed  f o r  th i s  s tud y .  
          
6 .  I  am  s a t i s f i ed  w i th  m y  in t e r a c t ion s  w i th  th e  
s t u d y  t e am .  
          
7 .  I  w o u l d  p a r t i c i p a t e  i n  t h i s  s t u d y  a g a i n .   
          
8 .  M y  c o n d i t i o n  im p r o v e d  a f t e r  com p l e t ing  th e  
t r e a tm en t s .           
 
 3 8  
9 .  W h a t  w a s  t h e  m o s t  p h y s i c a l l y  u n c o m f o r t a b l e  o r  d i s t r e s s i n g  p a r t  o f  t h e  s t u d y ?  
 Con s en t  
 S c r e e n i n g  q u e s t i o n n a i r e s  ( p e r f o rm e d  i n  t h e  d a y s  o r  w e e k s  b e f o r e  t r e a tm en t )  
 EEG  c a p  
 Mo rn ing  b e f o r e  t r e a tm en t  
 R e cov e ry  f rom  t r e a tm en t  
I f  y e s ,  p l e a s e  i n d i c a t e  w h i c h  ( c h e c k  a l l  t h a t  a p p l y ) :   
 1s t  
 2nd  
 3r d  
 4t h  
 5t h  
 6t h  
 N o  p e r i o d  w a s  p a r t i c u l a r  u n c om f o r t a b l e  o r  d i s t r e s s i n g  
 O t h e r :  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
1 0 .  H ow  p h y s i c a l l y  u n c om f o r t a b l e  o r  d i s t r e s s i n g  w a s  t h e  e x p e r i e n c e  s e l e c t e d  i n  t h e  p r e v i o u s  q u e s t i o n ?  
 Ex t r em e ly  
 A  lo t  
 A  l i t t l e  
 N o t  v e r y  
 N /A  
 
1 1 .  W h a t  d i d  t h e  s t u d y  t e am  d o  w e l l ?  
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
1 2 .  W h i c h  a s p e c t s  c o u l d  t h e  s t u d y  t e am  im p r o v e ?  
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
1 3 .  Add i t ion a l  c omm en t s :  
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39REFERENCES  
Abrams, R. (2002). Electroconvulsiv e Therapy. New York, USA, Ox ford University Press. 
Azuma, H., A. Fujita, K. Sato, K . Arahata, K. Otsuki, M. Hori, Y. Mochida, M. Uchida, T. Yamada, T. Akechi 
and T. A. Furukawa (2007). "Postic tal suppressio n correlates wi th therapeutic efficacy for depression in 
bilateral sine and pulse wave el ectroconvulsive therapy." Psych iatry Clin Neurosci 61(2): 168-173. 
Ballard, E. D., D. F. Ionescu, J. L. Vande Voort, M. J. Niciu, E. M. Richards, D. A. Luckenbaugh, N. E. 
Brutsche, R. Ameli, M. L. Fur ey and C. A. Zarate, Jr. (2014). " Improvement in suicidal ideation after ketamine 
infusion: relationship to reductions in depression and anxiety. " J Psychiatr Res 58: 161-166. 
Bandt, C. and B. Pompe (2002). "Perm utation entropy: a natural complexity measure for time series." Phys Rev 
Lett 88(17): 174102. 
Basner, M., A. Savitt, T. M. Moor e, A. M. Port, S. McGuire, A. J. Ecker, J. Nasrini, D. J. Mollicone, C. M. 
Mott, T. McCann, D. F. Dinges a nd R. C. Gur (2015). "Developmen t and Validation of the Cognition Test 
Battery for Spaceflight." Aerosp Med Hum Perform 86(11): 942-952. 
Bauer, P. R., R. D. Thijs, R. J. L amberts, D. N. Velis, G. H. V isser, E. A. Tolner, J. W. Sander, F. H. Lopes da 
Silva and S. N. Kalitzin (2017). "Dynamics of convulsive seizure termination and postictal generalized EEG 
suppression." Brain. 
Beck, A. T., M. Kovacs and A. We issman (1979). "Assessment of suicidal intention: the Scale for Suicide 
Ideation." J Consult Clin Psychol 47(2): 343-352. 
Blumenfeld, H. (2012). "Impaired c onsciousness in epilepsy." La ncet Neurol 11(9): 814-826. 
Boveroux, P., A. Vanhaudenhuyse, M. A. Bruno, Q. Noirhomme, S. Lauwick, A. Luxen, C. Degueldre, A. 
Plenevaux, C. Schnakers, C. Phillips, J. F. Brichant, V. Bonhom me, P. Maquet, M. D. Greicius, S. Laureys and 
M. Boly (2010). "Breakdown of wit hin- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging connectivity during propofol -induced loss of consciousn ess." Anesthesiology 113(5): 1038-1053. 
Bradley, M. M. and P. J. Lang (1994) . "Measuring emotion: the S elf-Assessment Manikin and the Semantic 
Differential." J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 25(1): 49-59. 
Brodbeck, V., L. Spinelli, A. M. Lascano, M. Wissmeier, M. I. Vargas, S. Vulliemoz, C. Pollo, K. Schaller, C. M. Michel and M. Seeck (2011). "Electroencephalographic source imaging: a prospective study of 152 operated 
epileptic patients." Brain 134(Pt 10): 2887-2897. 
Brumback, R. A. and R. D. Staton ( 1982). "The electroencephalographic patter n during electroconvulsive 
therapy " Clin Electroencephalogr 13(3): 148-153. 
Calev, A., R. Cohen, N. Tubi, D. N igal, B. Shapira, S. Kugelmass and B. Lerer (1991). "Disorientation and 
Bilateral Moderatel y Suprathreshold Titrated ECT." Convuls Ther 7(2): 99-110. 
Cimenser, A., P. L. Purdon, E. T. Pierce, J. L. Walsh, A. F. Salazar-Gomez, P. G. Harrell , C. Tavares-Stoeckel, 
K. Habeeb and E. N. Brown (2011). " Tracking brain states under general anesthesia b y using global coherence 
analysis." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108(21): 8832-8837. 
Delorme, A. and S. Makeig (2004). "EEGLAB: an open source toolb ox for analysis of single-trial EEG 
dynamics including independent component analysis." J Neurosci Methods 134(1): 9-21. 
Dinwiddie, S. H., D. B. Glick and M. B. Goldman (2012). "The ef fect of propofol-remifent anil anesthesia on 
selected seizure quality indices  in electroconvulsive therapy."  Brain Stimul 5(3): 402-407. 
Englot, D. J., L. Yang, H. Hamid, N . Danielson, X. Bai, A. Marf eo, L. Yu, A. Gordon, M. J. Purcaro, J. E. 
Motelow, R. Agarwal, D. J. Ellens , J. D. Golomb, M. C. Shamy, H. Zhang, C. Carlson, W. Doyle, O. Devinsky, 
K. Vives, D. D. Spencer, S. S. Spencer, C. Schevon, H. P. Zaveri and H. Blumenfeld (2010). "Impaired consciousness in temporal lobe sei zures: role of cortical slow activity." Brain 133(Pt 12): 3764-3777. 
Fink, M. (1979). Convulsive Therapy: Theory and Practice. New Y ork, USA, Rave Press. 
Fink, M. (1993). "Post-ECT Delirium." Convuls Ther 9(4): 326-330. 
Fink, M. and L. Johnson (1982). "Mon itoring the duration of electroconvulsive therapy sei zures: 'cuff' and EEG 
methods compared." Arch Gen Psychiatry 39(10): 1189-1191. 
 
 40Gerst, J. W., J. D. Enderie, R . D. Staton, C. E. Barr and R. A.  Brumback (1982). "The elec troencephalographic 
pattern during electroconvulsive t herapy II. Preliminary analys is of spectral energy." C lin Electroencephalogr 
13(4): 251-256. 
Haider, H. A., R. Esteller, C. D . Hahn, M. B. Westover, J. J. H alford, J. W. Lee, M. M. Shafi, N. Gaspard, S. T. 
Herman, E. E. Gerard, L. J. Hirsch, J. A. Ehrenberg, S. M. LaRo che and E. E. G. M. R. C. Critical Care (2016). 
"Sensitivity of quantitative EEG  for seizure identification in the intensive care unit." Neurology 87(9): 935-944. 
Hoyer, C., L. Kranaster, C. Ja nke and A. Sartorius (2014). "Imp act of the anesthetic agents ketamine, etomidate, 
thiopental, and propofol on seizure  parameters and seizure qual ity in electroconvulsive t herapy: a retrospective 
study." Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 264(3): 255-261. 
Hrachovy, R. A. and J. D. Frost, Jr.  (2006). "The EEG in selected generalized seizures." J Clin Neurophysiol 
23(4): 312-332. Kelz, M. B., Y. Sun, J. Chen, Q. Cheng Meng, J. T. Moore, S. C. Veasey, S. Dixon, M. Thornton, H. Funato and M. Yanagisawa (2008). "An ess ential role for orexins in eme rgence from general anesthesia." Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 105(4): 1309-1314. 
Koch, C., M. Massimini, M. B oly and G. Tononi (2016). "Neural c orrelates of conscious ness: progress and 
problems." Nat Rev Neurosci 17(5): 307-321. 
Koitabashi, T., T. Oyaizu and T. O uchi (2009). "Low bispectral index values following electroconvulsive 
therapy associated with memory impairment." J Anesth 23(2): 182-187. 
Kolbeinsson, H. and H. Petursson (1988). "Electroencephalograph ic correlates of electroconvulsive therapy." 
Acta Psychiatr Scand 78 (2): 162-168. 
Kranaster, L., C. Janke, C. Hoye r and A. Sartorius (2012). "Management of severe pos tictal agitation after 
electroconvulsive therapy with bi spectrum electroencephalogram index monitoring: a case report." J ECT 28(2): 
e9-10. Krystal, A. D. and R. D. Weiner (1 999). "EEG correlates of the response to ECT: a possible antidepressant role 
of brain-derived neurotro phic factor." J ECT 15(1): 27-38. 
Krystal, A. D., R. D. Weiner, M. D. Dean, V. H. Lindahl, L. A. Tramontozzi, 3rd, G. Falcone and C. E. Coffey (2003). "Comparison of seizure  duration, ictal EEG, and cogniti ve effects of ketamine and methohexital 
anesthesia with ECT." J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 15(1): 27-34. 
Landsness, E. C., D. Crupi, B. K. Hulse, M. J. Peterson, R. Hub er, H. Ansari, M. Coen, C. Cirelli, R. M. Benca, 
M. F. Ghilardi and G. Tononi (2009). "Sleep-dependent improveme nt in visuomotor learning: a causal role for 
slow waves." Sleep 32(10): 1273-1284. 
Lisanby, S. H. (2007). "Electroconvul sive therapy for depression." N Engl J Med 357(19): 1939-1945. 
Loo, C. K., N. Katalinic, J. B. G arfield, K. Sainsbury, D. Hadz i-Pavlovic and R. Mac-Pherson (2012). 
"Neuropsychological and mood eff ects of ketamine in electroconv ulsive therapy: a randomised controlled trial." 
J Affect Disord 142(1-3): 233-240. 
Luber, B., M. S. Nobler, J. R. Moeller, G. P. Katzman, J. Prudi c, D. P. Devanand, G. S. Dichter and H. A. 
Sackeim (2000). "Quantitative EEG during seizures induced by el ectroconvulsive therapy: r elations to treatment 
modality and clinical features. II. Topographic analyses." J EC T 16(3): 229-243. 
MacPherson, R. D. and C. K. Loo (2008). "Cognitive impairment f ollowing electroconvulsi ve therapy--does the 
choice of anesthetic agent make a difference?" J ECT 24(1): 52-56. 
Maier, K. L., A. R. McKinstry-W u, B. J. Palanca, V. Tamal, S. B lain-Moraes, M. Basner, M. S. Avidan, G. A. 
Mashour and M. B. Kelz (2017). "Protocol for the Reconstructing  Human Consciousness and Cognition Study." 
Front Hum Neurosci. 
Marcantonio, E. R., L. H. Ngo, M. O'Connor, R. N. Jones, P. K. Crane, E. D. Metzger and S. K. Inouye (2014). "3D-CAM: derivation and validatio n of a 3-minute diagnostic int erview for CAM-defined delirium: a cross-
sectional diagnostic tes t study." Ann Intern Med 161(8): 554-561. 
Massimini, M., F. Ferrarelli, S . K. Esser, B. A. Riedner, R. Hu ber, M. Murphy, M. J. Peterson and G. Tononi 
(2007). "Triggering sleep slow wa ves by transcranial magnetic s timulation." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(20): 
8496-8501. 
 
 41Mathew, S. J., A. Shah, K. Lapi dus, C. Clark, N. Jarun, B. Oste rmeyer and J. W. Murrough (2012). "Ketamine 
for treatment-resistant unipolar  depression: current evidence."  CNS Drugs 26(3): 189-204. 
Mathews, D. C. and C. A. Zarate , Jr. (2013). "Current status of  ketamine and related compounds for 
depression." J Clin Psychiatry 74(5): 516-517. 
Mayur, P. (2006). "Ictal electroencephalograp hic characteristic s during electroconvulsive therapy: a review of 
determination and clinical relevance." J ECT 22(3): 213-217. 
McDaniel, W. W., A. K. Sahota, B . V. Vyas, N. Laguerta, L. Hategan and J. Oswald (2006). "Ketamine appears 
associated with better word recall than etomidate after a cours e of 6 electroconvulsive  therapies." J ECT 22(2): 
103-106. 
Mitra, P. P. and H. Bokil (2008). O bserved Brain Dynamics. New York, Oxford University Press. 
Murrough, J. W., D. V. Iosifescu, L. C. Chang, R. K. Al Jurdi, C. E. Green, A. M. Perez, S. Iqbal, S. Pillemer, A. Foulkes, A. Shah, D. S. Charn ey and S. J. Mathew (2013). "An tidepressant efficacy of ketamine in 
treatment-resistant major depres sion: a two-site randomized con trolled trial." Am J Psychiatry 170 (10): 1134-
1142. Murrough, J. W., A. M. Perez, S. Pillemer, J. Stern, M. K. Pari des, M. aan het Rot, K. A. Collins, S. J. Mathew, 
D. S. Charney and D. V. Iosifescu (2013). "Rapid and longer-term antidepressant effects of repeated ketamine infusions in treatment-resistant major depression." Biol Psychiatry 74(4): 250-256. 
Nobler, M. S., B. Luber, J. R. M oeller, G. P. Katzman, J. Prudic, D. P. Devanand, G. S. Dichter and H. A. 
Sackeim (2000). "Quantitative EEG during seizures induced by el ectroconvulsive therapy: r elations to treatment 
modality and clinical features.  I. Global analyses." J ECT 16(3): 211-228. 
Nobler, M. S. and H. A. Sackeim (2008). "Neurobiological correl ates of the cognitive side effects of 
electroconvulsive therapy." J ECT 24(1): 40-45. 
Nuzzo, R. (2015). "How scientists  fool themselves - and how they can stop." Nature 526(7572): 182-185. 
Okamoto, N., T. Nakai, K. Sakamoto, Y. Nagafusa, T. Higuchi and T. Nishikawa (2010). "Rapid antidepressant effect of ketamine anesthesia dur ing electroconvulsive therapy of treatment-resistant  depression: comparing 
ketamine and propofol anesthesia." J ECT 26(3): 223-227. 
Palanca, B. J., Mitra, A., Larson-Prior, L., Snyder, A.Z., Avid an, M.S., Raichle, M.E. (2015). "Resting-state 
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Correlates of Sevoflurane-induced Unconsciousne ss." Anesthesiology 
122(XX): XX. Perera, T. D., B. Luber, M. S. Nobler, J. Prudic, C. Anderson a nd H. A. Sackeim (2004). "Seizure expression 
during electroconvulsive therapy: relationships with clinical o utcome and cognitive side effects." 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29(4): 813-825. 
Pogarell, O., S. Ehrentraut, T. Ruther, C. Mulert, U. Hegerl, H . J. Moller and V. Henkel (2005). "Prolonged 
confusional state following elect roconvulsive therapy--diagnostic clues from serial e lectroencephalography." 
Pharmacopsychiatry 38(6): 316-320. 
Ranft, A., D. Golkowski, T. Kiel, V. Riedl, P. Kohl, G. Rohrer, J. Pientka, S. Berger, A. Thul, M. Maurer, C. Preibisch, C. Zimmer, G. A. Mashour, E. F. Kochs, D. Jordan and R. Ilg (2016). "Neural Correlates of Sevoflurane-induced Unconsciousne ss Identified by Simultaneous Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and 
Electroencephalography." Anesthesiology 125: 861-872. 
Rush, A. J., M. H. Trivedi, H. M. I brahim, T. J. Carmody, B. Ar now, D. N. Klein, J. C. Markowitz, P. T. Ninan, 
S. Kornstein, R. Manber, M. E. Thase, J. H. Kocsis and M. B. Ke ller (2003). "The 16-Item Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS) , clinician rating (QIDS-C), an d self-report (QIDS-SR): a psychometric 
evaluation in patients with chron ic major depression." Biol Psychiatry 54(5): 573-583. 
Ryvlin, P., L. Nashef, S. D. Lhatoo, L. M. Bateman, J. Bird, A.  Bleasel, P. Boon, A. Crespel, B. A. Dworetzky, 
H. Hogenhaven, H. Lerche, L. Mai llard, M. P. Malter, C. Marchal, J. M. Murthy, M. Nitsche, E. Pataraia, T. 
Rabben, S. Rheims, B. Sadzot, A . Schulze-Bonhage, M. Seyal, E. L. So, M. Spitz, A. Szucs, M. Tan, J. X. Tao 
and T. Tomson (2013). "Incidence an d mechanisms of cardiorespir atory arrests in epilepsy monitoring units 
(MORTEMUS): a retrospectiv e study." Lancet Neurol 12(10): 966-977. 
 
 42Sackeim, H. A., B. Luber, G. P. K atzman, J. R. Moeller, J. Prud ic, D. P. Devanand and M. S. Nobler (1996). 
"The effects of el ectroconvulsive thera py on quantitative electroencephalograms. Relationship to clinical 
outcome." Arch Gen Psychiatry 53(9): 814-824. 
Sackeim, H. A., B. Luber, J. R. Moeller, J. Prudic, D. P. Devanand and M. S. Nobler (2000). 
"Electrophysiological correlates of the adverse cognitive effec ts of electroconvulsive therapy." J ECT 16(2): 
110-120. Semkovska, M. and D. M. McLoughlin (2010). "Objective cognitive  performance associated with 
electroconvulsive therapy for depr ession: a systematic review and meta-analysis." Biol Psychiatry 68(6): 568-
577. Sienaert, P., T. De Becker, K. V ansteelandt, K. Demyttenaere an d J. Peuskens (2005). "Patie nt satisfaction after 
electroconvulsive therapy." J ECT 21(4): 227-231. 
So, N. K. and W. T. Blume (2010). " The postictal EEG." Epilepsy  Behav 19(2): 121-126. 
Sobin, C., H. A. Sackeim, J. Prudic, D. P. Devanand, B. J. Mood y and M. C. McElhiney (1995 ). "Predictors of 
retrograde amnesia followi ng ECT." Am J Psychiatry 152(7): 995-1001. 
Soehle, M., S. Kayser, R. K. E llerkmann and T. E. Schlaepfer (2 014). "Bilateral bispectral index monitoring 
during and after electroconvulsive therapy compared with magnet ic seizure therapy for treatment-resistant 
depression." Br J Anaesth 112(4): 695-702. 
Thimmaiah, R., J. Thirthalli, V. J. Ramesh, M. C. Radhakrishnan , K. Muralidharan, M. Mahadevaiah, B. N. 
Gangadhar and G. S. Umamaheshwa ra Rao (2012). "Effect of a course of electroconvulsive therapy on 
interictal bispectral index valu es: a prospective study." J ECT  28(1): 20-23. 
Trotti, L. M. (2016). "Waking up is the hardest thing I do all day: Sleep inertia and sleep drunkenness." Sleep 
Med Rev. 
Tzabazis, A., H. J. Schmitt, H. I hmsen, M. Schmidtlein, R. Zimm ermann, J. Wielopolski and T. Munster 
(2013). "Postictal agitation after  electroconvulsive therapy: i ncidence, severity, and propofol as a treatment 
option." J ECT 29(3): 189-195. 
Volavka, J., S. Feldstein, R . Abrams, R. Dornbush and M. Fink (1972). "EEG and clinical change after bilateral 
and unilateral electroconvulsive therapy." Electroencephalogr C lin Neurophysiol 32(6): 631-639. 
Weiner, R. D. (1982). "Electroencephalographic correlates of EC T." Psychopharmacol Bull 18(2): 78-81. 
Weiner, R. D., H. J. Rogers, J. R . Davidson and E. M. Kahn (198 6). "Effects of elect roconvulsive therapy upon 
brain electrical activ ity." Ann N Y Acad Sci 462: 270-281. 
Yoosefi, A., A. S. Sepehri, M. Kargar, S. Akhondzadeh, M. Sadeg hi, A. Rafei, A. Alimadadi and P. Ghaeli 
(2014). "Comparing effects of keta mine and thiopental administr ation during electro convulsive therapy in 
patients with major depressive  disorder: a randomized, double-b lind study." J ECT 30(1): 15-21. 
Yu, L. and H. Blumenfeld (2009). "The ories of impaired consciou sness in epilepsy." Ann N Y Acad Sci 1157: 
48-60. Zoldi, S. M., A. Krystal and H. S . Greenside (2000). "Stationarity and redundancy of mu ltichannel EEG data 
recorded during generalized tonic- clonic seizures." Brain Topogr 12(3): 187-200. 
 