Page 1 of 8 
Version 13July2015  TITLE OF STUDY: Efficacy of Auto -adjustable Positive Airway Pressure (APAP) in p ediatric patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea  (OSA) . 
 
Principal Investigator:  Neepa Gurbani , DO 
Sub-investigators : Narong Simakajornboon, MD  
   Justin Brockbank, MD  
 
MAIL/PHONE: Pulmonary Medicine, MLOC 2021; ext. 64654  
 
1. ABSTRACT:  
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is a disease associated with sig nificant morbidity and is likely 
under -recognized in the pediatric population.  It is characterized by upper airway obs truction leading to 
partial or complete limitation of airflow whi le asleep.  Sequelae may include nocturnal hypoxemia, 
hypoventilation, arousals from sleep, and sleep disruption which may predispose the patient to 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease  and neurocognitive impairment.  Continuous positive airway 
(CPAP ) is commonly used to treat OSA by delivering  a predetermined amount of positive pressure  to the 
patient’s upper airway in order to red uce the collapsibility of airway structures during sleep .  The 
commonly accepted method for determining the appropriate pressure setti ng for children with OSAS is 
through an in-hospital overnight CPAP titration study.  Another commonly used treatment modality in 
adults with OSAS is auto -adjustable positive airway pressure (APAP), in which airway patency is 
maintained by adjusting pressure delivery through the night depending on the needs of the patient as 
determined  by the device.  Benefits o f APAP compared with CPAP include the ability to initiate therapy 
without an inpatient CPAP titration study, resulting in more prompt establishment of treatment and 
cost-savings.  Patient adherence may also be significantly improved as the pressure deliver ed is 
appropria te for sleep stage and patient position, resulti ng in greater patient comfort.  Utility and efficacy 
of APAP  com pared to CPAP have never been evaluated in the pediatric population.   The aim of this study 
is to establish APAP as an effect ive mean s of assessing CPAP pressure  for OSAS  in children , and to 
determine if APAP therapy confers better treatment adherence and quality of life  compared to  
traditional CPAP.  We hypothesize that APAP can effectively approximat e the pressure determined by 
CPAP titration study , that APAP is superior to fixed CPAP in terms of treatment success , and that 
adherence to therapy will be impr oved with APAP compared to CPAP.  
 
Forty patien ts aged 5-20 years will be enrolled in the study . These subjects will be recruited  from the 
pediatric pulmonary or pediatric sleep c linic at CCHMC.  Patients who are suspected of having OSA will 
be referred in the usual manner to the sleep center for diagnostic sl eep study  (PSG) .  Following the 
establishment of OSAS diagnosis  and subsequent enrollment in the study , the subject will begin therapy 
with APAP which will  continue for 4 to 8 weeks .  In that period of time the clinically ordered in-hospital 
CPAP titration study will be completed.   The subject  will then be randomized to  either traditional fixed 
pressure CPAP at the pressure determined by in -hospital titration or APAP.  The subject will receive 4 
weeks of treatment in the randomized group (CPAP or APAP) then crossover to 4 weeks in the alternate 
group (CPAP or APAP) .  Both patient and researcher will be blinded to the random ization of pressure 
modality.  The total study period will range from 14 -18 weeks.  
Page 2 of 8 
Version 13July2015   
Appropriate statistical analyses will be used to evaluate  two primary outcomes which are (1) the optima l 
pressure derived from APAP versus  CPAP titration study and (2) the adherence to APAP v ersu s fixed 
pressure CPAP.  Other secondary outcomes will be compared between APAP and fixed pressure CPAP 
including  the change in the score of Michigan Pediatric Sleep Questionna ire, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, 
Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory and CPAP Follow up Questionnaire.  
 
2. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY:  
The aim of this study is to establish APAP as an effective treatment modality for OSAS in the pediatric 
population.  We hypothesize that APAP can effectively approximate the pressure determined by PSG 
CPAP titration  as measured by the average 90th pressure  percentile and average CPAP pressure delivered 
to the patient .  The in -hospital CPAP titration PSG following initial diagnosis of O SA is the current 
standard of therapy.  APAP would potentially bridge the gap between the time of diagnosis and the 
follow up PSG for CPAP titration , allowing for more prompt intervention.  The other  purpose of the 
study is to determine how APAP therapy compares with traditional CPAP in terms of treatmen t 
adherence and quality of life.  We hypothesize that APAP is superior to fixed CPAP in terms of treatment 
success measured by quality of life and symptom reporting by patients or their parents.  Additionall y, we 
hypothesize that adherence to therapy will be improved with APAP compared to CPAP as measured by 
therapy usage hours downloadable from the machine.  
 
3. BACKGROUND:  
OSAS is a disease characterized by prolonged partial uppe r airway obstruction, intermitte nt complete 
obstruction (obstructive apnea), intermittent partial obstruction (obstructive hypopnea), or a 
combination  thereof while asleep ¹.  Sequelae include nocturnal hypoxemia, hypoventilation with CO2 
retention, and/or sleep disruption, which may predispose the patient to increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease and neurocognitive impairment.  Daytime sleepiness or hyperactivity with or with out 
inattentiveness frequently results, which can contribute to short term memory and concentration 
impairment.  Systemic hypertension has been reported  in children with OSA.  P ulmonary artery 
hypertension may also result from intermittent hypoxemia or chr onic hypoventilation.  There is limite d 
normative date for the apnea hypopnea index ( AHI) in children, although an AHI greater than 1 -2 per 
hour is used as a cutoff for diagnosis of OSA based on expert consensus.  An AHI greater than 5 is 
considered  to be consistent with a moderate  degree of OSA  and CPAP is commonly offered as one of the 
treatment option s for those patients.  OSAS is likely under -recognized in the pediatric population , but 
according to a recent meta -analysis, has an estimated prevalence bet ween 1 and 4 %².  The 
pathop hysiology of OSAS is likely multifa ctorial and involves the anatomic structure of the airway, 
neuromotor ton e, and inflammation.  An overall increase in upper airway resistance occurs during sleep 
under normal circumstances, howe ver, with any anatomic airw ay narrowing or impairment of 
neuromotor control, collapsibility is pronounced, and therefore airflow resistance is increased.  Once the 
obstruction occurs, gas exchange is impaired and hypoxemia and hypercapnia ensue, resulting in 
increased respiratory effort and arousal from sleep.  The cycle repeats frequently through the night 
causing recurrent hypoxemia and sleep fragmentation ³.  Many children instead experience prolonged 
partial airway obstruction through the night  resulting  in obstructive hypoventilation.  
Page 3 of 8 
Version 13July2015   
Surgical and non -surgical treatment modalities exist and often tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (T&A) 
is the first line of treatment in the pediatric population.  CPAP is frequently employed if T&A  is 
contraindicated or if symptoms persist following surgery, and is a c ommon treatment option for both 
adults and children with  OSAS.  CPAP delivers a predetermined amount of positive pressure  to the 
patient’s upper airway in order to reduce the collapsibility of upper airway stru ctures during sleep.  The 
commonly accepted method of determining the appropriate pressure sett ing for children with OSAS is 
through  an overnight CPAP titration study  done in the hospital .  Another commonly used treatment 
modality in adults with OSAS is APAP, in which airway patency is maintained by adjusting pressure 
delivery through the night depending on the needs of the patient as determined  by the device.  Benefits 
of APAP compared with CPAP include the ability to initiate therapy without an inpatient CPAP titration 
study, resulting in more prompt establishment of treatment and cost -savings.  Patient adherence may 
also be significantly improved as the pressure delivered is adjusted appropriate ly for the airflow 
detected during each  breath , which may var y according to patient position  and stage of sleep , resulting 
in greater patient comfort.  Although APAP has never been evaluated in the pediatric population, s everal 
adult studies have demonstrated similar treatment effects with APAP compared to CPAP .  In one 
double -blind randomized controlled trial  of adults with OSAS , 1 month of APAP treatment was 
equivalent to 1 month of CPAP in terms of improvement in daytime sleepiness, quality of life and 
respiratory disturbance during sleep.  The majority of patient s in that study preferred treatment in the 
auto -adjusting  mode ⁴.  Another adult study evaluating the efficacy of APAP as a means of titration, using 
the same device we intend to use (REMstar Auto), showed similar  efficacy of automatic titration 
compared wi th manual titration in terms of AHI and quality of sleep.  Both studies occurred over 2 
consecutive nights in the hospital.  For those patients receiving APAP titration on the first night, better 
sleep quality, as measured by total sleep time and sleep eff icacy, was demonstrated for APAP compared 
with traditional CPAP ⁵.  
 
4. STUDY DESIGN:  
The proposed study is a prospective, double -blind, randomized crossover trial.  We will only recruit 
patien ts who receive care from the pediatric pulmonary or pediatric sleep  clinic at CCHMC.  Following 
diagnosis of OSAS , patients who meet inclusion criteria will be enrolled in the study and treated with 
APAP  delivered via the Respironics REMstar Auto device for 4 to 8 weeks.  During  that period , an in -
hospital CPAP titration study will be completed and average 90th pressure percentile and average CPAP 
pressure derived from the device will be compared to the CPAP pressure determined by CPAP titration 
PSG.  For subjects who are clinically placed on APAP  prior to enrollment , they  may be recruited into the 
study up to two months after initiating APAP.  The patient will then be randomized in a double blind 
fashion to either continue on APAP or to change treatment to fixed CPAP at the pressure determined by 
CPAP titration study  for 4  weeks.  The subject  will crossover to the alternate  modality for an additional 4 
weeks.  The Michigan Pediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) , Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) 
and Epworth Sleepiness Scale  (ESS) will be administered  at the time of enrollment, and following 
completion of each randomization period to compare quality of life and symptom scores between 
modalities.  A CPAP Follow -Up Questionnaire (CFQ) will also be given after each randomization period to 
score the comfort and side -effec ts of treatment.  Finally, therapy usage hours downloaded from the 
Page 4 of 8 
Version 13July2015  device will be used to compare treatment adherence of APAP compared to fixed CPAP.  For subjects 
recruited after clinically starting APAP, once informed consent has been obtained, all clinical information 
after initiation of APAP will be included into the research data.  
 
5. DURATION:  
The study duration for each patient will be 12 -16 weeks.  The protocol will remain open to enrollment 
for 12 months.  Total study duration will be 24 mont hs, allowing for 8 months of data analysis.  
 
6. SELECTION AND RECRUITMENT OF PARTICIPANTS:  
A. Number of participants  
Forty -five subjects will be enrolled in the study, allowing for a 15% drop -out rate. When the total sample 
size is 40, the study design will have  greater than 80% power to detect a difference in means of 1.000 
(from published data, the difference between an APAP 90th pressure percentile of 10.4, SD = 1.4 and a 
mean CPAP titration of 9.4, SD = 1.9)5.  In the crossover portion of the study, when the sample size in 
each sequence group is 20 (total sample size of 40), a 2 x 2 crossover design will have 80% power to 
detect a difference in means of 35.000 (from published data, the difference between an APAP mean 
minutes of use of 306, SD = 114 and a CPAP mean minutes of use of 271, SD = 115) ⁶ using a two group t -
test (Crossover ANOVA) with a 0.05 two -sided significance level.  
B. Inclusion criteria  
Patients aged 5 to 20  years , male or female, of any race  and any socioeconomic background with 
moderate OSA  defin ed as an AHI of ≥5 or obstructive hypoventilation, determined by a measured end 
tidal carbon dioxide level >50 for more than 25% of total sleep time will be included.  
Exclusion criteria  
Those patients with significant cranio -facial abnormalities, chromosomal abnormalities  that would affect 
compliance , cerebral palsy , significant neurological disease  or neuromuscular disease will be excluded 
from the study.  
C. Recruitment  
Patients seen by pulmonary or sleep providers in the CCHMC pulmonary or sleep c linics who are 
suspected of having OSA based on history and physical exam will be referred in the usual manner to the 
sleep center for a diagnostic sleep study.   Those patients who meet inclusion criteria will be referred by 
their provider for enrollment i n the study.  Standard practice is for the patient to return to sleep clinic 
approximate ly 2 weeks after diagnostic PSG for follow -up and to discuss treatment options.  Patients will 
be recruited for enrollment  during that clinic visit.  
D. Vulnerable populati ons 
Subjects younger than 18 years old are considered vulnerable to coercion or undue influence and 
additional safeguards will be used to protect that population.  Assent will be obtained after age -
appropriate explanation of the study.  The child will only  participate voluntarily and will have the 
opportunity to withdraw at any time for any reason, independen t of their parent or guardian.  Assent 
will be reaffirmed before study procedures are performed.   
 
7. PROCESS OF OBTAINING CONSENT:  
Page 5 of 8 
Version 13July2015  Informed consent for study participation will be obtained by the principle investigator or CCHMC 
research nurse during the patient’s initial clinic visit following diagnostic PSG.  The consent form will be 
reviewed in detail with the patient and his or her parent or guardian, and any of their questions 
regarding the study will be answered.  Subjects aged 11 through 17 will sign their assent.  Parents of 
subjects aged 5 through 17 will sign the consent /parental permission  form.  Those subjects aged 18 
through 20 will sign their own consent for study participation.  All those signing consent will receive a 
copy of the signed consent form.  No study -related procedures will be initiated until informed consent is 
signed.   
 
8. STUDY PROCEDURES:  
Once the patient has been enrolled in the study at the time of the first clinic visit following diagnostic 
PSG, the subject and/or parent will complete the Michigan Pediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) , 
Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) and Epwor th Sleepiness Scale  (ESS).  This is standard practice 
for all patients seen in sleep clinic at each visit.   The enrolled subject will be fitted with an appropriate 
CPAP interface (mask apparatus) by an experienced sleep technologist, and will be trained on  use of the 
Respironics REMstar Auto device which will be set to APAP.  The subject  will continue to use the device 
at home every night for 4 to 8 weeks.  During that period of time the subject will return for an in -
hospital CPAP titration study .  The CPAP  titration study is the current standard of care for those 
diagnosed with OSAS and for whom treatment with CPAP is prescribed.  Follo wing CPAP titration the 
subject  will return to clinic , a standard practice  to initiate CPAP therapy.  At that visit , device  data from 
the treatment period will be downloaded including therapy us age hours, average 90th pressure 
percentile  and average CPAP pressure.  The PSQ, PedsQL and ESS will be re -administered, per current 
clinical practice.  He or she will also complete a C PAP Follow -Up Questionnaire (CFQ) to score the 
comfort and side -effects of treatment.  Questions similar to those found in the CFQ are typically 
reviewed with the patient during the regular clinic visit, however, for the purposes of the study, we will 
stan dardize those questions.  The subject  will then be randomized in a double blind fashion to either 
traditional fixed pressure CPAP at the pressure determined by in -hospital titratio n or APAP.  This 
treatment will continue for 4 wee ks, after which time the s ubject  will return to clinic  (standard follow -up 
after initiating CPAP therapy) , where the PSQ, PedsQL, ESS and CFQ will be re -administered and data 
from the device will be downloaded.  Treatment will continue for another 4 we eks on the alternative 
setting  with the same device and same mask interface.  The subject  will present for follow -up sleep clin ic 
appointment at the end of the second randomization per iod, at which time he or she  will complete 
another PSQ , PedsQL, ESS and CFQ.  I nformation from the dev ice will be downloaded, and the study will 
end.   This final clinic visit will occur approximately 1 month sooner than the typical follow -up 
appointment, but in all, the patient will not have additional visits beyond the standard clinical practice.    
A. Drugs,  Devices and Biologics:  
The Respironics REMstar Auto device will be used during this study period to deliver both APAP and 
fixed CPAP.  It currently has FDA approval for treatment of patients weighing >30 kg with OSAS .  As a 
comparison , one of the most com mon devices used to deliver fixed CPAP to CCHMC patients at home 
(REMstar Pro C -flex+) also carries the same >30 kg indication, however, the device is frequently used off 
label to treat smaller children  in routine clinical practice . The device will be disp ensed in Pulmonary 
Page 6 of 8 
Version 13July2015  Sleep Disorders clinic at the appropriate study visit. A log will be kept documenting the serial number 
and information on patient use. The e quipment will be kept in locked areas when not in use.  
B. Studies Using Surveys or Questionnaires:  
The Pediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) was developed by researchers at the University of Michigan and 
has been used extensively in both research and clinical applications to determine the presence of sleep 
related breathing disorders and associated sympto ms in children.  Validity and reliability of the PSQ was 
demonstrated in a study conducted by Chervin, et al. which was published in 2000 ⁷.  It was also 
validated in a pilot study conducted here at CCHMC ⁸.  The Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory 4.0 
(Peds QL) is an instrument designed to measure health -related quality of life in children and adolescents 
aged 2 -18.  It was shown to be a valid and reliable means of measuring quality of life for use in clinical 
trials, research, clinical practice, school healt h settings, and community populations  according to 
conclusio ns of a study published in 2001⁹ .  The Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) is an 8 item questionnaire 
determined to be a valid and reliable means of measuring dayti me sleepiness in adult patients¹⁰ .  The 
ESS has been modified for use in pediatric patients, however, the modified version has not yet been 
validated.  Current clinical practice at CCHMC is to administer the original ESS to all pediatric sleep 
patients.  The CPAP Follow -Up Questionnaire was d eveloped for use in this study .  The items included  in 
this questionnaire are typically reviewed with patients in  sleep clinic regarding side -effects, patient 
comfort, problems encountered with CPAP use and adherence to treatment.   It has not been validated, 
but is merely a means of collecting the above information.  
 
9. DATA ANALYSIS/METHODS:  
For each patient, 90th APAP pressure percentile, average CPAP pressure delivered and therapy usage 
hours will be downloaded from the APAP device  and recorded in a central database which will be stored 
on secure CCHMC servers.  Questionnaire responses and CPAP titration values for each patient will be 
stored in like manner.  Based on the study’s outcome variables we anticipate requiring enrollment of 45 
patients to power the study adequately, and to have enough subjects of each race, gender and pre -and 
post -adolescent ages.  For analysis of the primary outcome of APAP run -in period vs. CPAP titration 
pressure, statistical analysis of the data will b e completed using the standard 2 tailed paired t -test or 
Wilcoxon Signed -Rank test.  To determine the effect of treatment on adherence and quality of life 
outcomes as well as any carry over effect in the crossover portion of the study, an appropriate mixed  
effects model including period, sequence, and subject effects will be employed ¹¹. 
 
10. FACILITIES and PERFORMANCE SITES:  
All research activities will take place at CCHMC facilities including the CCHMC Pulmonary Sleep Center 
(sleep lab),  pulmonary sleep clinic  on M ain campus, and pulmonary slee p clinic on Liberty Campus.  
 
11. POTENTIAL BENEFITS:  
Potential benefits to the pa tient enrolled in the study include the ability to receive prompt  treatment for 
sleep disordered breathing  once his or her diagnostic sleep stud y is read, instead of awaiting results 
from a subsequent CPAP titration study, as is the current practice.  Subjects would benefit from the 
ability to use a machine that is potentially more comfortable than fixed CPAP, with potential for better 
Page 7 of 8 
Version 13July2015  adherence t o thera py, translating to improved resolution of symptoms and improved quality of life.   
Future patie nts may derive similar benefits from these study findings.   
  
12. POTENTIAL RISKS, DISCOMFORTS, INCONVENIENCES AND PRECAUTIONS:  
There are no identifiable risks  to the patient receiving the treatment being studied, above those risks 
conveyed with conventional therapy.  There are no known risks to pregnant patients.  All research 
procedures including the clinic visits and questionnaires are included in current cli nical prac tice, with the 
exception of a 15  item questionnaire (CFQ) that will be given to s tudy participants in the final 3  clinic 
visits.  There is a risk of unintentional disclosure of patient health information  (PHI) .  All patient 
identifiers will be removed at the time of data entry into a secure database.   Adverse events , including 
unanticipated problems and disclosure of PHI  will be conveyed to the CCHMC IRB and to the Pharmacy 
and Therapeutics Committee consistent with the requirements of each of t hese organizations.   
 
13. RISK/BENEFIT ANALYSIS:    
This is a minimal ris k study with a potential benefit to participants and to future patients.  
 
14. DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING:  
To protect the confidentiality of study subjects, all information will be entered into a secure database 
that is password protected . Subjects will be assigned study subject identifiers  for data downloaded from 
the CPAP/APAP device, questionnaire responses and CPAP titration study results . The da tabase will be 
maintained by study  nurses and respiratory therapists .  Data will be published in aggregate format only, 
without the possibility of identifying individual participants.   This study will not include a DSMB.  The 
data safety monitoring plan includes a review of adverse events by the PI at regular bi -weekly  research 
team meetings.  Adverse events that meet the criteria of reportable events will be reported to the IRB 
per hospital policy.  All other adverse events will be reported to the IRB in table form at the time of IRB 
revie w.  The study will be stopped for review if any study related adverse event results in hospitalization 
of the subject.  
 
15. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY:  
We will take all precautions to protect the privacy of our subjects and their families by respecting their 
requests regarding contact preferences.  We will protect confidentiality by protecting patient’s PHI.  
Subjects will be given a study ID that does not include any personal identifiers.  All PHI will be removed 
and the study ID will be used in databases and  all study records.  The ID code and the research records 
will be maintained in a secured location and/or in password protected databases.  CCHMC’s IRB will 
have the right to inspect and review all records.  
 
16. COST OF PARTICIPATION:  
All of the clinic visits and sleep studies (initial diagnostic and CPAP titration) will be done for clinical 
indications and do not deviate from the standard of care.  They will therefore be billed to the patient’s 
insurance company in the usual manner.  The REMstar Auto devices w ill be provided by Respironics for 
use in the study without charge.  
 
Page 8 of 8 
Version 13July2015  17. PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION:  
No reimbursement will be provided to the study participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES : 
1. Sinha D, Guilleminault C. Sleep disordered breathing in children . Indian J Med Res 2010; 131:311 -20. 
2. Lumeng JC, Chervin RD. Epidemiology of Pediatric Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Proceedings of the 
American Thoracic Society  2008;5(2):242 -52. 
3. Alkhalil M, Lockey R. Pediatric obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) for the allergist: update on 
the assessment and management. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol  2011;107(2):104 -9. 
4. Nussbaumer Y, Bloch KE, Genser T, Thurnheer R. Equivalence of Autoadjusted and Constant 
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure in Home Treatment of Sleep Apnea*. CHEST Journal  
2006;129(3):638 -43. 
5. Fietze I, Glos M, Moebus I, Witt C, Penzel T, Baumann G. Automatic pressure titration with APAP is 
as effective as manual titration with CPAP in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Respiration  
2007;74(3):279 -86. 
6. Massie CA, McArdle N, Hart RW, Schmidt -Nowara WW, Lankford A, Hudgel DW, et al. Comparison 
between automatic and fixed positive airway pressure therapy in the home. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med  2003;167(1):20 -3. 
7. Chervin RD, Hedger K, Dillon JE, Pituch KJ. Ped iatric sleep questionnaire (PSQ): validity and reliability 
of scales for sleep -disordered breathing, snoring, sleepiness, and behavioral problems. Sleep 
Medicine  2000;1(1):21 -32. 
8. Ednick M, Jain S, Fenchel M, Chini B, Simakajornboon N. Initial analysis of s leep outcome tools of the 
quality improvement initiative at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. Sleep  
2009;32(Supplement):A89 .  Presented at SLEEP 2009 (the 23nd Annual Meeting of the Associated 
Professional Sleep Societies), Seattle, Washington , USA.  
9. Varni JW, Seid M, Kurtin PS. PedsQL(TM) 4.0: Reliability and Validity of the Pediatric Quality of Life 
Inventory(TM) Version 4.0 Generic Core Scales in Healthy and Patient Populations. Medical Care  
2001;39(8):800 -12. 
10. Johns MW. Reliability and factor  analysis of the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Sleep  1992;15(4):376 -81. 
11. Jones, Byron and Kenward, Michael G., 2003, Design and Analysis of Cross -Over Trials: Second 
Edition,  Chapman & Hall/CRC, New York,  NY, p.382.  
 