Study Protocol 
Study Title: Narrative  Exposure Therapy for Justice‐ Involved Veterans 
NCT Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Document  Date: 4/21/2020  
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 1 of 31  
Background, Significance, and Specific Aims 
Data from the National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study found that nearly half of 
all Vietnam combat Veterans with posttraumatic st ress disorder (PTSD) had been arrested one or 
more times (Center, 2008), and several more recent studies ha ve identified co mbat exposure, 
PTSD, and combat-related moral injury as predictors of criminal justice involvement and 
violence in Veterans of the wa rs in Iraq and Afghanistan  (Angkaw et al., 2013; Dennis et al., 
2017; Elbogen et al., 2012; Elboge n et al., 2014; Jakupcak et al ., 2007; MacManus et al., 2015; 
Van Voorhees et al., 2016). Finally, childhood maltreat ment has been identifie d as risk factor for 
violent crime in both Veterans and non-Veteran samples (Flana gan, Teer, Beylotte, Killeen, & 
Back, 2014; WIDOM, 1989), and research has found higher rates of childhood abuse and other 
adverse childhood experiences in Veterans compared to their civilian counterparts (Blosnich, Dichter, Cerulli, Batten, & Bossarte, 2014; Zinzow, Grubaugh, Monnier, Suffoletta-Maierle, & Frueh, 2007).  
 A body of research has evolved outside of the U.S. for a type of tr auma focused therapy, 
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET), which was speci fically developed for su rvivors of organized 
violence (Alghamdi, Hunt, & Thomas, 2015; Bichescu, Neuner, Schauer, & Elbert, 2007; Crombach & Elbert, 2015; Ertl et al., 2011; Hermenau et al., 2013; Orang et al.; Robjant & 
Fazel, 2010; Schauer, Nuener, & Elber, 2011). NET also has a specialized adaptation, Narrative 
Exposure Therapy for Forensic Offender Rehabi litation (FORNET), designed to address the 
treatment needs of those who ha ve committed acts of violence and struggle with community 
reintegration after wartime and/ or incarceration. FORNET, in part icular, explicit ly calls into 
question the victim/perpetrator duality in its appr oach to interrupting the cycle of violence in 
traumatized offenders (Hecker, Hermenau, Cromb ach, & Elbert, 2015). This approach has been 
found to be effective in reducing PTSD symptoms  and aggression in seve ral contexts (Crombach 
& Elbert, 2015; Ertl, Pfeiffer, Schauer, Elbert, & Neuner, 2011; Hecker et al., 2015; Hermenau, 
Hecker, Schaal, Maedl, & Elbert, 2013; Hinsberger et al., 2017).  The flexibility of having the 
option to use either NET or FORNET with U.S. mil itary Veterans may be particularly powerful, 
given that this population is lik ely to have varying inciden ce of perpetration experiences. 
 Rationale for the Therapeutic Approach 
Trauma focused therapy for PTSD: The fear network.  The majority of therapies currently em ployed to treat PTSD are based upon the fear 
network model which holds that traumatic experien ces create a unique form of memory. In a 
traumatic memory, trauma-related cues become  powerfully associated with a fear network 
comprised of sensory (sight of blood, smell of  perpetrator), cognitive (“I will die”, “I am 
helpless”), emotional (fear, anger), and physiolo gical (heart racing, swea ting) elements. Many of 
these elements of memory are stored pre-verb ally, and trauma surviv or’s efforts to avoid 
thinking about traumatic material  keeps these memories walled  off from verbal processing. 
PTSD develops when the trauma memory rema ins walled off and is not integrated into 
autobiographical memory. Because the trauma memory remains unintegrated and thus unmoored 
from time, place, and context, trig gers related to one element of the trauma memory (i.e. a smell 
reminiscent of the perpetrator, feeling the heart racing) can activate the entire fear network, even 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 2 of 31 in situations where there is no actual threat (Foa, Huppert, & Cahill, 2006; Schauer, Neuner, & 
Elbert, 2011).  
The existence of the fear network forms the th eoretical basis for one of the therapies for 
PTSD treatment that has received  the most support, Prolonged Exposure Therapy (PE).  PE seeks 
to recontextualize the trauma in  time and place, with the ther apeutic goal of reducing avoidance 
symptoms and preventing the maladaptive reactiva tion of the trauma-related fear network in the 
absence of threat (Foa et al., 2006; Schauer et al., 2011). 
Some forms of PTSD-related aggression can also be accommodated by the fear network 
model. Reactive aggression, for example, is a form of aggression that occurs in the context of 
perceived threat, and is typically  associated with impulsive lash ing out in response to fear and 
negative affect. Cognitive biases associated with perceiving threat in  ambiguous or neutral 
situations have been associated with both PTSD and with ag gression (Taft, Creech, & Murphy, 
2017; Taft et al., 2015), and in fact addressing these biases is a fundamental element of the 
Strength at Home Program for Vete rans who have used violence in intimate relationships (Taft, 
Macdonald, Creech, Monson, & Murphy, 2016).    
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET): The fear network and chronic trauma 
NET is an empirically supported therapy for PTSD that, like PE, is based upon the 
construct of the fear network as being fundamental to the de velopment and maintenance of 
PTSD. NET differs from PE, however, in that it  does not focus on a single index trauma, but 
rather takes a “lifeline” perspec tive that allows for the identific ation and processing of multiple 
traumatic events within a broader developm ental context. This therapy was developed 
specifically to treat individuals with comple x, cumulative trauma who live in low resource 
situations of ongoing instability or threat (Schau er et al., 2011). Several RCTs have demonstrated 
NET to be effective in treating PTSD and impro ving functioning in refugees, asylum seekers, 
former child soldiers, and demobilized combatan ts in war-torn areas, including those who have 
experienced high levels of cumula tive trauma such as child maltreatment, war, genocide, and/or 
torture (Alghamdi, Hunt, & Thomas, 2015; Bi chescu, Neuner, Schauer, & Elbert, 2007; 
Crombach & Elbert, 2015; Ertl et al., 2011; Hermenau et al., 2013; Orang et al.; Robjant & 
Fazel, 2010).   
Brief description of NET.  NET begins with a session of  psychoeducation that reviews 
the symptoms of PTSD and how they develop, and provides the ra tionale for the therapy. In the 
second session patients create a “lif eline” using a rope or string to  symbolize the flow of their 
lives from birth to the present, placing flowers along the rope to  symbolize positive events or 
people in their lives, and stones to  symbolize losses or traumatic events. Over the following 6 to 
8 sessions, patients narrate the most important events of their lives  as the therapist takes notes 
and asks questions to facilitat e processing. When traumatic even ts are reached, the pace of 
narration is slowed, and the therap ist encourages the patient to de scribe the event slowly and in 
great detail. The detailed narration of each trauma allows for processing of traumatic material so 
that it can be integrated into the broader life st ory, and so that it can be contextualized as an 
event that happened at a specific tim e and place in the past. In the context of social injustice or 
oppression, NET also offers the possibility of in tegrating other factors known to contribute to 
criminal behavior and/or vi olence into the broader pers onal narrative, including poverty 
(Markowitz, 2003), injustice (Beugré, 2005), and racial discrimination (Brody et al, 2006; 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 3 of 31 McCord & Ensminger, 2003; Simons , Chen, Stewart, & Brody, 2003).  
As in other forms of exposure therapy, the session does not end until the patient’s 
emotional response has peaked in  intensity and the level of di stress has begun to diminish. 
During each session, the therapist takes notes on the na rration and the account is read back to the 
patient at the beginning of the next session.  After corrections are made, the narration process 
continues until the entire lifeline is complete. The final session involves reconstruction of the 
lifeline, and discussion of hopes for the future. The patient is offered a copy of the written 
narration (Schauer et al., 2011).  
 
FORNET: Trauma and aggression in th e context of organized violence 
FORNET was developed as an extension of NET for use with individuals who have both 
experienced and used violence. It is not uncom mon for ex-combatants an d traumatized violent 
offenders to report that their wo rst trauma involved ha rm to others (Hinsb erger et al., 2017), and 
the commission of violent acts in war has been  found to be associated with distress and 
impairment over and above the effe cts of PTSD (Dennis et al., 2017) . Within the past decade the 
unique psychological sequelae that ar e associated with harming othe rs in the context of war has 
begun to be studied under the c onstruct of “moral injury” (Lit z et al., 2009; Maguen et al., 2017). 
Pointing to the complexity of th e relationship between trauma and aggression, there is evidence 
that combat Veterans can come to  regard violence as appealing, even as they are traumatized by 
their own violent acts (Weierstall, Castellanos, Neuner, & Elbert, 2013).  
Developed for situations where the victim/perpe trator duality is not clear cut, FORNET 
integrates social learning theory with  a theoretical foundation that proposes a hunting network 
that operates in parallel to the fear network (Hecker et al., 2015). Human history is replete with 
examples where hunting behaviors or aggression against other human s has resulted in social and 
evolutionary advantages, and this has resulted in the devel oped of a reward-driven network 
where violence cues can elicit an approach or attack response (Hecker et al., 2015; Weierstall & 
Elbert, 2011). While the hunting ne twork can include many of these same elements as the fear 
network, the associated affective valence is positive and can be associated with feelings of power, control, and self-efficacy. For example, th e sight of blood and the feeling of the heart 
racing can be paired with cogniti ons of “I defeated the enemy” and “I am strong”, and with 
emotions such as exhilaration, fascination, and excitement (Heck er et al., 2015; Weierstall & 
Elbert, 2011). Aggression associated with posit ive feelings is known in  the literature as 
“appetitive aggression” (Weierstall & Elbert, 2011), an experience that in some military circles 
has been referred to as a “combat high” (Grossman, 1995).   
The overlap between the fear and hunting networks in violence-related PTSD can give 
rise to some of the confus ion and enduring psychological distress experienced by combat 
Veterans who have used violence in the context of war. Failure to  integrate both th e fear and the 
hunting network into processing of traumatic events involving harm to others may contribute to 
the higher rate of non-responders  to trauma-focused thera py for PTSD among traumatized 
individuals with a history of violence (Stenmark, Guzey, Elbert, & Holen, 2014).  
While over time the hunting network can become dominant as a mechanis m of adapting 
to situations of ongoing violence, there appears to  be a spectrum of appe titive violence even 
among those who have participated in situations of chronic violence and combat. Consistent with 
the construct of a “cycle of vi olence”, high levels of appetitive  aggression are most common in 
situations of the most severe and unrelenting viol
ence, where ceasing to feel distress at others’ 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 4 of 31 suffering may be self-protective (Weierstall & Elbert, 2011). In many cases, however, tension is 
likely to remain between fear and hunting ne tworks, and the cultural prohibitions against 
harming others are likely to continue to be a pa rt of an individual’s id entity.  In such cases, 
PTSD symptoms, moral injury, and other trauma  sequelae may be part icularly severe. For 
example, in our own research with U.S. Veterans  who had been deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan, 
we found that 14% of participants endorsed the item, “I came to realiz e during the war that I 
enjoyed violence” at a level of “sometimes” or “o ften”, and that endorseme nt of this item was 
significantly positively associated with PTSD sy mptoms, moral injury, suicidality, aggression, 
depression, and trauma-related guilt.   
 Brief description of FORNET .  
FORNET builds upon NET by nonjudgmentally  acknowledging all emotions and 
experiences associated with experiencing and us ing violence, and by anch oring both the negative 
and positive aspects of these events firmly in the past. It seeks to “d econstruct” the hunting 
network by linking the positive elements of viol ence to a specific time and context, and by 
reinforcing the association of positive, appet itive emotions to more prosocial or socially 
acceptable activities in the present. FORNET al so devotes specific attention to focusing on 
building an identity as a citizen, rather than a “criminal” or an “offender” (Hecker et al., 2015).  
 Much of the process of FORNET is s imilar to NET. FORNET begins with 
psychoeducation and building the ra tionale for the therapy, and patie nts build a “lifeline” of the 
flow of their lives from birth to the present. In  addition to flowers symbolizing positive events 
and stones symbolizing loss or trauma, patients have the option to use sticks to represent 
situations in which they harmed another person. Sticks can be combined with flowers or stones 
to reflect the complexity of these situations. Du ring the narration of even ts, the therapist helps 
patients to identify their feelings at the time, an d to juxtapose those with  their current feelings, 
firmly anchoring the events and all associated c ognitions and affect in th e past. After narration of 
such an event, the therapist can help patients identify the meaning of the events from their 
current point of view (Hecker et al., 2015).  
 In situations where someone has harmed anot her person more than once, the first event is 
often critical because it is most likely 1) to  have required particular effort to overcome 
neurobiological and cultural aversi on to harming others; and 2) to  involve particularly salient 
awareness of personal vulnerability that contribu ted to the ability to ove rcome those inhibitions 
(Hecker et al., 2015; Weierstall & Elbert, 2011). Attention to these el ements of the first event can 
be particularly important in help ing individuals make meaning of this experience. At the end of 
each session, the patient and therapist focus on how their understanding of their history can 
inform what they want to make of  their future (Hecker et al., 2015).  
The final session focuses specifically on developing perspectives for the future, 
strengthening self-efficacy for engaging in a positive, values-driven life, and identifying positive people in patients’ lives who car e about their future. The final session also includes asking 
patients to recall a recent prosocial event where they experien ced feelings of excitement, power, 
enjoyment, pride, or control, a nd to recount this in detail. Rath er than continuing the story until 
the intensity of the emotion diminishes, however , the therapist stops the narration at the most 
exciting part. This experience is intended to pr ime the creation of a positive associative network 
with prosocial experiences, and to reinforce the sense that the patient
  can create positive 
experiences in the future that are aligned with an identity consiste nt with their values (Hecker et 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 5 of 31 al., 2015).   
 A New Approach to Trauma Treatment fo r U.S. Military Veterans: VETNET 
 Though there is limited research on factor s that moderate the success of NET or 
FORNET with traumatized individuals  who have used violence agai nst others, the studies that do 
exist suggest that increased political or social stability, and perceptions of personal role change 
from “offender” or “combatant” to a more posit ive, pro-social community identity, may reduce 
the risk of recidivism (Kobac h, Schaal, Hecker, & Elbert, 20 17). The idea of integrating 
reparations with self-forgiveness and fostering r econnection with the community is also part of 
treatments for moral injury (i.e. adaptive disclosure; Litz et al, 2009) and is consistent with the 
principles of restorative justice (Latimer, Dowden, & Muise, 2005; Morrison & Ahmed, 2006).  
 Building upon the foundation of NET and FO RNET, we propose to adapt these therapies 
for use with US military Veterans. Specifically, during the lifeline exercise the therapist will elicit discussion of what are often life-altering military-relate d events including military training, 
deployments, and separation from the military. Participants will be offered the option to use 
sticks to symbolize events where they harmed a nother person. If participan ts do not indicate that 
they have ever harmed another person, then th e NET protocol will be used, though the possibility 
of using FORNET will be kept open if disclosure  of harm is made later on in therapy. If 
participants do choose to use stic ks in their lifeline, then the therapist will be alert to the 
possibility of needing to addr ess moral injury or appetitive aggression by using adaptations 
specific to the FORNET protocol.   
For all Veterans, whether the NET or FORNET pr otocol is used, therapists will include in 
the final session a component that will be unique  to VETNET and that draws upon elements of 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (Hayes, 2004)  and Adaptive Disclosure Therapy (Litz et 
al, 2009).  This session will include an invitation to Veterans to consider how they will reconnect 
with their communities in ways that will build up on their strengths. The therapist will work with 
Veterans to identify their values, and how they would best act upon these va lues to contribute in 
meaningful ways to their communities. Exampl es could be working at an animal shelter, 
volunteering at a church, joining a Veterans ’ service organization, or volunteering for a 
community garden, homeless shelter, or Habitat for Humanity. The therapist will help Veterans 
identify clear behavioral goals for following through on these ideas.  The end of the final session 
will also include an evaluation and referral to serv ices the Veteran is eligib le for, either within 
the VA or in the community, such as housing assi stance, educational assi stance, or employment 
training, to continue to support successful reintegration.    
  
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 6 of 31 Specific Aims 
 
The overall objective of this application is to ga ther data on the feasibility and acceptability of 
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET) in a pilot samp le of Veterans with PTSD and history of 
anger and aggression. We are also interested in evaluating whether th e intervention has the 
potential to have an effect on key clinical outcomes, includi ng PTSD symptoms, suicidality, 
substance abuse, and aggression.  The following Specific Aims  have been developed for this project:  
 Aim 1: Evaluate study feasibility and treatment de livery procedures of Narrative Exposure 
Therapy (NET) in Veterans  with PTSD and hist ory of anger and aggression. Data gathered will 
include recruitment rates, drop- out rates, adverse event frequency and severity, participant 
engagement in treatment, and therapist fidelity.    Aim 2: Collect data on appropriateness of assessment measures of ke y clinical constructs in the 
Veteran population. Clinical outcomes evaluated will include PTSD symptoms, suicidality, substance abuse, and aggression.    
Methods 
 Overview of Study Visits This pilot feasibility trial will use a randomized controlled design to 1) evaluate and refine the 
treatment access and delivery procedures in a Veteran samp le; 2) evaluate and develop 
procedures to ensure therapist fidelity; 3) ev aluate the adequacy of outcome measures (i.e. 
distribution of scores, potential ceiling or floor effects); and 4)  identify potential reasons for 
treatment adherence and treatment dropout. 
 Participants will be screened over the phone to determine whether basic inclusion criteria are 
met, after which they will be invited to an in -person screening visit at the laboratory. At the 
laboratory screening and baseline visit, informed  consent will be obtained. Veterans who meet 
inclusion criteria will be assigned to NET   
 Study participation will include a ba seline visit, participation in 10 weekly therapy sessions if 
randomized to NET a post-treatment follow-up visit, and completion of 3-month follow-up 
questionnaires by mail.   Participants We expect that it will be necessary to complete  a total of 29 in-person baseline assessments to 
enroll a final sample of 20 eligible participan ts. Based on Dr. Van Voorhees’ previous pilot RCT 
enrollment rates, we anticipate 70% of those screened to be  eligible for participation. 
  
Table 2. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Participants must meet all inclusion criteria: Participants who meet any one of the 
exclusion criteria will be exclude d:               
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 7 of 31  Is a Veteran; 
 Has a history of physical aggression; 
 Meets current crite ria for PTSD.  
   Currently incarcerated; 
 Current, active psychosis; 
 Is at imminent risk for suicide or 
homicide warranting immediate intervention; 
 Substance abuse that is severe enough to 
prevent full engagement in the study 
protocol; 
 Is unable to unwilling to complete study procedures. 
  Concurrent trauma-focused psychotherapy including Prolonged Exposure Therapy (PE), Cognitive Processin
g Therap y (CPT), or EMD R 
  Recruitment Potential participants will be recruited through referr als by clinicians who work with Veterans 
with a history of aggressive behaviors, incl uding Lucas Vrbsky, the Incarcerated Veterans 
Reentry Specialist for VISN 6; Courtney Ma’a t, the Durham VAMC’s Health Care for Reentry 
Veterans Specialist & Veteran’s Justice Outr each Coordinator; Kathy Williams-Brown, the 
Interpersonal Violence Program Coordinator fo r the Durham VAMC; and Jeremy Brogden, the 
Veterans Justice Outreach Specialist for the Durham VAMC.   Clinicians working with these Veterans will intr oduce the study to them, using the attached IRB-
approved clinician card as a guide. Similar to VA consults, a clinician ca n refer a participant 
directly to our clinic by adding the study PI or study coordinator as a co-signer to a note in CPRS 
in which the clinician has documented that the participant wishes to be contacted about participation. If Veterans are interested in par ticipation, they will also be given a business card 
and brochure containing contact info rmation for the study coordinator.  
 We also plan to use several other recruitment strategies. First, we will use VA Data Access Request Tracker (DART) requests to identify Veterans with PTSD who have attended at least one appointment in the Veterans  Justice Outreach clinic to be  mailed invita tional letters 
informing them of this study. Second, the Durham  VAMC is the primary site for the VISN 6 
Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinic al Center (MIRECC), which focuses on Post-
Deployment Mental Health of  OEF/OIF/OND-era Veterans. As  of February 2013, over 2,500 
Afghanistan/Iraq era Veterans have participated in the VI SN 6 MIRECC’s study, the Study of 
Post-Deployment Mental Health (IRB# 00933). A majo rity of those Veterans have agreed to be 
re-contacted regarding participation in future research studies regarding post-deployment issues 
as part of their enrollment in  the Re-Contact Database of th e VISN 6 MIRECC Post-Deployment 
Mental Health Data Repository (IRB# 01706). Application to recru it from the Re-Contact 
Database of the VISN 6 MIRECC Post-Deploym ent Mental Health Data Repository will be 
made to the VISN 6 MIRECC Director (Dr. John Fairbank) in accordance with IRB and R&D approved data repository pro cedures. Third, Peter Tillman, the Chief of the Health 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 8 of 31 Administration Service the Durham VA Health Care  System, has compiled a list of Veterans 
who were Other Than Honorably (OTH) discharged  from service, and has agreed to share these 
lists with the study team. Veterans  with OTH discharge status are at greater risk for suffering 
from psychiatric conditions, are at higher risk for suic ide, and are more likely to have a history of 
incarceration than Veterans with  honorable discharge status (E lbogen, et al, 2018; Reger et al, 
2015). Veterans identified as having an OTH discharge status are eligible for participation in this 
study. Fourth, we plan to recr uit from the Trau matic Stress and Health  Laboratory’s “Contact 
Database,” IRB #1080; this databa se contains information about previous lab study participants 
who have agreed to be contacted about ot her studies for which they may qualify.  
 
Any potential participant who is identified via a DART reques t, through the VISN 6 MIRECC 
Repository, via Mr. Tillma n’s list, or through the  Traumatic Stress and Health Laboratory’s 
“Contact Database” will be sent a recruitment le tter that provides basic information about the 
study. The letter will inform Veterans that they  will be contacted by phone in the coming days 
regarding their interest in partic ipating in the study. In the letter , potential participants will be 
given an “opt-out” number to call in order to decline participation an d/or further contact 
regarding participation. Seven busin ess days after the mailing, Ve terans who have not called the 
toll-free number to decline participation will be called by the st udy coordinator to request their 
participation in the research study.   Study staff members will perform ra ndom spot-checks of names and addresses on all letters prior 
to mailing. This will capture any sorting error that may have occurred during the preparatory procedures. Any person who cont acts the study coordinator for mo re information about the study 
(whether it be through brochures, word of mouth, etc.) will be informed about the study using the 
IRB-approved telephone screen script. 
 
Additionally, Jeremy Brogden, th e Veterans Justice Outreach Specialist for the Durham VA 
Health Care System, receives notifications from the Durham and Pitt County jail staff and from mental health providers about Veterans who are in custody in these county jails. He also reviews 
weekly arrest records for Wake County and cros s-references these with CPRS to identify 
Veterans in custody in Wake County.
 Mr. Brogden has agreed to share these lists with the study 
team. We note that VA policy prohibits recruitmen t of Veterans while they are incarcerated . Our 
study exclusion criteria also indi cates that incarceration is an exclusion criterion. However, Mr. 
Brogden has noted that individuals in county cu stody are often quickly released, frequently 
within 24-hours of his becomi ng aware of their arrest.   
 Upon receiving these lists each w eek from Mr. Brogden, the study coordinator will use the VINE 
system (a publicly av ailable network providing information regarding custody status) to ensure 
Veterans from Mr. Brogden’s li sts are no longer incarcerated pr ior to mailing IRB-approved 
recruitment letters to the Veterans’ home a ddresses to invite them to participate. Consistent with 
VA policy and with study inclusion/exclusion cr iteria, Veterans will only be eligible to 
participate after they have b een released from custody.  
 Seed recruitment is suitable for sampling “hidden popul ations” of particip ants who are best 
known by their own peers (Heckathorn, 1997).  It in cludes providing incentiv es to participants 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 9 of 31 for referral of other eligible participants. In our model, each part icipant, or seed, will receive 
three coupons to recruit other Veterans in his/ her social networks. The recruitment coupons will 
provide a brief description of the survey and a phone number for contacting the study 
coordinator. The coupon will be marked with a unique identification number (not the study 
identification number) so that when  the coupons are returned to us, the ID number can be used to 
provide a small payment ($15) to  the participant who made the referral. The key connecting the 
participant’s study ID number with the seed ID number will be kept in a database separate from 
other PHI, creating two layers of  separation between the seed ID  and the already-participating 
Veterans’ identifying in formation. Any Veteran who does not wi sh to recruit in this manner will 
not be required to do so. 
 Informed Consent, Screening and Baseline Participants will be pre-screened over the phone to  determine whether basic inclusion criteria are 
met. If the participant passes the phone screen, an in-person assessment/baseline visit will be 
scheduled.   At the in-person screening/baseline visit, info rmed consent with HIPAA authorization will be 
obtained prior to initiati on of study procedures.  
 Screening. The following measures will be used to determin e eligibility criteria, and to gather baseline 
characteristics of the sample   Demographics Questionnaire – A demographics questionnaire will collect demographic 
information including age, race, education, military history, and history of justice-involvement. 
 The Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire  [TLEQ; (E.S. Kubany et al., 2000)] is a brief self-
report inventory that asks about exposure to 21 kinds of potentially traumatic events  from natural 
disasters to sexual abuse. The TLEQ  provides a 7-point response fo rmat to indicate frequency of 
occurrence. This instrument allows for detailed assessment of trauma exposure prior to military 
service, during military service, and following mi litary service. TLEQ resu lts in trauma exposure 
summary categories of combat , childhood sexual assault, ch ildhood violence, adult sexual 
assault, attack, illness and accident. This measure will be administered at baseline to provide an 
index of the range of trauma  exposure in the sample.   
 The Clinician-Administered PTSD Scal e (CAPS) (F. W. Weathers et al., 2013) will be 
administered to evaluate for cu rrent PTSD at baseline and at follow-up. To minimize bias in 
outcomes evaluation, the clinician who conducts th e therapy may administer the baseline CAPS, 
but will not administer the follow-up CAPS. The CA PS has been extensively used with Veterans, 
and its strong evidence of reliability and validity  have established it as the “gold standard” for 
PTSD assessment. PTSD symptoms will be considered present based on the CAPS frequency ≥1/intensity ≥2 rule (Weathers, Keane, & Davidson, 2001). For Veterans with multiple traumas, 
CAPS administration will be modified as reco mmended by the authors of Narrative Exposure 
Therapy (Schauer et al., 2011). Specifically, rather that requiri ng Veterans to choose from among 
multiple events which is the most traumatizing, we will ask Veterans to identify a “type” of 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 10 of 31 trauma (sexual assaults), or a life period during which they expe rienced multiple traumas (i.e. 
combat deployment), upon which to evaluate their experience of PTSD symptomatology. 
 
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-V Disorders Research Version  (SCID; (First, 
Williams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2015)) (selected modules) will be administered to assess for active psychosis and severe substance abuse.   Diagnostic raters will be trained using SCID and CAPS standardized training, which includes 
review of interview manuals, tr aining videotapes, and co-rati ng training with an experienced 
rater. Interrater reliability base d on videotapes of patient interv iews for Axis I diagnoses across 
previous studies has been excellent (kappa = .96).    Baseline measures. If a Veteran is determined to me et inclusion criteria and agrees  to participate in the study, the 
following baseline assessments will be administered. These assessments will also be administered at post-treatment and both ma iled follow-ups, unless otherwise indicated. 
 The Appetitive Aggression Scale (AAS) (Weierstall & Elbert, 2011). This scale has two parts.  
Part 1 is a 17-item scale that asked participants to mark whether they have engaged in or witness 
specific violent acts. Fifteen of these items measure acts that could reflect appetitive aggression 
(e.g. “…made another person scream in pain”) , and two are more cl early reactive (e.g. 
“...defended yourself in a fight”) . If a participant endorses ha ving engaged in any of the 15 
potentially appetitive aggressive be haviors, then Part 2 will be administered.  Part 2 is a 19-item 
scale that asks participants to rate their pe rceptions of aggression on a 5-point Likert scale 
ranging from 0 (disagree) to 4 (agree). Part 2 of the scale has been demonstrated to have 
acceptable reliability, and has been shown to  measure a construct distinct from other 
conceptualizations of aggression (Weierst all & Elbert, 2011). This scale will only be 
administered at baseline and post-treatment. 
 Killing Cognitions Scale (KCS) (Maguen et al., 2017) 
The KCS includes 55 items that eval uate several constructs identifi ed as associated with distress 
in Veterans who have killed in the context of war.  It is currently under psychometric evaluation by the authors; we have obtained permission to  use it for this study from the primary author, 
Shira Maguen. This scale will only be used with  participants who endorse having killed in the 
context of war on Part 1 of the Appetitive Aggression Scale (AAS). 
 PTSD Checklist for the DSM-5 (PCL-5) (Weathers et al., 2013) . On the PCL-5, participants first 
report an autobiographical narrative of a trauma, and subsequently rate how bothered they were 
by each symptom (0 [not at all] – 4 [extremely]) for all DSM-V PT SD symptoms within the past 
week. Psychometric testing is cu rrently underway on the newest version of the PCL; previous 
versions have been found to have high reli ability and validity acro ss trauma populations.  
 The Moral Injury Events Sc ale (MIES) (Nash et al., 2013) . The MIES is an 11-item scale that 
measures moral injury associated with experience s during military service.  Statements related to 
distress or feelings of betrayal  related to potentially morally in jurious events are rated on a 6 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 11 of 31 point scale ranging from 1 (strongly  agree) to 6 (strongly disagree ). Three factors have been 
identified: Transgressions-Self, Transgressions-Othe r, and Betrayal. In tw o samples of Army and 
Air Force personnel, Cronbach’s alphas for the three scales ra nged from .79 to .96, and results 
provided evidence of construct validity  as well (Bryan et al., 2016).   
 
Revised Conflict Tactics Sc ales (CTS2) (Straus, Hamby, Boney-McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996) . The 
CTS2 includes 78 items measuring the use of  psychological and physical attacks by the 
participant, as well as the experience of such  attacks. Participants answer how often these 
behaviors were perpetrated agains t them within a specified time period, as well as how often they 
have perpetrated these aggressive behaviors over that same period: 0 (neve r); 1 (once); 2 (twice); 
3 (3-5 times); 4 (6-10 times); 5 (11-20 times); 6 (more than 20 times).  The original CTS2 
indexed a time period of one year, and was speci fic to aggression with an intimate partner. 
Consistent with previous studi es on Veterans and violence (B eckham et al., 1997), the original 
CTS2 instructions will be modified in 2 ways to  more appropriately reflect the goals of this 
study: 1) the target of the behavior will be expanded from “p artner” to “anyone”;  and 2) the time 
frame of the response will be reduced from one year  to three months to de tect potential changes 
associated with treatment. The CTS2 in cludes the following su bscales: Negotiation, 
Psychological Aggression, Physical  Assault, Sexual Coercion, a nd Injury. Coefficient alphas for 
the CTS2 subscales range from .07 to .95, with good evidence of construct validity (Straus et al., 1996).  Dimensions of Anger Reacti ons (DAR) (Novaco, Swanson, G onzalez, Gahm, & Reger, 2012) . 
The DAR is a 7-item scale measuring the freque ncy, duration, and behavior al response to anger, 
and anger-related functional impairment on social relationships, health, and work.  It was found 
to have concurrent and discrimin ant validity, and to correlate highl y with measures of functional 
impairment, in a large sample  of treatment-seeking soldiers  who had served in Iraq or 
Afghanistan. The DAR will be administered at base line, at each study visit, and at follow-up to 
provide information about the patte rn of change in anger- and a ggression-related cognitions over 
the course of the intervention.  Trauma-Related Guilt Index (TRGI) (Edward S. Kubany et al., 1996) . Guided by appraisal 
theories of emotion, the 32-item TRGI is an index of guilt associated with the experience of 
trauma. Participants rate statements on a 5-point scale ranging from extremely true/extremely guilty (4) to not at all true/not  guilty at all (0). Factor analyses has revealed four scales: 
Hindsight-Bias/Responsibility, Distress, Violat ion of Personal Standards, and Lack of 
Justification. Evidence of internal consistency and va lidity has been found in se veral samples.      
 Beck Depression Inventory (BD I-2) (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996) . The BDI-2 is a 21-item scale 
that evaluates symptoms of depres sion. It is widely used both clin ically and in research, and has 
been found to have high internal consistency (coefficient alpha = .91) with good evidence of 
convergent validity (Dozois,  Dobson, & Ahnberg, 1998). 
 Acquired Capability for Suicide Scale - Fearlessness About Deat h (ACSS-FAD) (Ribeiro et al., 
2014). The Interpersonal Theory of Suicide holds that the capacity to commit suicide requires a 
sense of fearlessness about death and an elevated pain tolerance, both of which can develop as a 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 12 of 31 result of repeated exposure to horrifying experiences involving pain or death. Such experiences 
are not uncommon in soldiers, theoretically  in creasing their risk for suicidal behavior. The 
ACSS-FAD is a 7-item scale that evaluates fearle ssness about death. Participants rate each item 
on a scale of 0 (not at all like me) to 4 (very much like me). Th e scale has been found to have 
good reliability and validity (Ribeiro et al., 2014). 
 
Depressive Symptom Index: Suicidality Subscale (DSI-SS) (Joiner, Pf aff, & Acres, 2002).  The 4-
item scale screens for suicidal ideation over the prior two weeks. Participants rate each item on a scale of 0 (e.g. “I do not have thoughts of killing myself”) to 3 (e.g. “I always have thoughts of 
killing myself”). Strong evidence of reliability and validity has been observed for this scale 
(Joiner et al., 2002).   Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire (INQ) (Van Orden, Cukrowicz, Witte, & Joiner Jr, 2012).  
Based upon the Interpersonal Theory  of Suicide (Joiner Jr et al., 2009), the INQ measures two 
proximal causes of the desire for suicid e: Thwarted belongingness and perceived 
burdensomeness. Participants rate each of the 15 items on a scale of 1 (not at all true for me) to 7 
(very true for me). Support for the reliability and validity of these sc ales has been observed 
across ages and in samples with  varying degrees of psychopat hology (Van Orden et al., 2012).  
 The Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT)  (Bradley, Bush, McDonell, Malone, & 
Fihn, 1998) contains 10 multiple choice questions about behavior  and symptoms related to 
alcohol consumption. The Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST)  (Skinner, 1982) contains 20 
“yes/no” questions about behavior  and symptoms pertaining to s ubstance use.   Both the AUDIT 
and the DAST have shown excellent psychomet ric properties in studies of Veterans.  
 
Study Visits  
 Three licensed clinical psychologists who have been trained by some of the original developers in Narrative Expos ure Therapy will provide ther apy in this study. As needed, 
consultation will be provided via telephone or video conferencing by national expert on NET, 
Liz Wieling, Ph.D., and/or by one of the deve lopers of FORNET, An selm Crombach, Ph.D.  
Participants will attend 10 weekly study vi sits of 90 minutes each. Session one will 
involve a psychoeducation session wherein the sy mptoms and etiology of  PTSD are explained, 
and the rationale for treatment is provided. Sessi on two will include development of the lifeline, 
during which the participant provides an overview of  their life using a rope  or string as symbol 
of the passage of time. The participant places fl owers along the rope to symbolize positive events 
or relationships, and stones to symbolize negativ e events or traumas. A key element of VETNET 
is that the therapist will elicit discussion of wh at are often life-altering military-related events 
including military training, deployments , and separation from the military.  
While creating the lifeline, participants w ill be offered the option to use sticks to 
symbolize events where they harmed another pe rson. If participants do no t indicate that they 
have ever harmed another person, then the ad apted NET protocol wi ll be used, though the 
possibility of using FORNET adapta tions will be kept open if disclo sure of harm is made later on 
in therapy. If participants do choose to use sticks in their lifeline, then th e therapist will be alert 
to the possibility of needing to address moral injury or appetitiv e aggression by using adaptations 
specific to the FORNET protocol.  In sessions th ree through nine particip ants will narrate key 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 13 of 31 events in their lives, with specific focus on trauma tic events as well as events when they harmed 
another person. During traumatic event narration,  therapists will guide participants through 
slowly explaining the details of the event to allow for exposure and processing of previously 
avoided emotions, sensations, and thoughts. Therapis ts will encourage particip ants to stay in the 
trauma memory until anxiety, or other strong emotion, has peaked and has begun to subside. 
During narration of perpetration events, therapists will use a similar protocol, and will focus on 
contextualizing the perpetrati on event and contrasting the memory feelings (what was 
experienced at the time of the ev ent) with the participant’s fee lings in the here and now while 
recalling the event. After each session, the ther apist will create the written version of the 
narrative, and this will be read to the participant at the beginn ing of the following session. After 
the participant has made corrections or additions to the narrative, the process will proceed to the 
next critical event. 
For all Veterans, whether the NET or FORNET pr otocol is used, therapists will include in 
the final session a component that will be unique  to VETNET and that draws upon elements of 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (Hayes, 2004)  and Adaptive Disclosure Therapy (Litz et 
al, 2009).  This session will include an invitation to Veterans to consider how they will reconnect 
with their communities in ways that will build up on their strengths. The therapist will work with 
Veterans to identify their values, and how th ey would best act upon th ese to contribute in 
meaningful ways to their communities. Exampl es could be working at an animal shelter, 
volunteering at a church, joining a Veterans ’ service organization, or volunteering for a 
community garden, homeless shelter, or Habitat for Humanity. The therapist will help Veterans 
identify clear behavioral goals for following through on these ideas.  The end of the final session 
will also include an evaluation and referral to services the Veteran is eligible for either within the VA or in the community such as housing assist ance, educational assistance, or employment 
training, to continue to support su ccessful reinte gration.     
In the final session, the lifeline will also be recreated. The participant will be invited to 
reflect on the meaning that they at tribute to the events, and to develop perspectives for the future. 
The final session also includes as king the patient to recall a re cent prosocial event where they 
experienced feelings of excitement , power, enjoyment, pride, or control, and to recount this in 
detail. Rather than continuing the story until the intensity of the emotion diminishes, however, 
the therapist will stop the narration at the most ex citing part. This experience is intended to prime 
the creation of a positive associative network with prosocial e xperiences, and to  reinforce the 
sense that the patient can create positive experi ences in the future that are aligned with an 
identity consistent with their values.   
To evaluate the change in PTSD symptoms over time, participants will be administered 
the PCL-5 and DAR at each session. 
Participants randomized to TAU will be contacted by phone once each week by the study 
coordinator for a brie f check-in and to comp lete a PCL-5 and DAR. 
 Post-treatment Follow-up Visits 
In-person follow-up interviews and assessmen ts will be conducted with each Veteran 
participant. Follow-up will occur 1 to 2 weeks after the final therapy session (for completers) or 
11 to 12 weeks after baseline (for those who drop out) to assess cha nges in PTSD, perceptions of 
moral injury, anger, aggression, trauma-related guilt, depression, substance use, and suicide-related constructs. For those randomized to TAU, follow-up will occur 11 to 12 weeks after 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 14 of 31 baseline. The CAPS and all baseline assessment s will be re-administere d. The CAPS will not be 
administered by any of the study th erapists.  To assess the degree to which participants trusted 
and felt respected and understood by the therapist, the Helping Alliance Questionnaire (Luborsky 
et al., 1996) will also be administered at the follow-up visit. 
Qualitative interviews following an interv iew guide will be administered to all 
participants. For those completed treatment, questi ons will evaluate treat ment acceptability, as 
well as participants’ impression s of whether and how the therapy was (or was not) helpful to 
them. For those who dropped out, reasons for dropout at each treatment phase  will be explored. 
The qualitative portion of the post-treatment follow-up visit will be audio recorded using the 
Olympus DM-720 4GB Digital Voice Recorder or the Olympus DM-620, which are newer models of the approved-for-use Olympus DM-420. Recordings will be transcribed and analyzed 
using thematic analysis.  Three-month Follow-up  Three months after the final treatment session, packets of questionnaires including the 
baseline measures will be mailed along with a self-addressed, stamped return envelope, to 
participants regardless of drop-out status.   
 
 
 
Measure Screening Baseline Post-
treatment 3 months 
Demographics Questionnaire X      
The Traumatic Life Events 
Questionnaire X      
The Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale X   X  
The Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-V 
(Psychosis, Substance Misuse 
Modules)  X      
The Appetitive Aggression Scale   X  X  
The Killing Cognitions Scale*   X  X  
PTSD Checklist for the DSM-5 (PCL-5)**    X  X  X 
The Moral Injury Events Scale   X  X  X 
Revised Conflict Tactics Scales   X  X  X 
Dimensions of Anger Reactions   X  X  X 
Trauma-Related Guilt Index   X  X  X 
Beck Depression Inventory   X  X  X 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 15 of 31 Acquired Capability for Suicide 
Scale - Fearlessness About 
Death   X  X  X 
Depressive Symptom Index: Suicidality Subscale   X  X  X 
Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire   X  X  X 
The Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test   X  X  X 
The Drug Abuse Screening Test   X  X  X 
The Helping Alliance Questionnaire    X  
     
* The Killing Cognitions Scale will only be administered if participants endorse  having killed in the 
context of war on Part 1 of the Appetitive Aggression Scale. ** To evaluate the change in PTSD symptoms over time, participants will be administered the PCL-5 at 
each session. 
 
Evaluation of Specific Aims 
Specific Aim 1 .  Evaluate study feasib ility and treatment delivery procedures  of Narrative 
Exposure Therapy (NET) in with a history of aggression and  PTSD. Data gathered will include 
recruitment rates, drop-out rate s, adverse event frequency and severity, participant engagement 
in treatment, and th erapist fidelity.  
To evaluate recruitment rates, we will track the number of Veterans who complete the in-
person screening.. To evaluate retention rates, we will consider retention rates > 80% to be 
successful.  Retention will be defined as completing at least 7 of 10 sessions, with the last sessions being a mutually-agreed upon final se ssion. Retention strategies will include: 1) 
reminder calls, texts, and/or emails 24 hours prio r to each study visit; 2) asking each participant 
at the end of each session about his or her inte nt to attend the next session; and 3) small 
appreciation gifts (e.g., pens, magnetized note pads, and thermoses). The second technique has been used successfully in previous clinical tria ls, and also provides in formation for assessing the 
assumption of ignorable attrit ion required for mixed effect s analyses (Leon, Demirtas, & 
Hedeker, 2007).  The third technique has proven ex tremely helpful in recent longitudinal studies, 
resulting in high retention rates (Elliott et al., 2015; Cook et al., 2015; Kimbrel, Meyer et al., 
manuscript in preparatio n; Kimbrel, Flynn et al., 2015). For t hose participants who drop out of 
treatment, we will 1) attempt to contact them to offer compensation for participation in the 
qualitative interview regarding their reasons for withdrawal and in the post-treatment 
assessments; and 2) encourage them to comp lete subsequent study a ssessments. Qualitative 
interviews will be audio recorded, and analyses w ill help identify ways that the intervention can 
be further tailored to reduce dropout and to me et the needs of justice-involved Veterans. 
To facilitate therapist fide lity, consultation will be provided via telephone or video 
conferencing by national expert on NET, Liz Wiel ing, Ph.D, and/or by one of the developers of 
the NET adaptation for traumas involving harm to others, Anselm Crombach, Ph.D. Study therapists will evaluate treatment fidelity afte r every session using checklists specifically 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 16 of 31 developed for NET. This checklist will be adapted to maximize effectiveness in future trials over 
the course of this pilot. 
To evaluate participant rete ntion through the 3 month assessm ent, we will consider the 
larger RCT feasible if 70% of Veterans comp lete the 3 month assess ment. As recommended by 
Wisniewski and colleagues (Wisniewski, Leon, Otto, & Trivedi, 2006), we will maintain 
frequent participant contact throughout the ev aluation period. For example, we will make 
intermittent phone calls to participants to check on their status, and send birthday and holiday cards to encourage a sense of community and ownership of the study.  
Adverse event monitoring is discussed in de tail in the Human Subjects section of this 
proposal. Though we do not anticipate adverse events to be frequent or severe, if we observe a problem with adverse events we  will build precautions into th e structure of the treatment 
protocol and the study design.  Specific Aim 2.  Collect data on appropriateness of assessment measures for measuring key 
clinical constructs in Veterans with a history of aggression. Clinical outcomes evaluated will include PTSD symptoms, suicidality,  substance abuse, and aggression.   
Change scores from baseline to 3 months post-baseline on the CAPS and on measures of 
PTSD symptom severity, perceptions of moral in jury, anger, aggression, trauma-related guilt, 
depression, substance use, and su icide-related constructs will be  calculated using the measures 
listed in the baseline section a bove. Measures will be evaluated fo r acceptable variability, and for 
absence of floor or ceilin g effects in this sample.  
 Participant Payment  Veterans will receive $70 at screening base line, $10 at each study visit for completion of 
assessment measure (PCL-5), and $80 at end- of-study follow-up. They will receive $35 for 
completing and returning 3-month follow-up questionnaires.  To tal possible compensation for 
full study participation will be $330.  For those study visits that occur in the research  laboratory, participants  in both arms may be 
provided with local bus passes in order to facilitate transportation. 
 
Risk/Benefit Analyses 
With regards to completing study m easures, there is a risk of disc omfort or distress in answering 
questions, especially questions  related to traumatic experi ences and PTSD symptomatology. 
There is also a risk of discom fort or distress during narration of traumatic experiences during 
therapy sessions. However, distress and discom fort related to questionnaire completion are 
usually temporary and well-tolerate d. Distress associated with narr ating traumatic events is not 
uncommon, but it is also usually temporary and well-tolerated, and the therapy protocol requires 
that the distress level be diminished before the end of each therapy session. There is a potential 
risk associated with the loss of confidentiality of study data.   
 Protection Against Risk Participants are informed clearl y during the initial in formed consent proce ss that the study is 
completely voluntary, and that they may refuse to  answer any items that they do not wish to 
answer on the questionnaires and inte rviews. They are also informed that they are free to decline 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 17 of 31 participation in any procedure and can withdraw from the study at any time.  
 Please see “Privacy, Confidentiality, and Information Security” section for more detailed information regarding protections  related to storage of electro nic and hard data. To ensure 
confidentiality, all records will be identified by the participant’s identification number, not by 
name. All raw hard copy data will be kept in a lo cked file cabinet in a locked room. Data files 
will be stored in a limited access folder on a s ecure server to which only study staff members 
have access.   Protections Related to Undue Influence  With regards to partic ipant payments, careful consideration has been given to the risk of undue 
financial influence. Veteran pa rticipants can earn up to $330 fo r full participation. We believe 
that the payments proposed are commensurate with the participant burden in this study. 
Screening, therapy visits, and fo llow-up procedures are lengthy, and given that the catchment 
area for our facility is quite larg e, it is not unlikely that any empl oyed participants will need to 
take an entire day off in orde r to travel to the VA and comple te the study procedures. It is 
necessary to provide financial incentive for them to participate b ecause the study does not 
guarantee personal benefits from participation. We believe that the payments proposed are 
appropriate given the time and effort  being asked of th e participants.  
 Data Safety and Monitoring Plan The individuals responsible for da ta safety and monitoring will be  Elizabeth Van Voorhees (PI) 
and the study coordinator. Mech anisms for monitoring and reporting of data safety and adverse 
events (AEs) will include ongoing participant cont act via study personnel, to include check-ins 
about any adverse events, a nd weekly meetings between the PI and study personnel.  
 The PI will meet at least weekly with study pe rsonnel to discuss enrollment, participation, and 
any adverse events or unantic ipated problems. Regular meet ings between investigators, 
therapists and the project ma nager will allow for ongoing progre ss reports, including the number 
of participants currently involved in the study, at trition rates, and scheduled data collection from 
participants, as well as notification and review of any AEs. Safety monitoring for AEs will be 
conducted in real time by the PI and/or study coordinator. Th e following information about 
adverse events will be collected: 1) the onset and resolution of the AE, 2) an assessment of the severity or intensity (use exis ting grading scales whenever possi ble), 3) an assessment of the 
relationship of the event to the study (definitely, probably, possibly or not related), and 4) action 
taken (e.g., none, referral to physician, start or increase concomitant medication). The PI will 
determine the severity of the event, will assign attribution to the event, and will monitor the 
event until its resolution.   Any adverse events will be reported to the I RB in accordance with local guidelines. We will 
follow established laborator y procedures for reviewing events to  determine if they meet criteria 
for reporting as an AE or SAE. In particular , we will pay close attention to any reports from 
participants regarding suicidal  or homicidal ideation, or in creases in aggression or mood 
dysregulation. Any such reports will be reported as required by our local Human Research Protection Program’s research reporting Standards of Practice (SOP). 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 18 of 31  
Based on the study team’s long-term clinical and research experience with patients with high risk 
psychiatric disorders such as PTSD, depression, and anxiety disorders, we have developed IRB-
approved standards of practice for psychiatric emergencies. These standards have been used for 
several years. It is not unexpected that partic ipants will experience increased distress associated 
with the assessment procedures and diagnostic clinical intervie ws. Our extensive clinical and 
research experience suggest that there is no seri ous risk in these patients associated with 
assessment and interview procedures as propose d. Over the past several years, several hundred 
patients with psychiatric diagnoses have participated in our research team’s clinical trials at 
DVAMC, and there have been only rare occu rrences of serious adverse events (i.e., 
hospitalization only) due to te mporary psychiatric symptom in creases. For more information 
regarding our standards of prac tice, please see section “Psychia tric Emergencies” below.  
 Psychiatric Emergencies The Traumatic Stress and Health Research Lab has established IRB-a pproved standards of 
practice (SOP) for the evaluation of risk of suicide and homicid e. All study staff members are 
trained in use of the psychiatric emergencies SO P by a Ph.D. or Masters’ level clinician with 
years of experience in working with persons w ith psychiatric disorders. The SOP includes a 
thorough risk assessment including evaluation of risk factors and protective factors associated 
with both suicide and homicide. Also included in the policy are differential recommendations for 
action based on determinations of low, moderate, or high risk. Any staff member conducting an 
interview in which moderate or high risk is de termined will contact a se nior staff person with 
clinical expertise in risk a ssessment (including the PI, co-i nvestigator(s), and/or DVAMC’s 
Psychiatric Emergency Clinic or  the Emergency Department).  
 
At several time points throughout the study, participants are remi nded that they are asked to 
inform the study therapist, study coordinator, or study PI if th ey experience a psychiatric 
emergency such as homicidal or suicidal ideatio n. In addition, particip ants are provided the 
telephone number of study staff who they can ca ll in the case of psychiatric emergencies, 
including an after-hou rs contact number.  
 
COVID-19 Temporary Study Procedures Participants who are ongoing at the time of the COVID-19 crisis  will complete therapy and 
follow-up visits via phone and/or other approved telehealth platforms. Questionnaires will be 
completed by mail, orally, and/or MyHealthyVet. If enrollment conti nues during the COVID-19 
crisis, study procedures will be completed in th e same manner. The consent process will take 
place by mail and phone.   Safety Concerns. Study therapists will be informed that prior to beginning therapy by telephone 
or telehealth platform, participan ts will need to identify an emergency contact for the participant 
to be used only in true emergencies (e.g., medi cal crisis, high risk suicidal ideation). Second, 
therapists will be asked to confirm the particip ant’s location at the start of every appointment 
(the exact address is ideal) in case they need to contact local emergency personnel in the case of 
a psychiatric or medical  emergency. If any participant expres ses suicidal or homicidal ideation 
(SI and HI, respectively), study staff will respond us ing a standard of practice that has been used 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 19 of 31 successfully in our lab’s past telehealth-based tr ials. The study staff memb er responsible for the 
call will be instructed to gather more inform ation from the participan t, including information 
about plan, means, intent, inte nded victim (in the case of HI) and history of suicidal and 
homicidal behavior. Any participant who expressed SI will be provided with the suicide hotline 
number. The participant will be informed that th e PI may contact him/her to talk more about 
his/her SI or HI. The study coordinator will obtain  current contact information for the participant 
and inform the PI, who will contact the participant as necessary to ensure participant safety. In 
cases of imminent homicidality or suicidality, wh ich are not anticipated, we will seek guidance 
from the Psychiatric Emergency Clinic on best st rategies for follow-up, which could include, but 
is not limited to, self-presentation at the VA’s emergency room with the help of an emergency 
contact, calling 911, or calling lo cal police for a wellness check.  
 Post-Study Referrals for Participants At completion of the post-trea tment assessment, the study therap ist will discuss referrals for 
further treatment or services with the partic ipant. TSHRL has devel oped patient educational 
materials regarding available resources, in cluding portable resource cards for Veteran 
participants. Veteran resources in clude peer support, local Vet Centers, and information about 
treatments available at various clinics at th e DVAMC and local VA community-based outpatient 
clinics, including the PTSD Clinic, Mental Health Clinic, Mental Health Access Clinic, 
Psychiatric Emergency Clinic, and Women’s Health  Clinic. In addition, we provide information 
about non-Veteran specific resources such as local community mental health centers, local 
private mental health providers, and the treatm ent clinics at nearby D uke University Medical 
Clinic. Where applicable and conve nient to the participant, dire ct referral will be made in 
addition to providing resource cards.  
 
Privacy, Confidentiality and Information Security 
 
1. Lists of Data Reviewed and/or Collected for Screening/Recruitment and Conduction of 
Study:  
The Personal Health Information that will be obtained, used, and/or shared for this study includes:   
Identifier(s) Source(s) of Health Information 
 Names  Medical history & physical exam 
informatio n 
 All geographic subdivisions smaller than a 
State, including street  address, city, county, 
precinct, and zip code.  Describe: For the purposes of recruitment, potential participants’ 
mailing address will be used to mail introductory letters. Participants’ address will be used to request payment from VA Financial Services.   Photographs, videotapes, audiotapes, or 
digital or other images 
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates 
directl y related to an individual, includin g birth  Biologic specimens (e.g., blood, tissue, 
urine, saliva). Describe: 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 20 of 31 Identifier(s) Source(s) of Health Information 
date, admission date, discharge date, visit or 
treatment dates, etc.; and all ages over 89,  Describe: Dates of study visits, dates of mental 
health treatment, & date  of study consent will 
be obtained and stored. Date  of study visits will 
be shared with VA Financial Services in order to pa
y participants for stud y participation.   
 Telephone numbers  Progress notes 
 Fax numbers  Diagnostic / Laborator y test results 
 Electronic mail addresses  Operative reports 
 Social Securit y Numbers  Imaging (x-ra y, CT, MRI, etc.) 
 Medical record numbers  Dischar ge summaries 
 Health plan beneficiar y numbers  Surve y / Questionnaire responses 
 Account numbers  Billin g records 
 Certificate and/or license numbers   HIV testin g or infection records  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, 
includin g license plate numbers   Sickle cell anemia information  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers  Alcoholism or alcohol use information  
 Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  Drug abuse informatio n 
 Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  Mental health (not ps ychotherap y) notes 
 Biometric identifier s, including finger & 
voice prints  Psychological test results 
 Full-face photographic images and any 
comparable ima ges  Genetic testing  
 Any other unique identifying number, 
linked study ID, charac teristic, or code, 
describe:  Stud y ID numbers  Other, describe:        
 
2. Data and/or Specimen Acquisition:    
Data for this study will be collected through ( check all that apply ): 
 
  Prospective data and/or specimen collection ob tained from participants .  Provide description 
of processes:  Data will be  obtained through standardized in terviews regarding psychiatric 
symptoms, self-report questionnaires, and through qualitative interviews. Data are acquired at 14 
time points (baseline, each treatme nt session (10 time points), post-treatment, 3 months, and 6 
months).   
  Retrospective data collection and/or speci mens obtained from medical chart review/data 
access.  Describe how data will be obta ined (e.g., fileman, CDW, etc.):  n/a. 
 
  Retrospective data collection and/or specime ns obtained from an IRB-approved data and/or 
specimen repository.  Indicate the repository source including  name, VA location, and IRB 
number:  n/a.  
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 21 of 31 Note:  for data and/or specimens obtained from a VA approved data repository, a Data Use 
Agreement (DUA) must be executed prior to ob taining data and/or specimens.  See VHA 
Handbook 1200.12 for further information.  3. Level of Data:   
The following level(s) of data will be acquired/maintained for this study ( check all that apply ): 
 
  Identified (e.g., names, addresses or other identifiers included)  
  Coded (direct and/or all identifiers  removed, but study code/ID included)  
  De-Identified (all HIPAA 18 and study ID/code removed): 
  Verified Statistically  
 OR 
  Verified by Absence or Re moval of HIPAA 18 and study ID  
  Limited Data Set 
  Other: Describe:        
 4. Location of Data and/or Specime ns, and Data Retention Plan:   
Data and/or Specimen Location:  Data will be stored  electronically in 
\\v06.med.va.gov\dur\Research  \Nicotine Research\Study Information\Study 
Logbooks\JIV_NET; \\v06.med.va.gov\dur\Res earch \Nicotine Research\Study 
Information\Study Databases\ JIV_NET; and \\v06.med.va.gov\dur\Research Nicotine 
Research\Study Information\Study Logbooks\JIV_NET\Qualitative Recordings. Data that will be stored electronically include name, address, phon e number, social securi ty number, amount of 
study payment earned, and dates of visits (i n Study Logbooks location). The study logbook will 
contain the key connecting PHI and the study iden tification number. The qualitative recordings 
will include audio recordings of qualitative interviews with Vete rans about their experience with 
the VETNET therapy. Questionnaire data and inte rview results will be coded and stored in the 
“Study Databases” location listed above.  Paper re cords of data include study consent form and 
HIPAA authorization (ident ified) and self-report questionnaires and interv iew results (coded).   
 
  Data will be also be placed at the VA Informatics and Computing Interface (VINCI; 
http://vaww.vinci.med.va.gov/vinc icentral/VINCI Workspace.aspx ). The VA Informatics and 
Computing Infrastructure is a partnership betw een the VA Office of Information Technology and 
the Veterans’ Health Administration Office of Research and Development.  Researchers and 
operations staff can use VINCI to access data and st atistical analysis tool s in a virtual working 
environment through a certified VHA network comput er using the VA Intranet or Virtual Private 
Network (VPN).   B. Data Retention Plan 
 Research records will be maintained and de stroyed according to the National Archives and 
Records Administration, Records Schedule Number:  DAA-0015-2015-0004.  Records 
destruction, when authorized, will be accomplishe d using the then current requirements for the 
secure disposal of paper and electronic records.  Currently, destruction of research records (see 
DAA-0015-2015-0004, section 7.6 “Research Investigator  Files” for materials included in 
research records) is scheduled for 6 years after the cut-off (the cut-off is the completion of the 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 22 of 31 research project) and may be retained longer if required by other federal ag encies.  Records will 
not be destroyed without pre-notification to the facility records manager.   
 
  Other data retention pl an, describe:        
 
5. Data Access and Data Recipients:    
Only members of our DVAMC research team will have access to identifiers and coded data. In order for data analysis to o ccur using SAS software (see “Data Analyses” below), a coded 
dataset will be sent to VINCI fo r analysis using VA-owned data an alysis software (SAS). In the 
event that appropriate SAS modules for analysis are not available through VINCI, coded data will be moved to Duke University Medical Center  for analysis. Any data movement outside the 
protected VA environment will be accompli shed using a VA-issued  and owned FIPS-140-2 
encrypted thumb drive loaned to a VA study staff member or via FIPS-140-2 encrypted DVD. 
Data will be stored at Duke on a protected server to which only Dr. Van Voorhees and her study staff have access; data are encrypted at rest.  
 All VA research personnel who have access to VHA records are in structed, in accordance with 
VA policy, on the requirements of Federal priv acy and information la ws and regulations, VA 
regulations and policies, and VHA policy. All study personnel who are VA employees working 
within the VA system have fulfilled all required HIPAA and other VA security and privacy policy training requirements and ha ve agreed to follow guidelines pertaining to the protection of 
patient data. All research staff sign VA Rules of Behavior, and all study staff are up-to-date with VHA Privacy Policy Training and the VA Office of  Cyber and Information Security Awareness 
Training Course. The data security and privacy procedures summa rized in that course include 
logging off or locking the computer when walking away from it ; no sharing of access codes, 
verify codes or passwords; not allowing anyone else to use the computer under one’s password; and disposing of sensitive information using VA-approved methods (e.g., shredder bins). Access to study data will be removed for all study personnel when they are no longer part of the research 
team.   6. Data and/or Specimen Transportation and/ or Transmission for all data and/or 
specimens involved in the study:    
I. 
   Data and/or specimens will not be tran sported or transmitted outside of Durham 
VAMC environment. n/a 
 
II.   Data and/or specimens will be trans ported BETWEEN sites that are under the 
auspices of the Durham VA Medical Center.  n/a 
  III. 
   Data and/or specimens will be trans mitted to other VA sites using the following 
method(s):  n/a 
 
A. Data 
  Data are de-identified and thus will be sent via un encrypted e-mail or 
unencrypted disk (encryption is optional). 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 23 of 31   Data are coded or contain id entifiers and thus will be sent   Other, describe:  
      
 
B. Specimens 
  Specimens are de-identified and thus will be sent via standard carrier (tracking is 
optional). 
  Specimens are coded or contain identifiers and thus will be sent via VA-
authorized carrier with tracking.   
  Other, describe:        
 
IV.   Data and/or specimens will be tran sported to non-VA/VHA sites (e.g., academic 
affiliates, laboratories, etc.) using the follow ing method(s): 
 
A. Data 
  Data are de-identified and thus will be sent via un encrypted e-mail or 
unencrypted CD. 
 Data are coded or contain identifiers and thus will be sent via a VA-issued and 
owned FIPS-140-2 encrypted flash drive loan ed to a VA study staff member or via 
FIPS-140-2 encrypted DVD. If any carrier is us ed to transfer data, we will use a VA-
approved carrier with tracking.  
   Data are coded or identif ied and will be sent via the Safe Access File Exchange 
(SAFE) at https://safe.amrdec.army.mil/safe/ .  SAFE is a secure method of 
exchanging files <2GB to and from individua ls with a valid .gov, .mil, .com, or .edu 
email address. < insert information incl uding collaborator name.  
  Data are coded or identified and wi ll be uploaded to sponsor website using 
electronic case report form (eCRF)  
 Other, describe:        
 
B. Specimens  
  Specimens are de-identified and thus will be sent via standard carrier (tracking is 
optional) or will be hand-delivered by re search study personnel.  Specify method of 
delivery:        
  Specimens are coded and t hus will be sent via VA-a pproved carrier with tracking 
or will be hand-delivered by research study pe rsonnel.  Specify method of delivery:  
       
In accordance with the HIPAA and the Privacy Act,  for any coded or identifiable data released 
from the Durham VAMC (with the exception of Limited Data Sets), an Accounting of 
Disclosure (AOD) will be maintained (e.g., in a database or spreadsheet) that includes the 
participant’s name, date of th e disclosure, description of the nature of the Individually 
Identifiable Information (III) di sclosed, purpose of each disclosure, and the name and address of 
the person/agency to whom the disclosure was made.
  
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 24 of 31 C.       Local DVAMC memorandum “Authorizati on to Use, Process, Store, or 
Transmit VA Sensitive Information Outside VA Owned or Managed Facilities” has been 
pre-filled out for each study team member w ho may transport the da ta and/or specimens 
off-site.  This (these) forms are included with the IRB materials.   
 
D.   Containers (e.g., briefcase, bin) are labeled with the fo llowing notice (l abel placed 
on the outside of container) in  accordance with VHA Directive 6609:  
NOTICE!!! 
Access to these records is limit ed to: AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY. 
Information may not be disclose d from this file unless per mitted by all applicable legal 
authorities, which may include the Pr ivacy Act; 38 U.S.C. §§ 5701, 5705, 7332; the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountabi lity Act; and regulations implementing those 
provisions, at 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.460 – 1.599 a nd 45 C.F.R. Parts 160 and 164. Anyone who 
discloses information in viol ation of the above provisions  may subject to civil and 
criminal penalties. 
 
V.   We will communicate with Vete rans enrolled as participants in this research study 
through MyHealtheVet.    
 
  7. Risk Mitigation Strategies:   
  Data are fully de-identifie d (stripped of HIPAA 18 and stud y ID/code) before being shared 
outside of Durham VAMC.  
  Specimens are fully de-identified (strippe d of HIPAA 18 and study ID/code before being 
shared outside of Durham VAMC.  
  Direct identifiers will be maintained separa tely from data and or specimens by using a code 
to “identify” subjects.   In a separate database (i.e., a “lin king” or “cross-walk” database) this 
code will be linked to identifying subject info rmation.  Persons responsible for overseeing the 
privacy and security of the study data are the PI, regulatory coordinator, study coordinator, and 
statistician. See “Protections Against Risk” herein for additional data protections.  
  Other, specify:        
 8. Suspected Loss of VA Information: 
Should any incident such as theft or loss of data, unauthorized access of sensitive data or non-
compliance with security controls occur it will be immediately reporte d according to VA policy. 
All incidents regarding information security/priva cy incidents will be reported to the ISO and PO 
within 1 hour of acknowledgement of issue and done so using the VHADUR Research Events 
Report e-mail group ( VHADURResearchEventReport@va.gov ). 
 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 25 of 31 9. Reporting of Results:    
   Reporting of results, such as in  scientific papers and pres entations, will never identify 
individual subjects.  Data will be presented in aggregate and individual-level data will not be 
published.  
  Other results reporting plan, describe:       
 10. Future Use of Data: 
  Data will be retained for future use.  This is described elsewhere in the protocol and is noted 
in the HIPAA authorization.  
  Future Use of data is optional (i.e., not required by the research subject). 
  Future Use of data is require d for participati on in the study. 
 
  No future use of data is currently planned. 
 11. Use of Mail Merge Technology 
   Mail merge programs will be used to generate letters and/or address labels for mailings to 
potential or already enrolled rese arch subjects.  The study team is  aware that to reduce risk of 
mail merge related privacy incidents, use of ma il merge programs requires a 25% accuracy check 
to verify that (potential) research subject name and mailing address are properly “matched”.  If discrepancies are found, a 100% accuracy check is required before letters may be mailed.   
 12. Use of Non-Standard Software 
 I do NOT intend to use any new specialized so ftware (i.e. Software that’s not already 
approved OR installed) in this study. 
 
 I intend to use specialized software that ha s not already been installed and it has been 
approved for use by the VA Technical  Reference Model (TRM) Group.  
(Note: All new software must be approved by TRM before it can  be installed on VA systems.) 
 
 I intend to use previously insta lled software on my VA computer.  
 
13. Use of Cloud Computing Services 
 Cloud computing services will NOT be used in this study. 
 
 Cloud computing services WILL be used in this study as described below and have been 
approved nationally by the VA Chief Information O fficer (CIO).  (Note: ONLY cloud computing 
services that have been appr oved nationally may be used.) 
   
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 26 of 31 References 
Alghamdi, M., Hunt, N., & Thomas, S. (2015). Th e effectiveness of Narrative Exposure Therapy 
with traumatised firefighte rs in Saudi Arabia: A randomized controlled study. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 66 , 64-71. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2015.01.008 
Angkaw, A. C., Ross, B. S., Pittm an, J. O., Kelada, A. M., Valencerina, M. A., & Baker, D. G. 
(2013). Post-traumatic stress disorder, depres sion, and aggression in OEF/OIF Veterans. 
Military Medicine, 178 (10), 1044-1050. doi:10.7205/MILMED-D-13-00061 
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory Manual (2nd ed) . 
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Beugré, C. D. (2005). Reacting aggressively to injustice at work: a cognitive stage model. 
Journal of Business and Psychology, 20(2) , 291-301. 
Bichescu, D., Neuner, F., Schauer, M., & Elbe rt, T. (2007). Narrative exposure therapy for 
political imprisonment-relate d chronic posttraumatic stre ss disorder and depression. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45 (9), 2212-2220. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2006.12.006 
Blodgett, J. C., Fuh, I. L., Maisel, N. C., & Midboe, A. M. (2013). A structured evidence review 
to identify treatment needs of justice-involved veterans and associated psychological 
interventions . 
Blosnich, J. R., Dichter, M. E., Cerulli, C., Batte n, S. V., & Bossarte, R. M. (2014). Disparities in 
adverse childhood experiences among individual s with a history of military service. 
JAMA Psychiatry, 71 (9), 1041-1048. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.724 
Bradley, K. A., Bush, K. R., McDonell, M. B., Malone, T., & Fihn, S. D. (1998). Screening for 
problem drinking : Comparis on of CAGE and AUDIT. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 13 (6), 379-388. doi:10.1046/j.1525-1497.1998.00118.x 
Brody, G. H., Chen, Y., Murry, V. M., Ge, X., Simons, R. L., Gibbons, F. X., Gerrard, M., 
Cutrona, C. E. (2006). Perceived Discriminati on and the adjustment of African American 
youths: A five-year longitudinal analysis with contextual moderation effects. Child 
Development, 77(5),  1170-1189. 
Bronson, J., Carson, E. A., Noonan, M. E., & Berzofsky, M. (2015). Bureau of Justice Statistics 
special report: Veterans in prison and jail, 2011-2012 . 
Bryan, C. J., Bryan, A. O., Anestis, M. D., Anestis, J. C., Green, B. A., Etienne, N., . . . Ray-
Sannerud, B. (2016). Measuring Moral Injury : Psychometric Propert ies of the Moral 
Injury Events Scale in Two Military Samples. Assessment, 23 (5), 557-570. 
doi:10.1177/1073191115590855 
Center, C. N. G. (2008). Responding to the needs of justice- involved combat veterans with 
service-related trauma and mental health conditions: A consensus report of the CMHS 
National GAINS Center’s Forum on Combat Veterans, Trauma, and the Justice System . 
Delmar, NY. 
Cook AJ, Meyer EC, Evans LD, et al., (2015). Chr onic pain acceptance in crementally predicts 
disability in polytrauma-exposed vetera ns at baseline and 1-year follow-up. Behav Res 
Ther , 25-32. 
Crombach, A., & Elbert, T. ( 2015). Controlling Offensive Beha vior Using Narrative Exposure 
Therapy: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Former Street Children. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 3 (2), 270-282. doi:10.1177/2167702614534239 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 27 of 31 Czajkowski, S. M. et al. From ideas to effi cacy: The ORBIT model for developing behavioral 
treatments for chronic diseases . Health Psychol. 34, 971 (2015). 
Dennis, P. A., Dennis, N. M., Van Voorhees, E. E., Calhoun, P. S., Dennis, M. F., & Beckham, J. 
C. (2017). Moral transgression during the Vietnam War: a path analysis of the 
psychological impact of veterans' in volvement in wartime atrocities. Anxiety Stress 
Coping, 30(2), 188-201. doi:10.1080/10615806.2016.1230669 
Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D., & Christian, L. M. (2009). Internet, mail, and mixed-mode surveys: 
The tailored design method.  New York: Wiley.  
Dozois, D. J. A., Dobson, K. S., & Ahnberg, J. L. (1998). A psychometric evaluation of the Beck 
Depression Inventory–II. Psychological Assessment, 10 (2), 83-89. doi:10.1037/1040-
3590.10.2.83 
Elbogen, E. B., Johnson, S. C., Newton, V. M., Stra its-Troster, K., Vasterling, J. J., Wagner, H. 
R., & Beckham, J. C. (2012). Criminal just ice involvement, trauma, and negative affect 
in Iraq and Afghanistan war era veterans. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(6), 1097-1102. doi:10.1037/a0029967 
Elbogen, E. B., Johnson, S. C., Wagner, H. R., Sullivan, C., Taft, C. T., & Beckham, J. C. 
(2014). Violent behaviour and post-traumatic st ress disorder in US Iraq and Afghanistan 
veterans. British Journal of Psychiatry, 204 , 368-375. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.113.134627 
Elbogen, E.B., Wagner, H.R., Brancu, M., Kimbre l, N.A., Naylor, J.C., Swinkels, C.M., VA 
Mid-Atlantic MIRECC Workgroup;  Fairbank, J.A. (2018). Psyc hosocial Risk Factors and 
Other Than Honorable Military Discharge: Providing Healthcare  to Previously Ineligible 
Veterans. Military Medicine, 183 (9/10),  e532 -e538. 
Elliott TR, Hsiao YY, Kimbrel NA, et al., (2015). Resilience, traumatic brain injury, depression 
and posttraumatic stress among Ir aq/Afghanistan war veterans. Rehabilitation 
Psychology, 60, 263-276. 
Ertl, V., Pfeiffer, A., Schauer, E., Elbert, T., & Neuner, F. (2011). Community-implemented 
trauma therapy for former child soldiers in northern uganda: A randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA, 306 (5), 503-512. doi:10.1001/jama.2011.1060 
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). User's Guide for the SCID-
5-RV Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders Research Version . Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Association. 
Flanagan, J. C., Teer, A., Beylotte, F. M., Kille en, T. K., & Back, S. E. (2014). Correlates of 
Recent and Lifetime Aggression among Ve terans with Co-Occurring PTSD and 
Substance Use Disorders. Ment Health Subst Use, 7 (4), 315-328. 
doi:10.1080/17523281.2014.924986 
Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, L. P. (2006). Emotional processing theory: An update. In B. 
O. Rothbaum (Ed.), Pathological anxiety: Emotional  processing in etiology and 
treatment  (pp. 3-22). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Grossman, D. (1995). On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society 
(1st ed.). New York, NY: Back Bay Books. 
Hayes, S. (2004). Acceptance and commitment therapy, relational frame theory, and the third 
wave of behavioral a nd cognitive therapies. Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 639-665. 
Hecker, T., Hermenau, K., Crombach, A., & Elbe rt, T. (2015). Treating Traumatized Offenders 
and Veterans by Means of Narrative Exposure Therapy. Front Psychiatry, 6 (80). 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00080 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 28 of 31 Hermenau, K., Hecker, T., Schaal, S., Maedl, A., & Elbert, T. (2013). Addressing Post-traumatic 
Stress and Aggression by Means of Narrative Exposure: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
with Ex-Combatants in the Eastern DRC. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 22 (8), 916-934. doi:10.1080/10926771.2013.824057 
Hinsberger, M., Holtzhausen, L., Sommer, J., Kaminer , D., Elbert, T., Seedat, S., . . . Weierstall, 
R. (2017). Feasibility and e ffectiveness of narra tive exposure ther apy and cognitive 
behavioral therapy in a context of  ongoing violence in South Africa. Psychological 
Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice and Policy, 9 (3), 282-291. doi:10.1037/tra0000197 
Jakupcak, M., Conybeare, D., Phelps, L., Hunt, S., Holmes, H. A., Felker, B., . . . McFall, M. E. 
(2007). Anger, hostility, and aggression among Iraq and Afghanistan War veterans reporting PTSD and subthreshold PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 20 (6), 945-954. 
doi:10.1002/jts.20258 
Joiner Jr, T. E., Van Orden, K. A., Witte, T. K ., Selby, E. A., Ribeiro, J. D., Lewis, R., & Rudd, 
M. D. (2009). Main predictions of the interp ersonal–psychological theory of suicidal 
behavior: Empirical tests in two samples of young adults. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 118 (3), 634.  
Joiner, T. E., Pfaff, J. J., & Ac res, J. G. (2002). A brief screeni ng tool for suicidal symptoms in 
adolescents and young adults in general health settings: reliability and validity data from 
the Australian National General Practice Youth Suicide Prevention Project. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 40 (4), 471-481. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-
7967(01)00017-1 
Kimbrel, NA, Flynn, EJ, et al. (2015). Internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and predictive 
validity for a Likert-based ve rsion of the SOOS-14 scale. Psychiatry Research, 228, 961-
962. 
Köbach, A., Schaal, S., Hecker, T., & Elbert, T.  (2017). Psychotherapeutic intervention in the 
demobilization process: Addressing combat ‐related mental injuries with narrative 
exposure in a first and se cond dissemination stage. Clinical Psychology & 
Psychotherapy, 24 (4),  807-825.   
Kraemer, H. C., Mintz, J., Noda, A., Tinklenberg, J. & Yesavage, J.  A. Caution regarding the use 
of pilot studies to guide power calculations for study proposals. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 63, 484-489 (2006). 
Kubany, E. S., Haynes, S. N., Abueg, F. R., Manke, F. P., Brennan, J. M., & Stahura, C. (1996). 
Development and validation of the Trauma-Related Guilt Inventory (TRGI). Psychological Assessment, 8 (4), 428-444. doi:10.1037/1040-3590.8.4.428 
Kubany, E. S., Haynes, S. N., Leisen, M., Owens, J. A., Kaplan, A. S., Watson, S. B., & Burns, 
K. (2000). Development and prel iminary validation of a brief broad-spectrum measure of 
trauma exposure:  The Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 
12(2), 210-224.  
Latimer, J., Dowden, C., & Muise, D. (2005). The effectiveness of restor ative justice practices: 
A meta-analysis. The Prison Journal, 85(2),  127-144. 
Leon, A. C., Demirtas, H., & Hedeker, D. (2007 ). Bias reduction with  an adjustment for 
participants' intent to dropout of a ra ndomized controlled  clinical trial. Clinical Trials 
(London, England), 4(5), 540-547. doi:4/5/540  
Leon, A. C., Davis, L. L. & Kraemer, H. C. The role  and interpretation of p ilot studies in clinical 
research. J. Psychiatr. Res. 45, 626-629 (2011). 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 29 of 31 Litz, B. T., Stein, N., Delaney, E., Lebowitz, L ., Nash, W. P., Silva, C., & Maguen, S. (2009). 
Moral injury and moral repair in war ve terans: a preliminary model and intervention 
strategy. Clinical Psychology Review, 29 (8), 695-706. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.07.003 
Luborsky, L., Barber, J. P., Siqueland, L., Johns on, S., Najavits, L. M., Frank, A., & Daley, D. 
(1996). The Revised Helping Alliance Questi onnaire (HAq-II) : Psyc hometric Properties. 
Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 5 (3), 260-271.  
MacManus, D., Rona, R., Dickson, H., Somaini, G., Fear, N., & Wessely, S. (2015). Aggressive 
and violent behavior among military personnel deployed to  Iraq and Afghanistan: 
prevalence and link with depl oyment and combat exposure. Epidemiologic Reviews, 37 , 
196-212. doi:10.1093/epirev/mxu006 
Maguen, S., Burkman, K., Madden, E., Dinh, J., Bosch, J., Keyser, J., . . . Neylan, T. C. (2017). 
Impact of Killing in War: A Rando mized, Controlled Pilot Trial. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology. doi:10.1002/jclp.22471 
Markowitz, F.E. (2003). Socioeconomic disadvantag e and violence: Recent  research on cultural 
and neighborhood control as explanatory mechanisms. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 
8, 145-154. 
McCord, J., & Ensminger, M. E. (2003). Raci al discrimination and vi olence: A longitudinal 
perspective. Violent crime: Assessin g race and ethnic differences , 319-330.  
Morrison, B., & Ahmed, E. (2006) . Restorative justice and civ il Society: Emerging practice, 
theory, and evidence. Journal of Social Issues, 62(2),  209-215.   
Nash, W. P., Marino Carper, T. L., Mills, M. A., Au, T., Goldsmith, A., & Litz, B. T. (2013). 
Psychometric evaluation of the moral injury events scale. Military Medicine, 178 (6), 646-
652.  
Noonan, M. E., & Mumola, C. J. (2007). Bureau of Justice Statistics special report: Veterans in 
state and federal prison, 2004 . 
Novaco, R. W., Swanson, R. D., Gonzalez, O. I. , Gahm, G. A., & Reger, M. D. (2012). Anger 
and postcombat mental health: validation of a brief anger measure with U.S. soldiers 
postdeployed from Iraq and Afghanistan. Psychological Assessment, 24 (3), 661-675. 
doi:10.1037/a0026636 
Orang, T., Ayoughi, S., Moran, J. K., Ghaffari, H ., Mostafavi, S., Rasoulian, M., & Elbert, T. 
The efficacy of narrative exposure therapy in  a sample of Iranian women exposed to 
ongoing intimate partner violence—A randomized controlled trial. Clinical Psychology & 
Psychotherapy, 0 (0). doi:doi:10.1002/cpp.2318 
Reger, M.A., Smolenski, D.J., Skopp, N.A., Metzger-Abamukang, M.J., Kang, H.K., Bullman, 
T.A., Perdue, S., Gahm, G.A. (2015). Risk  of Suicide Among US Military Service 
Members Following Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom 
Deployment and Separation From the US Military. JAMA Psychiatry, 72 (6),  561-569. 
Ribeiro, J. D., Witte, T. K., Van Orden, K. A ., Selby, E. A., Gordon, K. H., Bender, T. W., & 
Joiner Jr, T. E. (2014). Fearlessness about  death: The psychometric properties and 
construct validity of the revision to the Acquired Capability for Suicide Scale. 
Psychological Assessment, 26 (1), 115.  
Robjant, K., & Fazel, M. (2010). The emerging evidence for Narrative Exposure Therapy: A 
review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30 (8), 1030-1039. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2010.07.004 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 30 of 31 Saxon, A. J.. Davis, T. M., Sloan, K. L., McKni ght, K. M., McFall, M. E., Kivlahan, D. R. 
(2001). Trauma, symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder , and associated problems 
among incarcerated veterans. Psychiatric Services, 52(7), 959-964. 
Schauer, M., Neuner, F., & Elbert, T. (2011). Narrative Exposure Therapy: A Short-Term 
Treatment for Traumatic Stress Disorders  (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe 
Publishing. 
Simons, R. L., Chen, Y., Stewart, E.A., & Brody, G. H. (2003). Incidents of discrimination and 
risk for delinquency: A longitudinal test of strain theory with an African American 
sample. Justice Quarterly, 20 (4), 827-854. 
Skinner, H. A. (1982). The drug abuse screening test. Addictive Behaviors, 7 (4), 363-371.  
Stenmark, H., Guzey, I. C., Elbert, T., & Holen, A. (2014). Gender and offender status predicting 
treatment success in refugees a nd asylum seekers with PTSD. Eur J Psychotraumatol, 
5(1), 20803. doi:10.3402/ejpt.v5.20803 
Straus, M. A., Hamby, S. L., Boney-McCoy, S., & Sugarman, D. B. (1996). The Revised 
Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2): Developm ent and Preliminary Psychometric Data. 
Journal of Family Issues, 17(3), 283-316. doi:10.1177/019251396017003001 
Taft, C. T., Creech, S. K., & Murphy, C. M. (2017). Anger and aggression in PTSD. Curr Opin 
Psychol, 14, 67-71. doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2016.11.008 
Taft, C. T., Macdonald, A., Creech, S. K ., Monson, C. M., & Murphy, C. M. (2016). A 
Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial of the Strength at Home Men's Program for Partner 
Violence in Military Veterans. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77 (9), 1168-1175. 
doi:10.4088/JCP.15m10020 
Taft, C. T., Weatherill, R. P., Scott, J. P., Thom as, S. A., Kang, H. K., & Eckhardt, C. I. (2015). 
Social Information Processing in Anger E xpression and Partner Violence in Returning 
U.S. Veterans. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 28(4), 314-321. doi:10.1002/jts.22017 
Thabane, L. et al. A tutorial on pilot studies : the what, why and how. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 
10, 1, doi:10.1186/1471-2288-10-1 (2010). 
Van Orden, K. A., Cukrowicz, K. C., Witte, T. K., & Joiner Jr, T. E. (2012). Thwarted 
belongingness and perceived bur densomeness: Construct validity and psychometric 
properties of the Interper sonal Needs Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 24 (1), 
197.  
Van Voorhees, E. E., Dennis, P. A., Neal, L. C., Hicks, T. A., Calhoun, P. S., Beckham, J. C., & 
Elbogen, E. B. (2016). Posttraumatic Stress Di sorder, Hostile Cognitions, and Aggression 
in Iraq/Afghanistan Era Veterans. Psychiatry, 79(1), 70-84. 
doi:10.1080/00332747.2015.1123593 
Weathers, F., Litz, B., Keane, T., Palmieri, P., Ma rx, B., & Schnurr, P. (2013). The ptsd checklist 
for dsm-5 (pcl-5). Scale available from the National Ce nter for PTSD at www. ptsd. va. 
gov.  
Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. 
(2013).  Clinician-Adminstered PTSD Scale for the DSM-5 . 
Weathers, F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. R. (2001). Clinician-administered PTSD scale: a 
review of the first te n years of research. Depression and Anxiety, 13 (3), 132-156. 
doi:10.1002/da.1029 [pii] 
Research Protocol: Narrative Exposure Thera py for Justice-Involved Veterans (VETNET)  
Principal Investigator: Eli zabeth Van Voorhees, Ph.D. 
 
Protocol, 4/21/2020   Page 31 of 31 Weierstall, R., Castellanos, C. P., Neuner, F ., & Elbert, T. (2013). Re lations among appetitive 
aggression, post-traumatic stress and motives for demobilization: a study in former 
Colombian combatants. Confl Health, 7 (1), 9. doi:10.1186/1752-1505-7-9 
Weierstall, R., & Elbert, T. (2011). The Appetitive Aggression Scale-development of an 
instrument for the assessment of human's attraction to violence. Eur J Psychotraumatol, 
2. doi:10.3402/ejpt.v2i0.8430 
Widom, C. S. (1989). Child abuse, negl ect, and violent criminal behavior. Criminology, 27 (2), 
251-271. doi:doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.1989.tb01032.x 
Wisniewski, S. R., Leon, A. C., Otto, M. W., & Trivedi, M. H. (2006). Prevention of missing 
data in clinical research studies. Biological Psychiatry, 59 (11), 997-1000. doi:S0006-
3223(06)00186-7  
Wolff, N., & Shi, J. (2012). Ch ild and adult trauma experiences of incarcerated persons and their 
relationship to adult behavioral  health problem s at treatment. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 9(5).  
Zinzow, H. M., Grubaugh, A. L., Monnier, J., Suffoletta-Maierle, S., & Frueh, B. C. (2007). 
Trauma among female veterans:  A critical review. Trauma Violence Abuse, 8 , 384-400.  
  