February 8th, 2016Project Title: Methenamine Hippurate versus Suppressive Antibiotics in the Preventionof Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Project Title: Methenamine Hippurate versus Suppressive Antibiotics in the Preventionof Recurrent Urinary Tract InfectionsIntroduction: Recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common bacterial infectionsseen in women of all ages across disciplines. Several treatment options are nowavailable for prevention, but the gold standard is considered to be suppressiveantibiotics. Considering increasing antibiotic resistance in treating UTIs, we are lookingfor viable alternatives. There has not yet been a head-to-head comparison of thetreatment options for the last 2 decades.Hypothesis: Our hypothesis is that methenamine hippurate will have less or equalrecurrences of UTI’s as suppressive antibiotics and have a lower side effect proﬁle.Literature review:Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one of the most common bacterial infections inwomen and account for a signiﬁcant number of ofﬁce and emergency room visits peryear1-2. UTIs can cause vomiting, pain, dysuria, septicemia, fever, fatigues, andoccasionally renal failure in the worst cases. Elderly patients, long-term catheter use, orpatients with renal disease are examples of those at high risk of repeated UTIs, andpatients more likely to have serious complications3. The risk of recurrence has beenshown to be between 20-30% after one infection4. One study by Ikaheimo showed thatrecurrent infections occurred in 44% of women presenting in a primary care setting thathad been treated for UTI within the prior 12 months5.Several methods are available for use in the prevention of recurrent urinary tractinfections (UTIs). One review of management of recurrent UTIs stated that there islacking evidence for cranberry, Vitamin C, and methenamine hippurate and concludedthat antibiotic prophylaxis remains the most effective method of management1.However, long-term use of antibiotics can lead to resistance, in addition nausea andcandidiasis. Several antibiotics have been used in the prevention of recurrent UTIsincluding most commonly trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin. Trimethoprim can lead toLyell’s syndrome, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and pancytopenia. Even at low doses,long-term nitrofurantoin use may result in hepatotoxicity and pneumonitis, althoughusually reversible1.Methenamine hippurate is one such alternative that is currently used in practice. Thelast randomized control trial however comparing methenamine hippurate to suppressiveantibiotics was in 1985. Earlier randomized control trials had promising results showingmethenamine hippurate to be effective without long-term adverse effects. However,these studies had very small populations and did not follow patients for longer than 6months to 1 year. The Cochrane review of the literature concluded that there is notenough evidence to support the use of methenamine hippurate for prevention ofsuppression of recurrent UTIs and encouraged large randomized trials to answer thisquestion6. Methenamine hippurate may be a good alternative to suppressive antibioticsif it is as effective with a better adverse effect proﬁle.
Primary Aim(s): Identify if there is a differential impact on prevention of recurrent UTIswhen treated with either trimethoprim or methenamine hippurate in a 6 and 12 monthperiod.Secondary Aim(s):1. Identify adverse reactions of study medications in each group.2. Determine whether or not estrogen has a more additive effect to antibiotics ormethenamine hippurate in post-menopausal women.3. Identify tolerability of the study medications and whether the size of the pills or thefrequency of taking them prevents patients from continuing therapy.Methods:This will be a prospective randomized control trial comparing the efﬁcacy ofmethenamine hippurate versus trimethoprim, a suppressive antibiotic used in theprevention of recurrent UTIs. The deﬁnition of a UTI will include patients who have hadsymptoms including dysuria, suprapubic pain, increased frequency and urgency,malodorous urine, and hematuria plus a positive urine culture with any degree ofbacteriuria.Women with a diagnosis of recurrent UTIs, having had at least two UTIs in the past 6months or 3 in the past year that are proven culture positive with symptoms, will beincluded in the study. Upon entry into the study, the patient must have been treated fortheir last infection and have a negative urine culture before enrollment. Women whohave received previous prophylaxis for recurrent UTIs but have not taken it for aminimum of 30 days, will be eligible for enrollment. The patients will be prospectivelyfollowed for one year.After a patient is diagnosed with recurrent UTIs, she will be evaluated with a repeaturine culture to conﬁrm a negative prior to enrollment. Informed consent will then beobtained from the patient by the investigator or designate, who will then randomize thepatient to prophylaxis with either methenamine hippurate or trimethoprim. The groupswill be randomized in a 1:1, methenamine hippurate to trimethoprim. The randomizationwill be done by research coordinator and computer-generated sequence prior to theinitiation of the study. Randomization will be provided in sequentially-numbered, sealedenvelopes. Because estrogen is a known confounding factor, we will periodically assessthe number of estrogen users in each arm at 3 month intervals. If there is a largediscrepancy, we will adjust the randomization to include a stratiﬁcation method assignedequal amounts of estrogen users to each arm moving forward. Most likely,randomization itself will control for the number of estrogen users in each group. Eachenvelope will remain sealed until inclusion and exclusion criteria are met and informedconsent obtained. Patient identiﬁcation including initials and date of birth, envelopenumbers, and treatment designation will be recorded on the enrollment form.This study will not include a placebo arm as it would be unethical to not treat a patientwith recurrent UTIs, given known treatment. Our patients and investigators will not beblinded due to cost it would entail to blind the study medications. Investigators will have
to order the speciﬁc medication at the patient’s requested pharmacy. Patients will haveto know which medications they are picking up from the pharmacy. The two medicationsdiffer in frequency and size and would be difﬁcult to blind the patient to. Investigatorsmay choose to crossover to the opposing medication or add it to the patient’s currentregimen if she continues to have recurrences.Inclusion:1. age greater than 18-992. recurrent UTI: at least 2 in the past 6 months or 3 in past year (culture positive,any CFU/mL)3. must have been symptomatic with dysuria, urgency, frequency, suprapubic pain,hematuria, malodorous urine4. treated for last UTI and negative urine culture on entry into study5. English speakingExclusion:1. pregnancy2. urinary tract abnormalities (eg kidney stones)3. pyelonephritis4. renal insufﬁciency or failure5. known allergy to medications6. prophylaxis for post-coital recurrent UTIsInterventions: The groups will be randomized in a 1:1 of methenamine hippurate totrimethoprim once diagnosed with recurrent UTIs, inclusion and exclusion criteria aremet, and patient consents to participate in study.OutcomesPrimary:1. Time to subsequent infection2. Number of patients infection-free after 6-12 months3. Number of infections in 6-12 months per patientSecondary:1. Adverse effects of medications2. Additive effect of estrogen3. Patient tolerability of medicationsSample Size:There are very few prior studies which compared methenamine hippurate totrimethoprim currently published. One randomized control trial from 1982 byKasanen et al, allocated patients with recurrent UTIs to one of 4 groups: placebo,nitrofurantoin 75 mg, methenamine hippurate 1 gm, or trimethoprim 100 mg. Atone year, 63.2% of those in the placebo group had a recurrence, compared to34.2% in the methenamine hippurate group, 25% in the nitrofurantoin group, and10.4% in the trimethoprim group7. In a Cochrane review by Aydin et al, current
prevention strategies were reviewed for the prevention of recurrent UTIs.Prophylactic antibiotics reduced the rate of recurrence to 0.4 UTIs/patient/year. Acrossover study done by Cronberg et al found that the recurrence rate wasreduced to 0.8 UTIs/patient/year using long term methenamine hippurateprophylaxis6. Based on the results of these prior studies, we performed a powerand sample size calculation. It was determined that 41 subjects per arm would berequired to detect the expected difference in response with 80% power at a 0.05signiﬁcance level. We predict a 30% attrition rate, and therefore determine thatwe should have 65 subjects per arm.Proposed Analyses:We will determine:1. The time to subsequent UTI recurrence among patients with the diagnosis ofrecurrent UTIs under suppressive therapy with either methenamine hippurateor Trimethoprim. Differences in time to subsequent infection will be comparedand assessed for statistical signiﬁcance using a paired, two-tailed Student’st-test.2. At 12 months, the percentage of patients enrolled to either arm that areinfection-free. We will count patients who discontinued the studymedications, added the opposing study medication, or crossed over to usingthe opposing study medication as failures and include them in the totalnumber of patients in the denominator. The percentages will be comparedusing a one sample t-test.3. The number of recurrences in each group at 12 month intervals. Wewill determine the rate of recurrences in each arm and compare them using astudent’s t-test.4. The additive effect of estrogen will be determined at 12 months. A logisticregression model will be used to compare the two groups to determine if acombination of the study drug to estrogen further prevented recurrences inpost-menopausal women.5. The percentages of adverse effects of each of the study medications will becompared between the two groups using a one sample t-test.6. Patient tolerability to the study medications. A tolerability survey will beadministered at subsequent follow up visits to the enrollment into the study.Percentage of patients who discontinue the study medications will becompared between both groups using a one sample t-test.References:1. Abdullatif A, Ahmed K, Zaman I, Khan MS, Dasgupta P. Recurrent urinary tractinfections in women. Int Urogynecol J (2015) 26:795–804.2. Eells SJ, Bharadwa K, McKinnell JA, Miller LG. Recurrent urinary tract infectionsamong women: comparative effectiveness of 5 prevention and managementstrategies using a Markov chain Monte Carlo model. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 Jan;58(2):147-60.3. Mody L, Juthani-Mehta M. JAMA patient page. Urinary tract infections in olderwomen. JAMA. 2014 Feb 26;311(8):874.
4. Geerlings SE, Beerepoot MA, Prins JM. Prevention of recurrent urinary tractinfections in women: antimicrobial and nonantimicrobial strategies. Infect DisClin North Am. 2014 Mar;28(1):135-47.5. Ikäheimo R, Siitonen A, Heiskanen T, Kärkkäinen U, Kuosmanen P, Lipponen P,Mäkelä PH. Recurrence of urinary tract infection in a primary care setting:analysis of a 1-year follow-up of 179 women. Clin Infect Dis. 1996 Jan;22(1):91-9.6. Lee BS, Bhuta T, Simpson JM, Craig JC. Methenamine hippurate for preventingurinary tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Oct 17;10.7. Kasanen A, Junnila SY, Kaarsalo E, Hajba A, Sundquist H. Secondary preventionof recurrent urinary tract infections. Comparison of the effect of placebo,methenamine hippurate, nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim alone. Scand J InfectDis. 1982;14(4):293-6.