FRED & PAMELA BUFFETT CANCER CENTER SRC PROTOCOL 
 
 
Title Page ............................................................................................................................  2 
Abstract ..............................................................................................................................  3 
Schema ...............................................................................................................................  4 
Section 1.0 Objectives ..................................................................................................  4 
Section 2.0 Introduction, which includes background data and future aims ..................  6 
Section 3.0 Eligibility criteria .........................................................................................  8 
Section 4.0 Randomization/registration procedures .....................................................  9 
Section 5.0 Treatment plan or research design ............................................................  9 
Section 6.0 Measurement of effect ...............................................................................  15 
Section 7.0 Study parameters ......................................................................................  16 
Section 8.0 Drug formulation and procurement ............................................................  16 
Section 9.0 Toxicity and adverse event reporting guidelines ........................................  16 
Section 10.0 Biostatistical considerations including stopping criteria .............................  17 
Section 11.0 Records to be kept ....................................................................................  19 
Section 12.0 Patient consent form statement ................................................................ . 20 
Section 13.0 References ................................................................................................  20 
Section 14.0 Data collection forms .................................................................................  27 
Section 15.0 SRC Approval Letter ..................................................................................  28 
Section 16.0 IRB Approval Letter ...................................................................................  29 
Section 17.0 CCTR Grant Application ............................................................................  30 
Section 18.0 CCTR Funding Approval Letter ................................................................ . 33 
Section 19.0 CPCP Grant Application ............................................................................  35 
Section 20.0 CPCP Funding Approval Letter ................................................................ . 36 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 2 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
PROTOCOL TITLE 
Electrophysiological biomarkers of chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment 
 
Principle Investigator: 
Vijaya Bhatt, MD 
E: vijaya.bhatt@unmc.edu 
P: 402-559-5163 
 
Secondary Investigators: 
Matthew Rizzo, MD 
E: matthew.rizzo@unmc.edu 
P: 402-559-4849 
Sachin Kedar, MD 
E: sachin.kedar@unmc.edu 
P: 402-559-8553 
David Anderson, MS 
E: david.anderson@unmc.edu 
P: 402-559-6870 
Statistician: 
Kendra Schmid, PhD 
E: kkschmid@unmc.edu 
P: 402-559-8117 
Participating Personnel: 
Lori Maness, MD 
Krishna Gundabolu, MD 
Matthew Lunning, MD 
Sarah Holstein, MD, PhD 
James Armitage, MD 
Muhamed Baljevic, MD 
Philip Bierman, MD 
Robert Bociek, MD 
Julie Vose, MD, MBA 
Sushil Kumar, PhD 
Jennifer Merickel, PhD 
Matthew Garlinghouse, PhD 
Emily Frankel, BS 
Kaitlin Smits, BS 
Vikas Mudgapalli, BA 
Chris Thomas 
Gaurav Kumar, MBBS 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 3 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
Abstract : 
The goal of this study is to better understand the influence of chemotherapy treatme nt on the neural 
mechanisms of attention and cognition. Extant literature lacks diversity in studied cancer pop ulations and 
treatment protocols, and provides limited understanding of the cognitive abilities that are impa ired by 
chemotherapy. To overcome these limitations, this study will employ a sophisticated battery of tests in 
understudied cancer populations with hematological malignancies (HM). Eligible participants will eith er be 
patients diagnosed with Myelodysplasic Syndrome (MDS), Acute Myelogenous Leukemia (AML), Acute 
Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL), Multiple Myeloma (MM), Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL), Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL), and Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML). Demographically-matched 
healthy control participants will be included for comparison. 
After diagnosis and treatment protocols have been established, patients will be inducted into the 
longitudinal study comprised of three visits: 1) after diagnosis but prior to  chemotherapy treatment (baseline), 
2) one-month post-baseline or after one treatment cycle (whichever comes first) , and 3) three-months 
post-baseline or after three treatment cycles (whichever comes first). Patients will undergo a test battery 
designed to measure specific behavioral and neural mechanisms of attention; tests will either be computer-
based cognitive tasks or simulated driving tests that immerse patients into virtual driving scen arios. During 
each test, EEG will be concurrently measured through non-invasive scalp electrop hysiology recordings; EEG 
recordings will reveal underlying neural mechanisms affected by chemotherapy. A dditionally, 
neuropsychological tests of vision, attention, and memory will be administered,  as well as questionnaires to 
evaluate health, mobility, and life space. Finally, blood samples will be collect ed to examine levels of 
circulating inflammatory markers present in some cancer patients. This study will allow us to better 
understand the mechanisms through which chemotherapy influences cognitive pe rformance. Results from 
this study may allow informed treatment decision- making and therapy selection based on patients’ goal of 
care and value to preserve cognitive and functional capacity. 
 
  
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 4 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
 Schema : 
 
 
Section 1.0 Objectives : 
The broad goal of this research project is to develop a core set of biomarkers for detecting 
chemotherapy related cognitive impairment (or ‘chemobrain’). Multiple clinical studies have document ed 
cognitive impairment in chemotherapy patients, demonstrating impairments most frequ ently in attention and 
memory abilities, among other cognitive functions. Neuroimaging studies in these patients h ave shown 
structural and functional changes across cortical networks often linked with neural mechanisms of attention , 
including fronto-parietal cortical regions. Together, behavioral and neuroimaging studies converge on  the 
hypothesis that attention networks are most impacted by chemotherapy. 
Explanatory mechanisms for chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment require further r esearch 
and clarification for several reasons: 1) current research has focused on breast cancer popu lations and 

Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 5 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
ignored other prevalent tumor types; 2) few studies have examined dose-response effe cts of specific 
chemotherapy treatments on cognitive impairment; 3) neuropsychological tests used to charact erize 
chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment provide limited resolution for understanding imp airments of 
specific neural mechanisms; 4) neural factors associated with cognitive impairment have not been 
sufficiently distinguished from non-neural (e.g. psychosocial) factors. Despite these limitations of curre nt 
research, chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment affects everyday function and qu ality of life in cancer 
survivors. This is a problem that merits further investigation and cannot be ignored. 
To overcome these critical limitations of current research on chemotherapy-related cognitive 
impairment, we propose a two-year pilot study that aims to systematically examine the in fluence of cancer 
stage and treatment toxicity on attention abilities in patients diagnosed with a hemato logical malignancy 
(HM). We will establish and measure a core battery of behavioral and electrophysiological measures of 
attention to assess the impact of chemotherapy on this central cognitive ability. 
Our specific aims are to: 
SA1. Quantify chemotherapy-related attention impairments in HM patients 
H1a. HM groups will not differ from comparison subjects in attention abilities prior to chemotherap y 
and will perform worse than comparison subjects without cancer or chemotherapy after 
treatment. 
H1b. Degree of chemotherapy exposure will predict magnitude of attention impairments.  
SA2.  Quantify the link between chemotherapy-related attention impairments and 
electrophysiological measures of attention in HM patients and comparison subjects 
H2a. HM groups will not differ from comparison subjects in electrophysiological measures of 
attention prior to treatment but will differ from comparison subjects without cancer or 
chemotherapy after treatment. 
H2b. Degree of chemotherapy exposure will predict magnitude of changes in electrophysiolog ical 
measures of attention. 
H2c. Electrophysiological measures of attention decline will be predicted by concurrent impairments 
in behavioral measures of attention (as in H1b). 
SA3.  Quantify the effects of chemotherapy-related attention impairment on complex real-world 
behavior measured in controlled-simulations of on-road driving scenarios designed to 
challenge driver attention abilities 
H3a. HM groups will not differ in driving performance prior to treatment, and will perform worse than  
comparison subjects without cancer or chemotherapy. 
H3b. Degree of chemotherapy exposure will predict magnitude of changes in simulated driving  
performance. 
H3c. Declines in simulated on-road driving performance will be predicted by concurrent impairm ents 
in behavioral (as in H1a) and electrophysiological measures (as in H2a) of attention. 
Impact 
Our approach will allow us to more rigorously study the underlying mechan isms of chemotherapy-related 
cognitive impairment. The forthcoming pilot project promises to extend knowledg e on chemobrain by 
longitudinally investigating chemotherapy treatments for hematological malignancies, an understudied 
cancer population. Results from this study will have implications for several collaborative e fforts across basic 
and clinical research silos on campus, with a broad potential for impacting our kno wledge, treatment, control, 
and prevention of chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment. Furthermore, this line of work promises to 
benefit the Cancer Prevention and Control Program (CPCP) – a research arm of the Fred & Pamela Buffet 
Cancer Center. Our goal is that this line of research will advance the study and unde rstanding of risk factors 
associated with chemotherapy, allowing clinicians to make informed treatment 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 6 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
recommendations to mitigate cognitive impairment and preserve cognitive function, indepen dence, and 
quality of life in our ever-increasing cancer survivor population. 
Section 2.0 Introduction : 
Multiple behavioral studies have documented chemotherapy-related cognitive impairm ent across a 
broad range of cognitive abilities, with deficits most frequently observed in processing speed1-11, 
attention7,9,10,12- 20, and memory1,2,4,5,7,12-15,17,21-24,49 . Although the mechanism through which chemotherapy 
influences cognitive impairment is poorly understood, chemotherapy-related cognitive decli ne remains an 
important public health concern, given the impact of cognitive health on quality of life. 
While behavioral measures tell us what cognitive abilities are impaired by chemotherapy, they do 
not tell us how cognitive abilities are impaired. Our hypothesis is that chemotherapy negatively affects 
neural structures underlying attention mechanisms, which in turn would impair information processing  and 
memory abilities. According to current research, attention mechanisms are largely supported by th e so- 
called fronto-parietal attention network52-56, a largescale cortical network comprised of frontal and parietal 
cortical regions interconnected by long-range white-matter tracks. Specifically, parietal cortex has been 
implicated in the deployment of attention mechanisms towards relevant information in the enviro nment57-60 
and frontal cortex has been implicated in modulating goal-directed behaviors tha t govern mechanisms of 
attentional control61-63. Thus, impairments within fronto-parietal cortical regions would likely translate to 
concurrent impairments in attention mechanisms. 
Neuroimaging studies have revealed changes in both the structure and function of neural tissue  
after treatment, suggesting chemotherapy may have an impact on the integrity of neural archit ectures 
essential to impaired attention mechanisms. While some structural magnetic resonance ima ging (MRI) 
studies have reported global reductions in total gray and white matter volume5,25- 29, more informative 
studies have demonstrated chemotherapy-related reductions in gray and white matter volumes primarily in 
frontal30-33,50,51 and parietal30,31,34,35 cortical regions. In addition, diffusor tensor imaging (DTI) studies31,35 
have demonstrated reduced white matter track integrity between frontal and parietal cortical region s. Thus, 
MRI studies have revealed chemotherapy-related impairments in both the structure an d connectivity of the 
fronto-parietal attention network. 
Extending findings provided by structural MRI studies, functional MRI studies have documented 
distributed modulations of neural activity within the fronto-parietal attention network following  chemotherapy 
treatment. During performance in working memory and executive functioning tasks, chemothe rapy-related 
suppression of neural activity has been shown in parietal cortex26,33,36,37,41 , whereas chemotherapy-related 
enhancement of neural activity has been shown in frontal cortex26,36 -41. One possible interpretation of this 
empirical pattern is that chemotherapy damages parietal networks responsible for the select ion of task- 
relevant information in the environment, leading to a reduction in neural resources availab le in parietal 
cortex, and a subsequent hyperactivation of frontal cortex in the enforcement of t op-down goals to 
compensate for impairments in parietal cortex. These functional imaging studies com plement structural 
imaging studies by demonstrating concurrent abnormalities in the fronto-parietal attentio n network. 
Despite the growing body of literature on chemotherapy-related cognitive and neural imp airment, 
research is absent for understanding the impact of chemotherapy on real-world behavior. Th is lacking body 
of literature is problematic because computer-based tasks and paper-and-pencil  tests provide poor 
experimental fidelity for understanding the link between cognitive performance and  behavior in the wild. 
Given that motor vehicle driving is a nearly ubiquitous real-world behavior that recruits multiple cogn itive 
domains101, 102 , and that impairments in driving performance and safety have been document ed in 
individuals with low cognitive functioning103,104 and neurological disease105-109 , chemotherapy-related 
cognitive impairment may be associated with poor driving performance and safety. Thus, fu ture studies 
examining the link between chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment and real-world  behaviors, such as 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 7 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
driving, will provide novel insight into the impact of chemotherapy treatment on public he alth and safety. 
While MRI offers high spatial resolution of cortical structures, it is limited by its low temporal 
resolution of an indirect measure of neural activity (i.e. oxygenated blood flow associated with me tabolic 
demands of neurons). In contrast, scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) offers high temporal resolution o f 
population-level neuro-electrical activity occurring at synapses, thus providing millisecond- by-millisecond 
resolution of direct recordings of neural activity; this level of temporal resolution is necessary for measurin g 
rapid cognitive processes, such as shifts of attention or information processing. In a handful of EEG 
studies, chemotherapy-related impairments have been documented in the so-call ed P300 EEG 
component43-46, an electrophysiological correlate of information processing in working memory64-66, 
suggesting that chemotherapy negatively affects the amount of attention resources a vailable for stimulus 
processing. Together, MRI and EEG studies converge on the hypothesis that chemothe rapy negatively 
affects neural structure and function within the fronto-parietal attention network. 
In summary, chemotherapy negatively affects performance on behavioral measures of processing 
speed, attention, and memory, and has a profound impact on the structural and f unctional integrity of 
cortical regions within the fronto-parietal attention network. In the current proposal, our goa l is to take a top- 
down approach to understanding how chemotherapy leads to impaired attention m echanisms. To this end, 
we will be employing a battery of cognitive (SA1) and simulated real world (SA3) tasks that target sp ecific 
attention mechanisms; these tasks are able to measure subtle differences in attention proce sses within and 
between subjects on the order of milliseconds. To track task-related neural activity on the s ame timescale, 
we will incorporate EEG recordings into our cognitive battery (SA2) to link neural impairments of att ention 
with cognitive impairments of attention in chemotherapy patients. Results from this line of resea rch will 
provide motivation for further top-down research and new lines of bottom-up research t o better understand 
how chemotherapy negatively affects the biological pathways underlying the fronto- parietal attention 
network. 
 
Motivation 
Despite numerous investigations on the impact of chemotherapy on cognitive performance , current 
research is limited in four major ways: 
First, most research has studied breast cancer patients, making it difficult to dissociate the impact 
of chemotherapy on neurocognitive dysfunction from other factors specific to the breast cancer population. 
In particular, breast cancer almost exclusively affects female populations and impacts organs int egral to 
female identity. Additionally, the lack of studies examining interactions between hormone  treatment and 
chemotherapy treatment on cognitive health leaves hormonal factors as an alternative exp lanation for 
cognitive impairment observed in this population. In order to fully demonstrate the dir ect impact of 
chemotherapy on cognitive function, it is necessary to study chemotherapy-related cognitive de cline in a 
broader cancer population that controls for gender, psychosocial, and hormonal confou nds. 
Second, the neural mechanisms of chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment remain largely 
unknown. Neuroimaging studies of chemobrain have examined blood-oxygenated level d ependent activity 
associated with neural metabolic demands, and have converged on the hypothesis that c hemotherapy 
affects the structural and functional integrity of frontal and parietal cortical regions. While th ese studies 
appear to provide some insight into the mechanisms of chemobrain, neuroimaging methods  are limited 
both by their poor temporal resolution and reliance on blood-related correlates of neural activity. Given that 
chemotherapy introduces cardiotoxic effects and impairs the integrity of the blood brain b arrier67-69, current 
evidence is confounded by neuroimaging methods because they measure blood-related activity. Thus, 
neuroimaging studies remain inconclusive in determining whether chemotherapy affects the fun ction of 
frontal and parietal cortical areas or the vasculature providing metabolic demands to frontal an d parietal 
regions. To rule out vasculature-related impairments associated with chemotherapy, alternative met hods 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 8 of 36  
2017   
 UNMC IRB #: 137-16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/   
that more directly measure neural activity, such as scalp EEG, should be incorporated into studies of 
chemobrain. Currently, only a handful of electrophysiological studies have examined the imp act of 
chemotherapy treatment on a single electrophysiological component (i.e. P300), which was e voked by a 
non-demanding cognitive task. Further electrophysiological studies must incorporate more demanding 
tasks that challenge specific attention mechanisms. Given the limitations of current research on  the neural 
mechanisms of chemobrain, it is still unclear how chemotherapy affects the functional integrity o f the fronto- 
parietal attention network. Together, cognitive and electrophysiological measures of attentio n provide a 
powerful tool for isolating neural mechanisms influenced by chemotherapy treatment. Thus, more work 
should be devoted to more rigorous and targeted electrophysiological studies of attention,  which will be 
integral to separating neural from non-neural factors associated with chemobrain. 
Third, neuropsychological tests typically recruit multiple cognitive domains, limiting specificity of 
impaired cognitive functions. For example, most paper- and-pencil tests recruit additional speed of 
processing and motor control abilities during task performance. Furthermore, methods for measu ring task- 
related neural activity during neuropsychological testing are yet to be established. In contrast,  computer- 
based cognitive tests allow researchers to selectively measure specific cognitive processes by 
manipulating display timing and stimulus characteristics, thus providing insight into how different co gnitive 
systems interact during task performance. Furthermore, numerous studies have linked performa nce in 
computer-based cognitive tasks with neural function through MRI and EEG methods. In particula r, the high 
temporal resolution of EEG methods demands cognitive testing instruments that provide con current 
temporal resolution through precisely timed stimulus presentation. Thus, studies of chemotherapy -related 
cognitive impairment would benefit from the incorporation of more sophisticated cognitive b atteries. 
Finally, previous studies have used measures with high experimental control and low external 
validity, providing limited insight into how chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment translates to real- 
world behavior. It is essential to understand how chemotherapy affects real-world behaviors that could have 
a profound impact on public health, as impairments in these activities could lead to incursi ons with the 
general population. Importantly, identifying which aspects of real-world behaviors are affected b y 
chemotherapy could lead to the development of targeted rehabilitation strategies, ul timately leading to 
improved cognitive health and quality of life. Thus, combining basic and translational rese arch into future 
studies will provide better insights into how the lives of chemotherapy patients – and the lives of those in 
their surroundings – are affected on a daily basis. 
 
Section 3.0 Eligibility Criteria : 
Inclusion criteria for HM patients include: 1) HM diagnosis, 2) scheduled to receive treatment 
based on risk classification, 3) between 19 to 80 years of age, and 4) normal or corrected- to-normal vision. 
Inclusion criteria for healthy controls will be that they are matched to patient demographics. 
Excl usion criteria for HM patients include the presence of: 1) second cancer diagno sis in addition to recent 
HM diagnosis (however, patients with localized skin cancer may not b e excluded), 2) prior radiation or chemotherapy 
treatment, 3) cognitive impairment (MMSE score <25) prior to baseline assessment, 4) patients who are critically ill or 
require urgent initiation of chemotherapy will be excluded f rom this study, 5) patients with any other condition that 
may not allow safe participation in the study based on the clinical judgment of the treating oncologist will be excluded. 
Exclusion criteria for healthy controls include HM cancer diagnosis i n addition to all exclusion criteria for HM patients. 
There is the potential to detect cognitive impairment in research  participants during cognitive assessment. After 
consent, if a participant receives an MMSE score of 20 or less,  they will be discontinued from the study.  
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 9 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
Section 4.0 Registration Procedure : 
Patients will be recruited through the Department of Internal Medicine, Division  of Hematology- 
Oncology with the assistance of Drs. Vijaya Bhatt, Lori Maness, Krishna Gunda bolu, Sarah Holstein, Matthew 
Lunning, James Armitage, Muhamed Baljevic, Philip Bierman, Robert Bociek, and Julie Vose. Recently 
diagnosed HM patients will contact – or be contacted by – new patient coordinators to schedule a clinical visit 
at UNMC. During initial scheduling with new patient coordinators, patient contact informa tion will be recorded 
in a Patient Tracker, and they will be informed that research is being conducted to study cognitive abilities in 
HM patients. A brief description of the study will be included in their new patie nt packet. At the time of their 
clinical visit, Drs. Bhatt, Maness, Gundabolu, Holstein, Lunning, James Armitage, Muh amed Baljevic, Philip 
Bierman, Robert Bociek, and Julie Voss will provide further information about the  study, and ask patients if 
they are interested in participating. Interested patients will be screened for incl usion/exclusion criteria, 
provided with informed consent during their clinical visit, and their demogra phic information will be collected 
after consenting to participating in the study. After their clinical visit, a memb er of the Mind & Brain Health 
Laboratory (MBHL) will contact consented patients to schedule their initial pre- tre atment research study visit. 
MBHL lab personnel will coordinate with patient case managers to determine the ir next treatment date so 
that subsequent study visits can be scheduled accordingly. 
Demographically matched healthy controls will be recruited from the MBHL registry and RedCap 
(#564- 10-EP: Building UNMC-based research programs focused on wellness, frailty, and aging) re gistry 
based on demographic information collected from HM patients who have already been ind ucted into the 
study. Specifically, healthy controls will be matched to HM patients along the dimensions of age (5 years), 
gender (same gender), race (same race), and education ( 2 years). These registries provide query options 
for search for specific demographic factors, and are comprised of individuals who have expressed inte rest 
in participating in research studies. In addition, spouses or caregivers of chemotherapy patie nts may be 
recruited as healthy controls to examine the psychosocial effects of caring for chemothera py patients on 
cognitive abilities. 
Given the limited availability for enrollment of HM patients into this study, potential research 
patients will not be selected based on demographic factors of gender and race. Neve rtheless, equal 
preference will be given to individuals across all gender and race categories. 
Research participants that have been recruited into the study will be undergo study induction  either 
in the Division of Hematology/Oncology (HM patients) or in the Mind and Brain Health Labs (hea lthy 
controls). After study induction, all research participants will undergo the same testing batt ery within the 
Department of Neurological Sciences at each study visit. HM patients will complete each testing batte ry 
prior to undergoing their chemotherapy treatment scheduled on the same day. 
Research participants will receive monetary compensation ($20/hour) for their pa rticipation. In the event that 
adequate funding is not secured for compensation, research participants will be  recruited as volunteers. 
Section 5.0 Treatment Plan of Research Design : 
Experimental Design 
Patients will be recruited from one of two targeted treatment groups, based on t heir risk 
stratification: 1) high risk group for examining the influence of chemotherapy on cognitive im pairment; and 
2) low risk supportive care treatment schedules, which represents the chemotherapy control group. 
Additionally, we will recruit a demographically matched (matched at age, gender, and educ ational status) 
healthy control group, which will serve as the cancer and chemotherapy control group. 
Participants will complete a three-month longitudinal study that will examine the para metric effects 
of HM-specific chemotherapy treatments on cognitive and electrophysiological measures of attention  
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 10 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
mechanisms. We will sample during intervals corresponding to the onset of treatment cycles, thu s giving us 
the opportunity to examine additive dose-response effects of chemotherapy treatm ent. Sampling intervals 
for chemotherapy patients (or control patients) will occur according to the following schedule: 1 ) after HM 
diagnosis but prior to receiving chemotherapy treatment, providing a baseline assessmen t, 2) one month 
after baseline assessment or after one treatment cycle (whichever comes first) , 3) three months after 
baseline assessment after three treatment cycles (whichever comes first) . 
Experimental Control Measures . There are several health factors that may be affected by HM 
disease and treatment that could potentially impact cognitive performance independent  of chemotherapy 
treatment per se. To mitigate these potential confounds, we will measure these fact ors across patients and 
controls to include as cofactors during the modeling procedure of our analysis. If there is a link between 
factors unrelated to chemotherapy and variability in cognitive performance across groups, we will include 
these additional cofactors in the final model to control for these confounds; if there is n o link between 
factors unrelated to chemotherapy and variability in cognitive performance, we will not include these factors 
in the final model. 
Experimental control measures will include: 
฀ Disease Comorbidity . Patients may have other diseases in addition to the HM diagnosis critical 
to the current proposal. Hematopoietic cell transplantation-comorbidity index (HCT-CI) is a tool 
commonly utilized in the transplant setting that measures multiple organ impairments across 
17 different categories of organ dysfunction. Results from the HCT-CI are summated into a 
single total score, which will serve as a baseline measurement of disease comorbidity. Patients 
without any known or suspected cardiac or pulmonary diseases will be considered to have 
normal echocardiogram and pulmonary function test during calculation of HCT-CI. 
฀ Anemia . HM patients will likely suffer from anemia that could result in fatigue. To control for 
anemia-related fatigue on cognitive ability, we will measure blood cell counts in patien ts and 
control participants. Blood cell counts will be collected from HM patients’ most recent clinical 
visits. For healthy controls, we will obtain blood cell counts from their most recent clinical visit 
as well, though this measure may not be as recent as that of an HM patient; given th at we do 
not anticipate these levels changing significantly in the healthy population, larger variability in 
the difference between blood and cognitive testing will not impose any limitation on our 
experimental design. 
฀ Health and Mobility Questionnaires . Several questionnaires will be used to determine health, 
mobility, psychosocial status, and medication usage; these measures will be used to control for 
non-neural factors that may contribute to cognitive health. Questionnaires to be administered 
include: Beck Depression Inventory (depression screen), medication usage form (list of current 
medications), health survey questionnaire (inventory of health status and activity level), and life 
space questionnaire (mobility inventory). 
Attention Battery 
The goal of Specific Aim 1 is to construct a cognitive battery that decomposes the general 
construct of attention into its underlying mechanisms, enabling the examination of chem otherapy-related 
impairments across multiple processes of attention. To this end, we selected tasks that isolate fo ur 
mechanisms of attention: 1) processing speed – time required to attend and recognize an item, 2) inhibitory 
control – ability to ignore irrelevant items, 3 ) disengagement speed – time required to release attention from 
an item, and 4) storage capacity – number of items that can be simultaneously attended. 
Attention mechanisms measured by our battery are relevant to daily activities in the real world, 
such as holding a conversation in a noisy diner. For example, while listening to a friend speaking (i.e . target 
stimulus), the sounds of other patrons speaking (i.e. irrelevant stimulus) or dishes crashing to the floo r (i.e. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 11 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
distractor stimulus) compete for our limited attentional resources, thus providing opportunities for o ur 
attention to be distracted away from our friend speaking and towards an irrelevant stimulus. This 
hypothetical scenario provides examples of the four attention mechanisms measured in Sp ecific Aim 1: 
speed at which speech of friend can be processed to understanding ( processing speed ), ability to ignore 
other patrons speaking and dishes crashing ( inhibitory control ), speed at which attention can be released 
from a distracting stimulus and re-engaged with the conversation ( disengagement speed ), and how much 
information from the conversation can be held in memory ( storage capacity ). 
Collectively, our cognitive battery will offer millisecond- by-millisecond resolution of attention 
processes engaged by participants during task performance. 
Capture task . Capture tasks70-74 are an ideal candidate for studying attention because they offer 
experimenters a tool to precisely measure the cost of processing an irrelevant stimulus within a capturing 
display ( inhibitory control mechanism) and the timecourse of releasing attention when it is captured by an 
irrelevant stimulus ( disengagement speed mechanism). 
In this task (Figure 2), participants are instructed to identify a target item (e.g. a green square with 
a notch on one side) presented among multiple distractor items within a search display; prior to th e search 
display, a brief capture display is presented that contains a colored distractor item similar (conting ent 
condition) or dissimilar (singleton condition) to the target color. Performance is measured as resp onse time 
to correctly identify and respond with the location of the notch in target items. Previous studies have 
demonstrated: 1) longer reaction times in the contingent condition relative to the sing leton condition, 
because attention is more likely to be distracted by a contingent stimulus that matches the t arget stimulus 
color, and 2) shorter reaction times in both conditions at longer inter-stimulus intervals (ISI; time diffe rence 
between capture display and search display), because attention is more likely to disengage from th e 
capturing stimulus prior to the onset of the search display when ISIs are longer. 
In the current proposal, we will be able to directly measure the effects of chemother apy treatment 
on inhibitory control mechanisms as they apply to the suppression of an irrelevant stimulus and 
disengagement mechanisms as they apply to the release of captured attention from  an irrelevant stimulus. 
 
Filtering task . Filtering tasks75,76 are an ideal candidate for studying attention because they offer 
experimenters a tool to precisely measure the amount of information that can be simultaneously attended 
(storage capacity mechanism) and the efficiency to filter out irrelevant information embedded among 
relevant information ( inhibitory control mechanism). 
In this task (Figure 3), participants are instructed to remember the value (e.g. orientation) of ta rget 
items (e.g. blue lines) during a blank delay period (storage condition); on some trials, particip ants are 
instructed to ignore distractor items (e.g. red lines) presented simultaneously among target items (filteri ng 
condition). Performance is measured as response accuracy of correctly reporting the presence or ab senc e 
of a target value change in a memory probe following the blank delay period. Previo us studies have 

Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 12 of 36   
 UNMC IRB #: 137-16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
demonstrated: 1) lower response accuracy as the number of relevant items to be remem bered increases, 
2) lower response accuracy in filtering conditions relative to storage conditions when the number of relevant 
items is held constant across conditions, and 3) individuals with larger storage capacities show smaller 
costs in response accuracy in the filtering condition. 
In the current proposal, we will be able to directly measure the effects of chemothe rapy treatment 
on storage capacity mechanisms as they apply to the amount of information that can remembe red and 
inhibitory control mechanisms as they apply to the suppression of irrelevant information. 
 
 
Mobile cognitive testing. To track the timecourse of cognitive impairment between 
chemotherapy treatment cycles, patients will be given the option to complete customized atten tion tasks at 
home using BrainBaseline (Digital Artefacts), a mobile cognitive testing platform for use o n a personal iPad 
or iPhone. De-identified data will be wirelessly transferred to HIPAA compliant servers maint ained by 
Digital Artefacts. 
Electrophysiology 
The goal of Specific Aim 2 is to measure scalp electrophysiology to examine chemotherapy-relate d 
impairments in the neural mechanisms of attention on the timescale of milliseconds . To this end, we 
selected electrophysiological components that isolate four specific attention mechanisms: 1) deployment 
speed – time required to rapidly shift attention from one location to another, 2) target enhancement – 
amount of neural resources allocated towards selection of target item, 3) distractor suppression – amount 
of neural resources allocated towards inhibition of distractor item, and 4) online storage – amount of 
resources allocated toward storing target items in mind. 
N2pc . The N2pc component77-80 has been used in multiple empirical studies to examine neural 
mechanisms of attention because it reveals both when and where attention is being  deployed early during 
visual processing. The N2pc is a relative negative amplitude deflection in posterior parietal elect rodes with 
latency of 175-250 milliseconds, with more negative amplitudes occurring in electrodes contralat eral to the 
attended visual field (Figure 4 left panel). For example, when attention must be deployed  towards a target 
stimulus (e.g. a blue square outline with a notch on one side) presented in the left visual field,  
electrophysiological amplitudes observed in posterior parietal electrodes are more negative in c ontralateral 
(i.e. right hemisphere) electrodes relative to ipsilateral (i.e. left hemisphere) electrodes during  the N2pc time 
window. 
N2pc latency tracks deployment speed , where longer latencies suggest slower deployment speed; 
N2pc amplitude tracks target enhancement, where larger amplitudes suggest more resources were 
allocated towards target selection. Here, the N2pc component will be used to meas ure chemotherapy- 
related differences in target selection during capture and filtering tasks. 
Pd. The Pd component81-83 was more recently discovered and has been used to study inhibitory 
control mechanisms of attention due to its sensitivity to ignoring irrelevant information. The P d is a relative 

Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 13 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
positive amplitude deflection in posterior electrodes with latency of 200-300 milliseconds, with more p ositive 
amplitudes occurring in electrodes contralateral to an ignored visual field (Figure 4 middle pan el). 
Pd latency tracks deployment speed , where longer latencies suggest slower deployment speed; Pd 
amplitude tracks distractor suppression, where larger amplitudes suggest more resources were allocated 
towards inhibiting distractor items. Here, the Pd component will be used to measure chemotherap y-related 
differences in distractor suppression during the capture task. 
Contralateral Delay Activity (CDA) . The CDA component has been used in multiple empirical 
studies to examine neural mechanisms of attention specific to storage capacity because it tracks b oth 
which information is being stored in mind and how much information is being stored in mind 75,76,84 . The 
CDA component is a sustained relative negative amplitude modulation in posterior electrodes that onsets at 
approximately 300-400 milliseconds, with more negative amplitudes occurring in electrodes  contralateral to 
the remembered visual field (Figure 4 right panel). CDA amplitude tracks online storage, where larger 
amplitudes suggest that more items are stored in mind75,76. Here, the CDA will be used to measure 
chemotherapy-related differences in storage capacity during the filtering task. 
 
Driving Simulation 
The goal of Specific Aim 3 is to implement simulations of driving scenarios that integrate 
laboratory-based attention mechanisms into a naturalistic environment that requ ires the coordination of 
multiple cognitive domains, including attention. By selectively challenging distinct attention mechanisms 
under different driving conditions and loads (e.g. traffic, pedestrians, road signs), we will be  able to evaluate 
how impairments in attention affects driving outcomes. Broadly speaking, the goal o f testing patients in 
simulated driving scenarios is to determine how computer-based cognitive tasks (SA1) translate into real- 
world driving behavior. 
Car following task . The car following task requires drivers to follow a lead vehicle at a constant 
distance of two car lengths85,86. During this task, the lead vehicle pseudo-randomly changes its velocity, 
requiring drivers to vigilantly attend the lead vehicle to avoid an incursion while maintaining t he instructed 
two-car length distance. Critically, the lead vehicle will occasionally brake during the drive, requir ing drivers 
to rapidly brake in order to avoid collision. If attention is not fixed on the lead vehicle, a n accident will likely 
occur. Outcome measures for the car following task include: 1) mean distance between lead vehicle and 
driver, 2) brake delay , measured as the delay between lead vehicle and driver braking time, and 3) crash , a 
binary variable that indicates if a collision occurred. 

Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 14 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
The car following task requires the recruitment of the following attention mechanisms: 1) 
processing speed , used to process and update working memory with task-specific cues (e.g. braking, 
change of speed) provided by the lead vehicle, 2) target enhancement, required to enhance task-specific 
lead vehicle cues, and 3) inhibitory control, required to inhibit the processing of irrelevant environmental 
information (e.g. other vehicles, pedestrians, etc.). 
Visual search task . The visual search task87-91 requires participants to search for a target item 
among multiple distractor items while driving; this task uses displays similar to the search display of the  
capture task. Search item configurations can be manipulated to evoke either the N2pc or the  Pd to 
measure attentional shifts related to target enhancement or distractor suppression, respectively,  during 
driving performance. This line of research will be the first to examine rapid shifts of attention d uring driving 
behavior. 
The visual search task requires the recruitment of the following attention mechanisms: 1) 
processing speed, used to process each search item in turn in order to find the target item, 2) deployment 
speed, used to rapidly shift attention towards candidate search items, and 3) target enhancement, used to 
resolve target items from distractor items. 
 
 
 Specific Aim 1 Specific Aim 2 Specific Aim 3 
Attention 
Mechanism Capture Task Filtering Task N2pc Pd CDA  Car Following Visual Search 
Processing Speed X     X X 
Deployment Speed   X X   X 
Target Enhancement   X   X X 
Distractor 
Suppression    X    
Inhibitory Control X X   X X  
Disengagement 
Speed X       
Storage Capacity  X   X   
Table 2: Summary of attention mechanisms probed in 
each specific aim Auxiliary Measurements 
In addition to the proposed battery, we will administer several neuropsychological exams to 
determine whether the range of cognitive impairments predominately observed in the b reast cancer 
population are reflected in the HM population. These exams will give us the opportunity to link patterns of 
cognitive impairment between cancer populations . Additionally, we have selected novel measures 
(circulating inflammatory proteins, retinal anatomy) within the domain of the chemobrain literature to further 
explore the impact of chemotherapy on the brain and body. 
Cognitive assessment . Clinical neuropsychological exams to be used in the current proposal 
include: Mini-Mental State Examination5,14,20 (MMSE; mental status, dementia screening tool), Trails A and 
B1-4,6-11,15,18,20,22-24,35 (processing speed), Useful Field of View (UFOV; processing speed, divided attention, 
inhibitory control), Paced Auditory Serial Attention Task18,23 (PASAT; working memory, arithmetic), 
Stroop2,3,5-9,12,17,23,24 (executive function). 
Vision assessment . Clinical measures of visual deficits to be used include: visual acuity , contrast 
sensitivity (discrimination threshold for light and dark boundaries), frequency doubler task (visual field 
deficits), visual function questionnaire (self-reported impairment of visual function), and neuro- 
ophthalmology supplement (NAS)- 10 (self-reported impairment of visual function). 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 15 of 36  
SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
 UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB  
Retinal anatomy . Retinal anatomy is an underutilized tool for studying the link between brain 
disease and cognitive impairment, particularly in cancer populations. Optical coherence tomograph y (OCT) 
provides an easy, non-invasive and reliable method of studying retinal anatomy in healthy a nd diseased 
populations. With an axial resolution of 4-6 micrometer, the new generation spectral domain OCT ca n 
reliably identify the various neuronal layers of the retina. 
Previous work has demonstrated a link between retinal anatomy integrity and 
neurodegeneration110, particularly in Alzheimer’s Disease111, Parkinson’s Disease112, and Multiple 
Sclerosis113. In the current proposal, OCT measurements will allow us to determine the presence of 
neurodegeneration of the retina in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, and link declin es in retinal 
anatomy integrity with concurrent declines in cognitive performance. Thus, this method  has potential to 
further develop non-invasive and rapid imaging biomarkers for chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment. 
Cirrus HD-OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc.) will be used to obtain scans of the retina and optic nerve. 
Specifically, the Macular Cube and the Optic disc cube scans will be performed at each visit. These scans 
can be performed without the need for pupillary dilation and takes about 2 minute s per eye. The relevant 
parameters obtained with the optic nerve scan includes the retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (global 
average, quadrant average and clock hour average). The macular cube scans will provide the ganglion 
cell/inner plexiform layer thickness (global average and sector average) and macular thickness . 
Given the link between retinal anatomy and neurodegeneration, which has direct implications f or 
cognitive impairment, OCT will be measured for all three groups across the three study visits in th e 
following manner: HM groups will undergo OCT measurement at all three study visits; given that we 
anticipate minimal variability in healthy participants across a three-month time period, a  randomly sampled 
subset of healthy controls (n=10) will undergo OCT across all three study visits. This measurement protoco l 
will allow us to control for any within-subject variability in retinal anatomy that may be obse rved across 
groups so that we can account for concurrent variability in cognitive performance. 
Circulatory Inflammatory Proteins . Circulatory levels of cytokine interleukin (IL) proteins and C- 
Reactive Proteins (CRPs) have been found to negatively affect brain function. Specifically, increased le vels 
of IL proteins92-97 and CRPs116-118 have both been associated with impairments of memory and executive 
function, and has been implicated as a potential mechanism for chemotherapy-relat ed cognitive 
impairment114,115 . Given tumor presence and chemotherapy treatment associated with increased levels of 
these proteins in the blood98-100, measurement of inflammatory protein levels is essential to further 
understand the link between cancer, chemotherapy, and cognitive impairment. 
Given the link between inflammatory protein concentration levels and cognitive impairment, CRP 
concentrations will be measured for all three groups at all three study visits; this measurement pro tocol will 
allow us to control for any within-subject variability in CRP concentration levels that may be observed  
across groups so that we can account for concurrent variability in cognitive performance. 
 
Section 6.0 Measurement of Effect : 
Cognitive Battery 
฀ Response time (Capture Task) and response accuracy (Filtering Task) 
Electrophysiology 
฀ Amplitude and latency of N2pc, Pd, and CDA electrophysiological components 
Driving Simulation 
฀ Response time (Visual Search Task) 
฀ Brake time, mean following distance, and number of incursions (Car Following Task) 
CRP  
฀ Concentration levels of circulating inflammatory proteins 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 16 of 36  
SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
 UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB  
OCT 
฀ Surface area and volume of retinal ganglion cell layer and optic nerve fiber 
Given that we are not proposing an intervention trial our primary outcome measures will not be  related to 
the progression of HM. 
Section 7.0 Study Parameters : 
Summary of Study Events and Durations. Each study visit is anticipated to take approximately 2.5 
hours to complete. Table 1 contains a summary for the schedule of study events to occu r at each research 
component. Study induction takes place at the beginning of Visit 1. Time requireme nts for research 
participants at each study event are as follows: 
฀ Study Induction (~.5 total hours) : 
o Informed consent (20 minutes) 
o Demographic Information (10 minutes) 
o Comorbidity Index (conducted offline) 
o Anemia Evaluation (conducted offline 
฀ Each Study Visit (~2.5 total hours): 
o Cognitive Battery (40 minutes) 
o Electrophysiology (15 minutes) 
o Driving Simulation (20 minutes) 
o Neuropsychological Exams (45 minutes) 
o Health & Mobility Questionnaires (10 minutes) 
o OCT (10 minutes) 
o Blood Collection (10 minutes) 
 
 Pre- 
Induction Study 
Induction Visit 1 
(Month 
0) Visit 2 
(After Month 1 or 
1 treatment 
cycle) Visit 3 
(After Month 3 or 
3 treatment 
cycles) 
HM Diagnosis X     
Control Group ID X     
Informed Consent  X    
Demographic 
Information  X    
Comorbidity Index  X    
Anemia Evaluation  X    
Chemotherapy 
Treatment   X X X 
Cognitive Battery   X X X 
Electrophysiology   X X X 
Driving Simulation   X X X 
Neuropsychological 
Exams   X X X 
Health & Mobility 
Questionnaires   X X X 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 17 of 36  
5/25/2017   
 UNMC IRB #: 137-16-FB SRC Protocol v8 Section 10.0 Statistical Co  
 
OCT   X X X 
Blood Collection/ 
Protein Assay   X X X 
 
Section 8.0 Drug Formulation and Procurement : 
This pilot study is not a pharmaceutical trial. 
Section 9.0 Toxicity and Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines : 
 
 
There is the potential to detect cognitive impairment in research participants during cog nitive 
assessment. After consent, if a participant receives an MMSE score of 20 or less, they will be d iscontinued 
from the study. If cognitive impairment is identified, research personnel will proceed in the f ollowing way. 
First, the participant will be informed that an unexpected finding was encountered th at may have clinical 
significance, and that the clinical significance is best determined in conjunction with his or her primary care 
physician. Next, research personnel will ask the participant for their permission to contac t their primary care 
physician to help facilitate follow-up to determine clinical significance. The primary care physicia n will then 
be contacted and provided clinical context and concerns sufficient to allow for subseq uent evaluation, 
workup, and treatment of any unexpected finding. If the participant refuses to have the research personnel 
directly contact their physician, the research personnel will offer the participant a written explanation that an 
abnormal neurological finding was encountered and the written material will include en couragement to have 
an evaluation, as well as a phone number of the Mind and Brain Health Labs  to contact with questions or in 
case they change their mind. 
nsiderations : 
Our primary goal is to examine the effects of chemotherapy on behavioral and electrop hysiological 
measures of cognitive ability in an understudied cancer population. To this end, analyses for t he proposed 
pilot project will be performed on three groups: healthy controls (no cancer, no chemoth erapy), very-low to 
intermediate risk HM patients receiving supportive care treatment (no chemotherapy), and interme diate to 
very-high risk HM patients receiving chemotherapy treatment. 
Statistical Power. Although many of the statistical analyses will involve complex modeling 
procedures, the main emphasis of our aims and hypotheses is to determine differences between g roups 
and pre-post treatment. Hence, the issue of statistical power can be addressed via consideration  of the 
magnitude of standardized effect sizes that can be detected with reasonable prob ability. The current study 
aims to collect pilot data and demonstrate protocol feasibility for future studies and fun ding opportunities. 
As such, we plan to obtain 15 samples per group for a total sample size of 45. 
While we realize we will not have sufficient power to declare smaller effects statistically significant, 
as this is a pilot study, it will allow us to estimate effect sizes for a number of outcomes to co nduct fully 
powered studies. In future large-scale confirmatory studies, with a sample size of 32 per group, w e will 
have 80% power to detect a standardized effect size of 0.65 (a medium to large effect) for within g roup 
changes, and an effect size of .9 for between group differences. These power calculations assume a two- 
tailed alpha of 0.01 to informally adjust for multiple comparisons and multiple testing. A st andardized effect 
size of 0.65 corresponds to a 10% difference in response time from healthy controls (mean =1394.75, 
standard deviation = 213.23). This sample size will allow adequate power to detect medium to large e ffects 
within group, and large effects between groups. 
Statistical Analysis. To assess the data collected, for each group, we will first produce frequency 
tables, calculate descriptive statistics, and create univariate graphs (e.g. box-plots, histograms) on  the This research has been classified as Minimal Risk. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 18 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
predictor and response variables to investigate distributional properties and check for outliers in th e data. 
Although the specific statistical models that we will use to test our formal hypotheses and to ca lculate 
confidence intervals will depend on the outcome distributions that we observe in our  data, we anticipate 
using linear mixed models and generalized linear mixed models, as appropriate. This modeling approach 
allows us to properly account for the distribution of the outcome measure while also prope rly modeling 
repeated effects and adjusting for potentially confounding variables. Confiden ce intervals of all effects will 
be calculated in order to assess clinical significance of statistical results. 
We will employ linear mixed models and general linear models to assess within-subject, between- 
subject, and mixed effects of: 
฀ Behavior: 
o Capture condition, stimulus ISI, and treatment group on response time measures in the 
Capture Task 
o Filtering condition, storage load, and treatment group on response accuracy measures in the 
Filtering Task 
฀ Driving simulation: 
o Treatment group on response time measures in the Visual Search Task 
o Treatment group on lead car distance variability, brake time, and number of incursions duri ng 
the Car Following Task 
฀ Electrophysiology: 
o Capture condition, stimulus ISI, and treatment group on Pd (amplitude, latency) and N2pc 
(amplitude, latency) measures during the Capture Task of the Attention Battery 
o Filtering condition, storage load, and treatment group on N2pc (amplitude, latency) a nd CDA 
(amplitude) measures during the Filtering Task of the Attention Battery 
o Treatment group on N2pc (amplitude, latency) and Pd (amplitude, latency) measures du ring 
the Visual Search Task of the Driving Simulation 
Our primary hypothesis is that chemotherapy treatment negatively affects core neural mechanism s 
of attention. Here, we present predictions for how chemotherapy would affect outcome measures from  each 
task and electrophysiological measure, where specific predictions are given based on how impairments  in 
different attention mechanisms would affect the pattern of data observed in each task. 
Attention Measures 
Capture task . Two dissociable mechanisms of attention are measured in this task. First, inhibitory 
control is required to suppress the processing of the capture display; inhibitory control mechanisms will be 
tracked by the Pd component. Second, disengagement speed is required to rapidly release attention from 
capture displays to prepare for the subsequent search display; disengagement mechanisms w ill be tracked 
by the N2pc component. There are three possible predictions for impairments in each atten tion measured 
in the capture task. 
฀ Hypothesis 1: Inhibition effect/No disengagement effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this 
hypothesis predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) increase in response time differences between  
contingent and singleton capture conditions, 2) increase in Pd amplitude, and 3) decrease  in N2pc 
amplitude. 
฀ Hypothesis 2: No inhibition effect, disengagement effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this 
hypothesis predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) increase in response times in both capture conditions, 
2) decrease in N2pc amplitude, and 3) no difference in Pd amplitude. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 19 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
 
฀ Hypothesis 3: Inhibition effect, disengagement effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this hypothesis 
predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) increase in response times in both capture conditions, 2) increase 
in response time differences between contingent and singleton capture conditions, 3) increa se in Pd 
amplitude, and 4) decrease in N2pc amplitude. 
Filtering task . Two dissociable mechanisms of attention are measured in this task. First, inhibitory 
control is required to suppress the encoding of distractor items; inhibitory control mechanisms will be 
tracked by both the N2pc and CDA electrophysiological components. Second, sufficient storage capacity is 
required to maintain multiple items in working memory during the delay period; storage ca pacity will be 
tracked by the CDA electrophysiological component. There are three possible predictions for impa irments 
in each attention mechanism measured in the filtering task. 
฀ Hypothesis 1: Capacity effect, no inhibitory control effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this 
hypothesis predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) decrease in response accuracy in both storag e and 
filtering conditions, 2) decrease in CDA amplitude, and 3) no difference in N2pc amplitud e. 
฀ Hypothesis 2: No capacity effect, inhibitory control effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this 
hypothesis predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) decrease in response accuracy only in th e filter 
condition, 2) increase in N2pc amplitude, and 3) increase in CDA amplitude. 
฀ Hypothesis 3: Capacity effect, inhibitory control effect . Relative to comparison subjects, this hypothesis 
predicts a chemotherapy-related: 1) increase in response accuracy differences between filtering an d 
storage conditions, 2) increase in N2pc amplitude, and 3) increase in CDA amplitude. 
Car following task . According to the hypothesis that chemotherapy treatment impairs processing 
speed , a chemotherapy-related decline should be observed in car-following performa nce because fewer 
resources would be available for processing lead vehicle events. Specifically, delayed proce ssing would 
lead to delayed updating of lead vehicle driving information, which would lead to greater vari ability in car- 
driver distance and longer delay in driver brake onset, where longer brake delays would lead  to more 
crashes. 
Visual search task . According to the hypothesis that chemotherapy treatment impairs deployment 
speed , a chemotherapy-related increase in response time should be observed because atte ntional 
resources will be slower to deploy; furthermore, changes in the complexity of the driving enviro nment (e.g. 
road hazards, high visual load) would lead to longer response times as a function of complexity because 
attentional resources would be more engaged with more complex environments, leading to poor er inhibitory 
control . For electrophysiology, this hypothesis predicts chemotherapy-related reductions in N2pc amplitude  
and increases in N2pc latency – because lower inhibitory control would lead to a lower probability of being 
prepared to deploy attention towards the task-relevant search display. 
Auxiliary Measures 
Cognitive assessment . According to the hypothesis that chemotherapy impairs attention 
mechanisms, we predict impairments in performance across neuropsychological exams within the cognitive 
assessment, because these tests measure cognitive abilities directly related to attention. For example, 
memory tests (e.g. CVLT, BVRT) require attention to successfully encode information into mem ory storage; 
failures of attention would lead to failures of encoding into memory, and thus impairm ents in memory 
retrieval. 
Vision assessment and retinal anatomy . Our hypothesis is that chemotherapy negatively affects 
higher-level attention mechanisms, such that attention impairments cannot be expla ined by impairments in 
low-level visual processes. Therefore, we predict no changes across vision assessment exams and 
questionnaires. Conversely, given the hypothesis that chemotherapy leads to morphologica l changes in 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 20 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
neural structures, and the fact that the retina is a neural structure, we do predict reductions in retinal a nd 
optic nerve thickness. 
C-Reactive Proteins . According to previous work, circulatory levels of C-Reactive Proteins (CRPs) 
increase in response to inflammation, including tumor genesis and growth. We therefore predict a n 
increase in CRP levels in HM patients relative to healthy controls; furthermore, we predict further increase 
in CRP levels in HM patients receiving chemotherapy relative to HM patients receive best supportive  care 
treatment. Finally, we hypothesis that increases in CRP levels will predict concurrent increases in attentio n 
impairment both within and between research participants. 
Section 11.0 Records to be Kept : 
The following forms will be collected during each study visit, and stored in locked filing cabinets within keycard 
restricted lab space in the Mind and Brain Health Labs (first floor of Clarkson Doctor Building North). Data 
collection forms will be entered electronically into a study database on a pa ssword-protected, encrypted, 
dedicated research network. 
฀ Phone Screen Script 
฀ Patient Tracker 
฀ Demographic Form 
฀ MMSE Data Collection Form 
฀ HM Data Collection Form 
฀ Hematopoietic Cell Transplant Co-Morbidity Index (HCT-CI) 
฀ Beck Depression Index 
฀ Life Space Questionnaire 
฀ Medication Form 
฀ Health Survey 
฀ Visual Function Questionnaire 
฀ Far Visual Acuity Form 
฀ Contrast Sensitivity Form 
฀ Frequency Doubler Task (FDT) Record Sheet 
฀ Trails A Data Collection Form 
฀ Trails B Data Collection Form 
฀ Stroop Test – Participant Form 
฀ Stroop Test – Scoring Form 
฀ PASAT Scoring Sheet 
฀ UFOV Scoring Sheet 
In addition to the forms indicated above, electronic records of performance during th e cognitive, 
electrophysiological, and simulation batteries will be maintained in their raw form on p assword protected 
computers. After completing each testing battery, raw data will be stored on a  password-protected, encrypted, 
dedicated research network. 
Section 12.0 Patient Consent : The consent form must adhere to the guidelines established by the 
Institutional Review Board of the University of Nebraska Medical Center. 
 
Section 13.0 References 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 21 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
1. Ahles, T.A., Saykin, A.J., McDonald, B.C., Li, Y., Furstenberg, C.T., et al. (2010). Longitudinal 
assessment of cognitive changes associated with adjuvant treatment for breast cancer: impact of age 
and cognitive reserve. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 4434-4440. 
2. Collins, B., Mackenzie, J., Stewart, A., Bielajew, C., & Verma, S. (2009). Cognitive effects of hormonal  
therapy in early stage breast cancer patients: a prospective study. Psycho-Oncology, 18, 811-821. 
3. Hurria, A., Goldfarb, S., Rosen, C., Holland, J., Zuckerman, E., Lachs, M.S., et al. (2006). Eff ect of 
adjuvant bre ast cancer chemotherapy on cognitive function from the older patient’s perspective. Breast 
Cancer Research and Treatment, 98, 343-348. 
4. Jim, H.S.L., Donovan, K.A., Small, B.J., Andrykowski, M.A., Munster, P.N., & Jacobsen, P.B. (2009). 
Cognitive functioning in breast cancer survivors: a controlled comparison. Cancer, 15 , 1776-1783. 
5. Koppelmans, V., Breteler, M.M.B., Boogerd, W., Seynaeve, C., Gundy, C., & Schagen, S .B. (2012). 
Neuropsychological performance in survivors of breast cancer more than 20 years after adjuvant 
chemotherapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 30, 1080-1086. 
6. Kreukels, B.P.C., van Dam, F.S.A.M., Ridderinkhof, K.R., Boogerd, W., & Schagen, S.B. ( 2008). 
Persistent neurocognitive problems after adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Clinical Breast 
Cancer, 8, 80-87. 
7. Schagen, S.B., van Dam, F.S.A.M., Muller, M.J., et al. (1999). Cognitive deficits after postopera tive 
adjuvant chemotherapy for breast carcinoma. Cancer, 85, 640-650. 
8. Schilder, C.M., Eggens, P.C., Seynaeve, C., Linn, S.C., Boogerd, W., Gundy, C.M., et al. (2 009). 
Neuropsychological functioning in postmenopausal breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen or 
exemestane after AC-chemotherapy: cross-sectional findings from the neuropsychological TEAM-side 
study. Acta Oncologica, 48, 76-85. 
9. Van Dam, F.S.A.M., Schagen, S.B., Muller, M.J., et al. (1998). Impairment of cognitive function  in 
women receiving adjuvant treatment for high-risk breast cancer: high-dose versus standard -dose 
chemotherapy. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 90, 210-218. 
10. Wefel, J.S., Lenzi, R., Theriault, R.L., Davis, R.N., & Meyers, C.A. (2004). The cognitive sequaelae of 
standard dose adjuvant chemotherapy in women with breast carcinoma. Cancer, 100, 2292-2299. 
11. Wefel, J.S., Saleeba, A.K., Buzdar, A.U., & Meyers, C.A. (2010). Acute and late onset cogn itive 
dysfunction associated with chometherapy in women with breast cancer. Cancer, 116, 3348-3356. 
12. Jansen, C.E., Dodd, M.J., Miaskowski, C.A., Dowling, G.A., & Kramer, J. (2008). Preliminary results of 
a longitudinal study of changes in cognitive function in breast cancer patients undergoing 
chemotherapy with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide. Psycho-Oncology, 17, 1189-1195. 
13. Jansen, C.E., Cooper, B.A., Dodd, M.J., & Miaskowski, C.A. (2011). A prospective longit udinal study of 
chemotherapy-induced cognitive changes in breast cancer patients. Supportive Care Cancer, 19, 1647- 
1656. 
14. Minisini, A.M., De Faccio, S., Ermacora, P., Andreetta, et al. (2008). Cognitive functions and elde rly 
cancer patients receiving anticancer treatment: a prospective study. Critical Reviews in Oncology/ 
Hematology, 67, 71-79. 
15. Quesnel, G., Savard, J., & Ivers, H. (2009). Cognitive impairments associated with breast cancer 
treatments: results from a longitudinal study. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 116, 113-123. 
16. Scherwath, A., Mehnert, A., Schleimer, B., Kreienberg, R., et al., (2006). Neuropsychological function 
in high-risk breast cancer survivors after stem-cell supported high-dose therapy versus standa rd-dose 
chemotherapy: evaluation of long-term treatment effects. Annals of Oncology, 17, 415-423. 
17. Shilling, V., Jenkins, V., Morris, R., Deutsch, G., & Bloomfield, D. (2005). The eff ects of adjuvant 
chemotherapy on cognition in women with breast cancer- preliminary results of an observational 
longitudinal study. The Breast, 14, 142-150. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 22 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
18. Stewart, A., Collins, B., Mackenzie, J., Tomiak, E., Verma, S., & Bielajew, C. (2008). The cognitive 
effects of adjuvant chemotherapy in early stage breast cancer: a prospective study. Psycho-Oncology, 
17, 122-130. 
19. Weis, J., Poppelreuter, M., & Bartsch, H.H. (2009). Cognitive deficits as long-term side-effects of 
adjuvant therapy in breast cancer patients: “subjective” complaints and “objective”  neuropsychological 
test results. Psycho-Oncology, 18, 775-782. 
20. Yamada, T.H., Denburg, N.L., Beglinger, L.J., & Schultz, S.K. (2010). Neuropsychological outcome s of 
older breats cancer survivors: cognitive features ten or more years after chemotherapy. Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 22, 48-54. 
21. Ahles, T.A., Saykin, A.J., Furstenberg, C.T., Cole, B., Molt, L.A., et al. (2002). Neurop sychological 
impact of standard-dose systemic chemotherapy in long-term survivors of breast cancer and 
lymphoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 20, 485-493. 
22. Bender, C.M., Sereika, S.M., Berga, S.L., Vogel, V.G., et al. (2006). Cognitive impairment  associated 
with adjuvant therapy in breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 15, 422-430. 
23. Castellon, S.A., Ganz, P.A., Bower, J.E., Petersen, L., et al. (2004). Neurocognitive performa nce in 
breast cancer survivors exposed to adjuvant chemotherapy and tamoxifen. Journal of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology, 26, 955-969. 
24. Schilder, C.M., Seynaeve, C., Beex, L.V., Boogerd, W., Linn, S.C., et al. (2010). Effects of tamoxifen 
and exemestane on cognitive functioning of postmenapausal patients with breast can cer: results from 
the neuropsychological side study of the tamoxifen and exemestane adjuvant multinatio nal trial. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 1294-1300. 
25. Brown, M.S., Simon, J.H., Stemmer, S.M., Stears, J.C., et al. (1995). MR and proton spectroscopy o f 
white matter disease induced by high-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow transplant in advance d 
breast cancer carcinoma. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 16, 2013-2020. 
26. Ferguson, R.J., McDonald, B.C., Saykin, A.J., & Ahles, T.A. (2007). Brain structure and function 
differences in monozygotic twins: possible effects of brain cancer therapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
25, 3866-3870. 
27. Saykin, A.J., Ahles, T.A., & McDonald, B.C. (2003). Mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced cogn itive 
disorders: neuropsychological, pathophysiological, and neuroimaging perspectives. Seminars in 
Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 8, 201-216. 
28. Scherling, C., Collins, B., MacKenzie, J., et al. (2012). Structural brain differences in breast cance r 
patients compared to matched controls prior to chemotherapy. International Journal of Biology, 4, 3-25. 
29. Koppelmans, V., de Groot, M., de Ruiter, M.B., Boogerd, W., et al. (2014). Global and fo cal white 
matter integrity in breast cancer survivors 20 years after adjuvant chemotherapy. Human Brain 
Mapping, 35, 889-899. 
30. Inagaki, M., Yoshikawa, E., Matsuoka, Y., Sugarwara, Y. et al. (2007). Smaller regional volumes  of 
brain gray and white matter demonstrated in breast cancer survivors exposed to adjuvant 
chemotherapy. Cancer, 109, 146-156. 
31. Deprez, S., Amant, F., Smeets, A., Peeters, R., et al. (2012). Longitudinal assessment of 
chemotherapy-induced structural changes in cerebral white matter and its correlation with impaire d 
cognitive functioning. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 20, 274-281. 
32. McDonald, B.C., Conroy, S.K., Ahles, T.A., West, J.D., & Saykin, A.J. (2010). Gray matter reduction 
associated with systemic chemotherapy for breast cancer: a prospective MRI study. Breast Cancer 
Research and Treatment, 123, 819-828. 
33. Conroy, S.K., McDonald, B.C., Smith, D.J., Moser, L.R., et al. (2013). Alterations in brain structure and 
function in breast cancer survivors: effect of post-chemotherapy interval and relation to oxidative DNA 
damage. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 13 7, 493-502. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 23 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
34. De Ruiter, M.B., Reneman, L., Boogerd, W., Veltman, D.J., Caan, M., et al. (2012). Late effects of high- 
dose adjuvant chemotherapy on white and gray matter in breast cancer survivors: convergin g results 
from multimodal magnetic resonance imaging. Human Brain Mapping, 33, 2971-2983. 
35. Deprez, S., Amant, F., Yigit, R., Porke, K., Verhoeven, J., Van den Stock, J., et al. (2011 ). 
Chemotherapy-induced strucutural changes in cerebral white matter and its correlation with impaired 
cognitive functions in breast cancer patients. Human Brain Mapping, 32, 48-493. 
36. Kesler, S.R., Bennett, F.C., Mahaffey, M.L., & Spiegel, D. (2009). Regional brain activation  during 
verbal declarative memory in metastatic breast cancer. Clinical Cancer Research, 15, 6665-6673. 
37. De Reuter, M.B., Reneman,L., Boogerd, W., Veltman, D.J., van Dam, F.S., et al. (2011). Cerebral 
hyperresponsiveness and cognitive impairment 10 years after chemotherapy for brea st cancer. Human 
Brain Mapping, 32, 1206-1219. 
38. Kesler, S.R., Kent, J., & O’Hara, R. (2011). Prefrontal cortex and executive function impairments  in 
primary breast cancer. Achrives of Neurology, 68, 1447-1453. 
39. Silverman, D.H.S., Dy, C.J., Castellon, S.A., Lai, J., Pio, B.S., et al. (2007). Altered frontocortical , 
cerebellar, and basal ganglia activity in adjuvant-treated breast cancer s urvivors 5-10 years after 
chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 103, 303-311. 
40. Kam, J.W., Brenner, C.A., Handy, T.C., Boyd, L.A., et al. (2016). Sustained attention ab normalities in 
breast cancer survivors with cognitive deficits post chemotherapy: an electrophysiological study. 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 127, 369-378. 
41. Kreukels, B.P., Schagen, S.B., Ridderinkhof, K.R., Boogerd, W>, et al. (2005). Electrophysiological 
correlates of information processing in breast-cancer patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. 
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 94, 53-61. 
42. Kreukels, B.P. Schagen, S.B., Ridderinkhof, K.R., Bogerd, W., et al. (2006). Effects of hig h-dose and 
conventional-dose adjuvant chemotherapy on long-term cognitive sequelae in pa tients with breast 
cancer: an electrophysiologic study. Clinical Breast Cancer, 7, 67-78. 
43. Kreukels, B.P., Hamburger, H.L., de Ruter, M.B., et al. (2008). ERP amplitude and latency in bre ast 
cancer survivors treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. Clinical Neurophysiology, 119, 533-541. 
44. Vardiman, J.W., Thiele, J., Arber, D.A., Brunning, R.D., et al. (2009). The 2008 revision of the W orld 
Health Organization (WHO) classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia: rationale and 
important changes. Blood, 114, 937-951. 
45. Garcia-Manero, G. (2015). Myelodysplastic syndromes: 2014 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification , 
and management. American Journal of Hematology, 89, 97-108. 
46. Greenberg, P.L., Tuechler, H., Schanz, J., Sanx, G., et al. (2012). Revised international p rognostic 
scoring system for myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood, 120, 2454-2465. 
47. Estey, E., Thall, P., Beran, M., et al. (1997). Effects of diagnosis (refractory anemia with e xcess blasts, 
refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation, or acute myeloid leukemia [AML]) on outco me 
of AML-type chemotherapy. Blood, 90, 2969-2977. 
48. Montillo, M., Mirto, S., Petti, M.C., Latagliata, R., Magrin, S., et al.  (1998). Fludarabine, cytarabine, and 
G-CSF (FLAG) for the treatment of poor risk acute myeloid leukemia. American Journal of Hematology, 
58, 105-109. 
49. Friedman, M.A., Fernandex, M., Wefel, J.S. et al. (2009). Course of cognitive decline in he matopoietic 
stem cell transplantation: a within-subjects design. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 24, 689-698. 
50. Correa, D.D., Root, J.C., Baser, R., Moore, D., et al. (2013). A prospective evaluation of changes in 
brain structure and cognitive functions in adult stem cell transplant recipients. Brain Imaging and 
Behavior, 7, 478-490. 
51. Sostak, P., Padovan, C.S., Yousry, T.A., Ledderose, G., et al. (2003). Prospective evalua tion of 
neurological complications after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Neurology, 60, 842-848. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 24 of 36  
UNMC IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
  
52. Ptak, R. (2012). The frontoparietal attention network of the human brain: action, salien cy, and a priority 
map of the environment. The Neuroscientist, 18, 502-515. 
53. Szczepanski, S.M., Pinsk, M.A., Douglas, M.M., Kastner, S., & Saalmann, Y.B. (2013). Frontal and  
structural architecture of the human dorsal frontoparietal attention network. PNAS, 110, 15806-15811. 
54. Luckmann, H.C., Jacobs, H.I.L., & Sack, A.T. (2014). The cross-functional role of frontopari etal regions 
in cognition: internal attention as the overarching mechanism. Progress in Neurobiology, 116, 66-86. 
55. Katsuki, F. & Constantinidis, C. (2014). Bottom-up and top-down attention: different processe s and 
overlapping neural systems. The Neuroscientist, 20, 509-521. 
56. Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G.L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven  attention in the 
brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 201-216. 
57. Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience, 18, 193-222. 
58. Constantinidis, C. & Steinmetz, M.A. (2005). Posterior parietal cortex automatically encodes the 
location of salient stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 233-238. 
59. Constantinidis, C. (2006). Posterior parietal mechanisms of visual attention. Reviews in Neuroscience, 
17, 415-427. 
60. Gottlieb, J.P., Kusunoki, M., & Goldberg, M.E. (1998). The representation of visual salie nce in monkey 
parietal cortex. Nature, 391, 481-484. 
61. Connor, C.E., Egeth, H.E., & Yantis, S. (2004). Visual attention: bottom-up versus top- down. Current 
Biology, 14, 850-852. 
62. Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G.L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven  attention in the 
brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 201-215. 
63. Moore, T. & Armstrong, K.M. (2003). Selective gating of visual signals by microstimulation of fronta l 
cortex. Nature, 421, 370-373. 
64. Johnson, R. (1986). A triarchic model of P300 amplitude. Psychophysiology, 23, 367-384. 
65. Picton, T.W. (1992). The P300 wave of the human event-related potential. Journal of Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 9, 456-479. 
66. Pritchard, W.S. (1981). Psychophysiology of the P300. Psychological Bulletin, 89, 506-540. 
67. Bovelli, D., Plataniotis, G., & Roila, F. (2010). Cardiotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents and 
radiotherapy-related heart disease: ESMO clinical practice guidelines. Annals of Oncology, 21, 277- 
282. 
68. Pai, V.B. & Nahata, M.C. (2000). Cardiotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents: incidence, trea tment, and 
prevention. Drug Safety, 22, 263-302. 
69. Florescu, M., Cinteza, M., & Vinereanu, D. (2013). Chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity. Maedica, 8, 
59-67. 
70. Theewus, J. (1991). Cross-dimensional perceptual selectivity. Perception & Psychophysics, 50, 184- 
193. 
71. Theeuwes, J. (1994). Stimulus-driven capture and attentional set: selective search for color an d visual 
abrupt onsets. Journal of Expeimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 20, 799-806. 
72. Folk, C.L. & Remington, R. (1998). Selectivity in distraction by irrelevant featural singletons: Evidence 
for two forms of attentional capture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 24, 847-858. 
73. Folk, C.L., Remington, R.W., & Johnston, J.C. (1992). Involuntary covert orienting is contingent on  
attentional control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 
20, 1030-1044. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 25 of 36  
UNM   
 C IRB #: 137-16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017   
74. Folk, C.L., Remington, R.W., Wright, J.H. (1994). The structure of attentional control: Conting ent 
attentional capture by apparent motion, abrupt onset, and color. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance, 20, 317-329. 
75. Vogel, E.K., McCollough, A.W., & Machizawa, M.G. (2005). Neural measures reveal individual 
differences in controlling access to working memory. Nature, 438, 500-503. 
76. Jost, K., Bryck, R.L., Vogel, E.K., & Mayr, U. (2010). Are old adults just like low working memory young 
adults? Filtering efficiency and age differences in visual working memory. Cerebral Cortex,21, 1147- 
1154. 
77. Luck, S.J., Girelli, M., McDermott, M.T., & Ford, M.A. (1997). Bridging the gap between monkey 
neurophysiology and human perception: An ambiguity resolution theory of visual select ive 
attention. Cognitive Psychology, 33, 64-87. 
78. Luck, S.J. & Hillyard, S.A. (1994). Electrophysiological correlates of feature analysis during visual 
search. Psychophysiology, 31, 291-308. 
79. Luck, S.J. & Hillyard, S.A. (1994). Spatial filtering during visual search: Evidence from human 
electrophysiology. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 
1000-1014. 
80. Girelli, M. & Luck, S.J. (1997). Are the same attentional mechanisms used to detect visual sea rch 
targets defined by color, orientation, and motion? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 238-253. 
81. Hickey, C., Di Lollo, V., & McDonald, J.J. (2009). Electrophysiological indeces of target and distractor 
processing in visual search. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 760-775. 
82. Eimer, M. & Kiss, M. (2008). Involuntary attentional capture is determined by task set: Evidence from 
event-related brain potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 208, 1423-1433. 
83. Sawaki, R. & Luck, S.J. (2010). Capture versus suppression of attention by salient singletons: 
Electrophysiological evidence for an automatic attend- to-me signal. Attention, Perception, & 
Psychophysics, 72, 1455-1470. 
84. Vogel, E.K. & Machizawa, M.G. (2004). Neural activity predicts individual differences in visual working 
memory capacity. Nature, 428, 748-751. 
85. Dastrup, E., Lees, M.N., Dawson, J.D., Lee, J.D., & Rizzo, M. (2009). Differences in simulated car 
following behavior of younger and older drivers. Proc Int Driv Symp Hum Factors Driv Assess Train 
Veh Des, 2009, 76-82. 
86. Dastrup, E., Lees, M.N., Bechara, A., Dawson, J.D., & Rizzo, M. (2010). Risky car following in 
abstinent users of MDMA. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 42, 867-873. 
87. Treisman, A.M. & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 
12, 97-136. 
88. Treisman, A. (1988). Features and objects: The fourteenth Bartlett memorial lecture. Quarterly Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 40, 201-237. 
89. Treisman, A. (1999). Solutions to the binding problem: progress through controversy and con vergence. 
Neuron, 24, 105-110. 
90. Wolfe, J.M., Cave, K.R., & Franzel, S.L. (1989). Guided search: An alternative to the feat ure integration 
model for visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 15, 
419-433. 
91. Wolfe, J.M. (1994). Guided search 2.0: a revised model of visual search. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 1, 202-238. 
92. Bermejo, P., Martin-Aragon, S., Benedi, J., Susin, C., et al. (2008). Differences of periph eral 
inflammatory markers between mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Immunology 
Letters, 117, 198-202. 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 26 of 36   
 C IRB #: 137- 16-FB SRC Protocol v8   
93. Guerreiro, R.J., Santana, I., Bras, J.M., Santiago, B., et al. (2006). Peripheral inflammatory  cytokines 
as biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurodegenerative Disease, 4, 
406-412. 
94. Reichenberg, A., Yirmiya, R., Schuld, A., Kraus, T., et al. (2001). Cytokine-associated emotion al and 
cognitive disturbances in humans. Archives of Genetic Psychiatry, 58, 445-452. 
95. Magaki, S., Mueller, C., Dickson, C., & Kirsch, W. (2006). Increased production of inflammatory 
cytokines in mild cognitive impairment. Experimental Gerontology, 42, 2233-240. 
96. McAfoose, J. & Baune, B.T. (2009). Evidence for a cytokine model of cognitive function. Neuroscience 
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 33, 355-366. 
97. Wilson, C.J., Finch, C.E., & Cohen, H.J. (2002). Cytokines and cognition – the case for a head- to-toe 
inflammatory paradigm. Geriatric bioscience, 50, 2041-2056. 
98. Lippitz, B.E. (2013). Cytokine patterns in patients with cancer: a systematic review. Lancet Oncology, 
14, e218-e228. 
99. Dranoff, G. (2004). Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer, 4, 
11-22. 
100. Burkholder, B., Huang, R.Y., Burgess, R., Luo, S., et al. (2014). Tumor-induced pe rturbations of 
cytokines and immune cell networks. Biochemica et Biophysica Acta: Reviews on Cancer, 1845, 182- 
201. 
101. Lees, M. N., Cosman, J. D., Fricke, N., Lee, J. D., & Rizzo, M. (2010). Translating cognitive 
neuroscience to the driver's operational environment: A neuroergonomics approac h. American Journal 
of Psychology, 123, 391-411 . 
102. Dastrup, E., Lees, M. N., Bechara, A., Dawson, J. D., & Rizzo, M. (2010). Risky car following in 
abstinent users of MDMA. Accident Analysis and Prevention , 42, 867-873. 
103. Aksan, N., Anderson, S.W., Dawson, J., Uc, E., Rizzo, M. (2015). Cognitive functioning 
differentially predicts different dimensions of older drivers' on-road safety. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 75 , 236 – 244 
104. Aksan, N., Anderson, S. W., Dawson, J. D., Johnson, A. M., Uc, E. Y., & Rizzo, M. (2012). 
Cognitive functioning predicts driver safety on road tests 1 and 2 years later. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society , 60, 99-105. 
105. Vaux, L. M., Ni, R., Rizzo, M., Uc, E. Y., & Anderson, G. J. (2010). Detection of imminent collision s 
by drivers with Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease: A preliminary study. Accident Analysis 
and Prevention , 42, 852 –858. 
106. Dawson, J. D., Anderson, S. W., Uc, E. Y., Dastrup, E., & Rizzo, M. (2009). Predictors of driving 
safety in early Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology , 72, 521- 527. 
107. Uc, E., Rizzo, M., Anderson, S. W., Shi, Q., & Dawson, J. D. (2006). Unsafe rear-end collision 
avoidance in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 251 , 35-43. 
108. Rizzo, M., Uc, E. Y., Dawson, J., Anderson, S., & Rodnitzky, R. (2010). Driving difficulties in 
Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders, 25 Suppl 1 , S136-140. 
109. Uc, E. Y., Rizzo, M., Johnson, A., Dastrup, E., Anderson, S., & Dawson, J. (2009). Road s afety in 
drivers with Parkinson Disease. Neurology , 73, 2112-2119. 
110. Guo, L., Duggan, J., & Cordeiro, M.F. (2010). Current Alzheimer Research, 7, 3-14. 
111. Garcia-Martin, E., Larrosa, J.M., Polo, V., Satue, M., Marques, M.L., et al. (2014). Distributio n of 
retinal layer atrophy in patients with Parkinson Disease and association with disease severity and 
duration. American Journal of Ophthalmology, 157, 470-478. 
112. Galetta, K.M. & Balcer, L.J. (2013). Measures of visual pathway structure and function in MS: 
Clinical usefulness and role for MS trials. Multiple Sclerosis and Related Disorders, 2, 172-182. 
 
 
UNM  5/25/2017  
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 27 of 36   
  
113. Galetta, K.M., Calabresi, P.A., Frohman, E.M., & Balcer, L.J. (2011). Optical Coherence 
Tomography (OCT): Imaging the visual pathway as a model for neurodegeneration. Neurotherapeutics: 
The Journal of the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, 8, 117-132. 
114. Ahles, T.A. & Saykin, A.J. (2007). Candidate mechanisms for chemotherapy-induced cogn itive 
changes. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 192-201. 
115. Wang, X.M., Walitt, B., Saligan, L., Tiwari, A.F., Cheung, C.W., & Zhang, Z.J. (2015 ). Chemobrain: 
A critical review and causal hypothesis of link between cytokines and epigenetic reprogramming 
associated with chemotherapy. Cytokine, 72, 86-96. 
116. Singh-Manoux, A., Dugravot, A., Brunner, E., Kumari, M., et al. (2014). Interleukin -6 and C-reactive 
protein as predictors of cognitive decline in late midlife. Neurology, 5, 486-493. 
117. Tegeler, C., O’Sullivan, J.L., Bucholtz, N., Goldeck, D., et al. (2016). The inflammatory  markers 
CRP, IL-6, and IL-10 are associated with cognitive function – data from the Berlin Aging Study II. 
Neurobiology and Aging, 38, 112-117. 
118. Marioni, R.E., Strachan, M.W.J., Reynolds, R.M., et al. (2010). Association between raised 
inflammatory markers and cognitive decline in elderly people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes, 59, 710- 
713. 
Section 14.0 Data Collection Forms : 
Submitted as separate document 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrophysiological Biomarkers of Chemobrain  Page 28 of 36   
  
 
UNMC IRB #: 137-16-FB SRC Protocol v8 5/25/2017  