 
 
 
Optimizing Treatment Response in VA Specialized Intensive/Inpatient PTSD Programs  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 1 2, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scientific Narrative  
Group Prolonged Exposure   
PI Rebecca Sripada, PhD  
 
 
Abstract  
Objectives:  Prolonged Exposure therapy (PE) is a first -line treatment for posttra umatic stress 
disorder  (PTSD) ; however  few VA patients receive this treatment. One of the barriers to PE 
receipt  is that this treatment is only available in an individual (one -on-one) format , whereas 
many VA mental health clinics provide the majority of their psycho therapy services in group 
format. In particular, VA PTSD residential rehabilitation programs (RRTPs) offer most 
programming in a group format. Thus, t he current study was designed to pilot test a group 
format of PE  in RRTP s. 
 
Research Plan:  We recruited 39  veterans who were  engaged in care  at the Battle Creek VA 
PTSD RRTP  to participate in a Group PE protocol.  
 
Methods:  Participants engage d in twelve  90-minute sessions of Group PE over the course of 6 
weeks. Treatment consist ed of psychoeducation, rationale  for treatment , and in vivo exposure to 
reduce trauma -related avoidance and thereby improve PTSD symptoms. PTSD symptoms were  
measured vi a the PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL-5) and depression symptoms were 
measured via the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9).  
 
Statistical Analysis  Plan : We measured  PTSD symptoms and depression symptoms at 
baseline, endpoint (6 weeks),  and at 2 -month follow -up.  
  
Backgroun d and Significance  
Prolonged Exposure therapy (PE) is a first -line treatment for posttraumatic stress 
disorder  with the highest level of recommendation from the VA/Do D Clinical Practice 
Guidelines .1 Despite its efficacy , very few VA patients with PTSD receive this treatment. In 
residential PTSD programs, an average of 8% received PE in fiscal year 2012 (range 0–67%) .2  
One of the barriers to PE receipt is that PE is only available in an individual (one -on-one) 
format, whereas many VA mental health clinics provide the majority of their psychotherapy 
services in group format. In particular, PTSD residential rehabilitation programs (RRTPs) offer 
most programming in g roup format. Perhaps as a result , cognitive processing therapy  (CPT), a 
comparable trauma -focused treatment that is available in a group format, is provided  6 times 
more frequently than PE in residential care .2  In order to improve access to PE, the current 
study was designed to pilot test a group for mat of PE in RRTPs.  
 
Preliminary Studies and Current Status of the Field  
Promising preliminary evidence suggests that group PE is effective in outpatients .3,4 Co-
Investigator Dr. Erin Smith demonstrated that Group PE effectively reduced PTSD symptoms 
among 67 outpatient veterans .4 Group PE may enhance treatment response in several ways. A 
group format may provide unique validation and normalization from a group of peers who have 
experienced similar types of traum atic experiences .4,5 Group members may be motiv ated by 
improvement in their peers ,4 or may feel more  accountable to complete exposure homework 
assignments when they report homework completion in front of a peer group instead of 
reporting just to their individual therapist .4 A qualitative study of group PTSD treatment found 
that feedback and support from the group members was rated as the single most helpfu l 
component of therapy .6 Group PE may also be a more efficient way to utilize specialty trained 
staff resources .3 This could be particularly useful in PTSD -RRTPs, where PE offerings may be 
limited due to the scheduling constraints of staf f. Thus, the current study was designed to test 
the feasibility of conducting this treatment in residential treatment participants.  
 
Research Design and Methods  
Sample . Thirty -nine veterans who were receiving treatment in the PTSD RRTP at the Battle 
Creek VA were  recruited to participate in a Group PE protocol. It should be noted that N=30 was 
the median sample size per arm for trials with continuous outcome measures in a review of 79 
feasibility trials .7 Thus, a sample size of 39 provides  adequate feasibility data for a fully -powered 
randomized controlled  trial to be performed at the conclusion of this pilot.   
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria . Inclusion and exclusion criteria were  minimized and include d 
only those factors that prevent ed the Veteran from benefiting from the current program. 
Inclusion criteria were  current RRTP enrollment. Exclusion criteria were  level of suicidal risk or 
severe cognitive impairment that in the judgment of the investigator  made it unlikely that the 
patient could  adhere to the study regimen. Eligible participants were  offered participat ion in the 
study and those who agree d to participate review ed consent forms with study staff.  
Goals and objectives.  Consistent with recommen dations for feasibility studies ,8,9 the objectives 
of this study were to determine feasibility and acceptability  of the intervention . We measured 
PTSD symptoms (PCL -5) and depression symptoms (PHQ -9) at baseline, endpoint (6 weeks), 
and at 2-month follow -up. 
 
Location of resources.  The treatment was provided by existing RRTP providers.  
 
Staff training.  Staff were  trained in -person and through the provision of a treatment manual. All 
therapists  had previously  completed VA rollout training for PE. In addition to this training, Co -
Investigator Erin Smith provide d an in -person  therapist training session on Group PE. 
Therapists also receive d training on handling potential crisis situations and ad verse events. 
Ongoing consultation was provided as needed.  
 
Treatment Manual.  The RRTP Group PE treatment manual  was adapted from the manual used 
in Smith et al., 2015 .4 Therapists were  provided with this manual to refer to after training. 
Therapists  demonstrate d proficiency via role play practice prior to delivering sessions to study 
participants.  
Treatment implementation and monitoring . Protocol adherence and participant -rated 
acceptability were  monitored during the treatment.  All group sessions were  audiotaped for the 
purposes of fidelity monitoring. 25% of tapes were  randomly selected and coded by two 
independent raters on treatment a dherence and therapist competence. Participant safety was 
continuously monitored. Participation in the study was discontinued if a participant experience d 
intolerable exacerbation of PTSD.  
 
Procedure.  Partic ipants engage d in twelve 90 -minute sessions of Group PE over the course of 
6 weeks. Treatment consist ed of psychoeducation, rationale for treatment, and in vivo exposure 
to reduce trauma -related avoidance and thereby improve PTSD symptoms.  
 
Participant process/feedback  measures . Participants were administered the PCL -5 and 
PHQ -9 at baseline, 6 -weeks, and 2 -month follow -up. 
Expected Outcomes . The primary outcome measure was  the PTSD Checklist (PCL -5) – a 20-
item self -report measure .10  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  As recommended in the feasibility study literature ,11,12 descriptive 
statistics were  performed to study the feasibility of the adapted treatment. Effect size estimates 
from small developmental studies generally have large standard errors and are unstable .13 
Therefore, analyses were limited  to the cal culation of  means and standard deviations for 
primary outcome (P CL-5) and secondary outcome (PHQ -9) at baseline , endpoint , and 2 -month 
follow -up.  
 
Future Directions . Determination of the feasibil ity of Group PE will enable a full -scale 
randomized controlled trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment .  
  
References  
1. Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense. VA/DoD Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the manage ment of posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder. . 3.0 
ed2017.  
2. VA. The Long Journey Home XXI: Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
West Haven, CT2012.  
3. Sloan DM, Feinstein BA, Gallagher MW, et al. Efficacy of group treatm ent for 
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: A meta -analysis. Psychological Trauma: Theory, 
Research, Practice, and Policy 2013;5:176 -83. 
4. Smith ER, Porter KE, Messina MG, et al. Prolonged Exposure for PTSD in a Veteran 
Group: A Pilot Effectiveness St udy. Journal of Anxiety Disorders 2015;30:23 -7. 
5. Ready DJ, Sylvers P, Worley V, et al. The impact of group -based exposure therapy on 
the PTSD and depression of 30 combat veterans. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, 
Practice, and Policy 2012;4:84 -93. 
6. Mott JM, Sutherland RJ, Williams W, et al. Patient perspectives on the effectiveness and 
tolerability of group -based exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder: Preliminary self -
report findings from 20 veterans. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy 
2013;5:453 -61. 
7. Billingham SA, Whitehead AL, Julious SA. An audit of sample sizes for pilot and 
feasibility trials being undertaken in the United Kingdom registered in the United Kingdom 
Clinical Research Network da tabase. BMC medical research methodology 2013;13:104.  
8. Abbott JH. The Distinction Between Randomized Clinical Trials (RCTs) and Preliminary 
Feasibility and Pilot Studies: What They Are and Are Not. journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy 2014;44 :555-8. 
9. Thabane L, Ma J, Chu R, et al. A tutorial on pilot studies: the what, why and how. BMC 
medical research methodology 2010;10:1.  
10. Weathers FW, Litz BT, Keane TM, et al. The PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5). Scale 
available from the National Cen ter for PTSD. 2013.  
11. Arain M, Campbell MJ, Cooper CL, et al. What is a pilot or feasibility study? A review of 
current practice and editorial policy. BMC medical research methodology 2010;10:67.  
12. Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analys is of pilot studies: 
recommendations for good practice. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice 2004;10:307 -12. 
13. Kraemer HC, Mintz J, Noda A, et al. Caution regarding the use of pilot studies to guide 
power calculations for study proposals. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006;63:484 -9. 
 