 
 1    
Official tit le:   Remediatio n of auditory recognition in schizophrenia with 
transcranial direct current stimulation ( tDCS) 
 
NCT number: NCT0286933 4 
 
Document date: 10/27/2016
 
 2  NATHAN KLINE INSTITUTE/ROCKLAND PSYCHIATRIC CENTER
 INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD   
 
IRB Office Telephone: (845) 398 -5493 or 398 -5492  
 
 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF NEW PROTOCOL  
 
DATE :  8/29/2016  
Modifications required: 10/2 7/2016  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Remediatio n of auditory recognition in schizophrenia with 
transcranial direct current stimulation ( tDCS ) 
 
DOCUMENTS SU BMITTED WITH THIS APPLICATION (I nclude a list of all documents submitted, 
including protocol, consent forms, advertisements, etc., with version date  for each . Include all information 
required for the IRB approval letter ):   
Cover memo  9/28/2016 / 
Cover memo (response to conditions/ modifications required dated 10/24/2016  
Application for Approval of New Protocol 8/29/2016 /modifications required version 10 /24/2016  
Protocol  8/29/2016 /modi fications required version 10/27 /2016  
Example s of Session flow chart s with list of study procedures (for Auditory remediation/tDCS 
computer training conditions and for game computer training condition ) 
Consent form 8/29/2016 /modi fications required version 10/27 /2016  
Scope of Work -requested by IRB for response to conditions submission  
Progress report -included in response to conditions submission  
HIPAA addendum 8/29/2016  
Waiver of consent 8/29/2016  
Phone Screening Script 9/28/2 016 
NKI Notice of Privacy Practice  
Copies of CITI training and CVs for Odeta Beggel, Constance Shope , Anastasia Stoops  
Uploaded training and credentials for Drs. Javitt, Dias,  Kantrowitz, Sehatpour and for Gail Silipo  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR'S NAME, TITLE  & TELEPHONE NUMBER:  
 
The NKI site principal investigator is Elisa Dias, Ph.D.   845-398-6541  
The overall principal investigator is Daniel Javitt, M.D., Ph.D.   845-398-6534  
  
Name and telephone number of contact person, if different:  
For details regarding t he study for the IRB initial review please  contact: Daniel Javitt, M.D., 
Ph.D.  845 -398-6534  or Joshua Kantrowitz, M.D. at 845 -398-5503  
For other IRB issues contact Gail Silipo 845 -398-6536  
 
Co-Investigators (or Sponsor for research fellow or student):  
Odeta Beggel , M.A.  
Constance Shope , Ph.D.  
Anastasia Stoops , Ph.D.  
Gail Silipo , M.A.  
Joshua Kantrowitz, M.D.  is the study clinician and the safety monitor  
Pejman Sehatpour, Ph.D.  
STUDY/RECRUITMENT SITES:  List all sites involved in subject recruitment and/or c onduct of the 
study. (If subjects will be recruited from the community, state from what community - Rockland County, 
 
 3  Westchester County, etc.)  
Recruitment sites for patients will include inpatients from Rockland Psychiatric Center who have 
been transferre d to the inpatient research unit at NKI (Clinical Research and Evaluation Facility 
(CREF).   We will also recruit outpatients through the Volunteer Recruitment Program  (VRP) at 
NKI. The Volunteer Recruitment Program at NKI recruits from NYS office of Mental  Health 
facilities. The VRP also recruits outpatients living on the grounds at CLUE I and II, Conway 
House (Loeb House) , from Rockland County Department of Mental Health facilities and from the 
community.  We will also invite patients  who have participated in IRB approved studies conducted 
by Daniel Javitt, M.D., Ph.D., to participate in  this protocol  (those who have agreed to be 
recontacted for other studies) .   
 
 
 
FUNDING INFORMATION:  
______ No external funding  
______State  
___√___ Federal      Grant # __ R33MH099265 _____    
______ Other (Name of agency/company/private sponsor)________________________________  
 
Please indicate which inst itution grant is funded through:   
RFMH _ √_____;  NYU ______;  Other ______  specify: __ Funded to NYSPI/Columbia and NKI is a  
subcontract  (subcontract to NKI in process) .        
 
Is this a multicenter trial?  Yes ______    No_ __√____   If yes, indicate # of sites _____________  
 
IS THIS A CLINICAL TRIAL?   __ √____YES      __ __NO  
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION:   Controlled clinical  investigations, other than Phase 1 studies, of 
a product subject to FDA regulation must be registered on clinicaltrials.gov.   (This includes IND -exempt 
clinical trials).  Please provide   NCT #__ [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] _________    Identity of Responsible Party  
Dani el Javitt, M.D., Ph.D.  is the overall study PI . 
Dr. Javitt/Dr. Kantrowitz will update the information in clinical trials.gov  
Does this research require  an IND or IDE ?  Yes _ has an abbreviated IDE ___   No ____ ;  If yes, provide 
the number   CE Reg#MED30003 _ and name the person/entity that holds the IND or IDE  Brainv ision 
LLC. 
Note:   The study may not begin until this information is provided to the IRB office.   
 
PLEASE ANSWER IN LAY LANGUAGE WITHOUT JARGON, TECHNICAL TERMS OR 
UNDEFINED ABBREVIATIONS.  ALSO , ATTACH FULL PROTOCOL WHICH CONTAINS A 
BACKGROUND SECTION, THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE PROJECT, A FULL 
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND PROCEDURES, AND AN 
EXPLANATION OF HOW DATA WILL BE ANALYZED AND INTERPRETED . 
 
 
A.    IRB Submission Abstra ct 
  
All IRB submissions must be accompanied by a submission abstract. The abstract, at a minimum, 
should include the elements as per below.  Be complete yet concise; restrict your abstract to 2 pages , 
and expand on the components  in the abstract  in the other sections of this application as required.     
  
Outline of the IRB Submission Abstract  
1.     Brief Introduction (2 -3 sentences)  
2.     Specific Aims/Hypotheses (list and explain in bulleted format)  
 
 4  3.     Research Participants  
a.     Number  
b.     Method for Ascertainment  
c.     Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
d.     Relevant safety cut point (s) for dropping subject from the study  
       4.     Research Procedures  
5.     Risks  
6.     Consent Process  
7. State whether any drugs tested are approved by FDA, are  under an IND (Investigational New Drug 
Application), or are marketed products being used “off -label”.    
8. State whether any devices are under an IDE or Abbreviated IDE  
9. Issues requiring special attention of the IRB  
 
1. Abstract of Protocol:    
 Schizophrenia is  associated with impairments in basic auditory functions, such as the ability to 
match tones following brief delay. These impairments contribute to difficulties that patients have 
in detecting emotion based on tone of voice (auditory emotion recognition, A ER) along with 
other auditory functions such as sounding out words during reading (phonological processing). 
Schizophrenia patients also have difficulty in benefiting from remediation exercises designed to 
correct these deficits.  
 
Transcranial direct curre nt stimulation (tDCS) is a form of non -invasive brain stimulation in 
which low level electrical currents are applied to the scalp in order to manipulate brain function. 
In the present study, tDCS will be paired with auditory training to remediate deficits in basic 
auditory function in schizophrenia with the goal of assessing the tolerability and feasibility of 
this approach.  
 
Patients will receive 34 sessions of auditory remediation over approximately 12-17 weeks. A 
total of up to 60 individuals will be enr olled and of the 60, it is anticipated that 45 individuals  
with a diagnosis of DSM -IV Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder who have auditory 
sensory deficits (as reflected in a score of <65% correct on the tone matching task) will complete  
the study . Patients will be randomly assigned to one of 3 groups: 1) auditory remediation with 
active tDCS; 2) auditory remediation with sham tDCS; 3) computer video -game remediation.  
 
Behavioral measures (e.g. auditory emotion recognition) and EEG/event -related pote ntial (ERP) 
measures (e.g. mismatch negativity; MMN) will be used to evaluate effects of the tDCS and 
training methods.  
 
2. Specific Aims and  Hypotheses   
   The Specific Aims are:  
• To evaluate effects of transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) -
enhanc ed auditory remediation on specific measures of auditory function. 
Patients will receive  34 sessions  of auditory remediation over approximately 
3-4 months.   45 individuals with a SCID diagnosis of DSM -IV Sz or 
Schizoaffective  Disorder  who have  auditory  sensory  deficits  (<65%  on tone 
matching  task)  will be enrolled  (complete the study) . Patients will be 
randomized to 1 of 3 program trainings: 1) auditory remediation plus active 
tDCS; 2) auditory remediation plus sham -inactive tDCS; 3) computer video 
game re mediation.  
 
 
 
 5  • To assess changes in auditory function after auditory remediation. This will 
be assessed using event related  potentials  (ERP) and electroencephalographic 
(EEG) measures pre/post completion of the tDCS program training. The ERPs 
and EEG measure s will include  auditory  event related potential component N1 
and P3, mismatch negativity -MMN, auditory steady state response - ASSR.  
• To evaluate effects of tDCS -enhanced auditory remediation on 
neurocognition, functioning, social skills, reading and symptom s. These will 
be obtained before  and after completion of the program  training.  
1. Neurocognition  measures  will include:  MATRICS  Consensus  
Cognitive  Battery (MCCB) and Processing Speed Index  (PSI).  
2. Social  Cognition  measures  will include:  Auditory  Emotion  
Recog nition  (AER),  Penn Emotion Recognition Test -40 Faces 
Version (ER -40), and the Awareness of Social Inference Test  
(TASIT).  
3. Functioning measures will include: The University of California 
Performance -based Skills Assessment (UPSA), Global 
assessment of funct ion (GAF) and the Specific  Levels of 
Functioning Assessment  (SLOF).  
4. Social  skills  measure  will include:  The Social  Skills  Performance  
Assessment  (SSPA).  
5. Reading  measure  will include  the Comprehensive  Test of 
Phonological Processing -2 (CTOPP).  
6. Symptoms meas ure will include: Positive and Negative Syndrome  
Scale (PANSS).  
 
• To evaluate potential mediators of response of both tDCS and cognitive 
remediation efficacy  using  plasma  D-serine  and BDNF  levels.  These  will be 
obtained  at study baseline and after completio n of the tDCS program  training.  
 
• To assess target engagement. It will be measure d using the Intrinsic  Motivation  
Inventory  for Schizophrenia  (IMI),  Perceived  Competency Scale (PCS) and 
Treatment Motivation Questionnaire (TMQ)  scales.  
  
The Hypotheses are:  
• There will be objective evidence of improvement in brain function as reflected 
by auditory ERP generation  
 
• There will be moderate or greater effect size improvement of active 
tDCS/auditory remediation vs sham tDCS/auditory remediation.  
 
• There will be a lar ge or greater effect size improvement of tDCS/auditory 
training vs. (control) game training on specific cognitive measures(e.g. tone 
matching, AER, verbal learning, reading).  
 
3. Research Participants  
a. Number  
We project we will need to enroll 60 subjects t o obtain the 45 completers which is the 
required number to accomplish study aims.  
 
 
 6  b. Method for Ascertainment  
Potential candidates (patients) will be identified based upon their present diagnosis of 
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder based upon referr al from their primary 
clinician, chart reviews or the volunteer recruitment pool.   
 
c. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
All attempts will be made to maintain patients on stable doses of antipsychotic throughout the 
study.  Subjects will be permitted to have dose  changes for side effects.   In cases of worsening of 
symptoms, increases of up to 50% of dose will be permitted without removing patients from the 
study.  
 
 The following adjunctive medications are allowed: beta -blockers; mood stabilizers, 
antidepressants; and anti -anxiety agents. PRN doses of clinically determined 
benzodiazepines or antipsychotics will be permitted. Given a possible detrimental 
effect on cognition, regular use of benzodiazepines will be considered covariates in 
the analysis, and patients wi ll be asked to not take these medications for 3 hrs prior to 
testing/training session if clinically feasible. Participants receiving adjunctive 
anticholinergic medication will be excluded.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Method to ascertain  
Age 18-55 Clinical evaluat ion and/or medical 
history; self report  
Primary diagnosis of Schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective  disorder  Clinical evaluation and/or medical 
history  
SCID primary diagnosis of DSM -IV 
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder  SCID  
 
English  fluency  Interview  
Willing/capable to provide informed consent 
Capacity to  Consent  Capacity assessment by  licensed 
professional  
IQ≥75  WRAT, Clinical evaluation, medical 
history  
Score <65% on tone  matching  Tone Matching Test  
Normal Hearing  Audiometry testing , examination                                   
corresponding to a reduction of 1.5 sd 
vs. HV 
 Receiving stable antipsychotic medication  for 
>2 weeks  medical history , medication records, 
clinical evaluation  (criteria used in 
prior studies)  
 
 
 7   
 
 
Exclusion Criteria   
Metho d to ascertain  
Serious neurological  disorder  or medical 
condition/ treatment known to affect the brain. 
Neurological Disorder that affects the central 
nervous system (CNS), such as epilepsy, 
neurodegenerative disorders, movement disorders 
and sensory diso rders.   
 
 
 
Clinical evaluation, medical 
history  
Active suicidal ideation  Affirmative answers to items 3, 4 
or 5 of the Suicidal  ideation 
section of the screening and pre 
testing  Columbia Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale (CSSRS) in the 6 
months prior to scree ning or 
subject who represent a 
significant risk of suicide in the 
past 6 months    
Current or past history (within last 6 months) of 
substance abuse or dependence  
 (excluding Nicotine)  
 
 Clinical evaluation , medical 
history, urine toxicology, SCID  
 
Preg nancy or breastfeeding   
Urine Pregnancy Test, self report , 
medical records  
Taking Adjunctive a nticholinergic medication  (i.e. 
Cogentin , Benztropine ) Clinical evaluation, medical 
history,  medication records, self 
report  
  Participation in study of invest igational medication within  
the past 4 weeks (prior to screening) or investigational  
device within the past 4 weeks (prior to start of tDCS 
training)  Self report   
 Self report  
                                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                                                                          
 
      
 
d.     Relevant safety cut point (s) for dropping subject from the study  
 
Subjects will be withdrawn from the protocol by the study clinician, if any of the following 
should occur:  
 
-The subject experi ences a clinically significant adverse event, which, in the clinical judgment of 
the investigators/study clinician, would increase the risk to the welfare of the subject and be 
inconsistent with continuation in the study.  
 
-Clinical worsening: Clinical wor sening will be defined as a > 20% increase in PANSS total 
symptom score from baseline. In the event this occurs, the study clinician will speak with the 
 
 8  patient, and his/her treating psychiatrist will be notified. The participant will be referred to their 
primary psychiatrist for re -evaluation, who will then determine if the patient requires changes to 
his/her medication regimen and if he/she should  continue in the protocol or be exited for safety 
reasons. Patients who are judged by the study clinician to require emergency intervention due to 
clinical deterioration will be referred to the  local hospital  emergency department for further 
evaluation.  
-Pregnancy: If any urine test is positive for pregnancy or the subject reports becoming pregnant, 
the participa nt cannot to continue with tDCS training sessions and she will be withdrawn from 
the study.  
 
-Withdrawal of participant consent  
 
-Subject noncompliance, defined as refusal or inability to adhere to the study schedule or 
procedures.  Missing sessions will be  reviewed as to the reasons why and if it is found that the 
individual is failing to adhere to study requirements a decision will be made as to whether the 
individual will remain in the study.  This will be done on a case -by-case basis.  
 
 
4.  Research Proc edures  
The present study evaluates tolerability and feasibility of repeated administration of tDCS and 
auditory remediation alone and in combination.  
 
All participants will receive an eligibility screening, which includes demographics, psychiatric 
and medi cal history, SCID, assessment of auditory function and auditory emotion recognition, 
urine toxicology and, if applicable, pregnancy tests, and related measures (~2 hours).  
 
After consenting and establishing eligibility, each participant will be asked to pa rticipate   3 
behavioral sessions ( behavioral sessions can be combine into one or 2 sessions if preferred, each 
session is  ~2 hours or ~ 6 hours total ), one ERP/EEG session (~ 3 hours) and a blood draw (~ 5 
minutes).  These assessments will be repeated at the end of the study, following completion of all 
training sessions.  
 
Once the assessment sessions are completed, each participant will be assigned randomly to 1 of 
3 study arms: 1) active auditory remediation/training + active tDCS; 2) active auditory 
remediation/training + sham  tDCS; 3) computer game condition (“ control ” remediation). Each 
training  type involves two or three sessions per week, approximately 30 minutes each, for 
approximately 12-17 weeks ( 34/30 minute tDCS training sessions) depending on the number of 
sessions per week the subject is able to attend  
 
1. Eligibility Screening:  
 
After the patient signs the informed consent form and the HIPAA authorization, he/she will  
undergo a diagnostic interview (SCID) and brief audiometric examination to insure adequate 
hearing  ability, and will complete a simple behavioral test of auditory processing to determine 
the presence/absence of auditory sensory deficits (Tone Matching Test), and brief evaluation 
(WRAT Reading) to estimate premorbid intellectual a bility.  Also a screening  for active suicidal 
ideation ( Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale) will be completed  
 
Females of childbearing capacity will receive a urine pregnancy test; tDCS cannot begin unless 
a negative result is obtained.  
 
 9   
A brief clinica l evaluation and/or medical history will determine medication history and  
presence/absence of current alcohol or drug abuse. Additionally, a urine toxicology test will be  
perform ed to verify substance use. The total eligibility session length will be appro ximately 2  
hours . 
 
2. Pre -training assessments  
2.1 Behavioral Assessment  
 
The total behavioral assessment length will be approximately 3 sessions  (can be combine d into 1 
or 2 session s), 2 hour each  session  (6 hours total) . 
 
Behavioral assessments include s tandardized measures of neurocognition (MATRICS Consensus 
Cognitive Battery, Processing Speed Index of the WAIS -4), social cognition (Auditory Emotion 
Recognition, Penn Emotion Recognition Task, The Awareness of Social Inference Test), 
functional (i.e. eve ryday life) skills (UCSD Performance -based Skills Assessment, Global 
Assessment of Function, Specific Levels of  Functioning Assessment), social skill s (Social Skills 
Performance Assessment), and reading ability (Comprehensive Test of Phonological 
Processin g). Assessment of current psychiatric symptoms will include the Positive and Negative 
Symptom Scale  and the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale , The Assessment for Treatment 
Emergent Events (SAFTEE) to assess current preexisting health issues prior to t he start of the 
tDCS training sessions.  
 
2.2 Electroencephalography/Event Related Potential (EEG/ERP) sessions  
 
An EEG session will be completed before the experimental procedures. Electroencephalography  
(EEG) will be used to continuously record electrical  brain activity from the scalp while subjects  
complete the tasks described below. In addition, 10 minutes of resting eyes open/closed EEG will 
be obtained, leading to 1:45 hr total recording time. The total session length, including the  
application and rem oval of the electrode cap and any required breaks, will be approximately 3  
hours. Based upon our prior experience, we expect this session length to be tolerable even for  
cognitively impaired individuals.  
 
EEG data will be obtained from Brain Vision electro de system with 24 - 64 scalp electrodes, 
digitized at 500 -1000 Hz. digital recording system (Brain Product GmbH, Gilching, Germany).  
 
ERP will be obtained to synthetic FM -tones that differ in pitch, intensity or HF500. The FM -
tones  were developed by measure ment of acoustic cues of the Juslin and Laukka’s prosody  
stimulus set. FM -tones were synthesized (Adobe Audition) to be 500 msec in length with a  
modulation frequency of 3 Hz (1½ cycles per tone), at a nominal intensity of 75 dB sound  
pressure level (1). T he “standard” tone had moderate levels of F0M and F0SD (e.g., an  
F0M/F0SD of 125/125 Hz), and was designed to be emotionally ambiguous, while the deviants  
were designed to mimic specific emotions. The six deviants were modified from the standard  
tone as fo llows:  
1)   F0M: increased base pitch with unchanged pitch variability (i.e. 378 Hz/125 Hz); typically  
perceived as happy.  
2)   F0SD: unchanged base pitch with decreased pitch variability (i.e. 125 Hz/20 Hz); typically  
perceived as sad.  
3) HF500: adding an  overlay of HF500 noise with unchanged pitch characteristics; typically  
perceived as angry or fearful.  
 
 10  4)   Intensity: increasing the intensity (volume) to 85 dB with unchanged pitch characteristics;  
typically perceived as angry or fearful.  
5)   Dual (F0M/ F0SD): varying both base pitch and variability (378 Hz/20 Hz); leads to a  
stimulus that differs physically from the standard, but does not convey a predominant emotion  
percept  
6)   Non -FM: a simple, non -FM modulated tone (125 Hz), which is perceived primar ily as  
neutral or no emotion.  
7)   Stimuli will be presented through headphones with an interstimulus interval (ISI) of 250  
msec. During MMN testing, subjects will not be informed of the emotional intent, and watch a  
silent, unrelated movie.  
 
A multidimens ional, “optimized” design will be used, allowing for multiple deviants to be  
assessed simultaneously. Four 950 tone blocks will be used, with each block divided into an  
“oddball” section, followed immediately by a “repetitive N1” section. In the oddball se ction, 
600 tones will be presented: Standard tones (300 total/50%) alternated with one of the six 
deviant s (50 of each deviant tone per block ~8.33% for each deviant). The deviant tone c annot 
be the  same as one of the previous four deviants. In the repetit ive N1 section, 50 repeats of each 
of the  seven tones (350 total tones, 50 each) will be presented. Thus, each tone was presented 
both as a  deviant against a background of the more frequent, emotionally ambiguous “standard” 
stimuli in  the oddball section a nd repetitively in the “repetitive N1” section.  
 
All standardized assessments (behavioral and electrophysiological) and interviews will be  
conducted by a trained rater . Dr. Elisa Dias will supervise collection of assessments and 
electrophysiology.  
 
2.3 Blo od Draw  
 
BDNF/D -serine levels will be obtained at study baseline and after completion, and will be  
evaluated as potential mediators of both tDCS and cognitive remediation efficacy. Any 
additional blood remaining  will be kept frozen at -70°C to be used if o ther potential biomarkers 
are developed over  the course of the study.  
 
 
3.   Computer -based Training sessions  
 
After the first and final experimental training sessions, participants will complete  questionnaire -
based measures of motivation (Intrinsic Motiva tion Inventory, Perceived  
Competency Scale, Treatment Motivation Questionnaire) to assess engagement.  
 
Eligible participants will be randomly assigned to one of three training programs:  
1) auditory remediation plus active tDCS;  
2) auditory remediation plus  sham tDCS;  
3) computer game.  
 
All programs are 2 -3 sessions per week of at least 30 minutes each tDCS training session, 
conducted over approximately  12-17 week period  (34 tDCS training sessions total ). During the 
auditory remediation training sessions sub jects will receive either active or inactive tDCS.  
During the computer game program subjects will not receive active or sham tDCS.  
 
 
 11  Participants in the auditory remediation conditions will sit at individual computer workstations  
and respond to auditory sti muli presented through headphones. Auditory exercises will entail  
computer -based activities designed to train ability to identify and differentiate between tones that  
vary in pitch, intensity, and frequency. The exercises provide feedback to participants t o 
facilitate learning of acoustic cues to improve accuracy of auditory stimulus identification and  
discrimination. Level of difficulty for stimulus identification or discrimination is programmed  to 
vary based on the performance of each individual such that  as performance improves, task  
difficulty increases. After each tDCS training session, discomfort with tDCS will be assessed 
using the Wong -Baker Faces Pain Rating Scale and the Brunoni Questionaire for tDCS.   At the 
conclusion of each week ly session , par ticipants will engage in a 10 -minute  discussion with the 
facilitator to bridge computer -based training to everyday life. No tDCS will be given during 
weekly discussion.  Discussion for active training will include  topics aim ed to enhance 
motivation for the  exercises by providing a personally relevant functional  context for auditory 
training.  Discussion will also include study progress, enjoyment of computer activities and any 
issues relating to session adherence.  Also at the conclusion of every other weekl y session  
(biweekly) and at the conclusion of the last week of training , clinical and medical symptoms will 
be assessed.  
 
The computer game is the condition where participants will work on commercially available 
puzzle games to control for clinician contac t and the non -specific effects of mental stimulation. 
The schedule of computer -based activity will be the same as the auditory remediation.   
Participants will engage in a once weekly discussion with the session facilitator to discuss study 
progress,  enjoy ment of computer activities, and any issues related to session adherence. Also at 
the conclusion of every other weekly session (biweekly) and at the conclusion of the last week of 
training, clinical and medical symptoms will be assessed.  
 
tDCS:  
 
Stimulatio n will be performed using a battery -driven BrainStim SYS (Brainvision LLC,  
Germany), and transferred through two 7x5 cm sponge electrodes soaked in a saline solution  
(0.9% NaCl). tDCS electrode placement will be  over frontal areas and bilateral mastoids . 
Localization of electrode  placement will be established using the 10 -20 EEG technique. Each 
stimulation session will last~30 minutes.  
 
tDCS stimulations will be administered by trained  research staff member .  
Females of childbearing capacity will receive a urine pregnancy test monthly during computer  
based training sessions. tDCS cannot continue unless a negative result is obtained.  
 
4.    Post -training testing  
 
After completion of the compute r–based training sessions,  participants will be scheduled to 
compl ete post-training assessments which include behavioral  tests, one session of EEG, and a 
blood draw as described above for the pre -training testing.  They will also repeat the Tone 
Matching Task and the Audiometry (hearing test) that was done at screening.  
 
 
  
5. Risks  
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) procedures:  Risks associated with the tDCS 
procedures for this study are similar to risks associated with other tDCS studies, which are 
 
 12  minimal. tDCS is presently a widely used research technique, mos t commonly in the areas of 
motor rehabilitation and depression.  
 
The risks to human subjects directly associated with tDCS administration include:  
a) Mild tingling sensation at the site of application during administration.  
This sensation ceases after trea tment is completed.  
b) Mild headache  
c) Slight epidermal irritation, redness or burns at site of application  
d) Mild temperature changes at the site of application.  
 
The dosing  of tDCS proposed in this study (2 mA x 20 -40 min) are within the range used in 
recent and ongoing clinical studies. For example, in a recent study of 131 healthy subjects 
undergoing 277 tDCS sessions, no serious adverse events occurred. Side effects most commonly 
reported were tingling (76%), itching (68%), burning (54%), and pain (2 5%). Side effect severity 
was mild, with fewer than 2% of responses indicating a severity > 3 on all questions except 
tingling (15%), itching (20%), burning (7%), pain (5%), and fatigue (3%) during stimulation. 
Symptoms resolved promptly following terminat ion of stimulation without long -term 
consequences. In rare cases, nausea or insomnia have been reported. Although formal toxicity 
studies have not been performed, doses of tDCS used in present clinical studies are at least two 
orders of magnitude  below tho se that have been shown to produce brain lesions in rodent.  
 
Worsening of psychiatric condition : In addition to common tDCS side effects, the risk of 
repeated tDCS exposure in Sz is presently unknown. We have performed >100 individual 
sessions in patients with Sz without observing adverse effects on symptoms. Furthermore, in 
disorders such as depression, therapeutic effects have been observed from bifrontal tDCS. 
Nevertheless, given the lack of information there is a possibility of worsening of either sympt oms 
or cognitive function  (PANSS) . These potentials will therefore be monitored biweekly by an 
independent safety monitor, as detailed in section procedures for minimizing risks  below . As with 
all trials, there is a risk for development of suicidal ideatio n, which will be monitored biweekly 
using the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale as well.  
 
Electrophysiological EEG procedures : These studies entail the recording of EEG from  the scalp 
employing standard sensors and amplification methods. These procedu res are well  standardized 
and there are few known risks. These are principally due to equipment malfunction.  
The recording equipment used in these studies meet the current design criteria for subject safety,  
including isolation from potential electrical ha zards.  
 
Assessment/screening procedures : There are no known physical or psychological risks involved 
in taking these tests. Subjects may find the interviews about their psychiatric condition upsetting, 
and although the test procedures are designed to be re latively simple, some subjects might 
experience some frustration during the tests.  
 
Confidentiality:   There is a risk from study participation of loss of confidentiality  
 
Describe procedures for minimizing risks  
 
tDCS : Mild headache has been reported when  tDCS is administered in some cases, but has been  
known to cease with acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or aspirin.  Slight epidermal irritation at sight of 
application has been reported in some instances. Mild temperature change might be felt at the 
site of applic ation.  
 
 13   
During the period of administration, the participant will be closely and regularly observed and 
asked to report any adverse effects. Subjects may opt to discontinue at any point. We will also 
regularly debrief subjects following tDCS sessions to de tect patterns or procedures that might be 
associated with discomfort and will modify procedures as necessary.  
 
Additionally, we will monitor discomfort using Wong -Baker Faces Pain Rating Scale (WBFPRS) 
which we feel is readily understood by patients and pr ovides general evaluation of discomfort. 
To date, data have been collected from 37 patient sessions in which active stimulation was used 
and 15 sham session. Discomfort during the active stimulation session was generally low (mean 
WBFPRSscore = 0.51 ± .87) , corresponding to between “no -hurt” and “hurts little bit”. During 
sham, the mean scores were also low but non -zero for many subjects (mean score=.33 ± .82). 
The difference between scores was  not significant (p=.48). No patient scored above a 2 on the 
scale, and no patient discontinued due to discomfort.  
 
In addition , we will incorporate additional measures as suggested by Brunoni et al. (24) to 
monitor discomfort and potential objective adverse effects of tDCS (e.g. skin redness) . 
 
During this study, blin ded Adverse Effects Summaries (AES) will be provided to the independent 
monitor who will evaluate to insure  that adequacy of protection against risk is maintained, and 
will provide feedback to the PI and the research teams. In addition, any scores of 4 or 5 on the 
WBFPRS will be brought to the immediate attention to the PI, who will then review clinical 
procedures.  
 
Headache and dizziness are also known risks of tDCS. Anyone experiencing such symptoms will 
be monitored until symptoms resolve, and will be re contacted 24 -48 hrs after the event to insure  
that there were no long -term sequelae.  
 
Adverse Effects (AEs) and Serious Adverse Effects (SAEs) will be reported to the IRB as per 
standard protocol, and will lead to review of procedures to determine whether alterations in the 
protocol or monitoring procedures are required.  
 
Worsening of psychiatric condition:  
In order to detect potential worsening of symptoms, patients will be assessed with the Positive 
and Negative  Syndrome Scale (PANSS) ratings biweekly du ring the tr aining program . 
PANSS ratings, including positive, negative and cognitive factors, will be reviewed in a non -
blinded fashion by the independent monitor to insure that there is no significant worsening in the 
tDCS vs. sham group.  
 
In addition, su bjects showing >10 pt worsening on PANSS or > 2 pt worsening on psychosis 
items will have case reviewed to de termine potential causes and, if  appropriate, will have 
tDCS/AR treatments temporarily withheld for up to 2 weeks. All attempts will be made to 
maintain patients on stable doses of antipsychotic throughout the study. However, in cases of 
worsening of symptoms, increases of up to 50% of dose will be permitted without removing 
patients from the study.  
 
In addition to PANSS ratings, we will also maintai n close contact with treating clinicians and 
instruct them to contact the research team should they notice worsening of symptoms during 
clinical treatment.  
 
 
 14  Suicidality : It is expected that patients participating in this study will be clinically stable. 
Nevertheless,  because tDCS may affect mood symptoms and because effects of repeated tDCS in 
Sz are unknown, patients will be rated biweekly using the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale (25,26). Significant suicidal ideation will be reported immediately t o the PI or his 
designee, who will insure appropriate treatment intervention.  
 
General side effects:  General side effects will be assessed biweekly using the Systematic 
Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events (SAFTEE) scale (27), and will be provided in a  
unblinded fashion to the independent monitor .  All significant side effects will be reported to the 
PI, and appropriate intervention will be initiated . 
 
Independent individual/safety officer:  Because of potential discomfort induced by tDCS, Dr. 
Joshua Ka ntrowitz will serve as an unblinded independent individual/safety officer. Dr. 
Kantrowitz is a board certified psychiatrist. Dr. Kantrowitz will have access to unblinded subject 
safety ratings  biweekly , and will monitor quarterly the side effect frequency between groups. Dr. 
Kantrowitz will notify the PI should there be significant imbalance in rate of side effects between 
active and sham treatment, in which case appropriate adjustments will be made to the sham 
stimulation protocol, or if an excess of painf ul events occur (Wong -Baker score >3), in which 
case procedures which be reviewed. Dr. Kantrowitz will also review biweekly subject PANSS, 
suicide  (CSSRS scores) , and SAFTEE scores to  insure that no unanticipated side effects are 
observed.  
 
Electrophysiolo gical EEG procedures  
Regular preventative maintenance and careful attention to recording procedures further 
minimize the already insignificant risks of electrophysiological recording. Electrodes and 
materials used for affixing them in place are kept scrupu lously clean and sterilized and materials 
are utilized which minimize the chance of skin and scalp irritation  
 
Patients will be instructed to clean their hair following the procedure to minimize irritation.  
 
Subjects may find it upsetting to discuss their medical or psychiatric problems, but this is not 
different from interviews conducted during routine medical care. Participants may find the EEG 
or computer tasks tiring or difficult and may experience mental fatigue and transient stress from 
the neuropsych ological testing.  
 
Blood drawings : Phlebotomy will be performed by trained phlebotomist using sterile technique 
to minimize possibility of contusion or infection.  
 
Assessment/screening procedures : Frequent breaks will be given as needed. Subjects will be 
reassured that they will not have to answer questions that cause discomfort.  
 
Confidentiality: Every effort will be made to protect the participant’s confidentiality.  
 
6. Consent Process  
Subjects selected for the study will be fully informed of the nature and scope of the study.  
Research study staff who  have had consent training through the Clinical research division will 
meet with interested prospective participants.  A complete description of the protocol will be 
given including potential risks and benefits and other significant elements of the consent 
(including confidentiality, voluntary nature of research).  In addition, prior to approaching 
patients, we discuss patients who meet eligibility criteria with their treatment teams . For CREF 
 
 15  inpatients, we will  be in contact with the patient’s treating psychiatrist , and f or outpatients,  we 
will be in contact with a member of the patient’s treatment team/patient’s doctor to discuss the 
study and the patient’s participation. The consent process involves review of the consent form 
and the HIPAA addendum, along with additional elaboration of all elements and answering any 
questions the participant may have and asking questions to assess the participant’s 
understanding of the informed consent document. When all of the  participant’s questions have 
been answered and the research study staff is satisfied that the participant understands the study, 
has had an opportunity to evaluate the risks and benefits of participation and voluntarily 
consents to participate in the stud y, the participant and the research  study  staff member will sign 
the informed consent document.  
Consent to participate by CREF  inpatients and  RPC outpatients is documented in their 
electronic medical record in the form of a chart note and consent form. Rec ords of informed 
consent for all participants are maintained in the subject’s research record.  The subject is given 
a copy of their consent form and a copy of the NKI Privacy Practices form.  
 
Capacity will be assessed by the  Treating Psychiatrist or licen sed professional who is not 
directly involved in the research.  
 
7. State whether any drugs tested are approved by FDA, are under an IND (Investigational New 
Drug Application), or are marketed products being used “off -label”.    
No drugs are tested for this stu dy. 
 
8. State whether any devices are under an IDE or Abbreviated IDE  
 
The device, BrainStim SYS (Brainvision LLC,Germany) , has an abbreviated IDE     
CE Reg#MED30003  
There is a label on the device which contains: the name of the device, the manufacturer, a 
model and serial number.  We have placed a label on the device that states : “CAUTION --
Investigational device  limited by Federal (or United States) law to investigational use."  
Since the device itself  is quite small , an additional label with all warnings and precautions 
will not fit on the device.  We have place d a label  on the device case.  
The manual for the device is located in the device case (where we keep the device when not 
in use) and it describes all relevant warnings and precautions. We have a label  on the 
device case that states:  “This case contains the device manual describing all relevant 
warnings and precautions”.  
 
9. Issues requiring special attention of the IRB  
None.  
 
B.  SUBJECT POPULATION:  
Sample Size:  
We project we will need to  enroll 60 patients in  order to have 45 completers.  
 
Age Range (indicate whether children, subjects under age 18, will be enrolled):  
18-55 
 
Diagnostic Groups:   
Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder  
 
 16   
Ethnic, Race and Gender Breakdown:  
Participants will be representative of the respective population (ethnicity , race and gender ) at the 
recruitment site.  No racial or ethnic group will be specifically included or excluded.  
 
  
Also, indicate below whether the sample represents the minority and gender distribution of the populati on or 
immediate geographic area from which the sample is drawn.  Explain if any specific groups are excluded.  
Indicate whether each gender and minority group will be represented in sufficient numbers to allow 
statistical analysis of the results for each g roup.  Explain if the representation will not be sufficient.  Note: 
Although every effort should be made to include sufficient numbers of women and minorities, there are 
acceptable reasons why this cannot or need not always occur such as pilot studies, con dition limited to one 
gender, limited access, limited resources, or multi -center studies where total numbers will be representative.  
If gender and/or minorities are excluded, provide a clear rationale for their exclusion.  
 
No racial or ethnic group will b e specifically included or excluded.  Participants will be 
representative of the respective population (ethnicity, race, and sex) at the recruitment site.   
 
 
C. RECRUITMENT METHODS:  
 
• If advertising  for subjects, describe the process and attach to this for m any letters to be 
sent, texts of advertisements or other material to be used in recruitment.  If not available 
now, this material must be approved by the IRB before use.  
 
We will not be advertising at this time.  If we decide to advertise, we will submit  
material to the NKI IRB for approval first.  
   
 
 
 
• If screening  patient medical records to identify possible subjects, please so indicate below 
and complete the form “Request for HIPAA Waiver of Authorization and/or Waiver of  
Consent under 45 CFR 46.116(d) ”. 
 
Screening will be done by staff in our division.  A HIPAA Waiver of Consent is 
attached  and a phone screening script .   
We will use the phone screen to call outpatients that have been referred to us by 
the Volunteer Recruitment Program  (VRP) at NKI. Th e Volunteer Recruitment 
Program at NKI recruits from NYS office of Mental Health facilities. The VRP 
recruits outpatients living on the grounds at CLUE I and II, Conway House (Loeb 
House) , from Rockland County Department of Mental Health facilities and from  
the community.  We will use the phone screen to see if the outpatient is interested  
in participating in the study and to obtain any screening information specific to 
this study.  We will also use the phone screen to call out patients who have 
participated in IRB approved studies conducted by Daniel Javitt, M.D., Ph.D.,  
(those who have agreed to be recontacted for other studies)  to see if they are 
interested in participating  in this protocol  and if they are willing to answer phone 
screening questions .  We do  not have a treating relationship with these potential  
outpatients . If the outpatient meets phone screen criteria and agrees to come in and 
sign consent an d the HIPAA addendum to participate in the study, prior to starting 
the intervention, we will to spea k with the outpatient’s psychiatrist about the study, 
 
 17  the outpatient’s participation in the study(whether there is any issue with the 
subject participating in the study) and whether the psychiatrist’s plan s to keep the 
outpatient’s medications stable.  
 
We will also use the phone screen for outpatients who call from the community (i.e. 
saw study on Clinical trials.gov).  If the outpatient is interested in participating in 
the study  and in answering phone screening questions , we will obtain screening 
informat ion. We do not have a treating relationship with these potential 
outpatients. If the outpatient meets phone screen criteria and agrees to come in and 
sign consent and the HIPAA addendum to participate in the study, prior to starting 
the intervention, we wi ll need to speak with the outpatient’s psychiatrist about the 
study, the outpatient’s participation in the study(whether there is any issue with the 
subject participating in the study) and whether the psychiatrist plan s to keep the 
outpatient’s medications  stable.   
 
For CREF inpatients, we should be able to get the phone screen information from 
the medical records or the patient’s treating psychiatrist on CREF.  However, if we 
are unable to get screening information from medical records or patient’s 
psychi atrist, we may need to speak to the patient on CREF and talk to them about 
the study and their willingness to answer some study specific screening questions.   
We will also speak to the treating psychiatrist about the patient’s participation in 
this resear ch (whether there is any issue with participating in the study and whether 
the psychiatrist plans to keep the patient’s medications stable).  
 
 
 
• If recruiting by other means , such as referrals from community physicians, please describe  
below.  
 
We will not  be actively recruiting from community physicians, however, we will 
accept referrals from the community (physicians, friends, and family of the 
patients).  
We will use the phone screen for outpatients who call from the community (i.e. saw 
study on Clinical trials.gov).  If the outpatient is interested in participating in the 
study and in answering phone screening questions, we will obtain screening 
information. We do not have a treating relationship with these potential 
outpatients. If the outpatient meets ph one screen criteria and agrees to come in and 
sign consent and the HIPAA addendum to participate in the study, prior to starting 
the intervention, we will need to speak with the outpatient’s psychiatrist about the 
study, the outpatient’s participation in t he study(whether there is any issue with the 
subject participating in the study) and whether the psychiatrist plans to keep the 
outpatient’s medications stable.   
 
 
D.      RISKS AND BENEFITS:  
 
1.  Describe the risks presented by stu dy procedures and interventio ns, including the expected 
frequency of the risks.   Include all physical and nonphysical risks.  (e.g., emotional distress, 
economic harm, legal jeopardy , breach of confidentiality ).   
 
 Risks are described above in item 5. Risks  
 
 18   
2. If the research presents  more than minimal risk to subjects, describe all measures designed to 
minimize the risks.  When applicable, describe inclusion, exclusion and drop -out criteria 
intended to minimize risks and d escribe any procedures for follow up such as when subjects are 
found to be in need of medical or psychological referral.   
 
 Minimizing risks are described above in item 5 . Risks  
 
3.  Describe any potential for direct benefit to individual subjects as well as the benefit to society 
based on the scientific knowledge to b e gained.   These two types of benefits should be clearly 
distinguished in your discussion.  
 
E. CONSENT PROCESS AND PATIENT CAPACITY:  
1. Indicate Who Will Obtain Consent, Assess Capacity, and Under What Circumstances:  
 (Include name and title of these indivi duals)   
 
Consent for this project will be obtained by Odeta Beggel , MA , Constance Shope , Ph.D.  or 
Gail Silipo , M.A.   All have had consent training  through the Clinical Research Division . 
Capacity will be assessed by a Treating Psychiatrist or licensed prof essional who is not 
directly involved in the research.  Capacity will be assessed by Drs. Fabien Tremeau, 
Russell Tobe or his designee in the Outpatient Research Division or Dr. Karen Nolan.  
 
 
 2.  Will Individuals Potentially Lacking Capacity to Consent be  Considered  for Inclusion As 
Subjects:   
 
No.  Patients who lack capacity will not be considered for inclusion in this study.  Capacity 
will be assessed by the Treating Psychiatrist or licensed professional who is not directly 
involved in the research.  
 
 
 If yes, list name(s) and title(s) of persons who will assess capacity (Note: The person(s)  
who assess capacity must be a psychiatrist or a licensed psychologist who is  independent of 
the research.):   
 
Capacity will be assessed by Dr.  Fabien Tremeau, Dr. Russell Tobe or his designee in the 
Outpatient Research Division or Dr. Karen Nolan.  
 
F. COMPENSATION:  
 Will subjects receive any compensation?     Yes_ √____     No_____  
 If yes, indicate how much and criteria for payment.  Include method of pro -rating payme nt, if any, 
for subjects who do not complete the study.  
 
Subjects will be paid $20 for the eligibility screening, $60 for the pre training 
behavioral assessments, and $30 ($10 per hour) for completion of the EEG 
research procedure  and $5 for the blood draw . Subjects will be paid $10 per 
tDCS/training/discussion/and assessment sessions (34 sessions) for a total of 
$340  and $60 for the post behavioral assessments and $30 for completion of the 
post EEG  and $5 blood draw .  Subjects who complete the study will b e paid a 
 
 19  bonus of $50. The maximum total amount for the whole study will be $ 600. 
Participants will be paid for the time completed.  They will not receive the bonus 
if they do not complete the study.  
 
 
 
G. CONFIDENTIALITY:   Describe means by which privacy o f both paper and electronic  files will 
be protected and confidentiality maintained.  If a Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, 
please indicate.   
 
Note:  All study data whether on paper or in encrypted electronic records or devices must be 
stored  in locked files in a secured office. All electronic data containing PHI must be kept on the 
“HIPAA drive” or, when portability is required, on a hardware -encrypted device that has been 
approved by ISD.  
 
Research information obtained will not be identified  with participants’ names; we will 
use a code . All paper data will be kept in locked cabinets and in  locked offices . 
Electronic data will be stored in a HIPAA password protected directory.  Any b ehavioral 
data that is collected on laptop computer will be  collected on an ISD approved laptop 
that has been encrypted and has password protections which have been put into place by 
ISD.   
 
 
 
H.     CONFLICT OF INTEREST:   In order for the IRB to determine whether financial interests pose   
 a potential for bias t hat might affect the rights and welfare of the human subjects or the credibility  
 of the research, please briefly describe any financial relationship the principal investigator or other  
 researchers on this project may have with the study sponsor (other t han funding this project) or any  
 financial interest in the product being tested.  
(Note :  "“No conflict of interest” or “N/A” is not responsive to the question being asked.   
The question asks about financial relationships with the sponsor or financial int erests in 
the product. These interests and relationships need not be conflicts.   If no relationships or 
interests exist the answer should be “None” or a similar response.)  
None.  
 
 
I. OTHER ISSUES:  Does this protocol raise any other sensitive issues concer ning human subjects  
which would be of concern to the IRB or NKI Administration?  If so, please elaborate.  
 
 No. 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised 3/24/15  