Cover Sheet  
 Clinical trials.gov ID   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Ivermectin and human immunity  Protocol 
ID#STUDY00005069  
PI: Adrian 
Wolstenholme  Primary Contact:  Adrian 
Wolstenholme  
Submission 
Type:  Initial Study    
IRB 
Coordinator:  Brooke Harwell  Parent Protocol:  
Review 
Category:     
Approved 
Date:  9/27/2017   
Expiration 
Date:  7/11/2018   
  
   
Date: Monday, November 26, 2018 12:06:50 PM
View: SF: Basic Information UGA v2
Section 1 - Basic Information
1.* Title of Study:
The effects of ivermectin on the normal human
immune systemIf the study is/will be funded, the IRB recommends
matching the title in the funding proposal. 
2.* Short Title:
Ivermectin and human immunityThis can match the long title or be shortened if your
project uses an acronym or nickname; however, all
system generated lists, searches, and documents(including approval letters) will show the short title. 
3.
Principal Investigator (faculty or senior
staff only  - see help):
Adrian WolstenholmeOnly UGA faculty and selected staff members (senior
staff) are eligible to serve as PI.  See the policy formore information: http://research.uga.edu/documents
/eligibility
4.* Does the Principal Investigator have a
financial interest related to this
research? Yes NoSee the policy for more
information: https://research.uga.edu/docs/policies
/compliance/hso/PP_Financial%20Conflicts%20of%20Interests.pdf
5.
* Are you requesting determination if
your project meets the definition of
human subjects research? Yes No
Are you requesting determination if
your project meets the criteria fordevelopmental review?
Yes No
Will an external IRB act as the IRB of
record for this study?
Yes NoIf you are not sure if your project needs IRB
review, choose "Yes" in the first question.  A form willopen and provide prompts to guide you throughan initial assessment to see if your project needs IRBreview.
If you are seeking external funding and the sponsor or
the Office for Sponsored Programs requests for IRB
approval but you are not ready to create materials for
the human subject research activities, choose "Yes" inthe second question.  A form will open and provideprompts to guide you through an initial assessment tosee if you can receive a letter from the IRB withoutcompleting a full submission for review. 
If you are collaborating with other institutions and the
collaboration model involves review by a central IRB,and UGA is not the lead institution, choose "Yes" on
the third question.  Be prepared to submit information
that the other IRB will review.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
1 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Project Funding Details
Project Funding Details
1.0 Mark all that apply: Identify below if the study is/will be supported in
whole or in part. If the funding has not been awarded yet, mark  pending.
Check all that apply. If you have  not applied for funding or ha ve no plan to
at the time of initial submissi on, mark “No Funding” and contin ue to the
next page.  If you will or have applied for funding, choose Ext ernally
Funded or Internally Funded depe nding on the source (see Help o n right.) 
If the funding has not been awar ded yet, mark “Pending.”  Final ly, indicate
whether UGA is/will be the prime awardee or a sub-award/contrac t.
Funding Status:
No Funding
Externally FundedInternally FundedPending
Primary Awardee is UGA
Sub-Award or Sub-Contract to UGAInternal sources
include UGAdepartments or
institutes.  External
sources may befederal agencies(e.g., NIH, NSF),industry sponsors(e.g., Novartis), orprivate sponsors(e.g., Bill andMelinda GatesFoundation.)
2.0 Identify each funding source .  If you have more than one, ad d each
separately.  If the sponsor agency is not in the selection list , choose TBD
and identify the sourc e in Q5.  The Grants Office ID number is required: 
this is the Gr ants Portal Project ID (FP000XXXX) or Award ID
(AWD000XXXX.)
Funding SourceSponsor's
Funding IDGrantsOffice IDAttachments
Clinical & Translational
Research UnitCTRU Seed Grant RFPFY18.docxThe IRB must
review any fundingproposal, contract,or sub-contract forcongruence with the
description of
human subjectsactivities describedin this submission. The fundingproposal or draftcontract must beprovided.
3.0 Name of Project and/or Project PI if different from this IRB  submission.
4.0 Describe the scope of this IRB submission compared to the gr ant
proposal (sub-award or statement  of work) related to this proje ct.
Scope of Application:
All human subjects activities in th e grant proposal are covered in this
IRB Application.Not all human subjects activities in the grant proposal are covered in this IRB
Application; however, these activities  will be covered in future UGA IRB
Application(s).
Not all human subjects activities in the grant proposal are covered in this IRB
Application; however, these activities have been covered in another UGA IRB
Application. Identify the UG A PI (if different from PI of this IRB Application)
and the IRB Project Number below.
Not all human subjects activities in the grant proposal are covered in this IRB
Application; however, these activities have been or will be reviewed by
another institution’s IRB. Identify the PI and name of the other institution
below.
Other, please explain.
5.0 Provide any additional information as requested above.
This submission is associated with an application to the CTRU Seed
Funding Program.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
2 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Study Team Members
Study Team Members
1.0
Identify each UGA faculty, staff, or student who will be engaged in the conduct of human research . Do
not select the PI again.
Name RolesFinancial
InterestInvolved
inConsentE-mail Phone IsStudentProject
ViewMaisieAnderson-FrostRESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes Maisie.AndersonFrost@uga.edu706-713-2722
ViewROBERTCAPITANORESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes salvator@uga.edu 706-713-2722no
ViewKRISTINCapitanoRESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes capitano@uga.edu 706-713-2722no
ViewSTEPHANIECROYLERESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes scroyle@uga.edu 706-713-2732no
ViewJenniferDunlopRESEARCHCOORDINATORno no jdunlop@uga.edu 706-713-2722
ViewTEJAL HILL RESEARCH
COORDINATORno yes tejalh@uga.edu 706-713-2722
ViewJonathanMurrowCO-INVESTIGATORno yes jmurrow@uga.edu 706-542-4378no
ViewBarbaraReavesCO-INVESTIGATORno no bjreaves@uga.edu 706-542-6516no
ViewANGELIAROGERSRESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes alorrain@uga.edu
ViewKimberly
SchmitzRESEARCHCOORDINATORno yes schmitzk@uga.edu 706-713-2722no
2.0
Identify non-UGA collaborators* who will be engaged in the conduct of human research .
Name Email Organization
There are no items to display
*Submit an Individual Investigator Agreement for all study personnel with an institution that does not have an assurance with the
Office for Human Research Protections or OHRP (typically, local schools, private doctors, clinics).
*For study personnel who are affiliated with an institution that has an assurance (has its own IRB), do not submit an Individua l
Investigator Agreement.  Instead indicate that you have an External Site on the Study Scope page.If the collaborator
has notcompletedhuman subjectsresearch training,contact yourbusinessdepartment to
get a UGA
MyID forthem. Note: TheIndividualInvestigatorAgreement is notrequired forprojects that willbe submitted forExempt
determination
(see StudyScope page).Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
3 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: CITI Training Records
Study Team Members CITI Training Records
1.0
Principal Investigator (PI): Adrian Wolstenholme
Job Title: PROFESSOR
Please note: The training records update three times daily. Depending on when the course is
completed or updated, the record may not be uploaded until 24 hours later.
PI CITI Courses:
Stage Group Date Taken Expiration Date
1 - Basic Course Bio-Medical Research 6/7/2012 6/7/2017
2 - Refresher Course Bio-Medical Research 7/3/2017 7/3/2022If a record does not
display for someonethat has completed
training, try
removing/deletingthat person andadding them againon the Basic Infopage (PI) or StudyTeam Member page.
2.0
Study Team Members:
Person Group StageExpiration
Date
Maisie Anderson-FrostBio-MedicalResearch1 -BasicCourse10/19/2022
Person Group StageExpirationDate
ROBERT CAPITANOSocial &Behavioral
Research1 -
Basic
Course3/1/2022
Bio-Medical
Research1 -BasicCourse5/12/2021
Person Group StageExpirationDate
KRISTIN CapitanoBio-Medical
Research1 -
BasicCourse2/18/2021
Person Group StageExpirationDate
STEPHANIE CROYLEBio-MedicalResearch1 -BasicCourse6/21/2021
Person Group StageExpirationDate
Jennifer DunlopBio-MedicalResearch1 -
Basic
Course12/14/2021
Person Group StageExpirationDate
TEJAL HILLSocial &Behavioral
Research1 -
Basic
Course5/28/2020
Social &
BehavioralResearch -Prisoners1 -BasicCourse5/28/2020
Bio-Medical
Research1 -
BasicCourse10/24/2022
Person Group StageExpirationDate
Jonathan MurrowBio-MedicalResearch1 -BasicCourse4/15/2019
IRB Members1 -
Basic
Course3/5/2023If any study team
member includingthe PI has either notcompleted trainingor has not linkedpreviously-completed trainingto a valid UGAID,the record will show"There are no items
to display".
The application willnot successfullysubmit to the IRB ifthe trainingrequirement is notmet.  Likewise, iftraining has expiredand a refresher
course has not been
completed or thetraining will expire inless than 90 days,the application willnot sucessfullysubmit to the IRB.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
4 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
Person Group StageExpiration
Date
Barbara ReavesBio-Medical
Research1 -BasicCourse7/8/2019
Person Group StageExpirationDate
ANGELIA ROGERSBio-Medical
Research1 -
BasicCourse1/12/2021
Person Group StageExpirationDate
Kimberly SchmitzSocial &BehavioralResearch1 -BasicCourse11/13/2018
Bio-MedicalResearch1 -
Basic
Course8/31/2020
SFPrint: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
5 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: SF: Study Scope
Study Scope
1.0 Will you recruit or conduct th e study at a non-UGA agency/in stitution
/facility (i.e., referred to as an  External Site) where you do not normally
have research privileges?
Yes NoAnswer "Yes" if you
will recruit from a local
public or privateschool, medicalpractice, communityagency/organization,or will conduct yourprocedures at any ofthese.
2.0
Does  the study do any of the following:
Specify the use of an ap proved drug or biologic?
Use an unapproved drug or biologic?
Use a food or dietary supplement to diagnose, cure, treat, or
mitigate a disease or condition?
Use a food or dietary supplemen t only to evaluate the dietary
supplement's effect on the structure or function of the body?
Yes No
3.0
Does the study do any of the following:
Evaluate the safety or effectiveness of a device?
Use a humanitarian use devic e (HUD)?
Yes No
4.0 Check all that apply:
Project is Exempt (see Help Text on right)
Internet Research
Research activities are limited to analysis of data
Deception, concealment, or incomplete disclosureHIPAA (Protected Health Information)Blood Sampling/CollectionGenetic AnalysisDXA/X-RayMore than moderate ExerciseElectrical StimulationClinical Trial
Data/Tissue RepositoryBe sure to mark the
first box if the studymay meet criteria forexemption.  More
information about
exemption is availablein the Policy andProcedure:  ExemptReview in the Libraryor on the website athttp://research.uga.edu/hso/irb-guidelines/Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
6 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Drugs
Drugs
1.0
List all drugs, biologics, foods, and dietary supplements to be  used in the
study.
Generic Name Brand Name Attachment Name
ViewIvermectin STROMECTOL stromectol_pi.pdf
2.0
Will the study be conducte d under any IND Numbers
Yes No
If so, identify each IND:
IND Number IND Holder Other Holder
There are no items to display
3.0 If your study will not be condu cted under an IND number, it must meet all
of the following six criteria fo r an IND exemption.  Carefully evaluate each
criterion and check the box if it applies to your study.
The investigation does not involve a ro ute of administration, dose, patient
population, or other factor that significantly increases the risk (or decreases the
acceptability of the risk) associated with the use of the drug product (21 CFR312.2(b)(1)(iii)).
The investigation is not intended to be reported to FDA as a well-controlled study
in support of a new indication and there is no intent to use it to support any
other significant change in the labeling of the drug.
The investigation is conducted in complia nce with the requirements for review by
an IRB (21 CFR part 56) and with the requirements for informed consent (21 CFRpart 50).
The drug product is lawfully marketed in  the United States.
The investigation is conducted in complia nce with the requirements of § 312.7
(i.e., the investigation is not intended to promote or commercialize the drug
product).
In the case of a prescription drug, the in vestigation is not intended to support a
significant change in the advertising for the drug.
4.0 Attach files (such as IND or other information that was not attached for a
specific drug).
Document CategoryDate
Modified
ViewExemptionCriteria.docx(0.01)DrugAttachment8/18/2017Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
7 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Blood Sampling/Collection
Blood Sampling/Collection
1.0 Choose the method(s) of blood collection.
Venipuncture
2.0
For participants who are healthy, non-pregnant adults weighing at least 110 pounds:
Will blood be collected more than 2 times per week?
Yes No
Will the amount of blood drawn exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period?
Yes NoIf the answer to
either question is"Yes", this projectwill be reviewed viacommittee at aconvened meeting.
3.0
For other adults and children:
Will blood be collected mor e than 2 times per week?
Yes No
Will the amount of blood drawn exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml/kg in an
8 week period?
Yes NoIf the answer toeither question is"Yes", this projectwill be reviewed viacommittee at aconvened meeting.
4.0
Indicate the specific volume and  frequency (or the schedule) of  blood
collection.
Blood will be drawn immediately before subjects take an oral do se of ivermectin, then again 4
and 24 hours later. 30 mls of blood will be drawn on each occas ion. Only healthy, non-
pregnant adults weighing more than 110 pounds and less than 185  pounds will be recruited
as donors
5.0 Describe the specific collect ion procedures, in cluding the u se of sterile
techniques and adherence to standard laboratory safety practices.
The blood samples will be collected utiliz ing standard procedures at the CTRU,
utilizing all sterile equipment and adheri ng to standard lab safety practices
6.0 Personnel performing blood draws must have sufficient traini ng and
experience in conducting human  blood sampling.  Describe who will
collect the blood and this person' s experience/training in the specific
blood collection procedures.
Research nurses associated with the CT RU will collect the blood. CTRU nurses
have extensive training and experience in phlebotomy.
7.0 If participants will be asked to fast prior to blood collect ion(s), describe
how and when informed consent will be obtained prior to fasting .
It is recommended that Stromectol be administered on an empty stomach, so
participants will be asked to fast for two hours prior to the first blood draw.
Informed consent will be obtained  during the screening interview.If consent is
obtained withoutrequiring theparticipant to sign aconsent form, besure to request for a
waiver of the
requirement todocument informedconsent on theConsent Processpage.
8.0 Describe why it is important to collect blood for this study , including the
specific analysis that will be co nducted on the blood samples.
We are studying the effects of Strome ctol on the human immune system, so
blood is required for analysis of both  cytokines and leukocyte gene expression
following drug administration. Cytokines and chemokines will be determined
using Luminex and a commercial kit. Leuk ocyte populations will be separated into
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBM C) and polymorphonuclear cells (PMN)
and RNA extracted for RNASeq analysis. We will also test the ability of the PBMCand PMN populations to attach to, an d kill, Brugia malayi microfilariae.The consent
document shouldalso describe thetype of analyses that
will be conducted
and shouldspecifically statewhether or not thesample will beanalyzed forHIV/AIDS.
9.0 Describe the plan for disposit ion of any unused blood, including when
and how unused samples will be disposed of.
Unused blood will be disposed of by incineration as soon as practicable after theIf samples will beretained for futureanalyses, the futurePrint: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
8 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

cells have been isolated. use must be
described in the
consent documentand theadditional/future usecan be madeoptional via a tieredconsent statement.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
9 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Human Research Participants
Human Research Participants
1.0 Click "Add" to provide a general description of the targeted
participants. See Help text on the right for definition of huma n subject.
Targeted PopulationTargeted
GenderAge or AgeRangeTotal Number /Range
ViewHealthy adults from theGeneral PopulationNone 18-65 12Human Subject: A
living individual aboutwhom an investigatorobtains (1) datathrough intervention orinteraction with theindividual or (2)identifiable privateinformation.  NOTE: ifyou are not sure if your
project involves human
subjects, go back tothe Basic Informationpage and request for adetermination ofhuman subjectsresearch by answering"Yes" to the firstquestion in Section 5.
Samples of targeted
population responses:
(e.g., healthy adults
from the generalpopulation, childrenenrolled in an after-school program,adolescent femaleswith scoliosis.)
If the target age is
adults (in Georgia, it is
acceptable to choose"18+" as the targetage.
The "Total
Number/Range" shouldinclude the anticipatednumber of those whowill give consent but
may fail screening (if
research involves pre-screening participants)and other reasons forattrition (e.g.,withdrawals ortermination byresearchers).
2.0 Identify the inclusion and exclusion criteria.  If there are  two or more
targeted populations, identify eligibility criteria for each.
Inclusion Criteria:
Weight over 110 pounds and under 185 pounds.
Exclusion Criteria:
Pregnancy or nursing mothers.
Immunosuppressed individuals.Hypersensitivity to ivermectin, ce llulose, starch, magnesium stearate,
butylated hydroxyanisole, or citric acid powder (inert ingredients ofStromectol).Lactose intolerance (Lactose present in placebo)Recent (last 3 years) travel to West or Central Africa, or any othet countrywhere onchocerciasis is presentHepatitis/HIV
Liver or renal dysfunction
Currently taking any of the followi ng medications (potential for drug
interaction):- Blood thinners such as Coumadin (warfarin) or aspirin- Steroid medications (inhaled, oral or injection)- Barbiturates- Benzodiazepines such as Xanax or KlonopinIt is not necessary to
list exclusion criteria asthe opposite of
inclusion criteria. Use
these fields to narrowor refine the generaldescription provided inQ1.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
10 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
- Valproic acid (Lithium)
- Calcium channel blockers- Statins (cholesterol medication)
3.0 Describe how potential participants will be initially identi fied and how
eligibility will be determined.
Self-selection by reviewing recruitment materials; potential participants will
call the CTRU to be screened to determ ine eligibility. Verbal consent for
screening will be obtained as the first part of the interview.Possible methods of
identification includepublic record review,private medical orschool record review. If individuals will self-
select by reviewing the
eligiblity criteria listedin the recruitmentmaterials, state this. Or describe theprocess for screeningby phone, in-person ore-mail, or review ofrecords.
4.0 If the research will exclude a particular gender or minority  group,
provide justification.
N/AWhen appropriate,
provide citations or
references to supportthe justification. 
5.0 Describe any incentive/compensation for participation.
Participants will receive free parking at the CTRU, where blood will be drawn,
and monetary compensation of $25 cash for each time they allow blood to bedrawn, plus $25 for taking the drug, for a total of $100 if all parts of the studyare completed. A light meal will be provided during the first visit to CTRU tocompensate for fasting.Indicate the form of
incentive/compensation(e.g., monetarypayment by check, giftcard, services withoutcharge, reimbursementfor travel cost.)  If
offering extra class
credit, describe theavailable non-researchalternative ofcomparable time andeffort.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
11 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Vulnerable an d/or Special Populations
Vulnerable and/or Sp ecial Populations
1.0 Check any/all that apply.
Population:
Pregnant women, neonates, or fetuses.
PrisonersMinorsMentally-disabled/cognitively-impair ed/severe psychological disorders
Physically-disabledTerminally illEconomically/educationally disadvantagedA specific group based on religion, race, ethnicity, immigration status,
language, or sexual orientation
Students/Employees
Other (please describe)If you are using a UGA
student research pooland pool guidelinesrequire an educationaldebriefing, pleaseattach the debriefing tothe supportingdocuments page andlabel it "EducationalDebriefing".
2.0 Provide justification for including the group(s) checked abo ve in this
particular study.
It is possible that some of the participants may be students or employees of
the university, possibly within the same department or lab as the investigator.
3.0 Describe the working relationship between any researchers an d the
participants, as applicable.
It is possible that some of the participants may be graduate students or work inthe same department as the investigators.A working relationship
may exist between aresearcher and his/herown students oremployees.
4.0 Describe the safeguards to protect the rights and welfare of  these
participants and to min imize any possible c oercion or undue inf luence.
Minors or those with cognitive impairme nts will not be included. The amount of
the payment is intended to compensate participants for their time, and not as
an undue inducement to take part. We will attempt to recruit participants who
do not have a working relationship with the investigators.For example, assessthe amount of paymentand how/if itwill present undueinfluence for the
financially
disadvantaged.  Forminors or people withcognitive impairmentor educationaldisadvantage, describehow youwill ensure participants'understanding of thestudy (e.g., by using
advocatesduring the
consent process). Tomitigate a workingrelationship, consideruse flyers to recruitparticipants instead ofdirectly approachingyour own staff orstudents.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
12 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Recruitment Methods and Procedures
Recruitment Methods and Materials
1.0 Will you recruit (invite) indi viduals to take part in your study?
Yes NoRecruit means to
provide informationabout the study and
invite people to take
part. Any study thatinvolves interactionwith subjects shouldhave a well-definedrecruitmentprocess.  If youanswer "yes", youmust submitmaterials below.
2.0 Describe when, wher e, and how participa nts will be initially  contacted.
Study flyer has been uploaded and will be a main method of recruitment. It will
be used in other methods of advertisement include advertising through the CTRU,
posting to websites (including the CTRU website), social media, email
communication including listservs, newspape r ads. Subjects will be invited to call
or email study staff to determine eligibility.Methods of
recruitment couldinclude, but are notlimited to: In person,Phone call, flyers,brochures, bulletinboards, letters,social media, mediaadvertisements(e.g., newspaper,
radio, TV
announcements),research poolproject listingsystems (e.g.,SONA).
3.0 Describe any follow- up recruitment (e.g. multiple attempts/c ontacts for
the purpose of inviting someone to participate).
Individuals will only be called more than once for the purpose of inviting them to
participate if they have contacted us re questing more information and have not
been successful at reaching us. Additional attempts to call them may be made if
the first attempt was not successful and th e required number of participants has
not been reached.
4.0 Recruitment Materials: (add all to be seen or heard by subje cts)
Document Category Date Modified
ViewStudy ad edit.docx(0.04) Recruitment Materials 8/22/2017
ViewScreening Consent and phone script(5) Recruitment Materials 1/26/2018Add all materials to
be seen or heard by
subjects. All file
types are supported.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
13 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Consent Process and Materials
Consent Process and Materials
1.0Select the applicable option(s) below to describe the consent
process/es for this study.
Informed consent will be
obtained and documentedThe consent process includes allelements of consent and participantswill sign a consent document.
Signatures will not be obtainedon consent documentsParticipants will not physically sign adocument as part of the consentprocess.
Informed consent will not beobtained or some or all elements
will be waived or alteredThere will not be a consent process or the
consent process will not include all
elements of informed consent. If there are multiple
consent processes(for different subject
groups or for
separate phases ofdata collection), youmay mark more thanone, as applicable. Ifthe study involvesdeception orincompletedisclosure, indicatethat consent will be
waived or altered. 
For data collectionvia the Internet,indicate thatparticipants will notsign consentdocuments.
2.0Describe how, where and when informed consent will be
obtained from research participants.
Consent will be obtained for fasting du ring the screening interview. Signed
informed consent for other aspects of the study will be obtained at the time of
the participant's first visit to CTRU.Where one or more
processes will beused (e.g., no
signature for an
online consent butsigned forms forinterviews of somesurvey participants),describe eachprocess separately. If there are discretesubject groups (e.g.,minors and adults),
describe each
process (e.g.,parental permission,minor assent, adultconsent) separately. See Policy andProcedure: InformedConsent Process forResearch in theLibrary for additional
guidance.
3.0
Consent Forms:
Important Note:  The IRB strongly recommends the use of consent templates that are
available on the consent materials page to ensure that all the elements of informed consent
are included (per 45 CFR 116).  If more than one consent docume nt will be use d, please
name each accordingly.Refer to the following templates:
Consent Template - Parental Permission Form
Policy and Procedure: Informed Consent Process for ResearchConsent Template - Minor AssentConsent Template - Consent Form (with signature)Consent Template - Telephone E ligibility Screening Consent Script
Consent Template - Consent Cover Letter (no signature)
Consent Template - Consent Form for Use of Data Already Collected
(Artifacts)
Attach consent forms below:
Document Category Date Modified
ViewConsent form(7) Consent Form 2/6/2018Guidance and
policies andprocedures forinformed consentcan be found in theIRB Library. _Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
14 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Waiver of Requirements to Document Informed Consent
Waiver of Requirements to Document Informed Consent
1.0 The IRB may waive the requirement to obtain a signed consent  document
for some or all subjects if it finds that the project meets one  of the criteria
below.  Please choose the appropriate criterion.
Criteria 2
2.0 Provide supporting justification for requesting a waiver to document
informed consent.
We are simply asking participants to avoid eating solid food for two hours prior to
the first visit, to ensure reproducible ef fects of the drug - which is recommended
be given on an empty stomach. This is much less than the fasting required prior
to annual medical exams for example and presents minimal risk.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
15 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Research Design, Methods and Procedures
Research Design, Methods and Procedures
1.0 Brief Description (see Help)
We hypothesize that ivermectin interacts with the human innate immune system
and that this contributes to its anti-paras itic effects. Participants will donate blood
before and after being administered th e normal human dose of the drug. We
compare the CBC and cytokine profile of the two samples, and measure anychanges in gene expression in leukocyt e populations 4 and 24hrs after the drug
is taken.Summarize the
overall researchquestion and theprimary objectives.
If the project does
not involve asystematicinvestigation (e.g.,biography) or is notdesigned tocontribute togeneralizableknowledge (e.g.,oral history, quality
assurance), request
for a determinationof human subjectresearch byanswering "Yes" tothe first question inSection 5 on theBasic Informationpage (first page ofthe submission).
2.0 Research Design and Methods
Describe the overall research design and method(s) of data coll ection.
Also, identify specific factors or variables and, if applicable , treatment and
control conditions or groups.
Subjects will visit the CTRU twice on consecutive days and blood will be drawn
from them. On the first occasion they  will be weighed and will complete the
consent process. They will have been rand omly assigned to the test (Stromectol)
or control (placebo) group, with 8 pa rticipants in the test group and 4
participants in the control group. Stro mectol will be obtained from a medical
supply distributor and a placebo will be obtained through the UGA School ofPharmacy. Drugs will be prescribed by Jonathan Murrow MD. They will be stored
in their original packaging at room temp erature in a drug locker in the lab at
CTRU. Participants will be identified by  number and allocated to groups using a
block randomization protocol. Randomization and drug dispensation will be done
by CTRU. 18ml of blood will drawn in a fasting state and they will be
administered 150 mcg/kg Stromectol or th e equivalent number of placebo tablets
immediately after blood is drawn. Participants will remain at CTRU for four hoursafter they take the drug, then another 15ml of blood will be drawn. On thesecond day they will attend CTRU at the same time and the third blood sample
(18ml) will be drawn 24 hrs after admini stration of the drug. On each occasion
the drawn blood will be coded by CTRU staff prior to being collected by a memberof the Department of Infectious Diseas es and taken to the laboratory (Wildlife
Health G0007) for the isolation of leuk ocyte populations (peripheral monocytes,
lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs)) and for the preparation ofserum. Complete blood counts will also be carried out. Sera will be analyzed onthe Luminex for cytokine/chemokine conten t. RNA will be isolated from the cell
populations for RNASeq analysis.If groups or
conditions will be
assigned, specifythe number ofresearchparticipants that willbe assigned to eachcondition or group.
3.0 Duration of Participation and Study Timeline
Describe the time commitment per activity per individual subjec t and
provide the estimated total durat ion of participation.  If known, also
describe the anticipated duration to enroll all study subjects and the
estimated time until completion of primary analyses.
Subjects will visit the CTRU twice in two days. On the first visit, they will have
fasted for at least two hours. They will be asked to sign the consent form and will
be weighed. They will donate blood, then take Stromectol at a dose of
150mcg/kg, or the placebo. After taking  the drug, they will remain at the CTRU
for four hours, then another blood sample  will be drawn. On the second day they
will attend CTRU at the same time (24 hr s after the first visit), when they will
again donate blood. The first visit should last about 5 hrs and the second visitless than 1 hr.
4.0 Procedures
Describe in detail, and in seque nce, all study procedures from thePractice is the
exercise of anPrint: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
16 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
perspective of the participant.  Begin with any procedure that involves
interaction or collection of d ata to determine eligibility, if applicable. 
Separate any procedures that are  part of regular practice from procedures
that are specific to this resear ch study.  If procedures are lo ng and
complicated, use a table, flowchar t or diagram to outline the s tudy
procedures.
Participants will respond to an invitation  to take part, either by phone or by
responding to a posted flyer. After the screening interview, they will visit the
CTRU two times within a 1-week period. Th ey will receive a reminder with fasting
instructions prior to their first visit. On the first visit, they will complete and sign
the consent form and be weighed. They will then undergo a blood draw and then
will take 3 or 4 tablets of Stromectol (ivermectin), depending on their weight.
They will stay at the CTRU for the next four hours, and then another blood drawwill be performed. On the second visit th e following day, another blood draw will
be performed. After this, or after they voluntarily withdraw from the study, they
will receive $25 in cash for each blood sample they have donated, and $25 cash
for taking the drug.occupation or a
profession; activities
that are part of"practice" areconducted with allmembers of apopulation whetheror not they consentto participate inresearch.
Research activities
are voluntary, mustfollow a documentedprotocol, and areconducted underspecific conditions inorder to drawgeneralizableconclusions.
A project may use a
combination ofpractice andresearch in orderto reach desiredobjectives. 
5.0 Data Analysis
Describe the data analysis plan, including any statistical proc edures.  For
qualitative studies, specify the proposed analytic approaches.
Differences between the samples taken from individual participants will be
assessed via ANOVA. Data will be stored on  the principal investigator's computer,
anonymously. RNASeq data will be deposi ted in a relevant database, as required
by most journals and fundin g agencies; this will not be able to be linked to any
study participant. RNASeq data will be analyzed using DESEQ2 or similar method
to identify transcripts that are significan tly altered in participants receiving the
drug but not the placebo.If data or specimens
will be banked forfuture use, describewhere/how these will
be stored and
accessed and howthey may beused/analyzed. Ifanalysis will beconducted byinvestigators outsideUGA, be sure toinclude these sites
and investigators in
the correspondingsubmission forms.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
17 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Data Collection Instruments and Measures
Data Collection Materials
1.0
Click "Add" to list, describe, and attach all the materials tha t will be used to collect and
record data/information for this study.   
Instrument
NameInstrumentDescriptionParticipant Groupswho will CompleteAttachment
ViewDataSpreadsheetRecord of CBC,Luminex and
parasite killing dataDrs Reaves &
Wolstenholmedata to berecorded.xlsx(0.01)Data Collection
Materials mayinclude, but are not
limited to: surveys,
interviewguides/questions,questionnaires,focus groupguides/questions,observation guides,bio-metric measurerecording sheets. Do not list
equipment such as
audio/video-recording devices,EKG, Ultrasound.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
18 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Risks and Benefits
Risks and Benefits
1.0
If there is collection of informat ion that could place a partic ipant at risk of
criminal or civil liab ility or damage a participant's financial  standing,
employability, or reputation, mark any box(es) that apply below .  If
information to b e collected is not sensitive, do not mark any.  The list
below is not exhaustive but represents common elements or proce dures
in research where the primary risk is potential harm associated with
breach of confidentiality.
There are no items to displayIf the study includes
collectionof identifiable
sensitive information
(e.g., mental orphysical health,drug/alcohol use,sexual identity orbehaviors, religiousbeliefs or practices),then a breach ofconfidentiality maybe the primary risk
for participants.
2.0
Describe in detail the nature and  degree of risk and discomfort  associated
with participation.  Address an y items marked above in detail.  Include
any foreseeable physical risks, psychological harm, and/or priv acy
concerns that are associated with the procedures/interventions (See
HELP on right.).
The risks of drawing blood from the arm include the possibiliti es of a small bruise, infection,
bleeding or lightheadedness/fainting.
In controlled clinical trials, th e following laboratory adverse experiences were reported as
possibly, probably, or definitely related to ivermectin in ≥1% of the patients: eosinophilia (3%)
and hemoglobin increase (1%). The following adverse reactions h ave been reported since
ivermectin was registered overseas: Hypotension (mainly orthost atic hypotension), worsening
of bronchial asthma, toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnso n syndrome, seizures,
hepatitis, elevation of liver e nzymes, and ele vation of bilirub in.
The Mazzotti-type and ophthalmologic reactions associated with the treatment of
onchocerciasis or the disease itself would not be expected to o ccur in uninfected people; this
disease is not endemic to the USA.Assess risk and
discomfortassociated with allstudy proceduresincluding access toand use ofidentifiableinformation orspecimens. 
Consider the
proceduresdescribed on theResearch Design,Methods andProcedures page,the recruitmentprocess, and thestudy consentprocess when
assessing privacy
concerns.
3.0
Describe the measures that will be taken to minimize each of th e potential
risks and discomforts identi fied in questions 1 and 2.
Nurses at the CTRU are well trained in sterile venipuncture pro cedure and care is taken to
minimize bruising, fainting and other adverse incidents related  to venipuncture. Participants
will remain at the CTRU for four hours after taking the drug, w hich will allow monitoring of any
unforeseen adverse events.Measures to mitigaterisk associated withbreach ofconfidentiality (if anyare identified in Q1)include limitingcollection and/orretention of
identifers provided
with data, or usingcoding proceduresto replace directidentifiers withcodes/pseudonyms. Lab safety protocols,appropriate eligibilitycriteria, andmonitoring for
safety may
be measures tomitigate physicaland psychologicalrisk. Privacyconcerns can beaddressed byallowing people tocontrol the nature ofinformation they
give, the time and
place where studyprocedures takeplace, the thingsthey are required todo, and who hasaccess to theiridentifiableinforamation.  ForPrint: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
19 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
example, people
may want to be
weighed in a privatelocation.
4.0
Describe any anticipated direct benefits to participants.  If t here are none,
please state so.
None
5.0 Describe any anticipated benefits to others (e.g., societal)  that may result
from the research. Describe the generalizable or transferable k nowledge
that may result.
Ivermectin is a crucially important drug in programs to globally eliminate human
filarial diseases. A better understanding of  how it interacts with the human innate
immune system may aid in the design and implementation of those programs, or
lead to novel approaches to the developm ent of new treatments to improve their
efficacy.The IRB must
determine that
benefits outweigh
risks in order toapprove research.  Ifthere is no or littlerisk, there can befewer anticipatedbenefits.Thisresponse mustmatch the study
consent document, if
applicable.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
20 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: UGA SF: Confidentiality and Privacy
Confidentiality and Privacy
1.0 Will the researchers collect o r record any direct identifier s with the data
(e.g., names, addresses, telephone numbers)?
No. Skip to Q5
Yes. Complete Q2-4If the research
activities are limitedto analysis of de-identified datasets
or specimens,
request for adetermination ofhuman subjectresearch byanswering "Yes" tothe first question inSection 5 on theBasic Information
Page (the first page
of the submission.)
For no risk studies
or studies wheresensitive informationare not obtained, itis acceptable to usedirect identifiers.However, if thereis potential riskassociated with a
breach of
confidentiality,consider utilizing acoding procedure toreplace directidentifiers withcodes or uniquestudy IDs.
2.0 Indicate which of the direct identifiers below will be colle cted or included
with the data:
Audio-Recordings of Participants
Postal AddressEmail AddressesVideos of ParticipantsTelephone Numbers
Photographs of participant in which he/she is identifiable
Full Names
3.0 Will the researchers retain direct identifiers after data co llection is
complete?
Yes No
4.0 If the answer to Q3 is yes, w hy is it necessary to retain di rect identifiers
after completion of data collection?
5.0 Will the researchers use a coding system and/or will the dat a be
collected via the Internet?
Yes NoData collection
methods via the
Internet include, but
are not limited to:online datacollection host/toolsuch as Qualtrics orSurveyMonkey,social media.websites. 
6.0 Describe the coding system that will be used to link the cod e
(pseudonym or study ID) to the par ticipant (e.g., code key or m aster list).
If data are collected via the Internet, describe what indirect identifiers
may be collected (e.g., IP addresses).
A random code will be allocated to ea ch participant by the CTRU, but this
system will not be divulged to the investigators. Each sample will have a
randomly generated numerical code. At the end of the study, the samplenumbers corresponding to each participant, but not the participants' identity,Many Internet
hosts/tools offer a
way for investigators
to have IPaddresses strippedbefore data aredownloaded by theresearcher.  If this isPrint: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
21 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

will be revealed to the investigators. available, the IRB
suggests using such
tools.  If this is notavailable, or notutlized, be sure toacknowledge that IPaddresses may beincluded in the dataand provideresonses to Q7-9.
7.0 If a coding system is used or  data are collected via the Int ernet, will the
link/indirect identifier be retained after data collection is c omplete?
Yes No
8.0 If the answer ty Q7 is yes, why is it necessary to retain th e link/indirect
identifier?Common reasons toretain a link includebut are not limitedto: multiple data
sources, data
collected overmultiple timepoints.
9.0 Describe how long the direct /indirect identifiers or the lin k will be
retained, where and how this in formation will be stored, and wh at
security provisions will be taken to protect the data.  If info rmation
that associates a person with his/her data will be retained after data
collection is complete, all potential uses of this information must be
described here and in the consent documents.
No direct identifiers will be collected wi th the data, only to  generate study IDs
and send reminders. The link between iden tifiable information and study IDs will
be retained only long enough for data co llection. This link will be kept password-
protected on secure servers, only accessible by CTRU staff. If there is risk
associated with abreach ofconfidentiality, theIRB recommendsthat direct identifiersor links between the
participant and
his/her data bedestroyed at theearliest pointpossible congruentwith the researchdesign and plans foranalysis.  Note: Fornon-Exemptresearch, if the
study involves
minors andidentifiable data willcontinue to beused/analyzed afterthe minor becomesan adult (18 inGeorgia), consentmust be obtainedfrom the now-adult
participant even if
parental permissionand assent werepreviously obtained.
10.0 Is it reasonable foreseeable that the study will collect or  be privy to
information that State or Federal law requires to be reported t o other
officials (e.g., child or elder abuse) or ethically might requi re action by
the research (e.g., suicidal ide ation, intent to hurt self or o thers)?  If
"Yes", this must be described in the the consent documents.
Yes NoIf the investigatordoes not have amandate to reportsuchinformation, but theinvestigator will
voluntarily breach
confidentiality toreport such matters,this must bedeclared here and inthe study consentdocuments.Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
22 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07

View: UGA SF: Supporting Documents
Supporting Documents
1.0 Attach supporting documents and any other study-related mate rials
not specifically requested on previous sections.
Document Category Date Modified
ViewFasting Instructions for Participants.docx(1) Other 9/14/2017Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
23 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
View: SF: Final Page
Final Page
You have reached the end of the IRB submission form. When you a re ready to submit to the IRB, follow  the next steps
carefully:
Click Hide/Show Errors  to check for missing information. Address any errors. 1. 
 Click Finish  to exit the form. 2. 
Important!  If you are the PI, click Submit  on the next page.  If you are not the PI, click Notify PI to
Submit  to send an e-mail to the PI indicating that the submission is read y to send to the IRB.3. Print: STUDY00005069 - Ivermectin  and human immunity https://ovp r-click-prod.ovpr.uga.edu/uga-ovpr/ResourceAdministration/P...
24 of 24 26-Nov-18, 12:07
 
9032319
87447/080610
8495
 
1 TABLETS 
STROMECTOL ® 
(IVERMECTIN)  
DESCRIPTION 
STROMECTOL* (Ivermectin) is a semisynt hetic, anthelmintic agent for oral  administration. Ivermectin 
is derived from the avermectins, a class of highly active broad-spec trum, anti-parasitic agents isolated 
from the fermentation products of Streptomyces avermitilis.  Ivermectin is a mixture containing at least 
90% 5- O-demethyl-22,23-dihydroavermectin A 1a and less than 10% 5- O-demethyl-25-de(1-methylpropyl)-
22,23-dihydro-25-(1-methylethyl)avermectin A 1a, generally referred to as 22,23-dihydroavermectin B 1a 
and B 1b, or H 2B1a and H 2B1b, respectively. The respective  empirical formulas are C 48H74O14 and 
C47H72O14, with molecular weights of 875.10 and 861.07, re spectively. The structural formulas are:  
  
   Component B 1a, R = C 2H5  Component B 1b, R = CH 3  
Ivermectin is a white to yellowish-white, nonhygro scopic, crystalline powder with a melting point of 
about 155°C. It is insoluble in water but is freel y soluble in methanol and soluble in 95% ethanol. 
STROMECTOL is available in 3-mg tablets containing the following inactive ingredients: 
microcrystalline cellulose, pregelatinized starch, magnes ium stearate, butylated hy droxyanisole, and citric 
acid powder (anhydrous). 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
Pharmacokinetics 
Following oral administration of ivermectin, plas ma concentrations are approximately proportional to 
the dose. In two studies, after single 12-mg doses  of STROMECTOL in fasting healthy volunteers 
(representing a mean dose of 165 mcg/kg), the mean peak plasma concentrations of the major 
component (H 2B1a) were 46.6 (±21.9) (range: 16.4-101.1) and 30.6 (±15.6) (range: 13.9-68.4) ng/mL, 
respectively, at approximately 4 hours after dosing. Iv ermectin is metabolized in the liver, and ivermectin 
and/or its metabolites are excreted al most exclusively in the feces ov er an estimated 12 days, with less 
than 1% of the administered dose excr eted in the urine. The plasma hal f-life of ivermectin in man is 
approximately 18 hours following oral administration. 
The safety and pharmacokinetic properties of iverme ctin were further assessed in a multiple-dose 
clinical pharmacokinetic study involving healthy volunteers. Subjects received oral doses of 30 to 120 mg (333 to 2000 mcg/kg) ivermectin in a fasted state or 30 mg (333 to 600 mcg/kg) ivermectin following a standard high-fat (48.6 g of fat) meal. Administrati on of 30 mg ivermectin following a high-fat meal 
resulted in an approximate 2.5-fold increase in bioav ailability relative to administration of 30 mg 
ivermectin in the fasted state. 
                                                                          
 
* Registered trademark of Merck S harp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc.  
 Copyright © 1996, 2007 Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc.  
 All rights reserved 
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
2 In vitro studies using human liver microsomes and re combinant CYP450 enzymes have shown that 
ivermectin is primarily met abolized by CYP3A4. Depending on the in vitro  method used, CYP2D6 and 
CYP2E1 were also shown to be involved in the metabolism of ivermectin but to a significantly lower 
extent compared to CYP3A4. The findings of in vitro  studies using human liver microsomes suggest that 
clinically relevant concentrations of  ivermectin do not significantly inhi bit the metabolizing activities of 
CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2C9 , CYP1A2, and CYP2E1. 
 
Microbiology 
Ivermectin is a member of the avermectin class of broad-spectrum  antiparasitic agents which have a 
unique mode of action. Compounds of the class bind selectively and with high affinity to glutamate-gated 
chloride ion channels which occur in invertebrate nerve  and muscle cells. This leads to an increase in the 
permeability of the cell membrane to chloride ions with  hyperpolarization of the nerve or muscle cell, 
resulting in paralysis and death of t he parasite. Compounds of this class may also interact with other 
ligand-gated chloride channels, such as those gated by the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA). 
The selective activity of compounds of this class is attributable to the facts that some mammals do not 
have glutamate-gated chloride channel s and that the averme ctins have a low affinity for mammalian 
ligand-gated chloride channels. In additi on, ivermectin does not readily cross the blood-brain barrier in 
humans. 
Ivermectin is active against various life-cycle stages  of many but not all nematodes. It is active against 
the tissue microfilariae of Onchocerca volvulus  but not against the adult form. Its activity against 
Strongyloides stercoralis  is limited to the intestinal stages. 
Clinical Studies 
Strongyloidiasis 
Two controlled clinical studies using albendazole as the comparative agent were carried out in 
international sites where albendazole is approved fo r the treatment of st rongyloidiasis of the 
gastrointestinal tract, and three controlled studies were  carried out in the U.S. and internationally using 
thiabendazole as the comparative agent. Efficacy, as measured by cure rate, was defined as the absence 
of larvae in at least two follow-up stool examinations 3 to 4 weeks pos t-therapy. Based on this criterion, 
efficacy was significantly great er for STROMECTOL (a single dose of 170 to 200 mcg/kg) than for 
albendazole (200 mg b.i.d. for 3 days). STROMECTOL administered as a single dose of 200 mcg/kg for 
1 day was as efficacious as thiabendazole adm inistered at 25 mg/kg b.i.d. for 3 days.  
Summary of Cure Rates for Ivermectin Versus Comparative Agents in the  
Treatment of Strongyloidiasis  
  Cure Rate * (%) 
  Ivermectin ** Comparative Agent 
Albendazole *** Comparative 
International Study 
WHO Study  
24/26 (92) 
126/152 (83)  
12/22 (55) 
67/149 (45) 
Thiabendazole † Comparative 
International Study 
US Studies  
9/14 (64) 
14/14 (100)  
13/15 (87) 
16/17 (94) 
  
* Number and % of evaluable patients ** 170-200 mcg/kg *** 200 mg b.i.d. for 3 days † 25 mg/kg b.i.d. for 3 days 
 
In one study conducted in France, a non-endemic area where there was no possibility of reinfection, 
several patients were observ ed to have recrudescence of Strongyloides  larvae in their stool as long as 
106 days following ivermectin therapy. Therefore, at least three stool  examinations should be conducted 
over the three months following treatment to ensure eradication. If recrudescence of larvae is observed, 
retreatment with ivermectin is  indicated. Concentration techni ques (such as using a Baermann 
apparatus) should be employed when performing thes e stool examinations, as the number of 
Strongyloides  larvae per gram of feces may be very low. 
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
3 Onchocerciasis 
The evaluation of STROMECTOL in the treatment of onchocerciasis is  based on the results of clinical 
studies involving 1278 patients. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled st udy involving adult patients with 
moderate to severe onchocercal infection, pat ients who received a si ngle dose of 150 mcg/kg 
STROMECTOL experienced an 83.2% and 99.5% decrease in skin microf ilariae count (geometric mean) 
3 days and 3 months after the dose, respectively. A marked reduction of >90% was maintained for up to 
12 months after the single dose. As with other mi crofilaricidal drugs, there was an increase in the 
microfilariae count in the anterior cham ber of the eye at day 3 after treatment in some patients. However, 
at 3 and 6 months after the dose, a significant ly greater percentage of  patients treated with 
STROMECTOL had decreases in microfilariae count in the anterior chamber t han patients treated with 
placebo. 
In a separate open study involving pediatric patients ages 6 to 13 (n =103; weight range: 17-41 kg), 
similar decreases in skin microfilariae counts we re observed for up to 12 months after dosing.  
INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
STROMECTOL is indicated for the tr eatment of the following infections: 
Strongyloidiasis of the intestinal tract.  STROMECTOL is indicated for the treatment of intestinal 
(i.e., nondisseminated) strongyloidia sis due to the nematode parasite Strongyloides stercoralis . 
This indication is based on clinical studies of both comparative and open-label designs, in which 
64-100% of infected patients were cured followi ng a single 200-mcg/kg dose of ivermectin. (See  
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Clinical Studies .)    
Onchocerciasis.  STROMECTOL is indicated for the tr eatment of onchocerciasis due to the 
nematode parasite Onchocerca volvulus . 
This indication is based on randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled and comparative studies 
conducted in 1427 patients in onchocerciasis-endemic ar eas of West Africa. T he comparative studies 
used diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC-C). 
NOTE: STROMECTOL has no activity against adult Onchocerca volvulus  parasites. The adult 
parasites reside in subcutaneous nodules which are infrequently palpable. Surgic al excision of these 
nodules (nodulectomy) may be considered in the management  of patients with onchocerciasis, since this 
procedure will eliminate the microfilariae-producing adult parasites. 
CONTRAINDICATIONS 
STROMECTOL is contraindicated in patients who are hypersensitive to any component of this 
product. WARNINGS 
Historical data have shown that microfilaricidal drugs, such as diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC-C), 
might cause cutaneous and/or system ic reactions of varying severity (the Mazzotti reaction) and 
ophthalmological reactions in patient s with onchocerciasis. These reac tions are probably due to allergic 
and inflammatory responses to the death of micr ofilariae. Patients treated with STROMECTOL for 
onchocerciasis may experience thes e reactions in addition to clinic al adverse reactions possibly, 
probably, or definitely related to t he drug itself. (See ADVERSE REACTIONS, Onchocerciasis .) 
The treatment of severe 
Mazzotti reactions has not  been subjected to controll ed clinical trials. Oral 
hydration, recumbency, intravenous  normal saline, and/or parenteral corticosteroids have been used to 
treat postural hypotension. Antihi stamines and/or aspirin have been us ed for most mild to moderate 
cases. PRECAUTIONS 
General 
After treatment with microfilarici dal drugs, patients with hyperreactive onchodermatitis (sowda) may be 
more likely than others to experience severe adv erse reactions, especially edema and aggravation of 
onchodermatitis. 
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
4 Rarely, patients with onchocerciasis who are also heavily infected with Loa loa  may develop a serious 
or even fatal encephalopathy either s pontaneously or following treatment wi th an effective microfilaricide. 
In these patients, the following adverse experiences have also been reported: pain (including neck and 
back pain), red eye, conjunctival hem orrhage, dyspnea, urinary and/or fe cal incontinence, difficulty in 
standing/walking, mental st atus changes, confusion, lethargy, stupor , seizures, or coma. This syndrome 
has been seen very rarely following the use of ivermectin. In individuals who warrant treatment with 
ivermectin for any reason and hav e had significant exposure to Loa loa -endemic areas of West or Central 
Africa, pretreatment assessment for loiasis and ca reful post-treatment follow-up should be implemented. 
Information for Patients 
STROMECTOL should be taken on an empty stomach with water. (See CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics .) 
Strongyloidiasis: The patient should be reminded of the need for repeated stool examinations to 
document clearance of infection with Strongyloides stercoralis . 
Onchocerciasis:  The patient should be reminded that treatment with STROMECTOL does not kill the 
adult Onchocerca  parasites, and therefore repeated follow-up and retreatment is usually required. 
Drug Interactions 
Post-marketing reports of increased INR (Internat ional Normalized Ratio) have been rarely reported 
when ivermectin was co-administered with warfarin.  
Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
Long-term studies in animals have not been perfo rmed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential of 
ivermectin. 
Ivermectin was not genotoxic in vitro  in the Ames microbial mutagenicity assay of Salmonella  
typhimurium  strains TA1535, TA1537, TA98, and TA100 with and without rat liv er enzyme activation, the 
Mouse Lymphoma Cell Line L5178Y (cytotoxicity and mutagenicity) assays, or the unscheduled DNA 
synthesis assay in human fibroblasts. 
Ivermectin had no adverse effects on the fertility in rats in studies at repeated doses of up to 3 times 
the maximum recommended human dose of 200 mcg/kg (on a mg/m 2/day basis). 
Pregnancy, Teratogenic Effects 
Pregnancy Category C 
Ivermectin has been shown to be teratogenic in mice, rats, and rabbits when given in repeated doses 
of 0.2, 8.1, and 4.5 times the maximum recommended human dose, respectively (on a mg/m 2/day basis). 
Teratogenicity was characterized in the three s pecies tested by cleft palate; clubbed forepaws were 
additionally observed in rabbits. These developmental e ffects were found only at or near doses that were 
maternotoxic to the pregnant female. Therefore, iver mectin does not appear to be selectively fetotoxic to 
the developing fetus. There are, however, no adequat e and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. 
Ivermectin should not be used during pregnancy sinc e safety in pregnancy has not been established. 
Nursing Mothers 
STROMECTOL is excreted in human milk in low concentrations. Treatment of  mothers who intend to 
breast-feed should only be undertaken when the risk of delayed treatment to the mother outweighs the 
possible risk to the newborn. 
Pediatric Use 
Safety and effectiveness in pediat ric patients weighing less than 15 kg have not been established. 
Geriatric Use 
Clinical studies of STROMECTOL did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to 
determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has 
not identified differences in res ponses between the elderly and younger patients. In general, treatment of 
an elderly patient should be cautious, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or 
cardiac function, and of concomitant  disease or other drug therapy. 
Strongyloidiasis in Immunocompromised Hosts 
In immunocompromised (including HIV-infected) pati ents being treated for intest inal strongyloidiasis, 
repeated courses of therapy may be required. Adequate and well-contro lled clinical studies have not 
been conducted in such patients to det ermine the optimal dosing regimen. Several treatments, i.e., at 2-
week intervals, may be required, and cure may not  be achievable. Control of extra-intestinal 
strongyloidiasis in these patients is difficult, and suppressive ther apy, i.e., once per month, may be 
helpful. 
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
5 ADVERSE REACTIONS 
Strongyloidiasis 
In four clinical studies involving a total of 109 patients given either one or two doses of 170 to 
200 mcg/kg of STROMECTOL, the following adverse r eactions were reported as possibly, probably, or 
definitely related to STROMECTOL:  
Body as a Whole:  asthenia/fatigue (0.9%), abdominal pain (0.9%) 
Gastrointestinal:  anorexia (0.9%), constipation (0.9%), diarrhea (1.8%), nausea (1.8%), vomiting 
(0.9%) 
Nervous System/Psychiatric:  dizziness (2.8%), somnolence (0.9%) , vertigo (0.9%), tremor (0.9%) 
Skin:  pruritus (2.8%), rash (0 .9%), and urticaria (0.9%). 
In comparative trials, patients treated with ST ROMECTOL experienced mo re abdominal distention 
and chest discomfort than patients treated with albendazole. However, STROMECTOL was better 
tolerated than thiabendazole in comparative studies  involving 37 patients treated with thiabendazole. 
The Mazzotti-type and ophthalmologic reactions associated with the tr eatment of onchocerciasis or 
the disease itself would not be ex pected to occur in strongyloidiasi s patients treated with STROMECTOL. 
(See ADVERSE REACTIONS, Onchocerciasis .) 
Laboratory Test Findings 
In clinical trials involving 109 patients giv en either one or two doses of 170 to 200 mcg/kg 
STROMECTOL, the following laboratory abnormalities were seen regardless of drug relationship: 
elevation in ALT and/or AST (2%), decrease in leukocyte count (3%). Leukopenia and anemia were seen 
in one patient. 
Onchocerciasis  
In clinical trials involving 963 adult patients tr eated with 100 to 200 mcg/kg STROMECTOL, worsening 
of the following Mazzotti reactions during the first 4 days post-treatment were reported: arthralgia/synovitis (9.3%) , axillary lymph node enlargement and tenderness (11.0% and 4.4%, 
respectively), cervical lymph node enlargement and tenderness (5.3% and 1.2%, respectively), inguinal 
lymph node enlargement and tenderness (12.6% and 13.9%, respectively), other lymph node 
enlargement and tenderness (3.0% and 1.9%, respectively),  pruritus (27.5%), ski n involvement including  
edema, papular and pustular or frank urticarial ra sh (22.7%), and fever (22.6%). (See WARNINGS.) 
In clinical trials, ophthalmological conditions were  examined in 963 adult patients before treatment, at 
day 3, and months 3 and 6 after treatment with 100 to 200 mcg/kg STROMECTOL. Changes observed were primarily deterioration from baseline 3 days post-treatment. Most changes either returned to 
baseline condition or improved over baseline severity  at the month 3 and 6 visits. The percentages of 
patients with worsening of the followi ng conditions at day 3, month 3 and 6, respectively, were: limbitis: 
5.5%, 4.8%, and 3.5% and punctate opacity: 1.8%, 1.8%, and 1.4%. The corresponding percentages for 
patients treated with placebo were: limbitis: 6.2%, 9.9%, and 9.4% and punctate opacity: 2.0%, 6.4%, and 
7.2%. (See WARNINGS.)  
In clinical trials involving 963 adult patients who received 100 to 200 mcg/kg STROMECTOL, the 
following clinical adverse reactions were reported as pos sibly, probably, or definitely related to the drug in 
≥1% of the patients: facial edema (1.2%), peripheral edema (3.2%), orthostatic hypotension (1.1%), and 
tachycardia (3.5%). Drug-related headache and myalgi a occurred in <1% of patients (0.2% and 0.4%, 
respectively). However, these we re the most common 
 adverse experiences reported overall during these 
trials regardless of causality (22.3% and 19.7%, respectively). 
A similar safety profile was observed in an open study in pediatric patients ages 6 to 13. 
The following ophthalmological side effects do occur due to the disease itself but have also been 
reported after treatment with STROMECTOL: abnormal sensation in the eyes, eyelid edema, anterior uveitis, conjunctivitis, limbitis, keratitis, and chorioretinitis or choroidi tis. These have rarely been severe or 
associated with loss of vision and have generally  resolved without corticosteroid treatment. 
Laboratory Test Findings 
In controlled clinical trials, t he following laboratory adverse experi ences were reported as possibly, 
probably, or definitely related to the drug in ≥1% of the patients: eos inophilia (3%) and hemoglobin 
increase (1%). Post-Marketing Experience 
The following adverse reactions have been report ed since the drug was registered overseas: 
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
6 Onchocerciasis 
Conjunctival hemorrhage 
All Indications 
Hypotension (mainly orthostatic hypotension), worsening of bronchial asthma, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, seizures, hepatitis, elevati on of liver enzymes, and elevation of 
bilirubin.  
OVERDOSAGE 
Significant lethality was observed in mice and rats after single oral doses of 25 to 50 mg/kg and 40 to 
50 mg/kg, respectively. No significant lethality wa s observed in dogs after single oral doses of up to 
10 mg/kg. At these doses, the treatm ent-related signs that were observ ed in these animals include ataxia, 
bradypnea, tremors, ptosis, decreased activity, emesis, and mydriasis. 
In accidental intoxication with, or significant expos ure to, unknown quantities of veterinary formulations 
of ivermectin in humans, either by  ingestion, inhalation, injection, or exposure to body surfaces, the 
following adverse effects have been reported most  frequently: rash, edema, headache, dizziness, 
asthenia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Other adverse effects that have been reported include: seizure, 
ataxia, dyspnea, abdominal pain, paresthes ia, urticaria, and contact dermatitis. 
In case of accidental poisoning, supportive therapy, if indicated, should include parenteral fluids and 
electrolytes, respiratory support (oxygen and mechanical ventilation if  necessary) and pressor agents if 
clinically significant hypotension is present. Induction of emesis and/or gastric lavage as soon as 
possible, followed by purgatives and other routine anti-poison measur es, may be indicated if needed to 
prevent absorption of ingested material. 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
Strongyloidiasis 
The recommended dosage of STROMECTOL for the treatm ent of strongyloidiasis is a single oral dose 
designed to provide approximately 200 mcg of ivermectin per kg of body weight. See Table 1 for dosage 
guidelines. Patients should take tablets on an empty stomach with water. (See CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics .) In general, additional doses are not necessary. However, follow-
up stool examinations should be performed to veri fy eradication of infection. (See CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY, Clinical Studies. )   
Table 1  
Dosage Guidelines for STROMECTOL for Strongyloidiasis  
  
Body Weight (kg)  Single Oral Dose  
 Number of 3-mg Tablets  
15-24 1 tablet 
25-35 2 tablets 
36-50 3 tablets 
51-65 4 tablets 
66-79 5 tablets 
≥80 200 mcg/kg  
Onchocerciasis 
The recommended dosage of STROMECTOL for the treatm ent of onchocerciasis is a single oral dose 
designed to provide approximately 150 mcg of ivermectin per kg of body weight. See Table 2 for dosage 
guidelines. Patients should take tablets on an empty stomach with water. (See CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics .) In mass distribution campaigns  in international treatment 
programs, the most commonly used dose interval is 12 months. For the treatment of individual patients, 
retreatment may be considered at in tervals as short as 3 months.   
STROMECTOL ® (Ivermectin) 9032319 
87447/080610 
8495 
7 Table 2  
Dosage Guidelines for STROMECTOL for Onchocerciasis  
  
Body Weight (kg)  Single Oral Dose  
 Number of 3-mg Tablets  
15-25 1 tablet 
26-44 2 tablets 
45-64 3 tablets 
65-84 4 tablets 
≥85 150 mcg/kg  
HOW SUPPLIED 
No. 8495 — Tablets STROMECTOL 3 mg are whit e, round, flat, bevel- edged tablets coded MSD on 
one side and 32 on the other side. They are supplied as follows: 
NDC 0006-0032-20 unit dose packages of 20. 
Storage 
Store at temperatures below 30°C (86°F). 
 
  
Manufactured by: 
Merck Sharp & Dohme BV  
Waarderweg 39 2031 BN Haarlem Netherlands  
Issued May 2010 
Printed in the Netherlands 
Research Participants Needed! 
 
Researchers at the University of Georgia are conducting a study on how 
an important drug, ivermectin, might interact with the human immune system. The drug is used to treat infections with parasitic nematodes 
(roundworms)
 
Participants should:  
- Be between the ages of 18 -65 years old;  
- Be healthy and weigh more than 110 lbs, but less than 186 lbs.  
- Not be pregnant  or breastfeeding  
- Not have travelled to West or Central Africa in the past 3 years  
- Not be immunosuppressed  
- Live in the Athens area or surrounding communities.  
 
Eligible subjects will be asked to take a single dose of ivermectin (3 -4 
tablets depending on weight) and undergo three  blood draws  over the 
course of two days. They will be asked to remain at the CTRU for four 
hours after taking the drug.  Subjects will receive  $100  for completing the 
study.  
 
The study will be conducted at the Clinical and Translational Research Unit on the UGA Health Sciences Campus.  The Principal Investigator is 
Dr. Adrian Wolstenholme . 
 
For mor e information, call: 706 -713- 2721 or email ctru@uga.edu   
 
Telephone Eligibility Screening Consent Script  
 
Study: Ivermectin and human immunity  
 
 
Thank you for calling the Clinical and Translational Research Unit to find out more about the research 
study  entitled , Ivermectin and Human Immunity .  My name is _______________[study team member 
doing screening].   I am one of the researchers helping with  this study at the University of Georgia.  
 The purpose of this research study is to look at how  a drug called ivermectin affects healthy people, in 
particular, w hether it has an effect on the immune system . Ivermectin is used to treat infections with 
parasitic worms  and we hope that this study will help us understand how the drug works.  Do you think 
you might be interested in participating in th is study?   
 
{If No}:   Thank you very much for your time.  
 
{If Yes}:   Before enrolling people in this study, we need to ask you some questions to determine if you 
are eligible for this study.  What  I would now like to do is to ask you some questions about yourself .  This 
should only take about 5 minutes of your time.  
 There is a possibility that some of these questions may make you uncomfortable or distressed; if so, please let me know.  You don’t have to answer those questions if you don’t want to .  
 All information that I receive from you during this phone interview, including your name and any other 
information that can possibly identify you, will be strictly confidential and will be kept under lock and 
key.  Remember, your participation is voluntary; you can refuse to ans wer any questions, or stop this 
phone interview at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  Do I have your permission to ask you these questions?  
 {If No}:   Thank you very much for your time.  
 {If Yes}:   Are you:  
1. Within the ages of 18 -65 years old, inclusive;  
2. Healthy and have a weight over 110 lbs , and under 185 lbs ; 
3. Willing and able to undergo multiple blood draws ; 
4. A stable resident of the Athens area?  
{If No  to any questions }:  Unfortunately you are not eligible for this study. All the information you gave 
me will be immediately destroyed. Thank you very much for your time.  
[If yes to all, proceed to next questions]  
(Exclusion Criteria ): 
1. Are you p regnant  or breastfeeding ; 
2. Have you ever been told that you are immunosuppressed or have a problem with your immune 
system; 
4. Have you travelled to West or Central Africa in the past three years , or any other country where river 
blindness is present? (If asked, the specific countr ies of concern are Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau, Kenya, 
Liberia, Malawi,  Mali, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Sudan, 
Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, plus a very isolated region on the Brazil/Venezuela border. The rest of Brazil is safe.)  
5. Do you have any known allergies ? (Those that would cause ineligibility are: ivermectin /Stromectol , 
cellulose, pregelatinized starch, magnesium stearate, butylated hydroxyanisole, citric acid or 
cornstarch).   
 6. Do you have hepatitis?  
 7. Are you currently taking warfarin?  
 
{If Yes to any of these  questions }:  Unfortunately you are not eligible for this study. All the information 
you gave me will be immediately destroyed. Thank you very much for your time.  
[If No to all of these questions ]: You are eligible to participate in the study and I would like to extend 
you an invitation to participate in this research. If you decide to participate in the study, there will be 
two study visits  on consecutive days . Before the first visit we ask that you not eat anything solid for two 
hours b efore visiting CTRU, as the tablets we are using work better on an empty stomach. Normal drinks 
such as water, coffee and juice are fine. The first visit will last about 5 hours, and we will provide a light 
meal during this time . Is that acceptable?  
[If No  to this question]: Unfortunately you are not eligible for this study. All the information you gave 
me will be immediately destroyed. Thank you very much for your time.  
[If Yes to this question ]: Thank you . The second visit will last less than 1 hour and will be  24 hrs after the 
start of the first visit. Compensation of $100 is available for completing the study. The first study visit will involve going through the consent process , being weighed  and providing a blood sample. We will 
not take any permanent r ecord of your weight, this is only so that can give you the correct number of 
tablets. You will then be given some tablets; these tablets may be ivermectin, the drug we are studying, 
or a placebo. The number of tablets you will be given depends on your wei ght.  We will ask you to wait 
with us for four hours, at which time another blood sample will be taken. On the second visit, we will take a third blood sample. To participate, we ask that you come to the Clinical and Translational 
Research Unit located on the Health Sciences Campus of the University of Georgia. At the first visit, the 
purpose of the research along with all of the procedures that you will be asked to complete as part of 
the research study will be explained in detail. We will give you an opportunity to have all of your questions about the research answered before you decide to enroll in the study. You can refuse to 
participate or stop taking part in the study at any time without giving any reason, and without penalty or 
loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  
 
Are you still interested in participating in the study?  
 
{If No}:   Thank you very much for your time.  
 
{If Yes}: We can schedule a convenient time for you to come to the CTRU.  
 [Schedule time to come to CTRU . Record name, phone number and email address for reminder 
notifications. ]  
Fasting Instructions for Participants 
 
This study uses a drug named Stromectol, which is absorbed better into the body if it is taken on 
an empty stomach. For this reason, we request that you do not eat anything solid for two hours prior to your first visit to the CTRU. Drinks such as water, coffee and juice are fine, but not energy drinks or smoothies. We will provide a light meal during this first visit after you have taken the tablets.  
 Thank you for volunteering for the study and for your cooperation with this request. 
UNIVERSITY OF GEORGIA  
CONSENT FORM  
Ivermectin and Human Immunity  
 
Researcher’s Statement  
We are asking you to take part in a research study.  Before you decide to participate in this study, it is important that you understand why the research is being done and what it will involve.  This form is designed to give you the information about the study so you can decide whether to be in the study or not.  Please take the time to read the following information carefully.  Please ask the researcher if there is  anything that is not clear or if you need more information.  When all your 
questions have been answered, you can decide if you want to be in the study or not.  This process is called “informed consent.”  A copy of this form will be given to you.  
 Principa l Investigator:  Dr. Adrian Wolstenholme  
    Department of Infectious Diseases  
    706- 542-2404  
adrianw@uga.edu  
 Purpose of the Study  
Ivermectin is an FDA- approved drug used for the treatment of infections with parasitic 
nematodes (roundworms) in people. Every year it is given to hundreds of millions of people worldwide as part of international efforts to eliminate serious tropical diseases, river blindness and lymphatic filariasis (elephantiasis). Despite this, we really do not understand how the drug works against the parasites that cause these diseases, so the purpose of this study is to test the idea that the drug works together with the human immune system to remove the parasites.  
 Study Procedures  
If you agree to participate, you will be asked to visit the Clinical and Translational Research Unit (CTRU) Building twice on consecutive days. You will be asked to remain at the CRRU for 5 hours on the first day to complete the procedures which will include providing information about your race, ethnicity, age and gender. In addition, additional screening criteria will identify anyone who 
may not be eligible for the study. You will review and sign a copy of this consent form with CTRU 
staff to give your permission to enter the study. A trained research nurse will draw 18ml (a little 
more than one  tablespoon) of blood from you using standard phlebotomy techniques, and you 
will be weighed. We will not keep any permanent record of your weight, this is only so that give 
you the correct number of tablets. You will then be given three to four tablets (depending on your weight) to take. These will either be ivermectin (marketed as Stromectol in the USA), or a placebo. Which kind of tablet you will get will be determined completely by chance . You will not 
know which you have been given. You will be asked to wait in the CTRU for an additional four hours, after which a second sample of blood ( 15ml ) will be taken. You will then be free to leave. 
We will provide a light meal after you have taken the tablets, which are best taken on an empty stomach. On the second day, the visit should last less than 1 hour. A third blood sample ( 18ml ) 
will be drawn, approximately 24 hours after you took the tablets. We will then analyze the blood samples to determine if the drugs increase the ability of the blood cells to kill the parasites.  
Risks and Discomforts  
The risks and discomforts associated with your participation are related to the blood draws and 
possible side effects of the ivermectin. Ivermectin is generally considered to be very safe, but has not been extensively tested in pregnant women or immunosuppressed people. In clinical trials, 
the following clinical adverse reactions were reported as possibly, probably, or definitely related 
to the drug in  1-4 % of the patients: nausea,  diarrhea,  changes in white blood cell count,  
abnormalities in liver function, swelling of the face, swelling of the arms/legs, blood pressure 
drop when standing up quickly, fast heart rate and muscle pain.  Drug -related headache occurred 
in <1% of patients (0.2%).   If you are infected with a parasiti c worm called Loa loa  (the eyeworm) 
or Onchocerca volvulus (the parasite that causes river blindness), ivermectin may cause a severe 
reaction to dying worms. In order to avoid this, please do not take part in the study if you have travelled in the past 3 y ears to West or Central Africa (as this is the region of the world where it 
is possible to become infected with Loa loa ) or other countries in which Onchocerciasis may be 
contracted. In addition, if you are currently taking Warfarin or have hepatitis you are not eligible to take part in the study. You will be required to stay at the CTRU for four hours after taking the dose of ivermectin in order for nursing staff to monitor you for any possible adverse effects, and will give prompt medical attention in cas e of any adverse effects. Risks associated with drawing 
blood include redness, swelling, pain or discomfort, and bruising at the site of the needle stick. Although rare, infection may also occur. Some people may experience dizziness, lightheadedness, and/o r fainting. The CTRU nurses are very experienced in blood draws and will try to minimize 
any discomfort or bruising.  
 
Benefits  
This study will not directly benefit you. However, it will benefit society. A better understanding 
of individual people’s respons e to the parasite may help in the ongoing effort towards global 
elimination of  river blindness and  lymphatic filariasis.  
 Incentives for participation  
If you choose to volunteer, we will ask you to sign this consent form.  We will provide you with $100 as compensation for completing the study , however,  if you do not complete the study, you 
will be compensated $25 for each blood draw that you do complete, plus $25 for taking the ivermectin or placebo.  This will be paid in cash after your second  and final vis it to the CTRU.  You 
will be asked to sign a form verifying that you received this compensation.  
 Privacy/Confidentiality  
To ensure confidentiality, you will be assigned a code and your samples will be assigned a random 
number and we will not attach any personal tracking information to any of the samples collected 
from you. We do ask you to consider providing the following information for us on a separate questionnaire form: race, ethnicity, age, and gender. This information will be linked to your blood sample, to experimental results obtained using the blood sample and will be reported to the 
National Institutes of Health, the main funder of medical research in the United States. Providing this information is entirely optional. If you decide to provide this  information, please complete 
the questionnaire before the first blood donation. Researchers will not release identifiable results 
of the study to anyone other than individuals working on the project without your written 
consent unless required by law. The project’s research records may be reviewed by Food and 
Drug Administration and by departments at the University of Georgia responsible for regulatory 
and research oversight.  
 A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. ClinicalTrials.gov is a website that provides information about federally and privately support ed clinical trials. You can search this Web site at any time.  
 Taking part is voluntary  
Your involvement in the study is voluntary, and you may choose not to participate or to stop at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. If you decide to withdraw from the study, the information that can be identified as yours will be kept as part of the study and may continue to be analyzed, unless you make a written request to remove, return, or destroy the information.  
 If you are injured by this research  
The researchers will exercise all reasonable care to protect you from harm as a result of your participation. In  the event that any research- related activities result in an injury, the sole 
responsibility of the researchers will be to arrange for your transportation to an appropriate 
health care facility. If you think that you have suffered  a research -related injury, you should seek 
immediate medical attention and then contact Dr. Adrian Wolstenholme right away at 706 -542-
2404. In the event that you suffer a research- related injury, your medical expenses will be your 
responsibility or that of your third- party payer, although you are not precluded from seeking to 
collect compensation for injury related to malpractice, fault, or blame on the part of those involved in the research.  
 If you have questions  
The main researcher conducting this study is Dr. Adrian Wolstenholme, a Professor at the University of Georgia, who is assisted by Dr. Barbara Reaves, a Senior Research Scientist.  Please ask any questions you have now. If you have questions later, you may contact Dr Wolstenholme at adrianw@uga.edu or at 706 -542-2404.  If you have any questions or concerns regarding your 
rights as a research participant in this study, you may contact the Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
Chairperson at 706.542.3199 or irb@uga.edu.  
 Research Subject’s Consent to Participate in Research:  
To voluntarily agree to take part in this study, you must sign on the line below.  Your signature below indicates that you have read or had read to you this entire consent form, and have had all 
of your questions answered.  
  _________________________     _______________________   _________  
Name of Researcher     Signature     Date  
 
 
_________________________     _______________________   __________  
Name of Participant     Signature     Date  
 Please sign both copies, keep one and return one to the researcher.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Changes in Cytokine Levels 
Cytokine levels were obtained from the Luminex data . The mean level plus or minus standard error  of 
each analyte were  calculated  for each arm at each time point (0, 4 , 24 hrs post- treatment). For the control 
and ivermectin  arms, levels at 4 hr s and 24 hrs post -treatment were  compared to the levels pre- treatment 
using simple t -tests to determine if any individual results require d further investigation, taking p = <0.05 
as the level of significance. Since none of the individual analyte results met this criterion, no further 
analysis was carried out.  
 
Changes in Gene E xpression  
The Nanostring data were analysed on thei r proprietary software, nSolver™ (Nanostring Technologies 
Inc, Seattle). The data passed quality control criteria. The software calculated the log 2 geom etric mean 
levels of each mRNA measured and used t tests to determine statistically significant changes in 
expression between 4 and 24 hrs post- treatment for the control and ivermectin arms. The Benjamini -
Yekutie li False Discovery Rate method  was used to account for th e expectation that significant changes in 
genes may be correlated with or dependent on each other, and the subsequent resulting FDR adjusted p -
value  of <0.05 used to determine those changes that were deemed to be statistically significant.  
 
Complete Blood Counts  
The mean numbers of each cell type were calculated for each arm at 24 hrs post- treatment and compared 
to those pre -treatment using a simple t- test, with p = <0.05 as the level of signif icance. Since none of the 
measurements passed this test, no further analysis was performed.  