Study Protocol  
Title: Suicide Prevention in Rural Veterans During High- risk Care Transition 
Scenarios  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Date of Document:  11/06/2019 
1 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
  Research  Protocol/Protocol Addendum  Template 
 
Title 
Suicide Prevention in Rural Veterans During High- risk Care Transition Scenarios  
Investigators  
Brian Shiner, MD, MPH is the Principal Investigator of this study.  
Natalie Riblet, MD, MPH is the project lead. 
Specific Aims/Purpose  
The overall goal of our proposed work is to develop and implement an effective suicide prevention intervention for 
rural VA facilities to decrease suicide risk in veterans living in rural settings. To achieve this goal, we propose to 
study our VA adaptation of the World Health Organization  Brief Intervention and C ontact Program (WHO BIC)  
(which we will refer to as VA BIC) in rural veterans during high -risk care transition scenarios. Please see the VA 
BIC Manual for a full descrip tion of the intervention ( Appendix 1). We will study the effectiveness of VA BIC in four 
high- risk care transition scenarios common to rural VA facilities : 1) any patient being discharged from an inpatient 
mental health unit, 2) patients being discharged  an inpatient medical unit after receiving a psychiatric consultation, 
3) any patient discharged from a residential substance treatment facility, and 4) patients being discharged from an 
emergency room after presenting with a mental health concern. By eval uating the intervention in each of these 
four scenarios, we will be able to guide rural VA facilities to the target populations most likely to benefit from the 
VA BIC intervention.  We are initially requesting approval to conduct the VA BIC clinical trial enr olling patients from 
the first high -risk care transition scenario (any patient being discharged from an inpatient mental health unit). Once 
we reach our enrollment goal, we will submit a protocol amendment for the subsequent high- risk care transition 
scenarios.  Because the VA BIC Manual may be adapted throughout the trial to target each transition scenario, 
completing a protocol amendment for each enrollment phase will be most  logical and effective.  
In Year 1, we plan to confirm our pilot findings suggest ing that VA BIC is effective in reducing suicide risk after 
psychiatric hospitalization by conducting a small, randomized trial of VA BIC plus standard care versus standard care alone on the White River Junction ( WRJ ) VA Medical Center  (VAMC ) inpatient men tal health unit ( see 
Preliminary Studies section below ). In addition, we plan to further adapt VA BIC for veterans experiencing three 
other high- risk care transition scenarios described above. During Years 2 and 3, we will sequentially conduct  
randomized trials of VA BIC plus standard care versus s tandard care alone for the other three high- risk care 
transition scenarios. If our findings indicate that VA BIC is an effective intervention in one or more of these high -
risk care transition scenarios, we will s pend Year 4 working with three other rural facilities to develop materials for 
dissemination of VA BIC and assisting them with implementation at their sites. These materials would be used for broad dissemination in future work. Based on both our pilot work  with the VA BIC and the results of the orig inal 
international WHO BIC study, we are highly confident that our intervention will be helpful for rural VA facilities in 
decreasing suicide risk in at least one of the high -risk care transition scenarios. Howev er, we feel that taking the 
preliminary steps in Years 1- 3 will result in the most practical and effective program for rural VA facilities in Year 4.  
Because of our promising pilot work,
1 we believe it is appropriate to choose suicidal ideation as our prim ary 
outcome. In our pilot study, which included nine Veterans undergoing the VA BIC intervention, we found a 
greater than five- point improvement in the Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation (BSS) over the three months 
following inpatient mental health discharge . Five points is a clinically meaningful imp rovement on the BSS as it 
represents the mean difference in suicidal ideation between ambulatory and hospitalized psychiatric patients.2 
Furthermore, with this sample size and level of improvement, we were able t o demonstrate a significant 
difference in improvement in suicidal ideation compared to a matched group of historical controls participating 
in a post -mental health discharge qualitative study.3 Therefore, we believe that we will have sufficient power to 
show a clinically meaningful improvement in suicidal ideation overall and for each of the four high- risk care 
transition scenarios at one and three months after discharge if we enroll a total of 100 veterans  (25 per 
transition scenario) over 3 years. We will a lso assess other important measures o f suicide risk including 
hopelessness, connectedness, fatal/non- fatal suicide attempts and treatment engagement.4-7 Please see the 
Assessment Manual for all assessment templates  (see Appendix 2) . We will assess post -discharge treatment 
engagement by evalua ting continuity of care and disruptions of care (including missed appointments). We will 
abstract these data from the electronic medical record. In addition, we will ask veterans to report on any treatment they may have  received outside of the VA healthcar e sys tem. We will use a standardized data 
2 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 collection form to collect information on non- VA treatment. We have already piloted this data collection form in 
our current pilot study. We will include three measures of conti nuity of care including intensity of  treatment, 
regularity of care, and continuity of care across organizational boundaries. These measures of continuity of 
care have been shown to be associated with improved mental health outcomes.8 Because the focus of o ur 
project is on generating practical clinical results for rural VA facilities rapidly and cost -effectively, we will limit 
our longitudinal assessment to these outcomes. Finally, travel to appointments is a notable concern for veterans living in rural area s. We will give patients the choice to par ticipate in VA BIC contact visits in -person, 
by telephone or via VA Video Connect. This approach aligns with the VA’s goal to expand the use of telehealth services. 
  
Study Objectives  
1) To adapt the VA BIC for use during high- risk care transition scenar ios in cluding emergency 
room care, medical hospitalization and acute treatment in a drug dependence rehabilitation  
program.  
2) To confirm that the VA BIC is effective at reducing suicidal ideation and other related 
measure s of suicide risk during high- risk c are transition scenarios including psychiatric 
hospitalization, emergency room care, medical hospitalization and residential substance 
treatment  facility. 
3) To disseminate the VA BIC to other rural VA facilities and as sist these facilities with 
implementing VA BIC  at their local sites in order to reduce the burden of suicide in rural 
veterans during high- risk transition care  scenarios.  
 
Our specific aims and hypotheses are as follows.  
Specific Aim 1: The primary aim of the study is  to determine whether the VA BIC p rogram plus standard 
discharge care reduces suicidal ideation after discharge from an acute care setting compared to standard 
discharge care, alone.   
Hypothesis: Based on available evidence, we hypothesize that th e VA BIC program plus standard 
discha rge c are will lead to a significant reduction in suicidal ideation after discharge from an acute care 
setting.  We believe that the effect of VA BIC on suicidal ideation will be the greatest at the three -month 
follow-up because the greatest intensity of f ollow-u p care provided through VA BIC occurs within the 
first three months after discharge.  
  
Specific Aim 2:  The secondary aim of our study is to determine the effect of the VA BIC program on other 
related measures of  suicide risk.   
Hypothesis:  Based on available evidence, we hypothesize that the VA BIC program plus standard 
discharge care will reduce hopelessness and improve patient engagement and perceived 
connectedness after discharge compared to standard discharge  care.   
 
Specific Aim 3 (explorator y): We plan to conduct an exploratory analysis on the number of suicide 
attempts (fatal and non -fatal) that occur after discharge in the VA BIC plus standard discharge care arm 
compared to standard discharge care alone.   
 
Scientific Rationale a nd Signific ance  
 Suicide is a major public health concern.9 U.S. veterans account for a sizable proportion of all U.S. 
suicide deaths, with approximately 14% of suicide deaths in the U.S. each year being attributed to a veteran.10-
11 The rate of suicide in the veter an popu lation is more than two times that of non- Veteran U.S. adults.9,11 The 
average number of suicides in veterans who use VA services has risen from four suicides per day in 2001 to six per day in 2015.
 9,11 Veterans who live in rural areas may be at ev en hig her risk for suicide than their urban 
counterparts.12-13 For example, McCarthy et al reported that the risk for suicide among veterans in rural areas 
was 22% higher than those in urban areas.13 There is a criti cal need to  develop targeted intervention s to 
address suicide risk in veterans in rural areas.  
 In order to have the greatest impact on suicide in rural veterans, it is important to develop effective 
interventions that target periods of highest risk.  Avail able evidence indicates that suicide risk is most 
3 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 concentrated during high- risk care transition scenarios such as discharge from an inpatient mental health 
unit or emergency room.14-18 For example, in a study of psychiatrically hospitalized male veterans, Britton et al. 
(2017) found that patient s who lived in a rural setting were at 20% higher risk of suicide after discharge 
compared to urban patients.17 Similarly, patients who are discharged from an emergency room after presenting 
with suicidal behavior have a high risk for suicide in the months  following discharge.18 Yet, despite this known 
risk, patients discharged from an emergency room setting (after suicidal behavior) have very high rates of non -
adherence with post -discharge care (ranging as high as 70 %).18 There is also some evidence to sug gest that a 
subset of patients are at increased risk for suicide after medical hospitalization.19-24 For example, Riblet et al. 
(2018) found a three -times higher risk of death by suicide among veterans with an agains t medical advice 
(AMA) discharge from a VA gene ral medical ward, compared to those discharged routinely from the same 
wards.20 This underscores the importance of looking beyond typical mental health settings, as AMA discharges 
from general medical wards oc cur most frequently among Veterans with s ubstan ce abuse and mental health 
problems.25 Finally, a substance use disorder is a strong risk for suicide and substance use disorders are 
highly prevalent in the veteran population.26-27 Bohnert et al. (2017) found th at male veterans who were 
diagnosed with a substance use disorder were at nearly two times greater risk for suicide, even after adjusting 
for age and medical and psychiatric comorbidity.28 Studies have suggested that engagement in treatment (or 
lack th ereof) plays an important role in clinic al outcomes in veterans with substance use disorder. In particular, 
poorer continuity of care after discharge from VA residential substance treatment facilities may negatively 
impact patient engagement in care and ou tcom es.29-30 This observation is particul arly important given that rural 
veterans in general face more challenges accessing substance abuse treatment.27 Our own recent review of 
root-cause analysis (RCA) reports of suicides following discharge from a VA reside ntial substance treatment 
facilities  (2002  – 2015) found that RCA teams reported contributing factors to suicide after discharge include 
poor engagement in care and fragmented care.31 
 Several brief interventions have been developed to address the risk  for suicide following psychiatric and 
emergenc y room discharge.32-33 In a meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of suicide prevention 
strategies, Riblet et al. (2017) identified a single intervention, the World Health Organization Brief Int ervention 
and Contact (WHO BIC) Program,  that is proven to prevent suicide following psychiatric discharge.32 The WHO 
BIC (1) facilitates patient engagement through educating patients about suicide risk and (2) provides patients with regularly - scheduled profe ssional support after discharge by he lping  patients adhere to their discharge 
care plan through in- person and telephone contact.
34 The WHO BIC also aims to ensure continuity of care after 
discharge by facilitating the communication of emergent patient needs and concerns to their outpatient 
provider s. Yet, the WHO BIC has not been studied in high- income countries or in U.S. veterans. Our pilot work 
demonstrated that the WHO BIC may address systematic vulnerabilities in the discharge process and align 
with hospitalized veterans’ preferences for  treatment.3 
 
Preliminary Studies  
We conducted a pilot study of an adapted version of WHO BIC (called VA BIC) in psychiatrically 
hospitalized veterans at the White River Junction VA Medical Center.1 We found that rur al veterans exposed to 
VA BIC experienced significant and clinically meaningful improvements in suicidal ideation at one and three 
months after discharge. We also observed significant improvements in related measures of suicide risk including hopelessness and connectedness . Patients had high con tinuity of care after discharge. To the best of 
our knowledge there have been no studies of targeted interventions for rural Veterans that address suicide risk during other high- risk care transition scenarios including discharge from an emergency room, inpa tient medical 
stay or residential substance treatment facilities. The VA BIC has also not been pilot tested in these settings.  
Because of our promising pilot work , we believe it is appropriate to choose suicidal ideatio n as our primary 
outcome. In our pil ot study, which included nine Veterans undergoing the VA BIC intervention, we found a 
greater than five- point improvement in the Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation (BSS) over the three months 
following inpatient mental health discharge. Five points is a clini cally meaningful improvement on the BSS as it 
represents the mean difference in suicidal ideation between ambulatory and hospitalized psychiatric patients .
2 
Furthermore, with this sample size and level of improvemen t, we were able to demonstrate a signifi cant 
difference in improvement in suicidal ideation compared to a matched group of historical controls participating 
in a post -mental health discharge qualitative study .1,3 Therefore, we believe that we will have suf ficient power 
to show a clinically meani ngful improvement in suicidal ideation overall and for each of the four high- risk care 
transition scenarios at one and three months after discharge if we enroll a total of 100 veterans  (25 per 
4 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 transition scenario) over 3  years. We will also assess other im portant measures of suicide risk including 
hopelessness, connectedness, fatal/non- fatal suicide attempts and treatment engagement. 4-7  Please see the 
Assessment Manual for all assessment templates  (Appendix 2 ). We will assess post -discharge treatment  
engagement  by evaluating continuity of care and disruptions of care (including missed appointments). We will 
abstract these data from the electronic medical record. In addition, we will ask veterans to report on any 
treatment they may have received outside of the VA  healthcare system. We will use a standardized data 
collection form to collect information on non- VA treatment. We have already piloted this data collection form in 
our current pilot study. We will include thr ee measures of continuity of care including int ensity of treatment, 
regularity of care, and continuity of care across organizational boundaries). These measures of continuity of 
care have been shown to be associated with improved mental health outcomes.8 Becaus e the focus of our 
project is on generating practical clinical results for rural VA facilities rapidly and cost -effectively, we will limit 
our longitudinal assessment to these outcomes. Finally, travel to appointments is a notable concern for veterans  living in rural areas. We will give patients t he choice to participate in VA BIC contact visits in- person, 
by telephone or via VA Video Connect. This approach aligns with the VA’s goal to expand the use of telehealth services. 
 Our pilot work lends suppor t that VA BIC holds great promise for pre venting suicide in a high - 
resource, rural, VA setting. The VA BIC targets key factors that may contribute to suicide risk during high- risk 
care transition scenarios including problems with patient engagement in treatment and fragmented care in the post- discharg e period.
3,18,19,31 As a next step, it is important to confirm the effectiveness of VA BIC in 
addressing suicide risk in psychiatrically hospitalized veterans in rural settings and to determine whether VA BIC shows  similar effectiveness during other high-risk care transition scenarios in rural veterans such as 
emergency room care, medical hospitalization, and residential substance treatment facilities. Results of our work will serve as an important resource for  rural VA facilities to draw from in  order to dev elop and implement 
effective programs to mitigate suicide risk in Veterans living in rural settings at their facilities.  
 
Research Design and Methods  
Study Protocol for Patients Recruited from Ground East  As described in the Specific Aims section 
above, the proposed study will occur 
over the course of a total of four years 
with t he fu nding of the study starting 
October 1, 2019.  In year one of the 
study, we will first conduct a randomized trial of the intervention on Ground East. 
We made this decision because we have 
established experience conducting a 
small pilot of the intervention on the 
same unit. Therefore, it i s it reasonable 
to first conduct a full clinical trial in a location where we the greatest 
experience and can gain important 
insights that will be helpful when we 
spread the study to other areas of the 
medical facility. Accor dingly, we are 
requesting at this time fro m the IRB/R&D 
to open the study only on Ground East. Our plan is in then subsequently over the 
course of the years to submit 
amendments as appropriate to expand the study to additional locations with the 
WRJ V AMC a s described in the protocol. 
For each addi tional site, we will modify the protocol and submit relevant consent forms because these will differ 
modestly across locations. The additional sites of interest includes the residential rehabilitation substanc e Figur e 1. Flow chart of study proced ures 
 
d=days; IC = inclusion criteria; m= months; MH = inpatient mental 
health; w = weeks  
5 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 abuse program (RRC), the medical -surgic al uni t (specifically patients who were consulted by mental health and 
identified as being at risk for suicide), and the emergency room . 
 
This section outlines the study protocol for the clinical trial of VA BIC on Ground East.  
Overview of the VA BIC Inter vention and RCT Design 
As shown in Figure 1  ( see previous page) , to test the aforementioned hypotheses, we propose to 
conduct a single- site, assessor -blinded RCT at the WRJ VAMC comparing the VA BIC plus standard 
psychia tric hospital discharge care to standard psy chiatric hospital discharge care alone. The trial will 
enroll patients 18 years and older who are being discharged from the WRJ VAMC inpatient mental health 
unit.  The primary aim is to determine whether the VA BIC reduces suicidal ideation at  one and thre e 
months after psychiatric hospitalization.  The secondary aim  is to evaluate the impact of VA BIC on other 
important measures of suicide risk including hopelessness, connectedness, fatal/non- fatal suicide 
attemp ts and treatment engagement.  
Basel ine Assess ment and Randomization:  Prior to the start of study enrollment, t he statistician will 
independently  prepare allocation cards using a permutated block schedule. The statistician will the put these 
cards into sealed, opaque, numbered envelopes . The box of en velopes will be stored in a locked cabinet in the 
study coordinator’s locked office.  
    The study coordinator will meet with each eligible patient in a private room on GE around the time of 
discharge.  The study coordinator will obtain informed c onsent  from the patient and then administer the 
baseline assessments, which are described under the outcome measures (see below).  The baseline visit will 
take approximately 90 minutes to complete.  After obtaining consent and completing the baseline asses sment,  
the study coordinator will take the next numbered envelope from the box  (described above) and open the 
envelope to determine the patient’s assignment. In the event that the patient has been assigned to the 
intervention, the study coordinator wi ll notify the VA BIC intervention staff in order that the intervention staff can 
initiate the intervention. Otherwise, the patient will be informed that they have been assigned to usual care.  
VA BIC Intervention Descri ption:  Patients assigned to the VA BI C intervent ion will receive the VA BIC plus 
the standard psychiatric hospital discharge care.  The VA BIC is an adaptation of the successful WHO BIC intervention and designed to meet the unique needs of Veterans receivi ng car e in the VA medical system (see 
VA B IC Man ual, Appendix 1 ).  VA BIC can be delivered by a trained mental health staff member, such as a 
mental health nurse, social worker, or psychiatrist.  The VA BIC targets the needs of patients who are being disch arged from a VA inpatient mental health unit after  having been admitted because of acute suicide risk.  
The VA BIC incorporates aspects of motivational interviewing (MI).  Since the VA BIC is designed to enhance the standard hospital discharge care that pa tients  receive as part of psychiatric hospitalization, patients 
assign ed to th e VA BIC will continue to have access to standard discharge care (described below).  There are 
no restrictions on the types of treatments that patients may pursue after discharge.  
•  Bri
ef Educational Intervention:  Patients receive a one- hour, one-on- one, brief educational intervention 
on suicide prevention.  The session is performed by a VA BIC intervention staff member and takes place on the inpatient mental health unit around the time  of discharge.  We anticipate that, in most 
cases, the pati ents will receive the intervention the day prior to discharge. The education is designed to 
meet the information needs of Veterans receiving mental health care in the VA and to address patient barriers to follow- up.  The education includes a discussion of the p atient ’s safety plan.  The sessions 
are highly interactive, allowing time for questions and providing patients with written materials that they can keep for future reference.  
• Regular Contact :
  The patients will maintain regular contact with the same V A BIC  intervention staff 
member for a total of six contacts over the course of the three months after psychiatric hospitalization.  
At each of these contacts, the VA BIC intervention staff me mber w ill monitor the patient’s symptoms, 
assess treatment adhere nce, review  the safety plan with the patient, and, if necessary, assist the 
patient with engaging in care.   The contact sessions will be systematic and structured.  The contacts 
are designed to be highly interactive, allowing times for questions and providing patient s with written 
materials that they can keep for future reference.  Depending on the patient’s preference, the regular contacts will be delivered over the phone (or VA Video Connect ) or in-person in a private office on the 
grounds of the WRJ VAMC . These visit s last roughly 15- 30 minutes.  
6 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
  
Standard Psychiatric Hospital Discharge Care: Patients assigned to the VA BIC intervention as well as the 
control condition will receive the standa rd VA hospital discharge care that occurs as part of psychiatric 
hospi taliza tion.  VA current standard psychiatric hospital discharge care includes five core elements. First, 
patients and their outpatient providers are required to be involved in discharge planni ng.  Second, patients 
should be offered evidence- based trea tment s to address their mental health symptoms.  Third, the inpatient 
team should work with the patient to complete a safety plan prior to discharge.  Fourth, the inpatient team should arrange two follow- up care visits within 30 days of discharge.  Fifth, the i npatient  team in conjunction 
with the S uicide Prevention Coordinator ( SPC) assess whether patients are appropriate to be placed on the 
High Risk for Suicide List.  Patients who are place d on t he High Risk for Suicide List receive enhanced 
oversight as outlined in VA policy. More recently,  this enhanced care was renamed the Suicide Prevention 
Pathway.  The SPC oversees the following elements of the Suicide Prevention Pathway: 1) The SPC reminds the mental health provider that the patient should be scheduled to be seen four times within the first 30 days 
following hospitalization; 2) The primary care or mental health provider is expected to tailor the patient’s treatment to address his/her unique risk factors for suicide; 3) The SPC places a pop -up flag in the medical 
record to alert pro vider s of t he patient’s high- risk status; and 4) The continued need for the patient to remain on 
the High Risk for Suicide List is reassessed by the SPC every  three months .  Of note, at the clinical discretion 
of the inpatient treatment team and the SPC, some patient s may be assigned to the Suicide Prevention 
Pathway but may not meet criteria for the High Risk for Suicide List.  Per VA policy, SPCs are not required t o 
provide clinical care.  
 Outcome 
Measures: As 
outlined in Table 1, 
we will use several 
standardized 
instruments to 
collect information on primary and 
secondary 
outcomes 
throughout the 
study.  Copies of the assessment 
tools are available 
in the Assessm ent 
Manual  (App 2 ).  
 Baseline Characteristics:   We will collect socio -demographic data from  the electronic medical record such 
as age, sex, marital status and service history (e.g., branch, era, combat exposure).  With regards to diagnostic information, we will administer the MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) at study 
entry.  The M INI is  a short, structured diagnostic interview that takes about 15 minutes to administ er.
35 It 
has been validated against the Structured Clinical Inter view fo r Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM).  We will inquire about any history  of su icide attempts using the validated Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating- Scale (C -SSRS).36  The C -SSRS includes a seven- item subscale that assesses for  
actual  and interrupted suicide attempts.   
 
Primary Outcome (Suicidal Ideation):  The primary outco me will be as sessed using the Beck Scale for 
Suicidal Ideation (BSS)  (Specific Aim 1).2,37  Patients will be asked about their current suicidal ideation (i.e., 
past week) at baseline and at follow- up assessments.  The BSS is a self -reported questionnaire that as sesses 
severity of suicidal ideation. The BSS measures attitudes, behaviors, and plans to die by suicide.  Each item on 
the BSS is scored on a scale fr om 0 to  2 and the first 19 of the 21 items are used to calculate a total score 
ranging from 0 – 38.  The BSS ha s high reliability and is a valid measure of suicidal ideation. There is also 
evidence that the BSS is measurement invariant across time. 38  The BSS is  widely used in clinical trials, is Table 1: Overview of Standardized Assessment Measures and Timing o f Ass essmen t 
                   Measurement Methods  Timing of 
Assessment  
Outcome  Instrument  Cronbach’s α  Length  Time*  0M 1M 3M 
Suicidal Ideation  BSS 0.87 – 0.97 21 items  10 X X X 
Patient Activation  PIH 0.82 – 0.88 12 items  5 X X X 
Hopelessness  BHS  0.87 – 0.93 20 Items  10 X X X 
Connectedness  INQ-15 0.89 – 0.91  15 items  5 X X X 
Suicide Attempts  CSSR -S N/A 7 items  5-10 X X X 
Estimated time (in minutes) t o compl ete assessments  45 45 45 
BHS = Beck Hopelessness Scale; BSS = Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideat ion; CSSR -
S = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; INQ -15 = Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire- 15; M = months; N/A = Not applicable; PIH = Partners in Heal th;  
*Time is described in minutes   
7 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 sensitive to clinical change, and unlike most other measures o f suic idal ideation, higher scores on the BSS are 
associated with death by  suicide.  While there is no established BSS cutoff score to classify suicide risk a s 
high, low, or none, there is evidence that higher scores on the BSS correspond to more severe su icidal  
ideation.2,39  There is evidence that an improvement of five points or more on the total BSS scores may be 
clinically relevant . 2   
 
Secondary O utcome (Patient Engagement) : We will measure patient engagement in treatment at 
baseline and at foll ow-up asses sments.  Patient engagement is a complex phenomenon to measure.40  The 
term ‘patient engagement’ encompasses various aspects of care related to a patient’s motivation and intent 
to be an active participant in addressing their healthcare needs.40  To date, there is no agreed- upon 
measure in the literature that incorporates all aspects of the experience of ‘patient engagement.40  In the 
field of ment al health, there is some notion that ‘patient engagement’ should mean that a patient 
experiences collabor ative care, feels supported during their treatment, and adopts ‘good practices’ or 
behaviors that support their overall well -being.40-41  Therefore, only asse ssing whether a patient attended a 
mental health appointment may not adequately reflect treat ment engageme nt.  There is also evidence that 
symptom severity can preclude patients from engaging in care.42  Pfeiffer et al. found that, despite 
improveme nts in timely outpatient follow -up after VA psychiatric hospitalization, there were no significant 
changes in r eadmission or antidepressant treatment.43  In fact, Bernet et al.  found that appointment 
intensity was higher in Veterans who reattempted suicide after discharge versus those who did not 
reattempt.44  Thus, we conceptualize that engagement includes c ontinuit y of care and activation.  
o Patient activation:  Patient activation is defined as “an individual’s knowledge, skill and confidence for 
managing their health and health care.”45-46  Individuals who demonstrate higher degrees of patient 
activation have  been found to be more likely to engage in health- promoting behaviors and to 
experience better outcomes.47  We will measure activation using the validated Partners in Health 
(PIH)  scale.48  The PIH is a 12 -item generic instrument that is used to measure pa tient self-
management of chronic conditions.48  It includes three domains of self -management including 
knowledge of condition, partnership in treatment , and c oping with the condition.  It has good reliability 
and validity in patients with chronic condition s.49-50  The psychometric properties of the PIH in 
Veterans have not been studied. 
o Continuity of care: There is some evidence that improved continuity of care  may lead to better 
mental health outcomes.51-52 However, a single, valid, standardized measu re of conti nuity of care for 
mental health has not been described in the literature.  Work by Greenberg et al.  in Veterans who 
were discharged from a VA inpatient mental health unit provides sufficient evidence that three 
aspects of continuity of care after psy chiatr ic hospitalization (regularity of care, continuity of treatment 
across organizational boundaries, and intensity of treatment) are associated with improv ements in 
overall mental health.8 We will use the three measures of continuity of care as validated by 
Greenberg et al.   This includes:  
a) Continuity of care: Measure of whether a patient discharged from the inpatient MH unit received any MH outpatient  treatm ent in the first month and between 1 – 3 m after 
discharge.  
b) Regularity of care: The number of  mont hs in th e 3 m after the initial assessment in which 
the patient attended at least 1 MH visit (Range 0 – 3 m), and  
c) Intensity of care: Measure of the total number of MH visits between initial entry into the study and the last study assessment).  
In addition , we will also evaluate evidence of disruptions of care including no- show and cancelled 
appointments. We will abstract these measures from the electronic medi cal record.  Since it is possible 
that some patients may receive portions of their care outside of  the V A system, we will also ask patients 
to self -report on non- VA care.   
o Hopelessness : To gather clinical evidence of treatment engagement, we will assess h opelessness 
at baseline and at follow- up assessments using the Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS).   The  BHS i s a 
20-item self- report scale that assesses hopelessness over the past seven days.53  Patients comment 
on feelings about the future, loss of moti vation,  and future expectations.  Total scores range from 0 to 
20, with higher scores suggesting more hopelessnes s.  Higher scores on the BHS are associated 
with increased suicide risk.39  The BHS has good reliability and validity and is sensitive to chang e.39  
8 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 The psychometrics of the BHS in the Veteran population have not been studied, but the BHS has 
been used i n other studies of the Veteran population.54 
o Secondary Outcome ( Connectedness):  We will also include a measure of connectedness, the 
Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire- 15 (INQ -15).  The INQ -15 is a 15 -item self -report scale that 
measures thwarted belongingness and perceived burdensomeness.  Each item is measured on a 7 -
point Likert scale,  with higher scores suggesting lower perceived connectedness .5  The INQ-15 has 
good reliability and validity in the Veteran population.  Higher scores on the INQ -15 have been  
associated with suicide risk.5-6  
o Secondary Outcome (Suicide Attempts ): We will assess for non -fatal and fatal suicide attempts at 
one and thr ee mont hs after discharge using  the C -SSRS.36  The C -SSRS is a valid and reliable scale 
that includes a s even-i tem subscale that asks patients to self -report on actual attempts, interrupted 
attempts, aborted attempts, and preparatory acts or behaviors.  The scale  asks the assessor to 
document the actual and potential lethality of these behaviors.  The C -SSRS is wid ely used in the 
VA.  The psychometrics of the C -SSRS in Veterans is unknown.  
o Study Design:  As shown in 
Figure 2, patients allocated 
to the VA BIC intervention will 
meet with the VA BIC intervention staff prior to 
hospital disch arge.  During 
this visit, they will receive a brief educational intervention, 
which will be delivered in a private office on GE.  After 
hospital discharge, pa tients 
will participate in six regular 
contacts with the VA BIC 
intervention staff over a period of thre e months.  
Depending on patient preference, the regular 
contacts will occur in a 
private office on the WRJ VAMC campus or the contacts will occur over t he phone (or VA Video Connect).  
o All patients (including patients randomized to VA BIC) will have access  to standard psychiatric 
hospital discharge  care.  Furthermore, regardless of study assignment, all patients will undergo 
outcome assessment at baseline (0M), one month (1M) and three months (3M). These assessments 
will be conducted by the independent outc ome assessor.  The independent outcome assessor will 
conduct the baseline assessment in a private office on GE around the time of discharge.  We  
anticip ate that, in most cases, the baseline assessment will occur on the day before discharge.  
Depending on pat ient preference, the independent outcome assessor will conduct the follow -up 
assessments in a private office on the WRJ VAMC campus or over the phone (or VA Video Connect).  The assessor  will be blinded to study assignment and the patients will be  instructed to not reveal 
their status to the assessor.  
o As the WRJ VAMC is a rural medical center that serves a large geographic area (New Hampshire 
and Vermont), we anticipate that several enrolled patients will prefer phone (or VA Video Connect) 
over in -person  follow- up.  Fortunately, the assessment instruments that we selected for this study 
can be administered over the phone or in person.  Furthermore, our decision to allow patients to participate in study follow -up by phone (or VA Video Connect) o r in person  is consistent with the 
study methods of the original WHO BIC trials.  
Summary of Project Work/Deliverables over the 4 year study period  
1) Year 1: W e will c omplete four deliverables during the first year:  
A) Enroll 25 veterans  in a randomized trial  of VA BIC for  patients being 
discharged from an inpatient mental health  unit. (As described in the study Figure 2. Schedule of Assessments and Interventions  
 
 
BIC = VA Br ief Int ervention and Contact Program; dy = days; m = month  
MH = Mental health; SDP = Standard psychiatric discha rge practices;                           
   T0, T0, T1, T2 = assessment time points; wk = weeks  
9 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 protocol above for patients recruited from Ground East) 
B) Devel op an adapted version of the VA BIC for patients being discharged from 
an inpatient medic al/su rgical un it after receiving psychiatric  consultation .  
C) Pilot an adapted version of VA BIC in 3 veterans  being discharged from 
an inpatient Medical/surgical unit after receiving psychiatric  consultation. 
(We will submit a study amendment prior to condu cting  this wor k) 
D) Develop an adapted version of VA BIC for patients being discharged from a 
residential substance treatment  facility  
2) Year 2: We will complete six delive rables during the second year:  (We will submit a study 
amendment prior to conducting th e work  described b elow) 
A) Clean and analyze data from trial of VA BIC for patients being discharged from 
an inpatient mental health unit.  
B) Finalize VA BIC manual for patients being discharged from an inpatient mental 
health unit based on  results. 
C) Enroll 25 veterans  in a random ized trial of VA BIC for patients being 
discharged from an inpatient medical/surgical unit after receiving psychiatric  
consultation.  
D) Pilot a n adapted version of VA BIC in 3 veterans  being discharged from a 
residential substance treatment  facility. 
E) Enroll  13 veterans in a randomized trial of VA BIC for patients being 
discharged from a residential substance treatment  facility.  
F) Develop an adapted version of  VA BIC for patients being discharged from an 
emergency room after presenting with a ment al health conc ern. 
3) Year 3: We will complete seven deliverables during the third  year:  (We will submit a study 
amendment prior to conducting th e work  descri bed below ) 
A) Clean and analyze data from trial of VA BIC for patients being discharged from 
an inpatient medical/surg ical unit after receiving psychiatric  consultation.  
B) Finalize VA BIC manual for patients being discharged from an inpatient 
medical/surgical  unit after re ceiving psychiatric consultation based on  results.  
C) Enroll 12 veterans  in a randomized t rial of VA BIC f or patients being 
discharged from a residential substance treatment  facility. 
D) Clean and analyze data from trial of VA BIC for patients being  discharged from a 
residential substance treatment  facility.  
E) Finalize VA BIC manual for patient s bei ng discharged fr om a  residential 
substance  treatment facility.  
F) Pilot an adapted version of VA BIC in 3 veterans following discharge from an 
emergency room after presenting with a mental health concern.  
G) Enroll 25 veterans  in a randomized trial of VA BIC for patients being 
discharged from an emergency room after presenting with a mental health  
concern.  
4) Year 4: We will complete ten deliverables during the four th year:  (We will submit a study 
amendment prior to conducting th e work  described below) 
A) Clean  and analyze data from t rial of VA BIC for patients being discharged from an 
emergency room after presenting with a mental health concern.  
B) Finalize VA BIC manual for patients being discharged from an emergency 
room after presenting with a mental health concern.  
C) Integrate VA BIC t rial data across high- risk care transition scenarios and analyze results. 
D) Develop integrated VA BIC manual including all four high- risk ca re transition scenarios.  
E) Identify three rural sites interested in implementing VA  BIC. 
F) Disseminate VA BIC to 3 rural V A facilities  
G) Work with the three rural sites to adapt materials for their settings and assist 
facilities with implementation.  
H) Track use, success, and challenges of VA BIC implementation at the three rural  sites.  
10 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 I) Develop a generalizable V A BIC manual that i s adaptable to any rural VA  facility.  
J) Propose additional dissemination work to Rural Health Resource Center Eastern  Regio n. 
 
Please see Table 2 below for  a study timeline for the 4 year period . 
 
 
Table 2: Gant t Chart Representing Each of the Proposed Project Activities  
 
 
Calendar Year   
2019   
2020   
2021   
2022  
Quarter  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Development and testing of VA BIC in 4 High -Risk Care Transition 
Scenarios Tran sition Scenario 1: Patients Being Discharged from an Inpatient Mental Health Unit  
     Enroll 25 veterans in a RCT of VA BIC                  
Clean and analyze data                 
Finalize VA BIC manual for mental health discharges                  
Transit ion Scenario 2: Patien ts Being Discharged from an Inpatient Medical Unit after Receiving Psychiatric Consultation 
Develop adapted version of VA BIC for patien ts being discharg ed from an 
inpatient medical unit after receiving psychiatric consultation                  
Pilot adapt ed version of VA BIC in 3 veterans being discharged from an  
inpatient medical unit after receiving psychiatric consultation                  
Enroll 25 veterans in a n RCT of VA BIC                  
Clean and analyze data                  
Finalize VA BIC man ual for patients being discharged from an 
inpatient medical unit after receiving psychiatric consultation                  
Transition Sc enario 3: Patient s Being Discharged from a Residential Substance Treatment Facility  
Develo p ada pted version of VA BIC fo r patients discharged from a RST                  
Pilot adapted version of VA BIC in 3 veterans discharged from a RST                  
Enroll 25 veterans  in an RCT of VA BIC                  
Clean and analyze data                  
Finalize VA BIC manual fo r pati ents discharged from a RST                  
Transition Scenario 4: Patients Being from an Emergency Room after Presenting with a Mental Health Conc ern 
Develop adapted version of VA BIC for patients discharged from an ER 
after presenting with a mental  healt h concern                  
Pilot adapted version of VA BIC in 3 veterans discharged from an ER 
after presenting with a mental heal th concern                  
Enroll 25 veterans in a n RCT of VA BIC                  
Clean  and analyze data                  
Finalize VA BIC manual for patients discharged from an ER 
after presenting with a mental health concern                  
                                   Integration of Findings from VA BIC Use in 4 High-Risk Care Trans ition Scenarios  
Integrate VA BI C trial  data                 
Analyze results                  
Develop integrated VA BIC manual                  
Write up Manuscript of Work                  
Dissemination of VA BIC Findings to Rural VA Facilities  
Identi fy 3 rural VA facilities interested in impl ementing VA BIC                   
Work with 3 rural VA facilities to adapt VA BIC material locally                   
Assist 3 rur al VA facilities with implementation of VA BIC                   
Track use, success,  and challenges of VA BIC implementa tion by  facilities                   
Develop a generalizable manual that is adaptable to any rural VA facility                   
Propose  additional disse mination work to RHRCER                   
Manual Development and Te sting  Work   Integration Work   Dissem ination  Work     
Note. ER = Emergency Room; RCT = Randomized controlled trial; RHRCER= Rural Health Resource Center Eastern Region; RST = Residential 
Substance Treatment Facility; VA = Veterans Affairs; VA BIC = VA Brief  Intervention and Contact Program  
 
 
11 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 Statistical Considerations 
 
Statistical Analyses: T o maintain blinding, the statistician who is otherwise not directly involved in the study 
will conduct the analysis based on the intention-to- treat principle.  Below, we have outlined  the specific 
analysis plan for assessing each of the primary and secondary aims of interest of this study.  We will assess 
for statistically sign ificant differences in baseline study characteristics such as age, sex, race, and mental 
health diagnos is, bet ween study arms using t-tests for continuous measures and chi -squared tests for 
dichotomous variables.  We will report these results using 95% confidence intervals (CI) and P -values.  We will 
define statistical si gnificance as a P -value < 0.05.  If we identify any variables for which there are significant 
differences across study arms, we will control for these confounders in the analysis of the aim s.  
 Specific Aim 1:   We will generate descriptive summary statisti cs (e .g., means and standard errors,  
medians) and graphical displays for the BSS total scores at baseline and at each  of the follow -up 
assessments. For each of the four acute care settings  included in our study , we will perform simple 
statistical tests. Fi rst, we will use a repeated measures  analys is of variance (ANOVA) test to assess for 
changes in continuous variables in the first three months after discharge. Second, if the repeated 
measures ANOVA suggested a significant difference in means across time, we will perform a post -hoc, 
pair-wise comparison of means at baseline and one- and three- month follow -up using a two- sample t -test.  
    We will perform a more complex analysis for the entire study sample at the end of the four years 
because we will have adequate power to do so. The following outlines are specific approach:  Based on 
available evidence, we hypothesize that the VA BIC program plus standard hospital discharge c are will 
lead to a significant reduction in suicidal ideation after discharge from an acu te care setting.  We believe 
that the effect of VA BIC on suicidal ideation will be the greatest at the three- month follow -up because the 
greatest intensity of follow -up care provided through VA BIC occurs within the first three months after 
discharge. We will generate descriptive summary stat istics (e.g., means and standard errors, medians) 
and graphical displays for the BSS total scores at baseline and at each of the follow- up assessm ents.  
Because BSS scores are typically over dispersed, it is not approp riate to use standard parametri c 
statistics.  Therefore, we will treat the BSS scores as count data and use negative binomial regression.  
Specifically, we will use a generalized linear mixed model.  We will consider allocation of study arm (categoric al me asure) and time (continuous measure) as fixed effects.  Random effect will be used to 
account for correlation that arises from repeated measures of the same individual .  We will assume  a linear 
effect and model changes in suicidal ideation over time.  We will calculate 95% CI and P -values and will 
define a P -value of < 0.05 to be statistically significant.  We will use the maximum likelihood ratio to 
account for any mis sing data.  
 
Speci fic Aim 2:  First, we will perform an analysis to demonstrate whethe r there are greater improvements in 
patient  engagement, hopelessness, and perceived connectedness over time in patients assigned to the VA 
BIC intervention versus control condition at one, three months after discharge.  For  continuous variables 
measuring patient engagement (PIH, Hopelessness, Regularity of Care, Continuity of Care across Organizational Boundaries, and Intensity of Care) and perceived connectedness  (INQ -15), we will generate 
descriptive summary statistics (e.g., means and standard errors, medians ) and graphical displays for each 
meas ure at baseline and at each of the follow- up assessments.  Second, using analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA), we will calculate mean differences in sc ores for each of our continuous measures at the one- and 
three -month  follow -up, as well as the associated 95% c onfidence intervals and P -values.  For the categorical 
measure of disruptions in care, we will use chi -squared tests to compare t he proportion of patients 
experiencing disruptions in care between the two study arm s at one - month and three -months after disc harge.  
 Specific Aim 3:  While suicide deaths and suicide attempts are important clinical endpoints, this single- site trial 
will n ot be powered to detect a statistically significant effect between study arms.  Furt hermo re, because we 
assume that few events will be observed in either arm, we plan to summarize our findings by providing basic 
descriptive statistics regarding the number of events in each arm at one- and three- month follow -ups.   
 
  
12 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 Randomization: Prior t o the start of study enrollment, t he statis tician will independently  prepare allocation 
cards using a permutated block schedule. The advantage of this approach is that it ensures that an equal 
number of participants are assigned to each arm.56  The statist ician will the put these cards into  sealed,  
opaque, numbered envelopes. The box of envelopes will be stored in a locked cabinet in the study coordinator’s locked office.  
 
Sample Size : Because of our promising pilot work,
1 we believe it is appropriate to choose suicidal ideation as 
our primar y outco me. In our pilot study, which included nine Veterans undergoing the VA BIC intervention, we 
found a greater than five -point improvement in the Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation (BSS) over the three 
months following inpatient mental health discharge. Five points is a clinically meaningful improvement on the 
BSS as it represents the mean difference in suicidal ideation between ambulatory and hospitaliz ed psychiatric 
patients.2 Furthermore, with this sample size and  level o f improvement, we were able to demonst rate a 
significant difference in improvement in suicidal ideation compared to a matched group of historical controls participating in a post -mental health discharge qualitative study .
1,3 Therefore, we will have su fficient power to 
show a clinically meaningful improvement in suicidal ideation overall and for each of the four high- risk care 
transition scenarios at one and three months  after discharge if we enroll a total of 100 veterans ( 25 per 
transition scenar io) ov er 3 years.  
 
Study Population and R ecr uitment  
As described in the Specific Aims section, the proposed study will occur over the course of a total of four years with the f unding of the study starting October 1, 2019. In year one of the study, we will first conduct a 
randomized trial of the i ntervent ion on Ground East. We made this decision because we have established 
experience conducting a small pilot of the intervention on the same unit.  The first stage of the  study will be 
conducted at the WRJ VAMC and will recruit patients hospitalized on Ground East (GE), the facility’s 10- bed 
inpatient mental health unit.  GE staff includes an inpatient psychiatrist and psychologist, nursing staff, a social worker, and trainees from these disciplines.  We aim to r ecruit  a total of 25 patients from Ground  East. Study 
staff will communicate on a daily basis (Monday -Friday) with the inpatient treatment team in order to identify 
potentiall y eligible patients  who can be approached about study participation. The inpatient team and attending 
psychiatrist will ma ke the d etermination as to when and whether it is clinically appropriate for study staff to 
approach potentially eligible patients.  After approaching eligible patients, study staff will make them aware of the study and determine if they are interested in particip ating in the study.  If patients are interested in the 
study, study staff will obtain informed consent using a written informed consent document prior to enrolling the patient into the study.  Study staff involv ed in the recruitment and consent process will be blinded at the time of 
study allocation.  During the course of the study, it will be impossible to blind the VA BIC intervention staff or 
patients to treatment allocation; however, the outcome assessor will remain blind to study  assignment 
throughout the trial.  Patients will be instructed not to reveal their study assignment to the outcome assessor.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
o Per the unit psychiatrist, hospitalization was due to concerns about acute risk f or sel f-harm 
including suicidal ideation, suicide attempt, and/or admitting provider deemed the patient was at 
imminent risk for self -harm;   
o Be a Veteran eligible to receive VA services; be 18 years or older; be able to speak English;  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
o Unabl e to provide informed consent;  
o We do  not plan to enroll any potentially vulnerable populations including prisoners, institutionalized 
patients, or involuntarily committed patients .  
 
Inform ed
 Consent  
Eligible participants who are interested in parti cipati ng in this study will complete the in formed c onsent process. 
Study staff will inform the patient about the study and provide them with the informed consent document. Patients will have the option to review the document with their doctor, family, and/ or friends prior to signing if 
they choose.  Upon signing, they will be provided with a photocopy of the document. We do not anticipate a 
waiting period between informing the patient of the study and obtaining informed consent, but participants may 
13 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 choose t o wait . To ensure understanding of the study purpose and procedures, the patient will be encouraged 
to ask questions if there is anything they do not understand. Additionally, the informed consent  document is 
written in easy -to-understand language to facil itate comprehension.  
 
Risks and Side Effect s: 
 
Pote ntial Risks  
Since the study population is known to be at high risk for suicide and study endpoints include suicidal ideation, s
uicide attempts, and suicide, these events would be considered anticipated adverse events during the course 
of this study. Similarly, we also consider that psychiatric hospitalizations or emergency room for worsening psychiatric symptoms or suicidal beh avior are anticipated adverse events .   
 As described above, it is expected that  patie nts may report worsening suicidal ideation or  suicidal behaviors at 
the study assessments (i.e., baseline, one- month, or three- month follow -up) regardless of whether they  are 
assigned to the  intervention or control condition. It is also possible that  patie nts assigned to the intervention 
arm may report worsening suicidal ideation or suicidal behavior during an intervention visit. It is also possible 
that patients could be seen in the emergency room or be hospitalized because of any of these events. Thus, it is expected for the patients to cont inue wit h the study unless the patient requests to be removed from the 
study.  Furthermore, as outlined in our safety alert protocol  (Appendix 3) , study personnel will immediately 
follow the safety alert protocol in res ponse to any reports of worsening suicidal id eation or behaviors. If 
necessary, patients will be connected immediately with required clinical treatment.  All patients wil l continue to 
have access to standard -of-care treatment during the course of the trial regardless of study assignment.  
Furthermore , all patients may continue any treatments that they were receiving as part of their routine care 
prior to enrolling in the s tudy.   
 Therapeutic  Risks  
During the trial, the research staff will ask patients questions about how they are feeling and  their i nteractions 
with other people.  Patients will be exposed to these therapeutic risks during the baseline and follow -up 
assessm ents at one- and thr ee-month follow -ups.  In addition, patients assigned to the interv ention condition 
will also be exposed to thes e therapeutic risks at the intervention visits (brief education visit plus six contact 
visits after discharge).  Sometimes, patients can feel embarrassed, nervous, bored, or generally uncomfortable 
when they are  asked to answer these types of quest ions.  However, because there are sufficient safeguards in 
place to mitigate these potential risks, the overall therapeutic risk from this study to enrolled patients is very 
low.   
 Research Risk  
During the cours e 
 of the trial, protected health information includ ing name, social security  numbers (in order to 
process participant payments), phone numbers (for contact purposes), sociodemographic information (e.g. 
age, race), psychiatric diagnoses (e.g. Alcohol Use Di sorder , Substance Use Disorder, Depression) , mental  
health treatments received, and psychiatric symptoms (e.g. responses to standardized questionnaires) will be 
collected from  all enrolled patients.  Thus, there is some risk that a patient’s confidentialit y or protected health 
information could be compromi sed due to study participation.  As there are sufficient safeguards in place to 
mitigate this risk (see Protection Against R isk below), the overall research risk in this study is very low.  
 P
rotection Against Ri sk  
Study Population Safety Risk  
At each study assessment time point (i.e., baseline, one -month, and three -month follow -up), patients will be 
assessed for symptoms of s uicidal ideation and suicidal behavior because these are a priori  study endpoints . 
In addition, for patients assigned to the  intervention, patients may report worsening suicidal ideation or suicidal 
behavior in the context of the intervention visits.  Regardless of whether the patient is assigned to the 
intervention or control condition, the  study staff will be ethically bound to take appropriate action if the patient is 
at imminent risk for self -harm.  T he safety alert protocol  (Appendix 3) outlines the process that study staf f 
members will follow in order to ensure the safety and well -being of all enrolled patients regardless of whether 
they are assigned to the intervention or control condition. In the event that a safety alert is met, the research 
14 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 staff m ember will contact Dr . Natalie Riblet (or the mental health physician covering for her)  or, if necessary, 
the patient’s ment al health provider.  As part of this risk assessment, the assessing clinician will immediately 
complete a comprehensive risk evaluation and determine the  most appropriate next level of care for the 
patient.  The next le vel of care may include psychiatric admission , emergency room referral, or an urgent 
outpatient appointment with the patient’s healthcare provider.  Please see the safety alert protocol  (See  
Appendix 3)  for a full description of all safety alerts and  requi red actions by study staff members.   
 
Therapeutic Risk  
Patients will be given ample time to answer questions and complete visits in order to reduce any discomfort they may experience.  Patients will also be made aware that if any of the questions m ake them feel 
uncomfortable, they should feel free to mention this to the study staff member and have this concern 
addressed immediately.  At any point during a visit, a patient can take a break or refuse to answer a question.  
 Research Risk  
Every effort  will be m
 ade to ensure that the privacy and confidentiality  of the patient is maintained.  All study 
visits will occur in a private office on the WRJ VAMC campus to ensure pr ivacy.  If a visit or  assessment is 
done via a phone call, the research staff will conduct the phone call in a private offic e.  All assessments that 
can be collected electronically will be stored on a secure, password- protected file on a secure, local researcher 
server.  All s taff associated with the study will complete required securi ty tra ining prior to the start of the study  
in order to be permitted access to this server.  Furthermore, all study staff will adhere to the required annual training (by the W RJ VAMC) necessary to  maintain their access to the server.   All paper copies of study -
related data, including consent and H IPAA for ms, will be kept in a locked file cabinet, in a locked office, 
dedicated to this study.  Only research staff will have access to this locked cabi net. 
 
Benefits:   
All patients participating in this trial w ill receive standard of care and will be able to co ntinue all treatments 
and mental health care that they would otherwise have access to outside of the study.  In addition, 
depending on study assignment, some patients may receive the VA BIC intervention.  The VA  BIC is 
designed to enhance care that  patient s receive by helping to connect them with available mental health 
resources and educating them about suicide prevention after psychiatric hospita lization.  Although the VA 
BIC is adapted from a successful suicid e prevention strategy (WHO BIC ),32,34 it is u nknown whether the VA 
BIC significantly reduces suicide risk after psychiatric hospitalization relative to standard discharge practices.  The work from this proposed study will be able to more definitively  address whether the VA BIC 
intervention is  an effective suicide -prevention strategy in patients following a psychiatric hospitalization.  
This is important, given that death by suicide after psychiatric hospitalization remains an important problem in the Vetera n population despite the VA’s multipl e suicid e-prevention strategies.  Since the overall risks 
associated with this trial are minimal and the anticipated benefits and knowledge to be gained are clinically important, there is sufficient reason to conduct th is study.  
 
Protected Health Informati on: 
We will administer several validated instruments to all enrolled patients at baseline and follow -up (one- and 
three -month follow -ups).  These instruments ask various questions related to self- harming thoughts or 
behavior and social connectedness.  We wi ll also ask patients to report on any non- VA healthcare 
utilization at one - and three- month follow -ups.  Demographic data and other baseline characterist ics will be 
collected from the patient’s electronic medical record at baseline.  Information on VA healthcare u tilization 
will be collected from the patient’s electronic medical record at one - and three- month follow -ups.  All data 
will be collected solely for the purposes of this study.  All study data will be collected using an electronic 
data- capture syst em.  These data are stored on a local, secure research server that only study staff will 
have access to. All paper copies of study- related data, including consent and HIPAA forms, will be kept in a 
locked file cabinet, in a locked office, dedicated to this  study.  Only research staff will have access to this 
locked cabinet.  
 
Multi -S ite Study Concerns   
In Year 4 of the study, we wil l identify three rural sites interested in implementing VA  BIC and work with these 
15 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 sites t o implement VA BIC locally . Prior to conducti ng this work, we will submit a study amendment to VINNE.  
  
 
Resources Available     
This project will be conducted at WRJ VAMC. For the  first phas e of the study, recruitment  of 25 participants  will 
take p lace on Ground East. Over the next phases of the stud y, we will be recruiting 25 participants from each of 
the following locations including inpatient medical/surgical services, residential drug treatment program (RRC) and the emergency room. Drs. Shiner  and R iblet will oversee and lead this project with the  help of research staff, 
which includes: 
• A
 VA BIC interventionist (100%  Year 1, 2, 3; 50% Year 4) 
• A study coordinator (1 00% all 4 Years)  
• A  statis tician ( 10%, Year 1, 2, 3; 20% Year 4)  
• An independent as sessor  blinded to study arm (50% in Years 1 -3) 
• An imple mentation scientist to aid Drs. Shiner and Riblet to work with 3 rural VA facilities and develop 
generalizable materials  to disseminate VA BIC broadly in rural VA facilities through future work . 
 
Subject Com pens ation:  
We will compensate enrolled patients as follows: baseline: $50; one- month follow -up: $100; three- month 
follow- up: $150.  This schedule ensures that patients are sufficiently reimbursed for their time and effort in the 
study.  Furthermore,  the s taggered schedule of higher payments over  time ac counts for the additional burden 
of committing to the study for three months.  Finally, higher payments have been shown improve study 
retention, while not being unreasonably coercive.57-58 
 
Privacy and  C onfidentiality:  
Please see Protection Against  Risk above. 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
Monitoring and Interim Analysis Plan:  We have formed an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB)  comprised of Peter Mills, PhD (has expertise in ethics and has previously served on a DSMB), Yinong 
Young- Xu, ScD (statistician who has experience serving on the Dartmouth- Hitchcock DSMB), and Bradley V. 
Watts, MD MPH (who has experience in mental health and suicide prevention). The independent DSMB will 
provide i ndependent data and safety monitoring for this study. The DSMB will meets annually . The DSMB will 
focus on ensuring safety and feasibility, including participant accrual and retention, adverse events monitoring, 
and data analyses. Based on these findings, the DS MB may recommend: (1) continued approval 
(uncondi tionally or with conditions to be addressed); (2) probation; or (3) possibly termination, if there are 
problems with enrollment or safety concerns. We will also ask that the DSMB perform an independent , inte rim 
statistical analysis on our data on an annual  basis. Dr. Young -Xu has experience performing these types of 
analyses.  This will allow us to identify whether the treatment has greater benefits  or risks than anticipated and 
make necessary changes to  the trial including changing the trial or term inating the trial. 
 Study Safety & Monitoring:  
Enrolled patients will be monitored for any unanticipated problems or adverse ev ents during the course of  the 
study. Unanticipated death possibly related to research will be orally reported to VINNE immediately with a written report submitted via IRBNet within 5 business days. Possibly study -related unanticipated problems 
involving risk to subjects or others;  serious adverse events; and deviations/non- compliance w ill be reported 
within 5 business days to VINNE . Advers e events will be reported with continuing review. Information security 
or privacy incidents will be reported to the ISO or PO within one hour of discovery.  As described above, we 
consider that the following events are anticipated adverse events: suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, suicide, 
and psychiatric hospitalizations or emergency room for worsening psychiatric symptoms or suicidal behavior.   
 Reasons for stopping assigned treatment and follow -up:  
The following events will be considered reasons to st op assigned treatment and or follow -up of an enrolled 
patient:  (1) death because the patient would no longer be accessible to study staff; or (2 ) patient requests 
to withdraw from the study.  In the event t hat the patient is assigned to the interv ention, we will ask the 
16 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 patient if they are willing to continue with the outcome assessments but respect his/her wishes if he/she 
chooses to withdraw fro m the study.  
   
Step -by-S tep Guidance on Conducting 
the Study  
  
 
 Figure 1.  Flow chart of study procedures  
 
d=days; IC = inclusion criteria; m= months; MH = inpatient mental 
health; w = weeks  
Figure 2. Schedule of Assessments and Interventions  
 
 
BIC = VA Brief Intervention and Contact Program; dy = days ; m = month  
MH = Mental health; SDP = Standard  psychia tric discharge practices;                           
   T0, T0, T1, T2 = assessment time points; wk = weeks  
17 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 References & Literature Cited  
  
1. Riblet N, Shiner B, Schnurr P, Bruce ML, Wasserman D, Cornelius S , Scott R, Watts BV. A 
Pilot Study of an Intervention to Prevent Suicide following Psychiatric Hospitalization. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 2019 (in press).  
2. Beck AT, Kovacs M, Weissman  A. Assessment of suicidal intention: the Scale for Suic ide 
Ideation. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1979;47:343 – 52. 
3. Riblet N, Shiner B, Scott R, Bruce ML, Wasserman D, Watts BV. Exploring Psychiatric 
Inpatients' Beliefs About the Role of Post -discharge Follow -up Care in Suicide Prevention. 
Military medicine. 2018.  
4. Ribeir o, J. D., Huang, X., Fox, K. R., & Frankl in, J. C . (2018). Depression and hopelessness 
as risk for suicide ideation, attempts, and death: a meta- analysis of longitudinal studies. Br J 
Psychiatry , 212, 279 -286. doi:  10.1192/bjp.2018.27.  
5. Van Orden KA, Cukrow icz KC, Witte TK, Joiner TE. Thwarted bel ongingne ss and 
perceived burdensomeness: construct validity and psychometric properties of the Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire. Psychol assessment  2012;24(1):197- 215. 
6. Gutierrez PM, Pease J, Matarazzo BB, et al. Ev aluating the psychometric properties of 
the Inter personal Needs Questionnaire and the Acquired Capability for Suicide Scale in 
military veterans. Psychol assessment  2016;28(12):1684 -1694.  
7. Magnez i R, Glasser S, Shalev H, Sheiber A, Reuveni H. Patient activa tion, depression 
and quality  of life. Pat ient Educ Couns.  2014;94(3):432 – 7. 
8. Greenberg GA, Rosenheck RA. Continuity of care and clinical outcomes in a national health system. Psychiatr Serv. 20 05;56:427 – 33. 
9. National Institute of Mental Health. Suicide M ay 2018.  
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/suicide.shtml  
10. VHA. VA National Suicide Da ta Report, 2005 – 2015. O ffice of Mental Health and Suicide 
Prevention.  https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/data - 
sheets/OMHSP_National_Suicide_Data_Report_2005 -2015_06 -14-18_508- compliant.pdf . 
11. VHA. Suicide among Veterans and Other  Americans, 2001 – 2014. Office of Suicide 
Prevention.  https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/2016suicidedatareport.pdf . 
12. Rossen LM, Hedegaard H, Khan D, Warner M. County -Level Trends in Suicide Rates i n 
the U.S., 2005- 2015. American journal of preventive medicine . 2018;55(1):72- 79. 
13. McCarthy JF, Blow FC,  Ignacio RV, Ilgen MA, Austin KL, Valenstein M. Suicide Among 
Patients in the Veterans Affairs Health System: Rural –Urban Differences in Rates, Risks, 
and Methods. American Journal of Public Health. 2012;102(S1):S11 1-S117.  
14. Brenner LA, Barnes SM. Facilitating treatment engagement during high- risk transition 
periods: a potential suicide prevention strategy. Am J Public Health. 2012;102 Suppl  
1:S12- 14. 
15. Chung DT, Ryan CJ, Hadzi- Pavlovic D, Singh SP, Stanton C, Large MM. Suicide Rates 
After Discharge From Psychiatric Fa cilities: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. 
JAMA psychiatry. 2017;74(7):694- 702. 
16. Valenstein M, Kim HM, Ganoczy D, et al. Higher -risk periods  for suicide among VA 
patients receiving depression trea tment:  prioritizing suicide prevention efforts.  Journal  of 
affective disorders.  2009;112(1 -3):50- 58. 
17. Britton PC, Bohnert KM, Ilgen MA, Kane C, Stephens B, Pigeon WR. Suicide m ortality 
among male veter ans discharged from Veterans Health Administration acute psych iatric 
units from 2005 to 2010. Social ps ychiatry  and psychiatric epidemiology.  
2017;52(9):1081 -1087.  
18. Betz ME, Boudreaux ED. Managing suicidal patients in the emergency department. Ann 
Emerg Med . 2016;67:276- 282. 
19. Riblet N, Shiner B, Mills P, Rusch B,  Hemph ill R, Watts BV. Systematic and 
organizational  issues implicated in post -hospitalization suicides of medically hospitalized 
patients: A study of root - cause analysis reports. General hospital ps ychiatry.  2017;46:68 -
73. 
18 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 20. Riblet N, Richardson JS, Shiner  B, Pe ltzman TR, Watts BV, McCarthy JF. Death by 
Suicid e in the First Year After Irregular Discharge From Inpatient Hospitalization. 
Psychiatric services (Washington, DC).  2018;69(9):1032 -1035.  
21. Erlangsen A, Vach W, Jeune B. The effect of hospitalization with medical illnesses on the 
suicide risk in the oldest old: a population- based register study. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society.  2005;53(5):771- 776. 
22. Drake SA, Garza B, Cron SG, Wolf DA. Suic ide Within 72 Hours After Discharge From 
Health Care Set tings:  Decedent Characteristics. The American journal o f forensic 
medicine and pathology. 2016;37(1):32 -34. 
23. Horowitz LM, Boudreaux ED, Schoenbaum M, Pao M, Bridge JA. Universa l suicide risk 
screening in the hospital setting: still a pandora's box? The Joint Comm ission Journal on 
Quality and Patient Saf ety. 2018;44:1- 3. 
24. Aboumrad M, Shiner B, Riblet N, Mills PD, Watts BV. Factors contributing to cancer -
related suicide: A study of  root-cause analysis reports. Psycho- oncology.  
2018;27(9):2237 -2244.  
25. Glasgow JM, Vaughn- Sarrazin M, Kaboli PJ. Leaving against medical advice (AMA): risk 
of 30 -day mortality and hospital readmission. Journal of general internal medicine.  
2010;25(9):926 -929. 
26. Yuodelis -Flores C, Ries  RK. Addiction and suicide: A review. The American journal on  
addictions. 2015;24(2):98 -104. 
27. Teeters  JB, Lancast er CL, Brown  DG, Back  SE. Substance  use disorders  in military  
veterans: prevalence and treatment challenges. Substance abuse and rehabilitation.  
2017;8:69 -77. 
28. Bohnert KM, Ilgen MA, Louzon S, McCarthy JF, Katz IR. Substance use disorders and the 
risk of sui cide mortality among men and women in the US Veterans Health Administration. 
Addiction (Abingdon, England). 2017;112(7):1193- 1201.  
29. Schaefer JA, Ingudomnukul E, Harris AH, Cronkite RC. Continuity of car e prac tices and 
substance use disorder patients' engagement in continuing care. Medical care. 
2005;43(12):1234 -1241.  
30. Schaefer JA, Harris AH, Cronkite RC, Turrubiartes P. Treat ment staff's continuity o f care 
practices, patients' engagement in continuing care, and  abstinence following outpatient 
substanc e-use disorder treatment. Journal of studies on alcohol and drugs. 2008;69(5):747-
756. 
31. Riblet NB, Kenneally L, Shiner B, Watts BV. Healthcare processes contributing to suicide risk 
in veterans during and after  resid ential substance abuse treatment. Journal  of Dual  Diagnosis 
2019 (in press)  
32. Riblet NBV, Shiner B, Young- Xu Y, Watts BV. Strategies to prevent death by suicide: meta- 
analysis of randomised contr olled trials. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of 
mental science.  2017;210(6):396- 402. 
33. M ilner AJ , Carter G, Pirkis J, Robinson J, Spittal MJ. Letters, green cards, telephone calls 
and postcards: systematic and meta -analytic review of brief c ontact interventions for reducing 
self- harm, suicide at tempts  and suicide. The British journal of psyc hiatry :  the journal of 
mental science.  2015;206(3):184- 190. 
34. Fleischmann A, Bertolote JM, Wasserman D, et al. Effectiveness of brief intervention and 
contact for suicide attempters: a randomized controlled tri al in five countries. Bulletin of the 
World Health Orga nization.  2008;86(9):703 -709. 
35. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH,  Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, Hergueta T, Baker R, 
Dunbar GC. (1998). The Mi ni-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the 
development and validation of a structured diagnost ic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and 
ICD-10. J Clin Psychiatry. 59(Suppl 20):22–33.  
36. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et  al. The Columbia- Suicide  Severity Rating Scale: initial 
validity and internal consiste ncy findings from three multisite studies  with ad olescents and 
adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266 – 77. 
37. Beck AT, Steer RA. Manual for the Beck scale for suicide ideation. San Antonio, TX : 
19 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 Psychological Corporation. 1991. 
38. De Beurs DP, Fokkema M, de Groot MH, de Keijser J, Kerkhof AJFM. Longitudinal 
measurement invariance of the beck scale for suicide ideation. Psychiatry Research 2015; 
225: 368 – 373. 
39. Brown  GK. A review  of suicide  assessme nt measures  for intervention research with adults  and 
older adults.  http://sbisrvntwebuqacca/archivage/15290520.pdf  
40. Barello S, Graffigna G, Vegni E, Bosio C. The challenges of conceptualizing patient engagement in health care: a lexicographic liter ature review. The Journal of 
ParticipatoryMedicine.2014.  
https://par t
icipa torymedicineorg/journal/evidence/reviews/2014/06/11/the- challenges -of- 
conceptualizing- patient -engagement -in-health -care-a-lexicographic -literature -review/  
41. Greene J, Hibbard JH, Sacks R, Overton V. When seeing the same physician, highly activated patients  have better care experiences than less a ctivated  patients. Health affairs (Project 
Hope). 2013;32(7):1299 –305. 
42. Magnezi R, Glasser S, Shalev H, Sheiber A, Reuveni H. Patient activation, depression and quality  of life. Patient Educ Couns.  2014;94(3):432 – 7. 
43. Pfeiffer PN, Ganoczy D, Zivin K, McCar thy JF, Valenstein M, Blow FC. Outpatient follow -up 
after psychiatric hospitalization for depression and later readmission and treatment adequacy.  
Psychi atr Serv.  2012;63(12):1239 – 42. 
44. Bernet AC. Postdischarge behavioral health treatment and 6 -month reatt empt rat e for 
Veterans hospitalized for suicide attempt. J Am Psychiatr Nurses Assoc. 2015; 21:212 – 222. 
45. Hibbard J, Gilburt H. Supporting people to manage their health: an introduction topatientactivation.TheKing'sFund.  
https://www.king s
 fund.org.uk/sites/files/field/field_publication_file/supporting- people- manage -
health- patient -activation- may14.pdf  
46. Hibbard JH,  Mahoney  ER, Stockard J, Tusler M. Development and testing of a short form of 
the patient activation measure. Health Serv Res. 2005;40(6 Pt  1):1918 – 30. 
47. Greene J, Hibbard JH, Sacks R, Overton V, Parrotta CD. When patient activation levels 
change, health outcomes and costs change, too. Health affairs (Project Hope). 2015;34(3):431 
– 7. 
48. Smith D, Harvey P, Lawn S, Harris M, Battersby  M. Measuring chronic condition self -
management in Australian community: factor s tructu re of the revised Partners in Health (PIH ) 
scale.  Qual Life Res. 2017;26:149 – 59. 
49. Penarrieta -de CI, Barrios FF, Gutierrez -Gomes T, Pinonez -Martinez Mdel S, Quintero -Valle 
LM, Castaneda -Hidalgo H. Self -management in chronic conditions: partners in health s cale 
instrument validation. Nurs Manag (H arrow). 2014;20:32 – 7. 
50. Petkov J, Harvey P, Battersby M. The internal consistency and construct validity of the 
partners in health scale: validation of a  patient rated chronic condition self -management 
measure . Qual  Life Res. 2010;19:1079 – 85. 
51. Hoertel N, Limosin F, Leleu H. Poor longitudinal continuity of care is associated with an 
increased mortality rate among patients with ment al disorders: results fro m the French 
National Health Insurance Reimbursement Database.  Eur Psychiatry.  2014;29(6):358 – 64. 
52. Puntis S, Rugkasa J, Forrest A, Mitchell A, Burns T. Associations between continuity of care 
and patient outcomes in mental health care: a systematic review . Psychiatr Serv.  
2015;66(4):354 – 63. 
53. Beck AT, Steer RA. Manu al for the Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological 
Corporation. 1988.  
54. Brenner LA, Forster JE, Hoffberg AS, et al. Window to Hope: A Randomized Controlled Trial of 
a Psychological  Intervention for the Treatment of Hopelessness Among Veterans  With 
Moderate to Severe Traumatic  Brain  Injury.  J Head  Trauma Rehabil.  2017.  doi: 
10.1097/HTR.0000000000000351 
55. Adams RE, Urosevich TG, Hoffman SN, et al. Social support, help -seeking, and mental health 
outcomes among Veterans in non- VA facilities: r esults  from the veterans' health study. Mil 
Behav Health. 2017;5(4):393 – 405. 
20 
Protocol version date: 11 /6/2019  
 56. Matts JP, Lachin JM. Properties of permuted -block randomization in clinical trials. Control Clin  
Trials. 1988;9(4):327 – 44. 
57. Festinger DS, Marlowe DB, Dugosh KL, Croff JR, Arabi a PL. Higher magnitude cash payments 
improve re search f ollow- up rates without increasing drug use or perceived coercion. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2008; 96: 128 – 135. 
58. Gelinas L, Largent EA, Largent JD, Cohen G, Kornetsky S, Bierer BE, Fernandez L. A 
framework for et hical payment to research participants. NEJM 2018; 378:766 – 771. 
 
 
 