PARTNERS HUMAN RESEA RCH COMMITTEE  
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Partners Human Subjects Research Applicati on Form  Filename: Protocol  Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005  1 Answer all questions accurately and completely in order to provide the PHRC with the relevant 
information to assess the risk -benefit ratio for the study.  Do not leave sections blank.  
PRINCIPAL/OVERALL INVESTIGATOR  
Karen Sepucha Ph.D .  
PROTOCOL TITLE  
Improving Patient Involvement in Decision -Making in Primary Care  
FUNDING  
Massachusetts General Physicians Organization , The Donaghue Foundation  
VERSION DATE  
November 30, 202 1 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
Concisely state the objectives of the stu dy an d the hypoth esis being tested.  
1.Demonstrate the ability to introduce and disseminate shared decision -making (SDM)
programs  to patients within the Partners Healthcare System .  We will measure the
volume and type of programs  that are “prescribed” to pa tients.
2.Assess  “prescribing” utilization, trends and patterns by  clinician and across practices,
and identify and understand the barriers and problems faced by clinicians in making the
SDM programs  an integrated part of the clinical practice of primary and s pecialty care.
Identification and understanding of the barriers will be gained through clinician
interviews.
3.Gain feedback from the patients about: their experiences , perceptions and satisfaction
with receiving SDM programs ; the effect the program  has on their decis ion preference;
what they think about the available options; and how they feel about making a decision.
This feedback will be obtained through  written  and online  surveys , and telephone
interviews.
4.Surgery shared decision making survey: Integ rate new mea sures to assess the quality
of elective surgical decisions across the Partners Healthcare network for patients with
knee and hip osteoarthritis, herniated disc and spinal stenosis and test the hypothesis
that routinely measuring shared dec ision making for these elective surgical  decisions ,
and reporting that data back to clinicians and administrators, has the potential to make
a positive impact on the value of care provided to patients.
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Provide a brief parag raph summarizing prior experience important for understanding the 
proposed study and procedures. 
Multiple studies assessing the value of decision aids, such as the shared decision -making 
programs  produced by the  Informed Medical Decisions Foundation , have found that thes e 
tools reduce uncertainty and decisional conflict, and increase knowledge and patient’s desire 
to participate in decision -making, without increasing anxiety.  Decision aids have been 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     2  shown to increase patient involvement in treatment deci sions, and are pa rticularly helpful 
when the clinical evidence supports more than one treatment or testing option. Decision 
aids improve the ability of patients to take into account their own values when making such 
decisions, increase patient satisfaction  and improve heal th outcomes. High quality decision 
aids present the evidence about treatment and testing options in a fashion that most 
patients understand.  However, despite the multiple studies investigating the quality and 
value of decision aids and sha red decision -making, their integration into the practice setting 
has been slow. Questions remain as to how to successfully and efficiently incorporate 
decision aids into the office visit and how physicians can gain the knowledge, skills, and 
proper attitud e to promote t his process where appropriate. Additionally, further information 
is needed about the impact of these tools and processes on the care experience from the 
patient and provider perspectives and on the actual care that patients receive.  
 
RESEAR CH DE SIGN AND MET HODS  
Briefly describe study design and anticipated enrollment, i.e., number of subjects to be enrolled 
by researchers study -wide and by Partners researchers.  Provide a brief summary of the 
eligibility criteria (for example, age range, gen der, medical cond ition).  Include any local site 
restrictions, for example, “Enrollment at Partners will be limited to adults although the sponsor’s 
protocol is open to both children and adults.”
 
The dissemination of the programs  will occur as part of rou tine care and wil l vary depending 
on the provider group and program. They may be sent in advance of the visit, or prescribed 
after the visit. The programs may also be put online and accessed by patients with a 
password. One common way the programs are dist ributed is outlin ed as follows:  
1. Patient has visit with primary care clinician.  
2. Clinician determines patient is clinically eligible for one of the SDM programs and 
discusses it with the patient.  
3. Clinician “prescribes” program  through the electronic medical record, and gives  patient 
the one -page description of the program that automatically prints when the program is 
ordered.  The “prescription” function in the electronic medical record triggers an email 
message with the order information to be sent to the Bl um Pa tient and Fa mily Learning 
Center.   
4. The program  is sent (or given, in the case of the “pick -up” option) to the patient with a 
questionnaire  and pre -paid, addressed envelope . The goal of the questionnaire is to 
assess the patient’s intentions with rega rd to the topic a nd the patient’s opinion about 
shared decision -making prior to viewing the decision aid. After viewing the decision 
aid, patients will also be asked a series of general knowledge questions about the 
target topic and a few questions evaluat ing the content a nd comprehensiveness of the 
decision aid itself.   
5. Some patients will receive a follow -up “post -visit” survey in the mail and a pre -paid 
addressed envelope se veral months after receiving a decision aid. The purpose of this 
questionnaire is to learn the exte nt to which viewing decision aids impacts patients’ 
conversations with their providers and ultimately their treatment decisions.   
 
 
It is difficult to anticipate the total number of patients who will receive a SDM program  
because the “pre scription” of the  program is incorporated into routine clinical care, similar 
to clinicians giving a pamphlet or other written patient education materials to their patients.  
We anticipa te the target enrollment of patient s to be 80,000 . Patients who are el igible are:  
 Adult patients in  the Partners Healthcare System  primary or specialty care practices.  
 Patients,  for whom a SDM program  is clinically appropriate, based on the clinical 
judgment of the clinician.  This includes patients with the following healt h 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     3  problems/concer ns: general healthcare options,  low back pain (chronic, acute, spinal 
stenosis, and herniated disc), osteoarthritis of the knee or hip, coronary artery /heart  
disease, benign prostatic hyperplasia, abnormal uterine bleeding, uterine fibroid s, 
symptoms of me nopause, obesity, depression, ovarian cancer screening, prostate 
cancer screening, colorectal cancer screening, advance directives, heart failure, 
diabetes,  breast cancer treatment, prostate cancer treatment,  insomnia, carotid artery 
disease, and chronic p ain.   
 
Patient decision aids are all available in English and Spanish except for 4 programs that are 
only available in English : Prediabetes: Choices you can make to prevent diabetes, 
Pregnancy: Birth Options if your baby is getting too bi g, and Pregnancy:  Your birth options 
after cesarean , Prostate Cancer: Is radiation or surgery right for you . 
 
The staff maintain a  program  log as part of their standard operating procedures so they can 
keep track of the programs that are sent to patients .  Routine follow -up with patients who  
received a program  is important to ensure proper “close the loop” process . Follow -up may 
include  a phone call , post -card or email reminder to patients . Follow -up will occur within 2 
weeks of the initial survey. Reminder  survey packets w ill be mailed within 4 weeks if the 
patient has yet to return the survey. These patients will also receive reminder phone calls 
within 2 weeks of the reminder mailing.  It will be mentioned to the patient as a reminder 
that they can return the questionnaire , if they wish,  or complete the questionnaire by 
telephone during the phone call.  Patients willing to complete the  questionnaire  and who 
have not  yet viewed the decision aid will be asked only pre -viewing questions, and will be 
encouraged to view the decis ion aid and follow up for administration of the post -viewing 
questions.     
 
Questionnaires will include solely, a coded unique numeric identifier for each patient. 
Therefore, all completed questionnaires will be stripped of any personal i dentifiers and/or  
HIPAA related information. Only MGH approved study staff for this protocol will have access 
to the information crosswalk needed to link this unique identifier with confidential personal 
information. The completed , coded  questionnaires  will be returned, wh ere study staff will 
enter the de-indentified  data into a secured online data warehouse.  The online surveys will 
be entered directly into the data warehouse. The operating process es are as follows:  
 
 Study staff provides  questionnaires,  which are then assig ned a systematic unique 7-
digit study ID.   
 Study staff provide s a tracking  log for each title  that is “prescribed .”  
 Staff will record in a secured, restricted -access tracking  log the primary care practice 
name (of the prescribing clinici an); patient’s na me, address, and phone number ; 
program topic; date sent ; and date returned.   
 Once questionnaires have been returned, a stud y staff will enter the coded  de-
identified  data into a secured online data warehouse separate from the information 
crosswalk with no  ability to link the data back to patient’s personal and HIPAA related 
information .  
 
The provider s’ perspective s will also be collected, periodically, through questionnaire s or 
individual interviews .  An email invitation  will be sent  to all eligible Partn ers Healthcare 
System  primary care physicians, specialists, nurses and other clinic staff involved in a 
patient’s care to complete  either  the questionnaire  or participate in an interview. The 
providers and staff will be able to choose to c omple te the quest ionnaire online or by paper. 
A reminder email will be sent to those who haven’t completed the questionnaire within a 2-
week timeframe.  Study staff will work individually with those interested in the interviews, at 
the time  of a specific pr oject.  
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     4   
Patients  who have indicated their consent to be contacted in the future for other studies will 
be contacted to see if they would be interested in participating in a pilot study examining 
the effectiveness of mental health decisions aids: sleeping better, depressio n, and anxiety. 
Patients will be contacted first by telephone and asked if they would be interested in 
participating in a survey study. If they agree to participate they will be asked to review 
some additional patient educational materials  either online or  on paper. After the patient 
reviews the materials, they will be asked to complete and answer the questions via phone 
with study staff at a scheduled time. Consent will be implied by the completion of the 
questionnaire. If a patient would like to complete the questionnaire via paper, an 
information sheet, questionnaire, and return -envelope will be sent to the patient. The 
project goal is to have approximately 30 eligible patients complete the survey.  
 
Patients who have indicated their conse nt to be contacte d in the future for other studies will 
be contacted to see if they would be interested in participating in a structured interview 
either in -person or via telephone to  learn more about decision making for older adults about 
whether to conti nue colorectal ca ncer screening. We may also have primary care physicians  
(PCP)  identify patients who they believe would good candidates to  participate in the 
interviews. The PCP  will provide the patient  with the information sheet and if the patient  is 
interested, the PCP will provide the research staff contact information for the subject to call 
to indicate their interest  in participating . Subjects  will be contacted first by telephone and 
asked their interest  to participate i n an interview. If they agree t o participate the y will be 
asked whether they prefer to conduct the interv iew in -person or via telephone and study 
staff will schedule a mutually convenient time. Consent will be implied by the completion of 
the interview. A cover letter and an information  sheet will be se nt by mail  or email (if 
subjects provide verbal consent to use personal email) for those interested in an interview.  
The project goal is to have approximately 20 eligible subjects  complete the interview .  
 
We will conduct 60 interviews wit h up to 20 patien ts and physicians to evaluate how they 
interact with the patient decision aid accessed through Patient Gateway. The interviews will 
be conducted in-person or remotely using a videoconference approved by MGH Brigham 
(such as Hea lthcare Secu re Zoom or Enterp rise Zoom) . Each interview using the 
videoconference  will require a waiting room and secure password for that sp ecific meeting.  
During the interview, the moderator and research subject (physician or patient) will review 
all the steps in th e process. We wil l audiotape the interviews and a research coordinator will 
be present during the interview to take notes on the interaction. The interviews will take 
place at a location on the MGH campus convenient to the participant  or via th e approved 
videoconference pl atform . The interviews will follow structured gui des. 
 
Patien ts will be recruited from the database of patients who have received decision aids.  For 
patients who have given consent to be re -contacted, study staff will telephone the patient  
and invite them to participate in the interview . For patients who  were not as ked about being 
recontacted for future studies, w e will send the patient  an invitation  letter letting them know 
about the study opportunity and how to opt -out if they do not want  to be contacted.  We will 
also include the study information sheet  with the ma iling. If the person does not opt -out, 
study staff will call the patient  and ask if she/he is interested in participating. If they agree 
to participate, study staff will schedule  a remote intervi ew using a secure  videoconference  
at a mutually convenient time.  The patient will be asked to consent to participating in a 
secure videoconference  and will be asked permission for the researcher to audiotape th e 
call. Consent wil l be implied by completion of the interview. A letter indicating the date and 
time of the interview will be sent by mail or email (if the subjects provide verbal consent to 
use personal email). We will include English -speaking men and women  aged 40 -80 year s. 
Patient s will be asked i f they are enrolled in P atient Gateway.  If not, they will not be eligible.  
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     5   
Physicians will be recruited from the database of patients who were prescribed a patient 
decision aid at MGH in the past. We will recruit physicians acro ss a range  of practices and  
specialties.  
 
Patients who received a  specialty  referral  where their physician provisionally ordered a 
decision aid  will also be contacted for feedback . Their feedback on the referral process will 
be collected through individual  interview s or surveys. A c over letter and information sheet 
describing the study will be mailed to the patients so that they may choose to participate or 
not. A reminder phone  call will be placed for those who haven’t completed the questionnaire 
within a 2-week tim eframe. The patients’ demographic information will be collected through 
an RPDR data collection . 
 
The patients’ feedback will also be collected, periodically, through individual or group 
interviews.  An email or mailed invitation to participate i n intervie ws will be sent t o a sample 
of patients who indicated their consent to be re -contacted. The patients will be able to 
choose to participate in an individual or group interview. Participants will receive $ 20 for 
participation in the  45-minute  individual interview, $40 for th e 90-minute individual 
interview,  and $ 60 for participation in the group interview.  
 
A medical chart abstraction will be conducted looking at patients who have both received a 
decision aid and who have not . For patients  who have  not received a decision ai d, the 
patien ts’ medical records  will be pulled based on the relevant ICD-9, ICD-10, or procedure 
(CPT) codes associated with  a visit within the study timeframe.  
 
In collaboration with Partners Center for Population Health, patients acros s PHS who have a 
surgical procedure for one of the 4 identified clinical diagnoses: hip osteoarthritis, knee 
osteoarthritis, lumbar herniated disc and lumbar spinal stenos is, will be surveyed about 
shared decision making . The shared decision maki ng surveys  will be integrat ed into the 
routine patient reported outcomes measurement (PROMS) assessments that are in current 
clinical practice at these sites for these clinical situations. The PROMs platform does not 
capture  or include the shared decision making sur vey for all surge ons and all patients  and; 
as a result, study staff will track all potentially eligible patients and will mail the survey to a 
randomly selected sample of patients who are eligible , but who did not complete the 
questions as part o f the PROM s platform.  Patients who complete the mailed survey will be 
asked if they are interested in participating in a short phone interview  to discuss their 
survey responses. The patient can indicate their interest in the interview on the survey . For 
patients who  completed the sh ared decision making items via the PROMS system, a n 
invitation letter will be sent to the patient who completed the PROMs questionnaire to invite 
them to participate in a phone interview .  
 
A report  of surgical pa tients will be c reated by the eCare team to  support identification of 
eligible patients. The  report will identify adults across the four hospitals who are scheduled 
for, or who have recently had , one of the surgical procedures for the targeted diagnoses. , 
We will supp lement the eCa re report with a query from the Research Patient Data Registry 
(RPDR ) to identify and confirm eligible patients using their MRNs (from eCar e report) or 
using relevant ICD -10 and CPT codes to identify patients and get required data. The RPDR 
query  will pull information from  the medical record about surgeon visits, diagnoses and 
treatments related to the index diagnosis (hip or knee osteoarthritis, spinal stenosis or 
herniated disc), imaging reports (X -Ray and MRI), pathology reports (post -surgical bone 
patho logy), clinical a nd patient features (e.g. BMI, disease severity), patient demographics 
and contact information (to support mailing survey as needed). Specific diagnoses that may 
indicate that the procedure is not elective , or it’s for a differen t diagnosi s, will also be 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     6  included in the eCare report and RPDR queries to  help identify patients who should be 
excluded (e.g. to identify patients who had a hip replacement to treat a hip fracture as 
opposed to hip osteoarthritis) as outlined in Table 1. The list of patients genera ted by the 
eCare report will be compared to the list from the RPDR query in order to identify any 
potentially eligible patients missing from either list. For patients who are not captured by 
the RPDR query or for whom RPDR is mis sing data (e.g., patient -reported outcomes data), a 
limited review of that patient’s electronic medical record will be conducted, only covering 
the information listed above.  These data will help s tudy s taff identify a cohort of surgical 
patients who are po tentially eligible for the shared decision making survey. Table 1 has the 
specific eligibility criteria.     
 
To ensure that the RPDR and eCare reports are providing a complete, accurate list of eligible 
patients, a limited review of the surgical schedules  for the participating surg eons will also be 
conducted. We estimate that staff will need to review about 2 months for hip and knee 
surgeons and up to 6 months for spine surgeons to ensure a minimum number of about 300 
procedures for each of the four condit ions.  Whe n the review of s urgical schedules identifies 
a patient that is not included in the RPDR query or eCare report, a review of the visit and 
imaging notes from their surgical consults and surgical report in their EHR chart will be 
conducted to deter mine eligibility and reason s why the patient was not identified by the 
eCare or RPDR reports. This limited review will be used to establish validity of the approach 
(i.e., eCare report and RPDR query) that we are using to identify elective surgical patient s 
for thes e four clinical a reas. 
 
Based on estimates from RPDR and from analysts at Center for Population Health, we 
anticipate that 5,880  patients have one of the procedures for the targeted diagnoses e ach 
year and will be included in the e Care reports  and RPDR que ries. About 40% will have 
completed a PROMs assessment pre -operatively and 38% will have completed a PROMs 
assessment post -operatively. Our target is to receive 1,200 completed shared decision 
making surveys across the hospitals and  four conditio ns over th e three -year proj ect. 
Ideally, we will have about 300 surveys per diagnosis and about 300 per hospital. If the 
shared decision making survey completions from the PROMs system are not balanced across 
sites or across diagnoses, we will purposively select a s ample of eligible  patients to receive 
a mailed survey in order to meet the minimum targets.  
 
Cancer Screening Study 2020 :  
A subset of patients who received decision aids on: breast cancer screening, colorectal 
cancer screening, prostate cancer screening,  or lung cancer s creening will be eligible for this 
study. The goal of the study is to understand the decision making process between patients 
and providers related to cancer screening tests. The research study will be a one -time 
survey asking pa tients to reflect on conver sations with their providers regarding the 
decision to screen for breast cancer, colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, or lung cancer in 
the last 2 years. Our target is to receive 400 completed surveys across all 4 clinical 
context s. Eligible patients (see T able 2) will be identified and study staff will use RPDR 
queries to capture contact information for the study invitation packet  and information on 
relevant cancer screening tests that the patient had  completed . A chart review wil l be 
condu cted to collect i nformation related to cancer screening tests and visit notes related to 
cancer screening tests . This project is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality (AHRQ).   
 
Path to Lifestyle Change : Patient s who are eligibl e for the research study wi ll be part icipants in 
the Path to Lifestyle Change  program offered through the MGH Diabetes Center. As part of the 
Path to Lifestyle Change  program, the Healthwise® Decision Aid entitled “Pre -Diabetes:  Which 
Treatment Should I U se to Prev ent Type 2 Diabet es?” will be sent  to participants at enrollment 
in the clinical program. The goal of this research study is to survey patients using a secure 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     7  REDC ap link at 5 time points over 2 years ( one-week  post -baseline visit , 6 months, 12 m onth s, 
18 months  and 24 months) to colle ct patient -reported outcomes related to treatment 
decisions. The Path to Lifestyle Change  program is planning to recruit up to 200 participants. 
Once a patient has been enrolled in the Path to Lifestyle Change  clinical progr am, he/s he will  be 
asked permiss ion to use their email to send them a fact sheet and recruitment  letter  about a 
research  project . The clinician from the MGH Diabetes Center who enrolls the patient in the 
Path to Lifestyle Change  program will obtain permiss ion to send the information by e mail. For 
patients who do not provide their email, they will not be sent information about the study.  
 
 
Table 1: Eligibility Criteria  
             Eligible           Ineligible  
 • Adults 21 and older  
• Able to read and speak English  
• Schedule d for an electiv e primary total 
hip or knee replacement, spinal fusion, 
laminectomy, or discectomy or had 
procedure in past 4 weeks.  
• Primary or secondary diagnosis of hip or 
knee osteoarthritis, lumbar spinal 
stenosis or herniated disc for  the 
procedure   • Patients with se vere cognitive impairment 
who cannot consent for themselves  
• Hip and knee patients who had a hip or 
knee fracture within the last 12 months  
• Hip and knee patients with or aseptic 
necrosis in the past 12 months  Spine 
patients w ith severe weakn ess in leg/ 
foot, or bladder or bowel changes  
• Spine patients who had a spine fracture 
within the last 12 months  
• Any patients who had a possible or 
confirmed tumor at the surgery site within 
the last 12 months  
• Unable to confirm primarily lan guage is 
English   
 
 
Surgeons  who see patients  with these conditions across the participating sites will be 
eligible for a survey . Study staff will give the pa per survey to surgeons in person or send via 
email . The survey will ask for participant’s name as  it may be provi ded in a meeting . Once 
we get the survey we will mark each with a code and use the study ID code as the 
identifier. As needed, study staff will make up  to three reminders via email. The brief survey 
will contain questions about the surgeon’ s attitudes towa rd shared decisi on making, use of 
decision aids, and confidence in shared decision making skills. The survey participation is 
voluntary and surgeon implies consent by completing the survey and providing it back to 
study staff.  
 
Table 2: El igibility Criter ia for Cancer Sc reening Study 2020  
Clinical 
Context  Eligibility Criteria  Ineligibility Criteria  
Colon Cancer 
Screening  • Between the ages of 45 -75 
• Received a decision aid for 
colon cancer screening  
 • Previous diagnosis of colon cancer  
• Patients with severe  cognitive 
impai rment who cannot consent for 
themselves  
• Unable to con firm primary  language 
is English  
 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     8  Breast Cancer 
Screening  • Female  
• Between the ages of 35 -55 
• Received  decision aid for 
breast cancer screening  
 
 • Previous diagnosis of br east cancer 
• Patients with severe  cognitive 
impairment who cannot consent for 
themselves  
• Unable to confirm primar y language 
is English  
 
 
Prostate Cancer 
Screening  • Male 
• Between the ages of 45 -74 
• Received decision aid for 
prostate cancer screening  • Previous diagnosis of pro state cancer  
• Patients with severe cognitive 
impairment who cannot consent for 
themselves  
• Unable to confirm primar y language 
is English  
 
Lung Cancer 
Screening  • Between the ages of 50-80  
• Received decision aid for 
lung cancer screening  • Previous diagnosis o f lung cancer  
• Patients with severe cognitive 
impairment who cannot consent for 
themselves  
• Unable to confirm primar y language 
is English  
 
 
 
Briefly describe study procedures.  Include any local site restrictions, for example, “Subjects 
enrolled at Partne rs will not part icipate in the pharmacokinetic portion of the study.”  Describe 
study endpoints.
 
See above section for study procedures.   
 
Study endpoints include:  1) demonstration of the ability to introduce and disseminate SDM 
programs  to patients, 2) a ssessment  and un derstanding  of “prescribing” utilization, trends 
and patterns by clinician and across practices, 3) feedback from patients about receiving 
SDM programs , and their decision preferences and comfort with making a  decision and  4) 
Assess the qua lity of shared d ecision making for  elective  surgical decisions . 
 
 
For studies involving treatment or diagnosis, provide information about standard of care at 
Partners (e.g., BWH, MGH) and indicate how the study procedures differ from stand ard care.  
Provi de information o n available alternative treatments, procedures, or methods of diagnosis.
 
No diagnosis or treatments will be offered or administered as part of this study. There is no 
medical intervention as part of this study. The standard  of care is that  clinicians  discuss 
appropriate treatment options, including their benefits and risks with each patient.  The standard 
of care at these sites is also to engage patients in shared decision making and to assess patient -
reported outcomes period ically to measur e the quality of  care.  
 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     9   
Describe how risks to subjects are minimized, for example, by using procedures which are 
consistent with sound research design and which do not unnecessarily expose subjects to risk or 
by using procedures already b eing performed o n the subject fo r diagnostic or treatment purposes.
 
There are no known risks to participating individuals associated with or attributable to this 
project. Clinicians will provide their patients with evidence -based decision aids in much the  
same way they c urrently provide  other educational materials to their patients. Additionally, 
completed questionnaires do not capture personal identifiers nor  HIPAA related information . 
Only MGH approved study staff will have access to the information cros swalk.    
 
For the mailed surger y shared decision making surveys, participants will be informed that 
they may refuse to answer any question. It will also be emphasized that whether 
participants complete the survey or not, will not impact the medical care t hat they receive .  
 
If the patie nt completes the surgery shared decision making questions as part of the PROMs 
platform, the responses will be made available in their medical record  per standard practice . 
If the patient completes the PROMs by paper, the re sponses will not  be put in the m edical 
record.  Patients who complete the P ROMs questions will also  be sent an invitation letter to 
participate in a 30 -45 minute phone interview discussing their experience with elective 
surgery.   
 
Cancer Screening Project 2 020:  
For the ca ncer screening d ecision making surveys, participants will be informed that they 
may refuse to answer any question. It will also be emphasized that whether participants 
complete the survey or not, it will not impact the medical care that the y receive. 
Participants who wish  to complete the survey electronically will be provided with a link to 
the secure Mass General Brigham  REDCap survey platform.  Participants may also request 
the REDCAP survey link be sen t to them via email.  If email is prefe rred, st aff will discuss 
privacy  and obtain permission to send the survey via email without send secure (and confirm 
address). Study staff will read the following statement to patients, "The Mass General Brigham  
standard is to send email securely. This req uires yo u to initially set up an d activate an account 
with a password. You can then use the password to access secure emails sent to you from 
Mass General Brigham .  If you pre fer, we can send you “unencrypted” email that is not secure 
and could result in t he unaut horize d use or disclosur e of your information. If you want to receive 
communications by unencrypted email despite these risks , Mass General Brigham  will not be 
held res ponsible. Your preference to receive unencrypted email will apply to emails sent  from 
this rese arch study only. If you wish to communicate with other research staff at Mass General 
Brigham  regarding additional studies, your preference will have to be documented with e ach 
research group.” After reading the required warning language, st udy staf f will a sk for the 
patie nt’s verbal agreement.     
 
 
There are minimal risks to participating in interviews. Participants may refuse to answer any 
questions and ma y discontinue their participation at any time. Participants’ names will not 
be identif ied in a ny repor ts or manuscript . 
 
Path to L ifestyle Change . Patients will be informed that they may refuse to answer any 
question. It will also be emphasized that whethe r patients complete the survey or not, will 
not impact the medical care that they rece ive. Sur veys wil l be sent electr onically usi ng the 
Partners REDCap platform.  
 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     10  Describe explicitly the methods for ensuring the safety of subjects.  Provide objective cr iteria for 
removing a subject from the study, for example, objective criteria for wors ening di sease/la ck of 
improvemen t and/or una cceptable adverse events.  The inclusion of objective drop criteria is 
especially important in studies designed with placebo c ontrol groups.
  
As stated above, there are no known risks to participating individual s in thi s projec t.  The 
clinicia ns discuss w ith their patients, who are clinically eligible for one of the SDM programs, 
whether or not such a decision aid is something t hey are interested in receiving and 
watching.  This is done in the same manner in whic h other patient educational info rmation 
in more traditional medium (i.e., handouts, brochures, pamphlets) is given to patients.  
During the course of the discussion, if t he patient expresses that he/she is not interested in 
program , it will not be sent to the pati ent.  It  is the patient’ s decision w hether or not to  view 
the programs .   
 
The questionnaires that are included with the program or that are mailed to patients 
separately are optional. Patients can voluntarily complete them and send them back, but 
are not required  to do so.  An information sh eet will accompany the questionnaire that 
explains the study in detail, including how we protect patient  privacy, and explains  that 
returning the completed surveys indicates their consent to participate in the pr oject. W e 
inform  patients that w e may share their survey data with their clinicians, as some providers 
have requested the feedback to make sure that their patients unders tand the key 
information in the program and to guide future conversations about the de cision. We also 
explain that we may look at their medical record to examine whether specific tests or 
treatments were done (for example, to examine w hether someone who vi ewed the knee 
osteoarthritis program had a knee replacement).  
 
All patients who receiv e a deci sion aid  or a study surv ey will also be able to indicate their 
consent to be contacted in the future for other studies or to discuss their decision making 
experie nces. Of those patients who’ve given consent to be contacted: study staff  may 
contact these patients v ia email or tele phone, depen ding on their preferred method, to 
solicit feedback on all aspects of programming.  The feedback may be obtained over the 
telephone , via email , or via focus groups.   Participation in any future contact is volunta ry; 
patients may  choose to not p articipate a t any time.  
 
The completion of the provider and patient questionnaire or interview is also voluntary, and 
they may choose to s kip any question they wish not to answer. No information will be 
shared that will perm it ident ificatio n of any individ ual.  
 
For patients involved in the medical chart abstraction, each patient’s information will be 
coded with a study ID to protect their p rivacy.      
 
FORESEEABLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
Provide a brief description of any for eseeable  risks a nd discomforts t o subjects.  Include those 
related to drugs/devices/procedures being studied and/or administered/performed solely for 
research purposes.  In addition, include psychosocial risks, and risks related to privacy and 
confidential ity.  Wh en appli cable, describe risks to a d eveloping fetus or nursing infant.
 
As stated above, there are minimal known risks to participating individuals associated wit h 
or attributable to this project. This is a project in which patients are provided wi th evide nce-
based decision aids in the form of DVD  programs  or online versions of these program,  which 
aim to help them make better, more informed decisions about the scr eening, management, 
and treatment options available to them .  
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     11   
For patients that are i nvited  to comple te the surgery shared decisi on making survey , it is 
estimated that it will take  <5 minutes to complete the 10 -12 items. The PROMs, that are 
part of standa rd of care, are measured at the same time and take about 10 -20 minutes, 
depending on t he clini cal area . For patients w ho are inter ested in the phone interview it 
should take about 20 minutes.  
 
All reasonable measures will be taken to protect the privacy o f the data gathered to ensure 
that the protection of personal information. An analytic  data se t will b e created that d oes 
not cont ain any personal identifiers. All data from the ECare reports , RPDR queries,  and 
patient surveys will be kept on Partners pass word protected computers  in a limited access 
shared drive folder . Only approved study staff wi ll have access to the fo lder.  
 
The paper surveys will only contain a study  ID. Participant information is linked to a study 
ID will be kept in a password -protect ed file on Partners shared folder and only study staff 
will have access to the folder.    
 
Cancer Scree ning Project 202 0: 
For patie nts who are invited to complete the cancer screening survey, it is estimated that it 
will take 10 -15 minutes to complete.  All  reasonable measures will be taken to protect the 
privacy of the data gathered to ensu re to ensure tha t the protection  of personal  information. 
An analytic data set will be created that does not contain any personal identifiers.  All data 
from RPDR queries and patient surveys will be kept on Partners password protected 
computers in a limited  access shared d rive folder. Onl y approved s tudy staff will have 
access to the folder. The paper surveys will only contain a study ID. Participant information 
is linked t o a study ID will be kept in a password -protected file on Partners shared folder 
and o nly stud y staff will have access  to the fold er.   
 
In interviews, participants will be told that completing the interview is voluntary and that 
they may refuse to answer any question, at any time and can stop at any time. The major 
risk to participants wil l be dis comfort with the inte rview questions . 
 
 
EXPECTED BENEFITS  
Describe both the expected benefits to individual subjects participating in the research and the 
import ance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to result from the study.  Provi de 
a brief, real istic summary of  potential b enefits to subjects, for example, “It is hoped that the 
treatment will result in a partial reduction in tumor size in at least  25% of the enrolled subjects.”  
Indicate how the results of the study will benefit fu ture pat ients wi th the disease/c ondition bei ng 
studied and/or society, e.g., through increased knowledge of human physiology or behavior, 
improved safety, or technologica l advances.  
 
Potential benefits to participants include:  
 Increased knowledge (i.e.  better und erstandi ng of treatment/ screening op tions and the 
risks and benefits of the different options)   
 Better decision quality; reduced uncertainty and decisional confl ict 
 Feeling more comfortable with decision  
 Increased patient involvement in treatment and scre ening de cisions 
 Improved  ability for  patients to take into account their own values and preferences when 
making healthcare decisions  
 Improved health outcomes  
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     12   Increased patient satisfaction  
 
There is no direct benefit to partic ipants who are include d in the  RPDR qu ery and eCare 
reports or who  complete the surgery  shared decision making survey.   
 
The knowledge we expect to gain from this project include: 1) a demons tration of the ability 
to introduce and disseminate SDM programs  to patients, 2) asses sment and unders tanding 
of “pres cribing”  utilization , trends and patterns by clinician and across practices, 3) insight 
from patients about receiving SDM  programs , and th eir decision preferences and  comfort 
with making a decision , 4) a more comprehensive a nalysis of the q uality of decisi ons for 
patients undergoing elective joint replacement and spine procedures and 5) identification of 
practices and surgeons who are able t o achieve shared decision making.     
 
Cancer Screening Project 2020 : 
There is no dire ct benef it to pa rticipants who c omplete the cancer screening shared decision 
making survey.   
 
 
EQUITABLE SELECTION OF SUBJECTS  
The risks and benefits of the research mus t be fairly distributed among the populations that stand 
to benefit from it.  No group  of pers ons, for  example, men, w omen, pregna nt women, children, 
and minorities, should be categorically excluded from the research without a good scientific or 
ethical re ason to do so.  Please provide the basis for concluding that the study population is 
represent ative of  the population that stands to potentially benefit from this research.
 
Participants in this project will be adult patients with a provider in the Partner s Healthcare 
System adult primary and specialty care practice s. Patient decision aids are all availabl e in 
English and  Spanish exc ept for 4 programs that are only available in English: Prediabetes: 
Choices you can make to prevent diabetes, Pregnancy : Birth  Options if your baby is getting 
too big, and Pregnancy: Your birth options after cesa rean, Pr ostate C ancer: Is radiat ion or 
surge ry right for you . 
 
Participants will also be limited to those for whom a SDM  program  is clinically appropriate.  
This includes  men and women with the following health problems and concerns: general 
healthcare opt ions, low back p ain (chronic, ac ute, spinal stenosis, and herniated disc), 
osteoarthritis of the knee or hip, coronary artery /heart  disease, benign prostatic 
hyperplasia,  abnormal uterine bleeding, uterine fibroids, symptoms of menopause, obesity, 
depressi on, ovar ian canc er screening, pr ostate cance r screening, colorectal cancer 
screening, advance directives, diabetes,  breast cancer treatment,  heart failure,  insomnia, 
carotid artery disease,  and chronic pain .   
 
Only p articipants  who have consented to be co ntacted  will be included to prov ide feedback  
over the  telephone, via email or  via focus groups . Study staff will only reach out to those 
participants who have provided this consent.  
 
Patients for whom a decision aid was provisionally ordered for a specialt y referr al will be 
contacted to provide feed back through questionnaires and individual interviews.  
 
Providers who made a  specialty referral  for a patient will be emailed  a survey  to complete 
online or by paper regarding that specific referral.  Also, a ll eligible Partners  Healthcare 
System primary c are physicians, specialists, nurses and other clinic staff involved in a 
patient’s care may be asked to complete either the qu estionnaire or participate in an 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     13  interview. Study staff will work individually with th ose inte rested i n the interviews , at the 
time of a specific project.   
 
Participants in the surgery shared decision making  project will be adult patients who had 
surgery a t a Partners Hospital for one of the four identified clinical conditions during the 
recruitmen t period  who have been c onfirmed tha t primarily language is  English.  Participants 
will also be limited to those who meet the eligibility criteria laid out in Tabl e 1. Children will 
be excluded as these conditions and procedures are not relevant for  childre n.  
 
Cancer Screening Pr oject 2020 :  
Participants in the cancer screening shared decision making project will be adults who 
received a decision aid at a Partners Hospital for one of the four identified clinical conditions 
in the last 2 years, and English i s their confirmed primar y language . Participants will also be 
limited to those who meet the eligibility criteria laid out in Table 2. Children will b e excluded 
as these conditions and procedures are not relevant for children.   
 
Patients in the inte rviews w ill be r ecruited from th e database o f those who received a 
decision aid in the past. Patients must also be on Patient Gateway . Physicians will be 
recruited from t he same database and they will be eligible if they prescribed a patient 
decision aid i n the pa st.  
 
When people who d o not speak English are excluded from participation in the research, provide 
the scientific rationale for doing so.  Individu als who do no t speak English should not be denied 
participation in research simply because it is in convenie nt to tr anslate the cons ent form in 
different languages and to have an interpreter present.
 
Participants in this project will be adult patients with  a provider i n the Partners Healthcare 
System adult primary and specialty care practices. Patient d ecision aids are  all available i n 
English an d Spanish except for 4 programs that are only available in English: Prediabetes: 
Choices you can make to prevent diabetes, Pre gnancy: Birth Options if your baby is getting 
too big, and Pregnancy: Your birth optio ns after  cesarea n, Prostate Canc er: Is radia tion or 
surgery right for you . 
 
There are plans for more of the programs to be created in other languages; howeve r they 
are no t available at this time. We plan to include all of the non -English versions as they 
become av ailable in the future.  
 
Currently, the PROMs surveys are not available in Spanish. When they become available in 
Spanish, we will modify our protoco l to include Spanish -speaking patients in our surgery 
shared decision making survey portion of this  study.  
 
For g uidance, refer t o the follow ing Partners policy:  
          Obtaining and Documenting Informed Consent of Subjects who do not Speak English
          http://healthcare.partner s.org/ph sirb/non engco.htm  
 
 
 
RECRUITMENT PROCEDURES  
Explain in detail the specific methodology that will be used to recruit subjects.  Specifically 
addres s how, when, where and by whom subjects will be identified and approached about 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     14  participation.  Inc lude any  specifi c recruitment me thods used t o enhance recruitment of women 
and minorities.
  
Patient participants in this project will be patients in the Par tners Healthc are System  adult 
primary and specialty  care practice s. There is no formal recruitment of patie nt parti cipants, 
as this  is driven p urely by appropriate clinical care. The distribution of SDM  programs  will 
vary by practice and program. One commo n method is t hat during an office visit, clinicians 
will discuss the  program  with the patient to de termine if he or  she is interest ed in watchi ng 
it, in much the same way clinicians  currently discuss any patient education material they 
provide their patien ts. Those pat ients who are interested will then receive the  program , 
either via the mail , email,  or by pick ing it u p from the Blum Patient and Family Learning 
Center, depending on the patient’s preference.    
 
Clinicians are interested in automating the di stribution of  decision aids. To accomplish this, 
we will work with clinicians and practices to iden tify pat ients at  a decision poin t. Data will  be 
collected regarding the general practice patterns for the conditions covered to understand 
the number of elig ible patients . The investigators will work with Steve Atlas who has an IRB 
approved protocol to exa mine pra ctice pa tterns for quali ty improveme nt. For example, we 
may examine the number of men seen in MGH primary care practices who have never had a 
PSA tes t, and then w ork with providers to ensure that those men receive the appropriate 
decision aid in ad vance of  their n ext visit. The d ata will ena ble automation of distribution as 
well as evaluation of distribution rates to determine the  proportion of eligibl e patients we  
are reaching with each program.  
 
Quantitative data will be collected for the number and type  of programs “prescribed ,” both 
overall and by physician and practice.  This data will be strictly quantitative and will not be 
associated with any i ndividual pat ient or identifying information. Nothing about the patients 
will be associated with th ese numb ers.  Fu rthermore, this data will be  independent of active 
patient participation in the evaluation and feedback (i.e., patient questionnaires) portio n of 
the proj ect.  
 
All patients who receive a SDM  program  will be eligible to participate in the q ualitati ve 
(evaluation and feedb ack) portion  of the pilot. A questionnaire will be included with all  SDM 
programs  that are sent or given to patients. The que stionnaire s may also be incorporated 
into standard patient intake procedures at clinics , such as th e touch screen computers or 
kiosks that pati ents use to complete standard assessments before seeing a provider in the 
orthopedic clinic.  Patients can choose to complete t he questionnaire and mail it back or 
complete the questionnaire over the telephone  or online , thus pro viding implied c onsent 
(i.e., voluntary completion of survey or questionnaire), or they can choose to not complete 
the questionnaire.  Patients who have n ot returned the questionnaire  within 2 weeks of the 
initial survey will receive a foll ow-up ph one call . Reminder surve y packets wi ll be mailed 
within 4 weeks if the patient has yet to return the survey. These patients will also receive 
reminde r phone calls  within 2 weeks of the  reminder  mailing. Patients  may complete the 
questionnaire by te lephone during t he follow -up phone call . Patients willing to complete the 
questionnaire and who have not yet viewed the decision aid will be asked only pre -viewing 
questi ons, and will be encouraged to view the decision aid and follow up for administration 
of the p ost-viewing questions.  
 
All patient s who receive a decision aid will also be able to indicate their consent to be 
contacted in the future. Of those patients who’ ve given consent to be contacted: study staff 
may contact these patients via email or telephon e, depen ding on their pr eferred meth od, to 
solicit feedback on all aspects of programming. The feedback may be obtained by staff 
through individual i nterviews or group interviews. The information  will help us make 
improvements to the patient educat ion mate rials. All emails that a re sent for recruitment 
will be sent in accordance with Partners’ institutional guidelines for information security. Any 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     15  information provi ded by patients will be kept confidential. Participation in any future contact 
is volu ntary; p atients may choose to no t participat e at any time.  
 
Patients who have indicated their consent to be contacted in the future for other studies will 
be contacted to  see if they would be interested in participating in a pilot study examining 
the effec tiveness  of ment al health decisi ons aids: sl eeping better, depression, and anxiety. 
Patients will be contacted first by telephone and asked if they would be interested in  
participating in a survey study. If they agree to participate they will be asked to r eview 
some addit ional patient ed ucational ma terials either online or on paper. After the patient 
reviews the materials, they will be asked to complete and an swer the ques tions via phone 
with study staff at a scheduled time. Consent will be implied by the c ompletio n of the  
questionnaire. If a patient  would like to complete the questionnaire via paper, an 
information sheet, questionnaire, and return -envelope wil l be sent to the patient. The 
project goal is to have approximately 30 eligible patients complete t he surve y. 
 
Patients who have in dicated thei r consent to be contacted in the future for other studies will 
be contacted to see if they would be interested in  participatin g in a structured interview 
either in -person or via telephone to learn more about deci sion mak ing for older adults abo ut 
whether t o continue colorectal cancer screening. We may also have primary care physicians 
(PCP) identify patients who they  believe woul d good candidates to participate in the 
interviews. The PCP will provide the patient w ith the informat ion sheet and if  the patient  is 
interested, the PCP will provide the research staff contact information for the subject to call 
to indicate t heir interest  in participating. Subjects will be contacted first by telephone and 
asked their inter est to p articipa te in an intervi ew. If they agree to participate they will be 
asked whether they prefer to conduct the interview in -person or via telephone a nd study 
staff will schedule a mutually convenient time. Consent will be implied by the completion of 
the interview . A cover letter  and an info rmation sheet will be sent by mail or email (if 
subjects provide verbal consent to use personal email) for those interested in  an interview. 
All emails that are sent for recruitment will be sent in accordance wit h Partne rs’ inst itutional 
guidel ines for inf ormation security. The project goal is to have approximately 20 eligible 
subjects complete the interview.  
 
Patients who received a decision aid in the past will be sent a letter and information sheet to 
let them  know ab out an upcoming research  project  and that if they do not want to be 
contacted  about participating , they can opt -out by phone. Potentially e ligible pa tients will b e 
asked  if they are users of Patient Gateway. If so, the patient will be asked about t heir 
interest in participating  in the interv iew. If the patient is not on Patient Gateway, he/she will 
not be eligible. If the patient agrees to participate he/she will b e sent an information sheet 
describing the study  and a mut ually convenient time will b e schedu led for the patient to 
participate i n the interview. Consent will be implied by the completion of the interview.  
 
Physicians who prescribed a patien t decision ai d in the past will be sent a  recruitment email 
asking if they would like to participat e in the  60-minute intervi ew. Th e informatio n sheet will 
also be included . The physician will be asked to reply to the email to indicate if he/she is 
interes ted. For phys icians who respond to the email, a mutually convenient time will be 
scheduled for the physicia n to par ticipate in the interview. We will recruit physicians across 
a range of practices and specialties. All emails that are sent for recruitment w ill be sent i n 
accordance with Partners’ institutional guidelines for information security. Consent  will be  
implied  by the completi on of the in terview.  
 
Patients who received a specialty referral where their physician provisionally ordered a 
decision aid  through the Cl inical Referral Management System  will also be contacted  by the 
study staff  for feedba ck on the referr al process.  Their feedback w ill be collected through 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     16  individual interviews or surveys. The information will help us to better understand deci sions 
around the referral process. A cover letter and information sheet describing the study will b e 
mailed  to the patients so that  they may ch oose to participate or not.  Any information 
provided by patients will be kept confidential.  The patients’  demogra phic informat ion will be 
collected through an RPDR data collection . 
 
Physicians who have placed the  referra l for pa tients through t he Clinical Referral 
Management System will also be contacted by study staff for their feedback on the referral 
process. Thei r feedback wi ll be collected through an email survey. A cover letter and 
information sheet describi ng the s tudy wil l be included in  the email s o that they may choose 
to participate or not. Any information provided by these providers will be kept confidenti al. 
All email s that are sent for recruitment will be sent in accordance with Partners’ institutiona l 
guidel ines for  information sec urity.  
 
All eligible Partners Healthcare System primary care physicians, specialists, nurses and 
other clinic staff involved in a patient’ s care may be asked to complete either the 
questionnaire or participate in an intervie w. The e mail may  also include an  information  
sheet describing the study.  All emails that are sent for recruitment will be sent in 
accordance with Partners’ i nstitutional guidelines for information security.  Study staff will 
work individually with those int erested in the i nterviews, at th e time of a specific project.    
 
Medical chart abstraction will examine  visits, testing and treatment decisions for patients 
who have both  received a decision aid and those with target condition who have not. For 
patients wh o have n ot recei ved a decision a id, the pati ents’ medical records  will be pulled 
based on the relevant  ICD-9, ICD-10, CPT codes associated with a visi t, or with a provide r 
within the study timeframe.  
 
For the surgery shared decision making surveys, the pr ocedures  are as follows:  
1. Work w ith PROMs te am to schedule patients to receive the shared decision -making 
survey as part of their routine orthopedic PROMs as sessment at a  post-operative visit 
between 4 -26 weeks post -procedure.  
2. Use eCare report and RPDR qu eries to generat e a list of pati ents who are  scheduled 
for or who have recently had the target procedures across the Partners hospitals , 
along with selected details about  the patients, the surgery and their interactions with 
specialists.   
3. Study staff will  run the  report periodically and review resu lts to confirm eligibility. A 
database of eligible surgical patients will be created and updated throughout the 
study period. Study staff may use RPDR to pull data for eligible patients that was not 
available fro m the eC are repo rt. Staff may al so access EH R to pull data (e.g. PROMs 
completion and responses) that is not available through RPDR.    
4. Study s taff will trac k shared deci sion-making survey completion rates on the PROMs 
platform and upload survey data into the data base.  
5. Staff will compar e completion  data to targets across topics and hospitals and if 
needed, staff will use a computer -generated allocation scheme  to randomly select a 
subset of eligible surgical patients who did not receive the shared decision making 
survey on  the PROMs platf orm to recei ve it in the mail.  
6. The mailing will contain a cover letter signed by the PI and Clinical Chief at each site 
inviting patients  to complete the survey, an information sheet about the study, the 
survey, a $2 incent ive, and  self-addressed stamped return envel ope. The cover letter 
will include instructions for how to opt out of the survey if subjects are not 
interested.  
7. About two we eks after the mailing, research staff will make up to three attempts to 
call subjects who did not opt out to answer qu estions and encourage subjects to 
complete the survey.  
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     17  8. One reminder mailing will be sent about three  weeks after the initial  to non 
respo nders and that will be followed by up to two reminder phone calls.   
9. For patients w ho have complete d the PROMs ques tions or sur vey, they will be sent an 
invitation letter to participate in a 30 -45 minute phone interview discussing their 
experience with elective surgery.  
10. One week after mailing, study staff will call patients who did not o pt out t o ask th em 
if they are i nterested in  participating in a 30 -45 minute interview.  
11. Patients who complete a phone interview, will be sent a thank you le tter and $20 
cash compensation.  
 
Surgeons who see patients with these conditions across the partic ipating sites wi ll be 
eligible f or a survey.  Study staff will give the paper survey to surgeons in person or send via 
email. The survey will ask for particip ant’s name as  it may be provided in a meeting. Once 
we get the survey we will mark each with a code  and use  the stu dy ID code as th e 
identifier . As needed, study staff will make up to three reminders via email. The brief survey 
will contain questions about  the surgeon’ s attitudes toward shared decision making, use of 
decision aids, and confidence in sha red deci sion mak ing skills. The survey parti cipation is 
voluntary and surgeon implies consent by completing the survey and providing it back to 
study staff. All emails th at are sent for recruitment will be sent in accordance with Partners’ 
institutional gu idelines  for inf ormation securit y. 
 
Cancer S creening Project 2020 :  
For the cancer screening shared decision making surveys, the procedures are as follows:  
 
1. Study staff will identify patients through the prescription log of individuals who 
received patien t educat ion mate rials in the for m of decisio n aids on cancer screening 
for: breast cancer, colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer over the last 2 
years.  
2. Study s taff will mail eligible study participants a cover letter, information sheet 
describin g the st udy, a c opy of the first  page of the  educational materials they 
received through their Patient Gateway, a one time survey and $2 USD for their 
consid eration of co mpleting the study.  
3. Participants can choose to complete the survey and mail it back , complete  the sur vey 
over the tel ephone , or online via a REDCap survey link , thus providing implied 
consent (i.e., voluntary completion of survey or questionn aire). Partic ipants can also 
choose not to complete the survey.   
4. Study staff will make up to three reminder  calls t o patients regar ding the sur vey 
within 2 weeks of the initial mailing.  
5. Study staff will send reminder survey packets within 4 weeks if the pa tient has yet  to 
return the survey and receive up to three reminder phone calls within 2 weeks of the 
reminder mai ling.  
6. Study sta ff will cond uct a chart review to collect information on cancer screening 
tests and review visit notes related to cancer scree ning.  
7. Partic ipants will be sent a thank -you letter for their participation following completion 
and resea rch staf f’s receipt of c ompleted sur vey.  
 
Path to Lifestyle Change  
Patients eligible for the research study will be participants in the Path to Lifes tyle Change  
program offered through the MGH Diabetes Center. The clinician in the MGH Diabetes Cen ter 
will obtain permission to se nd the study  information by email. In addition, the clinician will be 
available to answer questions about the study . For patie nts who give permission to use their 
email to send the study information, they may opt -out of the research  by cont acting the study  
coordinator  by phone or email. For patients who do not opt -out, consent will be implied by 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     18  survey completion. Patients who di d not opt -out will receive a secure REDCap survey link by 
email  at 5 time points: one-week  post  baseline v isit, 6  mon ths, 12 month , 18 months  and 24  
mont hs. The protocol for following up at each time point will be the same : 1) t he patients will 
receive an automated r eminder from REDCap one week after each survey is sent if the patient 
has not respon ded, 2) one remind er phone cal l will be made one week afte r the automated 
response  is sent  if the patient has not responded. Study staff will offer to complete the survey 
over the phone , if the patient would prefer.  
 
Provide details of remuneration, when  applicable.  Even  when subjec ts may derive me dical 
benefi t from participation, it is often the case that extra hospital visits, meals at the hospital, 
parking fees or othe r inconvenien ces will result in additional out -of-pocket expenses related to 
study p articipation.  Inv estigators m ay wish to consi der providin g reimbursement for such 
expenses when funding is available
 
Those patients participating in an individual intervi ew will recei ve $20 after completion 
of the 45 -minute interview. Patients completing  a 1 hour audiotap ed interview  will 
receive $4 0. Focus gro up participants will receive $60 after completion of the 90 minute 
session. Participants will not receive any remu neration for completing questionnaires, 
including the specialty referral interview. Participants who w ill be parti cipating in a 90 -
minute indi vidual interview will receive $40 after completion of the interview. Patients 
participating in the recontract surv ey mental hea lth study will not receive compensation.   
 
Participants in the intervie ws about the patient decision aids prescribed through EPIC  
and accessed through Patient Gateway will receive $50 in cash  to thank them for their 
time 
 
Participants who rec eive the  surgery shared decision making survey in the mail  will receive 
$2 cash as an  incentive to prom ote survey completion.  
 
Cancer Screenin g Project 2020 :  
Participants who receive the cancer screening shared decision making survey by mail will 
receive $2 as an ince ntive to promote survey completion.   
 
Clinician’s participating in surve ys or interviews w ill not be compensated.  
 
Participants i n the Path to Life style Change  program will not receive any incentives.  
 
For guidance, refer to the following Pa rtners polici es: 
          Recruitment of Research Subjects 
          http:/ /healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/recruit.htm
 
          Guidelines for Advertisements for Recruiting Subjects
          http://healthca re.partners.org/ph sirb/advert .htm
 
          Remuneratio n for Research Subjects
          http://healthcare .partners.org /phsirb/remun.htm
 
 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     19  CONSENT PROCEDURES  
Explain in detail how, when, whe re, and by whom co nsent is ob tained, and the t iming of co nsent 
(i.e., how long subjects will be given to consider participation).  For most studies involving more 
than min imal risk and  all studies involving investigational drugs/devices, a licensed physici an 
investigator mu st obtain i nformed consent.  When subje cts are to be enrolled from among the 
investigators’ own patients, describe how the potential for coercion will be  avoided.
 
There are no formal written consent procedures in this  project .  Whether o r not a patient 
receives one of the SDM progra ms is deter mined by appropriate clinical care and the 
patient’s desire to receive information about his or her health problem /screening in  the form 
of a shared decision -making  program .  This occurs through a di scussion between t he patient 
and clinician dur ing the off ice visit, much like any conversation that occurs when a physician 
gives educational material to a patient.      
 
Patients who receive a SDM  program  will also receive an information sheet describing the 
study and  a questionnaire . Patients can ch oose to com plete the questionnaire and mail it 
back, online,  or complete the questionnaire over the telephone , thus providing  implied 
consent (i.e., voluntary completion of survey or questionnaire), or they can  choose to not 
complete the q uestionnaire. There will be routine  post-card reminders and  follow -up phone 
calls made to patients who have not returned the questionna ire within 2 weeks o f the initial 
survey. Reminder survey packets will be mailed within 4 we eks if the patient  has yet to  
return the surve y. These pa tients will also receive reminder phone calls within 2 weeks of 
the reminder  mailing .  It will be mentioned to the  patient as a reminder that they can return 
the questionnaire , if they wish , or compl ete the questionna ire over th e telephone. Pati ents 
willing to complete the questionnaire and who have not yet viewed the decision aid will be 
asked only pre -viewing questi ons, and will  be encouraged to view the decision aid and 
follow up for administration  of the post -viewing question s. 
  
The data col lected in t he questionnaires pertains to the processes of shared decision -making 
and receiving the  program , how helpful the p rogram was to  the patient in making their 
decision, the effect the program had on dec ision preference, what the pa tient thinks abou t 
the avail able options, and how they feel about making a decision.  
 
The provider survey , and specialty referral survey,  will not have fo rmal written consent 
either, and consent will be implied by the return of  the completed sur vey. The pr ovider 
questionna ire will pr ovide us with valuable feedback regarding the dissemination of the SDM 
programs , as well as their perspective barr iers and/or b enefits to prescribe  and refer  to 
eligible patients. Clinician consent w ill be implied by agreeing to  participate in t he intervie ws 
or completing a survey . Clinicians will be provided with a study information sheet as well.  
 
For the patients in the specia lty referral survey , no formal written consent will be collected. 
Patien ts’ consent will b e implied b y the return of t he complete d survey or completion of a 
telephone interview. A cover letter and  information sheet describing the purpose and t ime 
commitmen t of the study will be  mailed  to the patients so that they may choose to  
participate or no t. A remind er phone  call will be placed  for those who haven’t completed the 
questionnaire within a 2 -week timeframe.  They can choose to complete the surv ey over the 
phone at that point.  
 
For those patients who’ve given consent to be re -contacted: study sta ff may cont act these 
patient s via email  or telephone, depending on their preferred method, to invite them to 
participate in a n individual or group interv iew or via su rvey. An information sheet describing 
the interview study, time commitme nt and remuneratio n (if appli cable)  will be pr ovided. If 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     20  interested, patients will contact staff and schedule an interview  or participate in the phone 
survey . Consent to p articipate wi ll be implied by completion of the interview  and/or survey .    
 
For the surgery shared dec ision makin g surveys, there are no form al written consent 
procedures in this project. When the survey is included as part of the PROMs application, it 
is part of the standard of care. When surveys are mailed to patients, consent is implie d by 
the completio n and retur n of the survey. Study staff  will protect the privacy of research 
study participants.  Patients can skip any question and may stop at any time.  There are no  
procedures in this research for which written consent is normally requi red. For the maile d 
survey, e ligible participa nts will re ceive a cover letter signed by the chief of orthopedic 
surgery or medical director of the specific service from ea ch site and t he principal 
investigator inviting them to complete the survey, as well as an information sheet that will 
provide deta ils about t he survey study. Participants can review the questions and choose 
whether or not they wish to participate. Surgeon s who receive  a surgery shared decision 
making survey will have implied consent by co mpleting and retur ning the su rvey. Survey 
participation i s voluntary.  
 
Cancer Screening Study 2020 :  
No formal written consent will be obtained for participants of the ca ncer screenin g study 
survey. Potential participants will be mailed an information she et containing info rmation 
about the study and inviting pa rticipation. Participants may review the questions and the 
information provided in the mailing packet and choose w hether or not  they wish to 
participate. Participants may also contact study staff to opt out of the stu dy. Consent  for 
participatio n will be i mplied by the return of completed survey by mail or online via the 
REDCap survey  link. Participa nts may request  the RED CAP survey link be sent to their email . 
Study staff will read the IRB policy reg arding send -secure vs. unencr ypted emails  and obtain 
verbal consent f rom participants via telephone to s end the survey link via email ba sed on 
participant email preferen ce. Survey participation is vol untary.   
 
All participants in the Path to Life style Chan ge program will be asked perm ission to send 
them an email  about this research project. If the participant gives permission to use their 
email, he/she will be emailed a cover letter and fact sheet  explaining the research project  
per Partners guidelines . The cover letter will  ask partic ipants to opt -out if they do  not want 
to participate in the survey research . For participants who do not opt -out, they will be sent 
an email with a secure  link to a REDCap  survey at ea ch of the four timepoints.  Consent will 
be implied by complet ion of the REDCap surveys.   
 
NOTE: Whe n subjects are unable to give consent due to age (minors) or impaired decision -
making capacity, complete the forms for Research Involving Child ren as Subjec ts of Research 
and/or Research Involving In dividuals with Imp aired Decis ion-making Capaci ty, availab le on 
the New Submissions page on the PHRC website: 
http://healthc are.partners. org/phsirb/newapp.htm#Newapp
 
For guidanc e, refer to the fo llowing Par tners policy:  
          Informed Consent of Research Subjects
          http://healthcare.partners.org/phs irb/infcons.h tm
 
 
 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     21  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
Describe  the plan for moni toring the data to ensure th e safety of  subjects.  The plan should 
include a brief description of (1) the safety and/or efficacy data that will be reviewed; (2) the 
planned frequency  of review; a nd (3) who will be responsible for this rev iew and for determ ining 
wheth er the research s hould be al tered or stopped.  Include a brief description of any stopping 
rules for the study, when appropriate.  Depending upon the risk, size and comple xity of the 
study, the investigator, an expert group, an  independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) or o thers might be assigned primary responsibility for this monitoring activity.        
 
NOTE: Regardless of data and safety monitoring plans by th e sponsor or others, the principal 
investigator is ultim ately responsible for protect ing the rights, s afety, and welfare of subjects 
under his/her care.  
 
While there are no  known risks or safety concerns to participating individuals associated 
with or att ributable to viewing information about health topics and  voluntarily answe ring 
questi onnaires, we will  monitor pa tient feedback obtained in the questionnaires and any 
conversations they might have with their clinician in which they express complaints or 
problems relate d to the project. The Stoeckle Center staff are available to answer ques tions 
or concerns  that patie nts might have.  We plan to keep records of any feedback, questions, 
concerns and/or complaints received about the project and will address the m as necessar y.   
 
The main risks to patients will be lo ss of privacy.  Questionnaires  will include sol ely, a coded 
unique numeric identifier for each patient  and provider . Therefore, all completed 
questionnaires will be stripped of any personal identifiers  and/or HIPAA  related information. 
Only MGH approved stu dy staff for this protocol wi ll have access to  the inform ation 
crosswalk needed to link this unique identifier with confidential personal infor mation. The 
completed, coded  questionnaires will be retur ned, where st udy staff will enter the de-
identified data into a secured on line data w arehouse. Data wi ll be store d using a secure, 
online data warehouse hosted by the DatStat Company . All DatStat servers used for data 
collection are housed in a server room . The server room is in a building with 24/7 alarm 
secur ity. Any building compromise will sound the al arm and gen erate a call to the building 
supervisor and police, who will subsequently notify DatStat personnel of the intrusion. 
Protection of servers from  remote attac ks is accomplished with a dedicated hardwar e 
Watchguard firew all with au diting enabled at  the recomm ended settings. Watchguard 
LiveSecurity keeps IT staff advised of all known security alerts. The firewall ensures that all 
traffic is closely m onitored and suspicious packets blocked from access to t he production 
systems. Securi ty patches are ap plied to Da tStat servers on a timely and ongoing basis. 
Logs are created by the web servers to increase the accountability and are essential in 
investigat ing incidents  after the fact. Access to data stored in t he server is avail able only t o 
MGH approved st udy staffs that are assigned specified usernames and passwords within 
which to log in. Study staff at the sponsor and participating sites are also assigne d specified 
user names and passwords and can access only the aggregated st udy data. Users ar e 
logged o ut after a period of time. A listing of the users with a description of their access 
privileges is available within the application. The following are log ged: failed a nd successful 
logins, attempts to access fi les/directories wi thout autho rity, successful and failed attempts 
to access sensitive data.   
  
All emails that are sent for recruitment will be sent in accordance with Partners’ institutional 
guidelin es for inform ation security.  
 
Only approved study staff will have contact with the pa tients who’ve con sented to 
participate in the qualitative feedback sessions .  Any information provided by these patients 
will be kept confidential.  Individual interviews w ill be hosted  by two study staff.  One will 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     22  follow  a prepared interview script and th e other will take detailed n otes. There will also be 
at least two study staff, one acting as facilitator who will follow similar script as the phone 
interview, and one as  note-taker, during the group sessions. All notes will be  stripped of any 
personal ide ntifiers and/or H IPAA relate d information. The individual interviews that will be 
conducted for the weblink decision aid vide os will have two study staff, one as a note -taker 
and the o ther as a guide to assist the participate in viewing the  online video. T he videos will 
be viewed thr ough the Healthwise website.  No personal information will be captured during 
the qualitative feedback sessions .  It will be stated upfront duri ng the focus group sessions 
that no personal information  discussed is to l eave the ro om.  
 
The medical chart abstr action data will be stored in a database on a Partners password 
protected computer. Only study staff will have access to this database. A study  code will be  
used to protect t he confidentiality of pat ients.  
 
Data coll ection for surgery shared de cision maki ng survey , will be from the medical record 
and patient surveys  and surgeon surveys . There  are no foreseeable safety risks to 
participants for c ompleting the  survey. Study staff will protect the priva cy of research stu dy 
particip ants as described  in the Pri vacy and Confidentiality section.  
 
Cancer Screening Survey Study 2020 :  
Data collection for the cancer screening survey will be from medical r ecords and pa tient 
surveys. There are no risks to partic ipant safety in co mpleting th e survey. To miti gate risk 
of loss to patient privacy all surveys will be coded with unique numeric identifier for each 
patient. The medical chart abstraction data will be  stored in a database on a Partners 
password protected c omputer. Only stud y staff wil l have access to this databa se. Study staff 
will protect the privacy of research study participants as described in the Privacy and 
Confidentiality section.    
 
It is possi ble that part icipants may be upset by a question in the interview or surve y, 
although  our prior experi ence using these questionnaires with patients who have knee 
osteoarthritis or low back pain have found that it is very rare for participants to be upset. 
Nevertheless,  study staff will screen surveys for advers e events and addre ss them as 
described in the next sectio n.  
 
There are no formal stopping rules for this minimal risk study.   
 
Describe the plan to be followed by the Principal Investigator/study s taff for revi ew of adverse 
events experienced by subject s under his/her ca re, and whe n applicable, for  review of sponsor 
safety reports and DSMB reports.  Describe the plan for reporting adverse events to the sponsor 
and the Partners’ IRB and, when applica ble, for subm itting sponsor safety reports and DSMB 
reports to the Partner s’ IRBs.  W hen the investiga tor is also  the sponsor of the IND/IDE, include 
the plan for reporting of adverse events to the FDA and, when applicable, to investigators at 
other sites.    
 
NOTE: In addition to the adverse event reporting req uirements of the s ponsor, the  principal 
invest igator must  follow the Partners Human Research Committee guidelines for Adverse Event 
Reporting
 
Any adverse event or patient complaint that occurs as a r esult of or r elated to this pilot 
project will be addres sed immediately up on receivin g it. We will als o relay any  such event to 
the Informed Medical Decisions Foundation  if it pertains directly to the SDM  program .  
Again,  the Health Decision Sciences  Cente r (HDSC) staff are available to address any 
questions or  concerns that are  received  from the patients,  either dir ectly or through the 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     23  patients ’ clinician.  We will keep records of any feedback, questions, concerns and/or 
complaints that are received, and w e will addres s them immediately and appropriately.  
 
The HDSC have clinical  co-investi gator s in primary  care and s urgery  who will be able to 
consult with study staff on any clinical issues that become apparent. For example, if patients 
raise a clinical issu e with study staff during the course of phone reminders or on the written 
surveys. Ho wever, if a serio us adverse event occurs relating to the study, then the principal 
investigator will report the event to the IRB within 24 hours and will file an HRC Adver se 
Event Form  within 10 working days. If a mild or moder ate adverse event occurs, the  
principal invest igator will  summarize the event in the progress report at continuing review.  
 
MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
Describe the plan to be followed by the pr incipal inves tigator/study staff to monitor and assure 
the validity and in tegrity of the data and adhe rence to th e IRB -approved protocol.  Specify who 
will be responsible for monitoring, and the planned frequency of monitoring.  For example, 
specify who wi ll review the  accuracy and completeness of case report f orm entries, sourc e 
documents , and informed co nsent.   
 
NOTE: Regardless of monitoring plans by the sponsor or others, the principal investigator is 
ultimately responsible for ensuring that the study is conducted at his/her investigative site in 
accordance  with the IRB -approved protoc ol, and applicabl e regulatio ns and requirements of the 
IRB.
 
The study staff  will routinely review the  program  “prescription” log as well as all incoming 
questionnaires fo r monitoring purposes.  Monitoring of the prescription l og will also be do ne 
by the HDSC staff, as the y are the o nes who receive and process all requests for  SDM 
programs .  Other quality assurance monitoring will be accomplished through the patient and 
provider questio nnaires and interviews. The study staff and  the principal inv estigator w ill 
have routine meetings du ring the study period to ensure the project proceeds as intended 
per the protocol . We will track recruitment rates and response rates weekly  and identify 
issues as they come up. The study staff will complete all requi red documen ts for the study 
binder and this will  be reviewed quarterly by the principal investigator .  
 
The principal investigator will speak with the study staff on a weekly basis a nd as -needed to 
ensure that the protocol is being follow ed. This research does not en tail physical ris ks. We 
have procedures in place to minimize risks to loss of privacy.  
 
 
For guidance, refer to the following Partners policies:  
          Data and Safety  Monitoring P lans and Quality Assurance
          http://healthcare.partners.org/phsirb/datasafe.htm
 
          Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines
          http://healthcare.partn ers.org/phsirb/adv erse.htm
 
 
 
PRIVACY AND CO NFIDENTIALI TY 
Describe methods used to protect the privacy of subjects and maintain confidentiality of data 
collected.  This typically includes such pract ices as subst ituting codes for names and/or medical 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     24  record numbers; removi ng face she ets or other iden tifiers fro m completed 
surveys/questionnaires; proper disposal of printed computer data; limited access to study data; 
use of password -protected computer databases; tr aining for research staff on the importance  of 
confidentialit y of data, and storing resea rch records  in a secure location.   
 
NOTE: Additional measures, such as obtaining a Certificate of Confidentiality, should be 
considered and are strongly encouraged wh en the research involves the collection of sensitive 
data, su ch as sexua l, criminal or il legal behav iors.
 
As the goals of this study are to 1) demonstrate the ability to introduce and disseminate 
SDM programs  to patients, 2) assess and unders tand “prescri bing” utilization,  trends and 
patterns by c linician and acros s practices , 3) obtain feedb ack from pa tients about receiving 
SDM programs , their decision preferences and comfort with making a decision, and 4) 
assess the quality of shared decisio n making for elective surgical decisions.  
 
The study st aff will process a nd manage t he distribution a nd return o f program s and 
questionnaires.  Once questionnaires have been returned, the study IDs will be removed so 
that any ability to link the questionn aires back to  patients is removed prior to any review, 
database entry or a nalysis of the data.  Patien t identifie rs on the program  log (name, 
address and phone number) will be removed before a copy of it is given to study staff.  The 
study database will no t contain any  patient information.  In this way, the pri vacy of the 
subjec ts and conf identiality of th e data coll ected will be maintained.    
 
No personal information will be captured during the qualitative feedback sessions. Patient 
privacy will be maintai ned.  All not es will be stripped of any personal identif iers and/or 
HIPAA related inf ormation.    
 
The interviews will be recorded. The interview data will be identified by a code only. Once 
the interview is completed, we will not keep the link that ties th e participant  to the 
interview. To ensure confidentialit y, all study mater ials will be kept in locked file cabine ts 
and on electronic drives on a Partners password -protected computer to which only the study 
staff has access.  
 
For the surgery shared decisio n making surv ey, study staff will run e Care reports  and RPDR 
queries  to gather inform ation on potentia lly eligibl e subjects and will review the subject’s 
medical record to confirm eligibi lity. We will have names and addresses of eligible  
participants and t his informati on will be kept separate from the study dat a (e.g. PROMs 
patient survey data). A separate  file on a password -protected Partners shared drive will 
contain the codes linked to identifying information. Only the MGH study staff and 
investigators w ill have acce ss to this file. These will be kept as long  as required by th e 
research project. After th e study has  been completed the personal contact information of all 
eligible participants will be destroyed.   
 
Cancer Screening Study 2020 :  
For the cance r screening s tudy, researchers will identify patients wh o received a decis ion aid 
in the HDSC database  and will r un RPDR queries to gather contact information on potentially 
eligible subjects and confirm eligibility. We will have names and addresses of eli gible 
partici pants and this information will be kept sep arate from the stu dy data (e. g. patient 
survey s). All pat ients will receive a code number and the surveys will only be identified by 
code number. A separate file on a password -protected Partners share d drive will contain the 
codes linked to identifying inf ormation. Only the  MGH study staff and investi gators will  have 
access to this file. These will be kept as long as required by the research project. After the 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     25  study has been completed the personal cont act informati on of all eligible participants will be 
destroyed.   
 
All pape r files (e. g. eligibility sc reeners) th at contain PHI will be kept in a locked file cabinet 
or in a secure offsite file storage location or on a password protected Partners shared dr ive.  
 
Patien t confidentiality will be maintained as is routine for all pa tient care privacy guideline s. 
All rese arch staff are CITI certified and will be trained on the importance of data 
confidentiality.  
 
 
SENDING SPECIMENS/DATA TO RESEARCH COLLABORATOR S OUTSIDE 
PAR TNERS  
Specimens or data collected by Partne rs investigators w ill be sent  to research coll aborators 
outside Partners, indicate to whom specimens/data will be sent, what information will be sent, 
and whether the specimens/data will contain ident ifiers that c ould be used by the outside 
collaborators t o link the specime ns/data to individual subjec ts.
 
The de -identified program a nd decision aid  survey data will be shared with the sponso r, the  
Informed Medical Decisions Foundation . The sponsor is hos ting the data  warehouse 
described in detail above and it  will aggregate de -identified  data from other sites that are 
funded to collect the same data on implementation of the DVDs/booklets at primary care 
sites across the country. The data will not contain any identifie rs and other investigators, 
including the s ponsor, will not b e able to l ink the data to i ndividual s ubjects.   
 
A written summary of the interviews that does not contain any personal identifiers will be 
shared with the Healthwise, who is the f under . 
 
Cance r screening study 2020 :  
The research team is committed to ma king resour ces and data from  this propo sed research 
study available to other investigators in the research community. The patient information 
sheet states the data will be de -identif ied and made available to others for analysis and 
resear ch following study  completion . The study team will create  a clean and de -identified 
copy of the final data set which will include patient survey data in addition to the limited 
demographics and cancer  screening te st. Information for investigators intereste d in using 
this da ta will be made available on  the Health  Decision Sciences Center website and in 
publications of the data. Dr. Sepucha will share a de -identified data set with outside 
investigators a t no cost, pe r approved MGH/Partners policies for data s haring. We will ne ver 
share t he key that will enable an i nvestigator to link the coded data to an individual. 
Investigators from other sites will be able to request the data and will be required to 
complete a data  use agreement that ensures that all local IRB requirements a re met befo re 
using the data , that they  will not attempt to identify any data in the dataset, and that they 
will not share the data set with anyone outside their project team. We wil l also make 
information necessary to interpret the data,  such as study pro tocols, dat a dictionaries, a nd 
survey t ools available to interested investigators.   
  
After the study results  have been published, de -identified data sets will also be deposited in 
an open acces s service such as, ICPSR ( https://ww w.icpsr.umi ch.edu/icpsrweb/ ). This is to 
promote research replicability, transparency and future use of the data. On ICPSR, 
individuals must register and  agree to ICP SR’s Responsible Use statement prior to acc essing 
datasets. A dditionally , before a datase t is made a vailable for access, ICPSR completes a 
detailed review of all datasets to assess disclosure risk. If necessary, ICPSR modifies data to 
reduce d isclosure ris k or limits access to datasets for which mo difying the data w ould 
substa ntially limit the ir utility or the risk of disclosure remains high. No information that 
Partners Hum an Subjects Resea rch Applica tion Form    Filename: Protocol Summary  
Version Date:  June 1, 2005     26  contains identifiers or that could be used to link an individual to the data will b e included in  
the de-identified data set. The informatio n sheets will cont ain the fol lowing language:  After 
the study is completed, all identifiable information will be removed from the data and after 
removal, the de -identified information will be deposit ed in an open  access service to 
promote use of the data by other researche rs.   
 
 
Specifically addres s whether s pecimens/data will be stored at collaborating sites outside 
Partners for future use not described in the protocol.  Include whether subjects ca n withdraw 
their specimens/data, and how they would do s o.  When appropria te, submit documentation of 
IRB approva l from the recipient institution.
 
Since there will be no identifying information in the data submitted to the sponsor it will not 
be possible for an indivi dual to withdraw their information. We have  submitted the app roval 
for the protocol held by the spon sor that covers the aggregation of data from MGH and 
other participating sites.  
 
RECEIVING SPECIMENS/DATA FROM RESEARCH COLLABORATORS OUTSIDE  
PARTNERS  
Whe n specimens or data collected by research c ollaborators outsi de Partners  will be sent to 
Partners in vestigators, indicate from where the specimens/data will be obtained and whether the 
specimens/data will contain identifiers that could be used  by Partners investigators to link the 
specimens/data to  individual subjec ts.  When a ppropriate, submi t documenta tion of IRB 
approval and a copy of the IRB -approved consent form from the institution where the 
specimens/data were collected.
 
Study staff at MGH will be a ble to access the aggregated data that the sponsor has collec ted 
from ot her participating  sites. MGH  study staff will not be able to link data to individual 
subjects  from other participating sites . We have attached the IRB approval held by the  
sponsor that  covers the aggregation of data from MGH an d the other partic ipating sit es.
 