 PROTOCOL STUDY SYNOPSIS  
Title:  Evaluation of the Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implan t for Insertional 
Achilles Tendonopathy  
Study Device s: Rota tion Medical Bioinductive Implant  
(Cleared for commercial use by the U.S . Food and Drug Administration: 
K140300; K131637; K131635; K122048)  
Study Design:  Prospective, non -randomized  
Enrollment:  Up to 10 subjects will be treated  
Inclusion 
Criteria:  1. At least 21 years of age  
2. Insertional Achilles tendonitis requiring surgery that has failed conservative 
management, which consist of:  
A. Shoe modification  
B. Nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs  
C. Physical Therapy with/without modalities  
3. Chronic Achilles tendon  pain lasting longer than 3 months  
4. MRI of the ankle within 6 0 days prior to the  study procedure  
5. Willing to comply with the prescribed post -operative rehabilitation program  
6. Willing to be available for each protocol -required follow -up examination  
7. Able to understand the informed consent process, i ncluding regulatory 
requirements such as HIPAA authorization, and document informed consent 
prior to completion of any study -related procedures  
8. Ability to read, understand, and complete subject -reported outcomes in 
English  
Exclusion 
Criteria:  1. Achilles tendon rupture  
2. Previous Achilles tendon surgery on the index ankle  
3. Genetic collagen disease  
4. History of auto -immune or immunodeficiency disorders  
5. History of chronic inflammatory disorders  
6. Oral steroid use in last 2 months or injectable steroid use in last 4  weeks  
7. History of heavy smoking (> 1 pack per day) within last 6 months  
8. Hypersensitivity to bovine -derived materials  
9. Hypersensitivity to Polylactic Acid (PLA) and Polyetheretherketone 
(PEEK) materials  
10. Metal implants, fillings, shrapnel, and/or screws  
11. Femal es of child -bearing potential who are pregnant or plan to become 
pregnant during the course of the study  
12. Currently involved in any injury litigation or worker’s compensation claims 
relating to the index ankle  
13. Enrolled, or plans to enroll, in another clinic al trial during this study that 
would affect the outcomes of this study  
14. History of non -compliance with medical treatment, physical 
therapy/rehabilitation, or clinical study participation  
15. History of cognitive or mental health status that interferes with stu dy 
participation  
Stud y 
Obje ctive : To evaluate bioinduction of new tissue and tendon healing after implantation of 
the Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant used as adjunct to surgical repair in 
the treatment of insertional Achilles tendonitis.  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 Primary 
Outcomes:  MRI assessment of the following:  
1. Increase in tendon thickness  
2. Integration of induced tissue with the underlying tendon and maturation of 
the induced tissue  
3. Amount of defect fill -in and characteristics of both the filled -in tissue within 
the tend on  
4. Achilles tendon tear rate at surgical site  
Secondary 
Outcomes:  1. Safety  
2. Procedure parameters  
3. Recovery  
4. Subject satisfaction  
Study 
Assessments  Baseline  
Procedure  
Post-procedure follow -up: 3 months, 1 year, 2 years  
Sponsor:  Rotation Medical, Inc.  
15350 25th Avenue North  
Plymouth MN 55447  
Data 
Management 
and 
Monitoring:  Rotation Medical, Inc.  
15350 25th Avenue North  
Plymouth MN 55447  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
     
1 INTRODUCTION & RATIONALE 
 
Chronic inse rtional Achilles tendinopathy is a common ailment in the general population. 
It is traditionally described as a phenomenon of overuse in both athletic and nonathletic 
individuals. Non -operative management usually consist s of activity and shoe 
modifications,  nonsteriodal anti -inflammatory medicati ons (NSAIDs), and some form of 
physical therapy, which can be successful. In patients in whom conservative interventions 
fail, operative intervention is the next step. This intervention intails open detachment  and 
debridement of the diseased Achilles tendon, calcaneal oste otomy, and reattachment of the 
Achilles. Often the diseased Achilles debridement leaves the tendon compromised in terms 
of its integrity and the remaining tendon will need augementation with a tendo n transfer 
using the flexor hallucis longus  (FHL) .  
The Rotation Medical  Bioinductive Implant  is a bioabsorbable device  that provides a layer 
of collagen over injured tendons .  This  device  is indicated for the management and 
protection of tendon injuries in which there has been no substantial loss of tendon tissue 
and can  be implanted during a the standard open treatment for  insertional Achilles 
tendinopat hy.  The d evice was first evaluated  in a preclinical study  of 23 sheep  that was 
approved by the Colorado State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee .  
The device  did not eli cit an inflammatory response or  a foreign body reaction .Histological 
analysis  confirmed the device  was complete ly absorbed  after six months with integration 
of the new tendi nous tissue to  the underlying host tendon and a fibrocartilagenous transition 
zone at the tendon -to-bone insertion site.  Tendon thickness at the implant site increased 
by approximatel y 2.5 m illimeters  due to induction of new tendi nous tissue and remained 
stable one year after surgery . 
The Rotation Medical Bioinductive I mplant  was further evaluated  in a c linical study of 24  
subjects who underwent implant ation  of the de vice  and completed a minimum of one year 
follow -up.  This study was approved by the Northern Sydney Central Coast  Ethics 
Committee  and registered in the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry  
[#ACTRN12611001082998 ].  The procedure was performed arthro scopically in 14 
subjects  while the other  10 subjects underwent a mini -open procedure . The median implant 
time was 15 minutes  and all subjects were successfully implanted with no intent -to-treat 
failures .  One patient experienced a return to pain 12 months  after surgery that was 
associated with significant bursitis and an arthroscopic clean -up procedure was performed 
to debride the bursa.  D espite the bursal reaction in this patient, tendon healing and tissue 
induction were not compromised . 
Magnetic resonan ce imaging (MRI) at 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery provided evidence 
that the device  consistently induced the formation of new, t endinous tissue  that appeared 
well-integrated with each patient’s native tendon  tissue and showed progressive maturation  
over time.  MRI observations were  consistent with the histological results from prior sheep 
studies.  Shoulder  function and pain was also assessed at 3, 6 and 12 months after treatment 
using the ASES (American Shoulder and Elbow Surgery) and Constant (Constant -Murley) 
standard shoulder surveys.   All of the scores at 12 months were significantly improved 
from baseline  (p < 0.05)  and improvement was  comparable to published literature.  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    2 DEVICE DESCRIPTION 
2.1 DE VICE DESCRIPTION  
There are three implant able comp onents in the Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant ™ 
(Figure 1). 
Bioinductive implant :  The device is made from highly purified reconstituted collagen 
fibers derived from bovine tendon  and manufactured for Rotation Medical , Inc.  by 
Collagen Matrix, Inc. (O akland, New Jersey, USA) . It is contraindicated for use in patients 
with a history of hypersensitivity to bovine -derived materials and this is an exclusion 
criterion for study participation. The device  is designed to completely absorb within six to 
12 mont hs. 
Tendon staples :  The tendon staples are made from poly(L -lactide- co-D ,L -lactide) in a 
molar ratio of 70% L- lactide to 30% D,L -lactide.  Polylactide materials have been used in 
a variety of medical devices, such as bone  anchors, bone pins, screws, plates, and spinal 
fusion cages. The tendon staples are designed to completely absorb within approximately  
12 months.  
Bone staples :  The bone staples are made from polyetheretherketone (PEEK), which is a 
common polymer used for bone anchors in orthopedic s urgery. The bone staples are not 
bioabsorbable.  
The Rotation Medical Rotator Bioinductive Implant  has been cleared by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) [ K140300; K122048; K131635; K131637].  The purpose of 
this post -market study is to collect and  analyze outcomes data under a common protocol.  
  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    Figure 1: Rotation Medical Implantable System Components 
 
 
The tendon and bone staplers used to affix the bioinductive implant  to tendon tissue and 
the calcaneus  respectively  are shown in Figure 2.  These are designed as single -use 
devices.  
Figure 2: Rotation Medical Single-Use Disposable Staplers 
 
 
Tendon stapler  Bone stapler  
 
2.2 PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION  
No investigational devices  or procedures will be used in this post -market study  and all 
devices will be used according to their indications for use .  Operation , indication, and 
instructions for use are described in the Instructions for Use (IFU s). 
 
 
Bioinductive 
implant  
Tendon 
staple  Bone 
staple  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    3 STUDY OBJECTIVE 
To evaluate bioinduction of new tissue and tendon healing after implantation of the 
Rotation Medical Bioinductive I mplant used in the treatment of insertional Achilles 
tendonapathy . 
4 STUDY DESIGN 
This is a prospect ive, non -randomized, single -arm study conducted under a common 
protocol designed to evaluate long -term outcomes  following open treatment and  
implantation of the Rotation Medical Bioinductive I mplant  to treat insertional Achilles 
tendino pathy.  
4.1 SAM PLE SIZE 
Up to  10 subjects will be enrolle d and treated  with the Rotation Medical Bioinductive 
Impant at Union Memorial hospital and the associated Surgery Center.  
4.2 ST UDY DURATION  
Enrollment is anticipated to take up to  12 months and all subject s wi ll be followed for two 
years after surgery.   There fore, the overall study duration is estimated to be 36 months.  
4.3 PRIM ARY OUTCOME MEASURES  
4.3.1 Increase in Tendon Thickness 
Achilles  tendon thickness will be measured pre -operatively (baseline) and the total 
thickness of the tendon and any newly induced tissue at the implant site will be measured 
at each follow -up visit using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  The mean (± SD) change 
in post -operative Achilles  tendon thickness will be calcul ated at each follow -up interval .  
4.3.2 Integration and Maturation of New Tissue 
Integration and m aturation of the newly induced tissue will be assessed by MRI at each 
post-operative follow -up. This outcome will assess, at a minimum, the following 
characteristics  of the newly induced tissue : (i) presence or absence of a  clear  boundary 
betw een the device  and the underlying tendon;  (ii) maturation of new ly induced  tissue to 
resemble characteristics of underlying tendon tissue (versus debris,  artifact , or 
calcification ). 
4.3.3 Tear Rate 
Tear rate  following Achilles surgery will be asse ssed at each follow -up visit using MRI.  
4.4 SE CONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES  
4.4.1 Safety 
Safety will be evaluated by any of the following adverse events that occur over the duration 
of the study :  
1. Any death 
2. All serious adverse events (SAE) regardless of relation to the device or procedure 
3. Any non-serious adverse event (AE) that is classified as either device or procedure-
related  
4. Any unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE) 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    Adverse events will be summarized by relation to the study devices or study procedure.  
O
verall occurrence rate by event type will also be calculated. 
4.4.2 Procedure Parameters 
The following procedural parameters will be recorded on all subjects : 
1. De vice implant time : Mean (± SD) implant time defined as follows: 
Open procedure: Time from introduction of the bioinductive implant into the surgical 
field to completion of the last staple 
2. Procedure technical success: The proportion of subjects where the device was 
successfully delivered and affixed to target tendon location. 
3. De vice implant position: An intra-operative photograph(s) or video recording 
showing the implant location of the device and all tendon and bone staples will be 
obtained. 
4.4.3
 Recovery 
The following post-operative recovery parameters will be reported after discharge 
from the from study procedure: 
1. C AM boot time: cumulative number of days spent in a CAM boot 
2. R ehabilitation time: cumulative number of completed rehabilitation or physical 
therapy (PT) visits (mean ± SD) to treat index Achilles 
3. R eturn to work: cumulative number of days (mean ± SD) between discharge and 
return to work (employed subjects only) 
4. R eturn to normal daily activities (i.e. full, unrestricted activity): cumulative number 
of da
ys (mean ± SD) between discharge and return to normal daily activi ty 
4.4.4 Subject Satisfaction 
Subject  satisfaction is a self -reported measure of satisfaction with the outcome of the index 
surgery.   The level of satisfaction is assessed with a  5-point Likert scale.  Each subject will 
also be asked to indicate whether (s)he  would recommend the study pro cedure to a friend 
(“yes/no”).   
5 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 
This is an initial feasibility study and not powered to address the hypotheses. Changes in 
tendon 
thickness over the time of the follow up visits will be assessed by a Repeated 
Me
asures ONEWAY ANOVA with a post hoc Scheffe.  Indices of new tissue integration 
and maturation at each follow up visit will be assessed by Chi Square analyses.   
 
6 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Subjects who meet all inclusion criteria ( Section  6.1) and none of the exclusion criteria 
(Section 6 .2) will be eligible to participate in the study.  
Enrollment in the study occurs upon intra-operative confirmation that the subject meets all 
of the inclusi on criteria and n one of the exclusion criteria.  Subjects who meet eligibility 
criteria and are enrolled will be followed per protocol through the end  of the study  (i.e., 
intent -to-treat).   S ubjects who do not meet the study eligibility criteria at the tim e of surgery 
will not be enrolled .  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    6.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  
Subjects enrolled in the study MUST meet  all of the following criteria: 
1. At least 21 years of age 
2. I nsertional Achilles tendinopathy  requiring surgery  
3. C hronic insertional Achilles tendinopathy lasting longer than 3 months unresponsive 
to conservative therapy including, but not limited to, pain medication, physical 
therapy and shoe modification 
4. MR I of the Achilles within 60 days prior to the study procedure 
5. W illing to comply with the prescribed post-operative rehabilitation program 
6. W illing to be available for each protocol-required follow-up examination 
7. Able  to understand the informed consent process, including regulatory requirements 
such as HIPAA authorization, and document informed consent prior to completion of 
any study-related procedures 
8. Abili ty to read, understand, and complete subject-reported outcomes in English 
6.2 EX CLUSION CRITERIA  
Subjects enrolled in the study MUST NOT meet  any of the following criteria: 
1. Achilles tendon tear 
2. Previous Achilles tendon surgery on the index ankle 
3.
 Genetic collagen disease 
4. History of auto-immune or immunodeficiency disorders 
5. History of chronic inflammatory disorders 
6. Oral steroid use in last 2 months or injectable steroid use in last 4 weeks 
7. History of heavy smoking (> 1 pack per day) within last 6 months 
8.
 Hypersensitivity to bovine-derived materials 
9. Hypersensitivity to Polylactic Acid (PLA) and Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) materials 
10. Metal implants, fillings, shrapnel, and/or screws  
11. Females of child-bearing potential who are pregnant or plan to become pregnant during 
the course of the study 
12. Currently involved in any injury litigation or worker’s compensation claims relating to 
the index ankle 
13. Enrolled, or plans to enroll, in another clinical trial during this study that would affect 
the outc
omes of this study 
14. History of non-compliance with medical treatment, physical therapy/rehabilitation, or 
clinical study participation 
15. History of cognitive or mental health status that interferes with study participation  
 
7 S
TUDY ASSESSEMENTS 
The schedule of protocol-required study assessments is provided in Table 7.1.  Adverse 
e
vent (AE ) reporting as required and defined in Section 8  begins at the time of enrollment 
(i.e
. intra-operative confirmation of eligibility) and concludes at the end of the study. 
 
  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    Table 7 -1: S chedule of Study Assessments  
Study Evaluation  Baseline  Procedure  3-Month  1 Year  2 Year  
Within 60 
Days of 
Surgery  Within 6 0 
Days of 
Baseline  ± 15 days  ± 45 days  ± 90 days  
Informed Consent       
Medical History  & Exam       
Eligibility Assessment   1    
Enrollment (Date of Surgery)       
MRI  2  2 2 2 
Procedure  Data       
Medications  3 3 3 3 3 
Adverse Events   4 4 4 4 
Recovery /Satisfaction  
Questionnaire       
Revision/Additional Achilles  
Surgery    5 5 5 
1Eligibilty confirmation will be performed at the time of the study surgery to ensure the patient meets 
eligib ility criteria.  Patients who  do not meet study eligibility criteria will not be enrolled in the study.  
2Each study  MRI must be performed in accordance with the MRI study guideline . 
3Only prescription medications to treat the index Achilles  will be recorded. 
4Non-serious AEs will only be recorded if they are classified as either pos sibly or definitely  related to 
either the study device or the study procedure.  
5Any additional surgical intervention performed on the index Achilles  will be reported.  
 
7.1 EL IGIBILITY ASSESSMENT  
Subjects are considered eligible for this study if they meet all of the inclusion criteria and 
none
 of the exclusion criteria as defined in Section 6.1 and Section 6. 2.  The Investigator, 
co-
Investigator, or sub-Investigator performing the study surgery will confirm eligibility.   
7.2 ENRO LLMENT  
Enrollment in the study occurs upon clinical confirmation that the subject meets all of the 
inclusi
on criteria and none of the exclusion criteria.  Patients who do not meet study 
eligibility criteria at the time of the study procedure will undergo tendon repair at 
the discretion of the surgeon (without use of the Rotation Medical Bioinductive 
Implant) and will not be enrolled in the study .  The date of the study surgery is defined 
a
s the enrollment date and all subjects who are enrolled in the study will be followed per 
protocol unless voluntary consent is withdrawn.  All subjects enrolled into the study will 
be identified through a unique identifier.   
7.3 BASE LINE ASSESSMENT  
During the baseline assessment, the following activities must be conducted within 60  
calendar days prior to enrollment: 
1. Obtain written informed consent 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    2. Obtain medical history 
3. P erform an MRI per the Sponsor imaging guidelines 
 Prov ide the Sponsor with a de-identified digital copy, or access to the MRI  
4. Asse ss subject eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion criteria defined in Section 6.1 
and 6.2 . 
5. R ecord prescription medications 
 Re cord any prescription medications the subject is taking at the time of the 
baseline visit to treat his/her index Achilles  
6. Admini ster VISA-A (Victorian Institute of Sports Assessment-Achilles 
questionnaire) form to assess Achilles tendon pain. 
7.4 PR OCEDURE ASSESSMENT  
During the study procedure, use of any biological agents or implants aimed at augmenting 
tendon- to-bone healing, excluding the Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant, are strictly 
prohibit
ed.  Intra-operative data along with the following study-specific procedure 
infor
mation will be documented on the Procedure CRF :  
1. De vice implant time 
2. P rocedure technical success 
3. De vice implant position 
 After implantation of the device, an intra-operative photograph(s) or video 
re
cording showing the implant location of the device and all tendon and bone 
stapl
es will be obtained.  
4. I ntra-operative complication (if applicable; per Section 8) 
7.5 PR OCEDURE RULES  
Subjects should be scheduled to undergo the study procedure within 60 days of 
baseline assessment.  Device  implantation will be performed in accordance with the 
Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant System device and instrument Instructions for Use 
(IFUs ) and may be performed as an open procedure. 
All subject s will be place in a supine position with a small bump under the contralateral 
hip. A tourniquet will be placed on the operative leg. A standard incision will be placed 
just medial to the Achilles tendo n. The Achilles will be detached from the calcaneus, 
undergo debridement and assessed for integrity.  The posterior aspect of the calcaneus will 
undergo exostectomy. At the surgeon’s discretion  the flexor hallucis longus  tendon will be 
harvested. The Achil les tendon will be re -attached to the posterior aspect of the calcaneus 
using suture anchors. If the FHL is harvested a supplemental  oblique tunnel will be created 
using a small burr. The FHL will be passed through the tunnel, woven through and attached 
to the remaining debrided Achilles tendon. Following the bioinductive implant will be 
attached to the Achilles tendon.  
7.6 PO ST -OPERATIVE CARE 
Post-operative care, including discharge instructions, pain management, and 
frequency/duration of physical therapy/rehabilitation regimen are at the discretion of the 
surgeon.  To minimize the likelihood that the integrity or position of the device  is 
compromised after implant, recommended rehabilitation guidelines are provided in Table 
7.2.  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
     
Table 7-2: Post-operative Rehabilitation Guidelines  
Study Procedure  Rehabilitation Guidelines  
Device  implant    Remain in post mold splint until follow up  
 Remain nonweight bearing on operative  leg with crutches or walker  
 Follow up in one week for evaluation and pl acement into CAM boot 
with heel lift  
 Follow up at 2 weeks for suture removal  
 Follow up at 4 weeks for partial heel lift removal and progression to 
neutral foot  
 Follow up at 4  weeks for start of physical therapy  
 Fill out VISA -A (Victorian Institute of Sports Assessment -Achilles 
questionnaire) at 6 and 12 months  
7.7 FOLLOW -UP ASSESSMENTS  
All subjects will undergo post-operative study assessments at 3 months, 1 year, and 2 year s 
after discharge from the study procedure as described below and summarized in Ta b le 7.1. 
7.7.1
 3-Month (± 15 Days) Follow- Up 
1. P erform an MRI per the Sponsor Imaging guidelines. 
 Prov ide the Sponsor with a de-identified digital copy of, or access to,  the MRI 
2. C linical Assessment 
3. R ecord prescription medications 
 Re cord any prescription medications the subject is taking at the time of the 
follow-up visit to treat his/her index Achilles. 
4. Record any new adverse events and update the status of any ongoing, previously-
reported adverse events. 
5. R eport any new revision/additional Achilles surgeries performed on the index 
Achilles 
7.7.2
 1-Year (± 45 Days) Follow- Up 
1. Perform an MRI per the Sponsor imaging guidelines. 
 Prov ide the Sponsor with a de-identified digital copy of, or access to, the MRI. 
2. Clinical assessment 
3. Administer the recovery/satisfaction questionnaire (VISA- A) 
4. Record prescription medications. 
 Re cord any prescription medications the subject is taking at the time of the 
follow-up visit to treat his/her index Achilles. 
5. Record any new adverse events and update the status of any ongoing, previously-
reported adverse events. 
6. Report any new revision/additional Achilles surgeries performed on the index 
Ac
hilles. 
7.7.3
 2-Year (± 90 Days) Follow- Up 
1. Perform an MRI per the Sponsor imaging guidelines. 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
     Prov ide the Sponsor with a de-identified digital copy of, or access to, the MRI. 
2. Clinical assessment 
3. Administer the recovery/satisfaction questionnaire. 
4. Record prescription medications. 
 Re cord any prescription medications the subject is taking at the time of the 
follow-up visit to treat his/her index Achilles. 
5. Record any new adverse events and update the status of any ongoing, previously-
re
ported adverse events. 
6. Report any new revision/additional Achilles surgeries performed on the index 
Ac
hilles. 
 
The
 results of all follow-up assessments will be documented on their respective CRF s .  
Each reportable adverse event ( Section 4.1.1 ) will be documented on an Adverse Event 
CRF . 
7.8 UNSCH EDULED FOLLOW -UP 
Any unscheduled return visits to the study center/Principal Investigator for non-standard 
of care evaluation for ongoing Achilles-related issues will be documented. Visits required 
by the protocol or visits for routine post-operative follow-up are not considered 
unscheduled and do not need to be reported as an unscheduled visit.  
7.9 REVISION /ADDITIONAL ACHILLES SURGERY  
If the subject has additional or revision Achilles surgery on the index Achilles at any time 
during
 the follow-up period, the clinical site should make every effort to collect the 
proc
edure/operative notes for the procedure and complete the Revision/Additional Achilles 
S
urgery.   
7.10 EARLY WITHDRAWAL OR LO ST TO FOLLOW -UP 
If a subject wishes to withdraw from the study at any time, (s)he is  able to do so 
volunt
arily without having to justify it and without affecting her/his relationship with the 
I
nvestigator.  
Also, an Investigator may withdraw a subject from the study at any time if (s)he thinks it is 
in t
he subject’s best interest.  
The subject’s future management will not be changed by a decision, voluntary or 
other
wise, to withdraw from the study. 
All reasonable efforts should be made to retain the subject in this clinical study until 
c
ompletion of the clinical assessments at each follow-up visit.  A subject will be 
c
onsidered “lost to follow-up” after a minimum of 2 documented phone calls to the subject 
were completed by a member of the study staff and a certified letter was sent to the last 
known address by a traceable method (e.g., certified mail; courier; commercial 
shipping/transport company). 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    7.11 END OF STUDY  
Subjects will be exited upon successful completion of follow -up assessments or at the time 
of withdrawal or lost -to-follow -up.  
 
8 ADVERSE EVENT DEFINITIONS AND REPORTING 
Adverse events are to be reported from the time of enrollment through the last study 
follow
-up visit. 
8.1 DE FINITION OF ADVERSE EVENT (AE) 
An Adverse Event (AE) is any undesirable clinical occurrence experienced by the subject .  
Any underlying disease that was presen t at the time of enrollment  and prior  to surgery that 
persists after surgery is not considered  an AE . 
8.2 SE RIOUS ADVERSE EVENT (SAE) 
A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) includes any of the following events:  
 R esults in death 
 I s life threatening 
 R equires subject hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
 R equires invasive surgical intervention to fix the problem 
 R esults in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
 I s considered an important medical event 
An important medical event  that may not meet one of the above definitions might be 
considered as an SAE  if it jeopardize s the health of the subject  or require s surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the above definition.   Elective 
hospitalization after the procedure t hat was planned prior to subject enrollment is not to be 
considered as an SAE.   
8.3 UNANTI CIPATED ADVERSE DEVICE EFFECT (UAD E) 
An Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADE) is any serious adverse effect on health 
or safety, or any life -threatening problem or  death caused by, or associated with, a device, 
if that effect was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in 
protocol, subject informed consent form, or application, or any other unanticipated serious 
problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
Anticipated adverse  events are listed as known risks in  Section 12 .1. 
8.4 ASSE SSING , RE CORDING AND REPORTING AES, SAE S, AND UADE S 
Only non -serious AEs that are classified by the Investigator  as either device -related or 
procedure -related will be reported.  All SAEs , regardless of relationship to the Rotation 
Medical Bioinductive Implan t, and all UADEs will be reported . 
An AE may be volunteered spontaneously by the subject  or discovered as a result of 
questioning  or physical examination by the I nvestigator or study staff.  The following 
information should b e reported on the Adverse Event CRF  as soon as the I nvestigator 
becomes aware of the event and updated as needed until event resolves:  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
     Date of AE onset 
 Da te the Investigator became aware of the AE 
 Ma in complaints/symptoms of the AE 
 R elationship to the study device 
 R elationship to the study procedure 
 S tatus of the adverse event 
Source documents (e.g., procedural notes, trea tment notes, or a signed clinical summary) 
may be required as supporting docu mentation for the reported AE . 
9 MALFUNCTIONS 
Failure of the  Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant to meet its performance 
specificati ons or to perform as intended  will be documented on the Malfunction CRF .  In 
the event of a malfunction, every ef fort must be made to return the suspected Rotation 
Medical device  or instrument  to the Sponsor for analysis.   Malfunctions will be evaluated 
for reportable requirements through the FDA medical device reporting (MDR) system . 
 
10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 
Investigators  are required to adhere to the study p rotocol, signed Clinical Trial Agreement  
(CTA) , applicable national or local laws and regulations, and any conditions required by 
the appropr iate IRB/EC or applicable regulatory authorities.  
 
A protocol deviation is used to describe situations in which the protocol was not followed 
(this includes all activities at each scheduled visit or activities occurring outside of the 
study windows).  All attempts should be made to obtain Sponsor approval of the deviation 
prior to their occurrence.  
 
An Investigator must notify the Sponsor and the reviewing IRB/EC of any deviation from 
the Study Protocol that was done to protect the life or physical well -being of a subject 
(medical emergencies).  Such notice should be given within 5 days of the occurrence .  The 
Sponsor will determine if the subject affected is to continue in the study.  
 
Documentation of deviations identified by the investigational center, the  monitor, or other 
Sponsor rep resentative(s) will be entered i nto the Protocol Deviation CRF  for the purpose 
of tracking Investigator compliance with the protocol.  The investigational center will be 
required to document actions taken to prevent recurrence  of deviations.  The Sponsor 
representative will initiate corrective actions based on individual deviations or trending 
reports as appropriate.  
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    11 REPORTING REQUIREMEN TS 
Table 11-1 shows a summary of all reporting requirements.   In addition to this list, 
individual IRBs may add additional reporting requirements and/or require a different 
notification time frame.  
Table 11-1: S ummary of Reporting Requirements  
Type of Report  Prepared by 
Investigator FOR  Notification Time Frame  
Death1 Sponsor & IRB  Within 24 hours of knowledge  
Withdrawal of IRB approval  Sponsor  Within 5 working days of knowledge  
Protocol Deviation to Protect 
Subject Life or Physical 
Well -Being  Sponsor & IRB  Within 5 working days of knowledge  
Unanticipated Adverse 
Device Effect (UADE)  Sponsor & IRB  Within 10 working days of knowledge  
1Copies of death records, medical records for the events that led to the subject ’s death, a death 
certificate (if available) , and an au topsy report (if performe d) should be requested.  
 
12 RISKS AND BENEFITS 
12.1 RI SKS AND RISK MITIGATION  
Study patient s will be informed of all known potential side effects and complications 
associated with the study assessments and study procedure prior to enrollment in the study.  
There are no known incremental risks to the su bject for participating in the study .  The 
risks associated with participating in this st udy are the same as if the patient  is treated 
outside of the study using the same commercially -available device and include the 
following potential risks of Achilles Tendin opathy  surgery performed under general or 
regional anesthesia : 
 Tissu e inflammation 
 The  need for repeated surgery because tendons do not heal properly or tears 
 P ain or stiffness that won't go away 
 Fever and/or infection 
 C omplication from anesthesia 
 Nerve or blood vessel damage  
 Adverse reaction to device 
In addition, subjects will be required to undergo MR imaging.  MRI is gener ally a well -
tolerated procedure and there is no ionizing  radiation involved with MR imaging   The 
potential risks are minimal and include claustrophobia, coil element heating and peripheral 
nerve stimulation, although the latter two are considered highly unlikely, given that the 
subjects  will be imaged within p reset safety guidelines to eliminate peripheral nerve 
stimulation. Coil element heating ranges from a mild sensation of heat to a potential burn.  
This is considered highly unlikely, as the coils have all undergone extensive testing and 
clinical use, and s pecial pads are placed surrounding all contact points.  
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    All Investigators will undergo training and subjects will be screened and evaluated for 
medical histories/conditions that may compromise safe, successful completion of any of 
the stud
y assessments or performance of the de vice.  Subjects with a known 
h
ypersensitivity to bovine-derived materials will not be enrolled in the study. 
12.2 BE NEFITS  
Participation in this study is voluntary.  Subjects can obtain the same treatment without 
participating in this study.  However, information gathered from this study will help the 
S
ponsor to continue to evaluate long-term performance of the de vice. 
 
13 DATA MANAGEMENT 
13.1 DAT A COLLECTION  
Report forms will be completed by the Investigator (or authorized  study personnel) for 
each subject enrolled in the study.  Data queries and edit checks will be used to reconcile 
discrepancies between data on the source documents and data entered on the CRF s.  The 
Investigator must assure the accuracy and completeness of  the recorded data.   For the 
purpose of this study , the ASES  and Constant shoulder surveys , as well as the 
Recovery/Satisfaction form, may act as their own source data . 
13.2 DAT A PROCESSING  
All study documentation will be entered and maintained  in a central dat abase by the 
Sponsor or Sponsor -authorized representatives.  Automatic and/or manual edit checks will 
be issued as necessary to correct discrepant data.  Appropriate quality control measures 
will be established to ensure accurate and complete transfer of i nformation from the study 
documentation to the central database.   Data files will be exported from the central database 
for statistical analyses.  
14  ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES 
14.1 SITE AND IN VESTIGATOR SELECTION  
Each site and Investigator selected to participate will be evaluated to ensure each has the 
capacity, volume of surgical candidates, and capability to comply with all informed 
c
onsent and protocol requirements. Each study site and Investigator are required to 
c
omply with applicable local legal and regulatory requirements and applicable U.S. 
federal regulations. 
14.2 TRAINING  
The principal investigators must be Board Certified orthopaedic surgeons with experience 
performing surgery for insertional Achilles tendinopathy.  Prior to first enr ollment, each 
participating surgeon will complete  Sponsor -provided training on the  Rotation Medical 
Bioinductive implant  System .   
The Sponsor will also be responsible for ensuring each site and Investigator are  properly 
trained on the study protocol and a pplicable regulatory requirements.  
To insure uniform data collection and protocol compliance, the Sponsor or Sponsor -
authorized representatives will train the Study Coordinator(s) and study s taff on all 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    components of the study including the study protocol,  techniques for the identification of 
eligible subjects, instructions  for data collection during the procedure, and schedules for 
follow -up. 
14.3 INST ITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IRB)  / ETHICS COMMITTEE (EC) 
It is the Investigator ’s responsibility to obtain and main tain written approval of the final 
study protocol and Informed Consent from the appropriate IRB or Ethics Committee.  
Investigators are responsible for submitting and obtaining initial and continuing review of 
the trial by their IRB/EC.  It is also the Inv estigator ’s responsibility to notify the IRB/EC 
of any amendments to these documents.  A copy of the written approval must be forwarded 
to the Sponsor prior to first device shipment.  The written approval must identify the study 
and document the date of re view.  
The Investigators must keep on file all study -related correspondence with the IRB/EC and 
forward copies of such correspondence to the Sponsor.  
14.4 INF ORMED CONSENT FORM (ICF) 
Informed consent must be obtained in accordance with the applicable guidelines or local 
regulations and laws, whichever represents the greater protection of the individual.  The 
subject s must be informed about their right to withdraw from the study at any time and for 
any reason without sanction, penalty, or loss of benefits to which  the subject  is otherwise 
entitled and also informed that withdrawal from the study will not jeopardize their future 
medical care.  The institutional standard subject  consent form does not replace the study 
informed consent form (ICF).  
The Sponsor will pro vide a study -specific template ICF to each site for IRB/EC 
submiss ion.  This template may be modified to suit the requirements of the individual study 
site.  The Sponsor must pre -approve all changes to the ICF prior to initial submission to 
the IRB/EC.  The Informed Consent Form must be approved by the IRB/EC  prior to device 
shipment and a copy must be retained at the investigational site along with the other 
investigational forms.  A signed copy of the consent for m must be given to each subject 
enrolled in  the study  and a signed copy of the consent form must be retained for each 
subject at the investigational site . 
Modifications to the study -specific  Informed Consent Form and /or any written information 
distributed to subjects must be approved by the Sponsor , and the IRB/EC as necessary.  
14.5 CONFIDENTIALITY  
All information and data sent to the Sponsor concerning subject s or their participation in 
this study will be considered confidential.  All data used in the analysis and reporting of 
this evaluation will be us ed in a manner without identifiable reference to the subject .  The 
Investigator consents to visits by the staff of the Sponsor and its authorized representatives 
and the U.S. FDA or any other local governmental body to review the study subject s’ 
medical re cords, including any test or laboratory data that might have been recorded on 
diagnostic test media (e.g., MRI scan ). 
14.6 AM ENDING THE PROTOCOL  
The Sponsor must write amendments in order to alter the protocol.  Administrative changes 
that do not affect the subject benefit/risk ratio (e.g., editorial changes for clarity) may be 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    implemented without any further approvals.  Any change that would require alteration of 
the Informed Consent form must receive approval from all persons who approved the 
original protocol  and from the IRB/EC prior to implementation.  Following approval, the 
protocol amendment(s) will be distributed to all protocol recipients with instructions to 
append them to the protocol.  
14.7 CRIT ERIA FOR TERMINATING STUDY 
The Sponsor reserves the right to t erminate the study early but intends only to exercise this 
right for valid scientific or administrative reasons or reasons related to the protection of 
study subject s.  Investigators and associated IRB/EC will be notified in writing in the event 
of termina tion.  Reasons for study termination include  but are not limited to : 
 The  discovery of an unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to the study subject s. 
 A de cision on the part of the Sponsor to suspend or discontinue commercial 
distribution of the Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant.  
14.8 CRIT ERIA FOR TERMINATING AN INVESTIGATIONAL CENTER  
The Sponsor  reserves the right to stop enrollment of subjects  at an investigational  center at 
any time for any of the following reasons  including but not limited to:  
 R epeated failure to complete case report forms (CRF s) 
 F ailure to obtain Informed Consent 
 F ailure to report any study subject deaths, SAEs, or UADEs within the timeframes 
spe
cified in Table 11-1 
 R epeated protocol deviations 
 L ack of study enrollment or study activity 
14.9 SPONSOR RESPONSIBILITIES  
The Sponsor’s responsibilities for this study are to:  
 P rovide sufficient training to support study activities per agreements executed with the 
study sites 
 Select all clinical Investigators, study sites, and consultants (e.g., the study monitors) 
who participate in the study 
 Provide financial support to each study site per agreements executed with the study 
sit
es 
 F ollow all regulatory standards per federal regulations for clinical study sites, core 
labor
atories, and other participants, and ensure regular site monitoring to assure 
compliance with them 
 R etain ownership of all clinical data generated in this study 
 Work collaboratively with Investigators to present and publish study results 
14.10  INVESTIGATOR RESPONSIBILITIES  
The Investigator for each site is responsible for ensuring the study is conducted according 
to: 
 All si gned agreements 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
     The study protocol 
 I RB/EC guidelines 
 Applica ble FDA regulations 
The Investigator for each site may not begin enrollment until the Sponsor receives and 
a
pproves (when necessary) required documents, including the complete signed 
Investigator Agreement, Protocol Signature Page, IRB/EC and ICF approvals.  
It is acceptable for the Investigator to delegate one or more of the above functions to an 
associate or Co-Investigator or trained Study Coordinator; however, the Investigator 
remains responsible for the proper conduct of the clinical investigation, including 
obtaining the ICF, collecting all required data, submitting accurate and complete CRF s, 
etc. 
At each site, appropriate procedures must be followed to maintain subject confidentiality 
according to HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability Accountability Assurance) regulations.  
Each site may have its own internal procedures or requirements for use and release of 
subject medical information in research studies.  Each Investigator is responsible for 
obtaining
 appropriate approvals, consents or releases of medical information as dictated 
by their relevant subject privacy regulations. 
The
 study is not transferable to other sites attended by the Investigator unless prior 
approval is obtained from the appropriate IRB and the Sponsor.   
15 MONITORING AND AUDITING 
Monitoring visits to the investigational  centers will be made frequently during the study to 
ensure that all aspects of the current approved protocol/amendment(s) are followed.  Source 
documents will be reviewed for verificatio n of agreement with data entered on the CRF s 
and all regulatory documents will be checked  for accuracy including but not limited to 
IRB/EC approvals, study -related  correspondence, and subject  informed conse nt.  The 
Investigator/institution guarantees direct access to source documents by designated 
Sponsor personnel and appropriate regulatory authorities.  The site staff must agree to be 
available to meet with the Sponsor during each visit.  
The study may also  be subject  to a quality assurance audit by the Sponsor or its designees  
as well as inspection by appropriate regulatory authorities.  
 
16 REPORTS AND RECORDS 
16.1 REPORTS  
Adverse events and Rotation Medical Bioinductive Implant malfunctions will be 
evaluated for reportable requirements through the FDA medical device reporting (MDR) 
system. 
16.2 RE CORDS  
All records pertaining to the clinical study will be kept for a minimum of 3 years following 
the date on which the study is terminated or completed.  
 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016
 
    17 USE OF INFORMATION AND PUBLICATION  
Any previously unpublished information provided to the Investigators by the Sponsor, such 
as patent applications, manufacturing processes and basic scientific data, is considered 
confidential and will remain the sole property of the Sponso r.  The Investigator agrees to 
use this information only in accomplishing this study and will not use it for other purposes 
without the Sponsor’s written consent.  
An Investigator may publish the study experience from his/her site subject to approval by 
the Sponsor.  The Sponsor will work collaboratively with Investigators to support data 
analyses for publication of study results.  The Sponsor reserves the right to review all 
publications in order to verify accuracy of the data.  The In vestigator may proceed  with the 
publication when notified by the Sponsor.  
For any multi -center publication s (if applicable) , the number, names, and order of the 
authors will be determined by the Sponsor with input from the Investigators . 
 
Protocol Number: 3672-01 
Created: February 12, 2016