12/31/2019 Lavender vs Zolpidem Sleep Quality During Diagnostic Polysomnog raphy 
IRB: A19-156 
NCT: 04102345  
Clinical Study Protocol  and Statistical Analysis Plan
Amendment 1 Date: 31 December 2019  
Sponsor  
HealthPartners Institute 
This study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, IND regulations and other applicable 
regulatory requirements. 
Confidential Information 
No use or disclosure of this document is permitted without prio r written authorization from 
HealthPartners Institute 
Version: ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  1 Participant Contact Project Narrative 
1. Summary
A common problem associated with sleep studies (polysomnogram o r PSGs) is “first night effect” (FNE), with
disruption of sleep, resulting in insufficient time to make a d iagnosis or achieve effective therapy 1. Current
practice is to prescribe sleep aids or sleep medications to pre vent FNE. Zolpidem (Ambien) is the most
commonly prescribed medication, but has several significant sid e effects, limiting its usefulness 2. Hence, it is
important to find an alternative that is safer, more acceptable  and personable to patients. In this study we
propose to prospectively evaluate sleep related outcomes with l avender aromatherapy compared to those with
pre-medication prior to diagnostic or split night polysomnograp hy (PSG).
2. Study aims
Overall Objective: To determine if lavender aromathera py is as effective as pre-presc ribed zolpidem in
improving PSG quality, and reducing the need for repeating PSGs  for a diagnostic or split night sleep study.
Primary Outcome : 
xSleep efficiency
Secondary Outcomes : 
xA successful split night PSG or a diagnostic PSG and wake after  sleep onset (WASO)
Exploratory Outcomes: 
xTotal sleep time (TST), sleep onset latency, REM sleep onset la tency, Stage 3/4 sleep
percentage, Arousal index, side effects
3. Background, Rationale, Significance
FNE is well described in both normal and pathological condition s in the literature 1. The main characteristics of
the first night effect are shorter total sleep time and REM sle ep time, lower sleep efficiency, longer REM sleep
latency, and decreased slow wave sleep 1. This reduced sleep quality is probably due to multiple factor s:
discomfort caused by electrodes,  limitation of movements, and t he unfamiliar environment of the sleep
laboratory. To improve recordings, the sleep lab offers individ ualization of the environment such as controlling
temperature, personal pillows and  sound proofing. Despite these  factors, there is a percentage of studies
reported (33-46%) that result in the need to either repeat the study or have the patient return to the lab for
titrating study 2,3. This results in increased cost as well as poorer patient expe rience 4.  Pre-medication with non-
benzodiazepines sleep aids has been shown to decrease the likel ihood of FNE 2,3, however with side effects such
as falls and post-study confusion, it is important to find an a lternative that is safer, more acceptable and
personable to patients 5.
Aromatherapy encompasses the therapeutic use of aromatic essent ial oils. These are ‘non-oily, highly fragrant
essences extracted from plants by distillation, which evaporate  readily’ 6. Essential oils are usually presented as
massage oils or lotions, in herb al packets under a pillow, or i n an ambient vapor machine. The mechanisms by
which they are thought to function by are: olfaction, topical a bsorption and/or ingestion through the oral cavity
7. Jimbo et al, proposes the action of aromatherapy begins from a  smell molecule combined with a receptor
particular to each specific odor 8.  The smell molecule passes along the nasal cavity and adheres  to the olfactory
epithelium.  The stimulus is then transmitted from the olfactor y bulb to the higher sensory centers in the
cerebral cortex 9
Lavender ( Lavender angustifolia ) aromatherapy has a long history of being commonly used for pr omoting sleep 
10-17 with almost no side effects. Specifically relevant to this stu dy, Goel and colleagues studied the effects of
lavender using PSG in young men and women in 2005. When compare d to the controls, participants in the
lavender arm showed improvement in slow wave sleep, % sleep tim e, along with gender differentiated effects
on stage 2, REM sleep and wake after sleep onset latency 18.  In addition, the prospective study conducted by the
neuroscience research department with residents in memory care,  showed an improvement of total sleep by 42
Version: ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  2 minutes and increase in sleep e fficiency by 6.31% with lavender  19 (manuscript submitted).  In this study, we 
hypothesize that lavender will improve sleep quality and reduce  the need for repeat PSGs, as effectively as 
zolpidem.  
Aromatherapy is currently being utilized in many Regions Hospit al departments with a positive patient response 
and experience.  In addition, the study conducted by the neuros cience research evaluating aromatherapy with 
total joint patients at Regions hospital showed; patients that chose aromatherapy report better patient 
satisfaction scores in regard to the control of pain.  In line with the triple aim, we think that this study will 
provide an opportunity to reduce total cost of care by reducing  the number of failed diagnostic PSGs 
(affordability ), resulting in earlier initiation of treatment ( health ), with improved patient experience 
(experience ). In addition, lavender provides a better safety profile than any sedatives that are currently being 
used for diagnostic sleep studies.  
4. Approach
a. Study design
We propose to do a pragmatic clinical study by recruiting patie nts who are scheduled for their first in
center diagnostic or split nigh t sleep study (PSG).  The overal l goal for this study is to show that lavender
is as effective as Zolpidem (non-inferiority analysis) with reg ard to improvement of sleep quality and
usability of diagnostic PSGs with sleep efficiency as the prima ry outcome.
b. Population
Briefly, we will use a convenienc e sample (non-random selection ) to recruit patients (refer to pre-screen
form for recruiting patients). We plan to enroll about 144 pati ents, 120 who were prescribed sleep
medications and 24 who agree to use lavender aromatherapy. Stud y would be considered complete if
the enrollment was 24 or more in both groups. Patients who are not prescribed any sleep
medication/aids or chose not to use them, will be offered laven der aromatherapy as an alternative. The
sleep aids are prescribed by the referring doctor.  We will con sent both patients who are prescribed/use
zolpidem during their diagnostic or split/night sleep study and  those that chose lavender. At the
Maplewood center, there are 45-50 sleep studies scheduled per w eek. We estimate that there are 15-20
patients per week that are eligible for the study.
Inclusion Criteria
xAge >=18 years
xIn-center diagnostic or split night sleep study (PSG)
c. Data collection process
i. Process steps for identification of patients or records
Refer to Figure 1. Briefly, when the patient checks in for the sleep study, the research team
reviews the chart to identify if  the patient is potentially eli gible for the study. The pre-screen
algorithm will be used.  The pati ents can qualify for the study
i. If the patient is prescribed zolpidem (Ambien) by the referri ng doctor for the sleep study
or
ii. If the patient has not been prescribed any sleep aid.
ii. Recruitment
Refer to Figure 1If the patient is eligible;
xscenario (i), they will be offere d to participate in the study  as part of the zolpidem group or
xScenario (ii), they will be offered to participate in the study  as part of the Lavender group.
Version: [12/5/16] 3 In either scenarios, the patient will be consented. Consent wil l be collected from both groups to 
ensure we can use their sleep study results. 
Figure 1: Process Steps 
iii. Data sources
xEPIC – Chart review
xQuestionnaires
xPolysomnogram (PSG) – Sleep Study
Refer to data dictionary for det ails regarding data that will b e collected from each of the 
sources. 
Table 1: Terms and Definitions – for Sleep Study 
Term Definitions 
Total Recording Time 
(TRT) Total amount of time during which the patient is in bed with re cording equipment 
activated 
Total Sleep Time (TST) Total amount of sleep time scored  during the total recording ti me; includes time from 
sleep onset to sleep offset and is distributed throughout the s leep time as minutes of 
Stage N1 sleep, Stage N2 sleep, Stage N3, and rapid eye movemen t (REM) sleep. 
Sleep efficiency Refers to percentage of total time in bed actually spent in sle ep. It is calculated as sum of 
Stage N1, Stage N2, Stage N3, and REM sleep, divided by the tot al time in bed and 
multiplied by 100
Sleep Latency Time in minutes from ‘lights off’ that marks the starting of to tal recording time to the first 
epoch scored as sleep 
Wake after Sleep Onset 
(WASO) Periods of wakefulness occurring after defined sleep onset 
Apnea-Hypopnea Index Number of apnea and hypopnea events per hour of sleep. 
Total Arousals # of transient phenomenon that may lead to wakefulness or only briefly interrupt sleep
Arousal index Total number of arousals x 60/TST (min) 
Sleep R Latency Rapid eye movement latency is the time from the sleep onset to the first epoch of REM 
sleep 
N1 Time Stage N1 Sleep Time 
N2 Time Stage N2 Sleep Time 
N3 Time Stage N3 Sleep Time 
REM Time Stage REM Sleep Time 
% N1 Minutes of N1 sleep stage × 100/TST 

Version:ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  4 % N2 Minutes of N2 sleep stage × 100/TST 
% N3 Minutes of N3 sleep stage × 100/TST 
% REM Minutes of REM sleep stage × 100/TST 
Limb Movements Repetitive limb movements that may disrupt sleep 
Lights On Time that recording of sleep is terminated 
Lights Off Time at which the patient is allowed to fall asleep and marks t he start of data that will be 
staged and analyzed. 
iv. Process steps for data acquisition
At this visit, study staff will review the consent form with th e patient. All of their questions will
be answered and they will be asked  to demonstrate their underst anding of participation. If they
would like to participate, they will sign the consent form. As scheduled, the patient will undergo
all the scheduled standard procedures for the diagnostic/split night study. Data will be extracted
and entered into REDCap by the study staff. No data outside of standard of care will be
collected.
d. Intervention, treatments
Intervention: Aromatherapy with Lavender using a diffuser. To be eligible for this intervention, the
participant should not be prescr ibed any sleep aid. We will be using commercially available lavender
essential oil and diffusers. Th e study staff will fill the diff user with water sufficient to run for about two
hours and recommended drops of oil will be added about 10 min b efore the lights are turned off. The
diffusers automatically turn off (mode – two hour shut off) whe n the water level falls below trigger in
about two hours.
Comparator: Oral Zolpidem.  To be eligible for this group, the participant was prescribed zolpidem for
the sleep study by referring doctor, i.e., pre-prescribed physi cian-directed use of zolpidem. For this
group, the subjects will take the prescribed medication prior t o the sleep study, as directed by the
physician.
Consent will be collected from both groups to ensure we can use  their sleep study results.
e. Outcomes/endpoint and other variable definitions, and instrum ents used
Sleep Efficiency:  Refers to percentage of total time in bed actually spent in sl eep. It is calculated as sum
of Stage N1, Stage N2,  Stage N3, and REM sleep, divided by the total time in bed an d multiplied by 100
A successful split night PSG or a diagnostic PSG:  Is a binary outcome (yes/no) based on chart review. The
outcome will be inferred from documentation in the chart either  in notes or PSG report showing a
successful split night or if a diagnosis is made or if a repeat  PSG is ordered.
Wake after sleep onset (WASO):  Periods of wakefulness occurring after defined sleep onset
Side effects:  For both the interventions, th e side effects w ill be inferred from post sleep study
questionnaire. The side effects will be described and compiled as a binary outcome (yes/no). This will be
used to report the safety profile of the two interventions as a n exploratory outcome.
Please refer to attached data dictionary for details.
f. Statistical analysis plan
Outcome measures will be graphed  and visually assessed to deter mine if the planned analyses are
appropriate for the distribution of the outcomes. Descriptive s tatistics (means, standard deviations,
Version: ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  5 frequencies, etc.) will be calcula ted overall and by group for the population demographic variables. We 
will then compare these characteristics between the two groups using t-tests, Wilcoxon, chi-square, and 
Fisher’s exact tests, as appropriate. Missing data will be cons idered to be missing at random and those 
subjects will be excluded from analysis. If a large proportion of data is missing (>10%), we will compare 
baseline characteristics between  subjects with missing and non- missing data. No adjustment for 
multiple comparisons will be done.  
All statistical analyses will be p erformed in SAS Version 9.4. This analysis plan was written by and will be 
executed by Lauren Erickson. 
Primary Outcomes :  
Non-inferiority of sleep efficacy when using lavender versus zo lpidem will be assessed using a one-sided, 
two-sample t-test. A noninferiority margin of 6% will be used f or sleep efficiency (see power calculation 
for justification). The null hypo thesis of inequality (differen ce is greater than or equal to 6%) is rejected 
in favor of the alternative hypothesis of equality (difference is less than margin) if the 1-sided p-value is 
less than 0.025. Due to the infl ated probability of a type 1 er ror with unequal sample sizes, we will 
perform a sensitivity analysis in which a random sample of 24 a ctive control participants will be 
compared to the lavender group. 
Secondary Outcomes :  
The secondary outcomes, rate of successful split night PSG and wake after sleep onset (WASO) latency 
will be analyzed similarly to the primary outcome. The noninfer iority margins for successful split night 
PSG and WASO are 13.5% and 16 mi nutes, respectively, and are ba sed on data from the three Lettieri 
studies2,3,20. 
Exploratory Outcomes:  
This is a descriptive aim. All v alues will be summarized using means and standard deviations or 
frequencies and percentages, as appropriate.  
g. Power analysis or statement of precision
We reviewed 3 previous studies by Lettieri2,3,20 in which the pooled average sleep efficiency was 88.3%
for treatment groups versus 79.0%  for controls. The absolute de fference in sleep efficiency was 9.3% (CI:
6% - 12.3%). We, therefore, will define the lower bound of our confidence interval, 6%, as the operative
noninferiority margin.
It is estimated based on clinical experience that five times as  many people have a sleep aid prescription
upon arrival to the sleep clinic. This was accounted for in the  power calculation. Therefore, group sizes
of 24 (treatment) and 120 (control) achieve 80% power to detect  non-inferirority using a one-sided two-
sample t-test. The noninferiority margin is 6%, the true differ ence between the means is assumed to be
0, the alpha level is 2.5% and the data are assumed to be drawn  from populations with standard
deviations of 8.4 and 13.3.
This power calculation was conducted using the Non-Inferiority Test of the Difference of Two Means
function in PASS.
h. Strengths and limitations
There is potential for bias due to non-randomized nature of stu dy. We will compare baseline
characteristics to determine if the groups are inherently diffe rent.
5. Setting/Environment/Organizational feasibility
Version: ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  6 This study will be conducted at the Maplewood Regions Hospital Sleep Laboratory. This location is appropriate, 
as the sleep studies are scheduled at this location. We think t hat this will not disturb the standard practice at the 
lab as it adds about 5 to 10 min to normal care. The staff time  for research is compensated and is supported by 
the department leaders. 
6. Risks and Benefits
There are minimal psychological or physical risks from particip ating in this study. The largest risk is the
possibility of an allergic reaction or sensitivity to lavender.  The risk of uncovering a previously unidentified
allergy is low.
7. Data Confidentiality and Privacy
This study involves almost no ri sk. There is possibility of a c onfidential breach of the collected data, which
may result in risk for reputatio n and social risk. To minimize the risk of data breach, the records of the study
will be kept private. In any sort of report we might publish, w e will not include any in formation that will make
it possible to identify the part icipant. Research records will be locked up or stored on a secure server with
password protection and only researchers on this study will be able to use the records.
8. Timeline
Jan – April 2018 (Study Development) 
xPrepare and Submit Application to Conduct Research/IRB
May – Nov 2019
xRecruitment, Enroll Patients
xData Collection
Dec 2019– Mar 2020
xAnalyze and interpret data
xPrepare abstract and manuscript
9. Dissemination/Sharing Resu lts/Integration and Impact
We will disseminate results throu gh presentation at internal Sl eep meetings, and medical exective committee
meetings for red fund. We also p lan to publish the results in  conferences and peer-reviewed journal for sleep.
10. References
1. Agnew Jr H, Webb WB, Williams RL. The First Night Effect: An Eeg Studyof Sleep. Psychophysiology.
1966;2(3):263-266.
2. Lettieri CJ, Eliasson AH, Andra da T, Khramtsov A, Kristo DA. Does zolpidem enhance the yield of
polysomnography? Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2005;1(02):129-131.
3. Lettieri CJ, Quast TN, Eliasso n AH, Andrada T. Eszopiclone im proves overnight polysomnography and continuous
positive airway pressure titration: a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Sleep. 2008;31(9):1310-
1316.
4. Brown LK. Quantum physics and polysomnography: can we prevent  the act of measuring sleep from changing
sleep? Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2005;1(02):133-135.
5. LLC s-aUS. Labeling-Package Inse rt - Ambien. 2018; FDA Label.  Available at:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/01990 8s042lbl.pdf . Accessed Sep 26 2018, 2018.
6. Tisserand R. Aromatherapy : to heal and tend the body.  Santa Fe, N.M.: Lotus Press; 1988.
7. Buckle J. Clinical aromatherapy and touch: complementary ther apies for nursing practice. Critical care nurse.
1998;18(5):54-61.
8. Jimbo D, Kimura Y, Taniguchi M, Inoue M, Urakami K. Effect of  aromatherapy on patients with Alzheimer's
disease. Psychogeriatrics : the official journal of the Japanese Psychog eriatric Society. 2009;9(4):173-179.
Version: ϭϮͬϯϭͬϮϬϭϵ  7 9. Axel R. The molecular logic of smell. Scientific American. 1995;273(4):154-159.
10. Buckle J. Clinical aromatherapy: Essential oils in practice.  Elsevier Health Sciences; 2014.
11. Holmes C, Ballard C. Ar omatherapy in dementia. Advances in psychiatric treatment. 2004;10(4):296-300.
12. Forrester LT, Maayan N, Orrell M, Spector AE, Buchan LD, Soa res-Weiser K. Aromatherapy for dementia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2:CD003150.
13. Henry J, Rusius C, Davies M, Veazey-French T. Lavender for n ight sedation of people with dementia.
International Journal of Aromatherapy. 1994;5(2):28-30.
14. Wolfe N, Herzberg J. LETTER TO THE EDITOR. Can Aromatherapy Oils Promote Sleep in Severely Demented
Patients? International journal of geriatric psychiatry. 1996;11(10):926-927.
15. Goel N, Kim H, Lao RP. An olfactory stimulus modifies nightt ime sleep in young men and women. Chronobiology
International. 2005;22(5):889-904.
16. Lillehei AS, Halcon LL. A systematic review of the effect of  inhaled essential oils on sleep. J Altern Complement
Med. 2014;20(6):441-451.
17. Lillehei AS, Halcón LL, Savik K , Reis R. Effect of Inhaled L avender and Sleep Hygiene on Self-Reported Sleep
Issues: A Randomized Controlled Trial. The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 2015;21(7):430-
438.
18. Goel N, Kim H, Lao RP. An olfactory stimulus modifies nightt ime sleep in young men and women. Chronobiology
international. 2005;22(5):889-904.
19. Leah R Hanson PhD BK, MBBS, PhD, Amanda Cagan BA, Katie Rine himer, Logan Stuck MS, Thomas Flottemesch
PhD, Jayne Clairmont BS, Linda Sackett-Lundeen, Erhard Haus, MD . Lavender Essential Oil Improved Sleep in
Residents of a Memory Care Assisted Living Facility2018.
20. Lettieri CJ, Collen JF, Eliasson AH, Quast TM. Sedative use during continuous positive airway pressure titration
improves subsequent compliance: a randomized, double-blind, pla cebo-controlled trial. Chest.
2009;136(5):1263-1268.