 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 1 of 38 
 
 Efficacy, Safety, and Tolerability of Switching 
EFV/TDF/FTC to B IC/FTC/TAF in Virologically 
Suppressed Adults with HIV-1 Infection .  
 
Protocol Number:  IN-US-380-4543  
 
Protocol Version/Date:        Original: 21 February 2018  
 
Indication: HIV-1 Infection 
 
Sponsor:  Midland Research Group, Inc. 
    1421 East Oakland Park Blvd.   Suite 200 
    Oakland Park, FL 33334 
    Phone: 954-375-1275  
    Fax: 954- 283-7618  
    Email: research@midlandresearchgroup.com  
 
Principal Investigator:  Noah Lee , DO  
 
Sub-investigator: Erik Lowman, DO   
 
Study Contact:     Noah Lee , DO 
    Phone: 954- 375-1275  
    Fax: 954- 283-7618  
    Email: nlee@midlandresearchgroup.com  
 
Protocol Funding 
Provided By: Gilead Sciences, Inc. 
  333 Lakeside Drive 
  Foster City, CA 94404 
 
Reviewing Investigational 
Review Board (IRB):            Chesapeake IRB 
 
Clinical Trials.gov 
Identifier:                Not Available 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT 
 
The information contained in this document, particularly unpublished data, is the property or under 
control of Midland Research Group, Inc., and is provided to you in confidence as a con sultant, for 
review, and an applicable Institutional Review Board or Independent Ethics C ommittee. The information 
is only to be used by you in connection with authorized clinical stu dies of the investigational drug 
described in the protocol. You will not disclose any of the information to ot hers without written 
authorization from Midland Research Group, Inc., except to the extent necessary to obtain informed 
consent from those persons to whom the drug may be administered.  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 2 of 38 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
ABBREVIATIONS           6 
1. INTRODUCTION          7 
 1.1 Rationale for the Study         7 
2.  STUDY OBJECTIVES          8 
 2.1  Primary Objective                    8 
 2.2  Secondary Objective                   8 
3. STUDY ENDPOINTS  8 
 3.1  Primary Endpoint                   8 
 3.2  Secondary Endpoint                   8 
4. STUDY DESIGN  8 
 4.1  Study Summary          8 
 4.2  Study Design          8 
 4.3  Sample Size           8 
 4.4  Target Population         8 
 4.5  Eligibility Criteria         9 
  4.5.1   Inclusion Criteria        9 
  4.5.2  Exclusion Criteria        9 
 4.6  Risks/Benefits          9 
5. STUDY DATA  10 
6.      STUDY DRUG/STUDY PROCEDURES        10 
 6.1  Study Drug          10 
  6.1.1   Formulation        10 
  6.1.1.1  Packaging and Labeling       10 
  6.1.1.2  Storage and Handling       10 
  6.1.2   Dosage and Administration      10 
  6.1.3   Prior and Concomitant Medications     10 
  6.1.4   Accountability for Study Drug      11 
  6.1.5   Product Return or Disposal      11 
 6.2  Study Procedure         11 
  6.2.1   Subject Enrollment       11 
  6.2.2   Assessments        11 
  6.2.2.1  Screening Visit        12 
  6.2.2.2  Day 1/Baseline Visit       12 
  6.2.2.3  Treatment Assessments ( Weeks 4- 48)     12 
  6.2.2.4  Early Study Drug Discontinuation Assessment    13 
  6.2.2.5  Criteria for Discontinuation of Study Treatment    13 
  6.2.3   Post Study Care       14 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 3 of 38 
 
   6.2.4   Clinical Laboratory Assessments     14 
  6.2.4.1  Blood Samples        14 
  6.2.4.2  Urine Samples        14 
  6.2.5   Virologic Failure        14 
  6.2.5.1  Management of Viral Rebound      14 
  6.2.5.2  Subjects with HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at Study Drug      
   Discontinuation or Week 48      15 
7. ADVERS EVENTS AND TOXICITY MANAGEMENT  15 
7.1  Definition of Adverse Events, Adverse Reactions, and Serious Adverse Events  15 
 7.1.1   Adverse Events        15 
 7.1.2   Serious Adverse Events       16 
 7.1.3   Clinical Laboratory Abnormalities and Other Abnormal Assessments as  
   Adverse Events or Serious Adverse Events    16 
7.2  Assessment of Adverse Events        16 
 7.2.1   Assessment of Causality for Study Drugs and Procedures  17 
 7.2.2   Assessment of Severity       17 
7.3  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events      17 
 7.3.1   Adverse Events        17 
 7.3.2   Serious Adverse Events       17 
7.4  Toxicity Management         17 
 7.4.1   Grades 1 and 2 Clinical Events or Laboratory Abnormality  18 
 7.4.2   Grade 3 Clinical Events or Laboratory Abnormality   18 
 7.4.3   Grade 4 Clinical Events or Laboratory Abnormality   18 
 7.4.4   ALT Flare        18 
 7.4.4.1  Management of ALT Flare      18 
 7.4.5   Management of Potential Hepatobiliary Toxicity    19 
7.5  Hepatitis C Management        19 
7.6  Special Situation Reports        19 
 7.6.1   Definitions of Special Situations      19 
 7.6.2   Instructions for Reporting Special Situations    19 
 7.6.2.1  Instructions for Reporting Pregnancies     19 
 7.6.2.2  Reporting Other Special Situations     20 
8. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  20 
 8.1  Analysis          20 
  8.1.1   Primary Endpoint       20 
  8.1.2   Secondary Endpoints       20 
 8.2  Analysis Conventions         20 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 4 of 38 
 
   8.2.1   Analysis Sets        20 
  8.2.2   Full Analysis Set       20 
  8.2.3   Safety         20 
 8.3  Data Handling Conventions        21 
 8.4  Demographic Data and Baseline Characteristics      21 
 8.5  Efficacy Analysis         21 
  8.5.1   Primary Analysis       21 
  8.5.1.1  United States FDA-defined Snapshot Algorithm    21 
  8.5.1.2  Analysis of Primary Efficacy Endpoint     21 
  8.5.2   Secondary Analysis       21 
 8.6  Safety Analysis          22 
  8.6.1   Extent of Exposure       22 
  8.6.2   Adverse Events        22 
  8.6.3   Laboratory Evaluations       22 
  8.6.4   Other Safety Evaluations      22 
 8.7  Patient Reported Outcomes        22 
 8.8  Sample Snapshots         22 
 8.9  Analysis Schedule         23 
9. RESPONSIBILITIES          23 
 9.1  Good Clinical Practice         23 
 9.2  Investigator Responsibilities        23 
  9.2.1   General Responsibilities       23 
  9.2.2   Control of Study Drug       23 
  9.2.3   Medical Decision Making      23 
  9.2.4   IRB/IEC Review and Approval      23 
  9.2.5   Informed Consent       24 
  9.2.6   Confidentiality        24 
  9.2.7   Study Files and Retention of Records     24 
  9.2.7.1  Records Retention as Required      24 
  9.2.7.2  Record Tranfer or Record Destruction     24 
  9.2.8   Case Report Forms       24 
  9.2.9   Study Drug Accountability and Return     25 
  9.2.10  Protocol Compliance       25 
 9.3 Sponsor Responsibilities        25 
  9.3.1   Protocol Modifications       25 
  9.3.2      Study Report and Publications      25 
  9.3.3   Payment Reporting       25 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 5 of 38 
 
   9.3.4   Access to informations for monitoring     25 
  9.3.5   Access to Information for Auditing or Inspeciton    25 
  9.3.6   Study Discontinuation       25 
10. PUBLICATIONS          25 
11. REFERENCES           26 
12.  APPENDIXES           28 
 Appendix 1. Schedule of Study Visits        28 
 Appendix 2.  Grading Scale fo Severity of Adverse Events and Laboratory Abnormal ities 29 
 Appendix 3. PRO Questionnaires        36 
 
 
LIST OF IN-TEXT TABLES 
 Table 1  Prior and Concomitant Medications      11 
 
LIST OF IN-TEXT FIGURES 
 Figure 1 Management of Virologic Rebound      15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 6 of 38 
 
 ABBREVIATIONS  
ABC    Abacavir  
AE   Adverse event 
ATR   Atripla®, EFV/FTC/TDF  
BIC   Bictegravir 
BMI   Body Mass Index 
CD4   Helper T lymphocytes positive for surface glycoprotein CD4 
CI   Confidence interval  
DLP   Distal symmetrical polyneuropathy 
DM2    Diabetes mellitus 2  
EFV   Efavirenz 
FDC   Fixed dose combination  
HAART   Highly active antiretroviral therapy 
HBsAg   Hepatitis B virus surface antigen serology 
HBV   Hepatitis B virus 
HCV    Hepatitis C virus 
HCV  Ab Hepatitis C virus antibody  
HTN   Hypertension 
IRB   Institutional review board  
NNRTI    N on-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor  
NRTI   Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor  
PI   Protease inhibitor  
PIN   Patient identification number 
PVR   Pure virologic response  
PRO    Patient reported outcomes 
RAL   Raltegravir  
RPV   Rilpivirine 
RTV  /R, Ritonavir  
TAF   Tenofovir alafenamide  
TDF   Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
TFV   Tenofovir  
VL   HIV viral load 
  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 7 of 38 
 
 1. INTRODUCTION 
 Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV) is a life threatening and serious infection throughout the world.  
The World Health Organization estimates between 30-43 million people are living wi th HIV worldwide. The 
natural progression of the disease cripples the immune system, leading to uncheck ed infections and 
ultimately death. 
 
 With the advent of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), we saw HIV transform from a terminal 
infection into a chronic disease that was managed with drugs. This transformation, howe ver, required three 
drug combination regimens to prevent HIV from developing resistance to the drug. This  resulted in 
numerous pills taken at strict dosing intervals frequently throughout the day. As tr eatments evolved, therapy 
required fewer pill numbers and decreased dosing intervals. This tre nd eventually gave way to 
efavirenz/emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (EFV/FTC/TDF) co-formulated into a single tablet, 
ATRIPLA®. This was the advent of the single tablet regimen —one pill, once a day. ATRIPLA® has many 
years of proven efficacy and improved patient adherence1 
 
 With the continued evolution of potent HAART, virologically suppressed HIV -infected patients are often 
switched to safer and better tolerated drugs1. Both older patients with age associated comorbidities and 
younger patients, who can fairly expect to be on antivirals for many years to c ome, are rightly concerned 
about side effects and toxicities of long term exposure to highly potent medications . Patients depend on 
their providers to optimize long term safety and tolerability in their antiretroviral th erapy. 
 
1.1 Rationale for the Study  
 Therapeutic dosage of the tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) component of ATRIPL A® requires plasma 
concentrations of the drug that are associated with nephrotoxicity and decreased bon e mineral density3.  
Tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (TAF) has a unique metabolism that results in hi gher intracellular levels of 
the active phosphorylated moiety tenofovir-diphosphate2. Compared with TDF, the therapeutic dosage of 
TAF reduces tenofovir plasma concentrations by over 90%. This reduction in plasma concentrati on results 
in decreased renal and bone risks.  TAF has the potential to improve on the efficacy and safety profile of 
TDF. 
 
 Efavirenz, another component of ATRIPLA® is widely associated with neuropsychi atric side-effects, 
including sleep disturbances, depression, and anxiety4. Switching from Efavirenz to an integrase inhibitor 
is associated with improvements in mood5,6.  
 
 Bictegravir (BIC) is a novel, once daily integrase inhibitor. It has been sho wn to have potent antiviral activity, 
a favorable pharmacokinetic profile, good tolerability and an improved resistance prof ile when compared to 
previous integrase inhibitors.10,11. In a phase 2 trial investigating previously untreated people with HIV, 
bictegravir plus emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide (BIKTARVY®) vs  dolutegravir, plus emtricitabine 
and tenofovir alafenamide both showed high efficacy up to 24 weeks and bo th regimens were well 
tolerated.12 
 
 Additionally, switching HAART experienced patients to BIKTARVY® has been s hown to be non-inferior to 
continuation of regimens containing Atazanavir or Darunavir, when they  were given with either 
lamivudine/abacavir or FTC/TDF.13 
 
 We plan to evaluate in a real world setting the efficacy, safety and tolerabil ity of switching from the older, 
established single tablet regimen of ATRIPLA® (EFV/FTC/TDF) to a new single tabl et regimen of 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF). 
 
 Within the limitations of a real-world study, we have attempted to replicate t he protocol of Gilead Science’s 
Phase 3 study evaluating a switch to BIC/FTC/TAF from dolutegravir plus eithe r FTC/TAF or FTC/TDF14.  
This will have the potential benefit of comparing different regimen switches  as well as potentially adding 
robustness to the body of data regarding BIC/FTC/TAF. 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 8 of 38 
 
 2. STUDY OBJECTIVES 
2.1. The primary objective of the study is: 
• To evaluate the proportion of participants with virologic failure determined by HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50  
copies/mL at week 48 in virologically suppressed patients with HIV-1 infection   switching from 
ATRIPLA® to BIKTARVY®. 
 
2.2. The secondary objectives of the study are: 
• To determine the safety of switching from ATRIPLA® to BIKTARV®Y in virologically suppressed 
patients with HIV-1 infection as determined by the proportion of participants with vir ologic failure, a 
rise in serum creatinine values, a change in lipid parameters, and change in CD4 cell count from 
baseline.   
• To determine the efficacy of switching from ATRIPLA® to BIKTARVY® in virologically suppressed 
patients with HIV-1 infection as determined by the proportion of participants wi th HIV-1 RNA < 50 
copies/Ml. 
• To evaluate tolerability, durability of BIKTARVY® in virologically  suppressed patients with the aid 
of 2 Patient Reported Outcomes (PRO) questionnaires (see appendix 3) .  
 
3. STUDY ENDPOINTS 
3.1.   Primary Endpoint  
• The primary efficacy endpoint is the proportion of subjects that have HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at week 
48, as defined by the FDA snapshot analysis. 
3.2.   Secondary Endpoints  
• The proportion of subjects that have HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/mL at week 48, as defined by the FDA 
snapshot analysis. 
• The change from baseline in serum creatinine at Week 48 
• The change from baseline in CD4 cell count at Week 48 
• The change from baseline in lipid parameters at Week 48 
• The change in responses to the PROs from baseline at Week 4, 12, and 48 
 
4. STUDY DESIGN 
4.1. Study Summary 
Prospective 48 week single cohort study to evaluate the efficacy and safet y of switching from ATRIPLA to 
BIKTARVY® in HIV-1 infected adult subjects who are virologically supp ressed (HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/mL).  
 
4.2. Study Design 
This protocol describes a prospective study involving the switch of HIV infected pati ents currently on 
ATRIPLA® that are virologically suppressed (HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/mL) to BIKTARVY® and monitoring 
them over a 48-week period. 
4.3. Sample Size  
 All patients meeting eligibility will be included in the study, the expected sample size being a total number 
of subjects: 100 HIV-infected adults. 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 9 of 38 
 
 4.4. Target Population 
HIV-1 infected adults (≥ 18 years) with HIV -1 RNA < 50 copies/mL on a stable  ATRIPLA® regimen prior to 
screening. 
4.5. Eligibility Criteria:  
4.5.1.    Inclusion Criteria.  
Subjects must meet all, of the following criteria:   
• ≥18 years of age  
• HIV positive 
• On a stable antiretroviral regimen consisting of ATRIPLA® for at least t he 6 consecutive months 
preceding Screening Visit. 
• Plasma HIV-1 RNA concentrations at undetectable levels for at least 6 consecutive months prior to the 
screening visit and have HIV RNA< 50 copies/mL at the Screening Visit. 
• Estimated GFR ≥30mL/min according to the Cockcroft -Gault formula for creatinine clearance. 
• Hepatic transaminases (AST and ALT) ≤5x upper limit of normal (ULN)  
• Total bilirubin ≤1.5 mg/dL, or normal direct bilirubin.  
• Adequate hematologic function (hemoglobin ≥ 8.5g/dL; platelets ≥ 50,000/mm3; absolute neutrophil count 
≥1,000/mm3) 
• Female subjects of reproductive potential using a reliable and consiste nt method of birth control for at least 
three months prior to study dosing.  Male subjects should use condoms when engaging in intercourse of 
reproductive potential. 
• The ability to understand and sign a written informed consent form, which mus t be obtained prior to initiation 
of study procedures. 
 
4.5.2.     Exclusion Criteria 
• A new AIDS-defining condition diagnosed within 30 days prior to screening. 
• Individuals with decompensated cirrhosis. (i.e. ascites, encephalopathy, etc.) 
• Pregnancy 
• A history of malignancy within the past 5 years (prior to screening) or ongo ing malignancy other than 
cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), basal cell carcinoma, or resected, noninvas ive cutaneous squamous 
carcinoma. Individuals with cutaneous KS are eligible but must not have received a ny systemic therapy for 
KS within 30 days prior to baseline.  
• Active, serious infections (other than HIV-1 infection) requiring parenteral antibiotic or an tifungal therapy 
within 30 days prior to baseline.  
• Life expectancy < 1 year. 
• Subject participation in any clinical trial without prior approval from the Investigator . 
• Concomitant use of disallowed agents from Table 2 
• Participation in any other investigation study 30 days prior to enrollment. 
 
4.6. Risks/ Benefits  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 10 of 38 
 
 There are potential risks for adverse reactions and for patient intolerance to the investi gational drug. 
Benefits include the potential loss of neuropsychiatric effects of efavirenz as well as the documented 
reduced nephrotoxicity and bone mineral loss with switching from TDF to TAF. 
5. STUDY DATA 
 Demographic summaries will include sex, race/ethnicity, age, prior antivira l therap ies and (if available) 
pertinent prior mutations. Data relevant to endpoint evaluation includes subject HAART regimen, vi ral load 
(VL), CD4 T-cell count, fasting lipid panel, serum creatinine, PRO, at initial screening, weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, 
36 and 48.  
 
6. STUDY DRUG/STUDY PROCEDURES 
6.1 STUDY DRUG 
6.1.1  Formulation 
The BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF 50/200/25 mg) tablets are capsule-shaped, film coated pur plish-brown, 
debossed with “GSI” on one side of the tablet and “9883” on the other side of the tablet. Each tablet core 
contains 50 mg of bictegravir, 200 mg of emtricitabine, and 25 mg of tenofovir al afenamide. In addition to 
the active ingredients the BIKTARVY® tablets contain croscarmellose sodium, magnesium stearate, and 
microcrystalline cellulose. The tablet cores are film-coated with iron ox ide red, iron oxide black, polyethylene 
glycol, polyvinyl alcohol, talc, titanium dioxide. 
6.1.1.1 Packaging and Labeling 
 BIKTARVY® is packaged in white, high density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles. Each bottle contains 30 
tablets, silica gel desiccant and polyester packing material. Each bottle is enc losed with a white, continuous 
thread, child-resistant polypropylene screw cap with an induction-sealed and aluminum- faced liner. 
6.1.1.2 Storage and Handling  
Study drug will be stored at controlled room temperature of 25°C (77°F); excursions are permitted between 
15°C and 30°C (59°F and 86°F). Storage conditions are specified on the label. Until dis pensed to the 
subjects, all bottles of study drugs should be stored in a securely locked area, accessibl e only to those 
authorized site personnel. 
To ensure the stability and proper identification, study drug should not be stored in a contai ner other than 
the container in which they were supplied. Keep the bottle tightly closed to protect from m oisture. 
Consideration should be given to handling, preparation, and disposal through measures that m inimize drug 
contact with the body. Appropriate precautions should be followed to avoid d irect eye contact or exposure 
through inhalation when handling. 
6.1.2  Dosage and Administration 
BIKTARVY® will be provided by Gilead. Study drug is taken once daily, at approximately the same time 
every day.   Each BIKTARVY® tablet contains 50mg of bictegravir (BIC), 200mg of emtric itabine (FTC), and 
25mg of tenofovir alafenamide (TAF).  
 
6.1.3  Prior and Concomitant Medications 
With the following exceptions, subjects should continue to receive treatment for other conditions, 
prophylactic vaccines as per local medical guidelines and primary provider recommen dations.  
The use of medications for the treatment of HIV, other than the study drug, is prohibited. 
Medications and herbal/natural supplements listed in the following table are disa llowed or should be used 
with caution while subjects are participating in the study. Subjects will ref rain from consumption of grapefruit 
juice and Seville orange juice throughout participation in the study. 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 11 of 38 
 
  
 
 
Table 1 Prior and Concomitant Medications 
Drug Class Use for a minimum of 2 hours before and 2 hours after any 
dose of study drug 
Antacids Tums or Rolaids 
Buffered medications The ulcer medication sucralfate (Carafate) , supplements 
that contain calcium, iron or zinc  
Drug Class • Agents Disallowed -- must be discontinued at least 30 days 
prior to the Day 1 visit and for the duration of the study. 
Antiarrhythmic Agent Dofetilide 
Anticonvulsants Phenobarbital, Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, Oxcarbazepine 
Antimycobactrerials Rifampin, Rifapentine, Rifabutin 
Antiretrovirals Any antiretroviral that is not part of the study regimen 
GI motility Agents Cisapride 
Herbal/Natural Supplements St. John’s Wort, Echinacea  
If subjects need to initiate treatment with any excluded concomitant medication, the Investigat or must be 
consulted prior to initiation of the new medication. 
 
6.1.4  Accountability for Study Drug 
Subjects will be instructed to bring all study medication in the original conta iner at each clinic visit for drug 
accountability. The Investigator will be responsible for maintaining accurate rec ords for all study drug bottles 
dispensed and tablets returned. The inventory and dispensing logs must be available for inspectio n. Study 
medication supplies, including partially used or empty bottles, must be accounte d for by the study staff prior 
to destruction of return. 
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring adequate accountability of all us ed and unused study drug. 
This included acknowledgement of receipt of each shipment of study drug (quality and cond ition). All used 
and unused study drug dispensed to subjects must be returned to the site. 
Study Drug accountability records will: 
• Date received and quantity of IP kits 
• Date, subject number, subject initials, the IP kit number dispensed 
• Date, quantity of used and unused IP returned, along with the initials of the person recording the 
information  
 
6.1.5  Product Return or Disposal 
Study drug return or disposal will be performed on site. Unopened drugs that were not dispensed will be 
returned to Gilead. 
6.2  Study Procedure 
The study procedures to be conducted for each subject enrolled are as follows (also in table form in 
appendix 2).  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 12 of 38 
 
 6.2.1  Subject Enrollment  
It is the responsibility of the Investigator to ensure that subjects are eligible for study prior to t heir 
enrollment.  
6.2.2    Assessments 
6.2.2.1 Screening Visit 
Subjects will be screened within 30 days before Day 1 to determine eligibility for partici pation in the study. 
The following will be performed and documented at screening: 
• Obtain written informed consent(s) 
• Obtain medical history, including history of HIV-1 disease related events and current medic ations 
as well as any medications within 30 days of the screening visit 
• If available, obtain documentation of historical genotype(s) and Hepatitis B immuni ty. 
• Obtain measurements of blood pressure, pulse, temperature, height and weight 
• Complete physical exam (genital/rectal exam, if clinically indicated) 
• Obtain blood and urine samples as described in section 6.2.9 
• Record all AE/SAE’s to any protocol mandated procedures occurring after signing of the consent 
form 
Subjects meeting all inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria will return to the clini c within 30 days for 
the Day 1Visit. Subjects must continue their current HAART up until their scheduled Day 1 V isit 
6.2.2.2  Day 1/Baseline Visit 
The Investigator must have confirmed eligibility before proceeding with the Day 1 Vis it. 
The subject must complete prior to being administered the study drug: 
• Subject will read PRO questionnaires (appendix 3) and write/mark answers direc tly onto 
questionnaire. 
• Review/record SAE/ AE’s and changes in c oncomitant medications 
• Obtain measurements of blood pressure, pulse, temperature, height and weight 
• Complete physical exam (genital/rectal exam, if clinically indicated) 
• Obtain blood and urine samples as described in section 6.2.9 
• Dispense study drug 
• Observe first dose administration of study drug. 
• Subjects will be counseled regarding the importance of adherence and taking the study 
medication at the same time each day. 
• Record all AE/SAE’s to any protocol mandated procedures  
 
 
6.2.2.3  Treatment Assessments (Week 4-48) 
The following evaluations are to be completed at Weeks 4, 8, 12, 24, 36, and 48. 
Study visits are to be completed within ±2 days of the protocol specified  visit date (based on the Day 1 visit) 
through Week 12, visits for Week 12, 24, 36 and 48 should be completed ±6 days of the protocol specified 
date.  If the subject is not evaluated within the visit window, the database will refle ct missing/no available 
data for that visit. 
Regularly scheduled evaluations will be made on all the subjects, even if they  no longer are receiving study 
drug. 
The following will be completed at each visit: 
• Subject will read PRO questionnaires (appendix 3) to themselves and write/mar k answers directly 
onto questionnaire. 
• Review/record of SAE/AE’s and changes in concomitant  medications 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 13 of 38 
 
 • Obtain measurements of blood pressure, pulse, temperature, height and weight 
• Complete or symptom directed physical exam, as clinically indicated 
• Subjects will be reminded of the importance of adherence and taking the study medication at t he 
same time each day 
• Obtain blood and urine samples as described in section 6.2.4.1 
• Document dispensing of study drug and accountability for all study drugs. 
• Subjects should be reminded of the importance of adherence and taking the study medication at 
the same time each day. 
• Record all AE/SAE’s to any protocol mandated procedures  
• Subjects who meet criteria for virologic failure will be managed according to the Managemen t of 
Virologic Rebound Section 6.2.5. 
 
A prescription will be provided for continuation of antiviral therapy at the final study appointment. The 
subject will receive an additional 7 day supply of the study drug to prevent lapse in thera py. 
 
6.2.2.4 Early Study Drug Discontinuation Assessment 
If the subject discontinues the study drug prior to the Week 48 Visit, the subj ect will be asked to return to 
the clinic within 5 days of stopping study drug for the Early Study Drug Disconti nuation Visit. Every attempt 
should be made to keep the subject in the study and continue to perform the required f ollow ups and 
procedures through to the Week 48 Visit (see Section 6.2. 2.3). If this is not acceptable to the subject or 
investigator, the subject may be withdrawn from the study. 
If the subject discontinues the study drug and without notifying the Investigator withi n 5 days, the subject 
may be withdrawn from the study, at the Investigator’s discretion.  
At the Early Study Discontinuation Visit, any evaluations showing ab normal results indicating that there is 
a possible or probable causal relationship with the study drug will be repeated weekly (or as often as 
deemed prudent by the Investigator) until the abnormality is resolved/returns to bas eline (based on Day 1 
Visit) or is otherwise explained. 
The following will be completed: 
• Review/record of SAE/AE’s and chan ges in concomitant medications 
• Obtain measurements of blood pressure, pulse, temperature, height and weight 
• Complete or symptom directed physical exam, as clinically indicated 
• Obtain blood and urine samples as described in section 6.2.4.1 
• Document accountability for all study drugs. 
 
6.2.2.5 Criteria for Discontinuation of Study Treatment 
Study Medication will be discontinued in the following instances 
• Unacceptable toxicity, or toxicity that in the judgement of the investigator compromises th e ability 
to continue study specific procedures or is considered to not be in the subject’s best interest  
• Subject request to discontinue for any reason 
• Pregnancy during the study 
• Development of active tuberculosis 
• Discontinuation of the study at the request the IRB 
Study medication may be discontinued in the following instances: 
• Intercurrent illness that would in the judgement of the investigator affects assessments of c linical 
status to a significant degree. Following resolution of the intercurrent illness, the subject m ay 
resume study dosing at the discretion of the investigator. 
• Lack of efficacy 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 14 of 38 
 
 • Subject noncompliance 
6.2.3  Post Study Care 
After a subject has completed/terminated their participation in the study, long-term care for the subject w ill 
remain the responsibility of their primary treating provider. 
6.2.4  Clinical Laboratory Assessments 
Blood and urine samples will be collected throughout the study as outlined below, within S ection 6.2, and 
also in Appendix 1 Study Procedure Table. 
6.2.4.1  Blood Samples 
Blood sample collection for the following: 
• Chemistry profile: alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, direct and indirect bi lirubin, total protein, 
albumin, CPK, bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), chloride, creatinine, glucose, potassium, sodium 
• Fasting glucose and lipid panel (total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, and triglycerides) at Day 1, Weeks 12, 24, 
48. 
▪ If the patient is not fasting (no food or drinks except water for at least 8 hours prior to blood 
collection. 
▪ If the subject has not fasted prior to the visit, the visit may proceed but the subject must 
return within 72 hours in a fasted state to draw labs 
• Hematology profile: complete blood count (CBC) with differential and platelet counts 
• CD4+ cell count and percentage 
• Plasma Quantitative HIV-1 RNA 
• If no documented Hepatitis B immunity : Hepatitis B surface antigen, surface antibody and core antibody 
at Screening, Week 48. 
▪ The following tests will be conducted if the following criteria are met: 
• If positive surface antigen : plasma qualitative and quantitative 
HBV DNA, Hepatitis B virus e-antigen and antibody 
• If positive core antibody with negative surface antigen and 
surface antibody:  plasma qualitative and quantitative HBV DNA, 
Hepatitis B virus e-antigen and antibody 
• For subjects who are coinfected with Hepatitis B, plasma quantitative Hepatitis B DNA 
• Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) antibody (subjects who are HCV antibody positive will have HCV RNA te st 
performed) at Screening and Week 48.  
• Plasma and serum storage sample for safety or virology testing (all visits except Scree ning Visit). 
6.2.4.2  Urine samples 
Urine samples will be collected for the following: 
• Urinalysis 
• Urine pregnancy testing (If positive at screening, subject will not be enrolled.  If positive at subsequent 
visit, study medication will be discontinued) 
6.2.5  Virologic Failure 
Virologic failure is defined as virologic rebound or having HIV- 1 RNA ≥  50 copies/mL at study 
discontinuation or week 48   
6.2.5.1  Management of Viral Rebound 
Subjects who meet either of the criteria listed below will be considered to have viro logic rebound: 
• At any post Day 1 Visit, an HIV- 1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL which is subsequently confirmed at the following  
visit (scheduled or unscheduled) 
• Any subject with HIV- 1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at study drug discontinuati on  
Following the unconfirmed virologic rebound, subjects will be asked to return to the c linic for a blood draw, 
4 weeks after the date of the original test that had an RNA ≥50 copies/mL.  If virol ogic rebound is confirmed 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 15 of 38 
 
 and the HIV- 1 RNA is ≥ 200 copie s/mL, the blood sample from the confirmation visit will be the primary 
sample used for HIV- 1 genotypic and phenotypic testing. After a subject’s first post -baseline resistance 
test, additional testing will be conducted on a case- by-case basis. Any subject may be discontinued at 
Inves tigator’s discretion or per local treatment guidelines.  
If no resistance is detected from the genotype or phenotype, the subject ma y remain on study drug and 
HIV-1 RNA test should be again repeated 2-3 weeks later. If HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL remains 
Investigators should carefully evaluate the risks and benefits of remaining on study drug and document this 
assessment in the on-site medical record. 
Subjects who are nonadherent on an ongoing basis will be considered for disconti nuation per the 
Investigator’s discretion or local treatment guidelines. Sub-investigators who opt to discontinue study drugs 
for an individual subject must discuss with the Investigator prior to study drug discontinuation. 
For subjects who are off study drug but remain in study, it will be the Investigator’s discretion to manage  
virologic rebound. 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
6.2.5.2 Subjects with HIV- 1 RNA ≥  50 copies/mL at Study Drug Discontinuation or Week 48 
Subjects with HIV- 1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at Study Drug Discontinuation, last Visit, or Week 48 w ill be 
considered virologic failures. Subjects with HIV- 1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at Week 48 will be asked to return 
for an unscheduled visit within 4 weeks for a retest as detailed in Section 6.2.5. Subjects with HIV-1 RNA 
≥ 200 copies/mL will also have resistance testing as detailed in Section 6.2. 5. 
 
7 ADVERSE EVENTS AND TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 
7.1 Definition of Adverse Events, Adverse Reactions, and Serious Adverse Events 
7.1.1 Adverse Events  Rebound in HIV- ͳ RNA to ≥ 5Ͳ copies/mL
Confirm results with 5 days
confirmed ≥ 5Ͳ copies/mL
remain on study drug, check HIV- 1 
genotype
If NOnew Reverse Transcriptase or 
Integrase mutations detected, 
contiue on study drug. Repeat viral 
load in 4 weeks.If new Reverse Transcriptase or 
Integrase mutations detected, 
discontinue study drug and construct 
new ART regimenrepeat result <50 copies/mL
remain on current regimen, 
resume typical study protocol
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 16 of 38 
 
 An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study  subject which does not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with the medicinal product. An AE can be any unfavorable and/or 
unintended sign, symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal pro duct whether 
or not considered related to the medicinal product. AEs may also include  pre or post treatment 
complications that occur, as a result of protocol specified procedures, lack of effi cacy, over dose, drug 
abuse/misuse reports, or occupational exposure. Preexisting events that increase in severity  or change in 
nature during or as a consequence of participation in the clinical study will also be con sidered AEs. 
 An AE does not include the following: 
• Medical or surgical procedures such a surgery, endoscopy, tooth extraction, and transf usion. The condition 
that led to the procedure may be an adverse event and must be reported. 
• Preexisting diseases, conditions, or laboratory abnormalities present or detected b efore the screening visit 
that do not worsen. 
• Situations where an untoward medical occurrence has not occurred (e.g., hos pitalization for elective 
surgery, social or convenience admissions) 
• Overdose without clinical sequalae (see Section 7.6.1) 
• Any Medical condition or clinically significant laboratory abnormality  with an onset date before the consent 
form is signed and not related to a protocol associated procedure is not an AE. It is considered to be 
preexisting and should be documented in the medical record. 
7.1.2 Serious Adverse Events  
 A serious adverse event (SEA) is defined as an event that, at any dose, results in the  following: 
• Death 
• Life-threatening event in which the subject is at risk of death at the time of event. It does not refer to an 
event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe. 
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization 
• Persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
• Congenital anomaly/birth defect in offspring of study subject born after subject received study drug  
• A medically important event or reaction that may not immediately result i n death, hospitalization, or life-
threatening event but may jeopardize the subject or may require intervention to preve nt an SAE from 
occurring. Medical and scientific judgement must be exercised to determine whether s uch an event is 
reportable under expedited reporting rules. Examples of this type of occurrence would inc lude intensive 
treatment for allergic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in  hospitalization, 
development of drug dependency/abuse. For the avoidance of doubt, infections result ing from 
contaminated medical product will be considered a medically important event and s ubject to expedited 
reporting requirements. 
7.1.3  Clinical Laboratory Abnormalities and Other Abnormal Assessments as Adverse Events or Serious     
Adverse Events 
 Laboratory abnormalities ( e.g., clinical chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis) that require medic al or 
surgical intervention or lead to study drug interruption, modification or discontinu ation must be recorded 
as an AE or SAE. In addition, laboratory or other abnormal assessments ( e.g., EKG, x-rays, and vital 
signs) that are associated with signs and/or symptoms must be recorded as an AE or SA E if they meet 
the definition detailed in Sections 7.1.1 and 7.1.2. If the laboratory abnormality i s part of a syndrome, 
record the syndrome or diagnosis, not the laboratory result (i.e. “anemia ,” not “decreased hemoglobin”).  
 For specific information on handling of clinical laboratory abnormalities in th is study, please refer to Section 
7.5. 
7.2  Assessment of Adverse Events  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 17 of 38 
 
  The investigator or qualified sub-investigator is responsible for assessing  AEs and SAEs for causality and 
severity as well as for final review and confirmation of accuracy of event information and  assessments. 
7.2.1  Assessment of Causality for Study Drugs and Procedures 
 The investigator or qualified sub-investigator is responsible for assessing t he relationship to the study drug 
using clinical judgement and the following considerations: 
• No: Evidence exists that the adverse event has an etiology other than the study drug. For SAEs, an 
alternative causality must be provided (e.g., preexisting condition, underlying disease, 
intercurrent illness, or concomitant medication). 
• Yes:  There is reasonable possibility that the event may have been caused by the study drug.  
 It should be emphasized that ineffective treatment should not be considered as causally related in the 
context of adverse reporting. 
 The relationship to study procedures (e.g., invasive procedures such as venipunc ture) should be assessed 
using the following considerations: 
• No: Evidence exists that the adverse event has an etiology other than the study procedure. 
• Yes:  The adverse event occurred, as a result of protocol procedures. 
7.2.2  Assessment of severity 
 AE severity should be recorded and graded according to the Grading Scale for Sev erity of Adverse Events 
and laboratory Abnormalities (Appendix 2). For AE associated with laboratory a bnormalities, the event 
should be graded on the basis of the clinical severity in the context of the underlying conditions; which might 
not be in agreement with the grading of the laboratory abnormality. 
 The distinction between the seriousness and the severity of an AE shoul d be noted. Severe is a measure 
of intensity; a severe reaction is not necessarily a serious reaction. For exampl e, a subject might have a 
headache that is described as severe but would not be considered a SAE unless it met one of the criteria 
for serious events. 
7.3  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events 
7.3.1  Adverse Events 
 Following initiation of study medication, all AEs regardless of cause or relationship until end of study must 
be reported to the study database. 
 All AEs should be followed up until resolution/return to baseline or until the  adverse event is stable, if 
possible.  
7.3.2  Serious Adverse Events 
 All SAEs regardless of cause or relationship that occurs after the subject signs the informed consent and 
until the duration of the study, including the protocol defined follow-up period, must be reported. This also 
includes any SAEs resulting from protocol associated procedures performed after inf ormed consent is 
signed. 
 Investigators are not obligated to actively seek SAEs after the protocol defined fol low up period; however, 
if the investigator learns of any SAEs that occur after study participation has  concluded and the event is 
deemed relevant to the use of the study drug, they should promptly document and report the event. 
7.4        Toxicity Management  
 All clinical events and clinically significant laboratory toxici ties will be managed according to uniform 
guidelines detailed in Appendix 2 and as outlined below. 
• Clinical events and clinically significant laboratory abnormalities  will be graded according to the 
Grading Scale for Severity of Adverse Events and laboratory Abnormalities (Appendix 2 ). 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 18 of 38 
 
 • Grade 3 and 4 clinically significant laboratory abnormalities should be  confirmed by repeat testing 
within 7 calendar days of receiving results and before study drug discontinu ation, unless such a delay 
is not consistent with good medical practice. 
 Any questions regarding toxicity management should be directed to the Investigator. 
7.4.1  Grades 1 and 2 Clinical Event or Laboratory Abnormality  
 Continue study drug at the discretion of the Investigator 
7.4.2  Grade 3 Clinical Event or Laboratory Abnormality 
 For Grade 3 clinical event or clinically significant laboratory ab normality, study drug may be continued if the 
event is considered to be unrelated to study drug. 
 For a Grade 3 clinical event or clinically significant laboratory abnormal ity confirmed by repeat testing that 
is considered to be related to the study drug , study drug will be withheld until the toxicity returns to ≤ grade 
2. When restarting study drug following resolution of the adverse event, the study drug sho uld be restarted 
at full dose. 
 If following re-challenge with study drug a laboratory abnormalit y returns to ≥ Grade 3 and is considered to 
be related to the study drug, then the study drug will be permanently discontinued and the subject managed 
according to local practice. Recurrence of laboratory abnormalities considered unrelated to the study dru g 
may not require permanent discontinuation. 
7.4.3  Grade 4 Clinical Events or Laboratory Abnormality  
 For a Grade 4 clinical event or clinically significant laboratory abnormal ity confirmed by repeat testing that 
is considered to be related to the study drug, the study drug will be permanen tly discontinued and the 
subject managed according to local practice. The subject should be followed as c linically indicated until the 
laboratory abnormality returns to baseline or is otherwise explained, whichever occurs first.  
 A clinically significant Grade 4 laboratory abnormality that is not conf irmed by repeat testing should be 
managed according to the algorithm for the new toxicity grade. 
 Study drug may be continued without dose interruption for a clinically non-s ignificant Grade 4 laboratory 
abnormality (e.g., elevated CK after significant exercise or triglycerid e elevation on a non-fasting specimen) 
or a clinical event considered unrelated to the study drug, but must be discussed with the Inv estigator. 
7.4.4  ALT Flare 
 Defined as: serum ALT > 10 x upper limit of normal (ULN) and > 2 times Day  1 value, confirmed with repeat 
testing within 3 days of original results receipt, with or without associated symptoms 
7.4.4.1 Management of ALT Flare 
 When initial results are received, schedule subject to return to the clinic as soon as pos sible (ideally within 
3 days of initial blood draw). During the visit, in addition to redrawing blood for repeat CMP  testing, clinical 
assessment of the subject will be performed. The assessment should include a phy sical examination and 
evaluation of the subject’s mental status.  
 If ALT elevation is confirmed, the following labs should be performed: pla sma HBV DNA, HBV serology 
(HBsAg and HBsAb), HAC IgM, HCV serology, quantitative HDV RNA.  
 Based on the results of the confirmatory tests, the following treatment modifications are recomm ended: 
Elevated liver enzymes, normal or stable total bilirubin relative to Day 1 
 If ALT levels are elevated (as specified in Section 7.4.4) with normal or stable total bilirubin, the 
subject may remain on the study drug and should be monitored weekly until ALT lev els return to 
normal or Day 1 level. During monitoring, if the ALT values remain persisten tly elevated, the 
Investigator considers whether the study drug should be discontinued. 
Elevated liver enzymes, elevated total bilirubin 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 19 of 38 
 
  If ALT levels are elevated (as specified in Section 7.4 .4) and total bilirubin is confirmed to be ≥ 2 x 
Day 1 value and is > ULN, the investigator should consider discontinuing the study drug. The subject 
should be monitored weekly until ALT and total bilirubin levels return to normal or Day 1 level . 
During monitoring, if the ALT values and the liver function tests remain persi stently elevated, the Investigator 
should consider discontinuing the study drug. 
 
7.4.5  Management of Potential Hepatobiliary Toxicity 
 Any subject exhibiting signs/symptoms or laboratory abnormalities sugg estive of possible hepatobiliary 
toxicity should undergo thorough examination and clinical workup as deemed  appropriate by the 
Investigator. Consideration should be given to appropriate imaging studies ( e.g., ultrasound of the liver and 
biliary tree) and potential consultation with a gastroenterologist with specialty tr aining in hepatobiliary 
diseases. 
7.5  Hepatitis C Management 
 If a subject, tests positive for HCV RNA at screening or develops signs or sy mptoms of active Hepatitis C 
Virus, local medical practice is followed at the discretion of the Investigator. Study drug may be continued 
without interruption. Should the Investigator decide to initiate Hepatitis C treatmen t the investigator confirms 
that no drug-drug interactions are expected. Subjects should return to the clini c for scheduled or 
unscheduled follow up visits according to local medical practice for laboratory evaluatio ns.  
7.6  Special Situations Reports 
7.6.1  Definitions of Special Situations 
 Special situation reports include all reports of medication error, abuse, misus e, overdose, reports of adverse 
events associated with product complaints, reports of adverse reactions in infants following exposure from  
breastfeeding, occupational exposure with an adverse event, and pregnancy reports regardless  of an 
associated AE. 
 Medication error is any unintentional error in the prescribing, dispensing, or adm inistration of a medicinal 
product while in the control of the health care provider, subject or consumer. 
 Abuse is defined as persistent or sporadic intentional excessive use of a medic inal product by a subject. 
 Misuse is defined as any intentional and inappropriate use of a medicinal prod uct that is not in accordance 
with the protocol instructions or the local prescribing information. 
 An overdose is defined as an accidental or intentional administration of a qu antity of a medicinal product 
given per administration or cumulatively which is above the maximum recommen ded dose per protocol or 
in the product labelling (as it applies to the daily dose of the subject in question). I n cases of a discrepancy 
in drug accountability, overdose will be established only when it is clear that the subject has taken the 
excess dose(s). Overdose cannot be established when the subject cannot account f or the discrepancy 
except in cases in which the investigator has reason to suspect that the subject has taken the additional 
dose(s). 
 Product complaint is defined as complaints arising from potential deviations in the manufacture, packaging, 
or distribution of the medicinal product. 
 Occupational exposure is defined as exposure to a medicinal product as a result of one’s professional or 
non-professional occupation. 
7.6.2  Instructions for Reporting Special Situations 
7.6.2.1  Instructions for Reporting Pregnancies 
 The Investigator will report pregnancies in subjects that are identified after initiation of  the study drug and 
throughout the study to Gilead. 
 The subject should receive appropriate monitoring and care until the conclusion of the pregnancy .  
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 20 of 38 
 
  The pregnancy itself is not considered an AE nor is an induced electiv e abortion to terminate a pregnancy 
without medical reasons. 
 Any premature termination of pregnancy (e.g., spontaneous abortion, induced therapeutic aborti on due to 
complications or other medical reasons) must be reported within 24 hours as an S AE. The underlying 
medical reason for this procedure should be recorded as the AE term.  
 A spontaneous abortion is always considered to be an SAE and will be  reported as described in section 
7.3. Furthermore, any SAE occurring as an adverse pregnancy outcome post study will be reported to 
Gilead. 
 The outcome should be reported to Gilead via email or fax to: 
 Email: Safety_FC@gilead.com  
 Fax: 650-522-5477 
7.6.2.2 Reporting Other Special Situations 
 Any inappropriate use of concomitant medications prohibited by this protocol  should not be reported as 
“misuse,” but may be more appropriately documented as a protocol deviation.  
 Refer to Section 7.3 for full instructions on the mechanism of special situation reporting.  
 All clinical sequelae in relation to these special situation repo rts will be reported as AEs or SAEs at the 
same time using the AE EMR and/or the SAE report form. Details of the symptoms  and si gns, clinical 
management, and outcome will be reported, when available.  
 
8. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
8.1  Analysis   
The efficacy analysis endpoints are as follows:  
8.1.1 Primary Endpoint  
The primary efficacy endpoint is the proportion of subjects that have HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at week 
48, as defined by the FDA snapshot analysis. 
8.1.2 Secondary Endpoints  
1. The proportion of subjects that have HIV-1 RNA <50 copies/mL at Week 48, as defined by the FDA 
snapshot analysis. 
2. The change in serum creatinine from Day 1 to Week 48 
3. The change in CD4 cell count at Day 1 to Week 48 
4. The change in lipid parameters at Day 1 to Week 48 
5. The change in responses to the PRO at Day 1, Week 4, 12, and 48 
 
8.2 Analysis Conventions 
8.2.1  Analysis Sets 
8.2.2  Full Analysis Set 
 The primary analysis set for efficacy analyses is defined as FAS, which will include all subjects who have 
received at least 1 dose of study drug. Subjects who do not receive at least 1 dose of study drug will be 
excluded from all analysis. 
8.2.3  Safety 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 21 of 38 
 
  The primary analysis set for safety analysis is defined as safety analys is set, which will include all subjects 
who have received at least 1 dose of study drug. All the data collected up to 30 days  after subjects 
permanently discontinue their study drug will be included in the safety  summaries, unless specified 
otherwise. 
8.3 Data Handling Conventions 
 For analysis purposes, laboratory data that are continuous in nature but are ≤ the lower limit or ≥ the upper 
limit of quantitation will be inputted to the value of the lower limit minus 1 or upper limit plus 1 significant 
digit, respectively (e.g., If HIV- 1 RNA results of ‘No HIV -1 RNA detected’ and ‘≤ 50 copies/mL HIV-1 RNA 
detected’ will be inputted as 49 copies/mL). 
 Missing data can have an impact upon the interpretation of the trial data. In general , values for missing data 
from the specified visit will not be inputted. However, a missing pre-tr eatment laboratory result would be 
treated as normal (i.e. No toxicity grade) for the laboratory abnormality summary. 
 All available data for subjects that do not complete the study will be included in dat a listings. 
8.4 Demographic Data and Baseline Characteristic s  
Demographic and baseline characteristics will be summarized using standard de scriptive methods 
including sample size, mean, SD, median, minimum, and Maximum for continuous variables and frequency 
and percentages for categorical variables. 
Demographic data will include sex, race , ethnicity, and age. 
Baseline characteristics will include body weight, height, creatinine, lipid param eters and CD4 at baseline.  
8.5 Efficacy Analysis 
8.5.1  Primary Analysis 
 The primary analysis will consist of a descriptive analysis of sw itching  from EFV/TDF/FTC to BIC/FTC/TAF 
with respect to the proportion of subjects with HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at Week  48 as defined by the US 
FDA-defined snapshot algorithm. The primary analysis of the efficacy endpoint will  be based on the FAS.  
8.5.1.1 US FDA-defined Snapshot Algorithm 
 All HIV-1 RNA data collected on-treatment (i.e. including data collected up  to 1 day after the last dose date 
of the study drug) will be used in the snapshot algorithm. Virologic outcome will be defined as the following 
categories: 
• HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/mL :  subjects who meet this criteria by result of the last available on-
treatment laboratory result in the Week 48 analysis window 
• HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/ mL:  subjects who meet this criteria by result of the last available on-
treatment laboratory result in the Week 48 analysis window or do not have laboratory results in the 
Week 48 window and who discontinue study drug either: 
▪ due to lack of efficacy or 
▪ for reason other than lack of efficacy and have the last available on-treatment 
HIV-1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/ mL 
• No virologic Data in the Week 48 Analysis Window:  subjects who do not have on-treatment HIV-
1 RNA data in the Week 48 window because  
▪ Discontinuation of the study drug for reason other than lack of efficacy and hav e 
the last available on-treatment HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/mL or 
▪ Missing data during the Week 48 window but remain on study drug 
8.5.1.2 Analysis of Primary Efficacy Endpoint 
 The evaluation will be based on the proportion of subjects with HIV- 1 RNA ≥ 50 copies/mL at Week  48.  
8.5.2  Secondary Analyses 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 22 of 38 
 
  The proportion of subjects with HIV-1 RNA <50 copies/mL at Week 48 as defined by the US FDA-defined 
snapshot algorithm will also be summarized.  
 The Change from baseline in CD4+ cell count at Week 48 will be summarized by treatment using descriptive 
statistics.  
 
8.6 Safety Analysis 
 All safety analyses will be performed using the full analysis set.  
 All safety a data collected on or after the date of the study drug was first administer ed up to the date of the 
last dose of study drug plus 30 days, unless specified otherwise, will be summarized for subjects in the 
safety analysis set. 
 Data for the pretreatment period and the period past the date of last dose of study dr ug plus 30 days will 
be included in data listings for all enrolled subjects. 
8.6.1  Extent of Exposure  
 Duration of exposure to study drug will be expressed as the number of weeks betwee n the first and last 
dose of the study drug, inclusive, regardless of temporary interruptions in stu dy drug administration and 
summarized by treatment. 
8.6.2  Adverse Events  
 Clinical and laboratory adverse effects will be coded using the definition s detailed in Appendix 2 and 
recorded in the study database. 
 Summaries (number and percentages of subjects) of treatment-emergent adverse events (by SOC, HLT [if 
applicable], and PT) will be provided by treatment. Additional summaries will  include summaries for adverse 
events by grade, Investigator’s assessment of relationship to study drug and effect on study dru g dosing.  
 On an ongoing basis adverse events will be reviewed for event that might meet the definition of Stage 3 
Opportunistic Illnesses in HIV that are indicative of an AIDS-Defining Diagnosis. The P rincipal Investigator   
will review the possible Stage 3 events and approve the events that meet the definition. Tho se events that 
do meet the Stage 3 Opportunistic Illnesses definition of an AIDS-Defining Di agnosis will be listed in 
Appendix 2.  
8.6.3  Laboratory Evaluations  
 Selected laboratory data (using conventional units) will be summarized usi ng only observed data. Absolute 
values and changes from baseline at all scheduled visits will be summarized. 
 Graded laboratory abnormalities will be defined using the Grading of La boratory Abnormalities in Appendix 
2. 
 Incidence of treatment-emergent laboratory abnormalities, defined as values that incr ease at least 1 toxicity 
grade from baseline at any time post baseline up to and including the date of last dose of study drug plus 
30 days will be summarized. If baseline data are missing, then any graded abnormal ity (i.e., at least a 
Grade1) will be considered treatment emergent. The maximum post baseline toxi city grade will be 
summarized by laboratory parameter. 
 Laboratory abnormalities that occur before the first dose of study drug or after the las t dose of study drug 
plus 30 days will be included in a data listing.   
8.6.4  Other Safety Evaluations  
 Vital signs will be summarized as appropriate 
8.7 Patient Reported Outcomes  
 The PRO measures based on questionnaires (HIV Symptom Index and Pittsburg Sleep Quali ty Index, see 
Appendix 2) may be summarized by visit using descriptive statistics.    
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 23 of 38 
 
 8.8 Sample Size  
 A total of approximately 100 HIV-1 infected subjects  
8.9 Analysis Schedule  
 The Week 48 analysis will be conducted after all subjects either complete their Week 48 visit or prematurely 
discontinue from the study drug, respectively. Final analysis will be perf ormed after all subjects complete 
the study or prematurely discontinue from the study 
 
9. RESPONSIBILITIES 
9.1 Good Clinical Practice 
The rights and welfare of the individual clinical research subject must always be the p aramount 
consideration in conducting clinical research. Accordingly, clinical research must be  conducted in a 
manner that protects the rights, welfare and confidentiality of the human subject and also assures  data 
credibility by protecting the integrity of accurate data that has been demonstrably collec ted according to 
the approved protocol. 
9.2 Investigator Responsibilities 
9.2.1  General Responsibilities 
 
The Investigator is responsible for:   
• Ensuring that the study is conducted according to the signed investigator statement/agreem ent, 
the investigational plan (study protocol), applicable regulations 
• Ensuring that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed about the protoco l, the 
study drug, their tri al-related duties and functions 
• Protection of the rights, safety, and welfare of subjects under the inve stigator’s care  
• Control of the study drug included in the investigatio n. 
• Assuring that each subject’s informed co nsent is obtained appropriately 
• Proper delegation of authority for the conduct of various aspects of the study so that the 
investigator retains control and knowledge of the study 
 
9.2.2  Control of Study Drug  
 
The investigator shall control the study drug. The Investigator is responsible to ensure that:  
• The study drug is administered only to subjects under the investigator’s personal  supervision or 
under the supervision of a qualified sub-investigator responsible to the investigator . 
• The study drug is not to be supplied/provided to any person not authorized to receive i t. 
• Adequate records of the disposition of the study drug are maintained, including dates, quanti ty, 
receipt, distribution to subjects, and disposition.  
  
9.2.3  Medical Decision Making 
 
An MD/DO must be designated as responsible for all trial-related medical decisions. Medical de cisions 
must be made by a qualified person permitted by state licensure laws to make or enact such dec isions. 
The investigator should: 
• Ensure that adequate medical care is provided to a subject for any adverse events related to the 
trial, during and as follow-up to a subject's participation. 
• Inform a subject when medical care is needed for intercurrent illness(es) of which the 
investigator becomes aware. 
• Inform the subject's primary physician about the subject's participation in the trial if  the subject 
agrees to the primary physician being informed and has signed a HIPAA Authorization form  
permitting such disclosure. 
9.2.4  IRB/IEC Review and Approval 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 24 of 38 
 
 The investigator shall assure that initial and continuing review of the proposed clinical stud y is performed 
according to the policies and procedures of the Central Institutional Review Board (IRB), as well as with 
any other IRB that has jurisdiction. 
Continuous approval from the IRB must be maintained. 
All unanticipated problems involving risk to human subjects or others are promptly reported to the IRB . All 
serious adverse events are reported to the IRB within twenty-four hours of time investigator is aware o f 
the event. 
Any changes in the research activity are promptly reported to the IRB. 
No changes are made in the research without IRB approval, except where necessary to eliminate 
apparent immediate hazards to human subjects. 
 
9.2.5  Informed Consent 
 The Investigator is responsible for obtaining written informed consent from eac h individual participating in 
this study after adequate explanation of the aims, methods, objectives, and potential ha zards of the study 
and before undertaking any study related procedures. The investigator must use the most cur rent IRB/IEC-
approved consent form for documenting written informed consent. Each informed con sent (or assent as 
applicable) will be appropriately signed and dated by the subject’s legall y authori zed representative and the 
person conducting the consent discussion, and also by an impartial witness if requi red by IRB/IEC or local 
requirements. The consent form will inform subjects about sample retention. 
9.2.6  Confidentiality 
The investigator will assure that subjects’ anonymity will be strictly maintained and that their i dentities are 
protected from unauthorized parties. All information and data will be collected by the investigator. All 
collected data concerning participants or their participation in this study will be co nsidered confidential and 
maintained in a HIPAA-compliant electronic medical recording system. Subj ect data pertinent to the study 
will be de-identified and access limited only to personnel directly involved in this research study. All da ta 
used in the analysis and reporting of this evaluation will be used in a manner without ide ntifiable reference 
to the participant. Study data will not be transmitted nor disclosed to a third- party. Paper records will be 
kept in secure files and electronic records will be password protected. 
9.2.7  Study Files and Retention of Records 
  The investigator shall keep and maintain adequate and accurate records, including: 
• Case histories on each individual study subject that record all observations and other data 
pertinent to the investigation 
• Screening, enrollment, and informed consent documentation; demonstrating that informed 
consent was obtained prior to participation in the study 
• Study reports, including reports of progress, safety, financial disclosure and final completi on 
 
9.2.7.1 Records Retention as Required 
 
Midland Research Group, Inc. will use on-site facility and if storage becomes unavai lable due to capacity 
of documents, then Midland Research Group, Inc., will use an offsite facility once documen ts are ready to 
be retained for retention, if applicable. 
FDA regulation requires an investigator to retain records a minimum of two years after the close of  the 
study or after the records are no longer required to support a drug or marketing application, whichever is 
longer.   Contract commitments must be met. 
 
9.2.7.2 Record Transfer or Record Destruction  
All record transfers or record destruction will be verified and documented. 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 25 of 38 
 
 9.2.8  Case Report Forms 
 For each subject consented, a study file will be completed by an authorized s tudy staff member who has 
completed training for this function. The study file will only capture the da ta required per the protocol 
schedule of events and procedures. The Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria and Enrollment s hould be completed 
only after all data related to eligibility have been received. Subsequent to data en try, a second staff member 
will perform source data verification.  
9.2.9  Study Drug Accountability and Return 
 Unused study drug supplies will be returned to Gile ad.  Investigator will assist with disposal procedures and 
provide appropriate instruction for destruction of used study drug supplies.  
  
9.2.10 Protocol Compliance 
 The Investigator is responsible for ensuring the study is conducted in accordance with the procedur es and 
evaluations described in this protocol. 
9.3 Sponsor Responsibilities 
9.3.1  Protocol Modifications 
 Protocol modifications, except those intended to reduce immediate risk to stud y subjects, may be made 
only by the Investigator, who must submit all protocol modifications to the IRB in accordance with local 
requirements and receive documented IRB approval before modifications can be implemented. 
9.3.2  Study Report and Publications 
The Investigator is responsible for submitting any reports within time periods and according  to procedures 
called for by: 
• Midland Research Group, Inc. or applicable division or departmental policy or procedures, incl uding the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
• Contractual agreements with collaborators, etc. 
9.3.3  Payment Reporting 
 Investigators and their study staff may be asked to provide services per formed under this protocol. If 
required under applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, Midland Researc h Group Inc. will capture 
and disclose to Federal and State agencies any expenses paid or reimbursed for such services, including 
any clinical trial payments, meal, travel expenses or reimbursements, c onsulting fees, and any other 
transfer of value. 
9.3.4  Access to Information for Monitoring 
 As per Gilead contract 
9.3.5  Access to Information for Auditing or Inspection 
 
9.3.6  Study Discontinuation 
 The investigator reserves the right to terminate the study at any time. Should t his be necessary, they will 
arrange discontinuation procedures and notify the appropriate regulatory authorities and the IRB. In 
terminating the study, the Investigator will assure that adequate consideration is gi ven to the protection of 
the subjects’ interests.  
10. PUBLICATIONS  
Midland Research Group, Inc. shall adhere to the Recommendations for the Conduct, Reporting, Editing 
and Publication of Scholarly Work in Medical Journals established by the International Committee of 
Medical Journal Editors.   
 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 26 of 38 
 
  
 
11. REFERENCES 
1. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for the  use of antiretroviral 
agents in HIV-1 infected adults and adolescents. Department of Health and Human Services. July  14, 
2016; 1-288. www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines. 
 
2. Lee WA et al. Selective intracellular activation of a novel prodrug of the human immunodeficienc y virus 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor tenofovir leads to preferential distribution and accumulat ion in lymphatic 
tissue. Antimicrobial Agents Chemotherapy 2005; 49(5):1898-906. 
 
3. VIREAD® (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate) Tablets and Powder. US Prescribing Information. Gil ead 
Sciences, Inc. Foster City, CA. Revised 04/2017. 
 
4. Clifford DB et al. Impact of efavirenz on neuropsychological performance and symptoms in HIV- infected 
individuals. Ann Intern Med 143 (2005):714- 21. 
 
5. Nguyen A et al. A randomized cross-over study to compare raltegravir and efavirenz (S WITCH-ER) study. 
AIDS 25 online edition: doi: 10.1097/QAD: 0b013e328248dab0, 2011. 
 
6. Shamblaw D Et al. Switching from ATRIPLA® to Tenofovir Alafenamide (TAF) based Sin gle tablet 
regimen: Week 48. Data in virologic suppressed adults. Presented at Interscience Conference on 
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (ICAAC-ASM) 2015. 
 
7. GENVOYA® (Elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide) Tabl ets. US Prescribing 
Information. Gilead Sciences, Inc. Foster City, CA. Revised 04/2017. 
 
8. Gallant JE et al. Efficacy and Safety of Tenofovir Alafenamide (TAF) vs. Tenofovi r Disoproxil fumarate 
(TDF), given as fixed dosed combinations containing emtricitabine as backbones for trea tment of  HIV- 1 
infection in virologically suppressed adults: A randomized, double blind, active contr olled phase 3 trial.  
Lancet HIV, April 2016; 3(4):e158-165. 
 
9. Mills A, et al. Switching from tenofovir disoproxil fumarate to tenofovir alafenamide in  antiretroviral 
regimens for virologically suppressed adults with HIV-1 infection: a randomized, active –controlled, 
multicenter, open-label, phase 3, and non-inferiority study. Lancet Infect Dis.2016 Jan;16(1):43- 52.   
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00348-5. Epub 2015 Nov2. 
 
10. Gallant JE et al. Antiviral activity, safety, and pharmacokinetics of Bictegrav ir as 10-day monotherapy in 
HIV-1 infected adults. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr (in press). Presented at ASM Microb e, June 16-20, 
2016 Boston MA. 
 
11. Tsiang M et al. Antiviral Activity of Bictegravir (GS-9883), a Novel Potent HIV -1 Integrase Strand Transfer 
Inhibitor with an Improved Resistance Profile. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Nov 21; 60(12):7 086-
7097. Print 2016 Dec. 
 
12. Sax PE et al.Bictegravir versus dolutegravir, each with emtricitabine and tenofovi r alafenamide, for initial 
treatment of HIV-1 infection: a randomized, double-blind, phase 2 trial. The Lancet HIV. 201 7 Feb. DOI: 
http//:dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3018(17)30016- 4. 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                   Midland Research Group, Inc.  
   
 Version: Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 27 of 38 
 
 13. Daar E, et al. A Phase 3 Randomized Controlled Trial of Switching to Fixed –dose 
Bictegravir/Emtricitabine/Tenofovir Alafenamide (B/F/TAF) from Boosted Protease In hibitor –based 
Regimens in Virologically Suppressed Adults: Week 48 Results.ID Week 2017. San Diego, CA.  Oral LB-4 
 
14. Gilead Sciences. Switching to a Fixed Dose Combination of Bictegravir/Emtrici tabine/Tenofovir 
Alafenamide (B/F/TAF) in HIV-1 Infected Adults Who Are Virologically Suppressed. Protocol Version 
Original Feb 6, 2017. Amendment 1 Mar 20, 2017. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03 110380. 
15. Justice, A.C et al. Development and validation of a self-completed HIV symptom index. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology , Volume 54 , Issue 12 , S77 - S90  
16. Buysse,D.J., Reynolds,C.F., Monk,T.H., Berman,S.R., & Kupfer,D.J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index (PSQI): A new instrument for psychiatric research and practice. Psychiatry 
Research, 28(2), 193-213  
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 28 of 38 APPENDIX 1.  SCHEDULE OF STUDY VISITS 
 SCREENING 
VISIT DAY 
1 a WEEK 
4 a WEEK 
8 a WEEK 
12 b WEEK 
24 b WEEK 
36 b WEEK 
48 c EARLY 
DISCONTINUATION  
Informed Consent X         
Patient Questionnaires  X X  X   X X 
Height  X         
Weight  X X X X X X X X X 
Vital Signs  X X X X X X X X X 
Complete Medical History & 
Physical Exam X         
Concomitant Medication 
Review X X X X X X X X X 
Assess for Adverse 
Experiences   X X X X X X X 
Abbreviated History & 
Physical Exam  X X X X X X   
Hematology X X X X X X X X X 
Chemistry X X X X X X X X X 
CD4 Profile X X X X X X X X X 
HIV- RNA Quantitative X X X X X X X X X 
Fasting Lipid Profile  X   X X X X X 
Plasma and serum Storage 
Sample  X X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis X  X X X X X X X 
Hepatitis B Surface antigen, 
Surface antibody, and Core 
Antibody d X        X 
Hepatitis C antibody e X        X 
Plasma Hepatitis B viral 
load f  X  X X X X X X X 
Females of childbearing 
potential: Pregnancy Test 
(Urine)  X X X X X X X X X 
Dispensing or 
Administration of Study 
Drug  X X X X X X   
Counting of Returned Study 
Drug   X X X X X X X 
a  2 days 
b  6 days 
c     6 weeks 
d     If Hepatitis B Surface antigen positive or if Ag/Ab negative with Core antibody posit ive: plasma 
qualitative and quantitative HBV DNA, Hepatitis B virus e-antigen and antibody 
e    If Hepatitis C antibody positive, HCV RNA will be performed 
f    If Hepatitis B coinfected  
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 29 of 38 APPENDIX 2.  GRADING SCALE FOR SEVERITY OF ADVERSE EVENTS AND LABORAT ORY 
ABNORMALITIES 
 
 Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 
Hemoglobin 8.5-10.0 7.5-8.49 6.5-7.49 <6.5 
ANC 1000 -1300 750-999 500-749 <500 
Platelets 100-125 50-99 25-49 <25 
WBC 2.0-2.5 1.5-1.99 1.0-1.49 <1 
Hyponatremia >130 125-129 121-124 <121 
Hypernatremia <150 150-154 154-159 >159 
Hypokalemia >3 2.5-3.0 2.0-2.49 <2.0 
Hyperkalemia 5.6-6.0 6.01-6.5 6.51-7.0 >7.0 
Hypoglycemia 55-64 40-54.9 30-39.9 <30 
Hyperglycemia , 
Fasting 110-125 126-250 251-500 >500 
Hypocalcemia 
(corrected) Below normal 
but above 7.8 7.0-7.8 6.1-6.9 <6.1 
Hypercalcemia 
(corrected) Above normal 
but below 11.5 11.5-12.5 12.6-13.5 >13.5 
Total Bilirubin Up to 1.5 ULN 1.5-2.5 x ULN 2.5-5.0 x ULN >5.0 x ULN 
BUN 1.25-2.5 x ULN 2.6-5.0 x ULN 5.1-10 x ULN >10 x ULN 
Creatinine 1.5-2.0 2.01-3.00 3.01-6.00 >6.00 
Bicarb 16-LLN 11-15.9 8-10.9 <8.0 
Triglycerides 
(fasting)  NA 500-750 751-1200 >1200 
LDL (fasting) 130-160 161-190 >190  NA 
CK 3-6 x ULN 6.1-10 x ULN 10.1-20 ULN >20 x ULN 
AST 1.25-2.5 x ULN 2.6-5.0 x ULN 5.1-10 x ULN >10 x ULN 
ALT 1.25-2.5 x ULN 2.6-5.0 x ULN 5.1-10 x ULN >10 x ULN 
GGT  1.25-2.5 x ULN 2.6-5.0 x ULN 5.1-10 x ULN >10 x ULN 
Alk Phos 1.25-2.5 x ULN 2.6-5.0 x ULN 5.1-10 x ULN >10 x ULN 
lipase 1.0-1.5 x ULN 1.51-3.0 x ULN 3.01-5.0 x ULN >5.0 x ULN 
Albumin NA 2.0 to <LLN <2.0 NA 
Hematuria >ULN- 10 >10-75 >75 NA 
Proteinuria 1+ 2-3+ 4+ NA 
Glycosuria 1+ 2-3+ 4+ NA 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 30 of 38 Cardiac Arrhythmia Asymptomatic 
and no 
intervention 
indicated Asymptomatic and 
non-urgent 
intervention 
indicated Symptomatic and 
non-urgent 
intervention 
indicated Life threatening or 
urgent intervention 
indicated 
Cardiac 
ischemia/infarct NA NA Stable angina or 
testing with 
ischemia Unstable angina or 
acute MI 
Hemorrhage NA Symptomatic, no 
transfusion 
indicated Symptomatic, ≤ 2 
units PRBC’s 
transfusion 
indicated Life threatening or 
> 2 units PRBC’s 
transfusion indicated  
Hypertension Systolic: 140-
159 
Diastolic: 90- 99 Systolic: 160- 179 
Diastolic: 100-109 Systolic: >179 
Diastolic: 110 Life threatening (i.e. 
malignant 
hypertension) or 
requiring hospital 
admission 
Hypotension NA Symptomatic, 
corrected with oral 
fluids Symptomatic, IV 
fluids indicated Refractory shock 
Pericardial effusion Asymptomatic, 
small Asymptomatic, 
mod-large Physiologic 
consequences, 
no urgent 
intervention 
indicated Physiologic 
consequences, 
urgent intervention 
indicated 
PR prolongation 0.21-.025 >0.25 Type II 2nd degree 
AV block Complete AV block 
Prolonged QTc 450-470 
Or increase <30 
above baseline 471-499 
Or increase 30- 50 
above baseline >499 
Or increase >50 
above baseline Life threatening 
dysrhythmia  
Thrombus NA DVT, no 
intervention or 
anticoagulation 
indicated DVT, intervention 
or anticoagulation 
indicated PE or life-
threatening 
embolism 
Vasovagal episode No LOC LOC NA NA 
Ventricular 
dysfunction NA Asymptomatic and 
intervention 
indicated New/worsening  
symptomatic CHF Life threatening 
CHF 
 
Bronchospasm FEV1 70-80% FEV1 50-69% FEV1 25-49% FEV1<25%, 
cyanosis or 
intubation 
Dyspnea On exertion, 
minimal, without 
impact on 
activities On exertion, 
moderate, with 
impact on 
activities At rest, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Resp. failure with 
vent support 
indicated 
Uveitis Asymptomatic Symptomatic or 
intervention 
indicated Posterior or pan-
uveitis or Disabling visual loss 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 31 of 38 operation 
indicated 
Visual changes 
from baseline minimal, without 
impact on 
activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities unable to perform 
typical activities Disabling visual loss 
Alopecia Thinning 
detectable by 
subject  Thinning/patchy 
hair loss 
detectable by 
provider Complete hair 
loss NA 
Rash Localized 
macular rash Diffuse rash or 
target lesions; no 
vesicles, bulla or 
ulceration. No 
mucosal 
involvement Diffuse rash or 
target lesions; 
with vesicles, few 
bulla or 
superficial 
ulceration.  
mucosal 
involvement of 
one site Extensive bullous 
lesions/more than 
one site of mucosal 
involvement, 
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome or toxic 
epidermal necrolysis 
Pigmentation 
changes Slight or 
localized Marked or 
generalized NA NA 
pruritus minimal, without 
impact on 
activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities Severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities NA 
Anorexia Mild, not 
decreasing 
intake Decreased intake, 
no significant 
weight loss Significant weight 
loss Aggressive 
intervention 
indicated (i.e. 
feeding tube) or life 
threatening 
Ascites Asymptomatic Symptomatic, 
Intervention 
indicated  Symptomatic 
despite 
intervention Life threatening 
consequences 
Cholecystitis NA Medical 
intervention 
indicated Procedure 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
(sepsis/perforation) 
Constipation NA Persistent, 
requiring regular 
use of diet 
modification, 
laxatives/enemas Obstipation with 
manual 
evacuation 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
(obstruction) 
Diarrhea Transient/ 
intermittent or 
increase of >3 
stools over 
baseline /24 hr. 
 Persistent or 
increase of 4- 6 
stools over 
baseline/24 hr. Bloody diarrhea 
or increase of >6 
stools over 
baseline/24 hr. Life threatening 
consequences 
(shock) 
Dysphagia Able to eat 
usual diet Causes alteration 
of diet, but no 
medical Causes severe 
alteration of diet, 
medical Life threatening 
reduction of oral 
intake 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 32 of 38 intervention 
indicated intervention 
indicated 
 
Mucositis/stomatitis Erythema Patchy 
Ulcerations or 
pseudo-
membran es Confluent 
Ulcerations or 
pseudo-
membranes or 
mucosal bleeding Tissue necrosis or 
diffuse mucosal 
bleeding or life 
threatening 
consequences 
Nausea Transient or 
intermittent Persistent 
resulting in 
decreased oral 
intake 24-48 hours Persistent 
resulting in 
minimal oral 
intake >48 hours 
or aggressive 
rehydration 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
Pancreatitis NA Symptomatic, no 
hospitalization 
indicated Symptomatic, 
hospitalization 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
Proctitis Discomfort Minimal 
interference with 
usual activities or 
medical 
intervention 
indicated Unable to 
perfume usual 
activities or 
operative 
intervention 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences  
Vomiting Transient or 
intermittent Persistent 
resulting in 
decreased oral 
intake 24-48 hours Persistent 
resulting in 
minimal oral 
intake >48 hours 
or aggressive 
rehydration 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
Psychiatric issues 
(i.e. anxiety, 
agitation, 
depression, mania, 
psychosis) minimal, without 
impact on 
activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities Severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Behavior potentially 
harmful to 
self/others or unable 
to perform self-care 
AMS minimal, without 
impact on 
activities lethargy, with 
impact on 
activities Confusion, 
memory 
impairment 
lethargy, or 
somnolence, 
unable to perform 
typical activities Delirium/obtundation 
or coma 
Ataxia  Minimal but 
detectable on 
exam, without 
impact on 
activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities marked, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causin g 
inability to care for 
self 
Cognitive and 
behavior (including Minimal, without 
impact on moderate, with 
impact on marked, unable to 
perform typical Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 33 of 38 dementia and 
ADD) activities. No 
special 
resourced 
indicated 
 activities or part-
time special 
resourced 
indicated activities or full-
time special 
resourced 
indicated self or 
institutionalization 
CNS Ischemia NA NA Transient 
ischemic attach CVA/stroke with 
neurological deficit 
headache Minimal but 
detectable on 
exam, without 
impact on 
activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or 
hospitalization 
indicated 
Insomnia NA moderate, with 
impact on 
activities or part-
time special 
resourced 
indicated marked, unable to 
perform typical 
activities or full-
time special 
resourced 
indicated Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self 
Neuromuscular 
Weakness Asymptomatic 
but detectable 
on exam, 
without or 
minimal impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or respiratory 
failure 
Sensory alteration Asymptomatic 
but detectable 
on exam, 
without or 
minimal impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or respiratory 
failure 
Seizure, new onset NA 1 seizure 2-4 seizures Prolonged or 
repetitive seizures 
or difficult to control  
Seizure, pre-
existing NA Increased 
frequency, no 
change in 
character Change from 
baseline in either 
duration or quality Prolonged or 
repetitive seizures 
or difficult to control 
Syncope (not 
associated with a  
procedure) NA Present NA NA 
vertigo without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or respiratory 
failure 
Arthralgia without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or respiratory 
failure 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 34 of 38 Bone Mineral Loss BMP t-score or 
z-score -2.5 to -
1.3 BMP t-score or z-
score <- 2.5 Pathological 
fracture Pathological fracture 
causing life 
threatening 
consequences 
myalgia without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Disabling causing 
inability to care for 
self or respiratory 
failure 
Osteonecrosis NA Asymptomatic but 
with radiologic 
findings and no 
surgical 
intervention 
indicated symptomatic with 
radiologic findings 
or surgical 
intervention 
indicated Disabling bone pain 
with radiologic 
findings causing  
inability to care for 
self 
Acute systemic 
allergic reaction Localized 
urticaria with no 
medical 
intervention 
indicated Localized urticaria 
with mild 
angioedema with 
no medical 
intervention 
indicated Gen urticaria or 
angioedema with 
medical 
intervention 
indicated or 
bronchospasm Anaphylaxis, 
laryngeal 
angioedema, 
laryngeal edema or 
life threatening 
bronchospasm 
chills without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities NA 
Fatigue/malaise without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Incapacitating 
symptoms, unable 
to perform basic 
self-care 
Fever 99.8-101.5 101.6-102.8 102.9-104.9 >104.9 
pain without impact 
on activities moderate, with 
impact on 
activities severe, unable to 
perform typical 
activities Incapacitating 
symptoms, unable 
to perform basic 
self-care 
Unintentional 
weight loss NA 5-9% loss of body 
weight 10-19% loss of 
body weight >19% loss of body 
weight or aggressive 
intervention 
indicated (feeding 
tube, TPN) 
Lipodystrophy or 
lipoatrophy detectable by 
subject Detectable by 
provider Obvious or 
disfiguring NA 
Diabetes mellitus 
(new onset) NA without indication 
for medications Medications 
indicated Life threatening 
consequences 
Diabetes mellitus 
(existing) NA Requiring 
modification of  
medications Lack of control 
despite 
medication 
modification Life threatening 
consequences 
gynecomastia detectable by 
subject Detectable by 
provider Obvious or 
disfiguring NA 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 35 of 38 Hyperthyroidism asymptomatic Symptoms 
causing moderate 
impact of activities 
OR medication 
indicated Symptoms 
causing inability 
to perform 
activities OR 
medication 
indicated 
 Life threatening 
consequences 
hypothyroidism asymptomatic Symptoms 
causing moderate 
impact of activities 
OR medication 
indicated Symptoms 
causing inability 
to perform 
activities OR 
uncontrolled 
despite 
medication Life threatening 
consequences 
Intermenstrual 
bleeding Spotting ≤ typical 
menstrual cycle ≥ typical 
menstrual cycle Hemorrhage with life 
threatening 
hypotension 
Urinary obstruction 
(i.e. stone) NA Without hydro-
nephrosis or acute 
kidney injury With hydro-
nephrosis or 
acute kidney 
injury Life threatening 
consequences 
Infection (other 
than HIV) Localized, no 
systemic 
antimicrobial 
treatment 
indicated A ND 
symptoms 
causing minimal 
impact on 
activities Systemic 
antimicrobial 
treatment 
indicated OR 
symptoms causing 
>minimal impact 
on activities Systemic 
antimicrobial 
treatment 
indicated AND 
symptoms 
inability to 
perform activities 
OR operation 
intervention 
indicated (beyond 
simple I&D) Life threatening 
consequences (i.e. 
septic shock) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 36 of 38  APPENDIX 3.   PRO QUESTIONNAIRES  
 
Self-completed HIV Symptom Index15 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: The following questions ask about symptoms you might have had during the past four 
weeks . Please answer the following questions by placing a checkmark in the appropriate box . 
 
Symptom Did not 
have this 
symptom Symptom 
did not 
bother me Symptom 
bothers 
me a little Symptom 
bothers me Symptom 
bothers me 
a lot 
Fatigue or loss of energy      
Fevers, chills or sweats      
Feeling dizzy or lightheaded      
Pain, numbness or tingling in the hands 
or feet      
Trouble remembering      
Nausea or vomiting      
Diarrhea or loose bowel movements      
Felt sad, down, or depressed      
Felt nervous or anxious      
Difficulty falling or staying asleep      
Skin problems, such as rash, dryness 
or itching      
Cough or trouble catching your breath      
Headache      
Loss of appetite or a change in the 
taste of food      
Bloating, pain, or gas in your stomach      
Muscle aches or joint pain      
Problems with having sex, such as loss 
of interest or lack of satisfaction      
Changes in the way your body looks 
such as fat deposits or weight gain      
Problems with weight loss or wasting      
Hair loss or changes in the way your 
hair looks      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 37 of 38 Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index16 
Instructions: The following questions relate to your usual sleep habits during the past month only. Your answers 
should indicate the most accurate reply for the majority of days and nights of the past month. Please 
answer all questions. 
1. During the past month, what time have you usually gone to bed at night?  
BEDTIME____________ 
2. During the past month, how long (in minutes) has it usually takes you to fall asleep each n ight? 
NUMBER OF MINUTES _______________ 
3. During the past month, what time have you usually gotten up in the morning? 
GET UP TIME _________________ 
4. During the past month, how many hours of actual sleep did you get at night? (this may be di fferent than the 
number of hours you spent in bed.) 
HOURS OF SLEEP PER NIGHT __________________ 
 
For each of the remaining questions, check the one best response. Please answer all questions. 
5. During the past month, how often have 
you had trouble sleeping because you…  Not during 
past month Less than 
once a week Once or 
twice a 
week Three or 
more times a 
week 
a) Cannot get to sleep within 30 minutes     
b) Wake up in the middle of the night or early 
morning     
c) Have to get up to use the bathroom     
d) Cannot breathe comfortably     
e) Cough or snore loudly     
f) Feel too cold     
g) Feel too hot     
h) Had bad dreams     
i) Have pain     
j) Other reason(s), please describe and mark 
how often it occurs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
6. During the past month, how would you rate your sleep quality overall? 
Very Good ________ 
Fairly Good ________ 
Fairly Good________ 
Very Good________ 
BIKTARVY® (BIC/FTC/TAF)                 Protocol IN- US-380-4543                 Midland Research Group, Inc.  
 
Version Original, Date: 21 Feb 2018 CONFIDENTIAL Page 38 of 38  Not during 
past month Less than 
once a week Once or 
twice a 
week Three or 
more times a 
week 
7. During the past month, how often have you 
taken medicine to help you sleep (prescribed 
or “over the counter”)?      
8. During the past month, how often have you 
had trouble staying awake while driving, eating 
meals, or engaging in social activity?     
 
9. During the past month, how much of a problem has it been for you to keep up enough enthusiasm to get things  
done? 
No problem at all      ________ 
Only a very slight problem ________ 
Somewhat of a problem     ________ 
A very big problem     ________ 
10. Do you have a bed partner or a roommate? 
No bed partner or room mate     ________ 
Partner/roommate in other room     ________ 
Partner in same room, but not same bed   ________ 
Partner in same bed      ________ 
 
If you have a roommate or bed partner, ask 
him/her how often in the past month you 
have had…  Not during 
past month Less than 
once a week Once or 
twice a 
week Three or 
more times a 
week 
a) Loud snoring     
b) Long pauses between breaths while asleep     
c) Legs twitching or jerking while you sleep     
d) Episodes of disorientation or confusion 
during sleep     
e) Other restlessness while you sleep; please 
describe and mark how often it occurs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 