FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 1 of 15
Protocol Title
Nicotine  Dependence and Lung  Cancer  Genetics in African  Americans
Principal Investigators
FCCC: Camille Ragin,  PhD,  MPH
CUNY  Hunter:  Joel Erblich, PhD, MPH
Co-Investigator(s):
Claudia Henschke, MD, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Participating/Collaborating Institutions:
CUNY Hunter  College  
695 Park Ave, NY, NY 10065
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1081, New York, NY 10029
Statistician:
Karthik Devarajan
Funding Source:
National Cancer  Institute 
Initial Version Date:  11/20/2018
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 2 of 15Table of Contents
Section Page
1.0 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………….    3
2.0 Objectives………………........................................................................................   3
3.0 Background…………………………………………………………………………..   3-4
4.0 Study Design…………………………………………………………………………… 4-7
4.1 ……………………………………………………………………………… 5-7
4.2 ……………………………………………………………………………… 7
5.0 Risk to Participants…………………………………………………………………. 7
6.0 Potential  Benefits to Participants………………………………………………… 6
7.0 Provisions to Maintain the Confidentiality of Data…………………………….. 6
8.0 Costs to Participants………………………………………………………………    7
9.0 Consent Process……………………………………………………………………… 7
10.0   Off-Study  Criteria…………………………………………………………………….     7
11.0 Drugs and Devices…………………………………………………………………… 7
12.0 Multi-Site  Research  Study……………………………………………………. 7-8
13.0 Statistical Analysis………………………………………………………………… 8-9
14.0 Data Safety Monitoring Plan……………………………………………………… 9
15.0 Adverse Event Reporting………………………………………………………. 10
16.0 Quality  Assurance Procedures and Participant Confidentiality…………… 10
17.0 Participant Informed  Consent………………………………………………………. 10
18.0 References……………………………………………………………………………. 11-14
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 3 of 151.0Introduction
Racial differences in the burden of lung cancer  persist despite significant nationwide efforts  to 
promote smoking  cessation. A higher incidence of lung cancer is notable  among  African  
American (AA) in comparison to Whites, and this has not changed for more than a decade.1 
Despite the fact that AAs smoke fewer cigarettes per day than Whites,2,3 they are less likely  to 
stop smoking and are more likely to engage in deeper and longer  inhalations.4-7  Although 
access to health  care and other systemic and socio-economic  barriers  contribute  substantially  to 
these problems, biological factors continue to be a critical contributor to lung cancer disparities.8 
In particular, research by the study investigators  and others 9-11 (see also preliminary work  
section) have raised the intriguing  possibility  that  differences between AA and Whites may be 
attributable to genetic factors  that may be contribute to poorer  metabolism of tobacco-related 
carcinogens and increased  risk of addiction.12-14 
2.0Objectives
Aim 1: Identify ancestry-informative  variants  in tobacco metabolism and detoxification pathway 
genes that correlate with metabolic/detoxification capacity in AA smokers.  
Aim 2: Identify ancestry-informative  variants  in tobacco addiction pathway  genes that correlate 
with measures of nicotine dependence  in AA smokers.
Aim 3: Explore  the possibility that genetic  feedback about increased lung cancer  risk associated 
with African American ancestry may influence perceived risk, cancer worry, acute psychological 
distress, and motivation to quit.
3.0Background/Rationale
Genetics, race, tobacco-related  carcinogen metabolism, and addiction. Two prominent groups 
of potent tobacco  carcinogens are benzo[a]pyrene and tobacco-specific nitrosamines such as 
N'-nitrosonornicotine (NNN) and 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK). NNK is 
reduced in the body  to NNAL and activated by Phase I enzymes to a reactive metabolite that 
alkylates DNA or is further detoxified by Phase II enzymes in the UGT  pathway  to NNAL – 
glucuronide (NNAL-Gluc). Phase III enzymes (ABC transporters) are known to efflux  Phase II 
conjugates from cells to enable excretion  from the body. NNAL  is a potent carcinogen in 
rats.15,16 Studies demonstrate that urinary NNAL-Gluc:NNAL ratio,  a measure of an individual’s 
metabolism and detoxification capacity, is higher in Whites compared  to AA,13,14 suggesting 
racial differences  in metabolic activation/detoxification  of tobacco smoke carcinogens. Genetic 
polymorphisms have  been described  for a number  of Phase I, II/III enzymes involved in the 
metabolism of tobacco and efflux of carcinogens. Many of these polymorphisms have  been  
linked to phenotypic differences in protein activity or expression and are likely to be a major  
source of inter-individual  variation in susceptibility to tobacco carcinogenesis and thus increased  
lung cancer risk.17-23 Levels of urinary NNAL metabolites can be influenced by polymorphisms in 
the Phase  I and II genes,24,25 highlighting the importance of genetic variants in tobacco 
metabolism and carcinogenesis. 
Interestingly, the association of genetic variants in Phase  I/II/III  genes with the metabolism and 
efflux of tobacco  smoke  carcinogens from cells may prove to be dependent on race, because 
the frequency of these polymorphisms varies  among racial/ethnic groups.26 Our preliminary  data 
presented below also provides further support by demonstrating that in Phase I/II/III genes,  
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 4 of 15polymorphisms with varied frequencies between AA and Whites  (i.e., Ancestry  Informative 
Markers [AIMs]) are predicted to be biologically important and could influence the expression 
and function of these genes.  Less well studied  are ancestry informative polymorphisms related 
to addiction.  Although  a number of studies have identified associations  between a variety  of 
genetic polymorphisms and addiction and smoking-related outcomes,11, 27,28 no study to date 
has specifically investigated effects of ancestry-informative markers on addiction  and smoking  
behavior in AA smokers.
Clinical relevance of genetic risk information.   One potentially  important clinical  application of 
genetic testing  for lung cancer risk is the provision of test feedback to smokers in the hopes of 
encouraging cessation. Accumulating research  in this area has yielded mixed results, with 
recent meta-analyses  suggesting that genetic feedback about increased lung cancer risk can 
result in significant short-term improvements in smoking cessation, but no long-term changes.29 
These findings are perhaps not surprising,  given the poor long-term smoking cessation success  
rates, even with available treatments. Experimental  studies that systematically manipulate  risk 
information and assess immediate outcomes that are relevant to behaviour change (e.g., worry, 
perceived risk, motivation  to quit) might  provide a clearer and more accurate picture of the utility  
of genetic testing feedback in presenting a “teachable moment” in which  to intervene to 
encourage behaviour change. Consistent  with this possibility, Consultant  Lipkus  and 
colleagues30 conducted an experimental study  in which hypothetical  lung cancer genetic risk 
information was manipulated,  and they found  that high-risk information caused immediate 
increases in motivation to quit smoking. Our pilot data from AA current smokers also confirms  
this. Similarly,  other experimental studies using  hypothetical risk information as a model found 
that genetic risk feedback resulted in immediate increases in worry and perceived risk.31, 32 
Overall, the literature suggests that experimental studies of hypothetical  risk can be a useful tool 
in understanding the short-term effects  of receiving genetic risk information. What  has not yet 
been examined is the possibility that adding personally relevant information to the feedback can 
enhance effects. Feedback regarding genetic  ancestry may thus also have a significant impact  
on perceived risk, worry, and motivation to quit. Based on empirical  and theoretical models of 
heath literacy and numeracy advanced by Consultant Lipkus and others,33, 34 the proposed 
study will explore the potentially  important  contribution of personally relevant quantitative 
information to key motivational outcomes  related to behaviour change. For example, AA 
smokers who are informed that their genetic  ancestry is in fact highly concordant  with AA 
heritage may be particularly concerned about  genetic risks that have been  shown to be 
overrepresented in AAs.  Conversely, those who learn that they have  low levels  of genetic  
concordance with AA heritage may then self-identify less strongly as AA, resulting in lower  
concern for genetic risks that are overrepresented  in AA smokers.  To date, no study has 
investigated this intriguing possibility.
4.0Study Design
This is a multi-centered study being conducted  at the following centers:
Fox Chase  Cancer  Center (FCCC) by the lead investigator, Camille  Ragin, PhD,  MPH.  FCCC 
will serve as the coordinating center  for this study.
CUNY Hunter College  under the direction of  Joel Erblich, PhD, MPH will conduct  community  
based research  initiatives and recruit study participants from the community. 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 5 of 15Icahn School of Medicine  at Mount Sinai with Claudia  Henschke,  MD will obtain  IRB approval, 
recruit subjects and execute the protocol at Mount  Sinai.
We will enroll 360 AA smokers, 180 from clinic-based settings in Philadelphia and NYC that 
serve smokers and 180 from the general  community in Philadelphia and NYC. This recruitment 
strategy will provide  a regionally-diverse sample with an increased range of smoking  and 
dependence levels, which will enhance generalizability, as well as power to detect hypothesized 
genetic effects. To ensure that the demographics of both clinic and community-based samples 
are balanced, both subgroups will be matched on age and gender. 
Subjects that had participated in protocol 14-814, PI Ragin’s cohort of cancer-free individuals 
and indicated they would  like to be contacted for possible participation in future research will be 
offered an opportunity to enroll in this study. These participants will complete the intervention  
aspect of the study and we anticipate they will help us to reach  our recruitment goals.  This 
protocol enrolled  subjects in NYC and Philadelphia.  It also allowed those enrolled  to be notified 
of other  cancer related  studies led by Ragin and/or her collaborators.   
Recruitment and study setting: Philadelphia and NYC are racially diverse, with AAs comprising 
a large portion of the general populations.  This proposed study will leverage on our existing 
cohort (CAP3)  infrastructure,  as well as the considerable resources of the Mount Sinai Health  
System, with which we have partnered to enhance recruitment.
4.1Subject Recruitment and Data Collection
Face-to-face: As previously described in IRB 11-880, study subjects will be recruited 
from various locations throughout the metropolitan area of the aforementioned study 
cities (for example, stores, shops, community centers, senior centers,  health  fairs etc.). 
Based on results from protocol 11-880, we have  determined that “on-site” (face-to-face) 
recruitment from various locations  throughout the Philadelphia metropolitan area works 
best for control recruitment;  subsequently,  we will use this method as the primary 
recruitment method  for this study. Primary care and specialty clinics within TUHS (e.g. 
ENT and Pulmonary clinics) to identify  current smokers. We will also utilize study flyers 
(attached in recruitment section) throughout the TUHS with the contact information for 
study staff. If the individual calls in we will answer  any questions  and schedule  their 
enrollment during  their next appointment at a TUHS clinic.
After informed consent is obtained  Mouthwash/Saliva  samples will be collected  at 
the completion of the study  questionnaire. Participants will be supplied  with a 50 mL 
falcon tube containing 10ml of scope.  Participants  will be instructed to gargle while tilting 
to the back of the throat for 30-60 seconds before spitting it back into a separate tube. 
Participants will be required to have refrained from eating and drinking at least  30 
minutes prior to performing the mouthwash  rinses.  All mouthwash samples will be 
transported at 4 degrees Celsius (on ice packs)  to the laboratory  where  they will be 
processed. All samples  will be labeled with a unique  ID number corresponding to the 
questionnaire but without  personal identifiers. For urine collection, study staff will instruct  
the participant on how to conduct a clean catch  urine sample and the participant will self-
collect in nearest rest room. 
All participants with a history of cancer  screening (e.g. Pap test, breast 
mammography [females], PSA and/or DRE  [males], oral or skin cancer screening, etc.) 
within the past 12 months will be asked to sign an authorization to request information 
from another facility.  We will use the standard authorization  form used by Fox Chase 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 6 of 15Cancer Center (FCCC) (attached), which authorizes the research study  staff to request 
cancer screening results  from another  health care facility/medical provider. The signed 
authorization form will be sent along  with a memo outlining the specific  cancer screening 
result that would be requested.  All reports  will be de-identified upon receipt and labeled 
with the participants  study ID number. The cancer screening results  will be collected in 
order to confirm self-reported cancer status. 
All study  materials will be labeled with a unique ID and no PHI. Maintenance of 
participant confidentiality is discussed  in detail within the “Risk to Participants” section of 
this document.
For Aim 3: Participants recruited through Aims 1 and 2 at each of the two study sites will 
be randomly assigned to one of four conditions, in a 2 x 2 fully-crossed between-groups 
factorial design. In one group (“High Risk, High Ancestry [HRHA]”), participants will be 
asked to consider  a hypothetical scenario in which genetic test results reveal that: 1) 
they carry genotypes that place AA smokers at a particularly  high (~50%-80%)  risk for 
the development of lung cancer,  and 2) their profile of AIMs reflects a particularly high 
concordance with AA heritage (~90%).  In a second  group (“Low Risk, Low Ancestry 
[LRLA]”), participants will be asked to consider a scenario in which genetic test results  
reveal that: 1) they are at normal (~7%-10%) risk for the development of lung cancer,  
and 2) their profile of AIMs reflects a particularly low concordance  with AA heritage 
(~10%). The final two groups  will receive  “High Risk, Low Ancestry  (HRLA)” and “Low  
Risk, High Ancestry (LRHA)”  hypotheticals, respectively. Participants will be block  
randomized by age and gender to one of four groups following the 2 (Risk) x 2 
(Ancestry) design.  To increase feasibility, randomization will be conducted independently  
at all sites. Following randomization, participants will be presented with a brochure  
describing the nature of two hypothetical  genetic tests, one which assesses  lifetime  risk 
for the development of lung cancer in AA smokers, and one which  characterizes  the 
degree of a participant’s genetic concordance with AA ancestry. The brochure  will be 
explained in a standardized fashion to the participants by the graduate student trainees.  
Participants will then be given the hypothetical feedback according  to their randomized  
condition (HRHA, HRLA,  LRHA, LRLA), followed immediately  by the post-feedback 
assessments (see Measures). Participants  will then be debriefed,  offered a $30 gift card,  
and thanked for their participation.
Intervention Administration: The intervention will be administered by graduate student 
trainees.  They  will be trained to administer the brochure and feedback in a standardized 
fashion. Dr. Erblich will train the graduate students  in the administration  of the 
hypothetical genetic feedback and the collection of questionnaire data during the post-
feedback assessment. The trainees  will practice with each other until they achieve 
proficiency. Dr. Erblich will also personally observe the first five participant interactions in 
both NYC  and Philadelphia, as well as a random selection of later interactions (n=10) to 
ensure intervention fidelity.  Additional  training will be conducted as necessary to ensure 
fidelity to the intervention.   
To address Aim 3, we will administer the following well-established questionnaires, all of 
which have excellent  psychometric  properties. The questionnaires are brief,  so as not to 
create undue  participant burden. Numeracy, an important predictor of response to risk 
information, will be assessed using  the 7-item Subjective Numeracy scale  (SNS), 
developed by Fagerlin and colleagues. Self-perception of Ancestry Scale (a personal 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 7 of 15estimation of the genetic proportion of African ancestors)  will be assessed using a 
measure described  and validated by Ruiz-Linares et al. 
Post-Feedback Assessment: Motivation to quit will be assessed using the Motivation to 
Quit Smoking Scale (MTSS), which has been found to be a strong predictor of quit 
attempts.74,75 Perceived risk of lung cancer will be assessed using an established face-
valid perceived risk scale developed  and used by PI Erblich in previous  work. Cancer  
worry will be assessed using the well-established 4-item Cancer Worry Scale.  
Psychological distress will be measured  using the BSI-18. For all assessments, 
participants will be instructed to respond based  on how they believe they would feel if 
they actually received  the genetic  information that was presented to them. 
Projected Recruitment:  The number of participants that will be enrolled into this study will 
be 180 for 3 years (approximately 60 patients  per year, per site).  
Number of 
subjects per year 
projected at 
FCCCTotal number of 
subjects at 
FCCCNumber of subjects 
nationally or 
internationally (if 
applicableNumber of 
subjects at 
collaborating institutions (if 
applicable)
Up to: 60 Up to:180 360 180
4.2Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Key Inclusion Criteria:
1.Men and women age 18 years  and older  and able to speak and read English 
2.Must  be in good health and not knowingly  have  a cancer  at the time of study 
inclusion
Key Exclusion Criteria:
1.Head and Neck  cancer diagnosis at the time of the oral cancer screening
2.Low DNA quantity found in mouthwash/saliva sample
3.Incomplete questionnaire  data
4.Cancer diagnosis  within  the last 2 years
5.0Risks to Participants
Risk to the subject is breach of confidentiality. In order to minimize  this risk, all information 
obtained from or for this research study will be kept as confidential  as possible. Identification of 
questionnaire data and saliva specimens will be assigned a coded study number and files will 
be kept secure.
6.0Potential  Benefits to Participants 
No direct benefit will be gained by subjects, except for the satisfaction they might experience by 
participating in a medical research study.  Benefits  to society  will be those associated with a 
better understanding of the effects of ancestry on motivation to quit smoking  and screen for lung 
cancer. 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 8 of 157.0Provisions to Maintain the Confidentiality of Data 
All specimens and associated data (questionnaire,  cancer screening  results,  urine specimen, as 
well as mouthwash samples)  will be stored  with a unique ID only and not with subject identifiers. 
Identifiable information will never be placed  on specimens or associated  data (laboratory  or 
questionnaire data).  
8.0Costs to Participants
Not Applicable 
9.0Consent Process
On-Site Recruitment:  Local Information tables  will be set up in various locations such  as senior 
centers, community recreation centers, churches, community  health fairs and neighborhood 
block meetings. The information table will be manned by research staff who will explain the 
research studies conducted in the Ragin Lab and the purpose of the participant  recruitment.  
Recruitment initiated  by Phone-Call: Research staff will call participants  that enrolled  in 14-814 
and indicated their interest in future  research opportunities and briefly describe  the study 
objectives and rationale. The research staff will answer all questions asked by the potential  
participant and an invitation will be extended to participate in this study. If he/she agrees to 
enroll in this study, they will sign an informed  consent document, questionnaires will be 
administered, and biological samples  will be collected by trained research staff.  
As part of the informed  consent process,  all participants recruited in this study  that have not 
been enrolled in 14-814  will be given an opportunity to join the 14-814 registry  study.   On-Site 
Recruitment as described in section 9.0 of that protocol will be followed. 
10.0 Off-Study  Criteria
Participants will only be removed from the study  if a cancer diagnosis is made at the time of the 
oral cancer screening or if the participant  is re-contacted for other research opportunities within  
the Ragin  Lab and they had a cancer diagnosis subsequent to joining the study.
11.0 Drugs and Devices
Not Applicable
12.0 Multi-Site  Research  Study
This study  will be conducted at sites across the northeastern region of the country.  Survey  data 
and biological  specimens collected  from NYC  and Philadelphia, will be housed  at FCCC. 
In an effort  to minimize a breach in participant confidentiality, all site-PIs and their respective  
team members will: provide current Human Subjects  Training and be given  access  to both 
Presage Lite and REDCap, where they will securely  enter patient information  and complete  
study related questionnaires. Paper copies  are also available for back up if needed.  Scanned 
copies of signed consent forms will be emailed to the study coordinator at FCCC  using HIPAA 
compliant networks  and stored in a password protected  file on FCCC  stored on a HIPAA  
compliant institutional network drive. Only coded bio-specimens  will be sent to FCCC where all 
laboratory procedures  will take place. 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 9 of 15Adverse events that take place at an external site will first be reported to the respective site’s 
IRB followed by FCCC’s IRB. All study  findings will be reported under the blanket of the African  
Caribbean Cancer  Consortium, a collaborative research group where Dr. Ragin is the PI.
13.0 Statistical Analysis
Aim 1: Variance stabilizing and normalizing transformations will be applied when  appropriate.  
Descriptive statistics for demographic variables will be presented. The range and mean  
concentrations of free (NNAL),  conjugated (NNAL-Gluc) and total (NNAL+NNAL-Gluc) 
biomarkers will be summarized  by genotype. These  concentrations as well as the ratio of NNAL-
Gluc:NNAL concentrations  will be correlated with each AIM after adjusting for smoking  dose 
(pack-years), age and recruitment setting (clinic vs. community) using analysis of variance. A 
similar analysis will be done by correlating these  variables with each  haplotype block. In 
addition, multiple linear regression will be used to correlate NNAL concentration with proportion  
of African ancestry after adjusting for smoking dose, age and recruitment  setting. To account for 
multiple testing,  the Benjamini-Hochberg  (BH) method  will be used  to control the false discovery  
rate (FDR).  All tests will be two-sided and tests with FDR ≤ 10% will be considered to be 
statistically significant.35 
Sample Size and Power: With 360 samples split in a 1:3 ratio between  the minor and major 
allele groups,  we will have 80% power  to detect an effect size of 0.45 in mean NNAL 
concentration (total) between  the groups using  a two-sided test at a significance level of 0.005. 
This computation  is based on a standard deviation of 1 for NNAL concentrations (on the log2-
scale) from pilot studies. An effect  size of 0.45 corresponds  to a 1.37-fold change in NNAL 
concentration between groups. Similarly, with 360 samples split in a 1:3 ratio between  the minor 
and major allele groups, we will have 80% power  to detect an effect size of 1.09 in mean NNAL 
concentration ratio between the groups using a two-sided test at a significance level of 0.005. 
This computation is based on a standard deviation  of 2.44 for NNAL  concentration ratios (on the 
log2-scale) from pilot studies. An effect  size of 1.09 corresponds to a 2.13-fold change  in NNAL 
expression between groups. A significance level of 0.005  results  in 1 false discovery per 200 
non-differentially expressed SNPs.
Aim 2: For each SNP, nicotine dependence (as determined by high-very high FTND  scores:  6-
10) will be modeled using genotype after adjusting for smoking dose (pack-years),  age and 
recruitment setting  using  logistic  regression (LR). Sensitivity, specificity  and prediction accuracy 
(along with 95% confidence bounds) will be used to characterize  the precision of binary 
predictions from LR. Multiple linear  regression will be used to correlate the proportion of African  
ancestry with FTND  score (low vs. high) after adjusting  for smoking dose, age and recruitment  
setting. All tests will be two-sided and the Benjamini-Hochberg method will be used to account 
for multiple testing.35 Secondary outcomes will include cigarettes per day, age at initiation,  and 
intention to quit. To account for the potentially large number of SNPs resulting from this 
univariate analysis, penalized logistic regression (PLR) will be used to develop  a prediction  
model for nicotine  dependence  using these SNPs.36 PLR has been  demonstrated to have 
excellent power to identify covariate effects as well as superior prediction accuracy compared to 
competing methods like Classification and Regression Trees and Multifactor  Dimensionality  
Reduction.37-40 Sensitivity, specificity and prediction accuracy (along with 95% confidence 
bounds) will be used to characterize the precision of binary predictions from PLR.  AUC  curves 
(along with 95% confidence bounds)  will be used to characterize the predictive value of models 
from these methods. A participant whose  predictive probability is > 0.5 will be classified as 
having high nicotine dependence; however, alternative thresholds will also be evaluated in this 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 10 of 15analysis. In addition, the performance of each model will be evaluated using leave-one-out  
cross validation.  All computations will be performed using R statistical  language and 
environment.41 
Sample Size and Power:  With 180 subjects each in the low-medium (scores  0-5) and high-very 
high (scores 6-10) nicotine dependence groups,  we will have 80% power  to detect a difference  
in the range of 0.14-0.19  (in minor allele frequency between groups in SNPs of interest) at the 
0.005 significance  level. This calculation assumes  a 10-40% minor allele frequency  in the low 
nicotine dependence group.
Aim 3: Variance stabilizing and normalizing transformations will be applied to the data as 
appropriate. Analysis  of variance will be used to identify  the individual and interaction effects of 
factors on each outcome measure.  The Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method56 will be used to 
adjust for multiple tests involving each factor or interaction across the various outcome  
measures, and each test with an FDR ≤ 10% will be considered significant. The primary study 
analyses will be a 2 (Risk) x 2 (Ancestry) factorial  ANOVA.  With this statistical  approach,  we 
will be able to test for main effects  of Risk and Ancestry, as well as Risk x Ancestry interactions.  
The primary outcome measure will be motivation to quit; perceived risk, cancer worry, and 
psychological distress will serve as secondary  outcomes.  In addition to this primary analysis,  
we will also consider  including covariates  (e.g., demographics, numeracy,  FTND, study site, 
gender, age) to control for external  sources  of variation.  Finally,  we will be able to explore 
possible moderating effects of these covariates.  Although of course, the proposed study is not 
powered to detect such effects, such  exploratory  findings may be important  when deciding next 
steps in formally  utilizing the results  to develop interventions  aimed at increasing  knowledge  of 
genetic lung cancer  risk.
Sample size and power:  Power  computations for this aim are based on the 2 x 2 factorial design 
described above. With 90 participants per experimental condition (combination  of genetic risk 
and ancestry),  we would be able to detect an effect size of 0.685 due to genetic risk or ancestry 
at a significance  level of 0.0125 with 80% power.  Similarly,  we would be able to detect an effect 
size of 0.895 due to an interaction between genetic  risk and ancestry at a significance level of 
0.0125 with 80% power.42 A significance level of 0.0125 has been  used to account for the four 
outcome measures of interest in this aim and the calculations are based  on a standard deviation 
of 1.37 for motivation to quit smoking from the literature.43 
14.0 Data Safety Monitoring Plan
The PIs and Co-Is have  the responsibility  to oversee data handling, safety and issues of 
confidentiality, and has the responsibility to train research team  members  in procedures for 
safeguarding the well-being of human subjects and the confidentiality and correct handling of 
data as well as data storage.  The PIs are responsible  for monitoring protocol conduct and 
reporting to the Institutions’ Data & Safety  Monitoring Board (DSMB) any adverse  events  related  
to study procedures. The PIs will also be responsible for reviewing and completing the adverse 
event assessment.
15.0 Adverse Events
In accordance with FCCC  guidelines, this protocol will employ the following mechanisms for 
adverse event reporting: 1) alert the FCCC review  committees of any and all reports of adverse 
events; 2) inform all members of the study team of any all reports  of adverse events.  If 3 or 
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 11 of 15more adverse events  are reported, the study  team will assess potential  causes of the adverse 
events and, if events  are clearly linked  to study  participation, discontinue the study. 
16.0 Quality  Assurance Procedures and Participant Confidentiality
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed  according  to the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Those 
regulations required  a signed  subject  authorization informing the subject of the following: The 
protected health information (PHI) that will be collected from patient; who will have access to 
that information and why; who will use or disclose  that information; the rights of a research 
subject to revoke their authorization  or use their PHI. In the event  that a participant revokes  
authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all 
information prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  To ensure confidentiality identifier 
will be recorded and used  with electronic  data collected and all records will be secured in a 
locked location.  
All participants will be screened for eligibility using  a checklist  created for this study and the 
Principal Investigator  will regularly audit accrual  to ensure that participants meet eligibility  
criteria. In addition,  the Principal Investigator  will regularly audit the study  files to ensure that 
questionnaires completed  by participants contain all study items. Lastly, in order  to protect 
confidentiality, all data will be numerically coded and will contain no other  identifying  factors.  
Information linking the numeric codes to the participant’s name  will be kept in a secured file 
cabinet in a secured office. In addition, computer data files will be stored on password-protected 
computers.
17.0 Participant Informed  Consent
See separate Informed consent  document
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 12 of 1518.0 References
1.Howlader N, Noone  AM, Krapcho  M, Miller D, Bishop K, Altekruse SF, Kosary CL, Yu M, 
Ruhl J, Tatalovich Z, et al. (ed). SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2013, National 
Cancer Institute,  Bethesda, MD, based  on November 2015 SEER data submission, 
posted to the SEER  web site, April 2016
2.Haiman CA, Stram  DO, Wilkens LR, Pike MC, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, Le ML. Ethnic 
and racial differences in the smoking-related risk of lung cancer. N.Engl.J Med 2006 Jan 
26;354(4):333-42
3.Schwartz AG, Swanson GM. Lung carcinoma in African  Americans  and whites.  A 
population-based study in metropolitan Detroit, Michigan. Cancer 1997 Jan 1;79(1):45-
52
4.Giovino GA, Sidney  S, Gfroerer JC, O'Malley PM, Allen JA, Richter  PA, Cummings KM. 
Epidemiology of menthol  cigarette  use. Nicotine Tob Res 2004 Feb 1;6(Suppl_1):S67-
S81
5.Gandhi KK, Foulds J, Steinberg MB, Lu SE, Williams JM. Lower quit rates among 
African American and Latino  menthol cigarette smokers at a tobacco treatment clinic. Int 
J Clin Pract. 2009 Mar;63(3):360-7
6.Clark PI, Gautam  S, Gerson  LW. Effect of menthol cigarettes on biochemical markers  of 
smoke exposure among  black  and white smokers. Chest 1996  Nov;110(5):1194-8
7.Kabat  GC, Morabia A, Wynder EL. Comparison of smoking habits of blacks  and whites 
in a case-control study. Am J Public  Health 1991  Nov;81(11):1483-6
8.Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care., National 
Academies Press  (US), Washington (DC)
9.Schwartz AG, Cote ML, Wenzlaff AS, Land  S, Amos CI. Racial differences in the 
association between  SNPs on 15q25.1,  smoking behavior, and risk of non-small cell 
lung cancer. J.Thorac.Oncol. 2009 Oct;4(10):1195-201. PMCID:PMC3768000
10.Ramakodi MP, Devarajan  K, Blackman E, Gibbs D, Luce D, Deloumeaux J, Duflo S, Liu 
JC, Mehra R, Kulathinal RJ, Ragin CC. Integrative genomic  analysis  identifies  ancestry-
related expression  quantitative trait loci on DNA polymerase beta and supports the 
association of genetic ancestry  with survival disparities in head and neck squamous  cell 
carcinoma. Cancer  2016 Dec 1;
11.Erblich J, Bovbjerg DH, Diaz GA. Genetic  predictors of cue- and stress-induced  cigarette 
craving: an exploratory study. Exp.Clin.Psychopharmacol.  2012 Feb;20(1):40-6. 
PMCID:PMC3576834
12.Berg JZ, Mason J, Boettcher AJ, Hatsukami  DK, Murphy SE. Nicotine metabolism in 
African Americans and European Americans:  variation in glucuronidation by ethnicity 
and UGT2B10 haplotype. J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther. 2010 Jan;332(1):202-9. 
PMCID:PMC2802474
13.Richie JP, Jr., Carmella  SG, Muscat JE, Scott DG, Akerkar SA, Hecht SS. Differences in 
the urinary metabolites of the tobacco-specific lung carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 13 of 15(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone in black and white smokers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers  Prev 
1997 Oct;6(10):783-90
14.Muscat JE, Djordjevic MV, Colosimo  S, Stellman SD, Richie  JP, Jr. Racial differences  in 
exposure and glucuronidation of the tobacco-specific carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-
1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK). Cancer 2005  Apr 1;103(7):1420-6
15.Belinsky SA, Foley  JF, White CM, Anderson MW, Maronpot RR. Dose-response 
relationship between O6-methylguanine  formation in Clara cells and induction of 
pulmonary neoplasia in the rat by 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone.  
Cancer Res. 1990 Jun 15;50(12):3772-80
16.Rivenson A, Hoffmann D, Prokopczyk B, Amin S, Hecht SS. Induction of lung and 
exocrine pancreas  tumors  in F344  rats by tobacco-specific and Areca-derived  N-
nitrosamines. Cancer Res. 1988  Dec 1;48(23):6912-7
17.Kawajiri K, Nakachi  K, Imai K, Shinoda N, Watanabe J. Identification  of genetically high 
risk individuals to lung cancer by DNA  polymorphisms of the cytochrome P4501A1  gene.  
FEBS Lett 1990;263:131-3
18.Ford JG, Li Y, O'Sullivan  MM, Demopoulos R, Garte S, Taioli  E, Brandt-Rauf  PW. 
Glutathione S-transferase M1 polymorphism and lung cancer risk in African-Americans. 
Carcinogenesis 2000 Nov 1;21(11):1971-5
19.Garte S, Taioli  E, Raimondi S, Paracchini V, Binkova B, Sram RJ, Kalina I, Popov TA, 
Singh R, Farmer PB. Effects of metabolic genotypes on intermediary biomarkers  in 
subjects exposed to PAHS: results from the EXPAH study. Mutat.Res. 2007 Jul 1;620(1-
2):7-15
20.Taioli E, Ford J, Trachman J, Li Y, Demopoulos R, Garte  S. Lung cancer risk and 
CYP1A1 genotype  in African  Americans.  Carcinogenesis 1998 May;19(5):813-7
21.Adachi Y, Suzuki H, Schinkel AH, Sugiyama  Y. Role of breast  cancer resistance protein 
(Bcrp1/Abcg2) in the extrusion of glucuronide and sulfate conjugates from enterocytes to 
intestinal lumen. Mol.Pharmacol.  2005  Mar;67(3):923-8
22.Megaraj V, Zhao T, Paumi  CM, Gerk  PM, Kim RB, Vore  M. Functional analysis of 
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms of multidrug resistance-associated 
protein 2 (ABCC2).  Pharmacogenet.Genomics 2011 Aug;21(8):506-15
23.Kiyohara C, Shirakawa T, Hopkin  JM. Genetic polymorphism of enzymes involved in 
xenobiotic metabolism  and the risk of lung cancer.  Environ.Health Prev Med 2002 
May;7(2):47-59
24.Chung CJ, Pu YS, Shiue HS, Lee HL, Lin P, Yang HY, Su CT, Hsueh YM. 4-
(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) metabolism-related  enzymes gene 
polymorphisms, NNK metabolites  levels and urothelial carcinoma. Toxicol.Lett. 2013 Jan 
10;216(1):16-22
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 14 of 1525.Chen G, Dellinger RW, Gallagher  CJ, Sun D, Lazarus  P. Identification  of a prevalent 
functional missense polymorphism in the UGT2B10 gene and its association  with 
UGT2B10 inactivation  against  tobacco-specific nitrosamines. Pharmacogenet.Genomics 
2008 Mar;18(3):181-91
26.Garte S, Gaspari L, Alexandrie AK, Ambrosone C, Autrup H, Autrup JL, Baranova  H, 
Bathum L, Benhamou S, Boffetta  P, Bouchardy C, Breskvar K, Brockmoller  J, Cascorbi 
I, Clapper ML, Coutelle C, Daly A, Dell'Omo M, Dolzan  V, Dresler CM, Fryer A, Haugen 
A, Hein DW, Hildesheim A, Hirvonen  A, Hsieh LL, Ingelman-Sundberg  M, Kalina I, Kang 
D, Kihara M, Kiyohara C, Kremers P, Lazarus P, Le Marchand  L, Lechner MC, van 
Lieshout EM, London S, Manni JJ, Maugard  CM, Morita  S, Nazar-Stewart V, Noda K, 
Oda Y, Parl FF, Pastorelli R, Persson I, Peters  WH, Rannug  A, Rebbeck T, Risch A, 
Roelandt L, Romkes M, Ryberg  D, Salagovic J, Schoket B, Seidegard J, Shields PG, 
Sim E, Sinnet D, Strange RC, Stucker I, Sugimura  H, To-Figueras J, Vineis P, Yu MC, 
Taioli E. Metabolic gene polymorphism  frequencies  in control  populations.  Cancer  
Epidemiol.Biomarkers Prev. 2001 Dec;10(12):1239-48
27.Le FB, Gallo A, Le SY, Lu L, Gorwood P. Genetics of dopamine  receptors and drug 
addiction: a comprehensive review. Behav.Pharmacol. 2009 Feb;20(1):1-17
28.Erblich J, Lerman  C, Self DW, Diaz GA, Bovbjerg DH. Effects of dopamine D2 receptor 
(DRD2) and transporter  (SLC6A3)  polymorphisms on smoking cue-induced cigarette 
craving among  African-American smokers.  Mol.Psychiatry 2005 Apr;10(4):407-14
29.Hollands  GJ, French DP, Griffin SJ, Prevost AT, Sutton S, King S, Marteau TM. The 
impact of communicating genetic  risks of disease on risk-reducing health behaviour: 
systematic review with meta-analysis.  BMJ 2016;352
30.Shepperd JA, Novell CA, O'Neill SC, Docherty SL, Sanderson  SC, McBride CM, Lipkus 
IM. Contemplating genetic feedback regarding lung cancer susceptibility. Ann Behav 
Med 2014;47(3)
31.de Viron S, Van der Heyden  J, Ambrosino  E, Arbyn  M, Brand A, Van Oyen H. Impact  of 
genetic notification  on smoking cessation: systematic review and pooled-analysis. PLoS 
One 2012;7(7)
32.Smerecnik C, Grispen JE, Quaak  M. Effectiveness of testing for genetic  susceptibility to 
smoking-related diseases on smoking cessation  outcomes:  a systematic review  and 
meta-analysis. Tob Control 2012;21(3)
33.Lea DH, Kaphingst KA, Bowen D, Lipkus I, Hadley DW. Communicating genetic and 
genomic information:  health literacy and numeracy considerations.  Public  Health 
Genomics 2011;14(4-5):279-89. PMCID:PMC2909377
34.Morris  NS, Field TS, Wagner  JL, Cutrona SL, Roblin DW, Gaglio B, Williams  AE, Han 
PJ, Costanza ME, Mazor KM. The association between health literacy  and cancer-
related attitudes,  behaviors, and knowledge. J Health Commun.  2013;18  Suppl 1:223-
41. PMCID:PMC3815140
FCCC Principal Investigator: Camille Ragin
CUNY Hunter:  Joel Erblich
Abbreviated Title:  Nicotine Dependence and LCa Genetics in AAs
IRB # 18-8004
Page 15 of 1535.Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical  and powerful 
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical  Society, B 1995;57(1):289-
300
36.Park MY, Hastie T. Penalized logistic regression for detecting gene interactions.  
Biostatistics. 2008 Jan;9(1):30-50
37.Hothorn T, Hornik K, Zeileis A. Unbiased Recursive Partitioning:  A Conditional Inference 
Framework. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 2006;15(3):651-74
38.Ritchie MD, Hahn LW, Moore JH. Power of multifactor  dimensionality reduction for 
detecting gene-gene  interactions in the presence  of genotyping  error, missing data, 
phenocopy, and genetic heterogeneity.  Genet Epidemiol 2003 Feb;24(2):150-7
39.Wang M, Block  TM, Marrero J, Di Bisceglie AM, Devarajan K, Mehta A. Improved 
biomarker performance for the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma by inclusion of 
clinical parameters. Proceedings.(IEEE Int.Conf.Bioinformatics.Biomed.) 2012 
Dec;2012. PMCID:PMC3845221
40.Wang M, Mehta A, Block  TM, Marrero J, Di Bisceglie AM, Devarajan  K. A comparison of 
statistical methods for the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma based on serum  
biomarkers and clinical variables. BMC.Med.Genomics  2013;6  Suppl 3:S9. 
PMCID:PMC3980825
41.R Development Core  Team. A language  and environment for statistical  computing  R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.ISBN 3-900051-07-0, URL 
http://www.R-project.org.  2005 .
42.Montgomery  DC (ed). Design and analysis of experiments, John Wiley & Sons, 
43.Sanderson SC, Humphries SE, Hubbart C, Hughes E, Jarvis MJ, Wardle J. 
Psychological and behavioural impact of genetic  testing smokers  for lung cancer  risk: a 
phase II exploratory trial. J.Health  Psychol.  2008  May;13(4):481-94