 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Community Health Worker And MHealth to ImProve Viral Suppression 
(CHAMPS)  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
05/23/2023  
 
Persons  living  with HIV (PLWH)  now achieve  a near-normal  life expectancy  due to antiretroviral  therapy  
(ART) which has transformed HIV from a terminal diagnosis to a manageable chronic condition.1-4 Despite  
widespread availability of ART in the United States (US), many of the country’s approximate 1.1 million  
PLWH5—in diverse geographic locations —are not fully benefitting from ART due to poor adherence.6 
Suboptimal ART adherence is a challenge in the US South which acco unts for 51% of new domestic cases  
annually.7 The Southern HIV epidemic is even more pronounced in the “Deep South”8 with striking numbers in  
Alabama (AL) where PLWH experience poor viral suppression (62%).9 Likewise, the heavy HIV burden in the  
US Northea st10 is in New York City (NYC) which accounts for 82% of all PLWH in NY state.11 Further, in the  
NYC region, only 67% of PLWH achieve sustained, or durable, viral suppression (the ultimate goal of ART). In  
response, the US government prioritized four NYC -area counties and AL (our study sites) as five of 55 areas  
with a substantial burden of HIV in the Ending the HIV Epidemic (EHE) plan.12 These suboptimal HIV health  
outcomes occur at a time when clinicians have limited time and the US healthcare system rema ins 
fragmented,13 further exacerbating the challenges inherent in the lives of underserved, marginalized groups,  
such as PLWH.14 Therefore, the development and evaluation of interventions using a cadre of community  
health workers (CHW) holds promise for ad dressing these challenges in the US.15, 16 Yet, research is urgently  
needed  to bring  CHW interventions to  scale, particularly  in EHE priority  locations.  
Despite efforts to achieve UNAIDS 95 -95-95 targets, marked deficits remain in HIV viral  
suppression and  ART adherence among a growing number of PLWH.21-26 Progression of HIV disease and  
premature deaths among PLWH have been attributed foremost to insufficient engagement in medical care and  
adherence to HIV treatment regimens.27, 28 Quick access to ART and subsequent sustained ART adherence is  
central to therapeutic success and is a critical determinant of long -term health outcomes (e.g., viral 
suppression ) in PLWH.29-31 For many chronic diseases, such as diabetes or hypertension, drug regimens  
remain  effect ive even  after treatment  is resumed  following  a period  of interruption.  In the case  of HIV, however,  
loss of virologic control as a consequence of ART non -adherence may lead to emergence of drug resistance  
and loss of future treatment options.32-34Therefor e, developing effective interventions to enhance ART  
adherence  is essential.  
Gaps  in HIV treatment  are particularly  pronounced  in the US  South and  Northeast,  specifically,  
AL and NYC, the two high priority settings for our study. The Deep South, a colloquial term comprising  
nine US states,  including  AL, had the highest  HIV diagnosis  rates  of any US region  during  the past decade.35 
In AL, HIV disproportionally  affects  racial  minority  groups  with Blacks  comprising  63.7%  of PLWH  and 73.8%  of 
new diagnoses in 2019.36 Poorer HIV -related health outcomes are seen in AL as compared to other regions,  
with higher HIV -related mortality rates,37 higher rates of AIDS diagnoses38 (oftentimes an indicator of late  
diagnosis or poor disease management39-41), and lower rates of engagement in HIV care and viral 
suppression .42 While characteristically different from AL, NYC continues to have high HIV diagnosis rates as  
well.43 HIV disproportionally affects racial minority groups in NYC, too, with Blacks comprising 43.5% of PLWH  
and 45.9% of new diagnoses in 2018.44 Poorer HIV -health outcomes in the Bronx, as compared to other NYC  
boroughs, have been noted with higher HIV -related mortality rates,45 higher rates of AIDS diagnoses,43 and 
lower  rates of viral suppressio n.46 
CHW and related models have demonstrated positive impact for medication support, seeking  
treatment, and clinic -patient relationships. Interventions with CHW have shown promise both globally47-49 
and in the US. One study in Seattle tested the effect of  a 3-month CHW intervention and found an association  
with greater ART adherence at post -intervention.50 In another domestic study of an online CHW social support  
ART adherence intervention, substance using participants reported significantly higher overall  ART 
adherence.51 A small study of 20 PLWH in Kansas City, Missouri showed the positive effect of “READY,” a  
peer-led CHW intervention for improving ART adherence in patients who had experienced repeated non - 
adherence.52 Collectively, these studies demons trate the efficacy of CHW and other peer -led interventions for  
improving ART adherence. In addition, CHW can interface with the healthcare system at lower costs and  
require less training than clinicians.53-55 This is especially important now given the limi ted time of clinicians and  
the fragmented condition  of the US healthcare and  insurance  system.  
However, CHW models do not provide strong evidence for improving key psychosocial or HIV health  
outcomes associated with ART adherence and viral suppression ,56, 57 e.g., HIV -related stigma, quality of  
life, psychosocial distress/stress, adherence medication and skills, and adherence self -efficacy . Prior work in  
the Deep  South  suggests  that it is the enhanced  relationship  between  CHW  and PLWH that  is vitally  important  
and is associated  with improvements  in linkage  to care,  retention  in care,  and viral suppression .58 In our BA2C  
RCT,  CHW delivered  an intervention adapted  from ARTAS,  a CDC  evidence -based  intervention  (EBI)  shown  STUDY  PURPOSE  AND  RATIONALE  
to significantly increa se both linkage to and retention in care. While ARTAS was developed for new -to-care 
PLWH, BA2C was tailored and adapted for PLWH who had previously linked to but were not currently engaged  
in care.  BA2C  results  showed  that participants  in both the intervention  and comparison  groups  improved  
across multiple outcomes (linkage to care, retention in care, ART prescription, and viral suppression ), but there  
was no significant difference between groups. Some of the limitations of the BA2C study included poo r 
retention rates (70%) and difficulty attending CHW intervention sessions, suggesting that a hybrid intervention  
in which CHW sessions can be delivered through a mobile platform has the potential to improve the efficacy of  
the intervention. Given the limi tations of the BA2C intervention59, 60  and in direct response to RFA -NR-20-002, 
Strengthening the Impact of Community Health Workers on the HIV Care Continuum in the US, we will  
leverage our mHealth work to overcome the limitations of the BA2C study. Namel y, we will use mHealth  
technology to overcome logistic hurdles of connecting participants and their CHW and to improve engagement  
through  the tools  in our  WiseApp.  
The ubiquitous nature of mHealth technologies in daily life creates opportunities for health  
behavior management tools that were not previously possible61 and has the potential to address many of  
the healthcare needs of PLWH. The use of mHealth can reduce geographic and economic disparities and  
personalize healthcare,62, 63 which is particu larly relevant to PLWH since a majority represent underserved and  
minority groups.64-66 mHealth technology is especially important in the context of improving ART adherence in  
PLWH.67 There is preliminary evidence that mHealth technology is a feasible, att ractive, accessible, and  
effective platform for improving ART adherence in PLWH.68-70 Eighty -one percent (81%) of Americans are  
smartphone owners,71 and our previous work suggests that this percentage is surprisingly higher with 83.7% of  
PLWH in Birmingham , AL owning a smartphone.72 In NYC, smartphone ownership among low -income  
racial/ethnic minority PLWH is even higher with only 1.7% of participants who screened for our clinical trials  
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) being ineligible because they did not own a smartphone . There is evidence  
that underserved populations use smartphones as their primary method for accessing the Internet.73, 74  Finally,  
there is evidence that mHealth technology can promote the prevention and management of chronic illnesses  
such  as HIV,75 thereby  allaying  weaknesses of  the BA2C  intervention.  
To that end, we developed the WiseApp using strong user -centered design research with underserved PLWH  
that draws on considerable formative work with PLWH, HIV clinicians, HIV case managers and th e CDC  
(U01PS003715, PI: Schnall).19 We then built the app and integrated it with a smart pill box (CleverCap) to allow  
PLWH to self -manage their HIV and monitor their medication adherence in real -time (R01HS025071, PI:  
Schnall). The WiseApp is an innovativ e self -management tool aligned with the National Institute of Nursing  
Research (NINR) Strategic Plan76 currently being evaluated in a RCT ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) with 200 PLWH in NYC  
with poor ART adherence. Further details are in the preliminary studies section bel ow. Integrating the  
functionality of the WiseApp to deliver the CHW intervention remotely will overcome many of the limitations of  
the BA2C  intervention,  namely  attendance at  in-person  sessions  due to scheduling,  distance,  or finances.  
Implementation research is underutilized in HIV self -management, mHealth studies, and CHW  
interventions. Despite the development and well -documented success of behavior change interventions for  
PLWH, interventions often fail to sustain behavior change over time or demons trate long -term efficacy.18 
mHealth technology has the potential to empower patients to self -manage a chronic condition, such as HIV.77 
However,  implementation  of mHealth  technology  is often  fraught  with barriers  to adoption  sometimes  owing  to 
a dearth of evidence related to implementation of these tools.78 CHW interventions, too, are rarely designed,  
implemented,  or evaluated using  theory -driven  implementation frameworks.79 
Combining elements of clinical efficacy with implementation research can enhance pu blic 
health  impact.  Implementation  research  is often  overlooked  and can be used  to predict  issues  that may arise  
with the real -world implementation of an intervention. Guided by a rigorous implementation research  
framework, RE -AIM, we will assess the contextual factors that influence translation, adoption, replication,  
sustainability and implementation of CHAMPS across racial/ethnic groups and settings (Aim 3).  A priori  
blending of clinical efficacy and implementation trials can more quickly translate research findings into routine  
practice80 which can potentially yield much richer data that is especially useful to advance science and  
significantly impact public health. In this study, we will conduct an efficacy trial and assess implementation  
factors t o test a clinical intervention while gathering information on its delivery and/or its potential for  
implementation in a real -world situation. This method will allow us to evaluate the potential strategies for  
ensuring  widespread implementation  of CHAMPS in future work.  
In summary,  this study  addresses  limitations  in current  research  on CHW  interventions  to improve  viral 
suppression and ART adherence. We propose to build on our strong preliminary data and directly respond to  
RFA-NR-20-002 by strengthening  our CHW  intervention  (BA2C)  using  our existing  mHealth  approach  
(WiseApp). Guided by a rigorous theoretical model of supportive accountability, the literature and our  
preliminary work support the scientific premise that adding WiseApp to the CHW intervention will enable PLWH  
to self -manage their ART regimens while CHW monitor their ART adherence in real -time ultimately leading to  
viral suppression and ART adherence. The proposed study will provide further information regarding the  
successful  wide-scale  implementation of  this combination  intervention  in two  high priority  settings.  
The proposed study will test the clinical efficacy and assess the implementation factors of the resultant  
CHW intervention, Community Health Worker And MHealth to Im Prove Viral Suppression ( CHAMPS ), through  
the following  specific  aims  with virally  unsuppressed  adult  PLWH  (n=150 in  AL and 150  in NYC):  
1: Conduct  an RCT to assess  the efficacy  and sustainability  of CHAMPS  on viral suppression  
(primary  outcome)  and ART adherence  (secondary  outcome)  compared  to the standard  of care 
(standard  of care,  control  group)  over 6  and 12 months.  
PLWH  randomized  to CHAMPS  will have  significantly  greater:  
H1: Viral suppression  (primary outcome) than  those in  the standard  of care group.  
H2: ART adherence (secondary  outcome) than  those  in the standard  of care group.  
2: Identify  mediators  and moderators  of CHAMPS  on study  outcomes.  
H3: HIV medication taking self-efficacy, motivation expectancies, self -regulation skills, and HIV-related  
stigma mediate  the effect  of CHAMPS on  viral suppression and  ART adherence.  
H4: Depression,  anxiety,  and substance  use moderate  the strength  of the effect  of CHAMPS  on viral 
suppression  and ART adherence.  
3: Guided by the Reach Effectiveness Adoption Implementation Maintenance (RE -AIM) framework,  
identify multi -level factors associated with successful implementation of CHAMPS to inform future  
implementation  and scale -up. 
This study  seeks  to expand  and strengthen  a CHW  model  through  an extant  mHealth  approach.  Findings  will 
inform  the effect  of CHAMPS  on outcomes  related  to the HIV  Care  Continuum  in two EHE  priority  settings.  
 
Theoretical  Framework  
The intervention is guided by the conceptual model of supportive accountability illustrated in Figure 1 .86 The 
model  is based  on the premise  that human  support  increases  medication  adherence  through  accountability  to 
a coach  (in CHAMPS  – a CHW)  who is perceived  as trustworthy,  knowledgeable,  and benevolent.  
Accountability should involve clear, process -oriented expectations guided by the patient (e.g., reporting  
adherence, problem -solving). The effect of accountability may be mediated by patient motivati on, elicited  
through MI, so that patients with higher intrinsic motivation may actually require less support. The process of  
support is further supported by technology (WiseApp in this study) with different advantages and  
disadvantages for each mode. Multi ple studies have demonstrated that human support is a strong predictor of  
viral suppression and adherence to ART.87-89 Although overall support predicted adherence in these studies,  
other components of social support, such as instrumental support (i.e., pr actical assistance) and informational  
support (advice or problem -solving) offered through CHAMPS , are also predictive.87 Both BA2C and  
WiseApp —and the proposed  integrated  intervention, CHAMPS —have  been  designed  to validate  the 
importance  of viral suppression  and ART 
adherence as well as to prompt problem -solving  
(through  informational  support).  These  interventions  
utilize human support to provide tailored  
conversations to improve both short - and long -term 
adherence.  Social  support  theory  also suggests  
that an ongoing alliance between the study  
participants and CHW could protect against  
depression,  substance use,  and anxiety.90-93 
 
Preliminary  Data:  We have  conducted  two studies  
to support the  use of this  intervention.  
1) Birmingham Access to Care (BA2C) . BA2C  
(funded by AIDS United, Co -Is: Batey and  
Mugavero) was a single -site RCT conducted  
between July 2013 and February 2016 in  
partnership  with Birmingham  AIDS  Outreach  (BAO)  Figure  1. Model  of Supportive  Accountability  

and the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) 1917 HIV Clinic. The study focused on re -engagement to  
care among PLWH who had previously linked to care but who were not currently engaged at the time of the  
study (N=170). The BA2C intervention was based on a CDC -recognized EBI, ARTAS, which was the first RCT  
shown to significantly increase linkage to and retention in care among recently diagnosed PLWH.17, 82, 83  The 
ARTAS intervention consists of a brief, strengths -based case management/MI approach aimed at facilitating a  
close, supportive relationship between the CHW and participant and consists of up to five visits. BA2C, which  
was tailored and adapted to PLWH who dropped out of care, expanded on ARTAS to provide additional  
support over a longer period. Par ticipants enrolled in the intervention arm received an initial face -to-face 
meeting with an assigned CHW prior to attending their first return HIV primary care visit and attended at least  
ten and up to 12 visits over six months in which the CHW worked coll aboratively with participants to resolve  
any barriers to care. Depending on participant needs, the CHW may attend medical appointments with the  
participant and/or provide  transportation.  Participants  in the control  arm received  standard  of care.  Study  
findings from BA2C  showed  that participants  in both study  arms  improved  across  multiple  outcomes  (linkage  to 
care 30 days after baseline; retention in care, ART prescription, and viral suppression at 12 months after  
baseline), but there was no  statistically si gnificant difference  between  groups. The lack  of statistical  
significance was likely due to a small sample size and a 70% retention rate due to challenges participants had  
in attending study appointments. CHAMPS will build on the evidence -based premise of BA2C and the  
enhanced relationship between CHW and participants while adding an mHealth component to facilitate study  
retention,  described below.  
2) WiseApp  is derived from formative work funded by and in collaboration with the CDC ( U01PS003715) to 
design a s elf-management app for PLWH84 with the goal of being more widely applicable across chronic illness  
populations who require medications and adding self -management strategies. A comprehensive process for  
the design  of the  self-management  app was guided  by th e Information  Systems  Research  (ISR)  framework  
and incorporated end -user feedback throughout the design process.85 The resultant WiseApp is comprised of  
the following functional components: 1) testimonial videos of PLWH, 2) push -notification reminders, 3)  
medication trackers, (4) health surveys, and (5) a “To -Do” list outlining their tasks for the day, such as  
medications  to take (See  Figure  2). A key component  of WiseApp  is a medication  tracker  linked to  an 
electronic  pill bottle  and a capability  to link to a fitness  tracker  and 
monitor physical activity. WiseApp can then send tailored  
reminders based on the feedback from the linked devices, such  
as medication  reminders  if the pill  bottle  has not been  opened.  
Additional images of the WiseApp are found in Table 2. The  
WiseApp is aligned with the NINR Strategic Plan76 and is  
currently being evaluated in an RCT ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) in 200  
PLWH  with poor  ART adherence  in NYC  (R01HS025071,  PI: 
Schnall). Preliminary data show evidence for the success of this  
intervention  in comparison  to the control  group  for improving  ART 
adherence (primary outcome) (58% ART adherence, 47% ART  
adherence, respectively, p=0.03) in low -income racial and ethnic  
minority  PLWH  (mean  age=49.1  years, SD±10.6).  
 
 
 
 
Aim 1: Assess  the efficacy  and sustainability  of CHAMPS  on viral suppression  (primary  outcome)  
and ART adherence  (secondary  outcome)  compared  to the standard  of care (standard  of care,  control  
group)  over  6 and 12 months.  
 
Design  Overview  
A randomized controlled trial will be conducted with 300 PLWH (n=150 in AL and 150 in NYC) over 12  
months.  Participants  will be randomly  assigned  to CHAMPS  (intervention)  or a standard -of-care control  arm. Figure  2. Sample  Image from  the WiseApp  
List of currently  prescribed  medications  
 
 
STUDY  DESIGN  
Intervention Arm. The CHAMPS intervention,  
outlined in Table 1, is a 6 -month intervention  
guided by BA2C.17 The CHW will be  
demographically -matched to our study  
participants.  
 
Intervention  Training  and Support.  The CHW  
will be trained on the intervention: content of  
each se ssion, MI, strengths -based case  
management,  ARTAS,17 HIV and substance  
use, and safety in the field. The CHW will also be trained on use of the WiseApp and CleverCap assuring all  
study participants and CHW are able to successfully use the mHealth technology. Training for the CHW will  
also be provided on : human subjects research protection, financial conflict of interest, HIPAA, and data privacy  
and securi ty. The CHW will engage in supportive strengths -based case management and MI with the study  
participant. Intervention visits  (~ten  over a six-month  
period) will help participants access primary medical care  
by acknowledging  and addressing  barriers  to care.  
Participants will have the option to participate in most  
CHW sessions in -person or via the App. This will help  
participants overcome many of the challenges to  
participating  in-person,  which  was a frequent  barrier  in 
Birmingham and a current barrier due to  COVID -19 in  
NYC.  
The WiseApp offers the following functionality listed  
in Table 2, and the CleverCap is linked to the WiseApp.  
The CleverCap fits on standard pill bottles, dispenses  
only the prescribed  amount  of medication,  keeps  track  of 
medications disp ensed, and communicates wirelessly  
with mobile devices. Participants are then able to self - 
monitor  their medications,  and the CHW  will also be able 
to track study participants’ adherence to their ART  
medication in real time. Participants receive reminders  
through the WiseApp when they have not taken their  
medication on time and receive encouraging messages  
(e.g., Great job! You’ve met your goal for not forgetting  
your meds)  when  they have  taken  their medication.  
Communication, whether in -person or via the App, will  
enhance the relationship between the CHW and the  
study  participant.  
The sessions and sample content are illustrated in  
Table  3. CHAMPS  is a manualized  intervention  and 
study visits focus on topic areas such as linkage to care,  
medication adherenc e, health literacy, access to support  
services,  and HIV  disclosure. Ideally  session  #1 will be in 
person and #6 needs to be in -person during the care  
visit. 
The remaining visits can be in -person or through the  
WiseApp.  The CHW  maintains  consistent  communication  
with the participant to make sure the participant’s needs  
are addressed. Upon assignment to the intervention arm,  
a CHW is assigned to and meets with the participant as  
soon  as possible,  generally  on the same  day but no 
more than five busines s days. The WiseApp has a  
communication feature which will allow the CHW to  
deliver most of the sessions described in Table 3  
remotely.  Table  1. Components  of CHAMPS  delivered  over the  6 month  
intervention  period  
10 sessions  
with the  
CHW   
Detailed  in Table 3  below  
CleverCap  Participants  and CHW will  be able to track  ART adherence.  
 
 
WiseApp  • CHW  will be able to deliver  sessions  to the study  
participants  through the  WiseApp.  
• Participants  will be able to self-manage  their health  
through  the content described in  Table 2 . 
• Participants  and CHW  can securely  chat with one 
another.  
 
Table  2. WiseApp  Features  used  for CHAMPS  intervention  
WiseApp  
Feature  CHW  
Integration  WiseApp  Screen -shot  
Medication  Participant  and 
 Tracking  CHW  monitor  
medication  
 adherence.  
 Participants  
 receive  reminders  
 when  they have  
 not taken  their 
 medication  on 
 time.  
CleverCap  CleverCap syncs  
with the WiseApp  
to record  
medication  
adherence.   
 
Chat  1:1 chat for  
participant and  
CHW for individual  
conversations,  
allowing CHW to  
provide  
intervention  
sessions.  
 
Testimonials  Stories  of CHW’s  
 of Lived  experiences  living  
Experiences  with and/or  
 supporting  PLWH.  
 

Table  3. Outline  of CHW  Sessions  with study  participants  guided by  BA2C  and ARTAS  content  
 Title Sample  Content  for Each Session  
1 Building  the Relationship  Introduce  the goals  of CHAMPS  
2 Introduction  to the WiseApp  Discuss how the App can be used to facilitate communication between the CHW and the  
provider. Review the medication tracking function and how  this can be used by the CHW and  
the participant.  
3 Emphasizing  Personal  Strengths  To help the patient  self-identify  personal  strengths,  abilities,  and skills.  
4 Learning  to Make Contact  Assist  patient  in preparing a list  of questions to ask  care provider  
5 Reminder  Call Call at the agreed upon  time;  Remind participant  of any needed documents  
6 Primary  Care  Provider Appointment  #1 Support  patient’s  efforts  during  care provider  visit 
7 Debriefing  Provider  Visit with Client  #1 Solicit patient’s input on what went well for the patient. Elicit from the patient what he or she  
learned  from the care  visit and what  strengths he or  she demonstrated during  the care  visit. 
8 Reviewing  Progress  Plan for and review  the transition  process  between  the CHW  and study  participant  
9 Debriefing  Provider  Visit with Client  #2 Solicit patient’s input on what went well for the patient. Elicit from the patient what he or she  
learned  from the care  visit and what  strengths he or  she demonstrated during  the care  visit. 
10 Completing  the work  Review  the transition  process/  Transition  to long term/Ryan  White  case  manager  or other  
providers  
 
Standard  of Care (Control  Arm)  
The control condition includes standard health services offered at each site (e.g., mental health services, case  
management, referral to clinical care) and a brief adherence educational session. The standard educational  
session  consists  of a review  of medications  and recommended  dosing  (i.e., to understand  regimen),  adherence  
expectations, toxicity exp ectations, and medication misperceptions. During the educational session,  
participants can ask questions and receive answers to reinforce their current ART regimen. All participants  
receive  referrals  to mental  health,  drug/alcohol  treatment,  and/or  other  HIV services  as necessary.  In 
summary,  standard  of care at  each of  the sites  is comprehensive (far  more  extensive  than standard  of care for 
the general  non-HIV infected  population)  and follows  the Department  of Health  and Human  Services  HIV 
guidelines.113 All sites  also provide  mental health  and psychosocial  support  services.  
 
Eligibility  Criteria  for Participants  
Inclusion criteria :1) Able to speak, read, and write in English or Spanish (at the New York City site only); 2)  
Aged ≥18 years; 3) Willing to participate in any assigned arm of the intervention; 4) Having been diagnosed  
with HIV ≥6 months ago; 5) Have an HIV -1 RNA level >200 copies/mL, or at least one “no -show” visit in the  
past 12 months, or report either not virally suppressed in the past 12 m onths or virally unsuppressed in the  
past 12 months; 6) Own a smartphone; and 7) Ability and willingness to provide informed consent for study  
participation  and consent  for access  to medical  records.  Participants  are not eligible  if they meet  any exclusion  
criteria : 1) Reside  in a nursing  home,  prison,  and/or  receiving  in-patient  psychiatric  care at time of enrollment;  
2) Terminal  illness  with life expectancy  <6 months; and  3) Planning  to move  out of the area in the next 12 
months.  
Inclusion consideration : We carefully considered including newly diagnosed patients (diagnosed <6 months)  
and have chosen to not include this subset of PLWH because: 1) Our piloted interventions did not include  
newly -diagnosed  persons;  2) Newly -diagnosed  individuals  are treatment  naïve  and their adherence  behaviors  
are unknown and may change frequently as they begin their ART regimen; and 3) The advent of rapid -start 
ART for newly -diagnosed individuals is currently under trial in both locations, providing an ART -initiation  
interven tion for these  individuals that  could  compromise  our study  results.  
 
Recruitment  Plan  
We will enroll a minimum of 50% women or transgender women combined across sites and stop enrollment of  
men at 150 to meet this goal. We will track the reasons and demogr aphic characteristics of those refusing to  
participate and examine those data as part of our ongoing monitoring and implementation evaluation activities  
(see Human  Subjects).  
We will use the following strategies for recruiting PLWH for all aims of the stud y; these approaches  
have been successfully used by our team in past studies.94-98 Planned offline and online recruitment venues  
include  the following:  
• Clinic  and Community  Outreach : Clinic  social  workers  and peer outreach  staff will distribute  information  
about  the study  using  flyers and electronic advertisement  boards in  clinic  waiting  rooms.  
• Community  Presentations : Across  sites,  study  staff will attend  and/or  make  study  presentations  at selected  
activities  and social  events  sponsored  by community  partner s, e.g.,  community  advisory  boards,  health  
fairs, and clinic/organization staff meetings. When making presentations, the presenting recruiter will  
provide a brief study background and invite all interested potential participants to speak to one of the study  
recruiters.  
• Social  Networking  Websites  and Apps : We will recruit  participants  online  through  various  websites  and 
apps. We will use psychographic targeting (i.e., in -depth, publicly available consumer data such as  
interests,  city) to advertise  to potentially  eligible  individuals  in the two  cities.  
 
Consistent with the multi -pronged recruitment approach designed to reduce recruitment bias99, 100 and to  
minimize potential recruitment problems, our team will carefully monitor each approach. This w ill involve  
weekly review of recruitment data with staff to assess efforts. In this way, recruitment will be a dynamic  
process  and will reach  the proposed  diverse  group  of PLWH.  
Sex and Race/Ethnicity Considerations: The HIV literature is limited in interv entions among women and  
racial/ethnic minorities.102 Drs. Schnall and Batey have successfully recruited many African -American, Latino,  
and female PLWH.103-106 We plan to enroll a minimum of 50% African -American, Hispanic, Asian, and 50%  
female participants , resulting in representative findings. Sex as a biological variable will be analyzed as a  
potential effect -modifier in our outcomes. Data will be sex -stratified to explore sex -specific responses as an  
exploratory  analysis (e.g., not  powered to detect  sex-specific  differences  in outcomes).  
 
 
 
Sample  Size and Power  Calculation  
We have estimated the statistical power for the primary outcome of viral suppression (viral load ≤ 200). We will  
recruit and enroll 300 participants (n=150 in each site) and use a 1:1 random assignment to the intervention  
arm and the control arm (i.e., 75 in each arm per site). We estimate the statistical power to examine efficacy of  
the intervention at six months for the total subjects. All power estimations ar e based on α=0.05 and 2 -sided  
tests and following assumptions: (1) an 80% retention rate, at each follow -up assessment for each study arm  
(based on our 86.1% retention rate in New York City WiseApp trial); (2) a correlation of 0.6 of outcome  
measure for pa rticipants at different time points of assessment; (3) an intra -cluster correlation (ICC) of 0.2 of  
participants of same study sites; and (4) 75% baseline viral suppression rate (based on preliminary data of the  
BA2C  study).  
For the total sample (n=300), t he proposed study will have at least 80% power to detect a difference of 12% or  
greater in viral suppression. The 12% difference in viral suppression is equivalent to a small effect size  
(Cohen’s D of 0.31). Therefore, the proposed study will have sufficie nt power (≥80%) to detect a small effect  
size or greater. Based on findings from our BA2C and WiseApp interventions, we expect a combined  
improvement  of 12%  on viral suppression as  compared  to the control  arm. 
We have  also estimated  the statistical  power  to assess  sustainability  of the intervention  at 12 months.  For this 
analysis, we will conduct a non -inferiority test of viral suppression at Month 12 as compared to Month 6. This  
study  will have  at least  80% power  to conduct  a non-inferiority  test with a margin of 10%.  
Sampling approach to successfully enroll PLWH who are not optimally engaged in HIV Care : Using active and  
passive recruitment methods, the project coordinator at each site will oversee and participate in recruitment  
efforts. The study staff h ired through this project and the peer -to-peer networking efforts at each site will be  
used to recruit study participants. Our study team at both sites has extensive experience in recruitment efforts  
for projects  similar  to the one proposed here  and will be able  to successfully  recruit  the study  sample.  
 
Eligibility  Screening  
Potential participants will either call, text, or email the study team via the advertised phone number or email  
address or, if contact information is gathered at the recruitment  venue, be called, texted, or emailed by project  
staff. Screening will be conducted over the phone, in person for walk -ins, or electronically via REDCap. Each  
potential  participant  will be screened  for eligibility  based  on the inclusion/exclusion  criteria.  Participants  who do 
not have  a recent  (≤8 weeks) available  viral load test result  will need  to complete a  study  blood  draw.  
Participants may also sign a Release of Information (ROI) form, in -person or remotely, to allow study staff to  
access their electronic medical record (EMR) and determine eligibility based on past “no -show” visits. Forms  
completed electronically will be conducted via video conferencing such as Skype, Zoom, FaceTime using  
REDCap  to collect  the e-ROI and answer  participant  questio ns. Through  the REDCap  platform,  participants  will STATISTICALPROCEDURES  
be able to securely download a copy of the e -ROI for their records. As part of the REDCap e -consent platform  
e-ROIs  will be automatically  archived  and securely  stored  in REDCap.  If deemed  eligibl e, staff will work  with 
the potential  participant  to schedule  an enrollment  visit at  a convenient  time for the participant.  
Randomization  
Using the randomization approach described below, there will be random or minimally biased assignment of  
subjects to study arms. Randomization will be achieved through a blocked design utilizing permuted blocks of  
random sizes. The design ensures equal representation of treatment assignment across groups and protects  
the study  team  and investigators  from easily  anticipat ing treatment  allocation.107-110 Randomization  to CHAMPS  
or standard  of care is 1:1. Participants  will be  randomized using  computer -generated random numbers at  
baseline. The randomization database will be stored on a password protected computer at Columbia  University  
and will only be accessible  to MPI Schnall  to avoid  the possibility  of the study  sites subverting  randomization  
as has been noted in previous studies.111 Following completion of the informed consent and baseline  
assessment, participants will be  randomly assigned to one of two trial arms using sequentially numbered,  
opaque, sealed envelopes containing the intervention assignment, which the staff member opens at the  
moment  of randomization.112 
 
Procedures  
Upon  arrival  at the screening visit,  we will collect  written  informed  consent  prior to enrolling  into the study  trial 
(See Protection of Human Subjects). The informed consent form provides details of the study procedures,  
risks, benefits, site contact information, and the nature of confidentiality  and voluntary participation. The  
consent  process also  covers  information  on the trial and compensation  for time.  
Participants in both the intervention and control arms will visit the study sites (BAO/1917 Clinic -AL and  
Columbia University School of Nursin g–NYC) at the screening, baseline, 6, and 12 -month visits. Following the  
completion of the baseline study instruments, study participants in the CHAMPS intervention arm will be given  
a CleverCapTM Lite dispenser  and trained  on how to use it; they will also be trained  by study  team  members  on 
how to use the different features of the Wise App and receive medication reminders. Upon assignment to the  
intervention arm, a CHW is assigned to and meets with the participant as soon as possible, generally on the  
same  day but no more  than five business  days.  The CHW  will deliver  the interventions  outline  in Table 3  either  
in-person  or remotely  throughout  the course  of the study.  
Participants will be texted appointment reminders for study visits. Hard to reach participa nts will also be  
sent scheduling reminders. These reminders will be sent via Qualtrics, REDCap and/or encrypted e -mails from  
the study’s  secure CUMC  e-mail address.  
Participants in both arms will receive $40 at baseline, $50 at 6 -months, and $60 at 12-months as a  
token  of appreciation  for their time participating  in the study  visits  and for their blood draws.  Participants 
who complete Qualitative Interviews will be compensated $40 for completing that interview.  
 
Overview of  Data  Collection  Time  Poin ts 
Follow -up visits will be scheduled 30 days before to 30 days after the target window  based on participant  
availability and site capacity. Timing of follow -up visits is scheduled to allow site flexibility while still scheduling  
follow -up visits within a  reasonable  time span.  
Sound  Retention  Efforts  
Using  the retention  efforts  described  above  and in the Recruitment  and Retention  attachment,  we are confident  
that we will retain at least 80% of our study sample at the follow -up assessments as we have done  
previously.114 
 
Data  Management  
Data will be electronically collected, managed, and secured using REDCap™ by study staff trained on  
REDCap data entry, management, and security.125 Quality assurance measures, including built -in skip  
patterns, validation ran ges, and logic checks, minimize data collection and data capturing errors. Quality  
control  measures,  including  internal  monitoring  systems  and daily and weekly  reporting,  are run to ensure  
expedient  error  correction  and to optimize data  integrity.  
Study  Outcomes  
The study  outcomes  are described  
in Table  4. The primary  outcome  
of the study is viral suppression  
which will be operationalized as  
viral load ≤200 at 6 months. Viral  
load is the biologic correlate of the  
ART adherence behavior; yet, to  
achieve biologic change, there  
must be change in the adherence  
behavior. As suggested through  
the “Undetectable equals  
Untransmittable,” or “U=U,” public  
health  campaign,126, 127 PLWH  who 
take ART as prescribed and  
achieve and maintain viral  
suppre ssion have effectively no  
risk of sexually transmitting the  
virus to an serodiscordant  
partner.126 Our secondary and  
related outcomes include ART  
adherence  measured  in two ways:  
1) a single -item self -report  
measure, an empirically validated  
instrument,101 and 2) electronic  pill 
bottle data, collected via the  
CleverCap  bottle.  The electronic  
pill bottle data provide a less subjective measure as compared to self -report. We will also measure missed  
healthcare  visits using electronic medical record  (EMR)  data.  
Limitations and Considerations of the Study Outcome.  We recognize that all the approaches for measuring  
viral suppression and ART adherence are limited. First, viral suppression does not directly measure a  
behavioral outcome but, rather, the biologic effects of the behavior. Second, the self -report measure is biased  
and has ceiling  effects.  Finally,  the electronic  pill box is limited  to data collected  from the intervention  group.  
While this  is a limitation,  providing the electronic  pillbox to the  stand ard of care (control  group)  is likely  to bias  
our intervention effects since this pillbox will, in fact, have intervention effects as we have found from our  
preliminary findings from our WiseApp trial. We closely considered each of these limitations and ha ve, 
therefore, decided that this three -pronged (i.e., viral load, self -report, and electronic pillbox) approach which  
will provide the most rigorous approach to measuring our primary and secondary outcomes of viral  
suppression  and ART adherence.  
 
Mediators  
Several mediators are hypothesized to explain the mechanisms through which the intervention is anticipated to  
improve viral suppression. Hypothesized mediators include: self -efficacy, motivation expectancies, self - 
regulation skills, and HIV -related stigm a. The HIV Medication Taking Self -Efficacy Scale is also used to  
measure ART adherence self -efficacy, or the confidence to take medications in various situations.128 Motivation  
and outcome expectancies of ART adherence are assessed as three separate dimens ions: attitudes, norms,  
and behavioral intentions to adhere to ART medication.118 Self-regulation skills, which include self -monitoring,  
goal-setting, and enlistment of self -incentives/plans, are also assessed.119 In prior studies of ART adherence,  
HIV-related stigma and discrimination have been strongly associated with non -adherence;14, 129 thus, we also  
measure  HIV-related  stigma.  
 
Moderators  
Several moderators are hypothesized to affect the strength of the intervention to yield improvements in viral  
supp ression  and will be explored.  Hypothesized  moderators  include:  depression,  anxiety  and substance  use. Table  4. Measures  and Schedule  of Events  
 Screening  Baseline  6 mos 12 mos  
Sociodemographic:(e.g.,  age, race/ethnicity,  
education,  housing)   X   
Primary  Outcome Measures  
Viral Load through  a blood  draw  X  X X 
Secondary  Outcome  Measures  
ART adherence  (SRSI)101 and the CleverCap  
(intervention  group  only)  X  X X 
Additional  Outcome  Measures  X X X 
Quality  of Life (PROMIS -29)115 X X X 
HIV Symptom  Index  116 X X X 
Engagement  in HIV Care  117 X X X 
Mediators  
The HIV Medication  Taking  Self-Efficacy  Scale   X X X 
Motivation  and outcome  expectancies  of ART 
adherence are assessed as three separate  
dimensions:  attitudes,  norms, and  behavioral  
intentions  to adhere  to ART medication118 X X X 
Self-regulation  skills,  which  include self - 
monitoring,  goal-setting,  and enlistment  of self- 
incentives/plans119  X X X 
HIV-regulated  Stigma120  X X X 
Moderators  
Alcohol,  Smoking  & Substance  Involvement  
Screening  Test (ASSIST)109  X X X 
Depression  and Anxiety  (Beck  Symptom  
Inventory)  121-124 X X X 
 
Depression and anxiety will be measured through the Brief Symptom Inventory, a multi -item scale of mental  
health in the last seven days  that gives a global index and nine primary symptom domains, including  
depression  and anxiety  (α>0.80).  Problem  alcohol  and drug use are also assessed  with the Alcohol,  Smoking  
& Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST).130 The ASSIST consists of nine  items, covering ten  
substances (used in the past four months), including: tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, stimulants,  
inhalants, sedatives, hallucinogens, opioids, and other drugs. The ASSIST assesses frequency of use and  
associated  problems  for each  substance  with good  to excellent  reliability  and validity.  
 
Other  Important  Outcomes  
Quality of life will be measured through the PROMIS -29, an NINR Common Data Element, and an instrument  
which was validated by Dr. Schnall for use with PLWH.115 HIV symptoms and management will be measured  
with the HIV Symptom Index116 and Engagement in HIV Care117 will also recorded at all assessment points.  
The blood draw at baseline will also be tested for genotyping, GSA chip and qPCR, hormone blood levels  
(Estrog en and FSH),  and cytokine  blood  levels  (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-13, TNFα,  and CRP).  The 
genotyping with GSA chip and qPCR, cytokine blood level and CRP, and hormone blood tests will only be  
collected once during the course of the study, at  Baseline or at the 12 -month follow -up if not completed at  
Baseline. The genotyping, GSA chip and qPCR will be performed by the Feinstein Institute for Medical  
Research  at Northwell  Health.  
 
Data  Analysis  
The distribution of all variables will be assessed,  as will the correlations between all variables and the  
primary/secondary outcomes. We will assess for patterns of missing data, which are expected to be low as the  
study utilizes computer -assisted self -interview (CASI) for sensitive data, which reduces pa rticipant  
nonresponse.  The primary  anticipated  reason  for missing  data is attrition  due to loss to follow -up. Based  on our 
preliminary  studies,  we are accounting for  20% attrition  from randomization to  the 12-month  assessment.  
All multivariate analyses wil l be preceded by standard descriptive bivariate analyses to describe key variables  
and relationships among them. These analyses will include means, frequency tables, histograms, and  
examination  of distributions.  All statistical  tests  will be two-sided  tests with the level of significance  at 0.05.  The 
primary hypothesis 1 will be a comparison of viral suppression (primary outcome) between CHAMPS and  
standard  of care.  We will also compare  the drop in viral  load (measured in  logarithmic  scale  with base  10) 
between the two groups. Our secondary and related outcome is ART adherence measured in two ways: 1) a  
single -item self -report measure, an empirically validated instrument (SRSI)101 and 2) electronic pill bottle data  
which we will be collecting in the inter vention group since all participants will receive a CleverCap bottle for  
their medications. All the analyses will be based on initial assignment to groups, using the intention -to-treat 
principle.131, 132 
The primary hypothesis 1 ( H1) will be tested using a  generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) with logit -link 
function for binary outcomes (i.e., viral suppression) or a linear mixed model (LMM) for continuous outcomes  
(i.e., viral load measured  in logarithmic  scale)  to account  for the non-independence  of repeated measurements  
within individuals.133 The models will include a random intercept and fixed effects for intervention group, time,  
and interaction term of group and time which is for testing efficacy of the intervention. The model may include  
stratificati on variables, such as study site, age, and sex as covariates. A site by group interaction will be also  
examined and included in each model (above) if significant at the .05 level. All analyses will be tested for  
goodness -of-fit using the Wald -type test, wh ich shows satisfactory performance for models with fewer (<5)  
covariates.134 A similar  GLMM  will be used  to test sustainability  of the intervention  at month  12. For this 
analysis,  we will conduct  a non-inferiority  test135 to compare  viral suppression  rate between  month  12 and 
month 6. For primary hypothesis 2 ( H2), testing for intervention effect on ART adherence measured by SRSI  
(secondary outcome), we will use a similar LMM as mentioned above. For electronic pill bottle data in the  
intervention group, we will also examine the trend of electronic pill bottom data over time with a GLMM which  
will include a first -order autoregressive (AR1) covariance structure, as described by Hedeker and Gibbons.133 
We will also aggregate the electronic pill bottle data at d ifferent time points (0, 6, and 12 months) and examine  
the association between the election pill bottle data and ART adherence data measured by SRSI using  
Spearman nonparametric correlation.101 Similar GLMMs or LMMs will be used for secondary outcomes, wit h 
GLMMs  for binary  outcomes and  LMMs  for continuous outcomes.  
Aim 2: Identify  mediators  and moderators  of CHAMPS  on study  outcomes.  
 
Data  Analysis  
Mediators . If the intervention arm shows improved viral suppression in greater magnitude than the standard of  
care, we will explore the extent to which this relationship works through several possible mediators, including:  
self-efficacy,  motivation  expectancies,  self-regulation  skills,  and HIV-related  stigma.  For mediation  analyses,  
we will employ MEDI ATE procedures.130 MEDIATE estimates the total, direct, and indirect effects of causal  
variable(s) (xlist) on the outcome variable (yvar) through a proposed mediator variable or set of mediator  
variables (mlist), controlling for (optional) one of more vari ables in (covlist). MEDIATE is similar to INDIRECT136 
but allows  multiple  variables  and also offers  features  for handling  and coding  a single  multi -categorical  
variable. Inferences for indirect effects can be based on either percentile bootstrap confidence  intervals or  
Monte Carlo confidence intervals. For effect modification analyses, we will add interaction terms one -by-one for  
the intervention condition and the potential moderators (e.g., depression). Significant or large interaction terms  
suggest  that the effects  of the intervention  differ  for different  subgroups,  as defined  by the moderators.  
 
Moderators. In addition, we will study the moderators of treatment effect. This is a potentially impactful goal,  
given the gradual but assured paradigm shift in behavioral interventions from a “one -size-fits-all” approach to  
modern personalized medicine. Potential moderators in the current context are depression, anxiety and  
substance use. Regression analysis including potential moderators in the model as interact ion terms will be  
conducted. If any interactions are significant, then patient characteristics can be used to better inform  
dissemination of this intervention. Moderation analysis will be performed using the R software package  
qLearn.137 
 
Missing data . Missing data may occur in the proposed study in several ways. First, it may occur due to item  
non-response.  When  missing  data is limited  to only a few items  on a measure,  we will prorate  total scores  for a 
measure by taking an average score on the measure and  multiplying it by the total number of items in the  
scale.  Missing  data can also occur  from attrition  due to missed  assessments  or dropout  from the study.  Prior  to 
performing any outcome analyses, we will evaluate the amount, reasons, and patterns of missi ng data. If the  
reason for missing data is not related to the outcome of interest, then they are considered to be missing  
completely at random, and complete case analysis will still generate unbiased estimates.138 We will conduct  
sensitivity analyses to co mpare estimates of treatment effects with and without multiple imputation to assess  
the effect of  missing data on statistical inference.  
 
Aim 3: Guided  by the Reach  Effectiveness  Adoption  Implementation  Maintenance  
(RE-AIM) framework, identify multi -level factors associated with successful  
implementation  of CHAMPS  to inform future  implementation and  scale -up. 
 
Overview  
We will use a mixed -methods, multi -stakeholder (i.e., patients, clinic and CBO staff and clinicians) process  
evaluation using a theory -based  model  for implementation evaluation (RE -AIM) to understand the barriers and  
facilitators to CHAMPS implementation. We will work with study participants, clinic, and CBO staff and  
clinicians to better understand how we can disseminate this CHW intervention  more broadly and how this can  
be implemented as part of the HIV care delivery in the clinic setting, attending to nuances at our geographically  
diverse study sites. To that end, we have focused our RE -AIM analysis on factors which are unique to  
widespread  implementation with a focus on predisposing, enabling, and reinforcing factors to program  
implementation139 as well as paradata to better understand study participants use of the app. MPI Schnall has  
conducted extensive implementation analysis of her eHea lth and mHealth interventions by examining these  
factors.140-143 MPI Batey has conducted implementation work around the acceptability and feasibility of a  
workshop intervention to reduce HIV -related stigma among healthcare workers in AL and Tennessee,144 and 
he currently collaborates with Co -I Mugavero on implementation evaluation of a clinic -wide risk stratification  
with enhanced personal contacts for retention in HIV care at seven clinics in AL.145 Additionally, we have  
consulted  extensively  with Dr. Smith (consultant),  an implementation  expert,146-150 on the development  of the 
Table  5. Summary  of RE-AIM Dimensions  and Measures  
Study  Questions  Methods,  Variables,  & Measures  
Reach:  The absolute  number,  proportion,  and representativeness  of individuals  who participate  in the CHAMPS  Trial.  
What  percentage  of the study  participants  use the 
intervention?  % and characteristics  of PLWH  randomized  to CHAMPS  who use the 
intervention; Comparisons on sociodemographic variables of users and non - 
users  among  those randomized  to intervention  arm 
What percentage of the CHW visits did study  
participants  attend  in person  or through  the App?  % and characteristics  of PLWH  randomized  to CHAMPS  who attended  their 
CHW  visit 
Were participants representative of target  
population?  % and characteristics  of eligible  participants  who joined  the study  and those  
who didn’t;  Sociodemographic  comparisons  between  CHAMPS  participants  
and eligible study  participants  who did not join the  study  
Efficacy:  The impact  of an intervention  on outcomes  including  potential  negative  effects,  quality  of life. 
Did the intervention achieve primary and  
secondary  outcomes?  Between -group  comparisons  on primary  and secondary  outcomes  (Aim 1) 
Did it produce unintended adverse  
consequences?  Review  notes  from participant study  withdrawal,  Notifications  to the IRB about  
participant  complaints  
What effect did the mediators and moderators  
have  on the  primary  and secondary  outcomes?  Data  analyzed in  Aim 2  
Adoption : The absolute number, proportion, and  acceptability  of CHAMPS ; proportion  of eligible patients  that enroll.  
Did the intervention  help the organization  address  
its mission, values, and priorities?  Key informant interviews with clinic staff, research staff, CHW, and  
administration  - descriptive,  interpretative  analysis  for key themes  
Implementation: At the setting level,  includes  consistency of  delivery  and predisposing,  enabling,  and reinforcing  factors.  At the 
individual  level, implementation  refers to  individual’s  use of strategies.152 
Were intervention components delivered as  
intended?  Paradata  Analysis  –App use by  component  
What barriers to implementation were identified  
and how were they  addressed?  Key informant  interviews  with study  staff;  In-depth  interviews  with study  
participants.   - descriptive,  interpretative  analysis for key themes  
What enabling (facilitating) factors were required  
to support the  intervention?  Project  meeting  minutes  
Interviews  with stakeholders  
Maintenance : Individual – Understanding  Use of the App over  time.  
Did the intervention produce lasting effects at  
individual  level?  Long -term efficacy  of CHAMPS  intervention  over 12 months  
Is there the potential for sustaining CHAMPS over 
time?  Key informant  interviews with clinic  staff,  research  staff,  CHW  and clinicians,  
CBO  staff and study  participants.  
How did the  intervention evolve?  Project  meeting  minutes; Paradata  
implementation  evaluation  for this proposal;  Dr. Smith  will provide  oversight,  along  with MPIs  Schnall  and 
Batey,  for all implementation  activities.  
 
Process  Evaluation  Outcomes  
The RE -AIM evaluation dimensions and associated measures in our study are summarized in Table 5. In  
addition to testing the Efficacy of CHAMPS , we will concurrently measure the four  remaining RE -AIM 
dimensions151 as follows:  
 
Reach  –1) percent  and demographic  and clinical  characteristics  of those  who joined  the study  based  on the 
current national statistics of PLWH, and 2) percent and demographic and clinical characteristics of those  
randomized to the intervention who attended visits with the CHW and who used the App compared to those  
who did not.  
Adoption – We will recruit a random sample of study participants post -intervention to assess acceptability and  
perceived  usefulness  of CHAM PS (see Sample  Interview Guide  – Table 6) and recruitment  logs to calculate  
the percent  and representativeness  of patients  that agree  to participate  in the study.  Interviews  will be collected  
until saturation is  reached,  but we estimate a  total of 60 participants ( 40% of study  sample).  
 
Table  6. Follow -up Sample  Interview Guide  
• Describe your general perceptions of CHAMPS and its usefulness for  
helping  with ART  adherence.  
• How helpful was CHAMPS  for improving  your ART adherence?  
• How helpful  was CHAMPS  for improving  your viral  suppression?  
• What  would you  change  or improve  about CHAMPS ? 
• How did CHAMPS  help you gain information  about your  ART adherence?  
• How did CHAMPS  help you gain information  about viral suppression?  
• How comfortable were  you in using  the App in social settings?  Probe:  
where  and when did you  use it mostly?  
 
Implementation and Maintenance will be  
evaluated through interview data with the  
study  participants  (N=60)  and clinic  staff and 
research staff (N=15), CHW (N = 2  
Birmingham,  2 NYC),  and clinic  
administration (N = 2 Birmingham, 2  NYC) (Table 6). We will use post -intervention testing interviews with study  
participants  and clinic  administration  and staff to assess acceptability  and perceived usefulness  of the  
CHAMPS  intervention at  the 6-month  and 12-month  follow -up timepoints.  30 participants  will be randomized  for 
interviews at each time point; each site will conduct 15 interviews per time point. Interviews will be collected  
until saturation is reached. All in -depth interviews will be audio -recorded with two digital recorders to sa feguard  
against  mechanical  failure. The study  team will  also take field  notes. Participants will be compensated $40 for 
completing these interviews.  
At the individual  level,  we will understand  participants’  use of the App  over time through  
the collection of paradata153 (Table 7). Paradata is considered “free” in that it does not  
require any additional effort from the user.154 To explore barriers and facilitators to  
widespread implementation of CHAMPS , we will collect data during the intervention,  
implement ation,  and after  the trial  has ended.  
Data  Analysis  
Quantitative  Data  Analysis  of RE-AIM Dimensions  
We will use descriptive statistics to characterize process evaluation outcomes around RE -AIM (e.g., Reach:  
penetration; Adoption: representativeness of persons living with the disease). We will examine Reach and  
Implementation  as a function  of individual  (e.g.,  perceptions  of barriers  to care)  and organizational  level factors  
(e.g., provider type). Variance components analysis155 on Reach and Implementati on outcomes will be used to  
determine  the relative  percentages  of the overall  implementation  variability  being  introduced  at each  level.  
Multi -level regression models156 will be employed to assess the unique contribution of individual -level factors  
on outcomes.  
 
Paradata  Data  Analysis  
The primary paradata that will be collected is shown in Table 7. From this data, we will derive the following use  
of data for each session: duration on each page, page progression through the application, time from login to  
result, and total time from login to logout. We will analyze the data on multiple scales and perspectives:  
individual -level (i.e., user -level), application -level, page -level, session -level, and how these differ by  
demographic characteristics, technology us e, and outcomes measures. Additionally, we will measure the  
amount in bytes of user data transmitted. Importantly, longitudinal analysis will determine if user -experience  
changes with repeated use. The paradata collected from each page will be analyzed to generate a “heatmap”  
of user -interaction (i.e., the distribution of activity for each link/button). Use of the heatmap will inform user  
duration on each page of the application and user interaction with the app content, the contact pages, and the  
help page . We will explore usability issues with consideration for how many times users accessed help and  
what page of the app referred them to the help, implying the need for clarification. We will analyze differences  
in the aggregated  data by demographic  group  (e.g., age) to allow  us to better  understand  engagement  with the 
intervention  and potential  facilitators  and barriers  to App use.  
Qualitative  Data Analysis  of Interview  Data  
The study team will meet and review transcripts and notes from the interviews. Drs. Schnall, Batey, and Kay143, 
157-163 have extensive experience in qualitative analysis and will work with two research assistants to code the  
transcripts. Field notes and transcripts will be analyzed by the researchers using NVivo™ (QSR International,  
Victo ria, Australia) software. Participants’ statements will be captured using memoing and then sorted into the  
categories of interest. Open coding will be used to develop initial data categories. Some codes will be derived  
from the questions  included  in the interview  and other  codes  will emerge  from themes and  patterns  identified  in 
the narratives. An initial set of codes will be independently generated by two coders. Codes will then be  
compared and synthesized to result in shared coding categories and sub -categories, all with definitions,  
inclusion and exclusion criteria, and examples. Coders will discuss discrepancies until they reach consensus.  
Findings  will guide  modifications  of CHAMPS , if warranted.  
Scientific Rigor:  The team will adhere to qualitative research processes to ensure the credibility, confirmability,  
dependability, and transferability of the qualitative data from these analyses. To support the credibility of the  
data,  we will conduct  peer debriefing.  We will also use “member  checks,”  i.e., sharing  of initial  data 
 How often  did you use the App  in a typical  week?  Would you  recommend  
it to a friend?  
 Did you stop using  the App altogether  at some  point?  (If yes) Why?  
 Describe  the usefulness  of the reminders  to take your medication  and 
attend  the meeting  with your CHW.  
 Is there the potential for sustaining CHAMPS over time (clinic  
administration)  
Table  7. Paradata  
Collected  for Each  
App Use 
1. Unique  Code  
2. Page  accessed  
3. Time  stamp  
4. Device  Type  
 
interpretations with participants to ensure accurate interpretations. Triangulation of findings, along with  
reflexivity,  will enhance  the confirmability  of the interpretations.  The investigators  will carefully  record  an audit  
trail and keep  extensive  field notes  to facilitate  transferability  of study  findings  into other  contexts.  
 
Risks  to Human  Subjects  
Research  Environment  and Commitment  to Protection  of Human  Subjects:  
Columbia University Irving Medical Center (CUIMC), Birmingham AIDS Outreach (BAO), and University of  
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) are committed to safeguarding the rights and welfare of human subjects in all  
research activities , and all have a current Assurance of Compliance with the Office for Human Research  
Protections (OHRP). The investigators will follow all required policies related to the protection of human  
subjects. All investigators have fulfilled human subjects protect ion and Health Insurance Portability and  
Accountability Act (HIPAA) training requirements (including CITI basic and refresher courses, Good Clinical  
Practices, and conflicts of interest) and are up -to-date with these certifications. The study described in this 
application will be reviewed and approved by Western Institutional Review Board (IRB), and we will seek  
reliant review at UAB and BAO (to fulfill the single IRB policy) prior to any participant recruitment or data  
collection  activities.  All prospectiv e participants  will be fully informed  of the intent  of the study  and expectations  
of participants  prior to enrollment  using  an IRB-approved  informed  consent  form.  
 
Human  Subjects  Involvement,  Characteristics,  and Design  
Characteristics  of the Population : 
The trial will involve  the recruitment  and retention  of men and women  (n=300)  with HIV  infection  who are virally  
unsupressed in New York City (NYC) and Birmingham, Alabama. Study volunteers must meet general criteria  
to be eligible for further screening for participation in the study. In most cases, this information will be acquired  
during a telephone interview prior to a screening/consent visit. The inclusion and exclusion criteria have been  
carefully selected to enroll the most appropriate study populat ion while also ensuring the generalizability of the  
findings. All participants will engage in a 6 -month randomized adaptive intervention and will be followed for an  
additional  six months  following  the intervention  period.  The total study  duration  will be 12 months.  
 
Potential  participants  will be recruited  primarily  from partnering  HIV specialty  clinics  in NYC  and Birmingham.  
Persons  living with  HIV (PLWH)  will be included  if they meet the following  eligibility  criteria:  
 
There  are limited  inclusion  criteria  to support  the generalizability  of our findings.  
Participants . Inclusion  criteria : 
1) Able to speak,  read,  and write  in English  or Spanish;  
2) Aged  ≥18 years;  
3) Willing  to participate  in any assigned  arm of the intervention;  
4) Having  been  diagnosed  with HIV ≥6 months  ago; 
5) Have  an HIV-1 RNA  level >200  copies/mL,  or at least  one “no-show”  visit in the past 12 months,  or report  
either not being virally suppressed in the past 12 months or being virally unsuppressed in the past 12  
months;  
6) Own a smartphone;  and 
7) Ability  and willingness  to provide  informed  consent  for study  participation  and consent  for access  to medical  
records.  
Participants  are not eligible  if they meet  any exclusion  criteria : 
1) Reside  in a nursing  home,  prison,  and/or  receiving  in-patient  psychiatric  care at time of enrollment;  
2) Terminal  illness  with life expectancy  <6 months;  
3) Planning  to move  out of the  area in the next 12 months.  
 
Our study participants will be recruited from two geographic locations: Birmingham, Alabama and NYC.  
Electronic medical record (EMR) data from the UAB 1917 Clinic, a Ryan -White funded, patient -centered HIV  
primary and specialty medical clinic. suggests that at least 1,150 PLWH receiving care at this site during 2018  
would  meet  study  inclusion  criteria  based on viral load results.  In NYC,  the Comprehensive  Health  Program  of 
New York -Presbyterian/Columbia (NYP -CHP) is a Ryan White funded, bilingual, patient -centered clinic that  
emphasizes sexual health, hepatitis management, and HIV care. It primarily serves  Upper Manhattan and the  
South  Bronx  where  residents  are disproportionately  affected  by HIV. NYP-CHP’s  large  multidisciplinary  team  RISKS,  BENEFITS  & MONITORING  
provides HIV care to a population of more than 2,300 children, adolescents, and adults through more than  
16,000 vi sits per year. NYP -CHP clients are 58% male, 40% female, and 2% male to female transgender. We  
estimate that at least 1,200 PLWH receiving care at the NYC site would meet our inclusion criteria and would  
be eligible  for enrollment.  
If we have trouble recruiting, we have access to additional community sites in both NYC and Birmingham as  
well as entities associated with our academic medical centers with similar demographics. In addition, all  
members of the investigative team are involved in their institu tions’ respective and local Centers for AIDS  
Research  (CFARs),  which  can be utilized  to assist  with study  recruitment  via patient  registries.  Each  member  
of the investigative  team  is well  known  in their respective  communities.  
 
Study  Procedures,  Materials,  and Potential  Risks  
Study  Procedures  and Materials:  
All materials for the proposed study obtained from the participants will be in the form of specimens, EMR  
information,  and data.  Each  Multiple  Principal  Investigator  (MPI),  Dr. Rebecca  Schnall  at CUIMC  and Dr. Scott  
Batey  at UAB,  will be responsible  for ensuring  all information  is collected  according  to the study  protocol.  
Information  used  to identify  potentially  eligible  participants  will be obtained  using  the UAB 1917  Clinic  and the 
NYP-CHP EMR systems. We will also use patient -reported data obtained after consent. Trained and certified  
professional staff will obtain all data according to detailed study protocols. Data will be collected directly from  
study  participants and  their respective  EMR  and used  specifically  for research  purposes.  
 
The following  human  subjects -related  data elements  will be collected  for this study  with the source(s)  of 
information noted:  
• Participant  demographic  and clinical  characteristics  including  age, sex, gender,  race/ethnicity,  
employment status, and  ART adherence  (self-report)  
• Clinical  diagnoses,  clinical  HIV lab values  (CD4  and viral load),  medication  history,  comorbid  health  
conditions,  and primary care  visit data (electronic medical records)  
• Laboratory  measured  values  of CD4 and viral load (study -specific  blood  draw)  
• Notes  from the Community  Health  Worker  encounters  with the study  participants  
• Usage  data captured  through  the WiseApp  and the electronic  pill bottles  (CleverCap)  
 
Our study team is extremely  prudent in keeping subject data secure and confidential. All laboratory specimens,  
evaluation forms, reports, and other records will be identified by a unique coded number to maintain participant  
confidentiality. The material, records, and data obtained t hrough participation in the study will be specific for  
research purposes. Existing health records may be used with the permission of the participants. Materials will  
be obtained by trained staff at each study site. Data will be stored using REDCap (Researc h Electronic Data  
Capture) at each respective performance site, and, then, the completely deidentified data will be merged at  
CUIMC. All laboratory specimens will be identified only by the identification number. The code linking the  
participant identification number to subject identifying information (name, address, etc.) is maintained at the  
study sites through REDCap, and only authorized site personnel have access to the code. Limited individually  
identifiable  private  information  is collected  that is essential  for processing  participant  payments  and for analysis  
purposes.  
 
Potential  Risks:  
There is no more than a minimal risk associated with any of the proposed study activities. The study  
activities meet the general definition found in Subpart A  (46.102) that the probability and magnitude of  
harm  or discomfort  anticipated  in the research  are not greater  in and of themselves  than those  ordinarily  
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological assessments or 
tests.  
 
The risks of participating in this study are few. Potential risks are those related to venipuncture, discomfort  
with study interview questions, and potential breaches of confidentiality. It is possible that certain questions  
on the survey may ma ke participants feel uncomfortable, but participants are free to decline to answer any  
questions. Additionally, clinical study sites have co -located mental health and/or counseling services that  
may be consulted should a participant enter crisis. Participa tion in research can involve loss of privacy. All  
study data will be maintained on CUIMC, UAB, and BAO servers that are secure and HIPAA compliant. All  
signed consent forms, study data, and payment receipts used in this study will be kept in locked files a t both  
sites which only the investigators can access. We will also receive a Federal Certificate of Confidentiality  
which  will protect  against  attempts by  law enforcement  or other  government  agencies  to access  our data.  
Venipuncture:  
There  is a small risk of local hematoma  or infection  associated  with blood  sampling.  On rare occasions,  
drawing  blood can cause  dizziness,  presyncope,  and even  syncope.  
 
Confidentiality  and Privacy:  
The use of questionnaires,  interviews,  and collection  of personal  medical  information  poses  a risk to 
confidentiality  and privacy  and may cause embarrassment.  
 
Adequacy  of Protection  Against  Risks  
Informed  Consent  and Assent:  
Recruitment for participation in the study will occur following IRB approval. Recruitment strategies will be  
developed in collaboration with local clinics and community -based organizations (see Recruitment and  
Retention Plan). Study staff at both sites will complete an in -person training to standardize the recruitment  
and consenting  procedures.  The consenting  process  is part of the initial  study  visit, which  will take place  in a 
quiet meeting room. Volunteers may request a copy of the consent form in advance, and they will be given  
one at the start  of the  orientation;  time is allowed for  review  of the  consent  form.  Volunteers  then meet  with 
a member of the research team to a) have the study explained in detail; b) discuss their reasons and  
motivation for wanting to participate to determine whether they are realistic; c) discuss any practical  
problems (e.g., scheduling conflicts, vacations) that could interfere with participation; d) have their questions  
answered; and e) demonstrate their ability to provide informed consent by describing their understanding of  
the major  study  goals  and what is expe cted of them  if they choose  to participate.  
 
Participants  are given  a signed  copy  of the consent  form and a signed  copy  is maintained in  the study  chart  for 
each participant. HIPAA authorization is included in the consent form. Each MPI (Dr. Schnall and Dr. Batey)  
will have the responsibility of ensuring that research personnel are prepared to convey information to  
participants specific to the study protocol. The individual is informed of the purpose of the study, potential  
medical and social risks of par ticipation, their right to withdraw at any time, and compensation. If willing to  
participate,  the volunteer  and a study  team  member  will sign  the document.  
 
Protections  Against  Risk:  
The inclusion/exclusion criteria are designed to assure that participants  at highest risk for adverse events  
(AEs)  are excluded  while  preserving  study  generalizability.  In addition,  the specific  measures  to decrease  risks 
on the study  procedures  are detailed  below.  
 
Venipuncture:  
The risks of hematoma  and infection  are minimize d by having  trained  clinical  personnel  perform  the 
procedures  using  sterile  techniques.  
 
Confidentiality  and Privacy:  
Risks will be minimized by not including personal identifying information on the forms, when possible, and by  
conducting interviews and collection of personal information in a private setting. Reminder text messages will  
make no mention of HIV. All data will be collected using unique patient identification codes. All laboratory  
specimens, evaluation forms, reports, and other records will b e identified by a coded number to maintain  
participant confidentiality. All records will be stored in a locked file cabinet. Study data from all sites will be  
collected  and managed  using  REDCap.  REDCap  is a secure  web application  designed  to support  data capture  
for research studies, providing user -friendly web -based case report forms, real -time data entry validation (e.g.,  
for data types and range checks), audit trails, and a de -identified data export mechanism to common statistical  
packages (SPSS, SAS, St ata, R/S -Plus). REDCap data collection projects rely on a thorough study -specific  
data dictionary defined in an iterative self -documenting process by all members of the research team. This  
iterative development and testing process results in a well -planned  data collection strategy for individual  
studies. REDCap also includes a powerful tool for building and managing online surveys. The research team  
can create and design surveys in a web browser and engage potential respondents using a variety of  
notification methods. REDCap is flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of research and provides an  
intuitive user interface for database and survey design and data entry. Lastly, clinical information will not be  
released without written permissi on of the participant, except as necessary for monitoring by the IRB or the  
National  Institutes of Health  (NIH).  
 
Unexpected  and Serious  Adverse  Event  Reporting:  
A detailed monitoring plan will be included as part of the study protocol, submitted  to the IRB, and reviewed  
and approved by the funding Institute and Center before the study begins. Prior to initiation of the study,  
agreement about the data safety monitoring plan will be confirmed to ensure the safety of subjects and the  
validity and in tegrity of the data. The research coordinator at each site will report serious adverse events  
(SAEs) that are unexpected and study -related immediately to a study physician who will convey this  
information  to the study  team,  IRB, and NIH. All AEs and SAEs  will be captured,  reports  will be completed,  and 
information will be entered  into the  study database. A  safety report  will detail all serious  and unexpected  AEs 
or other unanticipated problems that involve risk to study participants or others and whether these appeared to  
be related to the study -based interventions or research assessment protocols. If the study team, CUIMC or  
UAB IRB, or NIH has concerns regarding SAEs, the Western IRB will be notified and a copy of the safety  
summary will be filed with bo th IRBs. Actions taken by the Western, CUIMC, or UAB IRB offices in response to  
AE concerns will be reported to the NIH. All AEs will be reviewed every six months, or sooner, with the  
designated  safety  officer.  
 
Vulnerable  Subjects:  
Economically and/or edu cationally disadvantaged persons will be enrolled. While this group is considered a  
vulnerable population, the study team has considerable experience enrolling these participants. As these  
groups carry the burden of the majority of HIV incidence in both st udy sites and demonstrate considerable  
challenges with achieving optimal HIV health outcomes, it is important that they are not excluded from  
participation  in this study.  Additionally,  our study  will analyze  the potential  impact  of the intervention(s)  on racial  
and ethnic groups, perhaps providing new information on the disproportionate impact of HIV felt by these  
populations.  
 
The study  will be conducted  according  to Good  Clinical  Practice  (GCP)  guidelines,  the U.S. Code of  Federal  
Regulations (CFR) Title  21 CFR (Part 50 – Protection of Human Subjects and Part 56 – Institutional Review  
Boards) and the Declaration of Helsinki. This protocol will be submitted to the IRB at the Western IRB for  
approval and will be reliantly reviewed at UAB. The informed conse nt of each subject will be obtained in  
accordance with 21 CFR Part 50 and the Declaration of Helsinki before protocol -specified procedures are  
carried  out. 
 
A study research assistant will obtain the participant’s written informed consent prior to any stud y-related  
procedures.  Consent  will be documented  by the dated  signature  of the subject.  The signature  confirms  that the 
consent is based on information that has been understood. Each subject's signed informed consent form will  
be kept in secure files  by the investigators  for possible  inspection  by regulatory  authorities.  
 
Potential  Benefits  of Proposed  Research  to the Participant  and Others  
 
The potential benefits to an individual participant in the study are not known. The potential benefits of the study  
to others could be considerable. If our hypotheses are true, this study will make a significant contribution  
towards helping PLWH who are virally unsuppressed improve adherence to their antiretroviral therapy (ART)  
regimen and ultimately achieve viral sup pression. If the intervention is effective, the direct benefit to  
participants is the increased ART adherence, retention in HIV primary care, and viral suppression. Increasing  
ART adherence for PLWH will yield significant benefits in current efforts to ach ieve HIV elimination. Possible  
risks (i.e., discomfort answering questions, potential confidentiality breaches) are outweighed by the new  
knowledge  gained regarding increasing  ART adherence  among PLWH.  
 
Importance  of Knowledge  to be Gained  
 
The knowledge  gained  from this research  will enable  the scientific  community,  clinicians,  and PLWH  to 
improve  the HIV care continuum  in the US. Consistent  with the priorities  of RFA-NR-20-002, findings  from 
this study  will focus  on the efficacy  of an adaptive  Community  Health  Worker  intervention  to improve  HIV 
care among  PLWH.  
 
Data  and Safety  Monitoring Plan  
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan is attached  separately.  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov  Requirements  
This trial will be registered  with ClinicalTrials.gov.  
References  
1. Attia S, Egger  M, Muller M,  Zwahlen  M, Low N. Sexual  transmission  of HIV according  to viral load and 
antiretroviral therapy: systematic review and meta -analysis. AIDS. 2009;23(11):1397 -404. doi:  
10.1097/QAD.0b013e32832b7dca.  PubMed PMID: 19381076.  
2. Cohen MS, Chen YQ, McCauley M, Gamble T, Hosseinipour MC, Kumarasamy N, Hakim JG,  
Kumwenda J, Grinsztejn B, Pilotto JH, Godbole SV, Mehendale S, Chariyalertsak S, Santos BR, Mayer KH,  
Hoffman IF, Eshleman SH, Piwowar -Manning E, Wang L, Makhema J, Mills LA,  de Bruyn G, Sanne I, Eron J,  
Gallant J, Havlir D, Swindells S, Ribaudo H, Elharrar V, Burns D, Taha TE, Nielsen -Saines K, Celentano D,  
Essex  M, Fleming  TR, Team  HS. Prevention  of HIV-1 infection  with early  antiretroviral  therapy.  N Engl J Med.  
2011;365(6) :493-505. Epub 2011/07/20. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1105243. PubMed PMID: 21767103; PMCID:  
PMC3200068.  
3. Montaner  JS, Lima  VD, Barrios  R, Yip B, Wood  E, Kerr T, Shannon  K, Harrigan  PR, Hogg  RS, Daly P, 
Kendall P. Association of highly active antiretroviral therapy  coverage, population viral load, and yearly new  
HIV diagnoses in British Columbia, Canada: a population -based study. Lancet. 2010;376(9740):532 -9. doi:  
10.1016/S0140 -6736(10)60936 -1. PubMed  PMID:  20638713;  PMCID:  PMC2996043.  
4. Parienti  J-J D-DM, Massari  V, Guzman  D, Deeks  SG, Verdon R,  Bangsberg  DR. Not All  Missed  Doses  
Are the Same: Sustained NNRTI Treatment Interruptions Predict HIV Rebound at Low -to- Moderate  
Adherence  Levels.  PLoS  One.  2008;3(7):e2783.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002783.  
5. Prevention  CfDCa.  Basic  Statistics:  Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention;  2020.  Available  from:  
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/statistics.html . 
6. Hygeine  NYCDoHaM.  HIV Surveillance  Annual  Report,  2018  November  2019.  Available  from:  
https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/dires/hiv -surveillance -annualreport -2018.pdf . 
7. (CDC)  CfDCaP.  HIV in the Southern  United  States:  Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC);  
September  2019.  Available  from:  https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/policies/cdc -hiv-in-the-south -issue -brief.pdf . 
8. Reif S, Safley  D, McAllaster  C, Wilson  E, Whetten  K. State  of HIV in the US Deep  South.  J Community  
Health.  2017;42(5):844 -53. Epub  2017/03/02.  doi: 10.1007/s10900 -017-0325 -8. PubMe d PMID:  28247067.  
9. AlabamaPublicHealth.gov.  HIV Continuum  of Care  by Public  Health  District,  Alabama  2017.  
10. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention.  HIV Surveillance  Report,  2018  (Preliminary).  November  
2019.  
11. NYS HIV Surveillance  System.  HIV Care  Continuum  - People  Living  with HIV, New York State  (2018).  
2019.  
12. Fauci  AS, Redfield  RR, Sigounas  G, Weahkee  MD, Giroir  BP. Ending  the HIV Epidemic:  A Plan for the 
United  States. JAMA.  2019;321(9):844 -5. doi:  10.1001/jama.2019.1343.  
13. McCarthy  M. Fragmented  US health -care system  needs  major  reform.  The Lancet.  
2001;357(9258):782.  
14. Kay ES, Rice WS, Crockett  KB, Atkins  GC, Batey  DS, Turan B.  Experienced  HIV-Related  Stigma  in 
Health Care and Community Settings: Mediated Associations With Psychosocial and Health O utcomes. J  
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2018;77(3):257 -63. Epub 2017/11/16. doi: 10.1097/qai.0000000000001590.  
PubMed  PMID:  29140873;  PMCID:  PMC5807196.  
15. Lefeuvre  D, Dieng  M, Lamara  F, Raguin  G, Michon  C. [Community  health  workers in  HIV/AIDS  care].  
Sante  Publique. 2014;26(6):879 -88. Epub  2015/01/30.  PubMed  PMID:  25629682.  
16. Nyblade  L, Stangl  A, Weiss  E, Ashburn  K. Combating  HIV stigma  in health  care settings:  what  works?  J 
Int AIDS Soc. 2009;12:15. Epub 2009/08/08. doi: 10.1186/1758 -2652 -12-15. PubMed PMID: 19660113;  
PMCID:  PMC2731724.  
17. (CDC) CfDCaP. ARTAS: Evidence -Based for Linkage to HIV Care and Retention in HIV Care 2018  
2018. Available from:  https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/research/interventionresearch/compendium/lrc/cdc -hiv-lrc- 
artas.pdf . 
18. Schnall  R, Bakken  S, Rojas  M, Travers  J, Carb allo-Dieguez  A. mHealth  Technology  as a Persuasive  
Tool for Treatment, Care and Management of Persons Living with HIV. AIDS Behav. 2015;19 Suppl 2:81 -9. 
doi: 10.1007/s10461 -014-0984 -8. PubMed  PMID: 25572830;  PMCID:  PMC4497931.  
19. Schnall R, Rojas M, Travers J , Brown W, 3rd, Bakken S. Use of Design Science for Informing the  
Development  of a Mobile  App for Persons  Living  with HIV. AMIA  Annu  Symp Proc.  2014;2014:1037 -45. Epub  
2014/01/01.  PubMed PMID: 25954413;  PMCID: PMC4419902.  
20. Beauchemin  M, Gradilla  M, Baik D, Cho H,  Schnall  R. A Multi -step Usability  Evaluation  of a Self- 
Management  App to  Support Medication  Adherence in  Persons  Living  with HIV. Int J Med  Inform.  
2019;122:37 -44. Epub  2019/01/10.  doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.11.012.  PubMed  PMID:  30623782;  PMCID:  
PMC6369913.  
21. Nachega  JB, Adetokunboh  O, Uthman  OA, Knowlton  AW, Altice  FL, Schechter  M, Galarraga  O, Geng  
E, Peltzer K, Chang LW, Van Cutsem G, Jaffar SS, Ford N, Mellins CA, Remien RH, Mills EJ. Community - 
Based Interventions to Improve an d Sustain Antiretroviral Therapy Adherence, Retention in HIV Care and  
Clinical Outcomes in Low - and Middle -Income Countries for Achieving the UNAIDS 90 -90-90 Targets. Curr  
HIV/AIDS Rep. 2016;13(5):241 -55. Epub 2016/08/01. doi: 10.1007/s11904 -016-0325 -9. Pu bMed PMID:  
27475643;  PMCID: PMC5357578.  
22. Levi J, Raymond A, Pozniak A, Vernazza P, Kohler P, Hill A. Can the UNAIDS 90 -90-90 target be  
achieved?  A systematic  analysis  of national  HIV treatment  cascades.  BMJ Glob  Health.  2016;1(2):e000010.  
Epub  2017/06/08.  doi: 10.1136/bmjgh -2015 -000010.  PubMed  PMID:  28588933;  PMCID:  PMC5321333.  
23. Levi J, Pozniak A, Heath K, Hill A. The impact of HIV prevalence, conflict, corruption, and GDP/capita  
on treatment cascades: data from 137 countries. J Virus Erad. 2018;4(2):80 -90. Epub 2018/04/24. PubMed  
PMID:  29682299;  PMCID:  PMC5892682.  
24. Wise  JM, Ott C, Azuero  A, Lanzi  RG, Davies S,  Gardner  A, Vance  DE, Kempf  MC. Barriers to  HIV 
Testing: Patient and Provider Perspectives in the Deep South. AIDS Behav. 2019;23(4):1062 -72. Epub  
2019/ 01/05.  doi: 10.1007/s10461 -018-02385 -5. PubMed  PMID:  30607759;  PMCID:  PMC6459728.  
25. Steehler  K, Siegler  AJ. Bringing  HIV Self-Testing  to Scale  in the United  States:  a Review  of Challenges,  
Potential Solutions, and Future Opportunities. J Clin Microbiol. 2019;57(11). Epub 2019/08/30. doi:  
10.1128/JCM.00257 -19. PubMed  PMID:  31462549;  PMCID:  PMC6813024.  
26. Bain LE, Nkoke  C, Noubiap  JJN. UNAIDS  90-90-90 targets  to end the AIDS  epidemic  by 2020  are not 
realistic: comment on "Can the UNAIDS 90 -90-90 target be achi eved? A systematic analysis of national HIV  
treatment cascades". BMJ Glob Health. 2017;2(2):e000227. Epub 2017/06/08. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh -2016 - 
000227.  PubMed PMID: 28589026;  PMCID: PMC5435269.  
27. Mugavero  MJ, Lin HY, Allison  JJ, Willig  JH, Chang  PW, Marler  M, Raper  JL, Schumacher  JE, Pisu M, 
Saag MS. Failure to establish HIV care: characterizing the "no show" phenomenon. Clin Infect Dis.  
2007;45(1):127 -30. Epub  2007/06/08.  doi: 10.1086/518587.  PubMed PMID:  17554713.  
28. Mills EJ, Nachega  JB, Bangsberg  DR, Singh  S, Rachlis  B, Wu P, Wilson  K, Buchan I,  Gill CJ, Cooper  
C. Adherence to HAART: a systematic review of developed and developing nation patient -reported barriers  
and facilitators.  PLoS  Med.  2006;3(11):e438.  Epub  2006/11/24.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030438.  PubMed  
PMID:  17121449;  PMCID:  PMC1637123.  
29. Wood E, Hogg RS, Yip B, Harrigan PR, O'Shaughnessy MV, Montaner JS. Effect of medication  
adherence  on survival  of HIV-infected  adults  who start highly  active  antiretroviral  therapy  when  the CD4+  cell 
count is 0.200  to 0.350 x 10(9) cells/L. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139(10):810 -6. Epub 2003/11/19. doi:  
10.7326/0003 -4819 -139-10-200311180 -00008.  PubMed  PMID:  14623618.  
30. Mannheimer S, Friedland G, Matts J, Child C, Chesney M. The consistency of adherence to  
antiretroviral  therapy  predicts  biologic  outcomes  for human  immunodeficiency  virus -infected  persons  in clinical  
trials.  Clin Infect  Dis. 2002;34(8):1115 -21. Epub  2002/03/27.  doi: 10.1086/339074.  PubMed  PMID:  11915001.  
31. McNabb J, Ross JW, Abriola K, Turley C, Nightingale C H, Nicolau DP. Adherence to highly active  
antiretroviral therapy predicts virologic outcome at an inner -city human immunodeficiency virus clinic. Clin  
Infect  Dis. 2001;33(5):700 -5. Epub  2001/08/07.  doi: 10.1086/322590.  PubMed  PMID: 11486292.  
32. Bangsberg DR, Acosta EP, Gupta R, Guzman D, Riley ED, Harrigan PR, Parkin N, Deeks SG.  
Adherence -resistance relationships for protease and non -nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors explained  
by virological  fitness.  AIDS.  2006;20(2):223 -31. Epub  2006/03/03.  doi: 10.1097/01.aids.0000199825.34241.49.  
PubMed  PMID:  16511415.  
33. Sethi AK, Celentano DD, Gange SJ, Moore RD, Gallant JE. Association between adherence to  
antiretroviral therapy and human immunodeficiency virus drug resistance. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(8):1112 -8. 
Epub  2003/10/03. doi: 10.1086/378301.  PubMed  PMID:  14523777.  
34. Wainberg  MA, Friedland  G. Public  health  implications  of antiretroviral  therapy  and HIV drug resistance.  
JAMA.  1998;279(24):1977 -83. Epub  1998/06/27.  doi: 10.1001/jama.279.24.1977.  PubMed  PMID:  9643862.  
35. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention.  Issue  Brief - HIV in the Southern  United  States.  2019.  
36. Alabama Office of HIV Prevention and Care. HIV Statistics, Quarterly Reports, 2019 - Volume 4  
(January -December).  Montgomery,  AL: Alabama  Department  of Health;  2019 12/30/2019.  
37. Reif SS, Whetten  K, Wilson  ER, McAllaster  C, Pence  BW, Legrand S,  Gong  W. HIV/AIDS  in the 
Southern USA: a disproportionate epidemic. AIDS Care. 2014;26(3):351 -9. Epub 2013/08/16. doi:  
10.1080/09540121.2013.824535.  PubMed PMID: 23944833.  
38. Reif S, Belden  CM, Wilson  E, McAllaster  CJSHASIDU,  June.  HIV/AIDS in  the US Deep South:  trends  
from 2008 –20162019:2008 -16. 
39. Girardi E, Sabin CA, Monforte AD. Late diagnosis of HIV infection: epidemiological features,  
consequences and strategies to encourage earlier testing. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2007;46 Suppl 1:S3 - 
8. Epub  2007/09/28. doi:  10.1097/01.qai.0000286597.57066.2b.  PubMed  PMID:  17713423.  
40. Conway  B. The role of adherence  to antiretroviral  therapy  in the management  of HIV infection.  J Acquir  
Immune Defic Syndr. 2007;45 Suppl 1:S14 -8. Epub 2007/05/26. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3180600766.  
PubMed  PMID:  17525686.  
41. Castilla  J, Sobrino  P, De La Fuente  L, Noguer  I, Guerra  L, Parras  F. Late diagnosis  of HIV infection  in 
the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: consequences for AIDS incidence. AIDS. 2002;16(14):1945 -51. 
Epub  2002/09/28. doi:  10.1097/00002030 -200209270 -00012. PubMed  PMID:  12351955.  
42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV Surveillance Dat a Tables (early release): Core  
indicators  for monitoring  the Ending  the HIV Epidemic  Initiative,  data reported  through  December 2019.  March  
2020.  
43. HIV Epidemiology  Program.  HIV Surveillance  Annual  Report,  2018.  New York,  NY: New York City 
Department of  Health  and Mental Hygiene, November  2019.  
44. New York City HIV/AIDS  Annual  Surveillance  Statistics.  New York:  New York City Department of  
Health  and Mental Hygiene,  2019.  
45. HIV Epidemiology  Program.  HIV in the Bronx,  New York City,  2018.  New York:  New York City 
Department of  Health  and Mental Hygiene, December  2019.  
46. HIV Epidemiology  Program.  Care  and Clinical  Status  of People  Newly  Diagnosed  with HIV and People  
Living with HIV in New York City, 2018. New York: New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygien e, 
December  2019.  
47. Van Tam V, Larsson  M, Pharris  A, Diedrichs B,  Nguyen  HP, Nguyen  CT, Ho PD, Marrone  G, Thorson  
A. Peer  support  and improved  quality  of life among  persons  living  with HIV on antiretroviral  treatment:  a 
randomised controlled trial from north -eastern Vietnam. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2012;10:53. Epub  
2012/05/23.  doi: 10.1186/1477 -7525 -10-53. PubMed  PMID:  22606977; PMCID:  PMC3491019.  
48. Peltzer  K, Ramlagan  S, Jones  D, Weiss  SM, Fomundam  H, Chanetsa  L. Efficacy  of a lay health  worker  
led group antiretroviral medication adherence training among non -adherent HIV -positive patients in KwaZulu - 
Natal, South Africa: results from a randomized trial. SAHARA J. 2012;9(4):218 -26. Epub 2012/12/14. doi:  
10.1080/17290376.2012.745640.  PubMed PMID: 23234 350. 
49. Robbins RN, Mellins CA, Leu CS, Rowe J, Warne P, Abrams EJ, Witte S, Stein DJ, Remien RH.  
Enhancing  Lay Counselor  Capacity  to Improve  Patient  Outcomes  with Multimedia  Technology.  AIDS  Behav.  
2015;19 Suppl 2:163 -76. Epub 2015/01/09. doi: 10.1007/s10461 -014-0988 -4. PubMed PMID: 25566763;  
PMCID:  PMC4537057.  
50. Simoni  JM, Huh D, Frick  PA, Pearson  CR, Andrasik  MP, Dunbar  PJ, Hooton  TM. Peer Support  and 
Pager Messaging to Promote Antiretroviral Modifying Therapy in Seattle: A Randomized Controlled Trial.  
Jaids -Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. 2009;52(4):465 -73. doi: DOI  
10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181b9300c.  PubMed  PMID:  WOS:000271721600005.  
51. Horvath KJ, Oakes JM, Rosser BRS, Danilenko G, Vezina H, Amico KR, Williams ML, Simoni J.  
Feasibility,  Acceptability  and Preliminary  Efficacy  of an Online  Peer -to-Peer  Social  Support  ART Adherence  
Intervention. Aids and Behavior. 2013;17(6):2031 -44. doi: 10.1007/s10461 -013-0469 -1. PubMed PMID:  
WOS:000319990900010.  
52. Enriquez M, Cheng AL, Banderas J, Farnan R,  Chertoff K, Hayes D, Ortego G, Moreno J, Peterson J,  
McKinsey  D. A Peer -Led HIV Medication  Adherence  Intervention  Targeting  Adults  Linked  to Medical  Care  but 
without a Suppressed Viral Load. J Int Assoc Provid AIDS Care. 2015;14(5):441 -8. Epub 2014/11/22.  doi: 
10.1177/2325957414558301.  PubMed PMID:  25412724; PMCID:  PMC5677528.  
53. Olaniran A, Smith H, Unkels R, Bar -Zeev S, van den Broek N. Who is a community health worker? - a 
systematic review of definitions. Glob Health Action. 2017;10(1):1272223. Epub 2017/02/23. doi:  
10.1080/16549716.2017.1272223.  PubMed  PMID:  28222653;  PMCID: PMC5328349.  
54. Kangovi S, Mitra N, Grande D, Long JA, Asch DA. Evidence -Based Community Health Worker  
Program  Addresses  Unmet  Social  Needs  And Generates  Positive  Return  On Investmen t. Health  Affairs.  
2020;39(2):207 -13. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00981.  
55. Kim K, Choi JS, Choi E, Nieman CL, Joo JH, Lin FR, Gitlin LN, Han HR. Effects of Community -Based  
Health  Worker  Interventions  to Improve  Chronic  Disease  Management  and Care  Among  Vulnera ble 
Populations: A Systematic Review. Am J Public Health. 2016;106(4):e3 -e28. Epub 2016/02/19. doi:  
10.2105/AJPH.2015.302987.  PubMed  PMID:  26890177;  PMCID: PMC4785041.  
56. Geldsetzer P, Vaikath M, De Neve JW, Bossert TJ, Sibandze S, Mkhwanazi M, Barnighausen T.  
Distrusting community health workers with confidential health information: a convergent mixed -methods study  
in Swaziland. Health Policy Plan. 2017;32(6):882 -9. Epub 2017/04/14. doi: 10.1093/heapol/czx036. PubMed  
PMID:  28407083.  
57. Han HR, Kim K, Murphy J, Cudjoe J, Wilson P, Sharps P, Farley JE. Community health worker  
interventions to promote psychosocial outcomes among people living with HIV -A systematic review. PLoS  
One.  2018;13(4):e0194928.  Epub  2018/04/25.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194928 . PubMed  PMID:  29689054;  
PMCID:  PMC5915269.  
58. Raper  JL, Mugavero  MJ, Batey  DS. Birmingham Access  to Care  Study  (BA2C):  University  of Alabama  
at Birmingham;  2016.  
59. Jain KM, Holtgrave  DR, Maulsby  C, Kim JJ, Zulliger  R, Massey  M, Charles  V. Improving  access  to HIV 
care:  lessons  from five US sites:  JHU Press; 2016.  
60. Kay ES, Batey  DS. Birmingham  Access  to Care:  Results  of A Randomized  Controlled  Trial of a 
Community  Health  Worker  Intervention  to Improve  Linkage  to and Retention  in CareIn  Prepartion.  
61. Estrin D, Sim I. Health care delivery. Open mHealth architecture: an engine for health care innovation.  
Science.  2010;330(6005):759 -60. doi: 10.1126/science.1196187.  PubMed  PMID:  21051617.  
62. Akter  S, Ray P. mHealth  - an Ultimate  Platform  to Serve  the Unserved.  Yearb  Med I nform.  2010:94 - 
100. PubMed  PMID:  20938579.  
63. Klasnja P, Pratt W. Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the space of mobile -phone health interventions.  
J Biomed Inform. 2012;45(1):184 -98. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.017. PubMed PMID: 21925288; PMCID:  
PMC3272165.  
64. Center  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC).  HIV Among  Latinos  2014  [cited  2014  June  11]. 
Available  from:  http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/racialEthnic/hispanicLati nos/facts/index.htm l. 
65. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC).  HIV Among  African  Americans  Atlanta,  GA2014.  
Available  from:  http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/racialEthnic/aa/facts/ . 
66. Hall HI, Song R, Rhodes P, Prejean J, An Q, Lee LM, Karon J, Brookmeyer R, Kaplan EH, McKenna  
MT, Janssen RS, Group HIVIS. Estimation of HIV incidence in the United States. JAMA. 2008;300(5):520 -9. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.300.5.520.  PubMed  PMID:  18677024;  PMCID:  PMC2919237.  
67. Horvath  T, Azman  H, Kennedy  GE, Rutherford  GW. Mobile  phone  text messaging  for promoting  
adherence to antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  
2012;3:CD009756.  doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009756. PubMed  PMID: 22419345.  
68. King E, Kinvig K, Steif J, Qiu AQ, Maan EJ, Albert AY, Pick N, Alimenti A, Kestler MH, Money  
DMJJomIr.  Mobile  text messaging  to improve  medication  adherence  and viral load in a vulnerable  Canadian  
population  living  with human  immunodeficiency  virus:  a repeated  measures  study2017;19(6):e190.  
69. Perera AI, Thomas MG, Moore JO, Faasse K, Petrie KJ. Effect of a smartphone application  
incorporating  personalized  health -related  imagery  on adherence  to antiretroviral  therapy:  a randomized  clinical  
trial. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2014;28(11):579 -86. Epub 2014/10/08. doi: 10.1089/apc.2014.0156. PubMed  
PMID:  25290556;  PMCID:  PMC4216527.  
70. Lewis  MA, Uhrig  JD, Bann  CM, Harris  JL, Furberg  RD, Coomes  C, Kuhns  LMJHP.  Tailored text  
messaging  intervention for  HIV adherence:  A proof -of-concept  study2013;32(3):248.  
71. Center  PR. Mobile  Fact Sheet2019.  
72. Schnall  R, Musgrove  K, Batey  DS. Symptom  Profile  and Technology  Use of Persons  Living  With HIV 
Who Access Services at a Community -Based Organization in the Deep South. J A ssoc Nurses AIDS Care.  
2020;31(1):42 -50. Epub 2019/03/26. doi: 10.1097/JNC.0000000000000078. PubMed PMID: 30908348;  
PMCID:  PMC6754806.  
73. Duggan  M, Rainie  L. Cell phone  activities  2012.  Pew Research  Center.  2012.  
74. Pollio  DE, Batey  DS, Bender  K, Ferguson  K, Thompson  S. Technology  Use among  Emerging  Adult  
Homeless  in Two U.S.  Cities.  Social  Work.  2013;58(2):173 -5. doi: 10.1093/sw/swt006.  
75. Kirk GD, Himelhoch  SS, Westergaard  RP, Beckwith  CG. Using  Mobile  Health  Technology  to Improve  
HIV Care for Persons Living wi th HIV and Substance Abuse. AIDS research and treatment.  
2013;2013:194613.  doi: 10.1155/2013/194613.  PubMed  PMID:  24381751; PMCID:  3870121.  
76. Research  NIoN.  The NINR  strategic  plan:  Advancing  science,  improving  lives2016.  
77. Whitehead  L, Seaton  P. The Effectiveness  of Self-Management  Mobile  Phone  and Tablet  Apps  in 
Long -term Condition Management: A Systematic Review. Journal of medical Internet research.  
2016;18(5):e97.  doi: 10.2196/jmir.4883.  PubMed  PMID:  PMC4886099.  
78. World  Health  Organization.  mHealth:  New horizons  for health  through  mobile  technologies:  second  
global  survey  on eHealth.: World  Health Organization 2011.  
79. Allen  CG, Barbero  C, Shantharam  S, Moeti  R. Is Theory  Guiding  Our Work?  A Scoping  Review on  the 
Use of Implementation Theories, Frameworks, and Models to Bring Community Health Workers into Health  
Care Settings. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2019;25(6):571 -80. doi: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000000846.  
PubMed  PMID:  30180116.  
80. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation Hybrid Designs:  
Combining  Elements  of Clinical  Effectiveness  and Implementation  Research  to Enhance  Public  Health  Impact.  
Medical  care.  2012;50(3):217 -26. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182408812.  PubMed PMID:  PMC3731143.  
81. Glasgow  RE, Vogt TM, Boles  SM. Evaluating  the public  health  impact  of health  promotion  interventions:  
the RE -AIM framework. Am J Public Health. 1999;89(9):1322 -7. doi: 10.2105/ajph.89.9.1322. PubMed PMID:  
10474547.  
82. Gardner LI, Metsch LR, Anderson -Mahoney P, Loughlin AM, del Rio C, S trathdee S, Sansom SL,  
Siegal HA, Greenberg AE, Holmberg SD, Antiretroviral T, Access Study Study G. Efficacy of a brief case  
management intervention to link recently diagnosed HIV -infected persons to care. AIDS. 2005;19(4):423 -31. 
Epub  2005/03/08. doi:  10.1097/01.aids.0000161772.51900.eb.  PubMed  PMID:  15750396.  
83. Craw  JA, Gardner  LI, Marks  G, Rapp  RC, Bosshart  J, Duffus  WA, Rossman  A, Coughlin  SL, Gruber  D, 
Safford LA, Overton J, Schmitt K. Brief strengths -based case management promotes entry into HIV medical  
care: results of the antiretroviral treatment access study -II. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2008;47(5):597 -606. 
Epub  2008/02/21. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181684c51.  PubMed  PMID: 18285714.  
84. Haberer  JE, Kahane  J, Kigozi  I, Emenyonu  N, Hunt  P, Martin  J, Bangsberg  DR. Real-time adherence  
monitoring for HIV antiretroviral therapy. AIDS Behav. 2010;14(6):1340 -6. doi: 10.1007/s10461 -010-9799 -4. 
PubMed  PMID:  20809380;  PMCID:  PMC2974938.  
85. Hevner  A. A three  cycle  view of design  science  research.  Scand  J Inform  Syst 2007;2.  
86. Mohr  DC, Cuijpers  P, Lehman  K. Supportive  accountability:  a model  for providing  human  support  to 
enhance adherence to eHealth interventions. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(1):e30. Epub 2011/03/12. doi:  
10.2196/jmir.1602.  PubMed PMID: 21393123;  PMCID: PMC3221353.  
87. Singh  N, Berman  SM, Swindells  S, Justis  JC, Mohr  JA, Squier  C, Wagener  MM. Adherence  of human  
immunodeficiency virus -infected patients to antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;29(4):824 -30. Epub  
1999/12/10.  doi: 10.1086/520443. PubMed PMID: 10589897.  
88. Murphy  DA, Marelich  WD, Hoffman D,  Steers  WN. Predictors  of antiretroviral  adherence.  AIDS  Care.  
2004;16(4):471 -84. Epub  2004/06/19.  doi: 10.1080/09540120410001683402.  PubMed  PMID:  15203415.  
89. Gardenier  D, Andrews  CM, Thomas DC,  Bookha rdt-Murray  LJ, Fitzpatrick  JJ. Social  support  and 
adherence: differences among clients in an AIDS day health care program. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care.  
2010;21(1):75 -85. Epub  2009/10/13.  doi: 10.1016/j.jana.2009.06.007.  PubMed  PMID:  19819169.  
90. Aneshensel  C FR. Stress,  support,  and depression:  a longitudinal  causal  model.  J Community  Psychol.  
1982;10(4):363 -76. 
91. Gonzalez  JS, Penedo  FJ, Antoni  MH, Duran  RE, McPherson -Baker  S, Ironson  G, Isabel  Fernandez  M, 
Klimas NG, Fletcher MA, Schneiderman N. Social support, po sitive states of mind, and HIV treatment  
adherence in men and women living with HIV/AIDS. Health Psychol. 2004;23(4):413 -8. Epub 2004/07/22. doi:  
10.1037/0278 -6133.23.4.413.  PubMed PMID:  15264978.  
92. Simoni JM, Frick PA, Huang B. A longitudinal evaluation of a social support model of medication  
adherence among HIV -positive men and women on antiretroviral therapy. Health Psychol. 2006;25(1):74 -81. 
Epub  2006/02/02.  doi: 10.1037/0278 -6133.25.1.74.  PubMed PMID:  16448300;  PMCID:  PMC5096446.  
93. Wills  TA, Vaughan  R. Social  support  and substance  use in early  adolescence.  J Behav  Med.  
1989;12(4):321 -39. Epub  1989/08/01.  doi: 10.1007/bf00844927.  PubMed PMID:  2600962.  
94. Erlandson KM, Allshouse AA, Jankowski CM, Duong S, Mawhinney S, Kohrt WM, Campbell TB.  
Comparison  of functional  status  instruments  in HIV-infected  adults  on effective  antiretroviral  therapy.  HIV Clin 
Trials.  2012;13(6):324 -34. doi: 10.1310/hct1306 -324. PubMed  PMID:  23195670;  PMCID:  PMC4379206.  
95. Erlandson  KM, MaWhinney  S, Wilson  M, Gross  L, McCandless  SA, Campbell  TB, Kohrt  WM, Schwartz  
R, Brown TT, Jankowski CM. Physical function improvements with moderate or high -intensity exercise among  
older adults with or without HIV infection. Aids. 2018;32(16):2317 -26. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000001984.  
PubMed  PMID:  30134299;  PMCID:  PMC6170687.  
96. Jankowski CM, Gozansky WS, Van Pelt RE, Wolfe P, Schwartz RS, Kohrt WM. Oral  
dehydroepiandrosterone  replacement  in older  adults:  effects  on central  adiposity,  glucose  metabolism  and 
blood lipids. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf ). 2011;75(4):456 -63. Epub 2011/04/28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365 - 
2265.2011.04073.x.  PubMed PMID:  21521341; PMCID: PMC3166648.  
97. Jankowski CM, Shea K, Barry DW, Linnebur SA, Wolfe P, Kittelson J, Schwartz RS, Kohrt WM. Timing  
of Ibuprofen Use and Musculoskeletal A daptations to Exercise Training in Older Adults. Bone Rep. 2015;1:1 -8. 
Epub  2015/02/03.  doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2014.10.003.  PubMed  PMID:  25642444;  PMCID:  PMC4310009.  
98. Park YM, Keller  AC, Runchey  SS, Miller  BF, Kohrt  WM, Van Pelt RE, Kang  C, Jankowski  CM, Morea u 
KL. Acute estradiol treatment reduces skeletal muscle protein breakdown markers in early - but not late - 
postmenopausal women. Steroids. 2019;146:43 -9. Epub 2019/04/01. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2019.03.008.  
PubMed  PMID:  30928279.  
99. Lloyd CE, Johnson MR, Mughal S, Sturt JA, Collins GS, Roy T, Bibi R, Barnett AH. Securing  
recruitment  and obtaining  informed  consent  in minority  ethnic  groups  in the UK. BMC Health  Serv Res. 
2008;8:68.  Epub 2008/04/01. doi: 1472 -6963 -8-68 [pii]  
10.1186/1472 -6963 -8-68 [doi].  PubMed PMID:  18373876;  PMCID:  2311303.  
100. Swanson  GM, Ward  AJ. Recruiting  minorities  into clinical  trials:  toward  a participant -friendly  system.  J 
Natl Cancer  Inst. 1995;87(23):1747 -59. Epub  1995/12/06.  PubMed  PMID:  7473831.  
101. Feldman BJ, Fredericksen  RJ, Crane PK, Safren SA, Mugavero MJ, Willig JH, Simoni JM, Wilson IB,  
Saag  MS, Kitahata  MM, Crane  HM. Evaluation  of the single -item self-rating  adherence  scale  for use in routine  
clinical  care of people  living  with HIV. AIDS  and behavior.  2013;17(1):307 -18. doi: 10.1007/s10461 -012-0326 - 
7. PubMed PMID:  23108721.  
102. Adam GP, Di M, Cu -Uvin S, Halladay C, Smith BT, Iyer S, Trikalinos TA. Strategies for improving the  
lives of US women  aged  40 and above  living  with HIV/AIDS:  an evidence  map.  Syst Rev. 2018;7(1):25.  Epub  
2018/02/03.  doi: 10.1186/s13643 -018-0684 -y. PubMed  PMID:  29391059;  PMCID:  PMC5796491.  
103. Webel  AR, Longenecker  CT, Gripshover  B, Hanson  JE, Schmotzer  BJ, Salata  RA. Age, stress,  and 
isolation in older adults living with HIV. AIDS Care. 2014;26(5):523 -31. Epub 2013/10/15. doi:  
10.1080/09540121.2013.845288.  PubMed  PMID: 24116852;  PMCID: PMC3945181.  
104. Webel  AR, Higgins  PA. The relationship  between  social  roles  and self-management  behavior  in women  
living with HIV/AIDS. Womens  Health Issues. 2012;22(1):e27 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.whi.2011.05.010. PubMed  
PMID:  21798762;  PMCID:  PMC3206212.  
105. Webel AR, Cuca Y, Okonsky JG, Asher AK, Kaihura A, Salata RA. The impact of social context on self - 
management in women living with HIV. Soc Sci Me d. 2013;87:147 -54. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.03.037.  
PubMed  PMID:  23631790;  PMCID:  PMC3656470.  
106. Webel  AR. Testing  a peer-based  symptom  management  intervention  for women  living  with HIV/AIDS.  
AIDS Care. 2010;22(9):1029 -40. doi:  10.1080/09540120903214389. PubMed PMID: 20146111; PMCID:  
PMC3131156.  
107. Markaryan  T, Rosenberger  WF. Exact  properties  of Efron’s  biased  coin randomization  procedure.  The 
Annals  of Statistics. 2010;38(3):1546 -67. doi: 10.1214/09 -aos758.  
108. Efron B. Forcing a seq uential experiment to be balanced. Biometrika. 1971;58(3):403 -17. doi:  
10.1093/biomet/58.3.403.  
109. Antognini  AB, Giovagnoli  A. A new 'biased  coin design'  for the sequential  allocation  of two treatments.  
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Appl ied Statistics). 2004;53(4):651 -64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467 - 
9876.2004.00436.x.  
110. Antognini  AB. A theoretical  analysis  of the power  of biased  coin designs.  Journal  of Statistical  Planning  
and Inference. 2008;138(6):1792 -8. doi:  10.1016/j.jspi.2007.06.033.  
111. Vickers AJ. How to randomize. Journal of the Society for Integrative Oncology. 2006;4(4):194 -8. 
PubMed  PMID:  17022927;  PMCID:  2596474.  
112. Hedden  Sl, Woolsen  RF, Malcolm  RJ. Randomization  in substance  abuse  clinical  trials.  Substance  
Abuse  Treatment, Prevention,  and Policy.  2006;1:6.  
113. Services.  DoHaH.  Department  of Health  and Human  Services  HIV guidelines  2020  [cited  2020  May 12, 
2020].  Available from:  https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines . 
114. Lyles CM, Crepaz N, Herbst JH, Kay LS. Evidence –Based HIV Behavioral Prevention From the  
Perspective  of the CDC's  HIV/AIDS Prevention  Research  Synthesis  Team.  AIDS  Education  and Prevention.  
2006;18(supp):21 -31. doi: 10.1521/aeap.2006.18.supp.21.  
115. Schnall R,  Liu J, Cho H, Hirshfield S, Siegel K, Olender S. A Health -Related Quality -of-Life Measure for  
Use in Patients with HIV: A Validation Study. AIDS patient care and STDs. 2017;31(2):43 -8. Epub 2017/01/04.  
doi: 10.1089/apc.2016.0252. PubMed PMID:  28051875.  
116. Justice AC, Holmes W, Gifford AL, Rabeneck L, Zackin R, Sinclair G, Weissman S, Neidig J, Marcus C,  
Chesney  M, Cohn  SE, Wu  AW. Development  and validation  of a self-completed  HIV symptom  index.  Journal  of 
Clinical Epidemiology. 2001;54(12, Supplement 1):S77 -S90. doi:  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0895 - 
4356(01)00449 -8. 
117. Bakken S, Holzemer WL, Brown M -A, Powell -Cope GM, Turner JG, Inouye  J, Nokes KM, Corless IB.  
Relationships  between  perception  of engagement  with health  care provider  and demographic  characteristics,  
health status, and adherence to therapeutic regimen in persons with HIV/AIDS. AIDS patient care and STDs.  
2000;14(4):189 -97. 
118. Amico  KR, Toro -Alfonso  J, Fisher  JD. An empirical  test of the information,  motivation  and behavioral  
skills model of antiretroviral therapy adherence. AIDS Care. 2005;17(6):661 -73. Epub 2005/07/23. doi:  
10.1080/09540120500038058.  PubMed PMID:  16036253.  
119. Reynolds NR. The problem of antiretroviral adherence: a self -regulatory model for intervention. AIDS  
Care.  2003;15(1):117 -24. Epub  2003/03/27.  doi: 10.1080/0954012021000039815.  PubMed  PMID:  12655839.  
120. Earnshaw  VA, Smith  LR, Chaudoir SR,  Amico  KR, Copenhaver  MM. HIV stigma  mechanisms and  well- 
being among PLWH: a test of the HIV stigma framework. AIDS Behav. 2013;17(5):1785 -95. doi:  
10.1007/s10461 -013-0437 -9. PubMed PMID:  23456594;  PMCID:  PMC3664141.  
121. Naar -King S, Templin  T, Wright  K, Frey M, Parsons  JT, Lam P. Psychosocial  factors  and medication  
adherence  in HIV-positive  youth.  AIDS  Patient  Care &  STDs. 2006;20(1):44 -7. 
122. Derogatis  LR. BSI brief symptom  inventory.  Administration,  scoring,  and procedures  manual.  1993.  
123. Nugent NR, Brown LK, Belzer  M, Harper GW, Nachman S, Naar -King S, Interventions ATNfHA. Youth  
living  with HIV and problem  substance  use: elevated  distress  is associated  with nonadherence  and sexual  risk. 
Journal  of the  International  Association  of Physicians in AIDS  Care.  2010;9(2): 113-5. 
124. Beck AT, Steer RA, Carbin MG. Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression Inventory: Twenty -five 
years  of evaluation. Clinical psychology  review.  1988;8(1):77 -100. 
125. Harris  PA, Taylor  R, Thielke  R, Payne  J, Gonzalez  N, Conde  JG. Research  electronic  data capture  
(REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research  
informatics support. Journal of biomedical informatics. 2009;42(2):377 -81. Epub 2008/09/30. doi:  
10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010.  PubMed  PMID:  1892968 6. 
126. Mccray  E MJ. Dear  Colleague:  Information  from the CDC  Division  of HIV/AIDS  Prevention:  Centers  for 
Disease Control and Prevention; 2019. Available from:  https://www.cdc.g ov/hiv/policies/dear - 
colleague/dcl/062719.html . 
127. The Lancet H. U=U taking off in 2017. Lancet HIV. 2017;4(11):e475. Epub 2017/11/04. doi:  
10.1016/S2352 -3018(17)30183 -2. PubMed  PMID:  29096785.  
128. Erlen JA, Cha ES, Kim KH, Caruthers D, Sereika SM. The HIV Medication Taking Self -efficacy Scale:  
psychometric evaluation. J Adv Nurs. 2010;66(11):2560 -72. Epub 2010/08/21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365 - 
2648.2010.05400.x.  PubMed PMID: 2072279 9; PMCID: PMC2970730.  
129. Rao D, Kekwaletswe  TC, Hosek  S, Martinez  J, Rodriguez  F. Stigma  and social  barriers  to medication  
adherence with urban youth living with HIV. AIDS Care. 2007;19(1):28 -33. Epub 2006/11/30. doi:  
10.1080/09540120600652303.  PubMed PMID:  17129855.  
130. Humeniuk R AR. Validation of the alcohol, smoking and substance involvement screening test  
(ASSIST)  and pilot brief intervention:  a technical  report  of phase  II findings  of the WHO  ASSIST project.  
Geneva:  World Health  Organization.  2006  
131. Gupta SK. Intention -to-treat concept: A review. Perspect Clin Res. 2011;2(3):109 -12. doi:  
10.4103/2229 -3485.83221.  PubMed  PMID:  21897887.  
132. Fisher  LD. Intention  to treat in clinical  trials.  Statistical  issues  in drug research  and development.  1990.  
133. Hedeker  D GR. Longitudinal  Data  Analysis.  Hoboken,  NJ: Wiley -Interscience;  2006.  
134. Tang M, Slud EV, Pfeiffer RM. Goodness of Fit Tests for Linear Mixed Models. J Multivar Anal.  
2014;130:176 -93. Epub  2014/09/01.  doi: 10.1016/j.jmva.2014.03.012.  PubMed  PMID:  28503001;  PMCID:  
PMC5426279.  
135. Walker E, Nowacki AS. Understanding equivalence and noninferiority testing. J Gen Intern Med.  
2011;26(2):192 -6. Epub  2010/09/21.  doi: 10.1007/s11606 -010-1513 -8. PubMed  PMID:  20857339.  
136. Preacher  KJ, Hayes  AF. Asymptotic  and resam pling  strategies  for assessing  and comparing  indirect  
effects in multiple mediator models. Behav Res Methods. 2008;40(3):879 -91. Epub 2008/08/14. doi:  
10.3758/brm.40.3.879.  PubMed PMID: 18697684.  
137. Xin J CB, Laber  EB. The Comprehensive R Archive Network. 2012. qLearn: Functions to implement Q - 
learning for estimating optimal dynamic treatment regimes from two stage sequentially randomized trials, and  
to perform inference via m -out-of-n bootstrap for parameters inde xing the optimal regime  [2018 -11-08]. 
Available  from:  https://cran.r -project.org/web/packages/qLearn/qLearn.pdf . 
138. Little  RJA,  Rubin  DB. Statistical  analysis  with missing  data.  New York:  Wiley;  1987.  
139. Kukafka R, Johnson SB, Linfante A, Allegrante JP. Grounding a new information technology  
implementation  framework  in behavioral  science:  a systematic  analysis  of the literature  on IT use. Journal  of 
Biomedical  Informatics.  2003;36(3):218 -27. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2003.09.002 . 
140. Cho H, Porras  T, Baik D, Beauchemin  M, Schnall  R. Understanding  the predisposing,  enabling,  and 
reinforcing factors influencing the use of a mobile -based HIV management app: A real -world usability  
evaluation. International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2018;117:88 -95. doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.06 .007. 
141. Schnall  R, Gordon  P, Camhi  E, Bakken  S. Perceptions  of factors  influencing  use of an electronic  record  
for case management of persons living with HIV. AIDS care. 2011;23(3):357 -65. doi:  
10.1080/09540121.2010.507745.  PubMed PMID: 21347899.  
142. Odlum  M, Gordon  P, Camhi  E, Schnall  R, Teixeira  P, Bakken  SJJohcftp,  underserved.  Perceptions  of 
predisposing, enabling, and reinforcing factors influencing the use of a continuity of care document in special  
needs  PLWH2012;23(4):1457 -76. 
143. Schnall  R, Clark  S, Olende r S, Sperling  JD. Providers'  Perceptions Of  The Factors  Influencing  The 
Implementation Of The New York State Mandatory HIV Testing Law In Two Urban Academic Emergency  
Departments. Academic emergency medicine : official journal of the Society for Academic Emergency  
Medicine.  2013;20(3):279 -86. doi: 10.1111/acem.12084.  PubMed PMID:  PMC3608143.  
144. Batey  DS, Whitfield  S, Mulla  M, Stringer  KL, Durojaiye  M, McCormick  L, Turan  B, Nyblade  L, Kempf  
MC, Turan JM. Adaptation and Implementation of an Intervention to Redu ce HIV -Related Stigma Among  
Healthcare Workers in the United States: Piloting of the FRESH Workshop. AIDS Patient Care STDS.  
2016;30(11):519 -27. Epub 2016/11/17. doi: 10.1089/apc.2016.0223. PubMed PMID: 27849373; PMCID:  
PMC5116658.  
145. Sohail M, Rastegar J, Lo ng D, Rana A, Levitan EB, Reed -Pickens H, Batey DS, Ross -Davis K, Gaddis  
K, Tarrant  A, Parmar  J, Raper  JL, Mugavero  MJ. Data for  Care  (D4C)  Alabama: Clinic -Wide  Risk Stratification  
With Enhanced Personal Contacts for Retention in HIV Care via the Alabama Q uality Management Group. J  
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2019;82 Suppl 3:S192 -S8. Epub 2019/11/26. doi:  
10.1097/QAI.0000000000002205.  PubMed PMID:  31764254.  
146. Smith JD, Polaha J. Using implementation science to guide the integration of evidence -based family  
interventions into primary care. Fam Syst Health. 2017;35(2):125 -35. Epub 2017/06/16. doi:  
10.1037/fsh0000252.  PubMed PMID:  28617015; PMCID: PMC5473179.  
147. McNulty  M, Smith  JD, Villamar  J, Burnett -Zeigler  I, Vermeer W,  Benbow  N, Gallo  C, Wilensky  U, Hjorth  
A, Mustanski B, Schneider J, Brown CH. Implementation Research Methodologies for Achieving Scientific  
Equity and Health Equity. Ethn Dis. 2019;29(Suppl 1):83 -92. Epub 2019/03/25. doi: 10.18865/ed.29.S1.83.  
PubMed  PMID:  30906154;  PMCID:  PMC6428169.  
148. Smith JD, Hasan M. Quantitative approaches for the evaluation of implementation research studies.  
Psychiatry  Res. 2020;283:112521.  Epub  2019/09/02.  doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.112521.  PubMed  PMID:  
31473029;  PMCID: PMC7176071.  
149. Smith JD, Li DH, Hirschhorn LR, Gallo C , McNulty M, Phillips G, 2nd, Birkett M, Rafferty M, Rao A,  
Villamar JA, Baral S, Mustanski B, Brown CH, Benbow ND. Landscape of HIV Implementation Research  
Funded by the National Institutes of Health: A Mapping Review of Project Abstracts. AIDS Behav. 201 9. Epub  
2019/12/18.  doi: 10.1007/s10461 -019-02764 -6. PubMed  PMID:  31845078.  
150. Smith JD, Rafferty MR, Heinemann AW, Meachum MK, Villamar J, Lieber RL, Brown CH. Pragmatic  
adaptation of implementation research measures for a novel context and multiple professi onal roles: a factor  
analysis study. BMC Health Serv Res. 2020;20(1):257. Epub 2020/04/02. doi: 10.1186/s12913 -020-05118 -4. 
PubMed  PMID:  32228572;  PMCID:  PMC7106795.  
151. Kessler RS, Purcell EP, Glasgow RE, Klesges LM, Benkeser RM, Peek CJ. What Does It Mean to  
“Employ” the RE -AIM Model? Evaluation & the Health Professions. 2012;36(1):44 -66. doi:  
10.1177/0163278712446066.  
152. Bakken  S, Ruland  CM. Translating  clinical  informatics  interventions  into routine  clinical  care:  How can 
the RE-AIM framework help?  J Am Med Inform  Assoc.  2009.  PubMed  PMID:  19717799.  
153. Bauermeister JA, Golinkoff JM, Muessig KE, Horvath KJ, Hightow -Weidman LB. Addressing  
engagement in technology -based behavioural HIV interventions through paradata metrics. Current opinion in  
HIV and AIDS.  2017;12(5):442 -6. doi: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000396.  PubMed  PMID:  28617711.  
154. Kreuter  F. Improving  surveys  with paradata:  Analytic  uses  of process  information:  John  Wiley  & Sons;  
2013.  
155. Garson  GD. Variance  Components  Analysis.  Asheboro,  NC: Statistical  Associates  Publishers  2012.  
156. Hayes AF. A Primer on Multilevel Modeling. Human Communication Research. 2006;32(4):385 -410. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1468 -2958.2006.00281.x.  
157. Schnall R, Smith AB, Sikka M, Gordon P, Camhi E, Kanter T, Bakken S. Employing the FITT  
Framewor k to Explore  HIV Case  Managers’  Perceptions  of Two Electronic  Clinical  Data  (ECD)  Summary  
Systems. International journal of medical informatics. 2012;81(10):e56 -e62. doi:  
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.07.002.  PubMed PMID: PMC3463235.  
158. Schnall R, Bakken S, Rojas M , Travers J, Carballo -Dieguez A. mHealth Technology as a Persuasive  
Tool for Treatment, Care and Management of Persons Living with HIV. AIDS and Behavior. 2015;19(2):81 -9. 
doi: 10.1007/s10461 -014-0984 -8. 
159. Hidalgo MA, Cotten C, Johnson AK, Kuhns LM, Garofalo  R. ‘Yes, I Am More than Just That’:  
Gay/Bisexual Young Men Residing in the United States Discuss the Influence of Minority Stress on their  
Sexual Risk Behavior Prior to Hiv Infection. International Journal of Sexual Health. 2013;25(4):291 -304. doi:  
10.108 0/19317611.2013.818086.  
160. Lichtenstein  B, Kay ES, Klinger  I, Mutchler  MG. Ricky  and Lucy:  gender  stereotyping  among  young  
Black men who have sex with men in the US Deep South and the implications for HIV risk in a severely  
affected population. Cult Health Sex. 2018;20(3):351 -65. Epub 2017/07/19. doi:  
10.1080/13691058.2017.1347280.  PubMed PMID:  28720021.  
161. Kay ES, Lee Y, Hauenstein K, Jackson L, Jackson E, Fordham M, Rafferty N, DeRamus R, Walton R,  
Mugavero  MJ, Batey  DS. “Where  people  are safe in their own homes”:  The interplay  of community  factors  and 
health  among  people  living  with HIV in the Deep  South.  . Journal  of HIV/AIDS  & Social  Services.  In Press.  
162. Batey DS, Hogan VL, Cantor R, Hamlin CM, Ross -Davis K, Nevin C, Zimmerman C, Thomas S,  
Mugavero  MJ, Willig  JH. Short  communication  routine  HIV testing  in the emergency  department:  assessment  
of patient perceptions.  AIDS  research  and human retroviruses.  2012;28(4):352 -6. 
163. Fredericksen  RJ, Edwards  TC, Merlin  JS, Gibbons  LE, Rao D, Batey  DS, Dant  L, Páez  E, Church  A, 
Crane PK. Patient and provider priorities for self -reported domains of HIV clinical care. AIDS care.  
2015;27(10):1255 -64. 