Apogee Clinical Investigation Plan (CIP)  
Destinati on Therapy (DT) Post Approval Study (PAS) Addendum 
Product Surveillance R egistry (PSR) Platform Addendum  
Version 2 01DEC2020 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan    Page 1 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  Apogee  
Destination Therapy (DT) Post Approval Study (PAS) Addendum  
Product Surveillance Registry (PSR)  Platform  Addendum  
Therapy  
Heart Failure  – Ventricular Assist Devices  
Version 2 
01DEC2020  
Sponsor  
Medtronic  
8200 Coral Sea Street NE  
Mound s View, MN U.S.A. 55112  
Phone: 1 -800-328-2518 
Medtronic, Inc  
Confidential  

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 2 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
Table of Contents  
A. Glossary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  3 
B. Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  4 
C. Sponsor Contact Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  6 
D. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  7 
E. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  7 
 Study Design and Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 7 
 Site Participation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  7 
 Enrollment and Duration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  8 
F. Data Collection Schedule and Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
 Data Collection Schedule  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  8 
G.  9 
  
  
  
  
  
  
H.  
  
  
  
 Home INR Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  14 
 Enoxaparin Bridging Recommendation (for stable ambulatory patients with sub -therapeutic INR)  .....................  14 
 GI bleeding Recommendation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 14 
J. Objectives and Statistical Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  15 
 Primary Apogee Objective  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 
  
  
  
K. Sample Size Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  17 
L. Report and Analysis Schedule  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  17 
M. Addendum Version History  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  18 
 
Table of Tables  
Table 1: Sponsor Contact Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 6 
Table 2:  Apogee Data Collection Table  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 9 
Table 3:  Proposed endoscopic algorithm for the management of GIB11  ................................ ................................ ............  15 
 
  

Version 2 Apogee Addendum Plan   Page 3 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  A.Glossary
Term  Definition  
ACE Angiotensin  Convert ing Enzyme  
AE Adverse Events  
AKI Acute Kidney I njury  
ARB Angiotensin II Receptor Blocker  
ASA Aspirin  
AVM  Arteriovenous Malformation  
BP Blood pressure  
cDV Color doppler velocimetry  
CPB Cardio -pulmonary bypass  
CBC Complete Blood Count  
CRF Case report form  
CT Computed Tomography  
CXR Chest x -ray 
DT Destination Therapy  
ECG Electro -cardiogram  
EGD  Esophago -gastro -duodenal  
eGFR  Estimated Globular Filtration Rate  
GI Gastrointestinal  
GIB Gastrointestinal Bleed  
HCP Healthcare provider  
ICH Intracranial Hemorrhage  
IFU Instructions for Use  
INR Internalized Normalized Ratio  
IVRT  isovolumetric relaxation time  
LDH lactate dehydrogenase  
LV Left ventricle  
LVAD  Left ventric ular assist device  
MCS  Mechanical Circulatory Support  
MR Mitral regurgitation  
mRS  Modified Rankin score  
MV Mitral valve  
OR Operating room  
PAS Post -approval study  
PPI Proton Pump Inhibitor  
PRBC  Packed Red Blood Cells  
PSR Product Surveillance Registry  
pfHb  Plasma free hemoglobin  
POD  Postoperative Day  
PT Pump thrombosis  
PT Prothrombin Time  
RHC  Right heart catheterization  
RPM  Revolutions per Minute  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 4 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  Term  Definition  
TEE Transesophageal echocardiogram  
TTE Transthoracic echocardiogram  
VAD  Ventricular assist device  
VCE Video Capsule Endoscopy  
 
B. Synopsis  
 
Title  Apogee  addendum in Destination Therapy (DT) Post -Approval Study (PAS) patients  
Clinical Study 
Type  Observational , Non -interventional  
Product Name  
and status  The commercially available HeartWare™ HVAD™ System. Approved patient populations, product 
purpose, indications and uses of the HVAD System and its components and accessories ar e defined 
in the product labeling, instructions for use (IFU), or other applicable manuals.  
Sponsor  Medtronic  
Indication 
under 
investigation  This post -market on -labe l study is intended to collect data from DT subjects who meet the standard 
criteria fo r implantation of a Medtronic HeartWareTM HVADTM System. No new indications are 
being explored in this study.  
Investigation 
Purpose  The purpose of the Apogee  co-enrollment study is to further enhance scientific understanding of 
the implant procedure, opti mized blood pressure management, and anticoagulation / antiplatelet 
therapies.  The goals of Apogee are: 
• To evaluate collective impact of Apogee  standardized  guidelines and characterize impact on 12 -
month aggregate adverse event rate  
• To better understa nd the effects of implant technique and patient management on clinical 
outcomes  
Study Design  DT PAS Sites have the option to co -enroll patients in Apogee .  Patients must be consented for the 
DT PAS  to be eligible for participation in Apogee , which will re quire a separate consent . 
 
Sample Size  The total sample size will be dependent on the number of sites  and patients  interested in 
participation in Apogee .  If 1/3 of the total DT PAS patients  participate in Apogee , the study would 
be expected to enroll  (but not limit ed to) ~100 patients (1/3 of the total DT PAS patients since the 
DT PAS enrolls 300 pa tients).  
Inclusion/  
Exclusion 
Criteria  Subjects consented to participate in the DT PAS are eligible for participation in Apogee .  There are 
no exclusion crit eria unique to Apogee.  

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 5 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  Study 
Procedures and 
Assessments  
 
Primary 
Objective  To characterize the 12 -month overall major adverse event rate after the collective impact of 
Apogee  standardized protocols and best practices.  Major adverse events are defined t o be 
occurrence of infection, bleeding, device malfunction, stroke or death.  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 6 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
C. Sponsor Contact Information  
 
Sponsor contact  information for the study  is provided in Table 1.  Study contact information c an be provided separately 
since this information is subject to change throughout the conduct of the  study.  Periodic updates to study contact 
information will be provided to sites  as needed.  
 
Table 1: Sponsor Contact Information  
  
US Study  Contact s 
 
Alejandra Gracia, Clinical Research Specialist  
Direct Phone: 1  (612) 242 -6540  
alejandra.m.gracia@medtronic.com    
 
Beth Ornell , Clinical Monitoring Manager  
Direct Phone: 1  (763)280 -2332 
beth.a.ornell@medtronic.com   
 
 
 

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 7 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
D. Introduction  
 
 Background  
 
Medtronic is sponsoring the Apogee  study.  Co -enrollment in Apogee  is allowed for patients participating in the 
Destination Therapy (DT) Post  Approval Study (PAS).  Patients must be consented for the DT PAS to be eligible for 
participation in A pogee , which will require a separate consent.  
  
Apogee is conducted within Medtronic’s Product Surveillance Registry (PSR) platform and is specific under  the DT PAS 
addendum. The Apogee  addendum outlines data collection, applicable procedures, objectives, statistical methodology, 
analysis cohort, and re porting plans specific to the Apogee  study  which are not defined in the PSR core and MCS 
appendix (MCS PS R platform base protocol)  or the DT PAS addendum . The combination of these elements together 
define the requirements for Apogee study.   
 
E. Methodology    
 
 Study Design  and Purpose  
 
The Apogee  study is a prospective, observational, multi -site study  in Destin ation Therapy (DT) patients .  The Apogee  
study includes three areas of data collection :  
 
• Implant Procedure  
• Blood Pressure Management  
• Anti-coagulation / Anti-platelet Therapy  
 
Sites choosing to participate in Apogee  are expected to collect data in each  of the se three  areas . 
 
Most  patients receiving mechanical circulatory support (MCS) experience severe adverse event burden. The 2013 
Intermacs report show ed that approximately 70% of patients experience a major adverse event within the first 12 
months foll owing LVAD implant , with ma jor event defined as the first occurrence of infection, bleeding, device 
malfunction, stroke or death.1 
 
Given the heavy adverse event burden, there is an opportunity to understand best practice guidelines. The purpose of 
Apogee  is to further enhance scie ntific understanding of the implant procedure, optimized blood pressure management, 
and anticoagulation / antiplatelet therapies.  The goals of Apogee  are: 
 
• To evaluate the collective impact of Apogee  standardized guidelines and c haracterize impact on 12 -month 
aggregate adverse event rate  
• To better understand the effects of implant technique and patient management on clinical outcomes  
 
 Site Participation  
 
It is expected that a subset of the DT PAS sites will participate in Apogee .  DT PAS sites can choose to participate in 
Apogee , or they can decline Apogee  and limit their participation to the DT PAS.  As an estimate, i f one -third of the  
approximately 50  DT PAS  sites participate in Apogee , it is expected the Apogee  cohort will be co mprised of 
 
1 Kirklin et al, Fifth INTERMACS annual report: Risk factor analysis from more than 6,000 mechanical circulatory support pa tients , J 
Heart Lung Transplant 2013;32:141 –156 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 8 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  approximately (but not limited to) 100 patients from  approximately  (but not limited to)  17 Apogee  sites .  In general, it is 
expected that any site participating in Apogee  would enroll all of their eligible patients in Apogee ; however,  there may 
be exceptions due to  timing of Apogee  activation,  lack of patient interest , or concerns regarding non -compliance.  
 
Prior to enrolling patients in Apogee , sites must be activated in the DT PAS and Apogee  and have an established 
contract,  Institutional Revi ew Board (IRB) approval and fulfill any and all other Apogee  or IRB initiation requirements.  
The consent for Apogee is separate from the DT PAS consent .  The patient must be consented with the DT PAS consent 
prior to consenting with the Apogee consent.   The study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, Good 
Clinical Practice , and the ap plicable regulatory requirements.  The clinical investigation shall be conducted in accordance 
with the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declarati on of Helsinki.  
 
 Enrollment and Duration  
 
The enrollment duration of Apogee  is expected to occur  parallel to enrollment in the DT PAS.  There are no additional 
inclusion or exclusion criteria to Apogee subjects outside of the requirements outlined in the M CS PSR platform base 
protocol and the DT PAS  Addendum .  Full enrollment is anti cipated to require approximately  30 months  from the date of 
first DT PAS  enrollment  and therefore with 12 months of follow -up, total study duration is expected to require 42 
mon ths.  There is no minimum or maximum number of enrollments per site since data is being used for characterization 
purposes only.  
 
Once consented  with the Apogee consent , subjects are considered enrolled in Apogee and will be followed under the 
Apogee  study  for one-year  post implant .  After this, their participation in Apogee  ends but  subject will remain enrolled in 
DT PAS and will have follow -ups as outlined in the  MCS PSR platform base protocol and  DT PAS  addendum .   
 
F. Data Collection  Schedule and Study Procedures  
 
 Data Collection  Schedule  
 
Apogee subjects will have scheduled follow -up assessments at 1 month, 3 month, 6 months, and 12 months post -
implant or as prompted by reportable AEs , defined in the MCS PSR platform base protocol and the DT PAS addendu m.  
 
Apogee  data collection is summarized in  Table 2 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 9 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  Table 2: Apogee  Data Collection Table  
 
  Enroll  
ment  Baseline  Implant  Discharge   1M 
F/U 3M F/U  6M F/U  12M F/U  Unsch  
<12M   Consent  X         Implant Procedure  Detailed Implant 
Collection   
 X       
Echo for 2D 
Velocimetry 
evaluation  (digital 
image)    
X X 
(2 TEEs*)  X 
With  
Lavare On 
x 5 min & 
Off x 5 
min  X    
CT Scan Post -
implant (digital 
image)   
 X 
if 
performe
d       
Right Heart Cath 
(RHC) 
Hemodynamics   X 
If 
subsequen
t RHC 
performed  X 
If performed  
Chest x -ray 
(digital image)    X 
Post -op        
Videotape 
procedure   
 X 
if 
obtained        BP  Patient BP Diary **   
  Every morning > 40 minutes after taking BP meds and  while sitting.  
Collect whether HCP contacted for values out of range  
Medication  
BP Control     Consider Medication Guidelines; Report Medication Changes  Anticoagulation/Antiplatelet  Home INR 
monitoring     .  Collect weekly INR and prescribed Warfarin d osing.   
VerifyNow Aspirin 
Assay Laboratory 
Test  X 
<7 days 
pre-
implant  
preferred    X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
If seen for 
bleeding or 
thrombotic 
complication  
Enoxaparin 
bridging  and GI 
Bleed          X 
angiopoietin -
2 levels if 
collected  
*Two abbreviated echos are performed in the operating room (OR) : 1) TEE in OR after chest is open before going on cardio -
pulmonary bypass, and 2) TEE in OR post -implant , after coming off cardio -pulmonary bypass,  while chest is still open  
** Diary includes Doppler pressure, presenc e of palpable pulse, LVAD parameters, and dizziness symptoms  
 
G. Implant Procedure  Investigation  
 
 Implant Procedure Data Collection  
 
Detailed information on the implant procedure will be collected , if available, including:  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 10 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  • Surgical incision and heparinization  
• Arterial and venous cannulation, cardio -pulmonary bypass (CPB) time  
• Inflow cannula and outflow graft placement  
• Driveline placement and concomitant procedures  
• Pump parameters exiting t he OR  
• Pericardium After Implant  
 
 2-D Echo Color Doppler V elocimetry  
 
Echos will be collected via digital media and uploaded to Medtronic  via secure file transfer (e.g. Box) .  Medtronic will 
share echos with the vendor University of California San Diego (UCSD) so they can conduct 2D velocimetry evaluation 
using their proprieta ry software to evaluate flow in new ventricular imaging techniques.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 The 2D echo color 
Doppler velocimetry (echo -CDV) modality allows for non -invasive personalized risk assessment of hemolysis and blood 
clot formation inside the lef t ventricle. It is hypothesized that this new modality can be used to non -invasively 
charact erize the effect of left ventricular assist device support in LV hemodynamics in vivo leading to improved patient 
care.  
 
The overarching goal is to evaluate the uti lity of echo -2D color Doppler velocimetry to guide LVAD positioning, pump  
settings, and mini mize the risk for cerebr ovascular accident (CVA), pump thrombosis (PT) and hemolysis in the clinical 
setting.   The goals for this work are to:  
 
• Evaluate shear stre sses near cannula and their dependence on LVAD pump speed and cannula placement 
(assess how to minimize hemolysis risk)  
• Evaluate changes in blood transport efficiency and blood stasis as a consequence of LVAD placement (assess 
how to minimize stasis and r isk of thrombus formation)  
• Evaluate energetic and momentum efficiency created by flow patter ns (e.g. flywheel effect) as a potential 
outcome predictor  
Echo cardiogram s will be obtained when performed per standard institutional procedures, which is expected to occur at  
the following timepoints : 
 
• Baseline (prior to implant) – transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)  
• In OR, after chest is open prior to cardio -pulmonary bypass and prior to implantation - transesophageal 
Echocardiogram (TEE)  
• In OR, after implantation, off cardio -pulmonary bypass, while chest is still open - transesophage al 
Echocardiogram (TEE)  
• Prior to Discharge ( capture with Lavare off  for 5 minutes *)- transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)  
• Prior to Discharge ( capture with Lavare turned on  for 5 minutes *)- transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)  
• 3 months post -implant - transthora cic echocardiogram (TTE)  
 
Echo d ata will also be collected on a Case Report Form (CRF).   
 
 
2 Braun et al, Non -Invasive Mapping of Intraventricular Flow Patterns in Patients Treated with Left Ventricular Assist Devices.  Journal of Card iac Failure, Supp 24, Vol. 23 No. 8S Augus t 
2017  
3 Garcia, del A lamo et al, IEEE TransMedImag. 2010  
4 Hendababi et al Ann Biomed. Eng. 2013  
5 Bermejo et al,  Am J Physiology 2014  
6 Martinez -Legazpi et al,  JACC 2014  
7 Wong et al, J Biomech 2014  
8 Rossini et al, J Biomech 2016  
9 Rossini et al, Mecc anica 2016.  
10 Martine z-Legazpi et al JACC Img. 2017. US patent (pending) #15/360,783  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 11 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  *The echo at Discharge should also capture images with Lavare on and off (capture basic views wi th Lavare turned OFF 
for 5 minutes , then doing the views needed for Doppler velocimetry with Lavare ON for 5 minutes  to see the improved 
washing with Lavare turn ed on).  Lavare views should:  
 
o Evaluate shear stress near cannula  
o Evaluate changes in blood tr ansport efficiency and blood stasis  
o Evaluate energetic and momentum efficiency created by flow patterns (e.g. flywheel effect)  
For instructions on the echo image  capture, p lease reference the  most recent version  of the  Apogee Echocardiography 
Manual.  
 
 Ches t X-Ray (if performed)  
 
A digital image of the standard post -op chest x -ray (expected to occur on Post -op Day 1) will be collected and 
uploaded to Medtronic . 
 
 CT Scan  (if performed)  
 
If a CT scan is performed post implant, a digital image will be uploaded to Medtronic . 
 
 Right Heart Cath eterization (RHC) Hemodynamics Collection (if performed)  
 
If a subject undergoes a ny RHC  during the first year post -implant, information about right ventricular function 
will be collected  on the CRF , as well as any available baseline data from a previous RHC  prior to implant.    
 
 Videotape Procedure (if performed)  
 
A videotape of the procedure will be collected for any sites with capability and interest to videotape the 
procedure for training purposes , if performed .  If the pro cedure will be videotaped, the  recording will follow 
institutional procedure and must be sp ecified in the  subject ’s signed  consent.   The recording is recommended 
to capture the apical implant portion, including the c annulation sequence  and a ortic outflow anastomosis . 
 
H. Blood Pressure (BP) Management  Investigation   
 
Apogee  sites will manage blood pressure according to blood pressure management guidelines described in the DT PAS 
PSR platform addendum  and the  product labeling, which may include but is not limi ted to  the IFU and the product 
reference manuals.  In addition, Apogee  sites will  report items from the patient diary and consider medication guidelines 
for hypertensive patients.   The patient will check whether they have a palpable pulse at each check.  Diary recordings will 
be entered into the CRF , including Doppler p ressure, presence of palpable pulse, LVAD measurements and presence of 
dizziness . 
 
Inpatient  Medication Guidelines  
1.  Manage to target goal: 75-90 mmHg  (via Doppler/cuff method  once arteria l line pulled ) 
2.  Ensure patient and caregiver(s) properly trained on Doppler/cuff method prior to discharge  
3.  Medication guideline recommendations for management of hypertensive patients prior to discharge:  
In patients without AKI or significant renal dysfunction:  
• First line therapy: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor  (ACE -I) or Angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB)  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 12 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  • Second line therapy: Nitrates and/or Hydralazine, spironolactone, or Norvasc* (Amlodipine)  
• Third line therapy: Clonidine  
In patients w ith AKI or significant renal dysfunction:  
• First line therapy: Nitrates and/or Hydralazine or Norvasc* (Amlodipine)  
• Second line therapy: Clonidine  
*Note: Norvasc (Amlodipine) will not acutely lower blood pressure  
 
Outpatient  Diary Collection & Medication Guidelines  
Blood pressure monitoring (using Doppler with cuff)  
• Time of day: Measure every morning at least 40 minutes AFTER taking BP medication and during resting conditions, 
while sitting  
• Frequency: Measure daily.  If stab le after 1 month of daily monit oring, Investigator can consider reducing frequency 
to measuring 3 times per week ( e.g., every Monday/Wednesday/Friday schedule ).  Stable is defined as: no instances 
of BP>90 mmHg for three consecutive days and not a single o ccurrence of BP>110 mmHg (i.e. no instances of 
needing to call HCP)  
• Diary: Patient to record Doppler pressure , presence of palpable pulse or dizziness, and HVAD measurements from 
controller (i.e. power, flow, RPM, peak, trough) in diary and bring to site d uring scheduled visits.  Site w ill record 
these onto CRF.  
Patient should c all site if: 
• BP >90 for 3 consecutive days or if postural symptoms >48 hours (e.g. orthostatic reaction)  
• BP >110 for single timepoint  (take BP measurement twice before calling  to confirm  both show >110 at timepoin t) 
• BP <6 0 for single timepoint (take BP measurement twice befo re calling to confirm both show <60 at timepoint)  
• Patients with symptoms of hypotension (dizziness/syncope/presyncope/weakness) should be instructed to call even 
if values read normal.  
Medicati on guidelines for hypertensive patients post discharge  
• See alg orithm   

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 13 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
 
 
I. Anti-Coagulation  / Platelet Therapy  Investigation  
 
 Aspirin Management Plan  
 
The site will be asked to report the patient’s aspirin dose and  dose  start date at discharge and througho ut 
follow -up or when the patient presents with a bleeding or thrombotic event, including hemorrhagic or ischemic 
strokes.  Per the HeartWare HVAD System Instructions for Use, “In general, aspirin should be started at do ses 
>81 mg/day” (i.e., moderate -dose aspirin of 162mg or high -dose of 325mg, etc.).  The Medication Log captures 
aspirin dose and any changes.  
 
  VerifyNow Aspirin Assay Laborat ory Test  
 
A VerifyNow Aspirin Assay and CBC (if available) will be collected alo ng with the current aspirin dose and its start 
date at each scheduled follow -up visit through 12 months.  The assay and CBC (if available) will also be collected 
at all Unscheduled Visits, if the patient presents with a bleeding or thrombotic complication,  including 
hemorrhagic or ischemic st rokes.   See Appendix A for instructions on the use of the VerifyNow Aspirin assay, 
which is also available online at http://www.accumetrics.com/products/verifynow -system -platelet -reactivity -
test.  
 
The purpose of collec ting this information is to correlate  the VerifyNow Assay results with bleeding or 
thrombotic events.  Information from the assay collection may characterize the platelet reactivity and 
responsiveness to aspirin in patients supported by the HeartWare HVAD System, up to one -year post -implant.  It 
may also characterize whether platelet activity is greater in ventricular assist device (VAD) patients with 
frequent/severe thrombotic events as compared to those with less frequent/less severe thrombotic events, an d 

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 14 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  also whether levels of platelet act ivity/reactivity are reduced in VAD patients with hemorrhagic events 
compared to those without such events.  
 
During this study, sites should continue to follow their current institutional practice and IFU recommendation s 
for aspirin dose adjustments.  Test  results from the VerifyNow Assay should not be used to guide aspirin dosing 
unless this is the center’s current standard of practice.   
 
 Home INR Monitoring  
 
The HVAD IFU recommends anticoagulation with the recommended INR range of 2.0 – 3.0. Home INR 
mon itoring will be i nstitute d with  point of care testing for subjects on anticoagulation therapy with intent to 
improve time in therapeutic range . Where possible, INR monitoring equipment will be provided to subjects for  
weekly  INR monitoring . Sites will reco rd reported  INR values.   
 
The a nticoagulation management strategy/protocol will be site defined.  Sites should use a  warfarin 
management software as part of the dosing algorithm (sites can follow their VAD center protocol and manage 
warfarin dosing using their preferred software  algorithms).   Any suspected stroke should be confirmed with CT 
scan.  
 
 Enoxaparin Bridging Recommendation  (for stable ambulatory patients with sub -
therapeutic INR)  
 
It is recommended that ambulatory patients with an INR ≤ 1.7 be bri dged with enoxaparin (or fondaparinux) 
unless contraindicated, such as increased risk of bleeding. Details of data co llection and enoxaparin bridging 
recommendations include :   
 
o Collect previous history of gastrointestinal ( GI) bleeding, presence of nasal arteriovenous malformation 
(AVM), proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use,  bleeding location (upper/ lower / small bowel bleed) , and any 
endoscopic procedure(s) findings such as  video capsule endoscopy (VCE) and enteroscopy  
o Enoxaparin Dosing: For eGFR > 30 -- 1mg per kg bid rounded to the nearest 10mg  
o Dosing may be altered for p atients with increased risk of bleeding where half -dose dosing may be 
considered (0.5mg/kg)  
o A patient should  meet the following criteria to receive enoxaparin bridging:  
▪ Minimum weight: women  must weigh more than 45 kg; men more than 57 kg  
▪ Most recent plate let count > 100,000/UL  
▪ Ability to safely and accurately self -administer enoxaparin  
o In a p atient with a contraindication to enoxaparin, fondaparinux can be utilized:  
▪ Fondaparinux 7.5mg SC dai ly (wt 50 -100kg)  
▪ Fondaparinux 10mg SC daily (wt > 100mg)  
 
 GI bleeding  Recommendation  
 
Subject management strategies for GI bleeding (GIB) have recently been described , including an endoscopic 
algorithm  to eliminate sequential and overlapping procedures, an d to eliminate low -yield procedures;.11This 
algorithm was focused on maximizing procedures with the highest diagnostic and therapeutic yields while 
 
11 Axelrad et al, Limited usefulness of endoscopic evaluation in patients with continuous -flow left ventricular assist 
devices and gastrointestinal bleeding. J Heart Lung Transplant 2018;37:723 –732 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 15 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  minimizing low -yield procedures or  procedures  without  therapeutic  potential .  Table 3 shows the recommended 
algorithm, adapted from Axelrad 2018 et al .11 
Table 3: Proposed endoscopic algorithm for the management of GIB11 
 
 If Upper GI Bleed Source 
Suspected  If Lower GI Bleed Source 
Suspected  If Occult GI Bleed  
Signs / Symptoms  Melena, coffee -ground emesis, 
hematemesis  Hematochezia  Hem epositive brown stool, 
iron deficiency anemia  
Suggested Actions  Push Entero scopy (PE) as first 
endoscopic procedure rather than 
EGD with sequential push 
enteroscopy  Colonoscopy  • Initial medical 
management with blood 
products  
• and/ or temporary 
reduction or withholding 
of anti -thrombotic 
therapy followed by push 
enteroscopy i f majo r 
bleeding occurs as 
defined by the 
replacement of >2 units 
of pRBC over a 48 -hour 
period  
For all patients, propose further endoscopic evaluation for:  
• Hemodynamic instability or continued GIB despite administration of blood products  
• Persistent GIB despi te withholding or after resumption of lower dose anti -thrombotic 
therapies  
• Age-appropriate colon cancer screening  
 
Diagnostic testing for GI bleeds will  be collected.  If acquired by the center  due to recurrent GI bleeding , 
angiopoietin -2 levels will be c ollected.  
 
J. Objectives  and Statistical Methodology  
 
General Considerations  
 
Many ancillary objectives are not statistical in nature.  Ancillary objective analysis methods will be detailed in the 
Apogee Statistical Analysis Plan.  This is an observational study;  therefore,  no hypothesis tests are planned.  
 
The Apogee study might ob serve variations in data collection due to 1) variations in routine care practices across 
participating sites and 2) the COVID -19 pandemic. Apogee does not have statistical hypothes es; thus, available data will 
be analyzed.  
 
 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 16 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  
 Primary Apogee  Objective  
 
To characterize the 12 -month overall major adverse event rate  after the collective impact of Apogee  standardized 
protocols and best practices.  Major adverse events are defined to be o ccurrence of infection, bleeding, device 
malfunction, stroke or death.  
 
Endpoint Definition  
 
Events counted as “major adverse events” are:  
• Major infection as defined by Intermacs a dverse events  V5 
• Major bleeding as defined by Adverse Events  
• Device Malfunct ion as defined by Adverse Events  
• Any stroke (includes ischemic stroke , acute symptomatic  ICH, and clinically covert ischemic stroke or ICH ) as 
defined by Adverse Events as a sub -category of neurological dysfunction  
• All-cause death  
Analysis Methods  
 
Time to  first major adverse event will be analyzed using Kaplan -Meier methods, with Time 0 being exit from the 
operating room following implant.  Subjects will be censored upon the earliest of explant of the original device, 
study exit, last known follow -up, and the date of their 12 -month follow -up.  There is no planned form al 
comparison of the major AE rate, though it could be informally compared to results from other studies, or non -
Apogee subjects in DT PAS.  
 
Additionally, the individual types of major adverse events will be summarized.   
 
Only DT PAS subjects successfully  implanted with the HeartWare HVAD and enrolled in the Apogee Study will be 
included in this analysis.  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 17 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  •  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
•  
  
   
  
 
    
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
K. Sample Size Considerations  
 
No minimum or maximum sample size will be specified since objectives are characterizations only and intended for 
hypothesis -generating pu rposes.  
 
 
L. Report and Analysis Schedule  
 
A final report will be sent to sites at the conclusion of the study  with a summary of study results . 

Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 18 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
M. Addendum Version History  
 
Version  Version Date  Summary of Changes  & Rationale  Author(s)/Title  
1 27 Jul 2018  Initial Release  Verla Laager, Sr. Clinical 
Program Manager   
2 01 Dec 2020   General administrative changes through out the document :  
• Added MCS PSR platform base protocol and DT PAS 
addendum references and clarifications regarding the 
names of the protocols  
• Added table of contents, u pdated glossary, e xpanded 
abbreviations as appropriate and other minor editorial 
modifications, clarifications, and reformatting  
• Updated the synopsis to reflect updates to addendum  
Replace d Intermacs V3. 0 adverse event  terminology 
throughout the document to Intermacs V5.0 to align wi th DT  
PAS Ad dendum  
 
Secti on C - Updated Tab le 1 with updated contact information  
 
Section E.2 – Included  clarification that Apogee cohort 
approximation  is not limited to 100 patients   
 
Updated addendum  to align with modifications in the MCS PSR 
platform base protocol  and DT PAS addendum including:  
• Section E.2 – Updated number of sites from 55 to 
appro ximately 50 , as stated in DT PAS addendum  
• Section E.3 – Update in  the anticipated time to achieve 
full enrollment durat ion  
• Section F.1.  – Includ ed follow -up assessment  
• Section H – Replaced HVAD IFU with “prod uct labeling, 
which may include but is not limited to the IFU and  the 
product reference manuals ”  
Section G.1 – Added clarifications and rewording for clarity and 
removed section under 2D color velocim etry since it is included 
in the Apogee Echo cardiography  Man ual, which is a separate 
document  
 
Section J.4 – Added section to describe  known or  foreseeable  
factors that may compromise study outcomes to fulfill  
ISO14155:2020 requirement  
 
Sectio n M – New section to include addendum  version history  
 Alejandra Gracia, 
Clinical Research 
Specialist  
 
 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 19 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
APPENDIX A: VerifyNow Aspirin Assay: Sample Preparation  
 
The VerifyNow Aspirin Test Procedure should be performed according to manufacturer’s instructions provided below:  
Verify Now®  Aspirin Test Procedure  
Principle  
Aspirin affects platelet function by irreversibly inhibiting the cyclooxygenase -1 (COX -1) enzyme involved in the 
conversion of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A2, which ultimately activates the GPIIb/IIIa receptors involved  in 
platelet aggregation. If aspirin has produced the expected anti -platelet effect, such aggregation will not occur. The 
Verify Now Aspirin Test incorporates the agonist arachidonic acid to activate platelets.  The Aspirin Test is designe d to 
measure plate let function based upon the ability of activated platelets to bind fibrinogen.  Fibrinogen -coated 
microparticles aggregate in whole blood in proportion to the number of unblocked platelet GP IIb/IIIa receptors.  Light 
transmittance increa ses as activated p latelets bind and aggregate fibrinogen -coated beads.  The instrument measures 
this change in optical signal caused by aggregation.  
Materials Required  
 
• VerifyNow Instrument with Electronic Quality Control (EQC).  
• VerifyNow Aspirin Test Device (reagent device ), 10 (PN: 85053 -10) or 25 (PN: 85053), individually sealed in foil 
pouches. Each test device contains lyophilized fibrinogen -coated beads, platelet agonist, peptide, bovine serum 
albumin, stabilizer, and buffer.  
• Store test devices at  2°C to 25°C (36° -77°F ) Store at room temperature.  
• Greiner Bio -One Vacuette® 2ml blood collection tubes containing 3.2% sodium        citrate. Greiner Catalog # 
454322 or Nipro catalog #NP -CW0185 -1 blood collection tube (1.8ml) containing Sodium Citrate (3 .2%).  
• Phlebotomy suppl ies, including needle of 21 gauge or larger.  
• Wet Quality Control (VerifyNow Assay WQC), P/N 85047, Box of 6 Diluent Tubes and 6 Pellets.  QC materials are 
stable at room temperature until the expiration date indicated on the tube or p ellet container.  
Speci men Collection and Specifications  
 
Specimen Type : Whole blood collected from venous or arterial sites must be collected in or immediately transferred to 
Greiner 2.0 mL partial fill blue top tubes containing 3.2% Sodium Citrate.  The t ube must be filled to its intended whole 
blood capacity (indicated by small black line).  
      - Samples should be collected between 2 and 30 hours after ingestion of aspirin.  
      - Blood must set a minimum of 30 minutes after collection before test but no longer than 4 hours . 
 
Instructions for Sample Collection Directly Into Vacuum Collection Tubes:  
1. Whole blood may be collected from venous or arterial sites using a 21 gauge or larger needle in partial fill 3.2% 
citrate vacuum collection tube.  Blood samples should be obtained  from an extremity free of peripheral venous 
infusions.  
2. Perform the phlebotomy and obtain the appropriate volume of blood in the sample tube following a discard tube of 
at least 2 mL of whole blood.  DO NOT DRAW A SAMPLE FOR ANY P LATELET FUNCTION TEST AFTE R A TUBE THAT 
CONTAINS EDTA (PURPLE TOP).  Always draw the sample tube(s) for the Verify Now Test first.  
3. Gently invert the citrated tube containing whole blood 5 times immediately after collection to mix the blood with 
the anticoag ulant and prevent clotting . 
4. Samples must be kept at room temperature.  Do not refrigerate, freeze or centrifuge the samples to be used for the 
Verify Now  Test.  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 20 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  5. Samples that are difficult to obtain may hemolyze or clot.  Samples that are hemolyzed or clotted  should be 
recollected.  
 
Special Instructions if blood is obtained from an indwelling catheter:  
1. Whole blood samples that are obtained from an indwelling catheter should be collected after sufficient discard 
(approximately 5 mL) has been drawn to clear the line.  
2. Ensure indwelling c atheter is free of clots.  
3. When using a syringe, transfer blood to the appropriate blood collection tube immediately after collection.  
4. Immediately gently invert the citrated tube containing whole blood at least 5 times to mix the blood with the 
anticoagulan t and prevent clotting.  
5. Samples must be kept at room temperature.  Do not refrigerate, freeze or centrifuge the samples to be used for the 
Verify Now  Test.  
6. Samples that are difficult to obtain may hemolyze or clot.  Samples that are hemolyzed or clotted sho uld be 
recollected.  
 
Sample Stability and Storage : The sample must be incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes prior to testing and 
can be used up to 4 hours after collection if stored at room temperature (18 to 25 C).  Do not refrigerate or freeze 
specimen . 
 
Sample Precautions : Collection of the blo od specimen should be performed with care to avoid hemolysis or 
contamination by tissue fluids.  Samples with evidence of clotting must not be used.  
 
Interfering Substances : 
Laboratory testing was performed  to determine the effects of several classes of dr ugs on VerifyNow Aspirin Test results. 
The following medications may cause a change in platelet function. The following information should be considered for 
patients who are to be tested with the VerifyNow Aspirin Test.  
 
P2Y12 Inhibitors:   Plavix®, Ticlid ®, and Effient® are commonly prescribed in conjunction with aspirin.  While infrequent, 
these agents may cause a reduction of ARU in some patients.  However, the effect of the P2Y12 inhibitors did not affec t 
the categorization of patients taking aspirin as  having platelet dysfunction (i.e. ARU < 550) due to aspirin ingestion.  The 
duration of inhibitory effects varies among these P2Y12 inhibitors.  Average durations are listed below:  
• Plavix (up to 5 Days)  
• Ticlid (up to 5 Days)  
• Effient (up to 10 days)  
 
Other  Anti -Platelet Agents:  These agents can all inhibit platelet function and may result in a decreased ARU value 
independent of the effects of aspirin. The duration of inhibitory effects varies among drugs. Av erage duration times are 
listed for each drug . 
• Aggrenox (10 days)  
• Persantine (12 hours)  
• Pletal/Cilostazol (12 hours)  
 
NSAIDs : Like aspirin (ASA), NSAIDs have been documented to inhibit platelet function.  Unlike ASA, NSAIDs do not 
irreversibly inhibit plat elet function. This may lead to less platelet  inhibition by ASA if the NSAID and ASA are taken at 
the same time. Average duration times for these inhibitory effects are given for each drug.  
 
• Ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil) (8 hours)  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 21 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  • Naproxen (Aleve, Anaprox, Nap relan, Naprosyn) (24 hours)  
• Diclofenac (Volta ren, Cataflam) (24 hours)  
• Indocin (24 hours)  
• Feldene (50 hours)  
 
GP IIb/IIIa Inhibitors: Patients who have been administered tirofiban (Aggrastat®) or eptifibatide (Integrilin®) within two 
days, or abciximab (Re oPro®) within two weeks should not be tested.  
Other classes of commonly used drugs were tested with no significant effect on VerifyNow Aspirin Test performance 
(antioxidants, ACE inhibitors, antiarrhythmics, anticoagulants, antidepressants, insulin, allopu rinol, alcohol, beta 
blockers, bronchodilator s, calcium channel blockers, gastrointestinal medications, betamethasone, lovastatin, and the 
thyroid hormone L -thyroxine).  The thrombolytic agent streptokinase showed a measurable inhibition of platelet 
functi on, as measured by the VerifyNow Aspirin Test . 
Laboratory and clinical testing was performed to assess the effect of the levels of several blood constituents:  
Test performance was not affected by hematocrit values between 29 -56%, platelet count values of ≥  92,000 platelets 
per microliter or moderate to extensive blood hemolysis induced by physical manipulation. The degree of hemolysis was 
determined by visual ex amination of plasma from centrifuged samples collected concurrently with VerifyNow Aspirin 
Test samples.  
No significant interference was obser ved on samples studied with triglyceride concentrations up to 577 mg/dL.  
Fibrinogen levels between 164 -529 mg/dL w ere tested with the VerifyNow Aspirin Test. No known relationship exists 
between performance of VerifyNow Aspirin Test and fibrinogen levels.  
 
Handling Conditions  
 
The sample must be incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature prior to testing.  If testin g is delayed, the sample can 
be stored at room temperature (18 to 25 C) for up to 4 hours.  Do not refrigerate or freeze specimen .  The sample must 
be handled in accordance with all policies and procedures relating to the collection, processing and dispos al of 
biohazardous samples.  
 
Reagent Storage and Handling  
Reagents Required:  
1. All required reagents are contained within the indiv idually packaged VerifyNow Aspirin Test device.  Each test device 
contains lyophilized fibrinogen -coated beads, platelet agoni st, peptide, bovine serum albumin, stabilizer, and buffer.  
2. Each individually sealed test device contains the lot number and expira tion date stamped on the foil pouch.  
3. Once removed from its foil pouch, the test device must be handled only by the finger grip  and used immediately.  
 
Receipt of Shipment:  
1. When a shipment of kits is opened, check the temperature indicator located on the outside of the box.  If the 
temperature indicator is activated, this indicates exposure to elevated temperatures and a VerifyNow Level 2 WQC 
should be performed.  
2. If the Level 2 WQC result does not fall within the accepted range on the package insert, call Accumetrics Technical 
Support at (800) 643 -1640.  
 
 
Storage Temperature : 
1. Store Test Devices at 2° C to 25° C (36° - 77° F).  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 22 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  2. If ref rigerated, allow test devices to reach room temperature, 18° C to 25° C (64° -77° F), prior to use.  
3. Test devices should remain sealed in the foil pouch until ready for use to prevent damage by humidity.  
 
Reagent Quality Control : 
1. The manufacturer recommends  that a Level 2 WQC be run once each time a new lot or a new shipment of 
VerifyNow Aspirin Test kits is received.  A Level 2 Qu ality Control should also be performed on each lot of test 
devices whenever a problem is suspected with the temperature indicator  of a newly received lot of test devices.  
2. Level 1 and Level 2 Quality Control must also be performed at the frequency specified .  Please refer to the Quality 
Control section below for additional instructions.  
 
Calibration and Calibration Verification  
1. The V erify Now  Aspirin Test devices are calibrated by the manufacturer at the factory.  This calibration information is 
contained in the barcode on the pouch of each test device.  
2. The barcode must be scanned whenever a new lot of test devices is to be tested.  Th e system  will not allow a test 
device to proceed without the lot number calibration information entered into the system.  If a new lot of test 
devices is being used, the instrument will prompt the user by displaying a barcode icon after the test device is 
inserted . 
a. At prompt, place the test device pouch approximately one inch in front of the barcode reader found on 
the left side of the instrument, so that the light shines on the center of the barcode.  
b. An audible beep will be heard when the instrument receiv es the r equired information.  
c. The user needs only to perform this action once per lot.  
3. No additional calibration is performed by the user.  
4. Calibration verification is performed by the use of WQC materials with every new lot of reagent and at specified 
time interval s, with periodic review of QC results by the laboratory technical supervisor.  Tests of platelet reactivity 
are non -linear, and no additional calibration verification is required.  
 
Quality Control Procedures  
Electronic Quality Control :  The Electro nic Qual ity Control Device (EQC) is supplied with each instrument and must be 
run each day of use prior to reporting patient results.  This device verifies instrument optics, reagent mixing and 
instrument pneumatics.  Refer to the Verify Now  System User Man ual for additional information.  
1. If required, enter Operator ID and Password.  
2. The EQC Device is located in a storage port on the right side of the instrument.  
3. Choose QC by pressing the QC button from the main screen.  
4. Open instrument cover.  Remove the EQC D evice fr om the storage port, open instrument cover and insert the EQC 
Device into the instrument.  Close instrument cover.  
5. EQC will automatically run.  
6. Open instrument cover and remove the EQC Device and return it to the storage port.  Close instrument cove r.  A 
result of PASS or FAIL will be displayed.  
7. If the EQC Device result is “FAIL”, repeat the EQC.  If the result is “PASS”, continue with patient testing.  If the EQC 
result is “FAIL” after the second analysis, use the cleaning cartridge as described in the Main tenance Section below 
and rerun the EQC.  
8. Print result and keep as source document.  
 
Wet Quality Control :   The manufacturer recommends that a Level 2 WQC be run once each time a new lot or a new 
shipment of Verify Now  Aspirin Test kits is received.   The We t Quality Control (WQC) procedure must also be performed 
whenever a problem is suspected with the temperature indicator of a newly received lot of test devices, whenever a 
problem is suspected with the Verify Now  System, and as part of the laborator y qualit y control program.  
 
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 23 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  Sample Preparation:  
1. All control material should be stored at room temperature (18 to 30 C). 
2. Do not open the vial containing the Level 2 Control pellet until immediately prior to use.  
3. Control Level 1 is ready for use as provid ed. 
 
Wet Quality Control:  
1. If required, enter Operator ID and Password.  
2. Press the QC Icon key.  The Insert Cartridge  screen will display.  
3. Open the foil pouch and remove the test device.  The test device should only be handled by the finger grip.  
4. Remov e the protective sheath from the test device needle by pulling directly up on the sheath.  Do not twist the 
sheath as this may remove the needle.  
5. Open instrument cover.  Insert the test device at the instrument prompt.  If this is a new device lot, the Bar  Code 
prompt will display.  At prompt, place the test device pouch approximately one inch in front of the barcode reader 
found on the left side of the instrument, so that the light shines on the center of the barcode.  An audible beep will 
signal that the instru ment has read the bar code, and the testing will continue.  
6. Prepare the WQC Sample.  
a. Level 1 : Test Control Level 1 is ready for use as provided.  
b. Level 2 : Remove the stopper from the tube containing the Level 2 Control diluent by twisting and pulling th e 
cap simultaneously.  
c. Add the Level 2 control pellet to the Level 2 control diluent tube and replace the stopper by pressing and 
turning simultaneously.  
d. Invert the tube gently 5 times to mix.  
7. At the prompt, insert the sample onto the device needle.  Close instru ment cover.  The test will automatically begin.  
CAUTION :  The sample is under pressure once it is inserted onto the device needle.  DO NOT REMOVE the test 
device or control tube from the instrument until the test is completed.  
8. The instrument will run the test and display the result.  
9. Print or record the result and return to the Main Screen.  
10. Open instrument cover.  Remove the test device by grasping the device finger grip and pulling straight up.  Do not 
remove the sample or diluent t ube from the device.  Cl ose instrument cover.  
11. Discard the used device and quality control tube as biohazardous waste.  
12. The instrument is ready to test the next sample.  
13. Determine that the WQC result is within the acceptable range of values printed on the tes t device pouch provided 
with the test.  
14. If the WQC is in control, proceed with the test of patient samples.  If the WQC is out of range, follow the procedure 
established by your institution.  
15. Print result and keep as source document.  
 
System (Internal) Quality Control for Each Sam ple Tested : 
1. Each time a test device is run on the Verify Now  System, the instrument verifies the test device expiration date, 
sample filling, optics performance, correct fluid transfer, and proper mixing.  
2. The system co ntrols prevent the operator from runnin g an expired test device.  
3. The system also detects certain other operator errors, such as placing the test device or the sample in the 
instrument at the wrong time, or removing the test device before the test is comple te.  These controls prevent 
reporting o f an inaccurate test result.  
4. The test device internal controls in the Verify Now  Aspirin Test device can detect failures of the reagent system due 
to improper storage or handling conditions.  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 24 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  5. The internal controls will flag an improperly collected or mishand led blood sample, or a blood sample with certain 
types of interfering substances.  
6. The test device internal controls detect errors from the reagent system, adverse environmental conditions, and 
additional types of oper ator errors.  
 
RECALL OF EQC  OR WQC  RESULTS: 
1. The last 100 EQC and WQC results can be recalled at any time.  You may scroll by using the arrow keys on the 
keypad.  
2. Press the Maintenance button from the Main Screen.  
3. Press the Next arrow 3 times to advance to the Maintenance Submenu where folders ar e displayed with the words 
EQC (2nd button) and WQC (3rd button).  
4. Press the appropriate button to recall the EQC or WQC results.  
5. Press the back arrow to return to the Main Screen.  
 
Testing Patient Samples  
 
1. Refer to the VerifyNow System User Manual for comp lete operating instructions.  
2. Power on the instrument.  This will initiate the following startup checks:  
a. A system program and data memory check to ensure memory integrity;  
b. A system temperature check  to ensure the test device warming plate reaches and mainta ins the proper 
temperature;  
c. A system check of proper operating voltages; and  
d. A system intra -communication validation.  
3. Perform Electronic Quality Control if one has not been performed within the req uired timeframe.  The following 
checks are performed:  
a. Instr ument optics.  
b. Pneumatics system that draws the sample into the test device and moves it into the test device for 
reaction and measurement.  
c. Reagent mixing parameters and sample data acquisition.  
d. Correct calibration parameters.  
4. If required, enter Operator ID  and Password.  
5. If required, enter the Patient ID.  
6. Open the foil pouch and remove the test device. Test devices should only be handled by the finger grip.  
7. Remove the needle’s protective sheath by pu lling directly up on the sheath.  Do not twist the sheath a s this may 
remove the needle.  
8. Open instrument cover.  Insert the test device at the instrument prompt.  If this is a new device lot, the Bar Code 
prompt will display.  At prompt, place the test dev ice pouch approximately one inch in front of the barcode re ader 
found on the left side of the instrument, so that the light shines on the center of the barcode.  An audible beep will 
signal that the instrument has read the bar code, and the test will conti nue.  
9. At the instrument prompt, invert the sample tube at le ast 5 times, and insert onto the needle in the test device. 
Close instrument cover.  CAUTION: Sample is under pressure. Do not remove sample tube from test device. Only 
remove test device from the instrument after the test is completed.  
10. The instrument will  run the test and display the result in less than five minutes.  
11. Record or print the sample result.  
12. Open instrument cover.  Remove the test device by grasping the device finger grip and pulling straight up.  Do not 
remove the tube from the test device.  Clo se instrument cover.  
13. Dispose of the entire test device/sample tube in appropriate biohazard waste container.  
14. The instrument is ready to test the next sample.  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 25 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential   
Recall Patient Results:  In order to enable the recall of specific patient results, the instrumen t must be configured to 
require a Patient ID to be entered before each test device is performed.  
 
1. If required, enter Operator ID and Password.  
2. CHOOSE THE SECON D OPTION (BUTTON NEXT TO FILE FOLDER) FROM THE MAIN SCREEN.  
3. Enter the Patient ID, and press the a rrow for Next.  
4. An Aspirin Test result is indicated by an “a”.  
5. Record or print the results.  The most recent result is displayed, along with the date stamp indi cating the date and 
time the test was performed.  To toggle to other results, use the left and ri ght arrow key.  
6. If you choose the PRINT ALL icon, everything displayed below the blinking cursor will print.  
 
Reported Results  
Test results are reported as Aspi rin Reaction Units (ARU), which are calculated as a function of the rate of aggregation. 
Interpre tation of results is based on the following assigned cutoffs:  
 
Interpretation of Results:  
≥550 ARU - Platelet dysfunction consistent with aspirin has not been detected  
< 550 ARU - Platelet dysfunction consistent with aspirin has been detected  
Results should be interpreted in conjunction with other laboratory and clinical data available to the c linician.  
 
Reference Range : 
The reference range for pre -aspirin samples is 620 -672 ARU.  
 
Test Limitations and Method Notes  
1. To minimize problems during specimen handling, test performance and reporting of test results, the area where 
testing is performed m ust contain the proper workb ench space, ventilation, utilities, and supplies necessary for 
conducting the type and volume of testing performed.  
2. Place the Verify Now  instrument on a clean, firm, level bench top, which is free of excessive vibration from 
equipment such as a centrifuge.   Provide adequate space around the instrument to access instrument components 
and be sure the area is free from exposure to unusual temperature fluctuations.  
3. Do not locate the Verify Now  instrument in an area next to a source of  heat, air conditioning or i n direct sunlight.  Do 
not place the instrument under an incandescent light source.  
4. The Verify Now  instrument operates at ambient temperature (18 -32C or 64 -90F) and up to 85% humidity without 
condensation.  
5. The lyophilized agen t is hygroscopic and can degrade after prolonged exposure to room air. Therefore, the test 
device should be used shortly after removal from the foil pouch.  
6. Store reagents and quality control material according to the package directions.  The test devices c an be stored 
either at ro om temperature or in the refrigerator.  
7. Delays in testing or difficulty of specimen collection may result in spurious values.  Do not test any sample that is 
clotted, too old, hemolyzed or that has been mishandled or mislabeled.  
8. Whe n results are not within the expected limits, the possibility of improper sample collection or handling should be 
investigated. Repeat the test using a new test device and sample.  
Version 2  Apogee Addendum Plan                Page 26 of 26 
01DEC2020   Medtronic Confidential  9. Patients with inherited platelet disorders such as von Willebrand Factor Def iciency, Glanzmann Thromb asthenia and 
Bernard -Soulier Syndrome have not been studied with the VerifyNow Aspirin Test.  
10. Patients receiving the following anti -platelet agents may not be tested with VerifyNow Aspirin Test, based on 
documented interference tes ting results: GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors, dipyridamole, clopidogrel, non -steroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) which inhibit COX -1 and/or COX -1, COX -2 enzymes (ibuprofen, naproxen, diclofenac, 
indomethacin, and piroxicam).  
11. The performance of VerifyNow Aspi rin Test on patients with  acquired non -drug induced platelet abnormalities is not 
known . 
12. The performance of VerifyNow Aspirin Test on patients with acquired non -drug induced platelet abnormalities is not 
known.  
13. Patients who have been treated with Glycoprot ein IIb/IIIa inhibitor dr ugs should not be tested until platelet function 
has recovered. This time period is approximately 14 days after discontinuation of drug administration for abciximab 
(ReoPro) and up to 48 hours for eptifibatide (Integrilin) and tiro fiban (Aggrastat). The pl atelet function recovery time 
varies among individuals and is longer for patients with renal dysfunction.  
14. The VerifyNow Aspirin Test results should be interpreted in conjunction with other clinical and laboratory data 
available to  the clinician.  
Diagnosti c Error Display Messages:  
 
Under certain conditions, a test run may be aborted. In this case, the instrument will display an Error or Attention 
message. Please refer to the VerifyNow User Manual for a more detailed explanation of t hese messages.  
 
Maintenance  
1. The Maintenance and Setup Icon is used to setup users, change the date and time, recall QC results, network the 
instrument, set patient ID requirements and for troubleshooting.  This function should only be performed by users 
with proper traini ng and autho rity.  Refer to the User Manual for additional information.  
2. Keep the surface of the instrument clean with any commonly used laboratory disinfectant specified in the User 
Manual.  Accumetrics recommends that the exterior surface be cleaned no le ss than mont hly. 
3. Cleaning Device:  Once every other week, or if the EQC Device fails twice.  REMOVE THE TAPE FROM THE CLEANING 
DEVICE AS INDICATED.  Place the device in the test well for 5 seconds and remove.  Dispose of the single use 
cleaning device.  Re run the elec tronic QC device.  If the EQC does not pass, call Accumetrics Technical Support at 1 -
800-643-1640.  
4. If the EQC device becomes contaminated, wipe with a damp cloth.  
5. Replace the fan filter yearly (see Section 10.2 of the User Manual for additional  information ). 
6. Other than fuse replacement, the external power cord, or parts discussed above no other user -serviceable parts 
exist on the Verify Now  Instrument. Contact Accumetrics Customer Support at 1 -800-643-1640  if further service is 
required.  
 
Referen ces: 
  
1. Verif yNow Assay WQC, Package Insert, P/N 14349  
2. VerifyNow Aspirin Test, Package Insert, P/N 14314  
3. VerifyNow System User Manual, P/N 14340  
 