Title: ACTIVATE -AKI: Activated Vitamin D for the Prevention and Treatment of Acute Kidney 
Injury  
 
ClinicalTrial s.gov  Registration Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date:  December 25, 2018  
 
 BRIGHAM AND  
WOMEN’S HOSPITAL  BRIGHAM HEALTH  
HARVARD  
MEDICAL SCHOOL  
 
 
 
ACTIVATE -AKI: 
Activated Vitamin D for the Prevention and Treatment of 
Acute Kidney Injury  
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed Protocol  
December 25, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary Investigators:  
 
David E. Leaf, MD, MMSc  
Assistant Professor of  Medicine, Harvard Medical School  
Associate Physician, Division of Renal Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
 
Sushrut S. Waikar, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School  
Constantine L. Hampers, MD Distinguished Chair in Renal Medi cine  
Director of Translational Research and Ambulatory Services, Division of Renal Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 2 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
ABBREVIATIONS ……………………………………………… ……… ……………………… …3 
TRIAL SUMMARY…………………………………………………………………………… …...4 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE…………………………………………………… ….5 
   A.  Historical background……………………………………………………………………... .5 
   B.  Previous pre -clinical and clinical studies supporting the research…………… ……… .6 
   C.  Justifica tion of agents……………………………………………………………………... .7 
   D.  Justification of dosing regimens………………………………………………………….. .8 
   E.  Safety data on 25D (calcif ediol)…………………………………………………………...11  
   F.  Safety data on 1,25D (calci triol)…………………………………………………………..13  
   G.  Rationale and potential benefits to patients/society ……………………………………14  
II. SPECIFIC AIMS……………………………………………… ……………………………….15  
III. SUBJECT SELECT ION………………………………………………………………………16  
A. Inclusion and exclusion criteria………………………………………………………… ...16 
B. Source of subject s………………………… ……………………………………………….16  
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT………………………………………………………………….. .17 
A. Methods of enrollment………… …………………………………………………………..17  
B. Procedures for obtaining infor med consent……………………………………………..17  
C. Treatment assignment and randomization …………………………………………… …18  
V. STUDY PROCEDU RES………………………………………………………………………19  
   A.  Parameters to be measured……………………………………………………………….1 9 
   B.  Drugs to be use d……………………………………………………………………………20  
   C.  Devices to be us ed…………………………………………………………………………21  
   D.  Procedures/surgical inter vention s………………………………………………………...21  
   E.  Data to be collected……………………………………………………………………… ...21 
   F.  Dosing modifications………………………………………………………………………. .21 
   G. Adaptive trial design……………………………………………………………………… …21 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS…………………………………………… ………………… .22 
A. Specific data variables being collected for the study………………………………… ...22 
B. Study end points………………………………………………………………………… ....22 
C. Statistical methods……………………………………………………………………… ….22 
D. Power analysis…………………………………………………………………………… …22 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS…………………………………………………………… ….21 
A. Complications of surgical and non -surgical procedures……………………………… ..23 
B. Drug side effects and toxicities………………………………………………………… ....23 
C. Confidentiality……………………………………………………………………………… .25 
D. Device complications/malfunctions…………………………………………………… ….25 
E. Psychosocial risks……………………………………………………………………… …..25 
F. Radiation risks…………………………………………………………………………… ....25 
VIII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS…………………………………………………………… …….....26 
A. Potential benefits to participating individuals………………………………………… ....26 
B. Potential benefits to society…………………………………………………………… .....26 
IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE………………………………………… …..27 
A. Independent monitoring of source data………………………………………………. ....27 
B. Safety monitoring……………………………………………………………………… ……27 
C. Outcomes monitoring…………………………………………………………………… ….27 
D. Adverse event reporting………………………………………………………………… …27 
X. REFERENCES……………………………………………………………………………… …28 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 3 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
1,25D = 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D  
25D = 25 -hydroxyvitamin D  
AKI = Acute Kidney Injury  
APACHE = Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation  
AUC = Area Under the Curve  
BWH = Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
CKD = Chronic Kidney Disease  
DSMB = Data safety and monitoring  board  
HED = Human Equivalent Dose  
ICU = Intensive Care Unit  
ESRD = End Stage Renal Disease  
MCT Oil = Medium Chain Triglyceride Oil  
NIDDK = National Institute of Diabete s and Digestive Kidney Diseases  
NIH = National Institutes of Health  
PBMC = Peripheral B lood Mononuclear Cells  
PHRC = Partners Human Research Committee  
RCT = Randomized Controlled Trial  
RRT = Renal Replacement Therapy  
SCr = Serum creatinine  
SOFA = Sequential Organ Failure Assessment  
ULN = Upper limit of normal  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 4 
 
TRIAL SUMMARY  
 
Title 
Activated Vitamin D for the Prevention and Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury  (ACTIVATE -AKI) 
 
Objective  
To assess the efficacy of calcifediol (25 -hydroxyvitamin D [ 25D]) and calcitriol (1,25 -
dihydroxyvitamin D [ 1,25D ]) in preventing and reducing the severity of acute kidney injury (AKI) 
in critically ill pati ents.  
 
Hypothesis  
Compared to placebo, t reatment with calcifediol  or calcitriol will reduce the occurrence and 
severity of renal injury, as determined by a composite of  time-averaged daily serum creatinine 
(SCr) levels for 7 days, renal replacement therapy (RRT), and death.  
 
Study Design  
ACTIVATE -AKI is a 3 -arm, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, phase II trial (n=150)  
of vitamin D metabolites  in critically ill patients at risk of  severe AKI.  W e will randomly assign 
participants in a 1:1:1 fashion to receive  calcifediol, calcitriol, or placebo.  Study drugs will be 
administered on a daily basis for 5 days, and will be administered either orally or via 
naso/orogastric tube.  
 
Study Sites  
ACTIVATE -AKI is a single -center study that will recruit patients from intensive care units at 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH).  
 
Funding  
ACTIVATE -AKI is approved and funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) / National 
Institute of Diabete s and Digestive Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) grant K23DK106448  (to David 
Leaf, MD ). 
 
Registration on clinicaltrials.gov  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 5 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
A.  Historical background  
 
Overview of AKI 
Acute kidney injury ( AKI) is associated with markedly increased hospital length of stay, 
mortality, and cost.1-3  Despite years of investigation, development of therapies for the 
prevention and treatment of AKI have been largely unsuccessful.  Therefore, investigation of 
novel therapeutic targets is needed.  
 
Overview of vitamin D metabolism  
Vitamin D is derived from dietary sources and sunlight -induced cutaneous synthesis, and is 
converted to 25 -hydroxyvitamin D (25D) in the liver  (Figure 1 ).4  25D is converted to its 
biologically active form, 1,25 -
dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25D), in the 
kidneys and other tissues by 1 -α 
hydroxylase.5  The conversion of 
25D to 1,25D is tightly regulated by 
two opposing hormones: 
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which 
stimulates 1 -α hydroxylase, and 
fibroblast growth factor -23 
(FGF23), which inhibits 1 -α 
hydroxylase.  FGF23 also 
stimu lates 24 -hydroxylase, which 
inactivates both 25D and 1,25D.6 
 
Non-classical actions of 1,25D  
In addition to maintaining calcium 
and phosphate homeostasis, a 
variety of non -classical effects of vitamin D metabolites are also appreciated.  1,25D binds to 
the intracellular vitamin D receptor (VDR),  which is  express ed nearly ubiquitously .7  This 
complex then translocates into the nucleus where it binds to specific DNA sequence elements in 
vitamin D -responsive genes, ultim ately influencing the expression of over 200 target genes.8  
These target genes affect a variety of critical physiologic functions  relevant to AKI,  including 
immune/inflammatory pathways and vascular endothelial cell activation .9 
 
Interventional studies of vitamin D metabolites for AKI prevention in humans  
Despite promising data on vitamin D metabolites  as therapeutic agents  in animal models  of AKI 
(summarized below) , as well as epidemiologic s tudies from our group10 and others11-13 
suggest ing that deficien cies in  vitamin D metabolite levels  contribute to mortality in critical 
illness , no interventional study has evaluated vitamin D metabolites as novel therapeutic agents 
for AKI prevention /treatment  in humans.  We recently published the results of a pilot r andomized 
controlled trial (RCT) evaluating the immunomodulatory effects of a single 2 µg IV dose of 
calcitriol ( 1,25D ) in critically ill patients  with severe sepsis .14  We found that calcitriol led to 
increased leukocyte mRNA expression of IL -10 and HO -1, which have important 
antiinflammatory effects and prevent AKI in animal models.15-19  The current study will expand 
on these findings by comprehensively evaluating the renoprotective effects of two vitamin D 
metabolites – calcifediol ( 25D) and calcitriol ( 1,25D ) – in critically ill patients at risk of AKI.  
 
 

Version date 12/25/18;  Page 6 
 
B.  Previous pre -clinical and clinical studies supporting the proposed research  
 
Overview  
The “non -classical” effects of vitamin D metabolites on inflamma tion have been demonstrated in 
numerous in vitro  studies.  Further, the beneficial effects of vitamin D metabolites on AKI 
prevention have been demonstrated in numerous animal models.  Finally, extensive safety data 
on vitamin D metabolites are available from clinical trials in humans.  
 
In vitro studies of 1,25D and inflammation  
In vitro s tudies have demonstrated potent antiinflammatory effects of 1,25D.  Treatment of T 
lymphocytes , monocytes, and other cells with  1,25D downregulates proinflammatory cytokines 
(e.g., IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α),20-25 upregulates antiinflammatory cytokines /enzymes  (e.g., IL -10, heme 
oxygenase -1 [HO -1]), 26-31 and increases the frequency of antiinflammatory T regulatory cells 
(Tregs).32-34  Upregulation of IL -10, HO -1, and Tregs protect against AKI in animal models.15-19, 
35-37 
 
1,25D and AKI in animal models  
In rodents, 1,25D attenuates renal injury induc ed by a wide variety of insults/toxins including 
ischemia,38-40 gentamicin,41 cyclosporine,42 cisplatin ,43 glomerulonephritis,44 and obstruction.45   
 
Clinical studies of vitamin D metabolites in non-critically ill patients  
Numerous RCTs have evaluated vitamin D metabolites as therapeutic agents across a wide 
variety of clinical settings , and a re reviewed elsewhere as meta -analyses.46-49  While these 
studies have reported mixed findings with respect to efficacy, they ha ve demonstrated a very 
favorable safety profile (discussed further below under sections on safety).  
 
Clinical studies of vitamin D metabolites in critically ill patients  
A recently published RCT evaluated the effects of a large (540,000 I.U.) oral dose of vitamin D 
versus placebo among 492 critically ill patients.  While the study found no effect on the primary 
outcome of hospital length of stay, a pre -specified subgroup analysis conducted in patients with 
severe vitamin D deficiency (defined as plasma 25D levels < 12 ng/ml) found a significant 
reduction in hospital mortality.50  Importantly, no change in mean total serum calcium levels was 
observed in the vitamin D versus placebo groups at the two follow -up time points (days 3 and 7) 
where it was tested, and only a single patient in the vitamin D group developed hypercalcemia, 
with a total serum calcium level of 12.0 mg/dl.  
 
Preliminary data  from our pilot RCT of calcitriol  
We recently published the results of a pilot RCT of calcitriol  (1,25D ).14  We randomly assigned 
67 critically ill patients with severe sepsis to receive either a single 2 µg IV dose of calcitriol or 
placebo.  Although the primary endpoint of plasma cathelicidin levels was null, patients 
randomized to calcitriol ha d higher IL -10 (P=0.03) and HO -1 (P=0.004) leukocyte mRNA 
expression at 24h.  Additionally, we found a graded relation between change in 1,25D levels 
and change in IL -10 (P=0.004) and HO -1 (p<0.001)  expression .  No hypercalcemia or other 
adverse events were observed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 7 
 
C.  Justification of agents  
 
25D vs. 1,25D  
Despite promising data on the antiinflammatory and renoprotective effects of 1,25D in preclinical 
models, it is unknown whether administration of vitamin D metabolites to critically ill patients will 
have beneficial immunomodulatory effects, and whether these effects will translate into 
improved clinical outcomes.  Addit ionally, it is unknown whether 1,25D or its precursor, 25D, will 
have greater efficacy in humans.  While 1,25D is the metabolite used in most preclinical studies, 
it is unclear whether the concentrations of 1,25D used in vitro  (1 to 100 nM in most studies) can 
be achieved in humans.  Additionally, although 1,25D is the “active” metabolite of vitamin D, it 
circulates in the plasma at ~1,000 -fold lower  concentrations than 25D.  Target cells such as 
monocytes express the 1 -α-hydro xylase enzyme that converts 25D into 1,25D,51, 52 and are 
therefore capable of converting local 25D into 1,25D.  Indeed, the ability of circulating 1,25D to 
exert immunomodulatory effects in humans has been questioned,53 and some experts have 
advocated targeting 25D rather than 1,25D to facilitate  local endogenous 1,25D production in 
target cells .53-56  The current 3 -arm study will add ress these uncertainties  by evaluating the 
effects of both calcifediol (25D) and calcitriol (1,25D) versus placebo.  
 
Overview of 25D  
Plasma 25D levels can be raised indirectly by administering its precursor, vitamin D, or directly 
by administering 25D  itself (Figure 1 ).  A disadvantage of administering the precursor, vitamin 
D, is that it requires several d ays to saturate adipose tissue stores and raise plasma 25D levels 
to the low -normal range (30 -35 ng/ml).55, 57  A recently published RCT evaluated the effects of a 
large (540,000 I.U.) enteral  dose of vitamin D versus placebo among 492 critically ill patients, 
and found no effect on hospital length of stay, the primary outcome.50  In this study, only ~50% 
of the patients in the  vitamin D arm actually achieved target plasma 25D levels >30 ng/ml by 
day 3.   In contrast, administration of oral 25D raises plasma 25D levels within hours .58  Thus, in 
the current study we will administer 25D.  
 
FDA status of 25D  (calc ifediol)  
Calderol .  25D was formerly available for use in patients as “Calderol”.  Calderol was approved 
by the FDA in 1980 for the treatment of hypocalcemia in patients undergoing chronic renal 
dialysis.  Calderol was withdrawn from the market in 2002 for  commercial reasons which were 
not associated with safe ty or efficacy of the product.  
 
Rayaldee .  25D is currently FDA -approved as “Rayaldee ” for the tr eatment of vitamin D 
deficiency  in chronic kidney disease stage 3 or 4 patients with secondary hyperpara thyroidism.  
 
Overview of 1,25D  
The rationale for evaluating 1,25D  as a therapeutic agent in AKI  is three -fold: 1) the 
renoprotective effects of vitamin D metabolites in animal models of AKI were demonstrated 
exclusively with 1,25D; 2) there may be impaired renal59 and extra -renal60 conversion of 25D to 
1,25D in critical illness due to elevated FGF2361 or other mechanisms; 3) our preliminary data 
from a pilot RCT in critically ill patients with sepsis demonstrate that a single 2 µg IV dose of 
1,25D increases leukocyte mRN A expression of IL -10 and HO -1,14 which are important 
antiinflammatory proteins that prevent AKI in animal models.  
 
FDA status of 1,25D  (calcitriol)  
1,25D is available for use in patients as c alcitriol , and is currently  FDA-approved for the 
treatment of hypocalcemia in patients undergoing chronic renal dialysis.  
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 8 
 
D.  Justification of dosing regimens  
 
Overview of dosing regimens  
Dosing regimens are shown in Figure 2 .  Participants assigned to 25D will be administered a 
liquid formulation of calcifediol, either orally or via naso/orogastric tube , at a dose of  400µg on 
day 0 (the day of enrollme nt) and 200µg on days 1, 2, 3, and 4 .  Participants assigned to 1,25D 
will be administered a liquid formulation of calcitriol, either orally or via naso/orogastric tube, at a 
dose of 4 µg daily on days 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.  Participants assigned to placebo will be 
administered medium chain triglyceride (M CT) oil.  
 
 
 
Rationale for dose of 25D  
The dosing regimen of calcifediol in the current study is intended to achieve plasma 25D levels 
> 50 ng/ml throughout the majority of the first 7 days of the st udy.  While o ptimal plasma 25D 
levels in critically ill patients are unknown , epidemiologic studies in this patient population have 
consistently shown that lower levels are associated with adverse clinical outcomes.11-13, 62  A 
study conducted in healthy volunteers found that raising plasma 25D levels to 55 ng/ml with 
administration of oral vitamin D  resulted in a significant increase in the frequency of regulatory T 
cells (Tregs),63 which have an important protective role in AKI.64  Additionally, a  recently 
published RCT conducted in critically ill ventilated patients found that raising 25D levels to 55 
ng/ml resulted in decreased hospital length of stay.65 
 
Rationale for dose of 1,25D  (data from in vitro studies)  
Most in vitro  studies demonstrating immunomodulatory effect s of calcitriol used concentrations 
ranging between 1 to 100 nmol/L.8, 31, 33, 66 -68  In our  recently completed pilot RCT evalu ating the 
immunomodulatory effects of a single 2 µg intravenous  dose of calcitriol among 67 critically ill 
patients , maximum mean (SD) plasma 1,25D levels were 0.2 (0.1) nmol/L,14 substantially lower 
than concentrations used in vitro, which may account for the largely negative findings in the 
study.  Thus,  higher doses of calcitriol – which are nonetheless still substantially lower than 
doses that have been used safely in prior humans studies ( discussed further in sectio n F below) 
– are planned in the current study.   Additionally, repeated dosing is planned ( Figure 2 ) to 
account for the short half -life of calcitriol.  
 
 

Version date 12/25/18;  Page 9 
 
Rationale for dose of 1,25D (data from animal studies)  
 
Animal m odels of AKI prevention with calcitriol  
▪ Xu et al69 evaluated the effects of calcitriol pretreatment on renal oxidative stress 
in an LPS model of sepsis -induced AKI in mice.  Mice were pretreated with three 
oral doses of calcitriol at a dose of 25 µg/kg at 1, 24, and 48 hours before LPS 
injection.  Calcitriol treatment compared to placebo resulted in significant 
attenuation of LPS -induced renal oxidative stress determined by markers of lipid 
peroxidation, renal inducible nitric oxide synthase expression, and other 
measures.  Th e human equivalent dose (HED) of calcitriol is shown below in 
Table 1 . 
 
▪ Kapil et al70 subjected rats to 40 minutes of bilateral renal ischemia -reperfusion 
injury (IRI).  Prior to IRI, calcitriol was administered intraperitoneally on a daily 
basis for 7 days at the following  doses: 0.25 µg/kg, 0.5 µg/kg, and 1 µg/kg.  
Treatment with each of these calcitriol dosing regimens compared to control -
treated animals significantly attenuated the effect of IRI on kidney function, with 
the maximum beneficial effect observed in the group  that received calcitriol 0.5 
µg/kg.  The HED of calcitriol in shown below in Table 1 . 
 
▪ Sezgin et al40 subjected rats to a combination of right -sided nephrectomy plus left 
sided IRI.  Rats were pretreated with calcitriol 0.5 µg/kg intraperitoneally on a 
daily basis  for 7 days proir to renal IRI.  Treatment with calcitriol compared to 
control -treated animals had a significant beneficial effect on biochemical 
parameters such as serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, as well as renal 
tissue expression of glutathione , superoxide dismutase, and nitric oxide activity.  
The HED of calcitriol in shown below in Table 1 . 
 
Animal models of autoimmune disease prevention/treatment with calcitriol  
 
▪ Mathieu et al71 evaluated the ability of calcitriol to prevent autoimmune diabetes 
in non -obese diabetic (NOD) mice.  NOD  mice received calcitriol 5 µg/kg 
intraperitoneally every other day beginning at the age of 21 days and ending at 
the age of 200 days or on the day diabetes was diagnosed.  Calcitriol compared 
to placebo resulted in significant prevention of diabetes.  The  HED of calcitriol in 
shown below in Table 1 . 
 
▪ Branisteanu et al72 evaluated the efficacy  of calcitriol in preventing autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis in mice.  Calcitriol at a dose of 5 µg/kg intraperitoneally every 
2 days was effective at preventing paralysis in 70% of treated mice.  The HED of 
calcitriol in shown below in Table 1 . 
 
 
 
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 10 
 
Reference  Animal Model  Calcitriol 
Dose  HED  HED in a 100 kg 
individual  
Xu et al69 Sepsis -induced AKI in mice  25 µg/kg  2.0 µg/kg  203 µg 
Kapil et al70 Renal IRI in rats  0.5 µg/kg  0.1 µg/kg  8.1 µg 
Sezgin et al40 Unilateral nephrectomy + renal IRI in rats  0.5 µg/kg  0.1 µg/kg  8.1 µg 
Mathieu et al71 Autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice  5 µg/kg  0.4 µg/kg  40.7 µg 
Branisteanu et al72 Autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice  5 µg/kg  0.4 µg/kg  40.7 µg 
     
    Average calcitriol 
dose = 60.1 µg 
 
    Median calcitriol 
dose = 40.7 µg 
 
Table 1.  Summary of animal studies in which calcitriol exerted protective 
immunomodulatory effects.  HED is calculated by applying a conversion fact or (6.2 -to-1 for 
rats-to-humans; 12.3 -to-1 for mice -to-humans) to account for differences in metabolism bet ween 
rodents versus humans.  Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; HED, human equivalent dose; 
IRI, ischemia reperfusion injury; NOD, non -obese diabetic.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 11 
 
E.  Safety data  on 25D (calcifediol)  
Overview  
The only known toxicity  of vitamin D metabolite s, including calcifediol (25D) and calcitriol  
(1,25D) , is hypercalcemia.  The dosing regimens of calcifediol planned in the current study are 
very un likely to produce hypercalcemia because they are  lower than doses that have been used 
safely in p rior studies in both animals and humans.  
 
Animal studies  
In mice, doses of 25D required to induce hypercalcemia are 1mg/kg orally on a daily basis for 5 
weeks.73  In contrast, the highest dose of calcifediol in the current proposal  is 400 µg, or 0.00 4 
mg/kg in a 100 kg adult.  Thus, we propose a dosing regimen that is approximately 200 -fold 
lower  than doses which induce hypercalcemia in mice.  Further, we propose a much shorter 
duration of administration ( 5 doses  over 5 days , in contrast to daily dosin g for 5 weeks).  
 
Human studies  
In a study conducted in 27 healthy adult volunteers, oral calcifediol was administered at doses 
of 1.5  µg/kg, 5  µg/kg, and 10  µg/kg of body weight.   Thus, a 70 kg individual assigned to the 
highest group would have received a  700 µg dose of calcifediol.   No hypercalcemia nor any 
other adverse effects were observed.58  In the same study, a single 1,000 µg IV dose of 
calcifediol  was administered to two healthy volunteers  and did not result in hypercalcemia or 
any other adverse events.58 
 
In a separate study conducted in 12 healthy adult volunteers, oral calcifed iol was administered 
at 10 µg/kg of body weight.  No hypercalcemia nor any other adverse effects were observed.  
Mean plasma calcium levels rose only minimally from 9.5 mg/dl to 9.7 mg/dl at 24 hours.74 
 
In a study conduced in elderly nursing home patients, 22 patients were assigned to received a 
single dose of calcifediol 10 µg/kg of body weight.   No hypercalcemia nor any other adverse 
effects were observed.   No significant differences were observed in serum calcium levels in 
calcifediol -treated versus control patients .75 
 
In a more recent study conducted in 29 subjects with stage 3 or 4 chronic kidney disease , 
subjects were randomly assigned to receive a single dose of oral calcifediol 450 µg, a single 
dose of oral calcifediol 900 µg, or an intravenous do se of calcifediol 448 µg.  No  significant 
increases in serum calcium were observed in any  treatment group during the post -dose 
period .76 
 
The safety of repeat ed (daily) dosing of oral calcifediol  in humans has been demonstrated in 
multiple smaller studies77-79 as well as  in two phase III RCTs, which included a total of 429 
subjects.80  In the latter studies, p atients received 30 or 60 µg of 25D on a daily basis for 26 
weeks .  Subjects assigned to 25D had an inconsequential increase in mean serum total calcium 
levels (0.2 mg/dl versus 0.1 m g/dl in the placebo group), and the percentage of patients who 
experienced at least one treatment -emergent adverse event was similar in the 25D versus 
placebo groups.80  Only six subjects (2%) in the calcifedi ol group required dose reductions for 
protocol -defined hypercalcemia (2 consecutive serum calcium values > 10.3 mg/dl).  
 
The current study will administer a total of five enteral doses of calcifediol over 5 days .  The 
rationale for this approach is that 2 5D levels are known to decline by ~50% of peak levels by 24 
hours.58, 74  To minimize the potential for a stepwise increase in plasma 25D levels with repeated 
dosing, the first dose will be 400 µg, and subsequent doses will be 2 00 µg (Figure 2 ).   
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 12 
 
 
Summary  
Plasma levels of 25D considered “toxic” (i.e. associated with hypercalcemia) have been 
reported to be in excess of 214 ng/ml.81 82  Based on the known pharmacokinetics of calcifediol 
from the studies above, plasma 25D levels are very unlikely to ever approach this limit . 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 13 
 
F.  Safety data on 1,25D (calcitriol)  
 
Overview  
The only known toxicity  of vitamin D metabolite s, including calcifediol and  calcitriol , is 
hypercalcemia.  The dosing regimens of calcitriol planned in the current study  are very un likely 
to produce hypercalcemia because they are lower than doses that have been used safely in 
previous studies in humans.  
 
Human stud ies of oral calcitriol  
In a phase I dose -escalation pharmacokinetics study of oral calcitriol in patients with advanced 
malignancy, patients received calcitriol for 3 consecutive days each week.  The highest dosing 
level of calcitriol administered was 38 µ g.  At this dose, the average increase in serum calcium 
was 0.5 mg/dl, and no dose -limiting toxicity occurred.83 
 
In a phase II study of high dose oral calcitriol, 39 patients with  prostate cancer were randomly 
assigned  to receive calcitriol 0.5 µg/kg (e.g., 35 µg in a 70 kg adult ) once per week for 4 weeks 
or placebo.  No patients deve loped hypercalcemia, and no significant changes in serum calcium 
were detected.  The median and range of serum total calcium levels at baseline was 9.3 (8.5 to 
10.4) mg/dl, compared with 9.3 (8.6 to 10.1) mg/dl on day 3, 9.4 (8.7 to 10.2) mg/dl on day 10, 
and 9.3 (7.8 to 10.0) mg/dl on day 25.  No significant differences in adverse events were 
reported between calcitriol vs. placebo -treated patients.84 
 
In a phase I pharmacokinetics study of an oral calcitriol formulation, DN -101, 38 patients 
received a singl e-dose administration of 15, 30, 60, 75, 90, 105, 135, or 165 µg of DN -101.  No 
hypercalcemia was observed at doses less than 60 µg, and the hypercalcemia that developed 
at higher doses (in 13.2% of patients) was grade 1 (minor and transient) in all cases.85 
 
Human studies of intravenous calcitriol  
In a phase I dose -escalation pharmacokinetics study of IV calcitriol in patients with advanced 
solid tumors, no patients developed hypercalcemia at weekly IV doses up to 15 µg.  At higher 
weekly IV doses of 74 µg, only one of seven p atients developed clinically relevant (grade 2 or 
higher) hypercalcemia, defined as serum calcium > 11.5 mg/dl.86 
 
In a phase I pharmacokinetics study of IV calcitriol in combination with oral dexamethasone and 
gefitinib in patients wi th advanced solid tumors, 20 patients received IV calcitriol on weeks 1, 3, 
and weekly thereafter.  The starting dose of calcitriol was 57 µg and escalation occurred in 
cohorts of three patients until the maximum tolerated dose was defined.  Escalations in cluded 
74, 96, 125, and 163 µg doses.  Doses of 125 µg were associated with grade 2 hypercalcemia 
(serum calcium 11.5 -12.5 mg/dl) and doses of 163 µg were associated with two cases of grade 
3 hypercalcemia (serum calcium 12.5 -13.5).  However, doses ranging  from 57 to 96 µg did not 
produce any clinically relevant (grade 2 or higher) hypercalcemia (defined as serum calcium > 
11.5 mg/dl).87 
 
Summary  
The dosing regimen of calcitriol planned in the current study (4 µg daily for 5 days) represents a 
dose far lower than dosing regimens that have been used safely in prior studies, and thus is 
very unlikely to cause hypercalcemia or other adverse events.  
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 14 
 
G.  Rationale behind the proposed research, and potential benefits to patients/society  
 
Despite compelling data from the pre -clinical and epidemiologic studies discussed above, it 
remains  unknown whether administration of vitamin D metabolites (25D or 1,2 5D) to critically ill 
patients  will have beneficial effects on acute kidney injury (AKI) or other clinically relevant 
outcomes.  Finding an effect of vitamin D metabolites on AKI would represent a major advance 
in the field, especially since currently ther e are no drugs or interventions that reliably prevent or 
treat AKI in humans.  Finding a beneficial effect of vitamin D metabolites on AKI in the current 
study would provide preliminary data t o justify a larger in terventional study of vitamin D 
metabolites  among critically ill patients , which would be powered to detect hard clinical end  
points such as need for renal replacement therapy and death .  Finally, the current study will 
answer important questions about vitamin D metabolism in critically ill patient s, which will inform 
future interventional studies of vitamin D metabolites in this and other clinical setting s. 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 15 
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
We will enroll 150 critically ill patients at risk of severe AKI into a 3 -arm, double -blind, 
randomized study of calcifediol (25D), calcitriol (1,25D), or placebo to test the following:  
 
Primary Objective – Prevention of AKI incidence/severity  
Test whether administration of calcifediol (25D) or calcitriol (1,25D), compared to placebo, will 
decrease the incidence/seve rity of AKI among ICU patients, assessed by daily measurement of 
SCr over 7 days . 
 
Secondary Objectives – Urinary Injury and Immune/Inflammatory Biomarkers  
Test the effects of calcifediol (25D) or calcitriol (1,25D), compared to placebo, on urinary injury  
biomarkers (NGAL and KIM -1) and key immune/inflammatory markers assessed by monocyte 
mRNA expression and flow cytometry . 
 
Tertiary Objectives – Clinical Outcomes (exploratory)  
Test the effects of calcifediol (25D) or calcitriol (1,25D), compared to placeb o, on ICU - and 
hospital length of stay, mortality, duration of mechanical ventilation, and other clinical outcomes . 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 16 
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
A.  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
• Age ≥ 18  
• Admitted to the ICU within 48h prior to enrollment  
• Likely to remain in the ICU (alive) for ≥72h  
• Naso/orogastric tube or ability to swallow  
• High risk of severe AKI*  • Total serum calcium > 9.0 mg/dl or phosphate > 6.0 mg/dL 
within previous 48h  
• Currently receiving oral calcium su pplementation  
• Ingestion of v itamin D 3 >1,000 IU/day or any 25D or 1,25D 
during the previous 7 days  
• AKI stage 2 or 3 ( based on SCr and/or UOP criteria)  
• History of transplantation or chronically (>7days) receiving 
immunosuppressive medications (not including glucocorticoid 
steroids at a dose ≤ prednisone 20 mg/day)  
• Neutropenia (<1000 PMNs/mm3) in the previous 48h  
• Primary parathyroid disease (active), granulomatous disease 
(active), or symptomatic nephrolit hiasis in the previous 3 
months  
• Receiving cytochrome P450 inhibitors† 
• CKD stage V or ESRD  
• Hgb < 7 g/dL  
• GI malabsorption  
• Prisoner  
• Pregnan t or breastfeeding  
• Enrolled in a conflicting study, including any study with a 
research blood draw   
Table 2.  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria.   *Patients are considered to be at high risk of 
severe AKI if they have either: AKI stage 1, defined as an increase in SCr ≥ 0.3  mg/d within the 
previous 48 hours , ≥ 50% within the previous 7 days , or urine output  ≤ 0.5 ml /kg/h x 6 hours ); or 
if they have an AKI risk score ≥ 6 – see Table 3.  †Patients will be excluded if they are receiving 
any of the following medications: ketoconazole, atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, 
itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, or voriconazole, since 
these drugs may inhibit enzymes involved in vitamin D metabolism.  
 
 
Risk Factor  Points  
Chronic   
Age>70y  
Hypertension  
Diabetes Mellitus  1 
1 
2 
Chronic Liver Disease (cirrhosis, NAFLD, AIH, or chronic viral hepatitis)  2 
   Congestive Heart Failure (NYHA class 3 or 4)  
   Chronic Kidney Disease (baseline eGFR<60 ml/min/1.73m2) 2 
3 
Acute   
   Blood pH (venous or arterial) ≤ 7.30  2 
Sepsis  2 
Mechanical ventilation expected to last > 24 hours  2 
Hypotension/shock, defined as MAP<70 mm Hg or use of pressors/inotropes  2  
Table 3.  AKI Risk Prediction Score  
 
B.  Source of Subjects  
Subjects will be enrolled from the following intensive care units (ICUs) at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital  (BWH) :  medical ICU (MICU), cardiac care unit (CCU), thoracic surgery ICU (TICU), 
surgical ICU (SICU), and neurology/neurosurgical ICU (NICU/NSICU).  
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 17 
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
 
A.  Methods of enrollment  
Patients from each of the ICUs listed above will be s creened  for eligibility , using electronic 
medical  records, based on the inclusion/exclus ion criteria listed above.   Women of child -bearing 
potential will not be included without documentation of a negative pregnancy test, unless they 
have previously undergone hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy.   Women of child bearing 
potential will be defined as any woman who has  begun menstruation and not yet reached 
menopause.  Menopause will be defined as any woman over the age of 45 who has not had a 
menstrual period for at least 12 months.  For those patients who appear eligible based on 
electronic medical records, study inve stigators  will confirm eligibility with th e patient’s nurse and 
attending physician  of record.  
 
B.  Procedures  for obtaining informed consent  
Once permission for study enrollment has been obtained from the patient’s attending physician , 
study investigators will request that a member of the patie nt’s primary treating team (e.g.,  the 
intern,  resident, fellow, attending, or nurse  caring for the patient)  ascertain the willingness of the 
patient to discuss the study with investigator David Leaf , M.D ., investigator Sushrut Waikar, 
M.D, or investigator Finnian McCausland, M.D .  Patients el igible and willing will then be 
approached by Dr. Leaf, Dr. Waikar , or Dr. McCausland  to explain the rationale of the study, 
answer any questions, and ask for written informed consent to participate.   Only physician -
investigators will obtain informed consent.   Subjects will be given up to 6 hours to consider 
participation given the time -sensitive nature of the study.   The 6 -hour period will begin once the 
patien t or surrogate has received the consent form.  
 
For patients deemed to lack decisional capacity by the primary treating team, study 
investigators will follow identical procedures as above with the patient’s surrogate.   The Partners 
Human Research Committee (PHRC ) preferred order of surrogates will be followed, and the 
investigator will document the relationship of the surrogate to the subject in the research record.  
The order of surrogates will be:  
 
i) court appointed guardian with specific authority to con sent to participation in research 
or authority to make health care decisions for a class of diagnostic and therapeutic 
decisions inclusive of the proposed research;  
ii) health care proxy/person with durable power of attorney with specific authority for 
making health care decisions inclusive of the proposed research; or  
iii) spouse, adult child, or other close family member who knows the subject well and has 
been involved in their care.  
 
For patients deemed to lack decisional capacity who are enrolled by surrogate consent, assent 
of subjects will be required for participation in the research unless the subject is incapable of 
providing  assent due to his/her medical condition (such as intubation/sedation).  For patients 
deemed to lack decisional capacity who are  enrolled by surrogate consent and who 
subsequently regain capacity during the study, investigators will explain the study  (including 
updating them on what has happened so far as a result of being in the study), answer any 
questions, and ask for written informed consent to continue to participate.  Alternatively, patients 
will have the option of withdrawing f rom the study, in which  case all data and biological samples 
collected will be destroyed.  
 
Although written consent from surrogates in person will be obtained whenever possible as the 
prefe rred means of consent for patients who are unable to consent,  for patients who do not 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 18 
 
have a surrogate available to provide written  consent  in person  we will ask a member of the 
patient’s primary treatment team (e.g., doctor or nurse) to contact the surrogate (using the same 
PHRC preferred order described above) by telephone to inform them of th e study and to 
ascertain their willingness to speak with one of the M.D. study investigators.   The primary team 
member making  the phone call  will verify the surrogate’s name and relationship to the patient, 
and will  be provided with a printed script  containing bullet points for the call ( script provided as 
separate attachment) . 
 
For surrogates expressing interest in hearing about the  study, physici an-investigator David Leaf, 
M.D., Sushrut Waikar , M.D., or Finnian McCausland, M.D.,  will first describe an overview of the 
study and answer any questions .  If the surrogate is interested in hearing more about the study, 
the physician -investigator will asc ertain whether the surrogate has plans of coming to the 
hospital in the next few hours , and will therefore be available to provide in person written 
consent .  If the surrogate states that he/she is planning on coming to the hospital in the next few 
hours, the physician -investigator will complete the consent process in person.  If the surrogate 
states that he/she is not planning on coming to the hospital in the next few hours, the physician -
investigator will send the consent form to the surrogate electronica lly, eith er by secure email or 
facsimile.   After confirming that the surrogate has a copy of the consent form in front of them, 
the physician -investigator will  summarize the required elements of informed consent, review the 
consent form with the surrogate,  answer any additional questions , and ask for written consent.  
If the surrogate agrees, the physician -investigator will ask the surrogate to sign and date the 
consent form and to send it back electronically by secure email or facsimile .  Given the time -
sensitive nature of the study, the surrogate will be asked to provide written consent as soon as 
possible and no longer than 6 hours from the time they receive the consent form.  
 
Non-English speaking patients will be eligible for inclusion .  We will use official Partners 
interpreters and the PHRC approved ‘short form’ consent document in the native language of 
the patient  and/or their surrogate . 
 
Using a checklist, we will document the following items of the informed consent process for 
each patient:  
 
▪ If consent was from subject or surrogate  
▪ If surrogate, in -person or on the phone  
▪ If surrogate, relationship to subject  
▪ If surrogate, could subject assent, and if not, why not?  
▪ Was an interpreter required and short form used?  
▪ If subject regains capacity to consent a later time;  if so, document whether the subject 
provides written consent to continue to participate or not  
▪ Copy of consent form provided to subject or surrogate/  
▪ Copy of consent form uploaded into Epic?  
▪ Research study associated to t he patient in Epic?  
 
C.  Treatme nt assignment and randomization  
Participants will be  randomly assigned, in a 1:1:1 fashion,  to receive calcifediol, calcitriol, or 
placebo.  Randomization will be stratified by the presence or  absence of AKI on enrollment, 
defined by an increase in serum Cr ≥  0.3 mg/dl within the previous 48 hours, ≥ 50% within the 
previous 7 days , or urine output  ≤ 0.5 ml/kg/h x 6 consecutive hours  during any 6 -hour block in 
the previous 24 hours .  Randomization will be performed  by the BWH research pharmacy  using  
a computer generated sequence and  permuted blocks . 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 19 
 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
A.  Parameters to be measured  
 
Clinical  data 
Upon enrollment in the study, the following demographic variables will be recorded:  age, 
gender, race, ethnicity, comorbidities, active medications, active medical issues, reason for ICU 
admission, date of ICU /hospital  admission, ICU location (e.g. , MICU , CCU), and severity of 
illness  at the time of study enrollment , as measured by APACHE II and SOFA scores.  
 
In addition, the following clinical outcomes data will be recorded:  
 
-ICU-, hospital -, and 28 -day mortality  
-ICU and hospital length of stay  
-Incidence /severity  of new/worsening AKI (defined by KDIGO guidelines)88 within 1 week of 
enrollment  
-Duration of mechanical ventilation  
-Duration of vasopressor support  
-Daily Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores for the f irst 7 days of the study  
-Physiolo gic data including heart rate, blood pressure, oxygenation, and  urine output during the 
first 7 days of the study  
-Hypocalcemia requiring I.V. calcium replacement during the first 7 days of the study  
-Total s erum calcium levels on a daily basis for the fir st 7 days of the study  
 
28-day mortality  
For patients discharged from the hospital prior to  day 28, investigator David Leaf, M .D. will 
ascertain 28 -day survival by calling the patient and/or their surrogate 28 days af ter enrollment 
as a courtesy follow -up to thank them for participating and to answer any questions they may 
have.   The duration of the phone call is expected to last less than 2 minutes.  
 
Blood samples  
We will obtain blood samples on days 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.  A summary of the volume s of blood 
that we will obtain at each time point is shown in Figure 3 .  On days 0 and 2 we will collect 
18mL of blood, which will allow us to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and 
store them in liquid nitrogen for comprehensive analyses i n the future, including flow cytometry 
and RT -PCR.  1 8mL of blood will ensure that we have a sufficient number of PBMCs to perform  
all of the planned analyses.  Specifically, each mL of blood has approximately 106 PBMCs, and 
therefore 18mL of blood has app roximately 18 x 106 PBMCs.  We will aliquot and store the  
PBMCs as follows: aliquot #1 will have 10 x 106 PBMCs, and will be used for RT-PCR analyses 
on monocytes.   Aliquots #2 and #3 will have 4 x 106 PBMCs each, and will be used for flow 
cytometry.  For each of these analyses, the number of PBMCs being collected and archived 
represents the minimum amount necessary for the intended analyses.  
 
In addition to the 1 8mL of blood on days 0 and 2 for PBMC isolation, we will also collect 2.5mL 
blood on days 0, 1, and 2 into PAXgene RNA tubes, which will allow us to evaluate leukocyte 
gene expression profiles.  Finally, on days 1, 3, 4, and 5, we will collect 9mL of blood and store 
the plasma and DNA.   9mL of blood contains approximately 4.5mL of plasma  (approximately 
50% of whole blood is plasma) , which will allow us to archive nine 500uL plasma aliquots at 
each time point.  Collection of nine plasma aliquots  at each time point  will allow us  to test the 
multiple hypotheses and measurements described below.  
 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 20 
 
Thus, the total volume of blood that will be drawn over the course of the entire study , including 
PBMCs, DNA, RNA, and plasma,  will be 79.5mL.  We will not enroll patien ts who are already 
enrolled in competing studies in which blood is being drawn, and we will not enroll patients with 
a hemoglobin level < 7 g/dl ( Table 2).  In most cases, we anticipate that b lood samples will be 
obtained from central venous or arterial ca theters  by the patient’s nurse.  For patients who do 
not have a central venous or arterial catheter, blood will be obtained by venipuncture by a 
hospital phlebotomist,  drawn concurrently with clinical blood samples whenever possible.  
 
 
 
 
The primary measurements that are anticipated to be performed on the plasma obtained from 
these collections will include: 25D, 1,25D, vitamin D -binding protein, heme oxygenase -1, 
interleukin -6, interleukin -10, thrombomodulin, parathyroid hormone, fibroblas t growth factor -23, 
and cystatin C.  
 
Urine  
We will collect 30mL  of urine at each of the above time points.   In the majority of cases, u rine 
will be collected from foley catheters placed for routine clinical care of ICU patients .  Foley 
catheters will not b e placed for research purposes.  If  a patient does not have  a foley catheter  in 
place  for routine clinical care, urine will be collected using a bed pan, commode, or direct 
urination into a specimen cup.   Anticipated tests that will be performed on the u rine samples 
include  neutrophil gelatinase -associated lipocalin (NGAL), interleukin 18, and kidney injury 
molecule -1 (KIM -1). 
 
 
B.  Drugs to be used  
We will administer calcifediol, calcitriol, or placebo.  The dosing regimens are provided in Figure 
2.  The rationale for these agents , justification of dosing regimens , and safety data are  provided 
in sections 1C -F.  Patients assigned to the placebo arm will receive medium chain triglyceride 
(MCT) oil, which has an identical appearance, color, consistency, and odor as calcifediol and 
calcitriol, both of which are also compounded in MCT oil.  
 

Version date 12/25/18;  Page 21 
 
Double -dummy design  
Although calcifediol, calcitriol, and placebo  will be identical to each other in appearance, the 
volumes administered will differ.  For example, the concentration of c alcitriol is 1 µg/ml, and 
therefore each 4µg  dose will be administered in 4 ml.  In contrast, the conce ntration of 
calcifediol is 100µg/ml.  Since the first dose of calcifediol is 400µg, the first dose will also be 
administered in 4ml, identical to the calcifediol arm.  However, calcifediol will be administered at 
a dose of 200µ g on days 1, 2, 3, and 4 ( Figure 2 ), whic h will be  in 2ml.  Therefore, to maintain 
blinding, we w ill use a double -dummy approach for drug administration on days 1, 2, 3, and 4 as 
follows:  
 
Calcifediol Arm  Calcitriol Arm  Placebo Arm  
Calcifediol 2ml  
Placebo 4ml  Calcitriol 4ml  
Placebo 2ml  Placebo 4ml  
Placebo 2ml  
 
C.  Devices to be used  
None  
 
D.  Procedures/surgical interventions  
None  
 
E.  Data to be collected  
The specific data variables that will be collected are provided in section V -A. 
 
F.  Dosing modifications  
All patients enrolled will have total serum calcium levels monitored on a daily basis  as part of 
routine clinical care in the ICU .  All subsequent d oses of study drug will be held  for any patient 
who develops a total serum calcium level > 10.0 mg/dl after enrollment.  Additionally,  if at any 
time during the course of the study >10% of participants  in either of the active treatment arms 
develops hypercalcemia , defined as per the BWH hospital laboratory as a total serum calcium 
level > 10.7 mg/dl, the dosing regimen for future participants assigned to that arm will be 
reduced by 25%.   For the calcifediol arm, this 25% dose reduction would result in a new dos ing 
regimen of 300 µg on day 0 and 150 µg on days 1, 2, 3, and 4.   For the calcitriol arm, this 25% 
dose  reduction would result in a new dosing regimen of 3 µ g daily for 5 days.   Unblinded safety 
data on hypercalcemia will be evaluated by the data and safety monitoring board (DSMB).  
 
G.  Adaptive Trial Design  
After enrollment of the first 18 patients (6 patients in each of the three arms), we will stop 
enrollment to measure plasma 25D levels in the patients who received calcifediol to ensure that 
mean plasma 25D levels on days 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are > 5 0 ng/ml.  If mean plasma 25D levels  
on days 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are < 5 0 ng/ml and the mean increase in serum total calcium levels 
from day 0 to day 5 is < 0.5 mg/dl, we will increase the dosing regimen for the calcifediol arm for 
the remaining study participants as follows:  
 
Mean plasma 25D level on days 1 through 5  Calcifediol dose adjustment for remaining participants  
40-50 ng/ml  500 µg on day 0 and 250 µg on days 1, 2, 3, and 4  
<40 ng/ml  600 µg on day 0 and 300 µg on days 1, 2, 3, and 4  
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 22 
 
VI.  BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
A.  Specific data variables being collected for the study  
The specific data variables that will be collected are provided in section V -A. 
 
B.  Study end points  
Primary end point .  The primary end  point is a composite of renal injury, RRT, and death.   
Renal injury will be assessed by time-averaged (area under the curve [AUC]) levels of daily SCr 
for the first 7 days following enrollment.   This end point has been used in previous clinical trials 
conducted in  AKI,89 and these measurements will be obtained through routine clinical te sting.   
To account for missing data, we will standardize the AUC  of daily SCr levels relative to the 
number of days in which SCr data  are available.  RRT and death are important confounders of 
SCr levels, as well as important end points by themselves, and  will therefore be considered 
along with the AUC of SCr levels as part of the primary composite end point.  RRT will be  
defined  as receipt of any form of dialysis within the first 7 days of enrollment.  Death will be 
defined as all -cause mortality within th e first 7 days of enrollment.  
 
To evaluate the primary composite end point, which includes both continuous (SCr  levels ) and 
dichotomous (RRT and death) variables, we will  use a rank -based procedure, as prior studies 
have done,90 as follows:  
 
-Patients who die within 7 days of enrollment will be  assigned the highest (worst) rank, with no 
difference in rank assigned to patients who die at different times within the first 7 days.  
-Patients w ho survive >7 days but who require RRT within 7 days of enrollment will be  assigned 
the second highest rank. 
-All other pat ients will be  assigned a rank based on the AUC of their SCr , as described above.  
 
Secondary end points .  Secondary end points will include new or worsening AKI ( defined by 
KDIGO guidelines );91 kidney function  on hospital discharge (assessed by SCr); hospital - and 
ICU length of stay;  and hospital -, ICU-, and 28 -day mortality .  We will a lso evaluate the AUC of 
urinary injury biomarkers, including KIM -1, NGAL, and IL -18, during the first 5 days using a 
similar global rank score strategy as described above.   Finally, we will evaluate organ -failure 
free days (assessed by daily SOFA scores) d uring the first 7 days following enrollment.  For the 
cardiovascular component of the SOFA score, we will used a modified scoring system that has 
improved accuracy in predicting outcomes,92 and for the renal component we will assign a score 
of “4” (the highest score) to any participant who requires RRT.  
 
C.  Statistical methods  
To evaluate the primary end point, we will compare the ranks between treatment groups versus 
the placebo group with the use of the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test.   To evaluate secondary end 
points, w e will compare means and medians between  each of the active treatment groups 
versus the placebo group using parametric (e.g., t -test) and non -parametric  (e.g., Wilcoxon 
Rank Sum) tests , as appropriate.  To account for two active treatment groups, we will consider p 
values <0.025 to be significant for the primary end point.  For secondary end points, all of which  
will be considered exploratory, we will consider p values <0.05 to be significant.  
 
D.  Power analysis  
150 participants (N=50 per group) will provide >80% power to detect a 0.62 standard devation  
difference in the global rank score in each of the active treatment groups vs. placebo, with a 
two-sided α of 2.5%.   
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 23 
 
VII.  RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
A.  Complications of surgical and non -surgical procedures  
Not applicable  
 
B.  Drug side effects and toxicities  
The only known toxicity  of vitamin D metabolite s, including calcifediol and  calcitriol, is  
hypercalcemia.81 82  Despite an excellent safety profile, transient hypercalcemia has been 
reported with calcitriol and, to a much lesser extent, with c alcifediol.   The risk s of hypercalcemia  
in the current study are low, since the planned doses of calcifediol and calcitriol are lower than 
doses that have been used safely in prior studies in humans ( discussed in detail in sections 1E 
and 1F ).  Additionally, the following precautions will further minimize risk to patients:  
 
1) Limiting our study to patients with serum total calcium levels ≤ 9.0 mg/dl.  Most prior 
clinical studies  of calcifediol and calcitriol (di scussed in sections 1E and 1F) were conducted in 
patients who were generally normocalcemic on enrollment.  In contrast, most ICU patients  have 
serum calcium levels in the low -normal range, and many patients ( 55.2% in one study)93 are 
frankly hypocalcemic on arrival to the ICU.   In the current study, we will exclude patients with 
serum total calcium levels > 9.0 mg/dl  on enrollment (Table 2).  By limiting enrollment to 
patients with serum total calcium levels ≤ 9.0 mg/dl,  a substantial barrier exists for serum 
calcium levels to ri se into the hypercalcemic range (>10.7 mg/dl) and an even larger barrier for 
clinically relevant hypercalcemia (>11.5 mg/dl).  
 
2) Limited number of doses of study drug .  In most prior clinical studies , calcifediol and 
calcitriol were administered on a regular ( daily) basis for weeks to months.  The current study 
will administer a total of only 5 doses of calcifediol or calcitriol drug over 5 days.  
 
3) Close monitoring of total serum calcium levels.   All patients enrolled will have tota l serum 
calcium levels monitored on a daily basis.  Subsequent doses of study drug will be held in any 
patient with a serum calcium > 10. 0 mg/dl . 
 
4) Exclusion of patients with primary parathyroid disease or granulomatous disease.   
These conditions may be associated with upregulation of 1 -α hydroxylase, which could increase 
the conversion of 25D to 1,25D and increase the risk of developing hypercalcemia.   Additionally, 
we will exclude patie nts with symptomatic  nephrolithiasis in the prece ding 3 months, and those 
receiving oral calcium supplementation  (Table 2). 
 
5) Exclusion of patients receiving cytochrome P450 inhibitors.   We will exclude patients 
receiving any of the following medications, since these drugs may inhibit enzymes involved in 
vitamin D metabolism and therefore could increase the risk of hypercalcemia: ketoconazole, 
atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, 
telithromycin, or voriconazole  (Table 2). 
 
6) Highly monitored setting.   Patients will be in the highly -monitored setting of an ICU at a 
tertiary care academic hospital.  Accordingly, if hypercalcemia or other adverse events occur 
they are likely to be appreciated  immediately and appropriate resources will be readily available.  
 
7) Pre -specified dose modification.   As described in section V -F, if at any time during the 
course of the study >10% of participants in  either of the active treatment arms develops 
hypercalcemia, defined by the BWH hospital laboratory as a total serum calcium level > 10.7 
mg/dl, the dosing regimen for future participants assigned to that arm will be reduced by 25%.   
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 24 
 
 
8) DSMB .  A DSMB will meet every 6 months to review unblinded data on all adverse events, 
with an emphasis on serum total calcium levels, and will submit a report to the IRB after each 
meeting.   Additionally, data safety monitoring will be reviewed by investigators Da vid E. Leaf, 
MD, and Sushrut S. Waikar, MD, on a weekly basis.  
 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 25 
 
C.  Confidentiality  
Loss of confidential patient information is a potential risk in any clinical trial.  To minimize this 
risk we will collect our database only on partners -protected computers; we will not include any 
protected health information in our primary database or in any study documents; the key linking 
the patient’s study ID# with their name and medical record number will be kept in a separate 
folder on a partners -protected c omputer.  The key linking the treatment group with the study ID 
will be  kept on a separate password -protected computer by the BWH research pharmacy.   
Biological specimen tubes containing plasma and urine will be tagged with study ID#’s only and 
will not in clude any protected health information.  Specimens will be stored in locked freezers at 
Brigham and Women’s hospital.  
 
Storing of genetic samples  
Genetic samples will be stored in locked freezers at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and kept 
for a maximum of 25  years.  The samples will be labeled with a study ID only;  no protected 
health information will be shared with collaborators outside of Partners.  Genetic data will not be 
placed onto publicly available repositories such as the National Institutes of Heal th (NIH) central 
repository.  
 
D.  Device complications/malfunctions  
Not applicable  
 
E.  Psychosocial risks  
Not applicable  
 
F.  Radiation risks  
Not applicable  
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 26 
 
VIII.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
A.  Potential benefits to participating individuals  
Individuals receiving calcifediol or calcitriol  may derive benefit through the drug ’s actions on 
immune/inflammatory pathways that are directly involved in the pathogenesis of AKI.  Our 
hypothesis that these pharmacologic agents may prevent/attenuate AKI i n critically ill patients is 
supported by ample data from preclinical studies and preliminary data in humans (discussed in 
detail in section I).  
 
B.  Potential benefits to society  
Potential benefits to so ciety include elucidation of  the physiology of vitamin D metabolism in 
critically ill patients.  Moreover, this study will help answer important questions about 
mechanisms responsible for the association between vitamin D deficiency and adverse 
outcomes , including AKI,  in critically i ll patients.  Understanding whether the 
immune/inflammatory response can be enhanced by calcifediol or  calcitriol  will inform the 
research community whether a larger study of  either agent, power ed to evalu ate hard end 
points  such as mortality , is justified . 
 
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 27 
 
IX.  MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
A.  Independent monitoring of source data  
Data collection will be performed by study investigator s in a blinded fashion.  The patient 
assignment key linking study ID# with treatment group assignment will be maintained securely 
by the BWH  research pharmacy throughout the data collection period.  
 
B.  Safety monitoring  
We have assembled a DSMB consisting of Dr. Gearoid McMahon, a faculty member in the 
BWH Division of Nephrology, and Dr. Benjamin Raby, a faculty member in the BWH Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine.  Drs. McMahon and Raby both have experience  
providing care to  critically ill patients and also have expertise  in patient -oriented research, 
clinical trials , and biostatistics.  The DSMB will meet every 6 months to review unblinded data 
on all adverse events, with an emphasis on serum total calcium levels, and will submit a report 
to the IRB after each meeting.   The DSMB will be responsible for determining if the research 
should be altered or stopped.  
 
Additionally, the PI (Dr. David Leaf) will review daily serum creatinine values for the first 7 days 
in real -time for each patient enrolled, and will take appropriate action as needed for any patient 
who develops  hypercalcemia.  
 
C.  Outcomes monitoring  
Not applicable.   The p rimary end point is a biomarker, SCr, and will not be assessed until study 
completion.  
 
D.  Adverse event reporting  
All adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects and  others will be 
reported to the PHRC in accordance with PHRC adverse event and unanticipated problems 
reporting guidelines:  
 
http://navigator.partners.org/ClinicalResearch/Reporting_Unanticipated_Problems_including_Ad
verse_Events.pdf  
 
We will report any ad verse events to the PHRC  within 5 working days/7 calendar days of the 
date the investigator first becomes aware of the problem.  Other adverse events and minor 
protocol deviations will be reported during continuing review.  
 
Additionally, in accordance with IND  regulations, we will report all adverse events to the FDA  in 
an IND safety report as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after the primary 
investigator (David Leaf, MD) becomes aware of the safety information and determ ines that the 
information qualifies for reporting:  
 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/UCM227351.pdf  
 
  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 28 
 
X.  REFERENCES  
 
1. Chertow GM, Burdick E, Honour M, Bonventre JV, Bates DW. Acute kidney injury, 
mortality, length of stay, and costs in hospitalized patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005; 
16(11):3365 -70. 
2. Waikar SS, Curhan GC, Wald R, McCarthy EP, Chertow GM. Declining mortality in 
patients with acute renal failure, 1988 to 2002. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006; 17(4):1143 -50. 
3. Waikar SS, Liu KD, Chertow GM. The incidence and prognostic significance of acute 
kidney injury. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2007; 16(3):227 -36. 
4. Masumoto O, Ohyama Y, Okuda K. Purification and characterization of vitamin D 25 -
hydroxylase from rat liver m itochondria. J Biol Chem. 1988; 263(28):14256 -60. 
5. Kawashima H, Torikai S, Kurokawa K. Localization of 25 -hydroxyvitamin D3 1 alpha -
hydroxylase and 24 -hydroxylase along the rat nephron. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981; 
78(2):1199 -203. 
6. Inoue Y, Segawa H , Kaneko I, et al. Role of the vitamin D receptor in FGF23 action on 
phosphate metabolism. Biochem J. 2005; 390(Pt 1):325 -31. 
7. Wang Y, Zhu J, DeLuca HF. Where is the vitamin D receptor? Arch Biochem Biophys. 
2012; 523(1):123 -33. 
8. Ramagopalan SV, Heger A, Berlanga AJ, et al. A ChIP -seq defined genome -wide map 
of vitamin D receptor binding: associations with disease and evolution. Genome Res. 
2010; 20(10):1352 -60. 
9. Bouillon R, Lieben L, Mathieu C, Verstuyf A, Carmeliet G. Vitamin D action: lessons from 
VDR and Cyp27b1 null mice. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2013; 10 Suppl 2:354 -66. 
10. Leaf DE, Waikar SS, Wolf M, et al. Dysregulated Mineral Metabolism in Patients with 
Acute Kidney Injury and Risk of Adverse Outcomes. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013; 
79(4):491 -8. 
11. Arnson Y, Gringauz I, Itzhaky D, Amital H. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with poor 
outcomes and increased mortality in severely ill patients. QJM. 2012; 105:633 -9. 
12. Braun A, Chang D, Mahadevappa K, et al. Association of low serum 25 -hydroxyvita min 
D levels and mortality in the critically ill. Crit Care Med. 2011; 39(4):671 -7. 
13. Matthews LR, Ahmed Y, Wilson KL, Griggs DD, Danner OK. Worsening severity of 
vitamin D deficiency is associated with increased length of stay, surgical intensive care 
unit cost, and mortality rate in surgical intensive care unit patients. Am J Surg. 2012; 
204:37 -43. 
14. Leaf DE, Raed A, Donnino MW, Ginde AA, Waikar SS. Randomized Controlled Trial of 
Calcitriol in Severe Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014; 190(5):533 -41. 
15. Maines MD, Mayer RD, Ewing JF, McCoubrey WK, Jr. Induction of kidney heme 
oxygenase -1 (HSP32) mRNA and protein by ischemia/reperfusion: possible role of heme 
as both promotor of tissue damage and regulator of HSP32. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1993; 264 (1):457 -62. 
16. Nath KA. Heme oxygenase -1 and acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 
2014; 23(1):17 -24. 
17. Tracz MJ, Juncos JP, Grande JP, et al. Renal hemodynamic, inflammatory, and 
apoptotic responses to lipopolysaccharide in HO -1-/- mice. Am  J Pathol. 2007; 
170(6):1820 -30. 
18. Milwid JM, Ichimura T, Li M, et al. Secreted factors from bone marrow stromal cells 
upregulate IL -10 and reverse acute kidney injury. Stem Cells Int. 2012; 2012:392050.  
19. Togel F, Hu Z, Weiss K, et al. Administered me senchymal stem cells protect against 
ischemic acute renal failure through differentiation -independent mechanisms. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005; 289(1):F31 -42. 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 29 
 
20. Lemire JM, Archer DC, Beck L, Spiegelberg HL. Immunosuppressive actions of 1,25 -
dihydroxy vitamin D3: preferential inhibition of Th1 functions. J Nutr. 1995; 125(6 
Suppl):1704S -8S. 
21. Palmer MT, Lee YK, Maynard CL, et al. Lineage -specific effects of 1,25 -
dihydroxyvitamin D(3) on the development of effector CD4 T cells. J Biol Chem. 2011; 
286(2 ):997 -1004.  
22. Cantorna MT. Mechanisms underlying the effect of vitamin D on the immune system. 
Proc Nutr Soc. 2010; 69(3):286 -9. 
23. van Hamburg JP, Asmawidjaja PS, Davelaar N, et al. TNF blockade requires 
1,25(OH)2D3 to control human Th17 -mediated synov ial inflammation. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2012; 71(4):606 -12. 
24. Griffin MD, Xing N, Kumar R. Gene expression profiles in dendritic cells conditioned by 
1alpha,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3 analog. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2004; 89 -90(1-
5):443 -8. 
25. Zhang Y, Leung DY , Richers BN, et al. Vitamin D inhibits monocyte/macrophage 
proinflammatory cytokine production by targeting MAPK phosphatase -1. J Immunol. 
2012; 188(5):2127 -35. 
26. Boonstra A, Barrat FJ, Crain C, et al. 1alpha,25 -Dihydroxyvitamin d3 has a direct effect 
on naive CD4(+) T cells to enhance the development of Th2 cells. J Immunol. 2001; 
167(9):4974 -80. 
27. Overbergh L, Decallonne B, Waer M, et al. 1alpha,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces an 
autoantigen -specific T-helper 1/T -helper 2 immune shift in NOD mice immunized with 
GAD65 (p524 -543). Diabetes. 2000; 49(8):1301 -7. 
28. van Halteren AG, van Etten E, de Jong EC, et al. Redirection of human autoreactive T -
cells Upon interaction with dendritic cells modulated by TX527, an analog of 1,25 
dihydroxyvitamin D(3). Diabetes. 2002; 51(7):2119 -25. 
29. Canning MO, Grotenhuis K, de Wit H, Ruwhof C, Drexhage HA. 1 -alpha,25 -
Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) hampers the maturation of fully active immature 
dendritic cells f rom monocytes. Eur J Endocrinol. 2001; 145(3):351 -7. 
30. Matilainen JM, Husso T, Toropainen S, et al. Primary effect of 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) on 
IL-10 expression in monocytes is short -term down -regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2010; 1803(11):1276 -86. 
31. Kovalenko PL, Zhang Z, Cui M, Clinton SK, Fleet JC. 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D -mediated 
orchestration of anticancer, transcript -level effects in the immortalized, non -transformed 
prostate epithelial cell line, RWPE1. BMC Genomics. 2010; 11:26.  
32. Jeffery LE, Burke F, Mura M, et al. 1,25 -Dihydroxyvitamin D3 and IL -2 combine to inhibit 
T cell production of inflammatory cytokines and promote development of regulatory T 
cells expressing CTLA -4 and FoxP3. J Immunol. 2009; 183(9):5458 -67. 
33. Barrat FJ, Cua DJ, Boon stra A, et al. In vitro generation of interleukin 10 -producing 
regulatory CD4(+) T cells is induced by immunosuppressive drugs and inhibited by T 
helper type 1 (Th1) - and Th2 -inducing cytokines. J Exp Med. 2002; 195(5):603 -16. 
34. Xia JB, Wang CZ, Ma JX, A n XJ. [Immunoregulatory role of 1, 25 -dihydroxyvitamin D(3) -
treated dendritic cells in allergic airway inflammation]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009; 
89(8):514 -8. 
35. Kinsey GR, Sharma R, Huang L, et al. Regulatory T cells suppress innate immunity in 
kidney ischemia -reperfusion injury. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009; 20(8):1744 -53. 
36. Lee H, Nho D, Chung HS, et al. CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells attenuate cisplatin -
induced nephrotoxicity in mice. Kidney Int. 2010; 78(11):1100 -9. 
37. Cho WY, Choi HM, Lee SY, et al. The  role of Tregs and CD11c(+) 
macrophages/dendritic cells in ischemic preconditioning of the kidney. Kidney Int. 2010; 
78(10):981 -92. 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 30 
 
38. Lee JW, Kim SC, Ko YS, et al. Renoprotective effect of paricalcitol via a modulation of 
the TLR4 -NF-kappaB pathway in is chemia/reperfusion -induced acute kidney injury. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014; 444(2):121 -7. 
39. Azak A, Huddam B, Haberal N, et al. Effect of novel vitamin D receptor activator 
paricalcitol on renal ischaemia/reperfusion injury in rats. Ann R Coll Surg  Engl. 2013; 
95(7):489 -94. 
40. Sezgin G, Ozturk G, Guney S, Sinanoglu O, Tuncdemir M. Protective effect of melatonin 
and 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3 on renal ischemia -reperfusion injury in rats. Ren Fail. 
2013; 35(3):374 -9. 
41. Park JW, Bae EH, Kim IJ, et al.  Renoprotective effects of paricalcitol on gentamicin -
induced kidney injury in rats. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010; 298(2):F301 -13. 
42. Park JW, Bae EH, Kim IJ, et al. Paricalcitol attenuates cyclosporine -induced kidney 
injury in rats. Kidney Int. 2010;  77(12):1076 -85. 
43. Park JW, Cho JW, Joo SY, et al. Paricalcitol prevents cisplatin -induced renal injury by 
suppressing apoptosis and proliferation. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012; 683(1 -3):301 -9. 
44. Makibayashi K, Tatematsu M, Hirata M, et al. A vitamin D analog  ameliorates glomerular 
injury on rat glomerulonephritis. Am J Pathol. 2001; 158(5):1733 -41. 
45. Tan X, Li Y, Liu Y. Paricalcitol attenuates renal interstitial fibrosis in obstructive 
nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006; 17(12):3382 -93. 
46. Shaffer JA, Edm ondson D, Wasson LT, et al. Vitamin D supplementation for depressive 
symptoms: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Psychosom Med. 2014; 76(3):190 -6. 
47. Bjelakovic G, Gluud LL, Nikolova D, et al. Vitamin D supplementation  for prevention of 
mortality in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(1):CD007470.  
48. Zheng Y, Zhu J, Zhou M, et al. Meta -analysis of long -term vitamin D supplementation on 
overall mortality. PLoS One. 2013; 8(12):e82109.  
49. Jiang WL, Gu HB, Zhang YF,  et al. Vitamin D Supplementation in the Treatment of 
Chronic Heart Failure: A Meta -analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Clin Cardiol. 
2016; 39(1):56 -61. 
50. Amrein K, Schnedl C, Holl A, et al. Effect of High -Dose Vitamin D3 on Hospital Length of 
Stay in Critically Ill Patients With Vitamin D Deficiency: The VITdAL -ICU Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2014 [Epub ahead of print].  
51. Adams JS, Beeker TG, Hongo T, Clemens TL. Constitutive expression of a vitamin D 1 -
hydroxylase in a myelomonocytic cell l ine: a model for studying 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D 
production in vitro. J Bone Miner Res. 1990; 5(12):1265 -9. 
52. Inaba M, Burgos -Trinidad M, DeLuca HF. Characteristics of the 25 -hydroxyvitamin D3 - 
and 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3 -24-hydroxylase(s) from HL -60 cells. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 1991; 284(2):257 -63. 
53. Smolders J, Damoiseaux J. Vitamin D as a T -cell modulator in multiple sclerosis. Vitam 
Horm. 2011; 86:401 -28. 
54. Adams JS, Hewison M. Unexpected actions of vitamin D: new perspectives on the 
regulation of innate and adaptive immunity. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008; 
4(2):80 -90. 
55. Amrein K, Sourij H, Wagner G, et al. Short -term effects of high -dose oral vitamin D3 in 
critically ill vitamin D deficient patients: a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled 
pilot study. Crit Care. 2011; 15(2):R104.  
56. Schnedl C, Dobnig H, Quraishi SA, McNally D, Amrein K. Active and native vitamin D in 
critical illness [letter]. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 [Epub ahead of print].  
57. Stamp TC, Round  JM, Haddad JG. Effect of oral vitamin D, 25 -hydroxycholecalciferol 
(25-HCC) and whole -body ultra -violet irradiation on plasma 25 -HCC levels in man. Clin 
Sci. 1973; 44(2):3P -4P passim.  
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 31 
 
58. Haddad JG, Jr., Rojanasathit S. Acute administration of 25 -hydroxyc holecalciferol in 
man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1976; 42(2):284 -90. 
59. Hasegawa H, Nagano N, Urakawa I, et al. Direct evidence for a causative role of FGF23 
in the abnormal renal phosphate handling and vitamin D metabolism in rats with early -
stage chronic  kidney disease. Kidney Int. 2010; 78(10):975 -80. 
60. Bacchetta J, Sea JL, Chun RF, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 inhibits extrarenal 
synthesis of 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D in human monocytes. J Bone Miner Res. 2013; 
28(1):46 -55. 
61. Leaf DE, Wolf M, Wa ikar SS, et al. FGF -23 Levels in Patients with AKI and Risk of 
Adverse Outcomes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012; 7(8):1217 -23. 
62. Braun AB, Gibbons FK, Litonjua AA, Giovannucci E, Christopher KB. Low serum 25 -
hydroxyvitamin D at critical care initiation is a ssociated with increased mortality. Crit 
Care Med. 2012; 40(1):63 -72. 
63. Prietl B, Treiber G, Mader JK, et al. High -dose cholecalciferol supplementation 
significantly increases peripheral CD4(+) Tregs in healthy adults without negatively 
affecting the fre quency of other immune cells. Eur J Nutr. 2014; 53(3):751 -9. 
64. Kinsey GR, Sharma R, Okusa MD. Regulatory T cells in AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013; 
24(11):1720 -6. 
65. Han JE, Jones JL, Tangpricha V, et al. High Dose Vitamin D Administration in Ventilated 
Intensive Care Unit Patients: A Pilot Double Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin 
Transl Endocrinol. 2016; 4:59 -65. 
66. Martinesi M, Bruni S, Stio M, Treves C. 1,25 -Dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits tumor necrosis 
factor -alpha -induced adhesion molecule expre ssion in endothelial cells. Cell Biol Int. 
2006; 30(4):365 -75. 
67. Heikkinen S, Vaisanen S, Pehkonen P, et al. Nuclear hormone 1alpha,25 -
dihydroxyvitamin D3 elicits a genome -wide shift in the locations of VDR chromatin 
occupancy. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 3 9(21):9181 -93. 
68. Suzuki T, Tazoe H, Taguchi K, et al. DNA microarray analysis of changes in gene 
expression induced by 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3 in human promyelocytic leukemia HL -
60 cells. Biomed Res. 2006; 27(3):99 -109. 
69. Xu S, Chen YH, Tan ZX, et al.  Vitamin D3 pretreatment alleviates renal oxidative stress 
in lipopolysaccharide -induced acute kidney injury. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015; 
152:133 -41. 
70. Kapil A, Singh JP, Kaur T, Singh B, Singh AP. Involvement of peroxisome proliferator -
activated r eceptor gamma in vitamin D -mediated protection against acute kidney injury 
in rats. J Surg Res. 2013; 185(2):774 -83. 
71. Mathieu C, Waer M, Laureys J, Rutgeerts O, Bouillon R. Prevention of autoimmune 
diabetes in NOD mice by 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3. Diabe tologia. 1994; 37(6):552 -8. 
72. Branisteanu DD, Waer M, Sobis H, et al. Prevention of murine experimental allergic 
encephalomyelitis: cooperative effects of cyclosporine and 1 alpha, 25 -(OH)2D3. J 
Neuroimmunol. 1995; 61(2):151 -60. 
73. Deluca HF, Prahl JM, Plum LA. 1,25 -Dihydroxyvitamin D is not responsible for toxicity 
caused by vitamin D or 25 -hydroxyvitamin D. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011; 505(2):226 -
30. 
74. Stamp TC. Intestinal absorption of 25 -hydroxycholecalciferol. Lancet. 1974; 
2(7873):121 -3. 
75. Weism an Y, Schen RJ, Eisenberg Z, et al. Single oral high -dose vitamin D3 prophylaxis 
in the elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1986; 34(7):515 -8. 
76. Petkovich M, Melnick J, White J, et al. Modified -release oral calcifediol corrects vitamin 
D insufficiency with minima l CYP24A1 upregulation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015; 
148:283 -9. 
Version date 12/25/18;  Page 32 
 
77. Bell NH. 25 -Hydroxyvitamin D3 reverses alteration of the vitamin D -endocrine system in 
blacks. Am J Med. 1995; 99(6):597 -9. 
78. Lathers DM, Clark JI, Achille NJ, Young MR. Phase 1B st udy to improve immune 
responses in head and neck cancer patients using escalating doses of 25 -
hydroxyvitamin D3. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2004; 53(5):422 -30. 
79. Orwoll ES, McClung MR, Oviatt SK, Recker RR, Weigel RM. Histomorphometric effects 
of calcium  or calcium plus 25 -hydroxyvitamin D3 therapy in senile osteoporosis. J Bone 
Miner Res. 1989; 4(1):81 -8. 
80. Sprague SM, Crawford PW, Melnick JZ, et al. Use of Extended -Release Calcifediol to 
Treat Secondary Hyperparathyroidism in Stages 3 and 4 Chronic Ki dney Disease. Am J 
Nephrol. 2016; 44(4):316 -25. 
81. Vieth R. Vitamin D toxicity, policy, and science. J Bone Miner Res. 2007; 22 Suppl 
2:V64 -8. 
82. Blank S, Scanlon KS, Sinks TH, Lett S, Falk H. An outbreak of hypervitaminosis D 
associated with the overfortification of milk from a home -delivery dairy. Am J Public 
Health. 1995; 85(5):656 -9. 
83. Muindi JR, Peng Y, Potter DM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of high -dose oral calcitriol: 
results from a phase 1 trial of calcitriol and paclitaxel. Clin Pharmacol T her. 2002; 
72(6):648 -59. 
84. Beer TM, Myrthue A, Garzotto M, et al. Randomized study of high -dose pulse calcitriol or 
placebo prior to radical prostatectomy. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004; 
13(12):2225 -32. 
85. Beer TM, Munar M, Henner WD. A Phase I  trial of pulse calcitriol in patients with 
refractory malignancies: pulse dosing permits substantial dose escalation. Cancer. 2001; 
91(12):2431 -9. 
86. Fakih MG, Trump DL, Muindi JR, et al. A phase I pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic study of intravenous  calcitriol in combination with oral gefitinib in 
patients with advanced solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13(4):1216 -23. 
87. Muindi JR, Johnson CS, Trump DL, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetics study of 
intravenous calcitriol in combination with oral  dexamethasone and gefitinib in patients 
with advanced solid tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2009; 65(1):33 -40. 
88. Kidney Disease; Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work Group. 
KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney inj ury. Kidney Int. 2012; Suppl 2:1 -
138. 
89. Endre ZH, Walker RJ, Pickering JW, et al. Early intervention with erythropoietin does not 
affect the outcome of acute kidney injury (the EARLYARF trial). Kidney Int. 2010; 
77(11):1020 -30. 
90. Group FHNT, Chertow GM , Levin NW, et al. In -center hemodialysis six times per week 
versus three times per week. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363(24):2287 -300. 
91. Kidney Disease; Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work Group. 
KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acut e kidney injury. Kidney Int Suppl 2. 2012:1 -138. 
92. Yadav H, Harrison AM, Hanson AC, et al. Improving the Accuracy of Cardiovascular 
Component of the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment Score. Crit Care Med. 2015; 
43(7):1449 -57. 
93. Steele T, Kolamunnage -Dona R, Downey C, Toh CH, Welters I. Assessment and clinical 
course of hypocalcemia in critical illness. Crit Care. 2013; 17(3):R106.  
 