  08/30/18 University	of	Chicago	Medical	Center	Research	Protocol	Principal	Investigator:		Erika	C.	Claud,	MD	–	Pediatrics/Neonatology	&											Medicine/Gastroenterology	Other	Investigators:		Nicole	E.G.	Grady,	MD	–	Pediatrics/Neonatology					Allison	H.	Bartlett,	MD	–	Pediatrics/Infections	Diseases		Study	Title:	Antibiotic	stewardship	and	protection	of	the	developing	preterm	infant	microbiome		ABSTRACT:	Fear	of	early-onset	sepsis	(EOS)	has	led	to	nearly	universal	initiation	of	empiric	antibiotics	at	birth	in	preterm	infants.	While	the	risk	of	morbidity	and	mortality	from	EOS	is	high,	the	frequency	is	low	at	0.98	per	1000	live	births	(Stoll	et	al	2011).	Evidence	shows	that	there	are	significant	risks	involved	with	prolonged	antibiotic	therapy,	including	necrotizing	enterocolitis,	invasive	fungal	infection,	and	even	death.	Furthermore,	antibiotics	alter	the	microbiome,	which	is	increasingly	being	recognized	as	a	key	determinant	of	health	and	disease.	The	development	of	the	microbiome	begins	at	birth;	the	very	time	empiric	antibiotics	are	begun	in	the	majority	of	preterm	infants.	We	hypothesize	that	antibiotic	stewardship	principles	can	be	used	to	limit	empiric	antibiotic	use	at	birth	in	preterm	infants,	thus	leading	to	protection	of	the	developing	microbiome	and	improved	clinical	outcomes.	I. Aim	and	Hypotheses		Preterm	infants	are	frequently	started	on	empiric	antibiotics	at	birth	due	to	the	risk	of	early	onset	sepsis	(EOS).	While	the	risk	of	morbidity	and	mortality	from	EOS	is	high,	the	frequency	is	low	at	0.98	per	1000	live	births	(Stoll	et	al	2011).	There	are	risks	involved	with	antibiotic	therapy	including	disseminated	fungal	infection,	neonatal	necrotizing	enterocolitis,	and	alteration	of	the	gastrointestinal	microbiome	(Nash	et	al	2009).	We	hypothesize	that	antibiotic	stewardship	principles	can	be	used	to	limit	empiric	antibiotic	use	at	birth	in	preterm	infants,	thus	leading	to	protection	of	the	developing	microbiome	and	improved	clinical	outcomes.	Aim	1:	Implement	an	antibiotic	stewardship	program	to	limit	initial	empiric	antibiotic	administration	in	a	pilot	study	group	of	30	preterm	patients,	28-34	weeks	gestation.	Aim	2:	Evaluate	outcomes	in	infants	who	do,	or	do	not,	receive	empiric	antibiotics	at	birth.	Blood	culture	results,	clinical	outcomes,	length	of	stay,	total	days	of	antibiotics	received	during	NICU	admission,	and	microbiome	development	from	birth	until	hospital	discharge	will	be	examined.	
  08/30/18 	II.			Background	and	Rationale	A.				Background:	Greater	than	12%	of	infants	in	the	United	States	are	born	premature	and	may	begin	their	lives	within	the	neonatal	intensive	care	unit	(Matthews	et	al).			Within	this	population,	the	evaluation	and	treatment	for	early-onset	sepsis	(EOS)	is	an	ongoing	controversy.		EOS	remains	the	leading	cause	of	morbidity	and	mortality	in	neonates	with	a	rate	of	0.98	per	1000	live	births	(Stoll	et	al).		Infants	admitted	to	NICUs	are	frequently	started	on	empiric	antibiotics due	to	the	risk	of	EOS.	Although	the	CDC	has	released	algorithms	for	the	evaluation	of	EOS	for	all	newborns,	without	a	lower	gestational	age	limit	indicated	to	which	they	apply,	clinical	experience	has	shown	that	nearly	all	premature	infants	receive	empiric	antibiotics	(Verani	et	al	2010).  Recent	algorithms	by	the	AAPs	Committee	on	the	Fetus	&	Newborn	recommend	discontinuing	empiric	therapy	at	48	hours	with	negative	cultures	in	preterm	infants	(Polin	et	al	2012).		However,	although	it	has	been	shown	that	discontinuing	antibiotics	when	cultures	are	negative	in	asymptomatic	ELBW	infants	does	not	compromise	clinical	outcomes,	they	often	receive	prolonged	antibiotic	treatment	courses	(Cordero	&	Ayers	2003).		Furthermore,	Kuppala	et	al	(2011),	studied	very	low	birth	weight	(VLBW)	infants,	and	found	that	within	their	population,	16%	did	not	receive	empiric	antibiotics.		For	those	who	were	treated,	each	day	of	initial	empiric	antibiotic	therapy	significantly	increased	the	odds	of	developing	late-onset	sepsis	(LOS),	NEC	or	death,	and	for	infants	who	had	received	any	initial	empiric	antibiotic	exposure,	the	number	needed	to	harm	was	3.		Within	our	unit,	there	were	794	admissions	in	2014.		Of	these,	196	were	within	our	study’s	target	age	range	of	28-34	6/7	weeks	of	gestation	at	birth.		While	there	were	no	positive	blood	cultures	at	birth	within	this	gestational	age	range,	only	6	of	these	196	patients	did	not	receive	empiric	antibiotics	at	birth.			Additionally,	of	the	190	that	were	treated,	43	were	treated	beyond	the	standard	48-hour	rule-out-sepsis	recommendations.			Recently,	there	has	been	a	growing	body	literature	describing	the	effects	of	antibiotics	on	the	gastrointestinal	microbiome.	In	a	study	of	26	patients	in	2009,	Tanaka	et	al.	found	that	the	neonates	that	has	received	either	oral	or	intravenous	antibiotics	during	the	first	4	days	of	life	had	less	gut	microbial	diversity,	as	well	as	an	attenuation	in	colonization	with	Bifidobacterium	and	an	increase	in	colonization	with	Enterococcus.		Additionally,	a	study	by	Fouhy	et	al	showed	that	infants	exposed	to	the	empiric	antibiotics	ampicillin	and	gentamicin	shortly	after	birth	tend	to	develop	microbiomes	with	higher	proportions	of	Proteobacteria,	Actinobacteria,	and	Lactobacillus	than	the	unexposed	infants	for	up	to	a	month	following	the	treatment	course. These changes within the microbiome may be especially important within the premature	population,	where	Wang	et	al	(2009)	found	that	infants	who	developed	necrotizing	enterocolitis	(NEC)	had	significantly	more	days	of	antibiotics	prior	to	disease	onset,	as	well	
  08/30/18 as	differences	in	their	gastrointestinal	microbiome,	having	less	microbial	diversity	and	an	increased	abundance	of	Gammaproteobacter.	Similarly,	Cotton	et	al	(2009)	has	also	shown	that	prolonged	antibiotic	therapy	(>5	days)	was	associated	with	increased	odds	of	NEC	or	death.		In	earlier	studies,	Cotton	et	al	(2006)	linked	prolonged	broad	spectrum	antibiotic	therapy	with	increased	risk	for	invasive	fungal	infections.		Beyond	the	immediate	neonatal	timeframe,	gastrointestinal	microbial	dysbiosis	has	also	been	linked	to	multiple	diseases	affecting	long	term	health,	including	inflammatory	bowel	disease	(IBD),	obesity,	asthma	and	atopy	(Arietta	et	al	2014).			Due	to	the	effects	of	the	microbiome	health	and	disease,	as	well	as	growing	concerns	for	antibiotic	resistance,	there	has	been	a	growing	recognition	for	the	need	for	antimicrobial	stewardship.	According	to	the	Infections	Diseases	Society	of	America	(IDSA),	antimicrobial	stewardship	includes	interventions	targeted	toward	the	improvement	and	monitoring	of	appropriate	antimicrobial	use	by	selecting	the	most	optimal	drug	regimen,	including	the	type	of	drug	used,	the	dose,	the	duration	of	therapy	and	the	route	of	administration.		While	studies	have	found	that,	in	general,	antibiotic	stewardship	is	not	commonly	used	within	pediatric	hospitals	(Hersh	et	al	2009),	Comer	Children’s	Hospital	has	a	strong,	multidisciplinary	antimicrobial	stewardship	team	with	an	active	presence	within	the	NICU.	These	collaborations	are	necessary	to	promote	proper	and	safe	use	of	antibiotics,	as	Grohskoph	et	al		(2005)	found	that	as	many	as	47%	if	infants	within	NICUs	were	on	at	least	one	antibiotic,	and	Clark	et	al	(2006)	found	that	antibiotics	are	the	most	prescribed	medications	within	NICUs.		Within	our	NICU	at	Comer,	30-40%	of	patients	are	on	at	least	one	antibiotic	on	a	given	day	(Nash	et	al	2014).		While	there	is	less	published	literature	on	the	presence	of	antibiotic	resistant	organisms	(AROs)	within	NICUs,	de	Man	et	al	(2000)	found	that	infants	treated	with	cefotaxime	as	initial	empiric	therapy	were	18	times	as	likely	to	grow	resistant	organisms.	Limiting	initial	empiric	antibiotic	therapy	is	one	way	to	promote	healthy	gastrointestinal	microbiome	development,	as	well	as	limit	the	presence	of	AROs.		While	there	is	little	data	supporting	the	withholding	of	initial	antibiotics	in	neonates,	the	administration	of	empiric	antibiotics	has	been	questioned	for	decades.		In	1961,	William	Blanc	questioned	the	safety	of	empiric	antibiotics,	stating	“The	diagnosis	of	congenital	and	early	neonatal	infections	is	difficult,	and	the	systemic	prophylactic	administration	of	antibiotics	is	potentially	harmful.		Its	dangers	have	to	be	weighed	against	the	risk	of	infection.”			More	recently,	Tagare	et	al	(2010)	found	that	in	low	risk	preterm	neonates	there	was	no	evidence	that	routine	empiric	antibiotic	use	had	a	protective	effect	in	clinical	sepsis,	further	questioning	the	immediate	use	of	antibiotics	at	birth.	 B.	Rationale:	Evaluation	and	treatment	for	EOS	is	an	ongoing	controversy	in	neonatology.	While	the	risk	of	morbidity	and	mortality	from	EOS	is	high,	the	frequency	is	low	at	0.98	per	1000	live	births	(Stoll	et	al	2011).	Although	the	CDC	has	released	algorithms	for	the	evaluation	of	EOS	for	all	newborns,	there	are	no	specific	algorithms	for	preterm	infants,	and	clinical	
  08/30/18 experience	has	shown	that	nearly	all	premature	infants	receive	empiric	antibiotics	(Verani	et	al	2010).	Recently,	there	has	been	growing	literature	on	the	detrimental	effects	of	antibiotics	on	the	development	of	the	gastrointestinal	microbiome.	Important	in	the	premature	population,	Wang	et	al	(2009)	found	that	infants	who	developed	NEC	had	significantly	more	days	of	antibiotics	prior	to	disease	onset,	as	well	as	differences	in	their	microbiome.	Cotton	et	al	(2009)	has	also	shown	that	prolonged	antibiotic	therapy	(>5	days)	was	associated	with	increased	odds	of	NEC	or	death.	Additionally,	the	microbiome	has	been	linked	with	long-term	health	outcomes,	such	as	asthma,	obesity	and	IBD.		With	this	growing	body	of	evidence	suggesting	potential	harm	associated	with	empiric	antibiotic	exposure	by	preventing	healthy	microbialization,	and	the	growing	numbers	of	infections	with	antibiotic	resistant	organisms	(Bizzarro	&	Gallagher	2007),	it	is	critical	to	develop	guidelines	to	limit	antibiotic	use	in	premature	infants,	and	study	the	effect	on	clinical	outcomes	and	the	microbiome	development.	III.		Research	Plan		Methods:	Through	literature	review	and	expert	input,	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria	for	randomization	have	been	developed	and	reviewed	to	allow	preterm	infants,	with	a	low	risk	of	infection,	to	be	closely	observed	and	monitored,	rather	than	receive	routine	empiric	antibiotics	on	admission	to	the	NICU.		Inclusion	Criteria	for	randomization:	1) Infant	must	be	born	between	the	gestational	ages	of	28	0/7	weeks	and	34	6/7	weeks		-AND-	2) Infant	must	be	considered	to	have	a	low	risk	of	infection	by	one	of	the	following	criteria:	a. Delivered	for	maternal	indications	(Cesarean	section	or	induction	of	labor	for	maternal	health,	including	HELLP,	pre-eclampsia,	placental	abruption,	history	of	IUFD/abruption,	multiple	gestation	requiring	preterm	delivery,	etc)	-OR-	b. Delivered	due	to	preterm	labor	to	a	mother	without	the	diagnosis	of	chorioamnionitis/maternal	fever	or	prolonged	rupture	of	membranes	>18	hours		Exclusion	Criteria:	1) Signs	of	clinical	illness	within	the	first	3	hours	of	life	(Escobar	et	al	2014):	a. 5-minute	Apgar	<5	b. Requiring	vasoactive	drugs	c. Seizures	d. Significant	respiratory	distress	requiring	supplemental	oxygen	>40%	2) I:T	Ratio	of	>0.2	on	initial	CBC	3) Congenital	anomalies,	including	renal	anomalies	requiring	serum	antibiotic	level	monitoring.		
  08/30/18 	30	patients	who	meet	inclusion	criteria	will	be	enrolled	for	randomization.		Parents	of	infants	that	may	be	eligible	will	be	consented	prior	to	the	birth	if	the	infant.		If	the	infant	meets	the	inclusion	criteria	at	the	time	of	birth,	they	will	be	randomized	into	one	of	the	study	groups.		Parents	who	consent	will	be	notified	whether	or	not	their	child	met	inclusion	criteria	and	were	randomized	in	the	study.		They	can	choose	to	withdraw	their	child	from	the	study	at	any	time.		If	infants	are	not	determined	to	be	low-risk	at	the	time	of	birth,	and	do	not	meet	the	inclusion	criteria	for	randomization,	they	will	remain	in	the	study	for	stool	sample	analysis	and	data	collection.		Their	medical	management	will	be	ordered	by	the	primary	care	team,	including	the	possible	administration	for	antibiotics	at	birth.				The	study	design	will	be	a	randomized,	double-blinded	study	where	all	consented	infants	who	meet	the	inclusion	criteria	will	undergo	a	standard	limited	sepsis	evaluation	at	birth,	consisting	of	a	blood	culture	and	complete	blood	count	with	differential,	as	recommended	in	the	CDC	guidelines	for	prevention	of	GBS	sepsis.	Following	evaluation,	infants	will	be	randomized.		The	control	group	of	infants	will	receive	current	standard	of	care	empiric	antibiotic	coverage	with	ampicillin	and	gentamicin.		The	infants	in	the	intervention	group	will	receive	placebo	at	the	same	dosing	intervals	of	the	routine	antibiotic	coverage.		Antibiotics,	or	placebo,	will	be	discontinued	after	48	hours,	at	which	time	the	blood	culture	would	be	reported	as	negative	at	48	hours,	consistent	with	the	standard	of	care	rule	out	sepsis	evaluation.		Each	treatment	group,	control	and	intervention,	will	have	15	study	participants.		We	will	further	aim	to	have	half	in	each	treatment	group	to	be	under	the	gestational	age	of	32	weeks	and	half	older	than	32	weeks.		Multiples	will	be	randomized	to	the	same	treatment	group.		We	will	consent	up	to	80	patients	in	order	to	have	30	that	will	meet	randomization	criteria.		If	at	any	time	during	the	initial	48	hour	trial	period	an	infant	shows	clinical	signs	of	sepsis,	as	defined	below,	or	the	initial	blood	culture	becomes	positive,	the	infant	will	be	un-blinded.		Repeat	evaluation	will	be	performed,	and	antibiotics	will	either	be	initiated	for	those	in	the	intervention	group,	or	appropriately	broadened,	per	the	discretion	of	the	medical	team,	for	those	already	receiving	antibiotics.		These	patients	will	remain	in	the	study	for	intention-to-treat	analysis		Signs	of	clinical	sepsis	for	which	to	unblind	infant	from	the	study	and	repeat	evaluation	(Hofer	et	al	2012,	Bekhof	et	al	2013)			-Temperature	Instability	(Rectal,	>38.5C,	<36.0C	or	>1.5C	change	in	3	hours)		-Increased	respiratory	support	of	more	than	20%	increase	in	oxygen		-Pale/dusky	skin	tones		-Prolonged	capillary	refill	time		-Lethargy		-Development	of	Seizures		-Requiring	vasoactive	medications	for	cardiovascular	support		-Other	signs	of	illness	per	the	discretion	of	the	managing	team		
  08/30/18 Throughout	their	entire	hospitalization,	all	infants	will	receive	routine	neonatal	care	per	the	medical	team	managing	the	patient.				During	the	entire	hospitalization	of	the	patients,	daily	stool	samples	will	be	collected	from	the	infant	diaper	as	available	from	spontaneous	defecation,	for	analysis	of	the	fetal	microbiota	through	16S	rRNA	gene-based	analysis,	as	previously	described	by	Wang,	et	al	(2009).		Through	this	stool	analysis,	the	development	of	the	fetal	microbiome	from	birth	through	discharge	will	be	examined	and	compared	between	the	infants	who	do,	or	do	not,	receive	empiric	antibiotics	at	birth.		Some	of	the	stool	samples	will	also	be	shared	with	the	investigators	at	the	University	of	Guelph	in	Ontario,	Canada	for	further	analysis,	including	identification	of	certain	metabolites	and	antibiotic	levels.		The	samples	that	are	sent	will	be	deidentified.		Parents	may	be	contacted	when	the	infants	are	18	months	of	life	to	answer	a	short	health	questionnaire	about	hospitalizations	and	chronic	illnesses,	as	well	as	to	provide	stool	samples	for	further	analysis	to	determine	if	the	differences	persist	once	they	are	outside	of	the	hospital	environment.		All	supplies	for	stool	samples	and	return	postage	will	be	provided	to	the	parents.		Parents	will	receive	a	small	monetary	compensation	($15	gift	card)	for	returning	the	questionnaire	and	stool	sample.				In	addition	to	analyzing	the	microbiome,	blood	culture	results,	clinical	outcomes	(chronic	lung	disease,	retinopathy	of	prematurity,	intraventricular	hemorrhage,	death,	NEC),	length	of	stay,	initiation	and	type	of	feeds,	feeding	tolerance	and	total	days	of	antibiotic	use	will	be	examined	through	review	of	the	EMR.				Monitoring:		The	study	team	will	report	all	events	in	accordance	with	IRB	policies	and	procedures.	Events	not	meeting	reporting	criteria	will	be	provided	at	the	time	of	continuing	review.		All	enrolled	infants	will	be	continuously	monitored	for	signs	of	infection	during	the	first	48	hours	of	life,	as	well	as	through	the	remainder	of	their	hospitalization	due	to	their	admission	in	an	ICU	setting.		Because	of	the	small	size	of	this	pilot	study,	if	there	is	any	adverse	event	or	safety	concern,	it	will	be	immediately	analyzed.				In	addition,	we	will	meet	to	evaluate	for	adverse	events	and	safety	for	every	3	patients	that	are	enrolled	into	the	randomization	portion	of	the	study	(weekly	may	be	impractical	due	to	the	varied	response	in	consent	among	our	patient	population	-	there	may	be	many	weeks	without	new	study	participants).		This	will	result	in	10	meetings	throughout	the	course	of	the	pilot	study.		We	will	also	invite	the	NICU's	medical	director	to	participate	in	these	meetings	to	ensure	patient	safety.		We	will	not	be	performing	an	interim	efficacy	analysis.		This	is	due	to	the	small	sample	size	and	single	site	design,	as	well	as	their	prematurity	of	our	study	population	which	requires	prolonged	hospitalization.		The	study	subjects	will	be	continuously	and	closely	monitored	due	to	their	gestational	age	and	hospitalization	within	an	intensive	care	setting.		If	at	any	time	a	patient	becomes	ill	during	the	initial	48	hours,	they	will	become	unblinded.		If	it	is	a	
  08/30/18 repeated	pattern	that	only	those	patients	who	are	receiving	placebo	are	becoming	ill,	the	safety	of	the	study	will	be	reevaluated	by	the	study	team.			If	three	patients	from	this	group	develop	sepsis	in	the	first	48	hours,	the	trial	will	end.		Works	Cited	Arrieta	M,	Steimsma	LT,	Amenyogbe	N,	Brown	EM,	Finlay	B.		The	Intestinal	Microbiome	in	Early	Life:	health	and	disease.	Frontiers	in	Immunology.	2014;	5(427):1-18.	[PubMed: 25250028]	Bekhof	J,	Reitsma	JB,	Kok	JH.	Clinical	signs	to	identify	late-onset	sepsis	in	preterm	infants.	European	Journal	of	Pediatrics.	2013;	172:501-508.	[PubMed:		Bizzarro	MJ,	Gallagher	PG.	Antibiotic-Resistant	Organisms	in	the	Neonatal	Intensive	Care	Unit.	Seminars	in	Perinatology.	2007;	31:26-32.	[PubMed: 17317424]	Blanc	W.	Pathways	of	fetal	and	early	neonatal	infection.	Viral	placentitis,	bacterial	and	fungal	chorioamnionitis.	Journal	of	Pediatrics.	1961;	59(4):473-496.	[PubMed: 13869795]	Clark	RH,	Bloom	BT,	Spitzer	AR,	Gerstmann	DR.	Reported	medication	use	in	the	neonatal	intensive	care	unit:	data	from	a	large	national	data	set.	Pediatrics.	2006;117:1979–87.	[PubMed:	16740839] Cotten	CM,	McDonald	S,	Stoll	B,	Goldberg	RN,	Poole	K,	Benjamin	DK.,	Jr	The	association	of	third-generation	cephalosporin	use	and	invasive	candidiasis	in	extremely	low	birth-weight	infants.	Pediatrics.2006;118:717–22.	[PubMed:16882828]	Cotten	CM,	Taylor	S,	Stoll	B,	Goldberg	RN,	Hansen	NI,	Sanchez	PJ,	et	al.	Prolonged	duration	of	initial	empirical	antibiotic	treatment	is	associated	with	increased	rates	of	necrotizing	enterocolitis	and	death	for	extremely	low	birth	weight	infants.	Pediatrics.	2009;	123(1):58–66.	[PubMed:19117861]	de	Man	P,	Verhoeven	BA,	Verbrugh	HA,	Vos	MC,	van	den	Anker	JN.	An	antibiotic	policy	to	prevent	emergence	of	resistant	bacilli.	Lancet.	2000;355(9208):973–978.	[PubMed:	10768436]	Escobar	GJ,	Puopolo	KM,	Wi	S,	Turk	BJ,	Kuzniewicz	MW,	Walsh	EM,	Newman	TB,	Zupancic	J,	Lieberman	E,	Draper	D.	Stratification	of	Risk	of	Early-Onset	Sepsis	in	Newborns	>/=	34	Weeks’	Gestation.	Pediatrics.	2014;133(1):30-36.	[PubMed:	24366992]	Fouhy	F,	Guinane	CM,	Hussey	S,	Wall	R,	Ryan	CA,	Dempsey	EM,	et	al.	High-throughput	sequencing	reveals	the	incomplete,	short-term	recovery	of	infant	gut	microbiota	following	parenteral	antibiotic	treatment	with	ampicillin	and	gentamicin.	Antimicrobial	Agents	and	Chemotherapy.	2012;56:5811–5820.	[PubMed:	22948872]	
  08/30/18 Grohskopf	LA,	Huskins	WC,	Sinkowitz-Cochran	RL,	et	al.	Use	of	antimicrobial	agents	in	United	States	neonatal	and	pediatric	intensive	care	patients.	The	Pediatric	Infectious	Disease	Journal.	2005;24(9):766–73.	[PubMed:	16148841] Hersh	AL,	Beekmann	SE,	Polgreen	PM,	et	al.	Antimicrobial	stewardship	programs	in	pediatrics.	Infect	Control	Hosp	Epidemiol	2009;30(12):1211–7.	[PubMed:19852666]	Hofer	N,	Muller	W,	Resch	B.	Neonates	presenting	with	temperature	symptoms:	Role	in	the	diagnosis	of	early	onset	sepsis.	Pediatrics	International.	2012;54:486-490.	[PubMed:	22299645]	Kuppala	VS,	Meinzen-Derr	J,	Morrow	AL,	Schibler	KR.	Prolonged	initial	empirical	antibiotic	treatment	is	associated	with	adverse	outcomes	in	premature	infants.	The	Journal	of	pediatrics.	2011;159:720–725.	[PubMed:21784435]	Matthews	TJ,	Minino	AM,	Osterman	MJ,	Strobino	DM,	Guyer	B.	Annual	summary	of	vital	statistics:	2008.	Pediatrics	2011;	127(1):146-157.	[PubMed: 21173001]	Nash	C,	Simmons	E,	Bhagat	P,	Bartlett	A.	Antimicrobial	Stewardship	in	the	NICU:	Lessons	We’ve	Learned.	NeoReviews.	2014;	15(4)	e116-e122.	Society	for	Healthcare	Epidemiology	of	America;	Infectious	Diseases	Society	of	America;	Pediatric	Infectious	Diseases	Society.	Policy	statement	on	antimicrobial	stewardship	by	the	Society	for	Healthcare	Epidemiology	of	America	(SHEA),	the	Infectious	Diseases	Society	of	America	(IDSA),	and	the	Pediatric	Infectious	Diseases	Society	(PIDS).	Infection	Control	and	Hospital	Epidemiology.	2012;33(4):322–327	[PubMed:22418625] Stoll	BJ,	Hansen	NI,	Sánchez	PJ,	Faix	RG,	Poindexter	BB,	Van	Meurs	KP,	Bizzarro	MJ,	Goldberg	RN,	Frantz	ID	3rd,	Hale	EC,	Shankaran	S,	Kennedy	K,	Carlo	WA,	Watterberg	KL,	Bell	EF,	Walsh	MC,	Schibler	K,	Laptook	AR,	Shane	AL,	Schrag	SJ,	Das	A,	Higgins	RD.	Eunice	Kennedy	Shriver	National	Institute	of	Child	Health	and	Human	Development	Neonatal	Research	Network.	Early	onset	neonatal	sepsis:	the	burden	of	group	B-streptococcal	and	E.	coli	disease	continues.	Pediatrics.	2011;127:817-826.	[PubMed:	21518717]	Tanaka	S,	Kobayashi	T,	Songjinda	P,	Tateyama	A,	Tsubouchi	M,	Kiyohara	C,	et	al.	Influence	of	antibiotic	exposure	in	the	early	postnatal	period	on	the	development	of	intestinal	microbiota.	FEMS	Immunolology	and	Medical	Microbiology.	2009;56:80–7.	[PubMed:	19385995]	Tagare	A,	Kadam	S,	Vaidya	U,	Pandit	A.	Routine	antibiotic	use	in	preterm	neonates:	a	randomized	controlled	trial.		Journal	of	Hospital	Infection	(2010);	74(4):332-336.	[PubMed:	19926166]	
  08/30/18 Verani	JR,	McGee	L,	Schrag	SJ;	Division	of	Bacterial	Diseases,	National	Center	for	Immunization	and	Respiratory	Diseases,	Centers	for	Disease	Control	and	Prevention	(CDC).	Prevention	of	perinatal	group	B	streptococcal	disease:	revised	guidelines	from	CDC,	2010.	MMWR	Recommendations	and	Reports.	2010;	59(RR-10):1–32.	[PubMed:	21088663]	Wang	Y,	Hoenig	JD,	Malin	KJ,	Qamar	S,	Petrof	EO,	Sun	J,	Antonopoulos	DA,	Chang	EB,	Claud	EC.	16S	rRNA	gene-based	analysis	of	fecal	microbiota	from	preterm	infants	with	and	without	necrotizing	enterocolitis.	ISME	J.	2009;	3(8),	944–954.	[PubMed:19369970]	