(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 1 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pain sensitization and habituation in a model of experimentally -
induced insomnia symptoms  
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
08/16/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 2 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
PART B  
STUDY DESCRIPTION  
 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL  Pain sensitization and habituation in a model of experimentally -
induced insomnia symptoms  
Principal Investigator  Monika Haack PhD  
Mailing Address  Dana 779, 330 Br ookline Ave  
E-Mail Address  mhaack@bidmc.harvard.edu  
P.I.’s Telephone   7-5234  P.I.’s Pager  Fax:      
Sponsor/Funding Source  NIH/NINDS  
 
B1. PURPOSE OF PROTOCOL  
Sleep is believed to have a protective effect on health, given findings that sleep deficiency, such as 
insomnia, results in suboptimal well -being8 and adverse health consequences25. At least 40% of 
individuals suffering from symptoms of insomnia (e.g., difficulty initiating sleep, disrupted sleep, or 
waking up too early)  also suffer from  co-morbid chronic pain28;39. Though i t was traditionally believed 
that the experience of pain  cause s insomnia symptoms, recent evidence has demonstrated that 
insomnia itself is a strong predictor of pain both in general as  well as in c hronic pain 
populations12.  
 
Despite strong evidence for a sleep -to-pain directionality20, the mechanisms  by which insomnia 
amplif ies the experience of pain is not yet understood.  The goal of  this project is to  understand 
pain amplification in resp onse to insomnia  from a mechanistic perspective . Given the high 
prevalence of chronic pain and coexisting insomnia, there is a critical need to invest in research 
designed to identify these mechanistic pathways.  This research is fundamental for the future  
development of novel strategies targeting specific mechanisms to prevent or reduce pain 
exacerbated by insomnia .  
 
To gain mechanistic insights into the insomnia -pain relationship , we developed a  model of repeated 
exposure to experimentally -induced insomn ia symptoms  characterized by : (1) Induction of 
insomnia symptoms , including delayed sleep onset, sleep disruption with frequent nighttime 
awakenings, and advanced sleep offset. (2) Repeated induction  of such simulated insomnia 
episodes , which allows for th e investigation of a key feature  of many biological system s, i.e. the ability 
of systems to adapt to a repeated challenge.   
 
Using this model, we will investigate two mechanistic candidates  – inflammation and  pain 
inhibition ; both are sensitive to sleep  deficiency  and are important for pain processing. (1) 
Inflammation : Pro-inflammatory markers  (interleukin [ IL]-6 and prostaglandin [ PG]E2) increase in 
insomnia and other forms of sleep deficiency26, while the newly discovered anti-inflammatory lipid 
mediators  (resolvins) decrease. Inflammatory markers also play an important role in pain processing: 
Pro-inflammatory markers result in sensitization  of  the nociceptive system  (i.e., increased 
responsiveness  to noxious stimulation)45, while the anti -inflammatory lipid mediators are  known for 
their active role in the resolution of inflammation and pain24;47. (2) Pain inhibition : The ability to inhibit 
pain is deteriorated in insomnia disorder21 as well as in many chronic pain conditions38;49. The 
capability to inhibit pain has been shown to determine the process of habituation  to pain6 (i.e. 
decreased response to repeated noxious stimulation)11;40, which appears to serve as a critical 
mechanism counter -balancing the process of sensitization and protecting against the development  of 
chronic pain32;36.  
  
Hypothesis : Repeated  exposure to insomnia symptoms increase vulnerability to chronic pain 
by promoting two processes: (1) sensitization of the nociceptive system via  a progressive 
incre ase of the inflammatory response  and (2) decreased  habituation to  pain via a progressive 
deterioration of the pain-inhibitory response . 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 3 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
This hypothesis will be tested by implementing a novel model of repeated exposure to experimentally -
induced  insomnia  symptoms, consisting of 3 consecutive 4-day episodes, each starting with 3 nights 
of sleep characterized by typical insomnia symptoms (delayed sleep onset, sleep disruption, early 
morning awakening), followed by a single recovery night of 8 hours of sleep . This model mimic s sleep 
patterns that are typical in insomnia populations31;41 as well as chronic pain populations28;29. Twenty -
six healthy women and men will be stud ied in an intra -individual balanced design,  with each 
participant undergoing 2 18-day-in-hospital conditions (total number of days include baseline and 
additional recovery nights), one consisting of repeated exposure to insomnia symptoms induction and 
the other serving as control condition with 8 hours of sleep per night. Frequent blood and urine 
sampling as well as administration of a complex pain testing battery will be obtained and utilized to 
evaluate the following aims:  
 
Aim 1 will investigate the inflammatory response  to repeated exposure to experimentally -induced 
insomnia symptoms. We postulate that there will be a progressive increase in pro -inflammatory 
markers (IL -6, PGE2) and decrease in anti -inflammatory lipid mediators (resolvins), leading to 
sensitization of the nociceptive system , as manifested by lower pain thresholds to pressure and 
heat, as well as increased temporal summation of pain  (an index of central sensitization).  
Aim 2 will investigate the pain-inhibitory response  to repeated exposur e to experimentally -induced 
insomnia symptoms. We postulate that there will be a progressive deterioration in the capability to 
inhibit pain (measured by the conditioned pain modulation test, resulting in less habituation  to pain 
(as measured  by pain inten sity ratings to daily pain supra -threshold stimuli).  
Aim 3  will investigate the ability of the inflammatory and pain -inhibitory system to recover  from 
the effects of experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms. We postulate a progressive impairment of 
systems  to return to baseline upon repeated exposure to insomnia symptoms.  
 
 
B2. SIGNIFICANCE AND BACKGROUND FOR THE STUDY  
Chronic pain affects over 100 million adults in the United States – more than those suffering from 
heart disease , diabetes, and cancer com bined14. Chronic pain  is highly co -morbid with insomnia28;39, 
such as difficulties falling asleep, staying asleep, or early morning awakening. It has been well -
established that the relationship between insomnia (as well as other for ms of deficient sleep, 
including short sleep duration) and pain is bi -directional in nature12. Not only does pain result in 
insomnia21, but insomnia and other forms of deficient sleep reciprocally amplify pain. In fact, insomnia 
symptoms more strongly predict t he frequency or intensity of pain symptoms than pain predicts 
insomnia symptoms12 in both the general population and clinical pain populations. Similarly, 
experimentally -induced sleep restriction or disruption for several days le ads to increased pain 
symptoms and pain hypersensitivity17;37. 
 
Despite strong evidence for sleep -to-pain directionality, the mechan isms  underlying how insomnia 
initiates and amplifies the experience of pain and increases vulnerability to chronic pain over time are 
not understood. Given that one -third of the population experience insomnia symptoms27, there is a 
critical need to invest in research designed to identify these mechanistic pathways.  This research is 
fundamental for the future d evelopment of novel strategies targeting specific mechanisms to prevent 
or reduce pain exacerbated by insomnia.  
 
The g oal of this project is to understand the mechanisms through which insomnia amplifies 
pain. We will test two promising mechanistic candidat es – inflammation and pain inhibition – using 
our novel model of repeated exposure to experimentally -induced  insomnia symptoms . Our 
model is  characterized by: (1) Induction of insomnia symptoms , including delaying sleep onset, sleep 
disruption via frequen t nighttime awakenings, early morning awakening. (2) Repeated induction  of 
insomnia episodes, i.e., after a period of sleep recovery, the next experimentally -induced insomnia 
episode starts. With our model of repeated exposure to experimentally -induced ins omnia, we are able 
to investigate a key feature of many biological systems: the ability to adapt to repeated  challenges , 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 4 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
e.g., the response of a system may decrease or increase over time, rather than remain static15. 
Studying single exposure to, or episodes of, deficient sleep do not have the ability to elicit information 
on system response changes – information that is likely of crit ical importance in gaining mechanistic 
insights. For example, the failure to habituate to the repetition of painful stimulation is not evident 
during the exposure to a single episode of sleep restriction, but emerges during repeated exposures 
to episodes o f sleep restriction (see Preliminary Data Section, Figure 7).  
 
Based on preliminary data, mechanistic insights of how insomnia may amplify pain will be gained by 
focusing on two processes  (see conceptual model in  Figure 1 ):  
(1) Inflammat ion (Aim 1) : Pro-inflammatory markers , in particular  IL-6, PG -E2, result in 
sensitization  of  the nociceptive system, as demonstrated by an increased response to 
noxious stimulation of peripheral 
and/or central nociceptive 
neurons45. These sensitizing 
markers have been shown to 
robustly increase over the course 
of experimental sleep restriction  in 
association with increased pain 
reporting16;18, and are elevated in 
patients with  insomnia7;43. Anti-
inflammatory  markers  are the 
newly discovered lipid mediators 
resolvins, which are 
biosynthesized from the omega -3 
fatty acids23. These mediators are 
part of an active biochemical 
program that enables the 
resolution of inflammation as well 
as pain, thus acting as anti -
nociceptive agents24. Importantly, our preliminary data show that resolvins of the E ser ies 
(RvE3) are detectable in human plasma and are sensitive to sleep restriction (see Figure 5).  
In summary, in Aim 1, we postulate a progressive increase in proinflammatory markers and 
opposite decrease in anti -inflammatory markers over the course of rep eated exposure to 
experimental insomnia, leading to sensitization of the nociceptive system. This sensitization 
process will manifest in lower pain thresholds, as well increased temporal summation (TS) of 
pain (i.e., pain increases with the duration or rep etition of a noxious stimulus, see also 
Appendix 3 for details), which is frequently used as an index of central sensitization of pain 
transmission neurons in the dorsal horn46. 
(2) Pain  inhibition (Aim 2) : Pain is modulated and controlled by central, top -down pain -
facilitatory and inhibitory circuits, which can dramatically increase or reduce  (respectively ) the 
intensity of a sensation30. The capability to inhibit pain has been shown to contribute to the 
phenomenon of pain habituation . Specifically, p ainful stimuli administered on a daily basis 
result in substantially decreased pain ratings11;40 (habituation) , and this effect has been linked 
to the activation of pain -inhibitory circuits6. The ability to habituate to daily aches and pains 
likely counteracts the process of sensitization and has been suggested to serve as a 
protective mechanism against the development of chronic pain32;36. We postulate here that the 
failure to habituate to repeated (day -to-day) painful stimulation over the course of repeated 
exposure to a model of experimental insomnia is driven by a progressive deterioration in the 
capability to inhibit pain, which has previously been shown sensitive to short -term sleep 
disruption37 as well as to insomnia disorder21. 
 
In summary, we propose two processes by which repeated exposure to experimentally induced 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 5 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
insomnia promotes chronic pain vulnerability: (1) Increased sensitization of the nociceptive system via 
inflammatory dysregula tion; (2) Decreased habituation to pain via failure of the pain -inhibitory system.  
 
Do we recover from the effects of rep eated exposure to experimental insomnia episodes (Aim 
3)? Is a single night of good sleep in -between episodes of deficient sleep suff icient to reverse 
inflammatory and pain -inhibitory system changes? Or are more nights required?  This is an important 
question designed to assess the elasticity or plasticity of systems in their attempt to return to normal 
functioning after exposure to sle ep deficiency. If these changes are more or less difficult to 
reverse by good sleep, this finding may urge to focus on the prevention of such changes, 
rather than treatment after change occurred .  
Recovery from deficient sleep has been rarely studied, but we and others have shown that after a 
single episode of sleep restriction or total sleep deprivation , the inflammatory marker IL -6 (plasma 
and mRNA levels) do not normalize after one night or even two nights of recovery sleep42. 
Furthermore, preliminary data from our ongoing study suggest that the exp ression of IL -6 by 
monocytes never fully returns to baseline during brief recovery sleep periods occurring during a 
longer period of sleep restriction (see Figure 3 ). From this perspective, (and as depicted in Figure 2 ), 
we expect that during a single nigh t of recovery sleep (typical for insomnia31;41) between successive 
episodes of experimental insomnia, the ability of inflammatory systems markers  to return to baseline 
will progressively decline, and their sensi tizing actions will prevent normalization of pain measures 
(i.e., pain thresholds and temporal summation of pain). Similarly, we assume that recovery of the 
pain-inhibitory system will not be fully achieved during a single night of good sleep  in-between 
experimental insomnia episodes, leading to a situation where the next exposure to insomnia ‘hits’ an 
incompletely recovered system. As depicted in Figure 2 , we expect that the ability of the pain -
inhibitory system to return to baseline will progressively dec line during successive recovery sleep 
periods, leading to less habituation to pain over time, as manifested in a failure to experience supra -
threshold pain as less intensive across day -to-day exposure.  
  
Summarizing the importance and implications of the k nowledge gained:  
(1) While it has long been known that insomnia is highly comorbid with chronic pain conditions, we 
still do not have a good understanding of the underlying mechanisms. To our knowledge, this 
proposal will be the first to investigate the mechan istic roles of two processes that we hypothesize 
to underlie insomnia -induced pain processing abnormalities: (a) Inflammatory -induced 
sensitization of the nociceptive system and (b) pain -inhibitory -induced habituation.  
(2) Considering the high life -time preva lence of insomnia  and chronic pain , as well as their high 
comorbidity, mechanistic knowledge is essential for the development of specific targets to prevent 
or ameliorate pain  amplification  due to insomnia. As it is unlikely that we will eradicate  insomnia  in 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 6 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
the population, targeting the mechanisms connecting insomnia and chronic pain could mitigate 
the consequences of insomnia . A mechanism -specific strategy for the prevention of pain 
amplification could be the administration of anti -inflammatory agents be fore or in the very 
beginning of exposure to insomnia.  
 
 
(B) INNOVATION  
 
(a) The major innovative aspect of this proposal is the approach, which is designed to investigate 
the mechanisms  (inflammatory -induced sensitization, pain -inhibitory induced habituation)  of 
pain amplification using a model of repeated exposure to experimentally -induced insomnia 
symptoms. While research has long focused on the characterization of the sleep -pain 
association, it is time to shift to the investigation of mechanisms underlying this association.  
(b) A novel aspect of this proposal is testing mechanisms within a model of repeated exposure 
to experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms , which closely resembles sleep -wake 
patterns that are increasingly common in the general population and highly comorbid with 
chronic pain conditions: How repeated exposure to insomnia  symptoms affect s the 
inflammatory and the pain-inhibitory system s, thereby leading to the proposed sensitization of 
the nociceptive system  and less habituation to pain, is curr ently unknown. This approach has 
high ecological validity, which will facilitate the translation of mechanistic findings directly into 
clinical applications.  
(c) Another new aspect of this proposal is the investigation of the time course and inter -
dependencies  of the inflammatory and pain -inhibitory systems response s upon 
repeated exposures to experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms. To date, both candidates 
have not been studied simultaneously or over an extended time period. Given the adaptive 
nature of biol ogical systems, changes in the response magnitude of both systems upon 
repeated challenges may elucidate valuable mechanistic information that cannot be obtained 
by studying single episodes of sleep deficiency.  
(d) The current proposal will address the abilit y of systems to recover  from recurrent episodes 
of experimentally -induced insomnia, an area that has been frequently neglected. The extent to 
which recovery sleep is able to reverse changes induced by insomnia may elucidate valuable 
information for the dev elopment of prevention and treatment strategies.  
 
To summarize, this proposal has various innovative aspects in the investigation of pain amplification 
in response to insomnia: (1) Taking a mechanistic approach (inflammatory -induced sensitization, 
pain-inhibitory induced habituation to pain), rather than continuing to characterize the general 
association between insomnia (or sleep deficiency in general) and pain. (2) Studying inflammatory 
and pain -inhibitory systems changes within a real -life model consisti ng of repeated exposure to 
experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms, rather than studying changes within short -term models 
of sleep restriction or deprivation of a few days. (3) Investigating the ability of system changes to 
recover from repeated exposure to experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms, rather than 
concentrating only on the effects of deficient sleep.  
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 7 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
B3. DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH P ROTOCOL  
A. Study Design – Overview, Methods, Procedures  
 
Proposed Research Plan . 
 
The overarching hypothesis of th is research is that repeated exposure to experimentally -induced 
insomnia symptoms  increases vulnerability to chronic pain by promoting two proce sses: (1) 
sensitization of the nociceptive system via a progressive increase of the inflammatory response and 
(2) decreased habituation to pain via progressive deterioration of the pain -inhibitory response.  
 
This proposal will implement a r esearch design consisting of 3  repetitions of a 4-day episode with  3 
nights of experimentally -induced insomnia  symptoms followe d by 1 night  of recovery sleep, thereby 
resembling  frequently observed sleep patterns in individuals suffering from insomnia . I.e., a fter an 
interval of 1 to 3 nights of poor sleep, individuals experience a better night of sleep, likely resulting 
from a bu ildup of sleep pressure during the insomnia episode31;41. The protocol will end with 4 nights 
of recovery sleep, in order to statistically model time to obtain full recovery of the inflammatory and 
pain-inhibito ry system. The study will take place under controlled in -laboratory conditions  in the 
Clinical Research Center , in order to ensure maintenance of sleep -wake schedules and minimize the 
influence of confounding variables such as food or fluid intake, light e xposure, body posture and 
motor activity. Each protocol includes frequent blood draws , urine collections, and the administration 
of a complex pain testing battery on 8  out of the 18  in-hospital days.  

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 8 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
Study Design.  
This study will employ an intra -individua l balanced 2 x 18-day in-hospital protocol (experimental  
insomnia vs. control sleep condition , see Figure 8 ).  The first 2 night s of each 18-day protocol will be 
adaptation night s, and the 3rd  night will serve as the baseline night, with a sleep  opportuni ty of 8  
hours (23 pm-7am) on all 3 nights . In the experimental insomnia study arm, insomnia symptoms will 
be induced during the  next 3 nights, followed by 1 night of 8 -hour recovery sleep ( for more details, 
see model description under  Procedures). During ni ghts with insomnia symptom induction, sl eep 
onset will be delayed by 1  hour (midnight 12am), the sleep period ( 12-6am) will be disrupted by 
hourly 20 min long awakenings, and sleep offset will be advanced by 1 hour (6am).  This episode of 3 
nights of exper imental insomnia followed by 1  night of recovery sleep will be repeated three times. 
After the last experimental insomnia episode, participants will have 4 recovery nights. In the control 
arm of the study, participants will receive an 8-hour sleep opportuni ty for all 18 nights of the protocol. 
These 2  arms of the study will be separated by an interval of at least 1 month  in order to allow 
recovery from blood sampling. Monthly separation was chosen to control for potential effects of 
menstrual phase in women.   Depending on the bed occupancy space, participants will stay in a 
private room in the CRC.  If a private room is not available, participants will stay in a double 
occupancy room with an individual of the same sex (assigned at birth)  
 
Visit 1. Initial scr eening . All potential participants will have the study explained to them in detail by 
the PI or another senior member of the research team. If interested, potential participants will sign the 
informed consent and nursing staff in the Clinical Research Cent er (CRC) will take vital signs and 
collect a blood sample.  A short battery of screening tests and questionnaires will also be collected in 
order to assess health status (see Appendix 1  for blood tests and questionnaires).  Potential 
participants will then  be introduced to the web -based, secured diary recording system (REDCap22) 
and given an actigraphy watch to take home to estimate sleep -wake habits , for 2 weeks (see 
Appendix 1 ). These data will be used to v erify nightly sleep duration between 7 to 9 hours to be used 
for eligibility .  
 
Visit 2. Medical history, physical, and sleep screening . During this visit, the study physician will 
meet with the study participant for a physical exam and review of blood tes t results.  Anemia and 
abnormal thyroid results are the most frequent exclusionary medical findings in our healthy 
volunteers.  Participants who remain eligible following the medical screen will be instrumented for 
polysomnographic recording (PSG) for a sl eep screening night in the CRC, in order to rule out any 
possible sleep disorders (see detailed exclusion criteria in Protection of Human Subjects).    
 
Visit 3 and 4: Two 18-day in-hospital stays (experimental insomnia and sleep control 
condition ). Throug hout the 18-day experimental insomnia condition  (see Figure 8 ), participants 
will start with 3 nights of adaptation/baseline nights, before undergoing 3  episodes  of 3 nights of 
insomnia symptom induction followed by 1 night of 8 hours of sleep. Four recove ry nights will follow 
the last experimental insomnia episode.   During this 18-day period, participants will have 8 days of 
intensive recording ( on the baseline night, every 2nd and 4th day of each episode, as well as the 3rd 
recovery night at the end of th e protocol, see also Figure ‘Study Protocol’ ). These intensive 
measurement periods will include PSG recordings, blood sampling, and urine collection during 
daytime (7am -11pm) and nighttime (11pm -7am) periods. Emotional and physical well -being will be 
asses sed on computerized visual analog scales every 4 hours throughout waking periods (see 
Appendix 2 ) and a pain testing battery will be administered at 2pm (see Appendix 3 ). For the 
experimental insomnia nights , the sleep opportunity will be from 12am -6am (rather than 11pm -7am) 
with hourly  20min -awakenings . However, participants will remain in bed in a semi -supine position 
during the wakeful nighttime periods  (11pm -12am, 20 -min awakening bouts, 6am -7am) , in order to 
maintain consistent postural and physical ac tivity inputs across all study nights and conditions.  Lights 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 9 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
will be less than 20lux during wakeful nighttime periods, which is still bright enough to read or play 
board games with the attending research assistant. These environmental precautions are take n to 
minimize changes in conditions that can be attributable to body movement or the time -keeping 
hormone, melatonin.  The sleep control condition  will also be conducted in the CRC. Because the 
study environment and protocol requirements themselves will ha ve a considerable effect on various 
behavioral and inflammatory outcome variables, we need to compare the results of our insomnia 
induction protocol against a sleep control condition.  These environmental (CRC) -related effects have 
occurred in multiple pre vious studies where we have observed decreases in inflammatory markers 
while staying in the CRC during control sleep periods16;18. 
 
At least seven days  before entering each 18-day in-hospital stay, participants will be asked to follow 
the study sleep schedule ( bedtime 11pm -7am), which wil l be verified by electronic sleep 
diary/actigraphy data. The week prior to the 2nd 18-day visit, blood tests used at screening will be 
repeated to ensure values are in the normal range . Throughout both protocols, participants will be 
maintained on a balanc ed diet (NA+ and K+ controlled) and regimented fluid intake in order to 
maintain body weight/composition throughout the study.  Meals and fluids will be served at regular 
hours. To prevent sedentary conditions and maintain constant activity levels, partici pants will take a 
10-15 min walk within the CRC or outside on hospital property every couple of hours throughout the 
waking periods of the protocol (except during induced nighttime awakenings). We will also encourage 
participants to follow their pre -study exercise habits through a daily opportunity to visit the hospital 
gym on the non -intensive recording days. Following any gym visits, participants will be allowed ad 
libitum  water for up to 1 hour. Participants may have visitors during daytime periods, as w ell as have 
access to email and phone, in order to minimize disruptions to their social networks and prevent 
social isolation. Each study arm will be separated by a n interval of 2 month s or more .  This will allow 
us to study women during the same menstrual  phase in both protocols and provide sufficient time to 
recovery from residual effects of blood sampling. 
 
In case of last -minute cancellations of the 18 -day in -hospital stays, we will attempt to fill the open 
slots with new participants. We will use adapt ation day 1 of the study for screening purposes (i.e., 
initial and medical/overnight screening), and if fulfilling screening criteria, the participant will continue 
the following day with adaptation day 2 of the study.  
 
Visit 5: Follow -up. Seven  to 14 days  following their final discharge from the CRC (after completing 
both study protocols), participants will return to the CRC to have a final blood draw to ensure that any 
potential activation of the blood markers have returned to baseline and to review their  study 
experience.  
 
Participants.  
We anticipate screening 612  subjects in order to have 34  participants with a n attrition rate of 32% 
complete both 18-day in-hospital study protocols. We typically screen 18 potential participants for 
every one that enter s the in -hospital part of the  study. In our experience with 2  25-day in -hospital 
stays separated by a monthly interval, we have an attrition rate of 32%. As such, 34 participants will 
need to enter the hospital phase to have 26 participants complete 2 18-day in-hospital protocols.  
Procedures.  
 
Model of repeated exposure to experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms. The hypothesis will 
be tested within an experimental insomnia model characterized by (1) induction of insomnia 
symptoms for 3 -day long episodes, and (2) the repeated nature of such insomnia episodes, i.e. after 
a night of good sleep, the next episode will start. Participants will undergo 3 of those 3 -day episodes  
of insomnia symptom induction , each followed by 1 night of 8 hours of sleep. Such patt erns are 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 10 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
commonly experienced in individuals suffering from insomnia, where intervals of 1 to 3 nights of poor 
sleep are followed by a night of good sleep, likely due to the buildup of sleep pressure during the 
interval of poor sleep31;41.   The advantage of this approach is that it mimics sleep -wake patterns 
frequently found in the general population for a number of reasons, and in chronic pain populations in 
particular28;39. In contrast to previous studies, mostly using single episodes of sleep restriction or 
deprivation, this approach will facilitate the translation of findings directly into clinical applications.  
 
In this model, we will induce 3 typical insomnia sy mptoms: (a) a delay in sleep onset by 1 hour (from 
11pm to 12am); (b) disruption of the sleep period (interval between 12am to 6am) by hourly 20min -
awakenings, totaling 6 nighttime awakenings; (c) advancement of sleep offset by 1 hour (from 7am to 
6am). To  force nighttime awakenings, a computer -generated signal  will be used  (and will be backed 
up by human intervention if the computer is not successful) . Specifically, an acoustic tone of 1000Hz 
will be generated by a computer located near the bedside (Aswin Software). The tone will start with a 
sound intensity of 40dB and will increase in 10dB -increments every 10sec to a maximal volume of 
90dB. Participants will signal awakening by pushing a mouse button located within reach that will stop 
the acoustic signal . Immediately thereafter, a research assistant will enter the room, switch on the 
light (less than 20 lux), and help participant maintain wakefulness while staying in bed. If the acoustic 
signal does not wake up the participant after maximal tone intensity  is reached (after one minute), the 
research assistant will enter the room and wake up the participant by calling her/his name, and if this 
is not effective, by gently shaking the participant.  
During the 20 min -awakenings at night,  participants will be as ked to rate their emotional and physical 
well-being on computerized VAS, and will interact with the attending research assistant while staying 
in bed, until a computer -generated tone signals the next sleep opportunity. As in the control group, 
which has an  undisturbed sleep opportunity of 8  hours for every night , participants will remain in bed 
between 23 pm to 7am  to control for body position and activity as well as light exposure . 
 
Polysomnographic recording (PSG) . Sleep will be recorded using the Embla sy stem N7000 
(Medcare US, Buffalo) on the screening night visit to ensure that participants are free from sleep 
disorders.  The Embla system will also be used to collect sleep data on the 8 intensive recording days 
of each study run (baseline, every 2nd and 4th night of each episode, 3rd recovery night at end of 
protocol). The PSG montage will follow standard criteria and sleep EEG will be manually stage -
scored on a 30 second epoch basis3. The m ain purpose for sleep dat a collection is the quantification 
and comparison of various sleep indices in insomnia  symptoms inducti on and control nights (e.g., 
sleep duration, sleep latencies, percent time spend in different sleep stages ). For explorative analysis 
(not specified in aims), spectral analyses will be conducted on EEG data using Remlogic software 
(Medcare US, Buffalo).  The homeostatic response will be calculated for each episode, by calculating 
change from baseline for the two homeostatic markers N3 (slow wave sleep) and delta power, and 
comparing between episodes. We will explore whether the robust and stable homeostatic response 
that has been observed within exposure to a single episode of deficient sleep1  will increase with 
episode repetition . Spectral analysis will be performed by the PI, who is experienced in this 
analysis19. 
 
Blood Sampling.  On the  baseline day  (Day 3) , as well as on the 8 intensive recording days of each 
18-day study run, blood samples will be drawn at 11 00am and after pain  testing, around 1550 (50 min 
after pain testing) per simple needle stick  The amount of the blood collected at each blood draw will 
range between 10ml and 50ml.  The total amount of blood taken over each 18-day protocol will not 
exceed 550ml. 
 
IL-6 will be  measured in plasma  in our laboratory, using a high sensitivity enzyme immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA, Quantikine ® HS, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). We will measure IL -6 twice 
throughout  the 8 intensive recording periods. IL -6 will be also measured in vitro  as the capacity of 
monocytes to express IL -6. In brief, whole blood will be stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 11 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
100pg/ml), incubated with fluorescence -conjugated antibodies  (CD14, CD45, IL -6), and IL6 -positive 
monocytes will be quantified using flow c ytometry (Gallios™ Beckmann -Coulter Inc, Flow Cytometry 
Core at BIDMC).  
Resolvins  are the newly discovered anti -inflammatory lipid mediators that are actively involved in the 
resolution of inflammation and pain24. Resolvins of the E series  are produced from eicosapentaenoic  
acid (EPA)23, and possess potent pro -resolving actions that include counter -regulation of cytokines 
and reduction in pain in animal models35. Resolvins of the E series will be measured in the Lipid 
Mediator Metabolomics Core at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Boston (Director Dr. Charles 
Serhan) , using liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry  (LC-MS MS). Assessment will be 
performed twice  per intensive recording day at 11 00am and after pain testing . 
PGE2  metabolite will be measured in collections of nighttime urine (11pm -7am) and daytime urine 
collected during/after pain testing (2pmam-5pm) during the 8 intensive recording days. Urinary PGE2 
will be analyzed in our lab using an EIA (Cayman Chemical, A nn Arbor, MI), and levels will be 
adjusted for urinary creatinine levels.  
Creatinine  will be measured in night - and daytime urine collects and used for the adjustment of 
PGE2 levels . 
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX -2), is the enzyme involved in PGE2 synthesis and is  the target of the pain -
relieving nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAID )33. COX -2 will be measured in vitro by the 
capacity of mo nocytes to express COX -2 after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 100pg/ml) 
and incubation with fluorescence -conjugated antibodies  (CD14, CD45, COX -2), using flow cytometry 
(Gallios™ Beckmann -Coulter Inc, Flow Cytometry Core at BIDMC). Though not pa rt of the aims, 
COX -2 measures may corroborate proposed findings of a role of PGE2 in experimentally -induced 
insomnia symptoms. COX -2 expression will be measured in the 11 00am blood sample obtained on 
during  baseline  and on the  8 intensive recording days.   
Opioid peptides : Beta-endorphin will be measured in leukocytes using flow cytometry.  
Cortisol  will be measured in plasma and saliva and assayed in the Harvard Catalyst Central Lab, 
using the Access Chemiluminescent Immunoassaay (Beckman Coulter Fullerton , CA).  
Norepinephrine : Norepinephrine will be measured in urine and plasma/serum collects and  assayed 
in the CORE lab on the HPLC system . 
 
DNA/RNA extraction from blood/saliva:  
RNA will be extracted from blood by RNA extraction method using the QIAGEN RLT  buffer or another 
RNA stabilizing reagent. Blood drawn at 1100 am during the 4th and 14th days will be used for RNA 
extraction in the laboratory. Samples will be stored in -80˚C freezer for future genetic analyses.  
 
DNA will be extracted from saliva using the saliva DNA isolation kit from Norgen Biotek Corporation 
(product# RU 45400). Saliva samples obtained from participants at 1100 am during baseline and 
every heavy recording day will be used for DNA extraction in the laboratory. Samples will be stored in 
-80˚C freezer for future genetic analyses.  
 
 
Cardiovascular markers : Radial artery blood pressure (BP) wi ll be assessed by averaging three to 
five measurements of BP taken at 3 min intervals following standard American Heart Association 
(AHA) guidelines an d using Dinamap a utomated oscillometric device ( GE Medical SIT Inc., 
Milwaukee, WI)  every 4h through the waking periods of the protocol , as well as during the disruption 
intervals at night . The arterial waveform in a finger of the non -dominant hand will be  derived on a beat -
to-beat basis by digital photoplethysmography (Portapres, TPI, Brussels, Belgium). The P ortapres 
system will be used between 0830 and 0930 for autonomic tests on pain testing days.  
  
Autonomic tests: To determine the effects of repeated fragmentation sleeps  on autonomic system, 
participants will undergo valsalva’s maneuver (VM) test , fast breathing test and mental stress test on 
6 days ’ mornings . The tests will begin at 0 930h, following portapres  instrumentation and 3 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 12 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
consecutive brachial  BPs, 10min baseline (BL) will be obtai ned to determine spontaneous barorefelx 
sensitivity and heart rate variability . Following BL, p articipants will be instructed  to breath  under a 
metronome control  at a rate of 15breaths/min for 5min to obtain standardi zed HRV. Then participant s 
will perform 3 VMs: we will place a nose clip on the subjects, after a normal inspiration, a sterilized 
mouth piece will be placed in the mouth, and a pressure gauge will be held in front of the subject, so 
they can read the pres sure gauge. Subjects will forcefully exhale until the scale reads 40mmHg and 
they will hold that pressure constantly for 15sec. After the Valsalva strain, subjects will rest and 
breathe normally for 1min (recovery). The VM will be repeated two more times, thus a total of 3 VMs 
will be performed. Mental stress test will be elicited via serial subtraction for 5min. The total time of 
autonomic test will be about 40min.  
 
Questionnaires : 
At the beginning of each 18 -day in -hospital stay, participants will be give n several questionnaires that 
assess general well -being, emotion regulation, as well as response reactivity to challenges:  
- Perceived Stress Scale (PSS14 , Cohen et al., 1983 ) 
- Fear of Pain Questionnaire (FPQ , McNeil et al., 1998)  
- Pain Catastrophizing Scale ( PCS, Sullivan, 2009))  
- Life Orientation Test (LOT -R; Scheier et al., 1994)  
- Affective Style Questionnaire ( ASQ, Hofmann and Kashdan, 2010  
- Ford Insomnia Response to Stress Questionnaire (FIRST, Drake, 2004)  
- State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI, Spielberger, 19 70) 
 
Cognitve function testing battery : 
Durin g the experimental insomnia symptom induction nights,  executive function will be measured by 
the Stroop color -word test  (for a detailed description , see Lezak, 1995 ). 
At several study days, the Psychomotor Vigil ance Test  (PVT, 10min) will be used to measure reaction 
time every 4 hours throughout the waking periods of the protocol, starting 2 hours after lights on, after 
sleep inertia is dissipated.  
 
Assessment of emotional and physical well -being . Every 4 hours d uring daytime wake periods, as 
well as after each nighttime awakening during the experimental insomnia induction nights, 
participants will rate intensity of mood and spontaneous pain symptoms using computerized visual 
analogue scales (AsWin, programmed by Martin Rivers & Associates, see Appendix 2 ).   The test 
battery requires approximately 5 minutes per administration. Though spontaneous  pain is not the 
focus of this grant, we will explore whether processes of inflammatory -induced sensitization and pain-
inhibitory induced habituation to evoked pain may relate to the experience of spontaneous pain.  
 
 
Pain testing battery : Pain sensitivity and pain inhibition tests will be administered at 2pm throughout 
the 8 intensive recording days. Throughout the 1 hour testing period, the participant will remain in a 
seated position in a comfortable chair. The sequence of laboratory events is as following (see 
Appendix 3  for a detailed description of tests , as well as21).  
 
(1) Pain sensitivity tests : (a) Heat pain thresholds (HPT) , (b) Pressure pain thresho lds (PPT)  
(2) Pain modulation tests: (a) Temporal summation of heat pain (TS). (b) Conditioned pain 
modulation  (CPM ) 
(3) Cold pressor test (CPT)  
 
We plan to apply heat stimuli using the Pathway Model CHEPS (Medoc, Minneapolis, MS), which has 
the advantage of a rap id and flexible heating rat e required for TS testing (see Budget J ustification). 
Pressure stimuli will be applied using an electronic pressure algometer (Somedic Sales AB, Hörby, 
Sweden ). For heat pain applications at the foot (being applied in TS), we wil l use a temperature -
controlled water bath (T echne® water baths , Bibby Scientific US, Burlington, NJ) . The proposed 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 13 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
inflammatory -induced sensitization should manifest in lower HPT and PPT, as well as increased TS 
of pain (used as an index of central sensiti zation). The proposed failure of the pain inhibition system 
(measured through CPM), should result in a lack of habituation to pain, as measured by heat pain 
supra -thresholds throughout the 8 intensive recording days of the experimental insomnia induction o r 
control sleep protocol.  
 
Pain testing details : 
(1) Pain sensitivity tests:  
(a) Heat pain thresholds (HPT, 10min ) will be assessed using a precise, computer -controlled 
thermode ( Somatosensory Analyzer , Medoc, Minneapolis, MS) for generating and recording 
response s to thermal stimuli. The thermode will be attached to the  forearm volar  skin of the 
arm not used for blood draws,  via a Velcro strap, to the palm. From a baseline temperature of 
32°C, the thermode is heated at a rate of 0.5 °C/sec. The partici pant is inst ructed to click a 
computer mouse with their free hand, as soon as heat pain is perceived. To improve 
accuracy, each threshold will be measured 4 times. The inter -stimulus interval is 15 sec, and 
the average will be used for further analysis.  
 
(b) Pressure pain  thresholds (PPT , 10min ) will be obtained with use of an electronic pressure 
algometer (Somedic Sales  AB, Hörby, Sweden) , and assessed at the posterior neck , 
trapezius muscle , and middle phalanx of the middle /ring finger , and pressure will be increased 
at a rate of 30 kPa/s . Participants  will be instructed to press a control button  when they 
experienced the first sensation of pain. A  series  of four pressure -pain stimuli will be applied 
with 15 sec intervals to each side, and the average of these stimuli w ill be calculated.  
 
(2) Pain modulation tests:  
(a) Temporal summation (TS, 15min)  of pain is frequently used as an index of central 
sensitization of dorsal horn neurons56, and will be assessed using the Somatosensory 
Analyzer (Medoc, Minneapolis, MS). Four sequences each consisting of ten brief consecutive 
heat pulses will be  applied via a thermode to the  forearm volar skin  of the arm not used for 
blood draws, with a pulse -to-pulse interval of 2.5 sec.  The temperature u sed to assess TS w ill 
be tailored to each person ’s tolerance level.  The first test sequence of this individually -tailored 
procedure will have a target temperature of 48 °C and an inter -pulse baseline temperature of 
32 °C. Depending on whether the participa nt can tolerate  the initial 10 -pulse sequence, the 
target temperature of the second sequence w ill be increased or decreased, respectively, by 
1.5 °C (i.e., increased to  49.5 °C  or decreased to 46.5 °C ). In the third sequence, the target 
temperature  will be  again increased or decreased by 1.5 °C, depending on whether the 
participant could tolerate the second sequence or not. The inter -sequence  interval w ill be 2 
min at a temperature of 32 °C. The thermode w ill be moved  systematically between 
sequences, start ing at the thenar eminence for a practice trial, and sequentially moving 
cephalad on the volar aspect of the forearm along the innervation  of C5 –6 for the remaining 
three trials. This sequence was designed to prevent testing on previously stimulated skin 
areas (see also25). During each test sequence, participants will be prompted to rate the 
intensity of the 1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th thermal pulse using a 0 –100 mm visual analogue scale 
(VAS) , presented  on separate data sheets for each rating. The participant will be instructed to 
say ‘STOP’  as soon as the sensation is  no longer tolerable at any point during the testing.  
Temporal summation of pain will be defined as an increase in perceived pain intensity across 
the 10 -pulse sequence, such that the last heat pulse intensity in a sequence is p erceived as 
more painful than the first. For statistical analysis, TS will be calculated by subtracting the first 
rating from the last rating in the 10 -pulse sequence. Highest tolerable temperature will be 
used as the conditioning stimulus in the condition ed pain modulation (CPM) paradigm.  
 
(b) Conditioned pain modulation (CPM, 20min) , assesses the principle of ‘pain inhibits pain’, and 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 14 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
is a measure of the pain -inhibitory capacity of the central nervous system. For this protocol,  
the test stimulus  will be the TS sequence at highest  tolerable temperature, applied to the outer 
volar  surface of the non -dominant forearm, along C8 -T1 innervations. Immersion of the 
contralateral  foot into a painfully hot water bath (47 °C , Techne® water baths , Bibby Scientific 
US, Bur lington, NJ) will be the conditioning pain stimulus that is intended to activate  the pain -
inhibitory circuits and thereby decrease the  perceived pain of the forearm test stimulus  (see 
Figure below for setup) .  
In total,  four CPM  trials will be performed : two trials using a hot  water bath (47 °C) and two 
baseline trials without a water bath . For each hot water bath trial, the participant’s foot w ill be 
first submerged  in the water bath. After 20 sec of immersion, the  10-pulse temporal summation 
sequence w ill be applied  to the forearm and the participant w ill be prompted to  rate the pain 
intensity of the 1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th stimulus using the VAS. There  will be a two -minute rest 
period between all trials during  which the thermode w ill be systematically move d from  the 
distal to proximal sites along the C8 -T1 innervated  skin in order to avoid re -stimulation of  the 
previously sensitized skin.  For statistical analysis, ratings of the two 10 -pulse  sequences 
under the conditioning stimulus (hot water) will be averaged, and contrasted against ratings 
from the baseline (no -water) condition. A decrease in pain intensity ratings under the hot 
water condition compared to the no -water condition will be used as an index of the pain -
inhibitory capacity.   
 
(3) Cold  Pressor Tes t (CPT):  
The C old Pressor  Test (CPT): This test requires the insertion of the hand into an ice -cold water 
bath ( Techne® water baths , Bibby Scientific US, Burlington, NJ ) held at a temperature of 3°C. 
Participants are instructed to leave their hand in the water bath for at least 1 minute and are told 
that they may remove their hand earlier if the pain gets unbearable. Maximum immersion time will 
be 3 minutes. Pain intensity and unpleasantness will be rated every 10 sec during the hand 
immersion, as well as every 10 sec for 2 minutes and 30 seconds post -testing to capture recovery 
slopes.  
 
 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 15 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
Statistical Considerations  
Sample size : 34 subjects (including a 3 2% discontinuation rate ) will run in balanced order through the 
two pr otocols, each consisting of a 18-day in-hospital stay (separated by an interval of 1 month or 
more ) in ord er to complete the study with 26  subjects.   Power calculations  for the inflammatory 
response (aim 1) were estimated using findings coming from sleep restriction models on IL -6 (plas ma 
levels and expression by monocytes). For the pain -inhibitory response (aim 2), we estimated power 
using the effects of a single episode of sleep disruption on the pain -inhibitory capacity37. For the 
recovery resp onse (aim 3), we used data from the effects of recovery sleep on IL -6 positive 
monocytes, as well as on the habituation to pain in the cold pressor test paradigm (data obtained in 
currently ongoing protocol). For all 3 aims, optimal power will be reached w ith a sample size of N=26 
(see Table 1 ). 
 
Randomization : Block randomization will be used with block sizes of 10, 8, 8, and 8. Each block will 
have equal numbers of females and males and equal numbers of sequences (1. insomnia induction – 
control sleep, 2.  control sleep – insomnia induction). Randomization will be prepared by the study 
statistician and the participant will be informed of the sequence on study day 1.  
 
Statistical Analysis :  
 
Table 2  shows the primary outcome variables for aim 1 -3, as well as secondary outcome variables 
used for explorative analysis (not part of aims).  
 
Some of the 
variables will be 
measured at 
different time scales 
and reduced to the 
following summary 
variables: 
Subjective 
estimations of 
emotional and 
physical well -being 
assessed every 4 
hours during the w aking periods (and after each nighttime awakening during insomnia induction 
nights) of the protocol will be averaged to nighttime and daytime frequency and intensity measures.  
 
Table 1: Power calculations.  Table 2 : Outcome variables  
Primary outcomes  Secondary outcomes  
Aim 1 Aim 2  
 Aim 3  
 Explorative  
Inflammatory: IL -
6, PGE2, resolvin  Pain-inhibitory: 
CPM  IL-6, PGE2, 
resolvin, CPM  COX -2, cortisol  
 
Sensitization: 
HPT, PPT, TS  Habituation:  
Intensity ratings 
of HPST  
 HPT, PPT, TS, 
HPTS  Emotional/physical  
well-being  
HPT= h eat pain threshold; PPT=pressure pain threshold, TS=temporal summation; 
HPST=heat pain supra - threshold, CPM=conditioned pain modulation, COX=cyclooxygenase  
Variable   Response  Power based on 
paired Student  t-
test (=0.05) – 
N=26  
IL-6 (pg/mL). Response to 10 days of restricted sleep to 
4h/night compared to 8h control sleep.  1.951.59 pg/ml  >0.80  
IL-6 positive monocytes (%).  Response to three cycles 
of sleep restriction (3 x 5 nights of 4 hours of sleep/nig ht), 
compared to 8h control sleep (ongoing protocol  R01 HL 
105544, see also Figure 3 ). 3866 
% >0.80  
Pain inhibition impairment (CPM test, %). Response 
to 3 days of experimental sleep disruption, compared to 
control sleep(estimation from graph)37. 4754 
% >0.80  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 16 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
 
Assessment of Aim 1 : Inflammatory response and its relation to indicators of sensitization of 
the nociceptive system upon repeated episodes of experimentally -induced insomnia 
sympt oms: Outcome variables will be measure d on 8 out of the 18  in-hospital protocols (baseline, 2nd 
experimental insomnia/control night and 4th recovery night of each episode, and 3rd recovery night at 
end of protocol).  The analysis will focus on episode -wise comparison of outcome variables between 
experimental insomnia and control sleep conditions. Although several forms of liner mixed model will 
be used, our main analysis will focus on  daily summary measures (mean, max, min, slope, AUC, etc.) 
The models will  be constructed as follows:  the study has two within factors (measurments over sev eral 
days and measurements within the same day ). Data will be used as it is or the difference between the 
two experimental conditions by episode will be used in the analysis.  The main method of data analysis 
will employ linear mixed model (repeated  measures analysis).  
By defining appropriate contrast we can evaluate (i)  the difference between experimental insomnia 
nights and recovery sleep nights for the entire  study period , (ii) the difference between days 3 and 6 
(day6 minus day3), 7 and 10, and 11 and 14 separately. We expect that each of the contrast s will 
yield a significantly positive value. These comparisons will show if IL -6 values drops or increases from 
experimental insomnia nights to recovery sleep nights. Similarly, from the same model, by defining 
appropriate contrasts, we will evaluate the difference between days 6 and 7, 10 and 11, and 14. 
These contrasts are expected to be negative. Time will also be used as a continuous variable to test 
the trend and quadratic effect , and if the above contrast does not suggest strong episode -wise effect 
but mild increment (or decrease) from one episode to the next.  We may also use price -wise 
regression with a knot at each episo de (and also with just one knot to capture the effect of prolonged 
recovery towards the end of the experiment). As mentioned earlier, many of the exploratory analysis 
will be guided by plots and summary assessment of the data. Other inflammatory marker (PE G2, 
resolvins) will be analyzed in a similar fashion.  
 
Sensitization variables (HPT, PPT, TS) will be analyzed similarly and are expected to mimic the time 
course of inflammatory variables. Correlation between inflammatory markers and sensitization 
variab les will be evaluating using the Altman -Bland  method2. The linear mixed model described above 
can be used to obtain the necessary estimates to compute this correlation.  
 
Assessment of Aim 2 : Pain -inhibitory response and its relation to indic ators of habituation to 
pain upon repeated episodes of experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms . Analysis will follow 
the strategy similar to one outlined in Aim 1.  To evaluate co -variation of the pain -inhibitory response 
with indicators of habituation we  will first obtain average values of each value for each day, and use 
the Altman -Bland  correlation approach described earlier.  
These data will be analyzed using linear mixed model for doubly repeated measures using SAS GLM 
procedure as described in: 
http://support.sas.com/documentation/cdl/en/statug/63033/HTML/default/viewer.htm#statug_glm_sect
054.htm .  
 
Assessment of Aim 3 : Recovery of th e inflammatory and pain -inhibitory response upon Habituation to pain (CPT test, sec). Response to 3 
cycles of sleep restriction (3 x 5 nights of 4 hours of 
sleep/night), on the ability to habituate to cold pain, 
compared to 8h control sleep (ongoing proto col  R01 HL 
105544, see also Figure 7 ).  -1525 
sec >0.80  
Habituation to pain after recovery sleep (CPT test, 
sec). Response to 2 recovery nights following 3 cycles of 
sleep restriction on the ability to habituate to cold pain, 
compared to 8h control slee p (ongoing protocol  R01 HL 
105544, see also Figure 7 ).  -2428 
sec >0.80  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 17 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
repeated episodes of experimentally -induced insomnia symptoms .  The proposed incomplete 
resolution of inflammatory and pain -inhibitory responses during the recovery nights and the 
progressive impairment of t hese responses across insomnia induction episodes will be evaluated 
using a mixed model approach and utilizing four time points: baseline, and recovery at the end of 1st, 
2nd, and 3rd insomnia episode. Recovery response will be further evaluated by compari ng effects of a 
single night of recovery sleep to a set of 3 nights of recovery sleep at the end of the protocol.  
Data analysis for this aim is similar to data analysis described for Aim 1 , but a different set of contrast s 
need to be defined .Our conjectu re is that during the recovery IL -6 drops but does not reach to the 
level of previous recovery.  To test this we will evaluate contrasts that compare IL -6 values at days 3 
and 7, 7 and 11 and 11 and 15.  Finally, the difference between day 15  and 17 is ass umed to be 
larger than any other difference between sleep restriction and recovery days. To test this we will 
evaluate the differences between other recovery days (average of days 7, 11, and 15) and  day 17.  
All analysis will be performed using SAS statist ical package (version 9.3).  
 
 
 
C. Subject Selection  
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
A total of 34 healthy adults ( 18-35 yrs, 17 women, includ ing a discontinuation rate of 32 %) will be 
enrolled. Subjects of all racial/ethnic backgrounds will  be eligible to participate (see Planned 
Enrollment Report for expected distributions ). Participants will be accepted into the study if they 
are in good health, do not have a n active medical disorder or  history of any medical disorders 
(including sleep dis orders), as determined by a medical history, physical screening, and overnight 
sleep study (PSG, as per methods).  Participants from the Boston area, who meet these strict 
medical eligibility criteria, will be recruited to participate in the 2 x 18-day in-hospital study. Once 
participants enter the study, they will stay in a patient room at the Clinical Research Center of Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Nurses will check vital signs daily and will assess general 
emotional and physical well-being at re gular intervals throughout each study day. The study 
physician will also perform an in -person visit with each participant every day, in order to ensure 
participant’s  well-being .  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
- Women and men between the ages 18-35 years . 
- Non smoking  
- Body mass index (BMI) between 18.5 and 30 kg/m2. 
- For female participants: regular menstrual cycles, no significant discomfort during pre -
menses/menses . 
- Daily sleep duration between 7 -9 hours, verified by REDCap electronic sleep diary .   
- Sleep onset within  one hour of 11pm  (to ensure normal entrainment) . 
- Blood chemistry in the normal range . 
- Medical examination finding within normal range.  
Exclusion Criteria : 
- Active infection/disease . 
- History of neurological, chronic pain, immune, cardiovascular, liver/kidne y, or metabolic 
disorder  or Raynaud’s syndrome within 6 months prior to study start.  
- Active or chronic psychiatric disorders  within 6 months prior to study start , including major 
depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, panic disorders, post -traumatic stre ss disorders 
(PTSD), thought disorders, and substance abuse/dependence disorders.  
- In psychotherapy or any other behavioral interventions at study start (eg acupuncture for 
insomnia)  
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 18 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
- Sleep disorders . 
- PSG screen results of  apnea -hypopnea index (AHI)  of >5 events/hour  based on PSG 
screening night , periodic leg movement index (PLMI) >15/hour  based on PSG screening night ; 
sleep efficiency <80% based on PSG screening night;  restless legs syndrome, circadian 
rhythm disorders, and nightmare disorders determined b y diagnostic interview.  
- Pregnant/nursing . 
- Regular medication use other than oral contraceptives . 
- Donation of blood or platelets 3 month pr ior to study start . 
- Systolic BP measurement <140/90 Hg.  
- Use of anti -inflammatory medication one week prior to study st art 
- Positive urine toxicology screen.  
-   
 
Sources of Materials : 
Blood , urine , and saliva  samples  from participants will be assayed for markers involved in the 
inflammatory and stress response.  
 
Inclusion of Women:  
All women of child bearing age who do or d o not take oral contraceptives  and who are not pregnant or 
nursing are eligible for the study.  
 
  
 
 
B4. POSSIBLE BENEFITS  
This research will not benefit participants  directly. However, it will provide important information 
regarding the effects of repeate d exposure to insomnia symptoms on mechanisms responsible for 
pain amplification . This research is fundamental for the future development of novel strategies 
targeting specific mechanisms to prevent or reduce pain exacerbated by insomnia   
 
 
B5. POSSIBLE R ISKS AND ANALYSIS OF RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
Side effects  related to lack of sleep and maintaining wakefulness for an extended period of time 
include fatigue, frequent mood changes, increased bodily discomfort such as mild back pain, stomach 
pain, or headache,  as well as nausea and vomiting.  
There is a minimal risk of infection associated with drawing blood from a vein . There are no  known 
risks of testing heat and pressure pain threshold s, and heat and cold pain tolerance.  Repeated 
application of noxious heat p ulses can be associated with irritation of the skin for up to 48 hours. 
There are no known risks of wearing BP or PSG equipment . The Portapres device, used to measure 
beat-to-beat blood pressure, involves two s mall cuffs worn on two fingers. The pressure o f the 
inflating finger cuff may cause temporary discomfort, tingling or numbing to the finger, and if that 
happens we will loosen or switch the cuff to a different finger. It is not unusual to experience cool and 
blue finger tips when the cuff is inflated,  and we may keep your hand warm with a warm pad. No 
lasting finger discomfort has been reported from using this device, but a single case of prolonged mild 
numbness has been reported.  
 
Participants will be extensively screened before being accepted into th e study. We will exclude 
participants with a history of immune, cardiovascular, pain -related, gastrointestinal, significant 
psychiatric disease, significant allergies, or conditions where extreme vasoconstriction can occur , 
such as Raynaud’s syndrome. Part icipant screening will include blood tests for CBC and differentials, 
as well  as thyroid hormone, and blood  glucose ; urinary toxicology screens  will also be conducted . We 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 19 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
will exclude participants  who smoke or take regular medications  other than hormonal  birth control 
medication.  The m edical history and physical will be conducted by the study  physician. If the study 
physician is not available, the medical research officer will conduct the screenings. To ensure the 
participants’ safety while undergoing short ened and disrupted sleep , as well as to assist the participants 
in following the protocol and maintaining alertness outside of all scheduled sleep periods, research staff 
will accompany the participant at all times throughout their stay in the C RC. All res earch assistants are 
trained to watch for signs of drowsiness and to circumvent sleep spells by initiating change s in activity, 
for example switching from watching a video to playing a board game  with the participant if s/he appears 
drowsy . The study physi cian (or medical research officer) will check on  all participants daily while they 
are admitted to the CRC , and serve as the doctor on -call throughout each participant’s  stay. Should  
participants need medical assistance, the monitor ing research assistant  will notify the ward nurses, who 
will address any immediate medical needs and also immediately notify the study physician and the PI. In 
the event of a medical emergency, t he CRC is located in a critical care hospital, and a code team is 
available at all ti mes.  
 
Risk/benefit ratio : This work has the potential to understand the mechanisms by which insomnia 
may amplify pain.  Preventive or treatment strategies may emerge in part due to the results of this 
research.  
 
 
B6. RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT PROCEDURES  
Recruitment  
Participants  will be recruited via i nternet postings, flyers,  bulletin advertisements , subway 
advertisement, and local newspapers .  When participants contact the research office, they will 
participate in preliminary screening via telephone and/or email . Participants will receive a REDCap 
survey asking general health questions as well as questions regarding their sleep.  If it appears that 
an individual may qualify to participate in the study,  s/he will be invited to come to the C linical 
Research Center (CRC) where s/he will go through the informed consent process and complete 
questionnaires designed to assist in determining eligibility. During the initial visit to the CRC, nurses 
will also take vital signs and collect a blood sample.  These results w ill be reviewed by the study 
physician prior to the potential participants’ 2nd CRC visit, during which participants will undergo a 
medical history/physical and overnigh t sleep screening.  If an eligible individual is still interested in 
study participatio n, s/he will be scheduled to participate in the  two in-hospital  portion s of the study.  
 
Consent  
The PI and/or senior research team member will interview each subject and obtain informed consent 
from interested participants, after the participant has the s tudy explained to them in detail and has 
had any questions answered.   
 
Subject Protection  
While none of the subjects in this study will be drawn from a population vulnerable to coercion or 
undue influence, the following measures to ensure subject protecti on will remain in place.  
Participants will be extensively screened before being accepted into the study. We will exclude 
participants with a history of immune, cardiovascular, pain -related, gastrointestinal, significant 
psychiatric disease, significant al lergies , Raynaud’s Syndrome , or a history of substance abuse . 
Participant screening will include blood tests for CBC and differentials, as well as thyroid hormone, 
and blood glucose; urinary toxicology screens will also be conducted. We will exclude partic ipants 
who smoke or take regular medications other than hormonal birth control medication.  The m edical 
history and physical will be conducted by the study physician. To ensure th e participants’ safety while 
undergoing shortened and disrupted sleep , as well  as to assist the participants in following the protocol 
and maintaining alertness outside of all scheduled sleep periods, research staff will accompany the 
participant at all times throughout their stay in the CRC. Research assistants will also accompany study 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 20 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
participants during all times that they are outside of the CRC (i.e., for outside -walks ).  All research 
assistants are trained to watch for signs of drowsiness and to circumvent sleep spells by initiating 
changes in activity, for example switching fr om watching a video to playing a board game with the 
participant if s/he appears drowsy. The study physician will check on all participants daily while they are 
admitted to the CRC, and serve as the doctor on -call throughout each participant’s stay. Should  
participants need medical assistance, the monitoring research assistant will notify the ward nurses, who 
will address any immediate medical needs and also immediately notify the study physician and the PI. 
One week prior to  medical screening  of the study,  participants will not be permitted to take any 
medications  (except birth control medication). In the event of a medical emergency, the CRC is located 
in a critical care hospital, and a code team is available at all times.   
 
If a participant  reports to hav e suicidal ideation (positive answer to item 9 of the PHQ -9), the physician 
will be called to evaluate the condition of the subject which may result in bringing the subject to the 
emergency room.  
 
 
B7. STUDY LOCATION  
Privacy  and Physical Setting  
Every ef fort to maintain subject privacy will be made.  When interested participants contact the study 
office, a research assistant will return their call from a private office, in order to maintain 
confidentiality.  Em ails sent to and rec eived by  study participan ts will be based on a study email 
address , and dir ect mail will only be sent with the participant’s express permission and provision of a 
physical mailing address.  Participants will only be contacted by phone at the number they provide to 
study staff.  
 
For their screening visits, participants will present to the CRC, a central shared clinical research floor 
in the main part of the hospital.  Presence in this area of the hospital does not provide any specific 
information for an outside observer who witnesse s the participant presenting for screening.  All in -
person screening, including collection of physic al data from participants, will take place in a private 
room, behind closed doors, in the CRC.  The in -hospital portion of the study will be conducte d in a 
private or shared room within the CRC.  Participants will be outside of their private /shared  rooms 
during walk periods (alt hough will still remain in the CRC).   
 
Whenever possible, participant information will be identified only with a ‘participant identif ication 
number’ and not with actual names.  The exception to this is clinical data acquired in the CRC, which, 
in accordance with hospital policy, is identified with first and last name.  As soon as it is feasible, this 
name identification is converted to a numeric identifier to maximize confidentiality.  
 
 
B8. DATA SECURITY  
All possible precautions will be taken to ensure data security.  Data collected from participants will be 
identified using a subject number, rather than a name, whenever possible.  All patient hard copies of 
materials containing patient information will be stored in a locked file cabinet in a locked office on a 
secured (swipe -card access) research floor of the hospital.  Electronic data will be maintained on a 
secure server behind the BI DMC firewall.  All computers in the laboratory require use of a login 
before accessing any information , and data are encrypted .  Similar to hard copy materials, laboratory 
computers are located in locked rooms on a secure (locked) research floor of the hos pital.   
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 21 of 21 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  3 -2013  
  PI Revision Date:   
08/16/2017  
 
B9 Multi -Site Studies  
 
Is the BIDMC the coordinating site ?        Yes     No  
 
Is the BIDMC PI the lead investigator of the multi -site study?      Yes     No  
 
B10 Dissemin ation of Research Results  
Descriptions of the data will be presented at national and international conferences and will be 
submitted to peer -reviewed journals. To encourage the greatest possible dissemination of our work 
we will, whenever possible, describ e our observations in open access journals or through open 
access options in more traditional journals. We will also deposit copies of manuscripts accepted for 
publication in Pub Med Central to ensure unfettered public access to our work.  
In addition, we plan to use the following dissemination strategies to reach out to various communities:  
- BIDMC Active Tools & Media, which includes  videos , podcasts , E-Letters , blogs , online chats , 
social media  (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube) reaches employees as well as patient 
communities and informs about latest research results and medical advances.  
- BIDMC Bulletin is a bi -monthly print publication that is distributed across the campus and 
shares news about empl oyees – research, awards, and more.  
- Community Connect to Research at Harvard Catalyst is part of the Public Communication 
Initiative and disseminates research findings and more to the public . 
- Research Days at colleges and universities (e.g., Soma Weiss Res earch Day, Harvard 
Research Day) in the Boston area, at which our graduate and undergraduate students 
present their work on study -related projects.  
- ClinicalTrials.gov  
 
 