 
Version 2021.0 6.10 Page 1 of 29 
   
Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Dr. Paolo Cassano , MD, PhD  
 
Project Title:  Transcranial Photobiomodulation for Executive Function  in 
Bipolar Disorder  (TPEB) 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Version Date:  May 18th, 2023  
 
 
  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 2 of 29  
1.  Background and Significance  
 
Bipolar disorder (BD) is characterized by debilitating depressive and manic or hypomanic 
episodes, effecting an estimated 45 million worldwide1. The lifetime prevalence rate is estimated 
at 1% for BD in general, with specific prevalence rates of 0.6% for BD type -I, 0.4% for BD type -
II, and 1.4% for subthreshold BD2. BD is among the most impairing psychiatric disorders, typically 
causing pronounced deterioration in quality of life. Furthermore, BD is associated with premature 
mortality due to a suicide rate 10 -30 times higher than the general population3. The economic 
burden of BD on society is high, ranking 12th in causing disability worldwide  according to the 
World Health Organization4. People with BD are at particular risk of acting impulsively when 
experiencing manic symptoms, with a significant association between impulsivity and severity of 
manic symptoms. However, even when in a euthymic state, people with BD retain high 
impulsivity5. These high -risk, impulsive, unrestrained behaviors can lead to harmful 
psychological, social, and financial outcomes.  
 
FDA -approved medications for manic symptoms, such as Lithium, Carbamazepine, Valproate, and 
antipsychotics, have significant drawbacks due to poor tolerability, including the risk of metabolic 
syndrome, cognitive dulling, sexual dysfunction, and anhedonia.  Consequently, nonadherence to 
medications is common in BD, with a reported rate of approximately 50%6. This nonadherence 
carries a high risk of relapse, recurrence of depression, mania and psychosis, hospitalization, and 
suicide attempt, especially after abrupt discontinuation of medications. Overall, nonadherence 
decreases the likelihood of achieving rem ission and recovery. While medications have been shown 
to reduce impulsivity, with combination antipsychotics and mood stabilizers having a greater effect 
than mood stabilizers alone, on the whole these impulsivity scores continue to be higher than 
healthy  controls7.   
 
There is promise in the use of device -based interventions to control manic symptoms. Prior to the 
advent of mood stabilizers and antipsychotic medications, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was 
the only −and very effective− intervention for mania, mixed stat es, and delirious mania8. 
Nowadays, the use of ECT for the treatment of manic symptoms is limited by poor tolerability, 
stigma, access, lack of specialists, cost, healthcare inequity, and national laws. Modern 
noninvasive brain stimulation (NIBs) could potentially achieve the same efficacy of ECT in 
controlling manic symptoms, however with better tolerability, lower stigma, and easier access.  
 
Impulsivity, associated with poor decision -making, is a prominent manic symptom, often 
associated with severe functional impairment. Furthermore, as impulsivity remains high in BD 
subjects outside of a manic state, it may represent a core feature or trait of BD. Recent imaging 
studies have shown hyperactivation of ventral striatum and ventromedial PFC when anticipating 
rewarding outcomes in euthymic patients9 as well as striatal activity during anticipation being more 
strongly modulated by the reward value of prospects in subjects with subsyndromal hypomania10. 
Accordingly, most treatment studies show reduced impulsivity by neuromodulation of the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC). Specifically, high -frequency rTMS (excitation) on right dorsolateral PFC 
(dlPFC) decreases hasty, impulsive choices driven by immediate reward11-14. Therefore,  it is 
evident  that the  dlPFC plays an essential role in some of the cognitive processes of impulsivity. 
Use of NIBs on dlPFC could reduce impulsivity in patients with bipolar disorder, depression, high 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 3 of 29 suicidality, and addictions.  Similarly, bilateral, right anodal (excitation) and left cathodal tDCS on 
dlPFC reduces impulsivity14. Therefore, excitation of right dlPFC (R -dlPFC) by NIBs is a potential 
mechanism for treatment of manic symptoms such as impulsivity, while preserving physical 
health, individual functioning, and quality of life.   
 
Mainstream NIBs devices, such as rTMS and tDCS, are limited by the complexity of their 
administration, which necessitates frequent in -office sessions with specialized staff. Mainstream 
NIBs are therefore not scalable to the large needs of our society. Instead, at -home, self -
administered NIBs could lead to broad access to non -stigmatizing, well -tolerated interventions 
for manic symptoms.  Transcranial photobiomodulation (t -PBM) with near -infrared light (NIR) 
over the forehead is a novel NIBs, which is inexpensive, user -friendly and can be safely 
administered at home without supervision15.   
 
A substantial body of literature proves that t -PBM with NIR penetrates deeply into the cerebral 
cortex, modulates cortical excitability16,17, and improves cerebral perfusion18-20 and oxygenation21. 
Its safety was demonstrated in 1,410 acute stroke patients22,23. t-PBM improves inhibition, 
attention, memory, working memory and learning24-32, with evidence for cognitive benefits in both 
healthy individuals and in neuropsychiatric patients.  t-PBM is ideally suited to excite R -dlPFC  
and to improve inhibition −  similarly to rTMS and tDCS  − with the substantial advantage that 
t-PBM is also suitable for in -home, self-administration.   In the proposed study,  we will test t -
PBM on R -dlPFC  to control impulsivity (improve decision making) in patients with a diagnosis 
of bipolar disorder and currently in the spectrum from euthymic to hypomanic. We will also use 
cerebral blood flow as the most reliable biomarker of target engagement of R -dlPFC.    
 
Mechanistically, t -PBM with NIR (wavelength 800 –1100 nm) is absorbed by the cytochrome C 
oxidase (CCO) in neuronal mitochondria, leading to an increased synthesis of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), along with photodissociation of nitric oxide (NO) and cerebra l vasodilation 
and subsequent increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF)33. t-PBM increases cerebral blood flow 
(CBF) based on SPECT18,34, Doppler Ultrasound20,21, and fNIRS  reports.  This proposal will use 
the fMRI BOLD signal as the biomarker of CBF change  induced by t -PBM. The BOLD signal 
was previously validated as a marker of target engagement and as a predictor of treatment outcome 
in other NIBs35,36. t-PBM to the R -dlPFC  led to both increase of BOLD signal and to cognitive 
improvement in adults with cognitive deficits37. By engaging the CBF (BOLD), we will test the 
propensity of t -PBM to modulate R -dlPFC in patients with impulsivity due to bipolar disorder.  
 
At MGH,  we are conducting a single -blind, sham -controlled (paired sample) study to test the effect 
of bilateral t -PBM on fMRI BOLD signal (dlPFC) in adults (n=1 5) with major depressive disorder. 
We have demonstrated feasibility for multiple t -PBM sessions per week and for the delivery of t -
PBM within MRI scanner, while recording BOLD signal ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  A collaboration 
between MGH and colleagues in Italy piloted bilateral t -PBM in adults (n=4) with BD38. t-PBM 
was helpful in alleviating BD residuals, including impulsivity and irritability.  
 
 
 
2. Specific Aims and Objectives  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 4 of 29  
1. To test the effect of a single t -PBM session on cerebral blood flow (CBF), while  irradiating 
R-dlPFC, in subject s with impulsivity due to BD  
Hypothesis : a single t -PBM session on the R -dlPFC  will significantly increase BOLD -signal at the 
R-dlPFC, relative to sham.    
2. To test the effect of repeated t -PBM sessions on CBF, after irradiating R -dlPFC, in 
subject s with impulsivity due to BD  
Hypothesis : repeated t -PBM sessions on the R -dlPFC will significantly increase BOLD -signal at 
the R -dlPFC at day 5 relative to baseline.    
3. To test the effect of repeated t -PBM sessions on impaired decision making, in subject s 
with impulsivity due to BD  
Hypothesis : repeated t -PBM sessions on the R -dlPFC  will significantly improve decision making 
− increase in net gain at  the Iowa gambling task , decrease in Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS) 
score at day 5 and follow -up visit relative  to baseline , decrease  in BRIEF -A score  at day 5 and 
follow -up visit  relative to baseline , and a decrease in I -7 Impulsiveness and Venturesomeness 
Questionnaire  score at day 5 and follow -up visit  relative to baseline.  
4. To test the effect of repeated t -PBM sessions on manic symptoms ( MOOD S-SR) in 
subject s with BD  
Hypothesis : repeated t -PBM sessions on the R -dlPFC  will significantly decrease the total Mood  
Spectrum -Self Report ( MOOD S-SR) score  at day 5  and follow -up visit relative  to baseline. 
Dimensional improvements will be analyzed as a secondary step.  
 
 
3. General Description of Study Design  
 
This is a single -blind study to test the neuropsychological and clinical effects of t -PBM with NIR 
in BD. For our primary aim of examining the effect of tPBM on CBF, the study is additionally 
sham -controlled. Twenty patients with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, not currently in a 
depressive , manic , or mixed state  episode, will undergo one sham and one NIR - t-PBM session 
on day 1 (within MRI scanner), and one daily NIR - t-PBM session from day 2 to 5. On day 5, the 
NIR t -PBM session will also occur in the MR I scanner. The fMRI scan will measure BOLD 
changes during sham t -PBM (day 1) and during NIR t -PBM (day 1 & 5), on R -dlPFC. 
Impulsivity will be assessed by the B IS at pre-screen  (for inclusion criteria), baseline, treatment 
day 5 , and the follow -up visit ; and by the gambling task s at baseline , after the first NIR t -PBM 
(day 1), after the fifth  NIR t -PBM (day 5), and at the follow -up visit . Other aspects of  
impulsivity and  executive functioning will be assessed by the  I-7 and  BRIEF -A at baseline, day 
5, and the follow -up visit. The MOODS -SR-Last Week will be administered at baseline, day 5 , 
and the follow -up visit to assess change in mood, particularly hypomanic symptoms.  At 
screening, subjects will complete the MOOD S-SR Lifetime.  
 
 
 
4. Subject Selection  
 
We intend on enrolling 30 subjects diagnosed with bipolar disorder , with the goal of 
randomizing 20 subjects .  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 5 of 29  
Inclusion criteria for this study include:  1) adult s between the ages of 18 and 65, 2) diagnosis of 
bipolar disorder assessed with M.I.N.I. diagnostic interview, 3) currently  experiencing symptoms 
of impulsivity as per BIS total cut-off score equal or greater than 70, 4) if of child -bearing potential 
must agree to use adequate contraception (e.g. oral contraceptives, intrauterine device, double 
barrier methods, or total abstinence from intercourse) , and 5) vision corrected to normal with 
contacts/ vision does not require glasses or other visual aids . 
 
Exclusion criteria for this study include: 1) currently in depressive , manic, or mixed episode ; 2) 
currently psychotic ; 3) judged to be at serious and imminent suicidal risk (C -SSRS≥4 ); 4) currently 
in alcohol or substance use disorder (meeting criteria in the past 3 months  as assessed with M.I.N.I. 
diagnostic interview ); 5) unstable medical conditions ; 6) inability to consent or to complete study 
procedures ; 7) failure to meet standard MRI safety requirements (e.g. claustrophobia, non -
removable piercings, implanted medical devices, other non -removable metals) as determined by 
the MRI Safety Checklist ; 8) changes in medications or  use of augmentative devices and other 
interventions in the 2 weeks prior to the study ; 9) participation in other clinical research trials that 
may influence  primary outcomes or adherence to the proposed study, as assessed by the PI and the 
Co-Is; and 10) current pregnancy.  
 
Source of subjects will include outpatient clinics at MGH and McLean, the Translational and 
Clinical Research Center, and Registries/Patient Databases such as the RPDR and Patient 
Gateway  Announcements and or Invitations . We will recruit primarily through referrals from 
physicians, flyers, online advertisements, and platforms such as Partners Rally and 
ResearchMatch . We will respond to all individuals who express interest in the study, whether it 
is from an online recruitment source or through a referral from outpatient clinics at MGH. 
Clinical research coordinators will primarily handle recruitment and outreach, tho ugh some tasks 
may fall to other members of study staff, like interns. Physicians may send referrals directly to 
Dr. Cassano, who will forward the information to a CRC to make contact.  
 
We will not discriminate against any group of persons. Based upon the composition of the 
patient population at MGH and Boston, we anticipate that at least 50% of the participants will be 
women. The percentage of minority participants is expected to be at least 20%, consistent with 
previous studies in our lab a nd at MGH. We expect a roughly equal distribution across sex and 
ethnicity, as has been previously demonstrated with BD, with the potential for slightly more 
diagnoses of B D type-I among men and BD type-II among women.  Fetuses, children, prisoners, 
and institutionalized individuals will not be recruited, because they are beyond the scope of the 
objectives. We will review recruitment regularly at team meetings to track progress and adjust 
recruitment strategies as needed.  
 
 
We are only enrolling English -speaking participants in this study since the measures used are 
developed and validated in the English language and because non -English speaking subjects may 
not be able to understand study procedures, which could undermine th e validity of the results.  
 
 
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 6 of 29 5. Subject Enrollment  
 
Individuals interested in participating in the study will contact study staff through online 
recruitment platforms, such as Partners Rally and ResearchMatch. Additionally, patients may be 
referred to the study from outpatient clinics at MGH. All interested  individuals will undergo a 
screening by trained study staff to ensure eligibility and, importantly, their capacity for 
voluntary, informed consent. Study staff will describe the study and go through informed consent 
procedures. Subjects will read the cons ent form without any time constraints and will be 
provided the opportunity to ask any questions related to study procedures. Individuals will be 
officially enrolled upon signing the consent form. This study will not change the clinical care 
that subjects r eceive, meaning that all subjects participating in the study will receive the same 
clinical care as those who are not.  
 
Individuals interested in participating will first be phone -screened for eligibility prior to signing 
the consent form. The PI  and licensed physician co -Investigators with detailed knowledge about 
the study aims, logistics, procedures, risks, benefits , and alternatives  will obtain written informed 
consent from subjects who meet criteria for this study. Individuals will be given the opportunity 
to take time to consider participation prior to signing the consent form . Since Dr. Ellard’s 
patients might be offe red the participation in this study, the PI, Dr. Cassano, or other licensed co -
Is will review the consent and co -sign the consent for any study subjects referred to the study by 
Dr. Ellard. This measure will be implemented to prevent any type of coercion.  
 
All subjects participating in the study will receive the same standard of care as those who are not. 
There are additional study procedures that subjects will undergo, though this should have little to 
no impact on clinical care. Further, study participatio n will not impact access to standard of care, 
meaning that participating in the study will not prohibit subjects from receiving standard 
treatments for bipolar disorder . 
 
t-PBM is not considered standard of care and is therefore an alternative treatment for bipolar 
disorder . Standard of care for bipolar disorder  includes, but is not limited to,  psychotherapy, 
medications (such as mood stabilizers, anti -depressants, or anti -psychotics), or device -based 
treatments (such as ECT) . Information on standard of care for bipolar disorder will be provided 
to all subjects. Subjects may continue with their current treatment regimen throughout the study . 
 
The MGH Brain Photobiomodulation Clinic (Director: Paolo Cassano, MD PhD) has historically 
served as a resource for subjects enrolled in t -PBM clinical trials who then wish to continue with 
specialized supervision. Study staff will offer access to the clin ic to all subjects upon study 
completion.  
 
Participants will be compensated $125 for each of the following visits: Baseline, Treatment 1, 
Treatment 5, and Follow Up. For each of these visits, the participant receives $25 for attending 
the appointment, $50 for completion of the first gambling task, and $50 for the completion of the 
second gambling task. Participants who complete all portions of the study will receive a total of 
$500.  Subjects who end study procedures prematurely will be compensated for all completed 
study procedures. Subjects will be  mailed a check at the conclusion of their study participation.  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 7 of 29 While participants will always receive the full $50 for completing each gambling task, they will 
be told that their real -world earnings are based on their performance on the gambling task. They 
will be told that the maximum amount of real-world money that the y can earn  in each task is 
$50. Participants will be told that the  better they do on the task, the closer they will get to earning 
the full $50, and that their total earnings will be revealed at the final study visit . The purpose of 
these gambling tasks is to investigate various aspects of behavior, such as impulsivity and 
decision -making. In order for these tasks to effectively gather accurate data on these behaviors, it 
is crucial that the participants believe that the amount of money they earn is based on th eir 
decisions within the tas k. Upon completion of all study procedures, participants will be informed 
that they will receive the full $50 for each of the eight gambling tasks that they completed . 
 
This deception may result in increased  frustration related to performance  on the gambling tasks. 
This deception involves no more than minimal risk to the participants.  
 
If participants do not believe that their compensation is affected by their performance on the 
gambling tasks, they will not be sufficiently motivated to perform to the best of their ability. The 
promise of a monetary reward will create a more realistic mo del of real -world decision making 
and impulsivity, which are the behaviors that these tasks are designed to measure. This deception 
is therefore necessary in order to obtain worthwhile data.  
 
This deception will be disclosed by study staff at the end of the follow up visit. Participants will 
receive a debriefing form explaining the reasoning for a nature of the deception.   
 
 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Study Visits   
  
Contact with potential participants  
 
Initial contact made with potential research subjects will include only the minimum PHI (name 
and email). Study staff will obtain written or verbal consent to continue correspondence through 
unencrypted emails or will send detailed study and PHI information using the “Send Secure” 
function.  Emails not sent using “Send Secure” to participants will contain and automatic email 
signature alerting them that the email is not encrypted. If participants are uncomfortable 
receiving information unencrypted,  they should alert study staff who will then proceed to 
communicate securely with the participant.  If an individual contacts the study staff by email first, 
it is implied that email communications are acceptable. Study staff will ver ify that individuals 
are comfortable  with unencrypted emails and obtain written or verbal consent to proceed with 
unencrypted  email  communication.  
 
Pre-Screen   
  
Prior to enrolling in the study, interested individuals will be  contacted  by trained study staff for a 
pre-screening , which can be completed over the phone or via a REDCap link . The trained study 
staff will review study details and procedures and will ask  a series of questions and administer 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 8 of 29 two questionnaires (the ASRM and the PHQ -9) to assess eligibility for the study.  Additionally, 
study staff will either administer the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS)  over the phone or send 
interested individuals the REDCap survey link to assess if their impulsivity levels meet our 
inclusion criteria.  Prior to collecting any information, individuals will be asked to provide verbal 
authorization to write down their responses and will be given the option to not answer questions 
if they do not wish to do so.  Individuals will also be given the opportunity to provide verbal 
consent regarding unencrypted emails.  If the individual is eligible for the study, they will be 
invited to a screening visit. If the individual is not eligible or decides not to enroll, any 
information collected during the phone call will be destroyed to protect privacy. If an individual 
is eligible for the study and enrolls, the information collected during the pre-screening phase  will 
be added to their research file.  Individuals will be sent  a copy of the consent form for their 
review via email and the screening visit will be scheduled.  Individuals will be reminded not to 
discuss medical information  through unencrypted emails.  Individuals will be instructed not to 
sign the consent form until  after they’ve discussed it with the clinician during the screening visit.  
  
Screening   
  
Subjects will review  the consent form  with the study clinician  (PI or Co -I; MDs)  and be given 
the opportunity to ask questions.  Consent will be obtained by a licensed physician investigator . If 
the screening visit is conducted remotely  using Zoom, the consent form will be collected 
electronically using  REDCap  following the  MGH  eConsent  Template. Subjects will then receive 
an electronic copy of the consent form through their provided email which they can download  
and keep for their records . This is an automatic function of REDCap. If the sc reening visit is 
conducted in -person, the consent form may be collected on REDCap or on paper.  If the consent 
form is signed on paper, subjects will receive a paper copy of the consent.  Subjects will be 
considered enrolled in the study once they sign the consent form.  
  
Subjects will be asked a series of question naires  to assess eligibility for the study , including the 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI),  and the Columbia Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale  (C-SSRS ). Demographic information , concomitant medications and therapies , prior 
treatment history, and medical history  will be collected. Subjects will complete an MRI 
Screening Form  and the MOODS -SR Lifetime . Screening will also include a dipstick toxicology 
urinalysis and, if applicable, a dipstick pregnancy test. If the subject is eligible, they will be 
invited to continue to the baseline visit. If not eligible, the subject will not be invited 
to continue  with the study.   
  
Baseline Visit  
 
Adverse events,  as well as  concomitant medications and therapies, will be collected. Participants 
will complete the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS), the BIS, the BRIEF -A, the I -7, the 
CAST -IRR, and the SAFTEE. A licensed clinician will administer the C -SSRS and the CGI -S. 
Skin color will be recorded using the NIS -SCS.  Participants will complete two computerized 
gambling tasks: The I owa gambling task  and the Delgado gambling task . The order of 
administration of the gambling tasks will be randomized.  This appointment will last 
approximately 90 minutes.  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 9 of 29 Treatment 1  
  
Vitals will be assessed and recorded. The MRI Safety Checklist will be completed and signed 
before the MRI. Participants will undergo an MRI Scan. While in the scanner, participants will 
first undergo a structural scan and resting state scan, followed by a functional scan during w hich 
the participants will  receive a sham t -PBM treatment. This scan will be followed by a pre-
stimulation resting -state functional acquisition. At this time, a ctive t -PBM will be administered , 
immediately followed by a post -stimulation resting state scan. Participants will then complete the 
Delgado gambling task . A functional sequence will be collected during the administration of the 
gambling task. Finally, participants will undergo a post -stimulation resting state functional scan. 
The MRI will last approximately 75 minutes in tot al.  
 
Participants will know that they are receiving both active and sham treatment, but they will not 
be told in which order the treatments will be delivered. Participants will complete the PBQ , 
CAST -IRR,  TSRQ , and the I owa Gambling Task  at the conclusion of the visit. Study staff will 
complete an intervention tracking form.  
 
Treatment s 2-4 
  
Treatments 2, 3, and 4 should ideally  occur once daily during the three days following the first 
treatment administration. If necessary, this window can be extended so that these three treatment 
visits occur within ten days of the Baseline/Treatment 1 visit  (in this case, the timing of follow 
up visits will be adjusted accordingly) . Adverse events and concomitant medications and 
therapies will be assessed and recorded at each visit. Participants will complete the TSRQ  and 
CAST -IRR after treatment administration. Study staff will complete an intervention tracking 
form  for each study visit.  
  
Treatment 5  
  
Treatment 5 should ideally occur the day after Treatment 4. If necessary, this window can be 
extended so that this visit occurs within ten days of the Treatment 1 visit  (in this case, the timing 
of follow up visits will be adjusted accordingly) . Adverse events, concomitant medications and 
therapies, and vitals will be assessed and recorded.  The MRI Safety Checklist will be completed 
and signed before the MRI. Participants will complete the MOODS -SR, the BIS, the BRIEF -A, 
and the I -7.  
 
Participants will undergo an MRI Scan. A structural scan and a pre -stimulation resting state 
functional scan will be collected first.  Active t -PBM will be administered immediately after the 
resting -state scan, followed by a post -stimulation resting state functional scan.  Participants will 
then complete the Delgado  gambling task. A functional sequence will be collected during the 
gambling task administration. The MRI will last approximately 4 5 minutes in total.   
 
Participants will complete the SAFTEE , the CAST -IRR,  the TSRQ, and the Iowa gambling task  
after the MRI/t -PBM session. Study staff will complete an intervention tracking form.   
 
Clinical Check -in Call  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 10 of 29  
A licensed study clinician will call the participant (phone or video call)  approximately 2 -3 days 
after the final treatment session . Adverse events and concomitant medications and therapies will 
be assessed and recorded . The clinician will administer the C -SSRS and the CGI -S/I. The 
clinician may use the PHQ -9 and/or ASRM to guide their call with the study participant, though 
these scales do not need to be completed in full. The purpose of this call is to check in on the 
general safety and well -being of the participant.  
 
Follow Up Visit   
  
The follow up visit  takes place  approximately  one week after the final treatment session.  This 
visit will be completed in person. Adverse events and concomitant medications and therapies 
will be assessed and recorded. Participants will complete the MOODS -SR, the BIS, the BRIEF -
A, the I-7, the SAFTEE,  the Delgado gambling task, and Iowa gambling task. The order of 
administration of the gambling tasks will be randomized. A licensed clinician will administer the 
C-SSRS and the CGI -S/I.  
 
Communication with participants throughout the study:  
Participants who consent to text messaging , in addition to standard email and phone 
communication,  will receive a text message reminder before every scheduled visit. Text 
messages will be sent via Updox Secure Text Messaging  and SMS . Updox is an online 
messaging service that specializes in secure healthcare communication.  
 
Participants who consent to text messaging will receive a text message the day before each 
scheduled study visit. This message will be sent as a SMS text message letting the participant 
know they have received a secure message from the MGH Photobiomodulation Lab with a link 
to access the message. The first message received will instruct them to enter in their f ull name 
and create a PIN to access the message. Each time a message is received they must enter their 
unique PIN number to access the message. Study  staff do not have access to anyone’s personal 
PIN numbers. Individuals are able to respond back to the message they receive with questions  or 
for more information if necessary .   
 
  
tPBM  Administration   
  
The t -PBM -NIR device used in the study is the  Litecure’s LightForce® EXPi  Deep Tissue Laser 
Therapy TM System, Transcranial PhotoBioModulation -1000 (tPBM -2.0). The tPBM -2.0 is an 
investigational device based on LiteCure’s LightForce® EXPi Deep Tissue Laser Therapy TM 
System. For the investigational study, the EXPi System’s beam delivery - Empower TM, is 
modified to non -invasively deliver Near -Infrared Radiation (NIR) to subjects diagnosed with 
Bipolar Disorder. The modified system is also configured to provide sham (placebo) treatment. 
The device is manufactured and supplied by LiteCure LLC, 101 Luke ns Dr, Suite A, New 
Castle, DE 18720.  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 11 of 29 The treatment program (using the parameters outlined below) will be programmed into the 
device. The console displays the time and energy delivered and automatically turns itself off 
once the treatment is completed.    
  
Table 1.  tPBM  Parameters   
Measure (unit)   Value   
    
Wavelength (nm)   808nm  
Exposure time  (s) 
  333  
Area of exposure  (cm2)  24 
Irradiance, Power Density (mW/cm2)    300 
Fluence (J/cm2) 100 
Total Energy (kJ)  2.4 
NIR Source  Laser  
Laser Output  (W) 3.5 per fiber (7 total)  
Wave Mode  Continuous  
Anatomical Targets  F4 & F8  (proximity)  
Device   Litecure’s LightForce® EXPi  Deep 
Tissue Laser Therapy TM System, 
Transcranial PhotoBioModulation -1000 
(tPBM -2.0) 
   
  
The tPBM -2.0 is considered a Class II medical device per 21 CFR 890.5500 and 878.4810 and is 
manufactured per 21 CFR 820. It utilizes a laser diode source with a maximum continuous (CW) 
output of ≤30 Watts at a wavelength of 808 nanometers (nm) and nominal  beam diameter of 
40mm at the outside aperture.  
 
The tPBM -2.0 consists of a therapeutic laser console (that produces laser energy as NIR), and an 
optical delivery system consisting of a flexible, double -sheathed optical fiber connected to a 
custom helmet (cap). The cap is configured to deliver NIR light to EEG site F4 (or in close 
proximity if covered by hair), covering a total surface treatment area of approximately 24 cm2 
[12 cm2 x 2]. It also includes laser safety eye ware with an optical density rating >5.0 at 808 nm.  
 
The therapeutic laser console is the only component of the device that is not MRI compatible. It 
will be stored in an equipment room located in Zone 2 (area with no detectable magnetic field 
but to which access is restricted due to scanner proximity). An M RI-compatible optical fiber will 
connect the laser console to the MRI -compatible cap. The safety eye wear is also MRI 
compatible.   
 
Aside from the cap, the tPBM -2.0 is the same device as LiteCure’s EXPi System – Model LTS -
2500, which is marketed under FDA’s 510(K) # K107637.  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 12 of 29 The cap is a custom 3D -printed headgear made of plastic and serves to hold the laser probe in 
place, between the MRI coil and the subject's head. The cap is provided by the device 
manufacturer (LiteCure) and is very similar to those used in our previous t -PBM studies. The 
laser probe (attached to the cap) will be connected to the laser console with a multimode MR -
compatible optical fiber. The distal end of the optical fiber is fitted with ceramic ferrules, which 
will be affixed to the cap. The cap (headgear ) contains clamps which secure the ferrules. The cap 
will be used in place of the wand. The cap is the only modification of the device delivery system, 
and it was required in order to do the t -PBM inside the MRI scanner. The cap is a component of 
the tPBM -2.0 device; it is not a separate device. The cap is used to apply NIR to EEG site F4.  
  
The t -PBM -2.0 is a nonsignificant risk device because it:  
 
1. Is NOT intended as an implant and DOES NOT present a potential for serious risk to the 
health, safety, or welfare of a subject;   
2. Is NOT purported or represented to be for a use in supporting or sustaining human life and 
DOES NOT present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject;   
3. Is NOT for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating 
disease, or otherwise preventing impairment of human health and DOES NOT present a 
potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject; or   
4. DOES NOT otherwise present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of 
a subject.   
 
Further,  
 
• The t -PBM -2.0 maximum dose administered in this study does not exceed the Maximum 
Permissible Exposure (MPE) for skin – Center for Devices and Radiological Health 
(CDRH), 21CFR1040.10 and 21CFR1040.11;   
• The t -PBM -2.0 is substantially equivalent to the OmniLux New U which the FDA has 
already categorized as a non -significant risk device;     
• Currently FDA -cleared lasers are typically available over -the-counter and are considered 
safe to use without professional supervision.   
• The MGB IRB determined a similar PBM device as NSR for the ELATED -3 study (IRB 
Protocol Number 2016P001490). The ELATED -3 device operated at significantly higher 
irradiances than the current PBM device. The FDA determined that an IDE was not 
required for t he ELATED -3 device.  
• The current PBM device was deemed to be NSR by the NYU Langone Health IRB  in 
previous studies . 
 
The tPBM -2.0 device is currently being used in two other approved studies at MGH: 
Transcranial Photobiomodulation for Alzheimer’s Disease (Protocol #2020p003051) and 
Transcranial Near Infrared Radiation and Cerebral Blood Flow in Depression (Protocol 
#2020 p000845).  
 
Safety data from the use of the t -PBM 2.0 device in currently active studies at the time of initial 
review  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 13 of 29 TRIADE (Protocol #2020p000845) – Adverse Events : As of May 4th, 2022, Cumulative data 
from all three study sites  
 
Adverse Event  Number  
Participants  Number  
Incidences  Severity  Study 
Intervention 
Relationship  Resolved  Expected   
   Mild= 1 
Moderate= 2  
Severe= 3  1= Not related  
2 = Unlikely  
3 = Possibly  
4 = Probably  
5 = Definitely  1= yes  
0= No  1= yes  
0= no  
SKIN WARMING  9 12 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,2,  
1,1 5,5,3,4,4,  
4,4,5,3,5  
5,4 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1  
1,1 1 
INSOMNIA  3 4 2,1,2, 2 3,4,3, 4 1,1,1, 0 1 
EARLY MORNING 
AWAKENING  1 1 3 4 1 1 
DISCOMFORT 
DURING MRI  2 2 1,2 5,3 1,1 1 
PANIC ATTACK 
DURING MRI  1 1 2 4 1 1 
ANXIETY DURING 
MRI  1 1 1 1 1 1 
HEADACHE  8 8 1,2,1,2,  
2,1,2, 1 1,3,3,3,  
1,1,4, 4 1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1, 1 1 
CLAUSTROPHOBIA  1 1 1 4 1 1 
BLURRY VISION  1 1 1 2 1 0 
SEIZURE  1 1 2 2 1 0 
PANIC ANXIETY  3 3 1,1,2 4,1,1 1,1,1 1,0,1 
PAIN ON 
FOREHEAD  1 1 1 4 1 1 
BURNING 
SENSATION ON 
SKIN  1 1 2 5 1 1 
PANIC ATTACK 
WITH 
DISSOCIATION  1 1 1 0 1 0 
RENAL INFECTION  1 2 3,3 1,1 1,1 0,0 
MOTOR VEHICLE 
ACCIDENT (NO 
PHYSICAL 
INJURY)  1 1 1 1 1 0 
NIGHTMARES  1 1 1 4 1 1 
STYE  1 1 1 3 1 0 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 14 of 29 WORSENING 
ANXIETY  1 1 2 2 0 1 
“MIND FOG” 
AFTER MRI  1 1 1 4 1 1 
 
  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10 Page 15 of 29 
 TRAP -AD (Protocol #2020p003051) – Adverse Events: As of May 4th, 2022, Cumulative data from all three study sites  
 
ADVERSE EVENT  NUMBER  
PARTICIPANT
S NUMBER  
INCIDENCE
S SEVERITY  STUDY 
INTERVENTIO
N 
RELATIONSHI
P RESOLVE
D  EXPECTE
D 
   Mild= 1 
Moderate= 2  
Severe= 3  0= Not related  
1 = Unlikely  
2 = Possibly  
3 = Probably  
4 = Definitely  1= yes  
0= No  1= yes  
0= no  
ANKLE EDEMA  1 1 3 0 1 0 
CHEST TIGHTNESS  1 1 3 0 1 0 
DIARRHEA  2 2 1,1 0,0 1,1 0,0 
DIZZINESS  3 4 1,1,1,1  1,0,2,2  1,1,0,1  0,0,1,1  
FATIGUE  2 2 1,1 1,2 0,0 0,1 
FEELINGS OF 
UNEASINESS  1 1 1 2 1 0 
HEAD WARMING  
3 13 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1  4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4  1,1,1,1,1, 
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1  1,1,1,1,1, 
1,1,1,1,1, 
1,1,1  
HEADACHE  2 2 1,1 2,3 0,1 1,1 
INSOMNIA  1 2 1,1 2,0 1,0 1,1 
ITCHINESS ON 
UPPER BACK  1 1 1 0 0 0 
JAW PAIN/TEETH 
CLENCHING 
DURING SLEEP  1 1 1 1 0 0 
LIGHTHEADEDNES
S 1 1 1 0 1 0 
POSITIONAL 
VERTIGO IN MRI  1 1 1 0 1 1 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 16 of 29 RASH (UPPER 
BACK)  1 1 1 1 1 1 
SEEING LIGHT 
DURING 
TREATMENT  1 1 1 4 1 1 
SKIN REDDENING  
3 27 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1  
1,1 4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1 
Skin warming 
(forehead)  
6 22 1,1,1,1,1  
11,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
2,1,1,1,1,  
1,1 4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,4,  
4,4,4,4,3,  
4,4 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1 1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1,1,1,1,  
1,1 
Stomach Discomfort  1 1 1 1 1 0 
Vivid Dreams  2 2 1,1 2,2 1,1 1,1 
Vomiting  1 1 1 0 1 0 
 
  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10 Page 17 of 29 
  
Assessments   
 
Adverse Events Form  
 
The Adverse Events Form captures any adverse event (serious or otherwise) that the subject 
experiences while participating in the study. Events may occur during or outside of study 
procedures.  
 
Altman Self -Rating Mania Scale ( ASRM ) 
 
The ASRM is a 5 -item self -rated mania scale designed to assess the presence and/or severity of 
manic symptoms over the past 7 days.  This scale will be administered as part of the pre -
screening phase.  
 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS )39 
 
The BIS is a 30 -item measure of cognitive and motor impulsivity rated on a 4 -point Likert scale 
(1 = rarely/never to 4 = almost always/always). It captures three factors: Motor Impulsiveness, 
Non-Planning Impulsiveness, and Attentional Impulsiveness. The BIS has demonstrated high 
internal consistency and validity across populations.  
 
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function  – Adult Version  (BRIEF -A)40 
 
The BRIEF -A is a 75 -item self -report scale to assess executive function. It consists of two 
indices: The Behavioral Regulation Index and the Metacognitive Index. T he Behavioral 
Regulation Index measures inhibition, set shifting, control , and attention monitoring. The 
Metacognitive Index measures ability to initiate tasks, working memory, planning/organization 
ability, task monitoring, and organization. The BRIEF -A has demonstrated good internal 
consistency and validity across several clinical populations and non -clinical controls.  
 
Concise Associated Symptom Tracking Irritability Scale (CAST -IRR)  
 
This instrument is a f ive item self -report that assesses irritability  over the last 24 hours . 
 
Clinical Global Impressions – Severity and Improvement (CGI -S, CGI -I)  
 
These two instruments are scored 1 -7 by the clinician based on assessment of the subject's 
overall clinical status. They measure, based on history and scores on other instruments: 
(a) severity of impairment  (CGI -S) and (b) clinical improvement (CGI -I).  
 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS ) 41 
 
An instrument endorsed by the FDA for clinical trials. This instrument systematically tracks 
suicidal ideation and behavior (e.g., suicide attempts, wish to die, thoughts of suicide, plan , and 
intent).  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 18 of 29  
Concomitant Medications and Therapies Form  
 
This form records all ongoing medications, as well as other therapies, and will be completed at 
every study visit, including the screening visit, as a safety -monitoring tool.  
 
Iowa Gambling Task  
 
In this computerized task,  participants play a game of chance in which they can win or lose fake 
money. Participants are presented with four cards and are asked to choose one. Their choice 
results in a gain or loss. Participants are given feedback on each choice. This task is designed to 
measure impulsivity.  
 
Delgado Gambling Task (IGT)  
 
In this computerized task , participants play a game of chance in which they can win or lose fake 
money.  Participants are given a target number. They are then presented with a sequence of cards. 
Before each card is presented, participants are asked to guess whether the number on the next 
card will be higher or lower than the target number. They are then given feedback on their 
choice. This task is designed to measure reward -processing.  
 
I-7: Impulsiveness and Venturesomeness Questionnaire  
 
The I -7 is a self-report scale of  54 items and three subscales. Of the 54 items, 19 measure 
Impulsiveness, 16 measure Venturesomeness, and 19 measure Empathy. Answers are marked as 
“Yes” or “No.”  
 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Intervie w (M.I.N.I)42 
 
The M.I.N.I. is a short structured diagnostic interview, developed jointly by psychiatrists and 
clinicians in the United States and Europe, for DSM and ICD psychiatric disorders. With an 
administration time of approximately 15 minutes, it is designed to me et the need for a short but 
accurate structured psychiatric interview for clinical trials. According to researchers at the 
National Institute of Mental Health's (NIMH) Division of Clinical and Treatment Research, the 
M.I.N.I. is a fully validated and more time-efficient alternative to the Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM Disorders (SCID).  For the purposes of this study, we will only use modules 
related to mood, psychosis, and substance abuse.  
 
MOODS -SR – Last Week  & Lifetime  
 
This 161 -item self -report scale assesses manic -depressive symptoms. Participants are asked to 
answer “Yes” or “No” to each question. Subdomains measure Moods, Energy, Cognition, and 
Rhythmicity. Time frame is either lifetime or the last week, depending on scale us ed. 
 
MRI Safety Checklist  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 19 of 29 This form identifies risk factors that may make MRI participation unsafe.  
 
New Immigrant Survey -Skin Color Scale (NIS -SCS)43 
 
The NIS-SCS is an 11 -point scale, ranging from zero to 10, with zero representing albinism, or 
the total absence of color, and 10 representing the darkest possible skin.   The ten shades of skin 
color corresponding to the points 1 to 10 on the Massey and Martin Skin C olor Scale are 
depicted in a chart, with each point represented by a hand, of identical form, but differing in 
color. The respondent never sees the chart. We gather this data for use as a potential covariate in 
analyses as skin color can affect absorption of NIR.   
 
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) 
 
This nine -item self -report measure assesses the presence and severity of depressive symptoms 
over the past 14 days. This scale will be administered as part of the pre -screening phase.  
   
Perceived Blinding Questionnaire (PBQ)  
 
The PBQ is a self -report questionnaire to determine the degree to which the participant believes 
they are receiving active treatment or sham.  
 
Prior Treatment Log  
 
This form captures information regarding prior treatments for bipolar disorder or other mental 
health concerns.  
 
Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events (SAFTEE )44 
 
The SAFTEE is a commonly used instrument originally developed by NIMH and adapted into a 
self-report instrument. The version of the scale that we plan to use is the same used by the multi -
center, NIMH -sponsored CO -MED trial, and it examines in a systematic  fashion all possible 
treatment -emergent side effects and probes specific adverse symptoms, including suicidal 
thoughts and behaviors, and self -injurious behavior.  
 
t-PBM Self -Report Questionnaire (TSRQ)  
 
An open -ended questionnaire focusing on potential inconveniences and discomforts from the t -
PBM treatment.  
 
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS)  
 
This 11 -item clinician -rated scale is used to assess the presence and severity of manic symptoms.  
   
MRI Scanning   
  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 20 of 29 The collection of MRI images will take place in a 3T magnet scanner with  multi -
channel  receivers. All protocols have been developed and validated at the Martinos Center for 
biomedical imaging.  
 
Participants will undergo conventional high -resolution 3D T1 -weighted MPRAGE scan s, resting 
state functional connectivity MRI sequence s, and task -based functional connectivity MRI 
sequences . 
 
We will examine areas pertaining to impulsivity , mood , and executive function, including but not 
limited to the Salience Network, Central Executive Network, Limbic Areas, Default Mode 
Network, and the dlPFC.   
 
This data will be used to test the effect of a single t -PBM session on cerebral blood flow (CBF), 
while irradiating R -dlPFC (SA1), in subjects with impulsivity due to BD and to test the effect of 
repeated t -PBM sessions on CBF (SA2).  
 
 
7. Risks and Discomforts  
 
Screening and Evaluation: The risks  and discomforts of the screening evaluations  include 
discomfort or distress responding to potentially sensitive questions regarding mental illness and 
drug use.  Research interviews are interrupted if individuals become distressed or object to 
answering questions.  
 
Delay in Initiation of New, or Changes in Ongoing, Bipolar Treatment:  While this study is not 
testing t -PBM as a treatment for bipolar disorder, it is possible that participants will experience 
improvements to their symptoms while undergoing t -PBM. Any delay in receiving t -PBM (while 
screening procedures are completed) migh t be considered as a delay in treatment from a patient 
perspective. We will emphasize that the study is not geared to test a treatment but instead the 
impact of t-PBM on cerebral blood flow.  
 
Further, study participation requires stable  BD treatment  during and two -weeks prior to 
enrollment.  Subjects  should not change medications, treatm ents, or therapeutic interventions two 
weeks prior to study enrollment or during study participation as to avoid interference with t -PBM 
treatment. However, without adjustment of medication it is possible that participants’ symptoms 
may worsen while participating in the study.  This may include  increased disturbances in mood, 
anxiety, sleep, appetite, energy , or cognition.  This could result in work loss, loss of social 
function, and possibly increased risk of suicide.  Therefore, there is some risk to halting 
medication changes while in the study.  However, the risk will be minimized as there are several 
safety precautions in place and participants will have frequent contact with study clinicians. The 
clinical monitoring in this study exceeds that of standard care for BD. The potential benefits of 
improving impulsivity and cognition offset the risk of worsening BD symptoms.  
 
Risks of Clinical Decompensation:  If a patient has worsened to such a degree that further 
participation would put them  at risk, then they will be discontinued from the study. In such cases, 
the patient is immediately transferred to standard clinical treatment and exited from the research. 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 21 of 29  At any point during the study, patients are told to immediately inform their study psychiatrist if 
they develop worsening of depression or anxiety, symptoms of mania or psychosis, or active 
suicidal plans.    
 
Suicidality Standard Operating Plan (SOP): If a subject spontaneously expresses suicidal 
ideatio n and the thoughts are passive, vague, or infrequent, the study team will respond with 
close monitoring of the subject. This may include phone calls, video calls, or in -person check -ins 
between  the study clinician and the subject. If the suicidal ideation includes more specific 
thoughts, intent, and/or plans, if the subject responds “Yes” to questions 4 or 5 of the C -SSRS , or 
if the subject answers 1, 2, or 3  to Question 9 of the PHQ -9, then they will be proactively 
discontinued from the study and referred to adequate care.  
 
Risks associated with study tasks:  Performing tasks  can result in frustration related to difficulty 
with performance, or boredom during longer sittings. Participants may refuse to answer 
questions that make them uncomfortable.  
 
Risks of Magnetic Resonance Imaging: MRIs use powerful magnets to make images.  There are 
no known radiation risks associated with MRI.  However, individuals with metal implants, such 
as surgical clips or pacemakers, should not have an MRI. All credit cards and other items with 
magnetic strips should also be kept out of the MRI room.  People who feel uncomfortable in 
confined spaces (claustrophobia) may feel uncomfortable in the narrow tube.  The MRI makes 
loud banging noises as it takes images.  Earplugs can be  used to reduce the noises.  The MRI can 
be stopped at any time at subject’s request. If the study subject is or suspects they are pregnant, 
they should not participate in this study. Study staff will assess chance of pregnancy . If there is 
any uncertainty, a study physician can recommend a pregnancy test. The MRI has the potential, 
during normal routine use, to cause localized warming of participant’s skin and of the underlying 
tissues. The participant will be instructed to immed iately inform study staff if  they experience 
discomfort due to warming and the procedure will be stopped.    
  
Some people experience dizziness or rarely nausea when going into an MRI scanner and these 
sensations may be more common in scans with higher magnetic fields. In most cases, these 
symptoms only last a short time. However, some people may experience them throughout the 
scan and/or continue to experience them for a short period of time after (generally, less than half 
an hour). No case of permanent problems is known.  
 
Risks of tPBM: The study laser device emits light with a longer wavelength than the human eye 
can see. The staff will be provided training on basic safety procedures relative to the use of the 
device. The staff administering the t -PBM will be careful not to operate the l aser unless it is in 
direct contact with the subject’s skin. Protective eyewear is required since the device is a laser. 
Failure of laser device, resulting in the cessation of investigative therapy can cause no adverse 
event to our knowledge . Delivery of the infrared laser energy to an inappropriate site, such as 
directly over the open eye, would pose risk to the subject, such as blindness. Based on previous 
observations with similar laser devices, application of the laser may result in mild thermal 
sensation of warmth during use. The temperature of the skin is however kept well below the 
level for thermal damage. Based on human clinical trial experience to date and on sale of t -PBM 
devices for their intended use (e.g.  Omnilux  New -U), each adv erse event listed below has been 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 22 of 29 reported by less than 0.1% of all subjects and users: erythema, pain, discomfort, warmth, 
headache , or other reactions at the application site. In our research experience, t -PBM devices 
could produce insomnia, irritability , and fleeting illusions.  The modality of administration for t -
PBM with the study laser device is analogous to the protocols used in our feasibility studies. The 
dose of light delivered by the study device is analogous to our feasibility studies and to publ ished 
studies on t -PBM.  No serio us adverse events occurred during our feasibility trials.       
 
8. Benefits  
 
The effects of the current proposal on impulsivity in individuals with bipolar disorder  are yet 
unknown. It is possible that subjects may experience improvements in impulsivity , cognition,  or 
other symptoms of bipolar disorder . Participant s in this study will improve our understanding of 
the pathology underlying bipolar disorder  and their participation may lead to the development of 
novel therapeutics.  
 
 
9. Statistical Analysis  
 
Preprocessing of MRI and fMRI data will be performed  with the FreeSurfer software package, 
scripted in Bash. Slice -time correction, motion -correction, and co -registration of functional 
BOLD scans,  Time of Repetition  (TR), and participant will then be performed. BOLD signals 
will then be smoothed to a full -width half maximum (FWHM) of 3mm and z -scored at every 
voxel.  
 
t-PBM related increase of BOLD percent signal change (PSC) averaged across all ROI voxels 
will be assessed during the first scanning session where the participant receives both sham and 
NIR over the R -dlPFC. PSC of t -PBM related increase in BOLD both during and after 
stimulation will be the dependent variable with the independent variable being the condition of t -
PBM during the first session (sham vs. NIR).  
 
BOLD signal will again be assessed during the 5th NIR session as a PSC across all ROI voxels in 
comparison with the BOLD PSC from the first NIR session  to observe any BOLD changes after 
5 NIR treatment sessions. The dependent variable will the BOLD signal and the independent 
variable will be the timepoint: day 1 vs. after 5 sessions (day 5).  
 
For both gambling tasks, the  gambling task net gain score  will be analyzed for changes from 
baseline to after treatment on day 1, baseline vs day 5, and baseline vs follow up.  The BI S, 
BRIEF -A, and I -7 will be analyzed for changes from baseline to  day 5  and follow up . Here, the 
dependent variable will be the gambling task s’ net gain s cores, BIS, BRIEF -A, and I -7 total 
score. The independent variable is the timepoint baseline vs. day 5  (for the gambling task s) and 
follow up. The MOOD -SR will also be analyzed for a decrease in impulsivity  at each timepoint 
of baseline vs. day 5  and follow up . A General Mixe d Models Regression will be used with time 
as a fixed effect and subject as a random effect.  
 
Secondary analyses will also be performed for the BIS, BRIEF -A, I-7, MOOD -SR, SAFTEE, 
and TSRQ . Each scale and their respective subscales will be analyzed for specific changes at 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 23 of 29 each timepoint to better understand the effect t -PBM NIR has on the symptoms and presentation 
of BD. These additional analyses will also be helpful in assessing the  initial  safety profile of t -
PBM in this psychiatric population.  
 
Power and Detectable Effects:  The study is powered (G*Power 80%) to answer Aim #1 for a 
moderate effect size (Cohen’s d≥0.5), based on a Wilcoxon signed -rank test (matched pairs; one -
tailed; alpha=0.05). Dmochowski et al. demonstrated a BOLD increase as high as 31% (dlPFC) 
within a single t -PBM session and in healthy subjects (pre - and post -t-PBM; Cohen’s d=0.374). 
In our current design, we will compare NIR versus sham (also within a t -PBM session) in 20 
subjects with impulsivity due to B D, therefore we anticipate a larger effect size.  
 
 
 
10.   Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
 
At enrollment, each subject will be assigned a unique ID number that will be used in place of a 
subject ’s name across all study forms and documents. Documents will be stored separately from 
other materials in a locked filing cabinet that is only accessible by study staff. Subjects may 
request that their data be withdrawn by contacting Dr. Cassano (contact in formation provided on 
the consent form). Experienced, doctoral -level clinicians will be available to participants by 
phone, or in -person if necessary, to discuss any concerns throughout the study. This will be 
clearly communicated orally and in writing to subjects.  
 
The data gathered from the project will include imaging and treatment data. Information relating 
to the data derived from this study will be made available to Partners IRB. The information 
collected in the study will be used only for research purposes. The re are no plans to share any of 
the collected data with anyone outside of the immediate study staff.  
 
Paolo Cassano, MD , PhD (Neuropsychiatry), Director of Photobiomodulation at MGH 
Depression Program and at MGH Neuropsychiatry will provide his expertise on t -PBM and its 
effects on psychiatric conditions. Joan Camprodon, MD , MPH is Chief o f the Division of 
Neuropsychiatry at MGH and directs the Laboratory of Neuropsychiatry and Neuromodulation. 
His will provide his expertise in imaging studies of neuromodulation. Kristen Ellard, PhD Is the 
director of Dimensional Neuroimaging Research within  the Division of  Neuropsychiatry and will 
provide her expertise in bipolar disorder  and neuroimaging . Dr. Cassano, Dr. Camprodon, and 
Dr. Ellard all have extensive clinical research and data safety monitoring experience. Dr. 
Cassano, as the principal investigator, will discuss safety concerns with research study team 
(CRCs and post -doc) and bring any conce rns to the other co -Is, if needed. Dr. Camprodon will 
provide safety monitoring and insight for neuroimaging and Dr. Ellard will provide her insight 
for safety of bipolar  disorder subjects.  In addition to these internal monitors, Dan Iosifescu, MD, 
MSc., will serve as the independent monitor for the study. He is the Director of Clinical 
Research at the Nathan Kline Institute in New York and has extensive expe rience  within the field 
of Psychiatry and t -PBM as a PI and co -I of many studies within the field. He will review the 
annual reports for safety,  and findings, and  he will  provide feedback on  the study.  
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 24 of 29 Study staff will meet on a weekly basis for the duration of the study to review the progress of the 
study, discuss safety concerns that arise, and make recommendations to improve safety 
procedures if indicated. Study staff will also review and monitor data on a weekly basis to ensure 
adherence to protocol  and accurate data collection .  
 
Subjects will be thoroughly screened prior to starting any study procedures to ensure they meet 
inclusion criteria and that they have the capacity for voluntary, informed consent.  
 
If the subject experiences any adverse event or discomfort throughout the t -PBM sessions that 
are not able to be alleviated by the PI or study staff, then the application session will be stopped.  
 
An adverse event means any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, 
including any abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the subject’s participation in the research, 
whether or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the research (modified from the 
definition of adverse events in the 1996 International Conference on Harmonization E -6 
Guidelines for Good Clinical  Practice).   
 
A serious adverse event means any event temporally associated with the subject’s participation 
in research that meets any of the following criteria:  
• results in death.   
• is life threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it 
occurred ). 
• requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization.   
• results in a persistent or significant disability/ incapacity.   
• results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
• any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may 
jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed above (examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm r equiring intensive treatment in the emergency room or at home, 
blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the 
development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
Expected adverse events and expected serious adverse events will not be accepted by the Mass 
General IRB nor will they  be reported unless the sponsor or investigator deems the event to be 
unexpected in nature. Only Unanticipated Problem Involving Risks to Subjects or Others 
(UPIRTSO) and Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE) Events meeting either of these 
definitions  are considered “Unanticipated Problems” and should be reported if they occur during 
the conduct of the study, after study completion, or after subject withdrawal or completion.  
Events meeting these definitions include unexpected or unanticipated drug or device adverse 
reactions attributable to the intervention and that place subjects at increased risk of harm . 
 
In the case of an  unexpected  adverse event and in accordance with Partners Human Research 
Committee Adverse Event Reporting guidelines, the PI and study staff will complete the 
appropriate adverse event form and send it to the IRB within the required time frame for 
reporting. This documentation will be completed  and submitted on I nsight within 5 business/7 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 25 of 29 calendar days from the day the investigator first became awa re of the event. This report will 
include:  
• a detailed description of the event  
• the basis for determining that the event is unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency  
• the basis for determining that the event is related or possibly related to the research 
procedures  
• the basis for determining that the research places subjects at an increased risk of harm)  
• whether any changes to the research or other corrective actions are warranted.  
 
Experienced, doctoral -level clinicians will be available to participants by phone, or in -person  if 
necessary, to discuss any concerns throughout the study. This will be clearly communicated 
orally and in writing to subjects.  
 
All monitoring and quality assurance procedures will be in accordance with the MGH sub -
committee on human studies. The PI will oversee the collection, maintenance, and analysis of the 
data. Research affairs will be contacted immediately in the case of unex pected adverse events  
likely related to the intervention . If an unexpected adverse event or serious adverse event does 
occur, the investigator will consider whether corrective actions should be made to study 
procedures in order to protect the safety and welfare of study subjects. If any changes are made 
the Protocol and Informed Consent Form will be updated and these edits will be submitted as an 
Amendment to the IRB .  
 
If a subject’s clinical condition deteriorates substantially by self -report  and clinician assessment , 
the subject will be withdrawn from the study. Subjects may also be withdrawn if the PI feels that 
the study poses a substantial risk to the participant or if the PI decides that a higher level of care 
is needed.  
 
Procedures used in this study are consistent with safe and ethical research practices and do not 
unnecessarily expose subjects to risk. Adverse events are expected  to be infrequent  given the 
excellent safety profile of t -PBM, but should they arise, the PI will review the adverse event and 
report it to the IRB. Moreover, study staff and subjects may report concerns directly to the IRB.  
 
Every effort will be made to enhance the comfort of subjects while throughout the study 
procedures. Subjects will be informed that they can stop any study procedure at any time if 
needed.  
 
 
 
11.   Privacy and Confidentiality  
 
☒ Study procedures will be conducted in a private setting  
☒ Only data and/or specimens necessary for the conduct of the study will be collected  
☒ Data collected (paper and/or electronic) will be maintained in a secure location with 
appropriate protections such as password protection, encryption, physical security 
measures (locked files/areas)  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 26 of 29 ☐ Specimens collected will be maintained in a secure location with appropriate protections 
(e.g. locked storage spaces, laboratory areas)  
☒ Data and specimens will only be shared with individuals who are members of the IRB -
approved research team or approved for sharing as described in this IRB protocol  
☐  Data and/or specimens requiring transportation from one location or electronic space to 
another will be transported only in a secure manner (e.g. encrypted files, password 
protection, using chain -of-custody procedures, etc .) 
☒   All electronic communication with participants will comply with Mass General Brigham 
secure communication policies  
☒ Identifiers will be coded or removed as soon as feasible and access to files linking 
identifiers with coded data or specimens will be limited to the minimal necessary 
members of the research team required to conduct the research  
☒ All staff are trained on and will follow the Mass General Brigham policies and 
procedures for maintaining appropriate confidentiality of research data and specimens  
☒ The PI will ensure that all staff implement and follow any Research Information Service 
Office (RISO) requirements for this research  
☐ Additional privacy and/or confidentiality protections  
  
 
12.   References  
 
1.GD 2017 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators. (2018). Global, regional, 
and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries 
for 195 countries and territories, 1990 –2017: a systematic analys is for the Global Burden of 
Disease Study 2017. The Lancet. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140 -6736(18)32279 -7 
2. Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., Viana, M. C., 
Andrade, L. H., Hu, C., Karam, E. G., Ladea, M., Medina -Mora, M. E., Ono, Y., Posada -Villa, 
J., Sagar, R., Wells, J. E., & Zarkov, Z. (2011). Prevalence and corre lates of bipolar spectrum 
disorder in the world mental health survey initiative.  Archives of general psychiatry , 68(3), 241 –
251. https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.12  
3. Dome, P., Rihmer, Z., & Gonda, X. (2019). Suicide Risk in Bipolar Disorder: A Brief 
Review.  Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania) , 55(8), 403. https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina55080403  
4. The Global Burden of Disease, 2004 update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008  
5. Newman, A. L., & Meyer, T. D. (2014). Impulsivity: present during euthymia in bipolar 
disorder? - a systematic review.  International journal of bipolar disorders , 2, 2. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/2194 -7511 -2-2 
6. Jawad, I., Watson, S., Haddad, P. M., Talbot, P. S., & McAllister -Williams, R. H. (2018). 
Medication nonadherence in bipolar disorder: a narrative review.  Therapeutic advances in 
psychopharmacology , 8(12), 349 –363. https://doi.org/10.1177/2045125318804364  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 27 of 29 7. Powers, R. L., Russo, M., Mahon, K., Brand, J., Braga, R. J., Malhotra, A. K., & Burdick, K. 
E. (2013). Impulsivity in bipolar disorder: relationships with neurocognitive dysfunction and 
substance use history.  Bipolar disorders , 15(8), 876 –884. https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.12124  
8. Perugi, G., Medda, P., Toni, C., Mariani, M. G., Socci, C., & Mauri, M. (2017). The Role of 
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) in Bipolar Disorder: Effectiveness in 522 Patients with 
Bipolar Depression, Mixed -state, Mania and Catatonic Features.  Current 
neuropharmacology , 15(3), 359 –371. https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X14666161017233642  
9. Nusslock, R., Almeida, J. R., Forbes, E. E., Versace, A., Frank, E., LaBarbara, E. J., ... & 
Phillips, M. L. (2012). Waiting to win: elevated striatal and orbitofrontal cortical activity during 
reward anticipation in euthymic bipolar disorder adults.  Bipolar disorders , 14(3), 249 -260. 
10. O'Sullivan, N., Szczepanowski, R., El -Deredy, W., Mason, L., & Bentall, R. P. (2011). fMRI 
evidence of a relationship between hypomania and both increased goal -sensitivity and positive 
outcome -expectancy bias.  Neuropsychologia , 49(10), 2825 -2835.  
11. Hsu TY, Tseng LY, Yu JX, Kuo WJ, Hung DL, Tzeng OJ, et al. Modulating inhibitory control 
with direct current stimulation of the superior medial frontal cortex. NeuroImage. 
2011;56(4):2249 -57. 
12. Meinzer M, Lindenberg R, Antonenko D, Flaisch T, Flöel A. Anodal transcranial direct current 
stimulation temporarily reverses age -associated cognitive decline and functional brain activity 
changes. J Neurosci. 2013;33(30):12470 -8. 
13. Cho SS, Koshimori Y, Aminian K, Obeso I, Rusjan P, Lang AE, et al. Investing in the future: 
stimulation of the medial prefrontal cortex reduces discounting of delayed rewards. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015;40(3):546 -53. 
14. Brevet -Aeby C, Brunelin J, Iceta S, Padovan C, Poulet E. Prefrontal cortex and impulsivity: 
Interest of noninvasive brain stimulation. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 2016;71:112 -
34. 
15. Gavish L, Houreld NN. Therapeutic Efficacy of Home -Use Photobiomodulation Devices: A 
Systematic Literature Review. Photobiomodulation, photomedicine, and laser surgery. 
2019;37(1):4 -16. 
16. Konstantinović LM, Jelić MB, Jeremić A, Stevanović VB, Milanović SD, Filipović SR. 
Transcranial application of near -infrared low -level laser can modulate cortical excitability. Lasers 
in surgery and medicine. 2013;45(10):648 -53. 
17. Chaieb L, Antal A, Masurat F, Paulus W. Neuroplastic effects of transcranial near -infrared 
stimulation (tNIRS) on the motor cortex. Front Behav Neurosci. 2015;9:147.  
18. Henderson TA, Morries LD. SPECT Perfusion Imaging Demonstrates Improvement of 
Traumatic Brain Injury With Transcranial Near -infrared Laser Phototherapy. Advances in mind -
body medicine. 2015;29(4):27 -33. 
19. Nawashiro H, Wada K, Nakai K, Sato S. Focal increase in cerebral blood flow after treatment 
with near -infrared light to the forehead in a patient in a persistent vegetative state. Photomed Laser 
Surg. 2012;30(4):231 -3. 
20. Salgado AS, Zangaro RA, Parreira RB, Kerppers, II. The effects of transcranial LED therapy 
(TCLT) on cerebral blood flow in the elderly women. Lasers in medical science. 2015;30(1):339 -
46. 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 28 of 29 21. Tian F, Hase SN, Gonzalez -Lima F, Liu H. Transcranial laser stimulation improves human 
cerebral oxygenation. Lasers in surgery and medicine. 2016;48(4):343 -9. 
22. Hacke W, Schellinger PD, Albers GW, et al. Transcranial laser therapy in acute stroke 
treatment: results of neurothera effectiveness and safety trial 3, a phase III clinical end point device 
trial. Stroke. 2014;45(11):3187 -3193.  
23. Lampl Y, Zivin JA, Fisher M, et al. Infrared laser therapy for ischemic stroke: a new 
treatment strategy: results of the NeuroThera Effectiveness and Safety Trial -1 (NEST -1). Stroke. 
2007;38(6):1843 -1849.  
24. Barrett DW, Gonzalez -Lima F. Transcranial infrared laser stimulation produces beneficial 
cognitive and emotional effects in humans. Neuroscience. 2013;230:13 -23. 
25. Blanco NJ, Maddox WT, Gonzalez -Lima F. Improving executive function using transcranial 
infrared laser stimulation. Journal of neuropsychology. 2017;11(1):14 -25. 
26. Blanco NJ, Saucedo CL, Gonzalez -Lima F. Transcranial infrared laser stimulation improves 
rule-based, but not information -integration, category learning in humans. Neurobiology of 
learning and memory. 2017;139:69 -75. 
27. Hwang J, Castelli DM, Gonzalez -Lima F. Cognitive enhancement by transcranial laser 
stimulation and acute aerobic exercise. Lasers in medical science. 2016;31(6):1151 -60. 
28. Morries LD, Cassano P, Henderson TA. Treatments for traumatic brain injury with emphasis 
on transcranial near -infrared laser phototherapy. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment. 
2015;11:2159 -75. 
29. Naeser MA, Saltmarche A, Krengel MH, Hamblin MR, Knight JA. Improved cognitive 
function after transcranial, light -emitting diode treatments in chronic, traumatic brain injury: two 
case reports. Photomed Laser Surg. 2011;29(5):351 -8. 
30. Naeser MA, Zafonte R, Krengel MH, Martin PI, Frazier J, Hamblin MR, et al. Significant 
improvements in cognitive performance post -transcranial, red/near -infrared light -emitting diode 
treatments in chronic, mild traumatic brain injury: open -protocol study. Journal of neurotrauma. 
2014;31(11):1008 -17. 
31. Saltmarche AE, Naeser MA, Ho KF, Hamblin MR, Lim L. Significant Improvement in 
Cognition in Mild to Moderately Severe Dementia Cases Treated with Transcranial Plus Intranasal 
Photobiomodulation: Case Series Report. Photomedicine and laser surgery. 2017;35( 8):432 -41. 
32. Disner SG, Beevers CG, Gonzalez -Lima F. Transcranial Laser Stimulation as 
Neuroenhancement for Attention Bias Modification in Adults with Elevated Depression 
Symptoms. Brain stimulation. 2016;9(5):780 -7. 
33. Uozumi Y, Nawashiro H, Sato S, Kawauchi S, Shima K, Kikuchi M. Targeted increase in 
cerebral blood flow by transcranial near -infrared laser irradiation. Lasers in surgery and medicine. 
2010;42(6):566 -76. 
34. Hipskind SG, Grover FL, Jr., Fort TR, Helffenstein D, Burke TJ, Quint SA, et al. Pulsed 
Transcranial Red/Near -Infrared Light Therapy Using Light -Emitting Diodes Improves Cerebral 
Blood Flow and Cognitive Function in Veterans with Chronic Traumatic Brain In jury: A Case 
Series. Photomedicine and laser surgery. 2018.  
35. Jog M, Jann K, Yan L, Huang Y, Parra L, Narr K, et al. Concurrent Imaging of Markers of 
Current Flow and Neurophysiological Changes During tDCS. Frontiers in neuroscience. 
2020;14:374.  
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board  
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol  
 
Version 2021.0 6.10  Page 29 of 29 36. Jog MS, Kim E, Anderson C, Kubicki A, Kayathi R, Jann K, et al. In -vivo imaging of targeting 
and modulation of depression -relevant circuitry by transcranial direct current stimulation: a 
randomized clinical trial. Translational Psychiatry. 2021;11(1):138.  
37. Vargas E, Barrett DW, Saucedo CL, Huang LD, Abraham JA, Tanaka H, et al. Beneficial 
neurocognitive effects of transcranial laser in older adults. Lasers in medical science. 
2017;32(5):1153 -62. 
38. Mannu P, Saccaro LF, Spera V, Cassano P. Transcranial Photobiomodulation to Augment 
Lithium in Bipolar -I Disorder. Photobiomodulation, photomedicine, and laser surgery. 
2019;37(10):577 -8. 
39. J. H. Patton, M. S. Stanford, E. S. Barratt, Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. 
Journal of clinical psychology 51, 768 -774 (1995).  
40. R. RM, I. PK, G. GA, Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function - Adult Version 
(BRIEF -A). Psychological Assessment Resources, (2005).  
41. Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., Currier, 
G. W., Melvin, G. A., Greenhill, L., Shen, S., & Mann, J. J. (2011). The Columbia -Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale: Initial validity and internal consistency findings from thre e multisite studies with 
adolescents and adults. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(12), 1266 –1277. 
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704  
42. Sheehan, D. V.,  Lecrubier , Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P.,  Janavs , J., Weiller, E.,  Hergueta , 
T., Baker, R., & Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I.): The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for 
DSM -IV and ICD -10. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59 Suppl 20, 22 -33;quiz  34-57. 
43.  Massey, Douglas S., Martin, J.A. (2003). The NIS Skin Color Scale.  
44. Levine, J., & Schooler NR. (1986).  SAFTEE : A technique for the systematic assessment of 
side effects in clinical trials.  Psychopharmacol  Bulletin, 22, 343 -381.  
45. Dmochowski GM, Dmochowski JP. Increased Blood Flow and Oxidative Metabolism in the 
Human Brain by Transcranial Laser Stimulation. bioRxiv. 2018:459883.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 