LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SCIENCES CENTER in Shreveport
Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the Protection of Human Research Subjects
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A        
                                                                          
Page 1 of 6HRP-502 
(6/1/2016)
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
Title of  research study: The Effects of Core Activation and Stabilization Training on Gait 
Kinetics, Kinematics, and Speed, and Self-Perceived Function in Patients with Knee 
Osteoarthritis
Sponsor:  LSU Health-Shreveport Program  in Physical Therapy
Investigator: Daniel  W. Flowers, PT, DPT
Contact Information:  E-mail: dflowe@lsuhsc.edu Phone: 318-813-2958
Participant Name:  ______________________________   
Participant ID  Number: __________________________
Why are  you being invited to take part in a research study?
(If you are  being asked to give permission for another person (example: your child) to be in 
this research study, as you read this consent form, “you” always refers to that person.
You are  being asked to participate because you are 40 years old or older and either have a 
diagnosis of knee osteoarthritis (OA) have been selected to participate in a control group 
without a diagnosis of knee OA. 
What should  you know about a research study?
Your  participation is completely voluntary.
You  can stop or leave at any time and your decision will not affect your relationship 
with this institution or your normal care.
You  will be told about any new information or changes in the study that could affect 
your health, welfare, or choice to stay in the research.
You  can ask all the questions you want before deciding if you want to be in this study.
Why is  this research being done?
The purpose of  this study is to find out whether activation or training of the abdominal 
muscles has an effect on the walking patterns of people with knee OA. The study will 
compare the walking patterns of participants with and without knee OA, then determine 
whether education on turning the abdominal muscles on while walking, and a six-week 
abdominal training program, improves the walking ability. 
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A    
                                                  
Page 2 of 6People with knee  OA typically have abnormal mechanics while walking when compared to 
those who do not have the diagnosis. Additionally, previous research has indicated persons 
with knee OA also have thinning of their abdominal muscles when compared to those 
without knee OA. Previous research in young, active individuals has demonstrated that 
abdominal training can have a protective effect against knee injury, and that a lack of 
stability of the trunk can predict knee injury in young athletes. As a result, the investigators 
of this study wish to determine whether or not targeting the abdominal muscles can change 
the gait of patients with knee OA. 
Potential benefits  to others include the knowledge gained from this study telling physical 
therapists whether or not to include abdominal muscle exercises in their treatment of 
patients with knee OA in an effort to improve their walking mechanics and function.
How long  will the research last?
We expect that you  will be in this research study for about 8 weeks if you have knee OA, but 
only one day if you do not. For those with knee OA, about 10-12 hours total over the span of 
the 8 weeks will be required. The 8 weeks of participation will conclude after the end of the 
6-week intervention program and the final walking assessment. 
How many people  will be in the research?
We expect about  50 people to participate in this research at our site. Approximately 50 
people will participate in the entire study nationally, since this is the only site where 
participants will be recruited. 
What happens  if I say yes, I want to be in this research?
For those  who decide they wish to participate, the extent of participation will depend on 
whether or not they have a diagnosis of knee OA. For both groups, all research activity will 
take place in the LSU Health-Shreveport School of Allied Health Professions (SAHP), located 
at 1450 Claiborne Ave, Shreveport, LA 71103. 
The first step  will be to perform a walking analysis in the Gait Lab. The investigators will first 
collect data on your body measurements, including height, weight, and other similar 
measurements. Then, markers will be placed on your pelvis and legs in order to allow the 
infrared cameras to track your movement. There will also be two video cameras used, along 
with force plates which will be walked on. All of this equipment will allow the investigators 
to analyze how you walk. You will be asked to walk across the room several times until the 
investigators have three good trials. At the same time, you will be wearing biofeedback 
electrodes on your waist to measure the activity of your abdominal muscles. There will be no 
electricity going into your body, as this device only reads electrical activity of muscles.
You will  then be taught how to contract your abdominal muscles, with the same biofeedback 
device attached to your waist which will have an alarm, or an investigator giving you a cue, 
as to whether or not you are contracting the muscle correctly. You will then be asked to 
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A    
                                                  
Page 3 of 6repeat the  walking activity while contracting your abdominal muscles just as before. You 
may be randomly selected to perform this second walking activity with the abdominal 
muscles activation, and the previously described trials without activation of the muscles 
second.
You will  only have to interact with the two investigators, and the front desk staff in the clinic 
when you enter the building, unless you are a participant in with knee OA and choose to 
participate in an exercise group and/or exercise in the open gym during the 6-week training 
program.
The following  information is only for those with a diagnosis of knee OA:
Those with  knee OA will then enroll in a 6-week abdominal muscle exercise program. This 
will include two appointments per week with the investigator, which will last 30-45 minutes. 
It will also include a home exercise program, consisting of a few exercises to be performed 3 
times per week. The training program will take place in the Rehabilitation Faculty Practice 
Clinic on the ground floor of the SAHP. You will be allowed to participate in a group or one-
on-one, and in the open gym or in a private treatment room. At the end of this training 
program, you will be asked to return to the Gait Lab for one more session of the walking 
assessment as performed on the first day. 
What are  my responsibilities if I take part in this research?
For those  without a diagnosis of knee OA:
You will  be responsible for participating in a single walking assessment in the Gait Lab. 
For those  with a diagnosis of knee OA:
You will  be responsible for participating in two walking assessments in the Gait Lab, before 
and after the 6-week training program. You will be asked to attend 12 exercise sessions (two 
appointments per week), not missing more than 4 sessions in the 6-week training program. 
You will also be asked to perform your home exercises at 3 times a week but performing it at 
least once per week. 
What are  my other options if I do not want to be in this research? 
You do  not have to be in this study. If you decide not to be in the research now or later, it 
will not affect your usual care and it won’t be held against you.
You do  not have to be in this study to receive treatment for your knee OA. You are free to 
participate in other treatment activities without participating in this study.
Instead of  being in this research, your choices may include treatment by a physician, 
surgeon, physical therapist, or other healthcare provider.
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A    
                                                  
Page 4 of 6What happens  if I say yes, but I change my mind later?
You are  free to leave the study at any time. There are no penalties and you do not lose any 
benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. Data that we have already used will stay in the 
study database and cannot be removed in order to maintain the integrity of the research. 
However, you can ask us to destroy any information that identifies you so that no one can 
tell the data belonged to you.  Our contact information is below.
If you  decide to stop, we may ask you if we can contact you for safety reasons or to follow 
your health. We may also ask you if we can collect data from your medical records and your 
routine medical care.
Can I  be removed from the research without my OK?
The physical  therapist in charge of the research study or the sponsor can take you out of the 
study even if you do not ask to leave. This may happen if, as a participant with a diagnosis 
with knee OA, you miss more than 4 sessions, and do not complete the home program at 
least once weekly.
What are  the risks of being in this study?
One possible  risk of participating in the study includes possible muscle soreness, or 
discomfort upon removal of adhesive markers due to hair on the skin of your legs or 
abdomen.
For breach of  confidentiality: One of the risks of being in this study is that your personal 
information could be lost or exposed. This is very unlikely to happen, and we will do 
everything we can to make sure that your information is protected.  
What are  the costs of being in the research?
Your medical  condition requires that you receive certain standard medical tests and 
procedures.  You and your insurance company will be charged for the health care services 
that you would ordinarily be responsible to pay. In some cases, insurance will not pay for 
services ordinarily covered because these services were performed in a research study. You 
should check with your insurance to see what services will be covered by your insurance and 
what you will be responsible to pay.
Tests and  procedures done solely because you are in the research study are not considered ordinary 
care.  The research specific costs will be at no charge to you or your insurance company.
Will being  in this study help me in any way?
 We  cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. 
However, possible benefits include improved walking mechanics and function after the 6-
week intervention program for those with knee OA. 
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A    
                                                  
Page 5 of 6Will my  information collected for the research remain confidential?
Efforts will  be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including 
research study and medical records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
We cannot promise complete privacy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your 
information include the LSUHSC-S HRPP and other representatives of this organization. 
After completion  of your participation in the study, the data collected will remain stored for 
possible future used in the computer system in the Gait Lab, and in the investigators office. 
This data will be deidentified, except for this form. This will only be accessible to others, or 
the investigators themselves, with additional approval by the institution. The data on the 
computer system is password protected, and both the Gait Lab and the investigator’s office 
are key accessible only. This data will be kept for a period of seven years. 
What else  do I need to know?
Participants can  contact the investigators at (318) 813-2958 after completion of their 
participation if they would like to know the results of the study.  
Who can  I talk to?
If you  have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the 
research team at (318) 813-2958 or dflowe@lsuhsc.edu.
This research  has been reviewed and approved by the LSUHSC-S IRB which is a group of 
people who help protect your rights and welfare as a research participant. You may also talk 
to them at (318) 813-1350 about:
Questions,  concerns, or complaints that are not being answered by the research 
team.
Concerns  if you cannot reach the research team.
The  need to talk to someone besides the research team.
Any  questions about your rights as a research subject.
The  desire to get more information or provide input about this research.
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
IRB ID Number: 1065
Document Version Letter: A    
                                                  
Page 6 of 6Signature Block  for Capable Adult
Your signature  documents your permission to take part in this research.
Signature of  subject Date/Time (AM  or PM)
Printed name  of subject
Signature of  person obtaining consent Date/Time (AM  or PM)
Printed name  of person obtaining consent
Signature of  witness to subject’s signature Date/Time (AM  or PM)
Printed name  of person witnessing subject’s signature
Document Approved Date: 11/8/2018                      