Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 1  of 11Adult Participant Consent  Form
Study Title: Open-Label  Intravenous Subanesthetic Ketamine For Adolescents With 
Treatment-Resistant Depression
Study #: CTSI  22225
Study Doctor: Kathryn  Cullen, MD
University of  Minnesota - Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
2450 Riverside  Ave., F256/2B, Minneapolis, MN  55454
Telephone Number: (612)  273-9711
After Office Hours: (612)  382-7052
You are  invited to enroll in a research study that will use a drug called ketamine as a potential 
antidepressant treatment. Before agreeing to participate in this study, it is important that you 
read this consent form. This form may contain words that you may not understand.  Please ask 
one of the study team members to explain any information that is not clear. You may take as 
much time as you wish to make up your mind about whether or not you would like to participate.  
You may take home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about or discuss with family 
or friends before making your decision.
This study is  being conducted by Dr. Kathryn Cullen and her colleagues in the Department of 
Psychiatry at the University of Minnesota (UMN). It is funded by the Clinical and Translational 
Science Institute at UMN.  We hope to enroll about 20 people aged 12-18 years at the 
University of Minnesota.
Why is this  study being done?
This study will  try to learn if a drug called ketamine can be used to help adolescents with 
treatment-resistant depression.  Ketamine is investigational in this study, which means it is not 
approved in the United States for adolescent treatment-resistant depression by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA).
How long  will the study last?
Participation in  this study may last up to 9 weeks, and we may also contact you after 6 months 
for a brief follow-up interview. 
What is  involved in the study?
The following information describes  what will happen if you agree to participate in the study. 
We will  ask you to participate in a clinical assessment, including a physical exam if you have not 
had one within 30 days. We will ask questions about your medical and psychiatric history, and 
ask you to complete questionnaires about your symptoms, including any thoughts of hurting 
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 2  of 11yourself or others.  We also test the urine for the presence of certain drugs. The study doctor or 
study staff will tell you if the drug test results are positive. The results of the drug test must be 
negative in order for you to be in the study.
Due to  unknown risks and potential harm to an unborn fetus, we will not include anyone who is 
pregnant in the study. Females who can have children will be asked to give a urine sample for a 
pregnancy test. The study doctor or study staff will tell you if the pregnancy test results are 
positive. The results of the pregnancy testing must be negative to participate in the study.
We will  ask you to have Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI) of the brain. This will take place on 
a 3 Tesla MRI scanner at the Center for Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR) at the 
University of Minnesota. This involves lying quietly inside the center of a large doughnut-shaped 
magnet. To help you keep still during the MRI, we will place foam pillows around your head. We 
will perform several different kinds of scans, including scans while you are at rest and scans 
during an "emotion task", during which you will look at pictures/words and decide whether they 
are positive or negative. 
The entire  MRI procedure will take about 2 hours. We will do this before and after the 2-week 
ketamine dosing. We will ask you to provide your own transportation to the CMRR. If you are 
admitted to the inpatient mental health unit on the day of the scan, you will need a pass written 
by your regular physician to allow you to leave the hospital to complete this visit. If either you or 
your regular doctor do not feel comfortable with having you go on a pass for this MRI visit, this 
part of the study does not need to happen.
The ketamine  infusions take place at University of Minnesota Masonic Children's Hospital in the 
Journey Clinic. You will complete several questionnaires about how you are feeling, and these 
are repeated throughout the session. Then we will place a tube, or IV (intravenous—directly into 
the vein) catheter, in your non-dominant arm to administer the ketamine at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg. 
The dose is based on your weight. We will measure heart rate and other vital signs (blood 
pressure, breathing rate and oxygen saturation) throughout the visit. The entire infusion will last 
40 minutes. You will stay another 2 hours after the infusion to be monitored for comfort and 
safety. The ketamine infusions will follow a Monday, Wednesday, Friday schedule for a total of 6 
infusions over 2 weeks. 
Participants will  undergo a blood draw (20 mL, or about a tablespoon) three times in the study, 
once before and once after the first ketamine infusion, and once after the last infusion. The 
blood samples will be sent to the Mayo Clinic in the laboratory of Susannah Tye, Ph.D. for 
analysis.
At two visits  during the study (at the beginning of the study and after the last infusion), you will 
be asked to take a “dot pattern expectancy” task, which will measure your ability to follow visual 
cues using simple dot patterns.
We will  re-assess your depression after the 6 doses of ketamine. 
In  the event you no longer wish to participate, you will be referred back to your regular 
physician for treatment. If you did not have established care for depression we will refer 
you to an appropriate provider. We will provide recommendations as to level of care (for 
example, inpatient vs. outpatient, time to next visit if outpatient). If inpatient care is 
needed, we will work with you to facilitate this. If safety is an immediate concern, we will 
escort you to the emergency room, which is located one floor below the research facility 
where your interviews will take place. We will also possibly share the study information 
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 3  of 11with your  treating physician. If you would like us to do this, we will ask you to sign a 
release of information to allow us to contact your treating physician and share the 
information and our recommendations.
If  you wish to continue the study, you will participate in 6 weekly follow-up visits for a 
brief interview and to complete questionnaires about how you are feeling. If depression 
returns before the sixth visit, you will exit the study at that time. Procedures for 
transitioning you to an ongoing provider will then be identical to those outlined above.
We  will also contact you after 6 months from the last day of your participation in the 
above activities in order to arrange a brief (approximately 30 minute) interview, either in 
person or by video conference, to assess your progression during the intervening time 
period. This encounter will be similar to the follow-up visits in content and duration.
Any urine  samples taken during the study will be used for the testing described above, and then 
discarded when the results are available. There are no plans to store these urine samples.
Your blood  samples will be identified only with your study code number.
All biological samples will be destroyed  at the end of the study.  Be aware that if you change 
your mind about being in the study, your blood samples may or may not be withdrawn from the 
research, depending on the study center's policies. You can ask the study doctor or study staff if 
you have questions about this.
While you  are in the study, you must:
Follow  the instructions you are given.
Come  to the study center for all visits with the study doctor or study staff.
Tell  the study doctor or study staff about any changes in your health or the way you feel.
Tell  the study doctor or study staff if you want to stop being in the study at any time.
What are the possible  risks?
Effects of  ketamine during infusion may include: 
feeling  detached from surroundings 
reduced  concentration 
feeling  as if in a dream 
colors  or sounds seeming brighter or duller than usual 
blurred  vision 
decreased  pain 
increased  anxiety 
euphoria  (feelings of extreme happiness) 
confusion  
hallucinations  
sweating  
increased  blood pressure 
increased  heart rate 
rash 
nausea  
vomiting  
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 4  of 11Ketamine at  lower doses, such as those used in this study, may have side effects that are mild, 
and only last for a short period of time. These effects include:
memory  impairment
dizziness
increased  libido
gastrointestinal  distress
increased  thirst
headache
metallic  taste
constipation
Some subjects  have reported a "hangover" on the day after ketamine administration, and some 
report vivid dreams for a few days afterward.
At higher  doses, ketamine can affect vital signs such as blood pressure and heart rate. We will 
monitor vital signs. Ketamine infusions will be administered with supervision in the Journey 
Clinic as a day procedure. Pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure will be continually 
monitored. If a severe or unexpected adverse event occurs, you will be evaluated to determine 
the need for any of the following: stopping the ketamine, changing other drugs, or providing 
medical care.
Please tell  the study doctor or study staff right away if you have any side effects.  Please tell 
them if you have any other problems with your health or the way you feel during the study, 
whether or not you think these problems are related to the study.
It is  possible that receiving ketamine may change how your regular medications, vaccines, or 
supplements work.  It is very important that you tell the study doctor about any medications, 
supplements, or vaccines before you take them during the study.
You may  be given medications during and after the ketamine infusions to help treat or prevent 
side effects. You should ask the study doctor or study staff about the risks of these medications.
Sometimes people have  allergic reactions to drugs. If you have a very bad allergic reaction, you 
could die.  Some things that happen during an allergic reaction that could be a sign or symptom 
of a life-threatening allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) are:
a  rash
a  fast pulse
sweating
a  feeling of dread
swelling  around the eyes and mouth
swelling  of the throat
wheezing
having  a hard time breathing
a  sudden drop in blood pressure (making you feel dizzy or lightheaded)
inability  to breathe without assistance
You should  get medical help and contact the study doctor or study staff if you have any of these 
or any other side effects during the study.
There are  risks associated with use of the high field MRI system. 
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 5  of 11Claustrophobia.  Some people experience claustrophobia (fear of confined spaces) while 
inside the  scanner. Use the squeeze bulb to let us know immediately if you are 
experiencing claustrophobia, and we will terminate the scan.
Magnetic  pull of metal objects.  Objects with magnetic properties can be pulled into the 
magnet. Also, an MRI  could be very dangerous if you have certain objects or devices 
implanted in your body, such as a pacemaker, insulin pump, ear implant, joint 
replacement, permanent dentures, piercings, or shrapnel.  You must tell the study doctor 
or study staff about any objects that you know are implanted or embedded in your body.
Energy  from the scanner can cause heating or nerve stimulation. Another risk is 
presented by  the energy waves used in the scanner. The power of the energy waves is 
well below the strength needed to heat the tissue in your body and cause harm, but any 
metal in contact with your skin could heat up. This is why you will be asked to remove all 
jewelry. If you have metal on your body that cannot be removed, we will review this with 
you carefully, and it may be that you will not be able to participate in the study. It is also 
possible that the scanner will cause peripheral nerve stimulation (stimulation of the 
nerves or muscles). If you feel any tingling or unusual sensations during the scan, or 
muscle contractions, use the squeeze bulb to alert the researcher immediately. 
Scanner  noise.  The noise generated by the operation of the scanner during a study is 
loud enough to  cause hearing damage if you do not wear hearing protection, which we 
will provide. If, even with the hearing protection we give you, you find the noise from the 
scanner to be uncomfortable or painful, you should ask the scanner operator to stop the 
scan immediately. 
Unknown  long-term risks. In addition, there is a risk of unknown effects related to 
participation in  3 Tesla MRI research. Long-term effects of exposure to high magnetic 
fields are unknown. 
Short-term  symptoms. Short term, most people experience no ill effects from the strong 
magnetic field,  but some people report dizziness, mild nausea, headache, a metallic 
taste in their mouth, or sensations of flashing lights. These symptoms, if present, 
become less intense shortly after leaving the magnet. If any sensations experienced 
during participation cause discomfort or pain, notify the researcher right away and your 
scan will stop and you will be taken out of the magnetic field. 
Risks  related to pregnancy. The risks of exposure to high magnetic fields are unknown 
for fetuses.  Therefore, we will not include anyone in the study who is pregnant, as 
measured by a urine pregnancy test. 
Potential  for discovery of brain abnormalities. It is possible that the MRI scan would 
reveal unknown and  unlooked for abnormalities in your brain. We routinely have each 
scan sent to a radiologist (a doctor who specializes in looking at these images), and if 
there are abnormalities we will let you know of these results. We will provide your regular 
physician with a copy of these images if you would like. 
The risks  of drawing blood and putting an I.V. catheter in your arm include dizziness, pain, 
bruising, or infection at the site of the needle stick. Infections happen rarely.
In addition,  problems you could have from I.V. administration of ketamine directly into your vein 
include:
irritation  of the vein; your skin near the vein could become warm, swell, hurt, or get red
damage  to your vein
damage  to the skin or tissue around the injection site
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 6  of 11too  much of the ketamine may be given to you
increase  or decrease in electrolyte levels (the amount of certain salts and other 
chemicals in your blood), causing health problems
a  blood clot or an air bubble could form, which could block a blood vessel in another 
part of your body
Some of  these problems could be very serious.
Over time,  getting a lot of injections can cause a vein to become hard or scar, which can make it 
difficult to put a needle into the vein to give you a shot or take blood.
If you  are pregnant or nursing a child while receiving ketamine, there may be risks to your 
unborn baby or nursing child.  Some drugs cause premature (early) birth or birth defects.  
Nobody knows what all of these risks are right now.
If you  are a woman who can have children, the study doctor or study staff will talk to you about 
birth control you must use during the study.
If you  think you are pregnant during the study, you must tell the study doctor or study staff 
immediately. Women who become pregnant during the study will have to leave the study.
Some of  the questions you will be asked in the study questionnaires may make you feel 
uncomfortable or upset. Please tell the study doctor or study staff if you feel uncomfortable or 
upset while answering the study questionnaires. You do not have to answer any question that 
makes you uncomfortable or upset.
There is  a risk of loss of confidentiality of your information.  You will read more about the 
protection of your information later in this form.  Please ask the study doctor or study staff if you 
would like to know more about how your information will be protected while you are in this study.
There may  be other unknown side effects that could occur, which include your depression 
getting worse.
Ask the study doctor if  you have questions about the signs or symptoms of any side effects that 
you read about in this consent form.
Are there  any potential benefits?
With ketamine,  it is possible that you may experience a reduction in depressive symptoms and 
improvement in social and family functioning. However, this is not guaranteed and there may be 
no direct benefit to you from being in the study. The knowledge gained from this study may 
benefit others in the future.
What other  options are there?
You do  not have to be in this study to get help for your treatment-resistant depression. You can 
choose to not participate in this study. You can continue to work with your current provider to 
manage depression.
You should  discuss your alternatives to participating in this research with the study doctor or 
study staff. In addition, you may discuss your options with your regular health care provider.
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 7  of 11What are the costs?
Participation in  this study will be at no cost to you. 
Will I  get paid?
You will  be compensated up to $220 for your participation at different time points: $40 for the 
initial visit, $20 for the post infusion clinical visit, $40 after each MRI assessment (total of 2), $20 
for the 6 month visit, and $10 for each of the weekly follow-up visits (up to 6). There will be no 
reimbursement for the ketamine infusion visits. If you start, but do not finish the study, monetary 
compensation will be pro-rated according to each completed visit.
In addition  to study payment, you will also be reimbursed for parking at the study center, up to a 
total of $126 for the entire study.
What will happen  if there is a research-related injury?
In the  event that this research activity results in an injury, treatment will be available, including 
first aid, emergency treatment and follow-up care as needed. Care for such injuries will be billed 
in the ordinary manner to you or your insurance company. If you think you have suffered a 
research related injury let the study doctor or study staff know right away.
You do  not give up any of your legal rights by signing this form.
Be aware  that your health care payer/insurer might not cover the costs of study-related injuries 
or illnesses.
Will medical  information be kept private?
The records of  this study will be kept private. In any publications or presentations, you will not 
be identified by name or other recognizable way on any records, results or publications relating 
to the study. Your medical records, as they relate to the research study, may be reviewed by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, CMRR personnel, other regulatory authorities, and Quorum 
Review (a group of people who review research studies to protect the rights and welfare of 
research participants) to check trial data and procedures and ensure that the information is 
accurate. 
Any information  obtained in connection with this study that can be identified with you will remain 
confidential and will be disclosed only with your permission.  However, mental health 
professionals are mandated reporters, which means that we are obliged to report alleged or 
probable abuse, as well as known abuse. If there are any concerns about maltreatment, they 
will be reported in accordance to the law. If you tell us that someone (including yourself) is in 
danger of serious harm, we may need to obtain outside assistance. 
Only researchers  associated with this study and other authorized personnel will have access to 
the records; research records will be kept in a locked file. In any sort of report we might publish, 
we will not include any information that will make it possible to identify you. 
Your protected  health information created or received for the purposes of this study is protected 
under the federal law known as HIPAA. This means that we must keep your medical information 
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 8  of 11private and  confidential to the greatest extent possible. Your protected health information 
includes contact information or any identifying information. You will be asked to review and sign 
a separate HIPAA authorization form concerning the use of this information. 
To these extents,  confidentiality is not absolute.
A description of this clinical trial will be  available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by 
U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site 
will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.
Incidental Findings
The images  or pictures created during this study are for research purposes only and are not 
intended to provide health care to you. However, if the results from the magnetic resonance 
imaging show something unusual in the pictures, a Radiologist trained in reading the pictures 
will look at them. The Radiologist would not receive any personal information except your age 
and pertinent medical history collected as part of the research. There will be no charge to you 
for having the Radiologist look at your pictures. The investigator in charge of this study will 
contact you if the recommendation of the Radiologist is to further investigate the unusual results 
of the pictures with your own physician. However, further medical follow up is not a part of this 
study and the study does not have funds set aside for this purpose. Therefore, if the results do 
show something unusual, any medical follow up cost will be your responsibility and/or the 
responsibility of your health insurance carrier.
What are your  rights as a research subject?
Your decision  to take part in this study is voluntary.  You have the right to decide not to 
participate.  Should you agree to participate in this research, you may change your mind at any 
time and withdraw yourself from the study. A decision not to participate will not harm your 
relationship with the study doctors and the study staff, nor will it affect your regular treatment in 
any way. Deciding not to be in this study or changing your mind later will not result in any 
penalty to you, and you won't lose any benefits except for benefits having to do with the study.
The study  doctor may withdraw you from the study without your consent at any time if: he or she 
believes it is in your best interest (for example, if your condition is worsening, and a treatment 
option outside of the study is available that would be better for you); you significantly fail to 
follow study directions and procedures; or if there are unexpected or serious side effects.
If you  stop being in the study early, the study doctor or study staff may ask you some questions 
about being in the study.  The study doctor or study staff may ask you to participate in some 
procedures or tests to help you leave the study safely and/or to collect more information for the 
study.  If you leave the study, the study doctor and study staff will still be able to use your 
information that they have already collected.
What if new information  becomes available about the study?
The study  doctors will notify you if there are new findings that might affect your willingness to 
continue to be in the study, or that could affect your health either during or after the study.
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 9  of 11Who can  you call if you have questions about the study? 
In the  event of an emergency, dial 911 immediately.
If you  require emergency care, be sure to tell the emergency care provider about your 
participation in this study.  Contact the study doctor or study staff as soon as possible.
You can  ask questions about the study at any time.  You can call the study doctor or study staff 
at any time if you have any concerns or complaints.  You should call the study doctor or study 
staff at the phone number listed on page 1 of this form if you have questions about the study 
procedures, study costs (if any), study payment (if any), or if you get hurt or sick during the 
study.
Quorum Review  reviewed this study.  Quorum Review is a group of people who review research 
studies to protect the rights and welfare of research participants.  Review by Quorum Review 
does not mean that the study is without risks.  If you have questions about your rights as a 
research participant, if you are not able to resolve your concerns with the study doctor or study 
staff, if you have a complaint, or if you have general questions about what it means to be in a 
research study, you can call Quorum Review or visit the Quorum Review website at 
www.quorumreview.com.
Quorum Review  is located in Seattle, Washington.
Office hours are 8:00 AM  to 5:00 PM Pacific Time, Monday through Friday.
Ask to  speak with a Research Participant Liaison at 888-776-9115 (toll free).
You will  be given a signed copy of this form to keep for your records.
Permission to Videotape
We are  asking your permission to videotape certain portions of the study during visits and 
ketamine infusions. You do not have to let the study doctor or study staff videotape you if you 
don't want to. You can still be in the study if you do not want to be videotaped. You can ask the 
study doctor or study staff questions about it before you decide if you want to let them videotape 
you.
If you  agree to be videotaped, the videotape will be used by individuals directly involved in the 
study for research purposes in order to ensure the reliability of the diagnoses and assessments.
Videotapes may  also be presented to individuals such as medical students and residents for 
educational purposes. (We will not provide your name.)
The videotapes  will show your whole body. It is possible that people who see the videotapes will 
recognize you.
If you  change your mind later, tell the study doctor or study staff.  Be aware that any videotape 
taken before you changed your mind may still be used and shared as described in this form.
You will  indicate your choice about being videotaped at the end of this form.
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 10  of 11Permission to Share  Data Outside the Study
The data  that you provide is valuable and could be useful for other studies of adolescent health 
problems. When individuals provide consent to be in a research study, they are consenting for 
their information to be used only for the purpose of that study. The data cannot be combined 
with data from other studies. Investigators who focus on clinical samples do not always have 
easy access to comparison groups. Therefore, we request your consent to use your data in the 
context of other studies where Dr. Cullen is a co-investigator. We need to know if this is okay 
with you. If you agree to have your data shared across studies, your data will be grouped with 
that of other study participants for comparison with groups from other studies (for example, 
other groups of people with depression or other conditions, other healthy groups, groups of 
different ages). Data to be shared may include results from any of the tests that are described 
above in the study procedures. We will not share your name, address, or other contact 
information. 
You will  indicate your choice regarding data sharing at the end of this form.
Permission for  Future Re-Contact
The study  team wants to know if you will allow the members of the study team to contact you in 
the future to request information about your progress, and possibly to request further 
participation in an expanded portion of this study. Allowing the study team to contact you again 
does not obligate you to join any study or take part in any activities. If you do not want to allow 
this contact, you can still be in the study. If you agree now, you can change your mind at any 
time.
You will  indicate your choice regarding future re-contact at the end of this form.
Statement of Consent
I have  read the above information.  I have asked questions and have received answers.  I 
voluntarily consent to participate in the study.
By signing  this form, I do not give up any of my legal rights.  I will get a signed copy of this 
consent form.
Permission to Videotape:  Please initial one line regarding videotaping of study visits as 
described above:
_____ I  agree to allow portions of the visits to be videotaped for research purposes.
_____ I  do not agree to be videotaped. I can still be in the study.
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD
Adult Participant  Consent Form
CTSI 22225
Initials __________     Date __________
Version 3,  dated 06/19/17
Page 11  of 11Permission for  Data-Sharing: Please initial one line regarding data-sharing as described 
above.
_____ I  agree to have my data shared with other studies where Dr. Cullen is a co-investigator.  I 
may withdraw this consent to share data at any time in the future by contacting Dr. 
Cullen at (612)-273-9711.
_____ I  do not agree to have my data shared with other studies. I can still be in the study.
Permission for  Future Re-Contact:  Please initial one line regarding your choice to be 
contacted in  the future as described above.
_____ I  agree to be re-contacted.
_____ I  do not agree to be re-contacted. I can still be in the study.
Printed Name  of Participant
Signature of  Participant Date
I attest  that the individual providing consent had enough time to consider this information, had 
an opportunity to ask questions, and voluntarily agreed to participation in this study.
Printed Name  of Person Explaining Consent
Signature of  Person Explaining Consent Date
QUORUM REVIEW
APPROVED
INSTITUTIONAL
REVIEW BOARD