A pilot project to investigate 
the use of an external 
vestibular prosthesis potential 
to improve clinical 
management of Chronic 
Subjective Dizziness (CSD)  
NCT#
 02048670 
Ju
ly 22, 2013 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 1 of 8 IRB Minimal Risk Protocol Template  
General Study Information 
Prin
cipal Investigator :  Jeffrey P. Staab, M.D. 
Stud
y Title:    A pilot project to investigate the use of an external vestibular prosthesis potential to 
improve clinical management of Chronic Subjective Dizziness (CSD)  
Prot
ocol version number and date:    01, 22 JUL 2013 
Purpose  
Hypot
hesis: #1The use of the BalanceBelt™ will provide differential information about body sway movements 
during specific clinical balance and gait tasks in patients with CSD that is not currently available through 
routine measures.  
Hypot
hesis: #2 The use of the BalanceBelt™ will provide for a more rapid rate of reduction in patient 
symptoms compared to the historical data from the traditional habituation therapy method. 
Aim
s, purpose, or objectives:  #1 Motion detectors contained in the BalanceBeltTM will be used to record 
information about the subtle changes in posture and gait that are thought to occur in patients with CS D with the 
tractors turned off.  The goal of this portion of the study will be to improve diagnostic strategies for CSD. 
Aim
s, purpose, or objectives:  #2 In this second portion of the study we will test the benefits of a 1- week 
intensive rehabilitation p rogram using the BalanceBeltTM with tactors activated in 10 patients with CSD.  The 
goal of this study will be to develop a treatment that is quicker and more effective than current therapies. 
Bac
kground ( Include relevant experience, gaps in current knowledge, preliminary data, etc .):  
Chroni
c subjective dizziness (CSD) is the second most common condition identified in patients referred to 
Mayo Clinic for persistent dizziness. We manage nearly 500 patients with CSD each year. CSD is a syndrome of persist ent non-vertiginous dizziness and unsteadiness that may be worsened by patients’ own motion, 
exposure challenging visual stimuli such as busy shopping areas, or performance of precision visual tasks such as reading.  CSD develops in about 25% of patients f ollowing medical events that acutely disrupt balance. Once 
established, CSD may last for many years, even if the problems that triggered it resolves.  As a result, CSD causes considerable distress and functional impairment, even to the extent of work disability and disruption of family and social life (Staab, 2012).   
Over
 the last decade, the Mayo Clinic Integrated Neurotology team, and other investigators around the world 
have developed two treatment strategies for CSD.  One uses serotonergic medications  such as sertraline (Zoloft) 
and venlafaxine (Effexor).  The other is a variation of vestibular and balance exercises known as vestibular habituation.  These therapies reduce symptoms for 60-80% of patients when administered by experts in the field 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 2 of 8 (St
aab, 2012).  However, they have important shortcomings.  They are time-consuming, taking a minimum of 2-
3 months of diligent treatment to achieve best results.  They usually achieve a partial reduction in symptoms, 
which improves patients’ functioning, but falls short of a cure.  They can make patients worse, rather than better, when used by clinicians who are unfamiliar with them.  
A new
 theory about altered postural control mechanisms in CSD suggests that it could be diagnosed more 
accurately and treated more quickly by using an external vestibular prosthesis to enhance sensory feedback during vestibular exercises. A suitable prosthesis is the BalanceBelt
TM, which is currently in final beta testing by 
BalanceTek, the company that developed it.  This device has  been shown to have efficacy in reducing sway 
behavior in patients that have bilateral vestibular hypofunction (Sienko et al, 2010). For those patients with deficient vestibular systems the belt provides information that is missing from the lack of vestibu lar system cues 
for detecting sway or leaning behavior, hence drawing attention to the information that is missing. The BalanceBelt
TM is a comfortable, self -contained unit worn under the clothes around the waist.  It has sensitive 
motion detectors and small tactors that vibrate against the skin at four locations to provide information about posture and motion.  Patients with CSD do not have permanent vestibular deficits, but underutilize vestibular signals because they develop visual or somatosensory dependence.  We expect the BalanceBelt
TM to reset this 
error by providing patients with reliable motion stimuli.   
We pr
opose two preliminary studies using the BalanceBeltTM in patients with CSD.  In the first study, we will 
use the motion detectors contained i n the BalanceBeltTM to record information about the subtle changes in 
posture and gait that are thought to occur in patients with CSD.  This goal of this study will be to improve diagnostic strategies for CSD.  We will compare postural movements recorded w ith BalanceBelt
TM with tactors 
turned off during quiet stance, normal walking (Dynamic Gait Index), functional reach test, and the Sensory Organization Test in 10 patients with CSD and 10 age and gender matched normal individuals.  In the second study, we will test the benefits of a 1 -week intensive rehabilitation program using the BalanceBelt
TM with 
tactors activated in 10 patients with CSD.  The goal of this study will be to develop a treatment that is quicker and more effective than current therapies. 
Referen
ces: 
Sta
ab, J.P: Chronic subjective dizziness. Continuum Lifelong Learning Neurol 2012; 18(5):1118–1141. 
Sie
nko, K.H., Vichare, V.V., Balkwill, M.D., Wall, C: Assessment of vibrotactile feedback on postural 
stability during pseudorandom multidirectional platform motion. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, 2010; 57(4): 944-952. 
Subject Information – charts, records, images, or specimens are considered ‘subjects’ 
Targ
et accrual: Proposed number of subjects to be included in your study at your site. “Subjects” may include 
Mayo Clinic charts, records, or specimens, and/or  charts, records, or specimens received at Mayo Clinic from 
external sources for collaborating analysis by the investigator under this IRB application:    
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 3 of 8 Subj
ect population:  20 patients with diagnosis of Chronic Subjective Dizziness (CSD) and 10 normal 
volunteers. 
In
clusion Criteria:  1. Subjects will be 25-70 years of age inclusive and pregnant women may participate.  
2. Patients will have CSD as their primary diagnosis  for the cause of their balance and
dizziness complaints provided by the Behavioral Medicine Program for Dizziness, a division of the 
Department of Psychiatry & Psychology. 
3. Normal volunteers will have a negative history of otologic & neurologic disorders and
no history of dizziness and balance problems. 
4. Normal volunteers will have normal findings on a screening office examination for
peripheral and central vestibular system involvement (see methods for details of the examination) and screening for normal or symmetrical hearing loss of explainable origin.  
Ex
clusion Criteria:   1. Patients with positive indications from testing of peripheral and/or central vestibular 
system involvement that is felt to be influencing the symptoms reported beyond t he CSD alone.  
2. Patients with mobility restriction that would prevent participating in the tests or the
intensive therapy trials.  
3. Subjects with hearing impairment that interferes with oral communication.
Will a
 Certificate of Confidentiality b e obtained? If yes, provide an explanation. 
NO 
Study Design 
Me
thods: Describe, in detail, the research activities that will be conducted under this protocol :  
For
 Hypothesis and aim #1: Ten consecutive patients, ages 25-70 years, diagnosed with CSD a fter completion 
of their routine evaluation in the Dizziness and Balance disorders laboratory and their evaluation by  the 
Behavioral Medicine program for dizziness, would then be recruited for participation in the study. If they agree to participate they w ill individually be placed through the following evaluations while wearing the 
BalanceBelt™ with the tractors turned off but the recording elements turned on. Each of these tests is  a standard 
evaluation tool used in the Vestibular and Balance Laboratory on a routine basis:  
1.Dy
namic Gait Index – evaluates gait under normal walking and under conditions of head turns, walking
around two objects on the floor, stepping over a shoe box, walking at different speeds, walking with astop and 180 degree turn, walking up and down 3 standard steps with hand rails. During the evaluationthe physical therapist or the audiologist guards the subjects at all times walking with the subject and thesubject wears the harness used for the test in #3 that has a hand grab to prevent falls.
2.Functional Reach Test – the subject stands in a stationary position and reaches out with a single arm asfar as they can without taking a step. Here again the physical therapist or the audiologist is guarding thepatient during the performance o f the test, again with the subject in the harness used in #3 with the hand
grab to prevent falls.
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 4 of 8 3. Se
nsory Organization Test – this is a 6 condition standard evaluation of balance control performed on a
dynamic platform that can record sway movement in the A/P dimension while the sensory inputs from
proprioception and vision are varied through the platform and visual surround movements. The subjectwears a full chest harness that is fastened to a roll bar above the subject to prevent any falls.
For
 each of the patients an age and gender matched normal (± 5 years) volunteer will go through the same 
evaluations. The time for testing will take 45 minutes. Normal subjects will be recruited through written advertisements from visitors and / or accompanying persons for patients to Mayo Clinic.  Each of the normal 
subjects will go through an office vestibular examination that will consist of direct monitoring for nystagmus in all positions of gaze with and without visual fixation present. They will also undergo the head thrust test with visual fixation present and headshake test with visual fixation absent. Pursuit and saccade office examination will be performed with a hearing screening by pure tones only. If any abnormalities are revealed with the screening the nor mal volunteer will be advised as to formal testing that should be performed via their primary 
care physician also being notified.  
For
 Hypothesis and aim #2: Ten consecutive patients, ages 25-70 years, diagnosed with CSD who live within a 
30 minute drive time of the Rochester Mayo campus will be asked to participate in the habituation therapy activities typically used as treatment of CSD but with an intensive treatment program using the exercises at home for the week. The patients will be using the BalanceB elt™ with the tractors activated. The typical therapy 
evaluations pre- therapy will be taken in addition to Visual Analog Scales related to the intensity of symptoms 
provoked by visual motion, head movements and walking in visually complex environments. The se same 
measures will be taken at the end of the week of intensive therapy at a return visit to check their exercise activities prior to continuing their progressive home treatment. The one week of intensive therapy will be performed prior to starting any recommended medications or medication changes for the CSD. The therapy will 
be conducted by one of the Physical Therapists certified in Vestibular and Balance therapy.  
Fo
llowing the intensive therapy the patient will continue with the therapy activities and medication trials as is 
standard currently for the CSD patients. 
Res
ources: Describe the available resources to conduct the research (personnel, time, facilities, mentor 
commitment, etc.) :  
All of the equipment and procedures described above are already in place and used routinely by the Audiologists and Physical therapists that work in the Dizziness and Balance Disorders Center on Gonda-12 in the department of Otolaryngology. The only acquisition is that of the BalanceBelt™ for which the department of Otolaryngology research committee has approved a request for $7800 from the small grants program to cover the cost of the belt ($6000) and the 30% indirect costs ($1800). 
Check all that apply. If none apply, leave blank:  
 The research involves contact or interaction with subjects, for example, surveys, 
questionnaires, observation, blood draw. 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 5 of 8 Blood Collection 
If
 this study involves prospective blood collection by finger, heel, ear stick or venipuncture, complete the 
following:  
  F
rom healthy, non pregnant, adult subjects who weigh at least 110 pounds . For a minimal risk 
application, the amount of blood drawn from these subjects may not exceed 550ml in an 8 week period 
and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week. 
Volume per blood draw: _____ml   
Frequency of blood draw (e.g. single draw, time(s) per week, per year, etc.) _______ 
  F
rom other adults and children considering age, weight, and health of subject. For a minimal r isk 
application, the amount of blood drawn from these subjects may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml 
per kg in an 8 week period, and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week. 
Volume per blood draw: _____ml 
Frequency of blood draw (e.g. single draw, time(s) per week, per year, etc.)_______ 
Review of Chart, Images, Specimens 
Provide the date range for collection of data and/or specimens that will be included in your research dataset.  
(Example: 01/01/2000 to 12/31/2012)  
Date range: From _ 02/01_/2014  to 01/_ 31/2015 
Check all that apply : 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 6 of 8   T
his study involves only data and/or specimens that will be collected after submission to the IRB. 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
Page 7 of 8 Data Confidentiality, HIPAA Subject Identifiers  
Revie
w the list of subject identifiers below and, if applicable, check the box next to each subject identifier being 
recorded at the time you are collecting/abstracting data/specimens for use in this study.  
Sub
ject Identifiers :  Individually identifiable information, including demographic data, that identifies the 
individual or for which there is reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify the individual.  NOTE: 
Identifiers apply to subjects enrolled in your study and to the subject’s relatives, household members, employers, etc.  
Int
ernal  refers to subject identifiers that will be included in the dataset maintained by the study team.  
External  refers to subject identifiers that will be shared with persons outside of the immediate study team, for 
example, sent to an external collaborator or shared with a national registry.  
SUBJECT IDENTIFIERS  
Check all that apply  INTERNAL  
IDENTIFIER  EXTERNAL  
IDENTIFIER  
Name  
Social Security number  
Medical record/patient registration number, lab accession, s pecimen or 
radiologic image number  x 
Study number, subject ID, or any other unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code that can be used to link the identity of the subject to the 
data x 
Dates: All elements of dates [month, day, and year] directl y related to an 
individual. Their birth date, date of death, date of diagnosis, etc.   
Note: Recording a year only is not a unique identifier.  x 
Medical device identifiers and serial numbers  
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints, f ull face photographic 
images and any comparable images  
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs),  Internet Protocol (IP) address 
numbers, email address  
Street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes  
Phone or fax numbe rs 
Account, member, certificate or professional license numbers, health 
beneficiary numbers  
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
If None of the above identifiers will be recorded or maintained in the 
dataset and/ or sent outside of the study team, please check “None”.  
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.004]  Effective August 28, 2012  
 Page 8 of 8 Statistical Information 
Note
: Power analyses and study endpoints are not needed for a pilot or feasibility studies . 
 No
 statistical information. If checked, please explain : 
Statistical Considerations  
Pow
er Statement :  Power analyses not used as this is a pilot study. 
Data A
nalysis Plan:  
For H
ypothesis and aim #1: The outcome parameters from the BalanceBelt™ that represent the total amount of 
sway and sway activity in the A/P and M/L directions will be compare between the CSD patients and the 
normal age matched volunteers via the Wilcoxon rank-sum test for mean comparisons. 
For H
ypothesis and aim #2: The visual analog scale scores pre & post the week of intensive therapy will be 
compared for the 10 subjects using also the Wilcoxon test for mean comparisons. 
Endpoints 
As this is a pilot study no fixed endpoints will be used.   
Prima
ry: 
Secon
dary: 