 
Randomized, Double Blinded, 
Placebo Controlled Trial To 
Understand E fficacy Of 
Colesevelam I n Diarrhea 
Predominant IBS Patients With 
Bile Acid Malabsorption 
 
NCT# 03270085 
 
October 15, 2018 
 
Study Title:  Randomized, Double Blinded, Placebo controlled trial to understand efficacy of Colesevelam in 
diarrhea predominant IBS patients with Bile Acid Malabsorption  
 
Name of Principal Investigator (PI) : Michael Camilleri, M.D.  
 
Version and date: Version 09 dated 10/15/2018  
Original protocol date: 07/03/2017  
 
  
SPECIFIC AIM   
     Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is the most common lower gastrointestinal (GI) disorder that affects 11% of 
adults (1). Currently, IBS and subgroups diarrhea -predominant IBS (IBS -D), and IBS -constipation (IBS- C), are  
defined by symptoms alone. Apart from central hypervigilance and psychological disturbances in IBS  (2),48% 
of IBS -D patients have accelerated colonic transit , 21% have increased rectal sensation  (3), and others have 
increased intestinal permeability,  reduced barrier protein expression (4) and abnormal bile acid  (BA) synthesis 
or excretion  (5). These findings suggest that colonic “irritation” may be mediated by extrinsic factors  (e.g. 
stress or prior GI infections)  and intraluminal mediators [e.g. BAs and short chain fatty acids (SCFA) ] which 
alter mucosal function, stimulate serotonin release, alter mucosal permeability, induce immune activation, and 
increase colonic motility.    
We have previously shown that colonic mucosal mRNA expression ( first in 9 patients, then confirmed in 47 
other patients ) show ed that IBS-D is associated with changes in transcriptome  which regulates mucosal 
functions , such as  neurotransmitters (P2RY4  and V IP), ion channels  [GUC2AB , and PDZD3) cytokines 
(CCL20), and immune function ( C4BPA).  
Building on these preliminary observations, our  overarching goal  is to examine effects of BA sequestration  in 
IBS-D with increased BA excretion on  quantitative traits  and mucosal mRNA expression in rectosigmoid colon.  
Hypothesi s:  BA sequestration normalizes colonic functions  in IBS -D with increased fecal BA excretion.  
Specific Aim : To compare with a randomized trial (n=15 per treatment group) , effects of  colesevelam 1.875g 
bid and placebo treatment,  on colonic transit , bowel functions,  permeability and tight junction expression in 
rectosigmoid mucosa of IBS -D with Bile Acid Malabsorption.  
 This protocol addresses the third specific aim of a program on IBS -D with increased fecal BA excretion
 ABBREVIA TIONS  used: ASBT : apical, Na -dependent bile acid transporter;  ASIC: acid -sensing ion channel; ATP2C2:  
annotated as splice- site acceptor motif, and involved in Ca2+ encoding secretory pathway ; BA: bile  acids; C4BPA:  
complement component 4 binding protein, alpha; CA: cholic acid; CCL20: chemo kine (C -C motif) ligand 20  CDCA 
chenodeoxycholic acid; CDH- 1: cadherin 1; CLDN: claudin;CNR1: cannabinoid type 1 receptor;  C11orf30: chromosome 11, 
open- reading fr ame 30;   CYP, cytochrome P450; DCA deoxycholic acid; FAAH: fatty acid amide hydrolase;  FABP6 : fatty acid 
binding protein 6; FDR: false discovery rate; FXR : farnesoid X receptor; FGF19 : fibroblast growth factor 19; FGFR4 : FGF 
receptor 4;  FN1: fibronectin 1;  GpBAR1 :G protein coupled bile acid receptor 1; GUC: guanylate cyclase; 5- HT: serotonin; 5-
HTTLPR: 5 -HT transporter, long polymorphic repeat; IL: interleukin;  IBS: irritable bowel syndrome; IFIT3: interferon- induced 
protein with tetratricopeptide repeats  3;  KLB: klotho B; LRH1:  liver receptor homolog-1 ; MAF: minor allele frequency; NaV: 
voltage gated sodium channel; NR1H4:  Nuclear  receptor subfamily 1, group H, member 4 ;OCLN: occluding; ORMDL3: 
Orosomu coid like 3; OST: organic solute transporter; OTU: operational taxonomic units; PRDM1: positive regulatory domain 
I-binding factor;   P2RY4 : puri nergic receptor P2Y, G -protein coupled, 4;  PDZD3 : postsynaptic density -95, disks large, 
zonula occludens -1, domain 3; QTL: quantitative trait loci;  RBP2: retinal -binding protein 2;SHP: Small Heterodimer Partner ; 
SLC solute carrier C; SNP: single nucleotide polymorphism;  SNV: Single nucleotide variants; Th17: IL- 17-producing CD4+ T 
cells;  TGR5 =GpBAR1 ;  TFF1 : trefoil factor 1 TJ: tight junctions; TNFSF15: tumor necrosis factor, superfamily 15; TLR9: toll -
like receptor 9; TRPV: transient receptor potential vanilloid; VIP: vasoactive intestinal peptide; XAF -1: X-Linked inhibitor of 
apoptosis -associated factor -1; ZO: zonula occlud ens 
A. INTRODUCTION  
A.1. Significance of  the Problem . IBS affects ~11% and IBS -D affects ~5% of the US population ( 1) and 
often impairs quality of life ( 13). IBS is currently defined by symptoms (i.e., abdominal discomfort associated 
with bowel disturbances) in the absence of organic disease on routine testing. The few available therapeutic 
agents for IBS -D are of very limited efficacy. In contrast to this “one size fits all ” approach, there is a large body 
of evidence that IBS -D symptoms are manifestations of peripheral mechanisms that perturb motor , 
mucosal  and sensory functions  (3,14) . This application is founded on the concept that better understanding 
of the phenotypes in IBS -D will identify biomarkers that ultimately will support  diagnosis and targeted 
(individualized)  therapy for the disorder , significant ly enhancing health.  
   Current concepts on IBS focus on disturbances of colonic transit, mucosal immune function, visceral 
hypersensitivity, and central nervous system (CNS) hypervigilance ( 2,14,15 ). The current proposal focuses 
on IBS -D: in our series of 119 patients with IBS -D (3) , 48% had accelerated transit , while  20.5% had increased 
and 16.5% had reduced rectal sensation.  Since  the pathophysiology and, possibly, genetic and expression 
mechanisms  controlling (for example) motor and secretory functions, may  differ significantly in IBS -D and IB S-
C, this proposal  focuses  on IBS -D. Recent research, detailed in New England Journal of Medicine (14) and 
Journal of Physiology  (16), summarizes  peripheral m echanisms  in IBS : intraluminal irritants (such as mal -
digested carbohydrates (producing SCFA) or fats, excess of BAs,  bioactive amines  [e.g. serotonin (17)], 
mucos al barrier function ( TJ proteins, e.g. ref. 18 ), immune activation, increased small intestinal and colonic 
permeability , and alterations in microbiome .  These factors activate  local reflexes to alter intestinal motility or 
secretion , and stimulat e sensation and  pain (reviewed in ref. 4 ).  
We propose that these QUANTITATIVE traits , linked to underlying genetic mechanisms or to alterations in 
tissue expression of pivotal mechanisms, provide the basis for  understanding IBS-D and optimiz ing treatment .  
Figure 1. Schema of 3 proposed aims of DK92179 application examining germ -line DNA, mucosal 
expression, and effect of BA sequestrant , Colesevelam , including numbers of participants in each aim . 
 This protocol addresses the third specific 
aim of a program on IBS -D with increased 
fecal BA excretion   
A third aim addresses the potential effects 
of bile acid sequestration on bowel 
function,  transit,  permeability and 
expression of barrier proteins in 
rectosigmoid mucosa and will thus 
confirm the relevance of mucosal 
alterations demonstrated in aim 2.  To 
enhance the power of studies in IBS-D 
exploring gene quantitative trait loci 
(QTLs) and mucosal expression, it is 
essential to measure key quantitative 
traits . The relevance of the quantitative 
traits to subtypes of IBS and its symptoms 
are discussed elsewhere ( 14).    
 Fig. 1  
 
A.2. Mucosal Expression of Factors Impacting Pathophysiology of IBS. IBS has been associated with 
changes in the rectosigmoid mucosal expression of immune mechanisms and non- immune protective factors . 
Table 1. Changes in Colonic  Mucosal Expression in IBS in the Published Literature  
There are only a few 
examples  of the inherited 
genotype that is associated 
with altered mucosal gene 
expression, e.g., 
differential expression of TNFSF15 genes  (which 
are associated with IBS ), 
has been linked with 
functional alterations of 
mucosal immune and 
protective functions ( 6,22).  
 
PRELIMINARY DATA  
1. A systematic review and meta- analysis ( 39) shows an average  28% of IBS -D patients have  
evidence of increased BA synthesis or fecal BA excretion (figure 2)    
2. Pilot Study of RNA -Seq of 
Rectosigmoid Mucosa :  
We examined RNA expression of 
rectosigmoid mucosa from 9 female  IBS-D 
patients ( 36) by RNA -Seq (Illumina  
methods) (Fig. 3) , and analyzed using the 
edgeR software . We identified [ FDR 
corrected p <0.05 ] 21 genes ( Fig. 4) with 
altered mRNA expression in  that may  be 
biologically relevant in IBS -D: 
neurotransmitters  [P2RY4 (p=0.001) , VIP  
[p=0.02)] , cytokines [ CCL20  (p=0.019 )], 
immune function ( C4BPA complement 
cascade  [p=0.0187]; TNFSF15 [ p= 0.0098] 
and  IFIT3 which determines  expression of 
interferon- induced genes [p=  0.016),  
mucosal repair  and cell adhesion (TFF1 
gastrointestinal trefoil protein,  [p= 0.012 ]; 
RBP2 retinol binding protein [p=0.017]; FN1 
fibronectin [p=0.009] ), and ion transport  
function s with i ncreased express ion in : (i) GUC 2AB ( p= 0.017); guanylate cyclase activator 2B , which  
encodes uroguanylin which causes  enterocyte chloride secretion through guanylat e cycles C receptor [GC -C]); 
(ii).PDZD3 ( p=0.029 ); PDZ protein associates with GC-C and regulates  cGMP production, leading to chloride 
secretion ( 36). After  validating  RNA -Seq data with RT- PCR of  same samples, we proposed  in a model of 
barrier, ion secretory and imm une dysfunctions, based on mucosal transcriptome changes in  IBS-D.        
 Figure 3:   Summary model (based on RNA -Seq) of  increased 
mucosal expression of ion secretory mechanisms (GUCA2B, 
PDZD3), barrier dysfunction (FN1, RBP2), t ransmitters  
(P2RY4, VIP), and immune regulation (TNF) in IBS -D.   
 
3. Replication of abno rmal mucosal mRNA expression in  
IBS-D and novel observations in IBS -C (38). The initial 
observations  by RNA -Seq were replicated using RT -PCR in 
rectosigmoid mucosal biopsies from a cohort of 47 IB S-D patients 
and contrasted findings in 10 IBS -C and  17 healthy controls.     

 
 Figure 4. Expression of mRNA (vs. healthy) in IBS -D, IBS-C (blue histograms)  show ing the specificity 
of the  increased expression of guanylin and PDZD3 ion transport and immune mechanisms in IBS -D.    
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 . Western blots  for protein 
expression of PDZD3 in colonic 
mucosa (left)  from IBS -D (n=10)  (38), 
and PPP2R5C (n=7  IBS-D) in small 
bowel mucosa ( 43). Note the increased 
protein  expressions relative to  vinculin or 
actin (as control) compared to healthy 
controls.  
Figure 6. I mmunofluorescence of 
colorectal mucosa showing  increased 
expression of PDZD3 protein in 
epithelial cells in IBS -D patient 
compared to control . 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Fig 4  
Fig 5  
  
Fig 6  
 
Open- label  study of the BA sequestrant , Colesevelam , in 12  patients with IBS -D and high fecal bile acid 
excretion  demonstrated  biological relevance of increased fecal BA excretion ( 27).   
Figure 7. Effects of colesevelam on 
sequestration of bile acid (methanol extraction 
of stool released the bile acids showing that 
increased amounts were bound)  and reduced  
stool form.  C olesevelam  improved stool 
consistency,  sequestering and inactivating BA 
(shown by  increased BA in stool after  methanol 
extraction).  
  
 
 
 
  
  
METHODS  
Participants:  Eligibility of 30 patients with IBS -D and evidence of BAM . Through the application of natural 
language processing and the electronic medical record, we have an established database of ~8000  patients 
with IBS who reside within ~ 100 miles , and have been evaluated at Mayo Clin ic in Rochester, Minnesota; 
about  ~2000 have been identified with IBS -D. All participants with IBS -D will be selected by computer -based 
random selection to be invited to participate. The randomly selected 300 patients with IBS -D will complete a 
validated bowel disease questionnaire, including Somatic Symptom Checklist [BDQ corresponding to Rome III 
criteria ( 58)], IBS quality of life [IBS -QOL ( 59)], and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [HAD ( 60)]. 
Ethnicity and race information is available in >90%  of patients at Mayo Clinic .  
Consideration of Sex as a Biological Variable: Scientific premise for inclusion of both genders includes: 
(i) IBS -D affects both genders; (ii) there is no a priori evidence that mechanisms or pathobiology of IBS -D 
differs between genders. We shall set up special efforts to recruit males with IBS using REDCAP to identify 
male patients through the electronic health records (established 17 years ago at Mayo Clinic).  
Participants with IBS -D will be screen for BAM 3 ways with either fasting serum alpha C4 or FGF19 taken 
before 10 am. If C4 ≥ 40 ng/mL or FGF19 ≤ 80 pg/mL either in the past or at the time o f screen, the patient will 
be included in the trial and subsequently randomized. Also IBS- D with a fecal BA  >2000µmoles/48h  either in 
the past or at the time of screen will be included in the trial or  subsequently randomized.  
Quantitative Traits  
Colonic permeability  is measured by  urinary excretion of mannitol and lactulose after oral ingestion  (44). We 
refined a  previous HPLC- tandem mass spectrometry technique ( 45). We validated measurement of colonic 
permeability after oral delivery by direct instillation of sugars into the colon ( 46). We have published data 
showing  significantly increased small bowel (P<.001) and colonic (P=0.10) permeability in IBS -D (35); and 
effects of dietary gluten on small bowel permeability , especially  in HLA DQ2/8 +ve  (P=0.02 ) patients with non-
celiac IBS -D (35). We validated 13C-mannitol  to avoid confounding by dietary  12C-mannitol ( 47).  
Rectosigmoid mucosal expression of tight junction (TJ) proteins , a measure of barrier function: IBS-D 
patients have lower mRNA expression of TJ proteins [ZO -1 
and occludin (both P<.001)], but not claudin proteins ( 35) 
relative to healthy controls; values show fold change vs. mean in controls  (Table 2). 
Table 2. TJ protein expressions in rectosigmoid mucosa 
in IBS D and healthy controls  (mean  ± SD).    
In addition, gluten -containing diet was associated with 
signifi cant decreases in ZO -1 and occludin mRNA expression in rectosigmoid mucosa ( 48).       
  
Mucosal morphology  will assess intra -epithelial lymphocytes, mast cells and immunocytes in  lamina propria, 
and immunohisto- chemistry of TJ proteins ( 35). GI pathologist will ensure correct orientation.    

 
     Colonic transit : Extensive experience over 28 y ears with validation of colonic transit by radioscintigraphy 
(49) .  
Gallbladder size measurement: Studies have demonstrated that patients with hormones that regulate bile 
acid synthesis (FGF15 in mice and FGF19 in humans) facilitate gallbladder filling. We want to determine if 
there is any difference of baseline and post t reatment gallbladder measurements. Gallbladder measurement 
will be conducted fasting both pre and post treatment with a 2- D ultrasound. Patients will be in the supine 
position with the transducer placed in a sagittal plane in the right upper quadrant of the supine patients and 
positioned until the greatest length of the gallbladder is obtained. The image will be captured and the length will 
be measured. The probe will then be rotated 90 degrees to obtain the short axis and obtain the greatest dimension in that window.  
    BA kinetics: Assess ment of  BA synthesis and fecal excretion (uniquely available in USA at Mayo Clinic)  
Serum 7
α-hydroxy -4-cholesten-3- one (7α-HCO or C4)  measures  hepatic  cholesterol synthesis, and  is a 
validated method for BA malabsorption [BAM ( 51,52)]. Serum C4 ( ref. 53 , assay based on ref. 54 ) is positively 
correlated with fecal BA excretion [r s=0.61, p<0.001 ( 5)].  
Serum fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) , a measure of feedback regulation of BA synthesis ( 54B), will be 
measured by ELISA (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).      
Fecal BA excretion: Using HPLC/tandem mass spectrometry, we adapted a method ( 55) to measure fecal total 
and individual BAs.  We have previously shown that fecal total BA ( 5), and secretory  primary and secondary 
BAs [chenodeoxycholic (CDCA) and deoxycholic acids (DCA)] are higher in IBS -D, whereas  CDCA is 
decreased and non -secretory lithocholic acid increased in IBS -C (56)]. 
    Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) in stool by  gas chromatography -mass spectrometry  (Mayo CTSA ICL Lab)  
The method is adapted from Tangerman et al. (57)  and permits analysis of 8 SCFAs, from C2 to C6, plus an 
internal standard, 2 -ethyl butyric acid using a Thermo Trace GC Ultra Gas Chromatograph (San Jose,  CA) 
fitted with a flame ionization detector  (FID).  Fecal samples a re extracted using  acetonitrile and injected without 
dilution ; components  were  identified according to their retention times compared to standards.  
Studies on  Sigmoid Mucosal Biopsies: Tight Junction Proteins, Morphology, RNA -Seq.  With informed 
consent, 8 samples will be acquired from the rectum and sigmoid colon and 4 from terminal ileum, for each 
patient. Biopsies will be immediately preserved in formalin (histopathology), or in a solution of RNAlater 
(Ambion, Austin, TX), stored at - 80°C. RNA extraction will be performed as in the manufacturer’s instructions 
(RNeasy mini kit, Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The quantity and quality of the extracted RNA will be determined by the NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE) and the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA). All RINs will be determined using the Agilent Bioanalyzer. RNA -Seq 
analysis will be conducted as in section C.1.e and as in Camilleri  et al. (36). Ileal mRNA of ASBT (SLC10A2) 
and FXR (NR1H4) in ileal mucosa will be measured by RT- PCR (see C.2.9.i.).  
     Quantitation of Tight Junction (TJ) Proteins in Sigmoid Mucosa Using Real -Time PCR .  
TJ proteins [zonula occludens 1 (ZO -1), occludin (OCLN), claudin- 1 (CLDN- 1), and glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, control)] will be assayed in rectosigmoid biopsies. cDNA synthesis will be 
performed using 0.2  μg of total RNA with the High Capacity Reverse Tra nscription Kit (Applied Biosystems, 
Foster City, CA). Taqman gene expression assays for ZO -1, OCLN, CLDN- 1, and GAPDH will be carried out in 
triplicate for each gene on an ABI Prism 7300 Real -time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) according to 
manufacturer's  instructions using the comparative 
ΔΔCT method for relative quantification.  mRNA expression 
of each gene (normalized to GAPDH) will be compared by statistical analysis( 35,48).  
    Colonic Mucosal Morphology.  The colonic biopsies will be stained with H&E and tryptase to assess 
intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) and mast cells.  Immuno- histochemical staining of 5μ -thick paraffin sections 
will be performed using a commercial kit; primary antibodies used will be CD3, CD4, CD8, CD68, CD79, 
tryptase (Dako, Carpenteria, CA) and ZO -1 (Invitrogen Corporation, Camarillo, CA). Biopsies will be assessed 
by one experienced GI pathologist ( T. Smyrk, MD ) who will be blinded to IBS -D/C subtype. Dr. T. Smyrk, co-
investigator , has expertise and experience from our prior collaborative studies ( 48, DK86182). IEL will be 
counted on the H&E slides and expressed as IEL/100 epithelial cells. Immune cells stained for CD3 and CD8 
will be counted on semi -quantitative scale of 1 -4. ZO -1 will be scored as percentage of epithelial cells positive, 
and semi -quantitative assessment of stain intensity [on scale 0- 3 (48)]. 
     In Depth RNA Sequencing of Colonic Mucosa (analysis by E.W. Klee, Ph.D., Bioinformatics ). 
Assay Protocol:  Total RNA will be isolated from mucosal biopsies ( Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit) . RNA -Seq will be 
performed  on the Illumina Hi- Seq 4000, using the RNA -Seq protocol with 101 base, paired- end reads. 
 
Samples will be multiplexed 6 per lane, averaging > 100 million reads -per-sample, with 60.4% of reads 
mapping to the gene regions. Bioinformatics tools for pathway analysis will also be utilized (Dr. E. Klee Ph.D.). 
Library preparation and sample sequencing will be performed by the Mayo Clinic Advanced Genomic 
Technology Center Core Facility .  Special techniques for analysis, ensuring uniformity in cross -gene and 
sample set comparisons and pathway analysis are detailed in the section on laboratory facilities available.  
      In Depth Proteomics of  colonic mucosal biopsies in duplicate by a labe l-free LC -MS/MS method 
(see letter of support from Dr. Daniel J. McCormick Ph.D., Proteomics Core, Mayo).    
Extraction and separation:  Proteins from the biopsy will be extracted in SDS buffer containing protease 
inhibitors using a bead beater to disrupt tissue. Extracted proteins will be run on a gel, proteins separated by size, segmented, and in- gel trypsin digested to obtain peptides to compare across samples.  
Liquid chromatography is used to load peptide sample onto a C8 cartridge, which is then placed i n-line with 
a C18 analytical column. Peptides are sorted by ionic strength using a mobile phase gradient of acidic low to 
high organic solvent, eluted off the column, captured into mass spectrometer (MS) via electrospray ionization, 
followed by data depend ent ms/ms data for peak identification.  D. We also have access to single reaction 
monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry on QExactive and triple quad instruments in the Proteomics Core for more accurate quantification of proteins if necessary.   
Data analysis from high resolution MS will use MaxQuant, a quantitative proteomics software to compare 
high resolution MS data. Database searching within MaxQuant assigns amino acid sequence to peptides and 
assembles peptide information back to proteins. Quantified values of proteins between groups are compared.  
 
Biological Samples Collected  
1. Venous Blood Sample  (fasting) will be collected for  serum FGF19 and C4. Venous blood DNA will 
be stored for future genetic studies.   
2. Fecal Sample  for Fecal Organic Acids: Gas chromatography -mass spectrometry for SCFA in s tool 
and HPLC tandem MS for total and individual fecal BAs. Samples will now be a random stool sample 
without a required dietary change unless they have not had a qualifying diagnosis of BAM as noted in 
the Research Plan below . Samples will then be processed for total fat  (routine van de Kamer method a t 
Mayo Medical Laboratory) , total BAs, and primary and secondary BA s [by LC/MS as previously 
described from our lab (56)], and SCFA by GC -MS  
3. Additional stool  and rectosigmoid mucosa  samples will be  stored for future microbiome studies. 
4.  Urine Samples to quantitate  Excretion of Lactulose and 13C-Mannitol after Oral Ingestion  of 
lactulose and 13C mannitol  (5:1 ratio by mass)  (47). The 0 -2h urine most closely reflects small intestinal 
permeability and 8- 24h urine reflects colonic permeability  (46). HPLC- tandem mass spectro metry will 
be used for detection of the sugars  (Mayo Clinic CTSA  Lab). Baseline and post treatment small bowel 
and colonic permeability will be performed for every patient.  
Cumulative (Cum) excretion (0- 2h and 8 -24h) = Concentration of sugar (µg/mL)] * total urine volume (mL).    
Lactulose:  mannitol ratio (L:M R) is: 0.2 x (Cum excretion lactulose) / (Cum excretion 13C-mannitol) . 
       5.  Sigmoidoscopy  and Mucosal Biopsies from sigmoid will now be optional. Participants will have 
the option to complete sigmoidoscopy at the beginning, end, both time points or refrain from completing this 
portion of the study. If participants agree to perform the sigmoidoscopy, it will be performed in all fasting 
participants  in the Clinical Research unit, and in the same time of day (7- 8am), with the patients’ medications 
stopped 48 hours before the biopsies for the baseline studies. The biopsies will be collected in formalin or 
RNAlater solution (Ambion, Austin, TX) and stored at -80°C until further analyzed.    
 
RESEARCH PLAN for Randomized controlled trial of colesevelam in IBS -D with high fecal BA.  
Hypotheses: BA sequestration normalizes colonic functions  in IBS -D with increased fecal BA excretion.  
Specific Aim : To compare with a randomized trial (n=15 per treatment group), effects of  colesevelam 1.875g 
bid and placebo treatment,  on colonic transit, bowel functions , permeability and tight junction expression in 
rectosigmoid mucosa  of IBS -D with fecal BA> 2000 µmoles /48h (upper limit of normal).  
Rationale : BA diarrhea is increasingly recognized as a subtype of IBS -D (39,41 ). In an open -label study ( 27), 
we identified beneficial effects of colesevelam in the treatment of IBS symptoms in patients with high total fecal 
BA excretion (> 2000µmoles/48h) , elevated primary bile acids ( >4%) with elevated total fecal bile acids (>1,000 
µmol/48h) , or primary bile acids > 10%, elevated C4 (> 40 ng/mL), and decreased FGF19 (<80 pg/mL)  (section 
C.1.g and figure 7 )).  
 
Human subjects and design: 30 IBS-D patients  with BAM  will be randomized (15/group) in 4-week  double-
blind , parallel -group trial to  Colesevelam , 1.875g b.i.d. or placebo. Patients will be stratified on gender and 
BMI; we anticipate  90% female and 75% BMI >30kg/m2.     
Experimental procedures: E ffects of colesevelam/placebo  on symptoms  (daily stool diaries ), as well as 
colonic transit,  fecal bile acid and fat excreti on and fasting serum C4 and FGF- 19, intestinal permeability and 
TJ expression in rectosigmoid mucosal biopsies at baseline and at end of 28 days’ treatment.  
Primary endpoints : 1. Bowel movements/week; 2. Stool consistency based on Bristol Stool Form Scale, BSFS. 
Secondary endpoints : 1. Quantitative total fecal BAs; 2. Proportion of secretory BA (CDCA, DCA) in stool; 3. 
Fasting serum C4 and FGF- 19 levels; 4. Colonic transit, geometric center at 24 and 48  hours; 5. Intestinal and 
colonic permeability (mannitol, lactulose excretion); 6. TJ expression in rectosigmoid mucosa .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
This study consists of ten visits to Mayo Clinic at the Charlton 7 Clinical Research Trials Unit (CRTU).  Some of 
the visits can be combined.  
Visit 1 (Screen visit) Volunteers  will be asked to come to the Charlton 7 to review and sign this informed 
consent form and all have all their  questions answered. This visit will require about 90 minutes.  
• QUESTIONNAIRES: Volunteers  will be asked to complete two questionnaires.  
1. Bowel Disease Questionnaire, which asks questions about their bowel symptoms  
2. Hospital Anxiety and Depression Inventory, which asks about any anxiety or depression they are currently feeling  
3. Quality of Life Questionnaire, which ask you how your bowel symptoms are affecting your life  
4. Symptom Checklist, which ask you about any symptoms you are currently feeling  
• VITAL SIGNS, HEIGHT AND WEIGHT: A nurse will take your height, weight and vital signs (pulse, blood pressure, respiration rate and temperature).  
• HISTORY AND BRIE F PHYSICAL EXAM: A study physician will review  their medical hist ory, current 
medications and supplements and perform a physical exam.  
• POSSIBLE BLOOD DRAW: A small amount of blood may be taken  if the study physician determines 
that blood tests need to be run to see if they qualify for the study.  Such as serum alphaC4 or FGF19.  
If the study physician finds the volunteer  eligible for the study, they will be asked to participate in the rest of the 
study . 
• STOOL COLLECTION: You will be given a stool kit and will be asked to return a stool sample before 
your Flexible Sigmoid oscopy.  
• If the patient has not had previous qualifying FGF19, C4, primary to total fecal bile acids in the past, then fasting serum blood work for FGF19 and C4 will be completed at the Screen visit. A 48 hour stool 
Colesevelam Study Design  
Screen  
Visit 
Within  
4 weeks  
VISIT: 
Baseline Testing  
 1) Transit for GC24 & urine 
permeability; gallbladder 
measurement  
2) 4 day High Fat diet with  
48 hour stool collection*  
3) Blood samples (DNA, C4 & FGF19)  
4) Rectosigmoid biopsies**  
5) 1 week stool diary collected  
6) Medication pickup  
 
6-10 
Day 1  
2-5 
Day 28+2-7  
Treatment Testing  
1) Full Transit & Urine Permeability; 
gallbladder measurement   
2) 4 day High Fat diet with  
48 hour stool collection*  
3) Blood samples (C4 & FGF19)  
4) Rectosigmoid biopsies**  
5) treatmentstool diary collected  
6) Unused medication returned  
4-5 week Treatment with  
Colesevelam/Placebo  
Within  
1 week 
* Fecal Bile Acids (total and individual), Short Chain Fatty Acids & Microbiome  
** TJ protein expression, proteomics, morphology & RNA sequencing  
 
test to evaluate for primary and total fe cal bile acids will be conducted first. The remaining  study 
examinations, abbreviated colonic transit test, permeability  test, random stool sample, flexible 
sigmoidoscopy, and gallbladder ultrasound will be postponed by at least one week. 
 
Visit 2 (Pretreatment testing) Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 after a n 8 hour 
fast (no food/drink, a small amount of water is OK), and the avoidance of artificial sweeteners 48 hours before 
and during the permeability testin g (Visits 2 -3).  The visit should take approximately 45- 60 minutes.  
• PREGNACY TEST, if needed: A urine sample will be collected for a pregnancy test from women who 
can get pregnant if it was not done within 48 hours of this study day. The results of this test must be 
negative in order for participants  to continue the study.  
• FASTING BLOOD DRAW: Participants  will be asked to give a small amount of blood for DNA, serum 
alpha C4 and FGF19 testing if not done previously.  
DIARY RETURN: Participants will be asked to return the completed 7- day Pretreatment Diary.  
• ABREVIATED COLONIC TRANSIT TEST /Permeability test : : Participants  will be asked to swallow a 
small capsule containing a small amount of a radioactive substance with a liquid containing a small 
amount of naturally occurring sugars: lactulose and mannitol. The sugars allow the measurement of the permeability of the small intestine and colon.  T he participants will be instructed to have breakfast one 
hour later.   
VISITS 3 -5 MAY BE COMBINED 
Visit 3  (24 hour image) Participants will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 (fasting required) 
approximately 24 hours after they ingested the capsule containing radioisotope during Visit  2. Ultrasound 
measurement can be performed before or after the 24 hour image is obtained. The ultrasound gallbladder measurement should take ~ 10- 15 minutes. This visit should take approximately  25 minutes.  
Visit 4 (Flexible sigmoidoscopy)  [OPTIONAL]   Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 
(no fasting required). The visit should take approximately  75 minutes.  
• ENEMA: Participants will need to prepare the colon for the sigmoidoscopy by means of a tap water enema at the CRTU. A CRTU nurse will give a tap water  enema. Two enemas may be given if needed.  
• FLEXIBLE SIGMOIDOSCOPY WITH BIOPSIES: A sigmoidoscopy is a lower endoscopy that uses a flexible endoscope to visually inspect the lining of the  sigmoid colon. Several biopsies of the lining of 
the colon will be removed for examination under a microscope, TJ protein expression, proteomics and 
RNA sequencing.. No sedation is needed. The nurse will review information regarding post -endoscopy 
care and the participant  will be dismissed. 
 
Visit 5 (Study Medication pickup) Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 (no fasting 
required).The visit should take approximately 15- 30 minutes.  
 
• PREGNACY TEST, if needed: A urine sample will be collected for a pregnancy test from women who 
can get pregnant if it was not done within 48 hours of this study day. The results of this test must be 
negative in order to continue the study.  
• STUDY MEDICATION: The nurse will dispense a 5 week supply of the Colesevelam /placebo and 
instruct participants  to take 3 tablets orally twice daily with lunch and supper.  
•  SINGLE RANDOM STOOL SPECIMENS: Returned as instructed  
• DIARIES RETURN: Participants  will be asked to return the completed 7 -day Pretreatment Bowel diary  
•  
 
TREATMENT:  Participants  will take 1875 mg (3 tablets [625 mg/tablet]) of the medication orally twice daily 
with lunch and supper for 4- 5 weeks. They  also will be asked to complete the following visits after 21  days of 
treatment with the treatment fat diet and stool collections completed after the transit/permeability and flex 
sig/biopsy tests.  A separate stool sample collection kit will be provided on Visit 6 to be returned before the 
flexible sigmoidoscopy. No special diet is required with this particular stool collection.  
Note: Treatment Bowel diary will not be completed by participants during high fat diet.  
 
 
Visit 6 (Treatment testing) Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 after an 8 hour fast 
(no food/drink, a small amount of water is OK). And the avoidance of artificial sweeteners 48 hours before and 
during the permeability testing (Visits 6 -7).  This visit will require ab out 9- 10 hours total.  
• PREGNACY TEST, if needed: A urine sample will be collected for a pregnancy test from women who can get pregnant if it was not done within 48 hours of this study day. The results of this test must be 
negative in order to continue the study.  
• VITAL SIGNS: A nurse will take vital signs (pulse, blood pressure, respiration rate and temperature).  
• FASTING BLOOD DRAW: Participants  will be asked to give a small amount of blood for serum alpha 
C4 and FGF19 testing.  
• FULL COLONIC TRANSIT/PERMEAB ILITY TEST: Participants  will be asked to swallow a small 
capsule containing a small amount of a radioactive substance with a liquid containing a small amount of 
naturally occurring sugars: lactulose and mannitol. The sugars allow the measurement of the 
permeability of the small intestine and colon. Approximately one hour later, the transit test starts with a 
scrambled egg breakfast (with toast and a glass of milk). The eggs also contain a small amount of 
radioactive substance. Participants  will eat two additional meals, a lunch of chicken breast (4 hours 
after the egg breakfast) and a dinner of a roast beef sandwich (8 hours after the egg breakfast). These 
meals are not radioactive, they are supplied only so all participants in this study will eat the same type 
and same amount of food this day.  They  will be asked not to eat or drink anything except for water 
while undergoing testing today other than what they  are given. At the completion of the breakfast test 
meal they  will be instructed to stand in front of  a special camera and pictures will be taken immediately 
after the egg breakfast and then 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 8 hours later. Participants  will be asked to collect urine 
samples at scheduled intervals for the next eight hours. After the 8 hour image is taken,  they will collect 
all urine until the next morning. A urine collection kit will be provided to then  for this. After they  leave the 
CRTU, they may  eat or drink your own foods, but ingestion of alcohol and drinks containing any 
sweeteners must continue being avoided until after Visit 7 as they interfere with the measurements of 
the research study.  
• STUDY MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION: The CRTU nurse will administer a dose of the study 
medication with the lunch and snack meals provided during this visit.  
• STOOL COLLECTION: You will be given a stool kit and will be asked to return a stool sample before 
your Flexible Sigmoidoscopy.  
•  
Visit 7 (24 hour image)  Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 (fasting required)  for the 
24 hour image. Ultra sound measurement can be performed before or after the 24 hour image is obtained. The 
ultrasound gallbladder measurement should take ~ 10-15 minutes.  The visit should take approximately 25 
minutes.  
VISITS 8 AND 9 MAY BE COMBINED 
Visit 8 (48 hour image and urine collection return) Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on 
Charlton 7 (no fasting required) to drop off their 8 -24 hour urine collection and have the 48 hour image taken. 
The visit should take approximately 10 minutes.  
Visit 9 (Flexible s igmoidoscopy)  [OPTIONAL] Participants  will be asked to report to the desk on Charlton 7 
(no fasting required). The vis it should take approximately 75 minutes.  
• ENEMA: same as Visit 4  
• FLEXIBLE SIGMOIDOSCOPY WITH BIOPSIES: same as Visit 4  
Visit 10: End of Study:  
• DIARIES RETURN: Participants  will be asked to return the completed Treatment Bowel diary  
• MEDI CATION RETURN: On the last visit participants  will be asked to return any unused medication.  
Statistical analyses
: Effects of treatment will be compared ( using Intention -To-T reat principles)  using 
ANCOVA wit h BMI, gender, baseline colonic transit and baseline fecal BA excretion as  covariates.   
November 1 2018 : at least 75 % of the participants will have completed all study procedures. We plan to 
complete an interim analysis  in order to submit an abstract for a national gastroenterology meeting in May 
2019. We anticipate completing all studies in all participants by the time the data need to be presented.  At that 
time, we shall present the data from the ENTIR E patient cohort ; that analysis will be used for the one full 
manuscript emanating from these data . 
 
 
A senior statistician will review the interim analysis results and analyze the data  related to the previously 
determined primar y endpoints . All members  of the study team and the investigative team will remain blinded to 
treatment arm assignment and treatment arm results until the completion of the study. Thus, this would not 
affect the p value when the study is completed.  
Statistical power: Based on our pr evious open- label study, the proposed sample size (15 per group) has 
~80% power (2- sided α=0.05)  to detect clinically 
relevant  effect size s in stool frequency  and form 
(expressed as detectable difference [Δ] in 2 groups :  in 
Table 3: Detectable differences based on 80% 
power . 
Anticipated results and significance:  Colesevelam 
will reduce stool frequency , decrease stool consistency  
and slow colonic transit  in IBS -D with high  BA 
excretion.  
Precautions and alternative approaches:  
1. The RCT has sufficient power based on directly relevant open- label trial data with same drug and disease.  
2. Other agents that reduce hepatic BA synthesis and are in development  will be alternatives for BA 
sequestrants, e.g. FXR agonists,  FGF-19 analog s.  
 
PLANNED ENROLLMENT REPORT     
 Comments:   30 patients IBS-D with BAM  
 
Racial Categories  
Ethnic Categories  
Not Hispanic or Latino  Hispanic or Latino  Total  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
American Indian / Alaska Native  1 0 0 0 1 
Asian  2 1 0 0 3 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 0 0 
Black or African American  2 1 0 0 3 
White  13 7 2 1 23 
More Than One Race  0 0 0 0 0 
Total  18 9 2 1 30 
 
Inclusion of Children  
Children, 18- 21 years of age, and adults 21 years or older will be eligible for participation in the study as active 
participants or as healthy controls. However, children below 18 years of age will be excluded, since there are 
differences in the criteria of diagnosis in adults and children, and insufficient quantitative pediatric data on the 
traits to be analyzed in order to assess the phenotypes of IBS , e.g. transit, permeability , etc.   
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
In advertisements for patients and healthy subjects, we shall specifically solicit participation of women and minorities. We anticipate that there will be a majority of whites and representation of blacks and Asians, 
consistent with the ethnic constitution of communities in southeastern Minnesota, which is approximately 90% Caucasian, 5% Southeast Asian, and 5% other  minorities. The prevalence of IBS among whites, blacks and 
Hispanics in the U.S. is very similar. 
 Consideration of Sex as a Biological Variable  
We plan to recruit approximately 2 females to one male patient for these studies . We shall set up special 
efforts to recruit males with IBS using REDCAP to identify male patients through the electronic health records 
 
(established 17 years ago at Mayo Clinic .  Thus , we have identified through search of electronic medical 
records  that there are:  
a. 2000 IBS patients residing within 100 miles of Rochester, MN.  
b. 350 patients with IBS -constipation residing within 100 miles of Rochester, MN   
Scientific premise for inclusion of both genders includes:  
IBS-D affects both genders; there is no a priori evidence that mechanisms or pathobiology of IBS -D differ  
between genders.  Therefore, our study will assess mucosal mRNA and protein expression and response to 
colesevelam treatment in both genders.   
  
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 1.    Risks to the Subjects  
        a.   Human subject involvement and characteristics  
 
 We shall recruit 30 patients with IBS -D, and BAM , residin g in an area with a radius of 10 0 miles from 
Rochester, MN.  We have an established database of ~ 2000   patients with IBS -D within 100 miles of Mayo 
Clinic in MN.  Patients will have been evaluated by the investigators in the Division of Gastroenterology at Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN.  Healthy subjects residing in southeastern Minnesota will be recruited without 
restrictions for gender, race or ethnic group.  We anticipate that among healthy participants there will be a 
majority of whites, and representation of blacks and Asians, consistent with the ethnic constitution of communit ies in southeastern Minnesota, which is approximately 90% Caucasian, 5% Southeast Asian, and 5% 
other minorities.  Given the ratio of females to males in irritable bowel  syndrome in gastroenterology  clinic s, we 
anticipate recruit ing 2 females to 1 male . We shall set up special efforts to recruit males with IBS using 
REDCAP to identify male patients through the electronic health records (established 17 years ago at Mayo Clinic) . Therefore the proposal addresses the requirement for relevant inclusion of both genders in the 
research proposal.  
To avoid tertiary referral bias, at least 50% of patients selected will reside within 100 miles of Mayo 
Clinic .  
The racial and ethnic characteristics of the study cohort will be characterized in ~90% of participants. 
This is information that has to be collected on a voluntary basis in the medical record, and patients cannot 
legally be coerced into providing this information.  
 Participants:  Eligibility of Patients with IBS  
We have a database of ~900 patients with functional gastrointestinal diseases who reside within ~150 
miles from Mayo Clinic which is located in Olmsted County, MN.   
All participants will complete the validated Bowel Disease Questionnaire [BDQ , including questions to 
correspond to Rome criteria ( 58)], the  Symptom Checklist- 90 [SCL-90 (59)] and the Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale [HAD ( 60)]. The B DQ also includes a psychosomatic symptom checklist intended to identify 
somatization disorders.  We have used these questionnaires extensively in several studies.  
A positive diagnosis of IBS will be based on the Rome III criteria ( 83): At least 3 months, with onset at 
least 6 months previously, of recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort  associated with 2 or more of the following:  
a) Improvement with defecation; and/or b) Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool; and/or c ) 
Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool (discomfort means an uncomfortable sensation 
not described as pain).  
  
Inclusion criteria                                     IBS patients  
Age (yr)      18-75     
Gender (F:M)      2:1    
BDQ - IBS symptoms                 +ve by Rome III criteria  
Hospital Anxiety/Depression score   No restrictions  
Abdominal surgery (except appy or choly)  None               
GI medications                None past 48h  
 
BAM  serum alpha C4 ≥ 40 ng/mL or FGF19 ≤ 80 pg/mL, fecal BA  
>2000 µmoles/48h , total fecal BA > 1000 µmoles/48h + >4% 
primary BA, or >10% primary BA  
 
Note: If a score of ≥11 for either anxiety or depression is obtained from the Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale, 
these finding will be documented in their medical record, the volunteer is informed of the findings and their 
primary  care physician is contacted  about the score. If the volunteer is experiencing active suicidal/ homicidal  
ideations , they will be sent to the emergency room.  
 
Exclusion criteria  
In all patients diagnosed with IBS, we apply rigorous standards to exclude clinically -relevant 
inflammation.  Patients with known bleeding diathesis will be excluded, given the need for sigmoid mucosal 
biopsies.  
 
PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS  
Patients participating will not take any of the following disallowed medications for at least 7 days prior to 
and during the remainder of the study:  
1. Any treatment specifically taken for IBS- D, including loperamide, cholestyramine, alosetron  
2. Drugs with a known pharmacological activity at 5- HT4, 5 -HT2b or 5- HT3 receptors (e.g, tegaserod, 
ondansetron, tropisetron, granisetron, dolasetron, mirtazepine, cilansetron);  
3. All narcotics (e.g, codeine, morphine, and propoxyphene, either alone or in combination)  
4. Anti-cholinergic agents (e.g, dicyclomine, hyoscyamine, propantheline).  
5.  Tramadol  
6. GI preparations : 
•  Anti -nausea agents (e.g, trimethobenzamide, promethazine, prochlorperazine, dimenhydrinate, 
hydroxyzine);  
•  Osmotic laxative agents (e.g, lactulose, sorbitol or PEG solutions as Miralax and Glycolax);  
•  Prokinetic agents (e.g, cisapride, metoclopramide, prucalopride, domperidone);  
•  5-HT3 antagonists (e.g. alosetron)  
 7. Oral anticoagulants  
 8. Antimuscarinics  
 9. Peppermint oil 
10. Systemic antibiotics, as well as antibiotics directed at colonic flora such as rifaximin and metronidazole   
 
In advertisements f or patients , we shall specifically solicit participation of women and minorities.  The 
prevalence of IBS among whites, blacks and Hispanics in the U.S. is very similar.  Children, 18- 21 years of 
age, will be eligible for participation in the study as patients or as healthy controls. However children below 18 
years of age will be excluded since it is unethical to expose healthy children to the potential risks of rectal 
intubation and radiation, and studies of IBS children in these age groups will be uninterpretable without age and gender matched controls from healthy individuals . 
 Dietary, Fluid and Other Restrictions  
During recruitment, informed consent review, and baseline period, the subjects will be informed and 
reminded of the following restrictions: 
• No alcohol for 48 h ours before each and during each test . 
• Patients must fast for at least 8 hours before visiting the clinic for the colonic permeability test  and colonic 
transit test s. 
• No artificial sweeteners for 48 hours [Splenda (sucralose), NutraSweet (aspartame), lactulose or mannitol] 
before the permeability testing. Examples of foods to avoid are sugar free gums, mints  and diet soda 
• Avoid taking any additional over -the-counter or prescription medications or herbal supplements that have 
not been reviewed and approved by the physician or the study coordinator until the study has been 
completed.   
 Sites Where Research Will Be Performed  
 
Mayo Clinic Rochester will be the only site where the research is performed; the human studies will be 
conducted in the CR TU of the Mayo Clinic CTSA; all analyses of biological samples in the Molecular 
Genotyping core facilities or the Immunochemistry Core Lab (CTSA) at Mayo Clinic and the functional 
genomics studies in the Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering at Mayo Cl inic.  
      
b.   Sources of research materials  
       Research material will be the medical records (of those who authorize review of the records for 
research purposes), prospectively acquired measurements of gastrointestinal and colonic transit with an external gamma camera, observations obtained at flexible sigmoidoscopy, mucosal biopsy mRNA expressions 
of interest (tight junction proteins and mRNA sequencing) , measurements of fecal BAs and short chain fatty 
acids, and in vivo permeability measurements. There will also be venous blood samples from which DNA will be extracted and stored and subsequently analyzed using whole gene  sequencing.  Results of studies will be 
accessed by a secure password available only to study personnel.  Data will be merged for studies of associations by the study biostatisticians.  
All of the information collected in this study will be for research purposes only.  
 
c.   Potential risks  
The potential risks associated with the study are radiation exposure from scintigraphy, 
sigmoidoscopy , and rectosigmoid  mucosal biopsies. The precautions associated with minimizing these risks 
are discussed below under 2 b, protection against risk, and under 5, the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  
 2.     Adequacy of Protection against Risks  
         a.   Recruitment and Informed Consent  
 
 Prior to initiating the study, all subjects will provide written informed consent using forms. The consent 
form becomes a permanent part of the medical record at Mayo Clinic. All subjects will be given a verbal 
explanation of the study, provided time to read and study the written consent form approved by Mayo’s 
Institutional Review Board and its information, given opportunities to ask questions and a copy of the consent 
form.  Participants will be informed of their right to withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice to their 
clinical management now or in the future.  Consent will be sought by one of the members of the investigative team (physician or study coordinator) properly trained in the consent process.  The consent will be 
documented by the  participant’s signature on the consent form.  Specific information is provided in the Mayo 
consent form regarding storage and future use of the DNA sample.  The participants will be informed that since 
this genetic information is not yet pertinent to clinical practice, the information will not be included in the 
medical record, but will be maintained in a coded fashion accessible only to study personnel.  
 
 All recruitment or contact information will be approved by Mayo Clinic  Institutional Review Board. 
 
 b.   Protection against risk  
 
Responsible Conduct of Human Research by Study Personnel    
 Mayo Clinic has established a formal program entitled the Mayo Investigator Training Program or MITP.  
The MITP is a web based educational course designed to provide all personnel involved in human subject research with training about human subject protection.   All Mayo personnel engaged in human subject 
research are required to complete the course.  The primary objectives of the course are to provide the 
historical  framework for current human subject protection regulations and to explore the evolving issues related 
to human subject research.   The course is divided into four sections:  
* Course introduction and general overview  
* History section with examples of unethical behavior in human subject research  
* Review of major human subject protection issues  
* Discussion of the various roles and responsibilities of individuals involved in human subject 
research  
At the conclusion of the instruction, individuals are required to complete a thirty -question assessment.  All Mayo 
investigators have completed the Mayo IRB's mandated certification in the responsible conduct of research.   
 
 
Specific Risks and Precautions Proposed  
i. Radiation exposure  
 Radiation exposure results f rom 99mTc (sulfur colloid, SF) and 111In used to measure gut transit. These 
exposures conform to previously approved levels of radiation exposure approved by the Radiation Control 
Committee at Mayo Clinic.   
 The radiation dosimetry and organ exposures (in mrad) are listed below:  
GASTRIC, SMALL BOWEL AND COLONIC TRANSIT  
Radiophar - Activity  Body Gonads Breast Red     Lung Thyroid Bone ULI Colon Stom   Blad   Liv Esoph Oth   
maceutical    mCi                   marrow                                    - ach     -der   - er  -agus -er 
111In Cl 3             0.1          20       140                 20                                   380     740     60    40     10      160 
99mTc  S.C.    1.0          20         90                  20                                   420     300    130   20     10      220 
(mrad= radiation absorbed dose to organs;  S.C. = sulfur colloid))  
 He or the radiation effective dose to the body summarizes the risk to the whole body as the individual doses to 
each of the organs; effective dose is used to compare risks among various types of x ray and radionuclide 
studies: 
111InCl 3  0.1 mCi: H e 142 mrem; 99mTcDTPA  1.0 mCi, H e 90 mrem; (where mrem= radiation equivalent 
dose).  
In view of the radiation exposure, all females of childbearing age will be required to have a negative urine 
pregnancy test within 48 hours of the radioisotope studies.   
  
ii. Flexible Sigmoidoscopy  has very low risk of bowel perforation, estimated at ~1 in 10,000.  
To date , these studies have not been associated with any perforation or mucosal damage that resulted in any 
clinically important issues such as local hemorrhage or abscess formation.  
 
iii. Medications:  
No unapproved medications ar e being tested:  
 Colesevelam will be used for an unapproved indication, but there is no intention to develop plans to acquire 
approval to market the medication for the indication IBS -diarrhea with increased fecal BA excretion.  Mayo 
Clinic Research Pharmacy will over -encapsulate commercially available medication, produce identical placebo 
capsules and will be responsible for maintaining the randomization code and study blinding.  
  Flexible sigmoid oscopy and rectosigmoid biopsies will be performed without  conscious sedation. 
 iv. Genetic in formation  
Results of the studies will be maintained in summaries in computer -secured files protected by a personal 
password.  In the latter files, participants will be identified only by a 7 digit Mayo Clinic registration number rather than by name to ensure confidentiality. Since genetic information collected is not yet pertinent to clinical 
practice, the information will not be included in the medical record, but will be maintained in a coded fashion 
and is accessible only to IRB -approved study personnel.   Many of the principles described by Beskow et al. 
(84) with respect to the exploratory analysis of gene- disease associations apply, so the consent process for 
genetic analysis will not require exhaustive genetic counseling. 
 
Plans for ensuring necessary interventions to protect participants are included in the data safety monitoring 
plan (see under 5 below)  
 Given the prior track record with use of all of the intubations, measurement devices, secure protection of information on genetic information, there is a very high likelihood that the studies will be conducted safely and 
the participants will be protected from harm.  
 
3.    Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
  The PROPOSED RESEARCH has the potential to develop a new approach to the treatment of 
gastrointestinal diseases, grouped as irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, which is  recognized as a 
spectrum of disorders with significant unmet clinical need.  The participants have the potent ial to benefit from 
 
the information regarding their gastrointestinal and colonic transit rate, serum C4, fecal BA excretion and 
potentially in future  studies, the microbial flora.   
The benefits to participants may include recommendations on medications to  retard colonic transit or to 
bind BAs in the colon for those patients with evidence of BA malabsorption.  By the time the study is conducted, or possible considerations will be fecal bacteriotherapy, probiotics or non -absorbable antibiotics, 
such as rifax imin which was recently approved for marketing for IBS-D .   
The current state of knowledge about the role of increased mucosal permeability and immune activation 
is too rudimentary to justify consideration of treatment for those pathophysiological changes.   There are, 
however, medications in development for both potential pathophysiological disorders in association with IBS including the dietary supplement glutamine ( 85). Therefore, there is potential to propose therapy if such 
treatments become approved during the “life cycle” of this application.  
 Given the anticipated mechanistic insights to the participants in this research proposal, and to others 
with irritable bowel syndrome, and the track record of the investigators in the conduct of such research, the 
benefits outweigh the risks in the studies proposed.    
 
4.    Importance of the knowledge to be gained 
 The PROPOSED RESEARCH has the potential to develop a new approach to the treatment of 
gastrointestinal diseases, specifically irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea and increased fecal bile acid 
excretion, a disorder with unclear relationship to increased mucosal permeability or immune activation or secretory mechanisms. This disorder is associated with significant unmet clinical need.  Understanding t he 
potential role of factors leading to motor and sensory dysfunction of the small bowel and colon in patients with 
IBS will provide mechanistic information that may lead to novel biomarkers that may assist in subtype 
identification in IBS and therapeutic approaches for IBS.   
 The risks to the participants are reasonable since many procedures are noninvas ive (other than 
sigmoid oscopy  with biops ies), the research team has vast experience in the proposed testing, there is no risk 
of any significant morbidity or mortality, and precautions are taken to minimize discomfort or adverse effects.  
Radiation exposure is being kept to the minimum that allows successful completion and data acquisition.  
There is a high likelihood (e.g., investigator’s record and expertise, validated methods, statistical power) of 
obtaining meaningful, useful information in each specific aim.    
 5.      Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
 
Name of Principal Investigator (PI) – Michael C amilleri, M.D.  
 Study Overview  
 
Brief Description of the Purpose of the Study  - This study  assesses the effect of bile acid sequestration in 
patien ts with IBS -D and bile acid malabsorption in a randomized controlled trial  and a study of the patient’s 
DNA  and the transcriptome and proteome  of the mucosa of the rectosigmoid colon. 
  
This study does not involve administration of any investigational agent and therefore poses minimal risk to 
participants.   Because of this low risk status, the Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for this study focuses 
on close monitoring by the PI in conjunction with an Independent Monitor.  Adverse events will be reported to the NIH and to the Mayo Clinic IRB.  
 Adherence Statement – The Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) outlined below will adhere to the protocol 
approved by the Mayo Clinic IRB.   
 III. Confidentiality  
 
A.  Protection of Subject Privacy – During this study, medical history and physical examination will be 
performed , and questionnaires will be administered. Additional research material will be:  review of medical 
records (of those who authorize review of the records for research purposes), quantitation of gastrointestinal and colonic transit with an external gamma camera, venous blood samples from which DNA will be extracted 
and stored, venous blood samples for measurement of factors reflecting BA metabolism, urine and stool 
 
collections, colonic mucosal biopsy collections and expression of m RNA and proteins  in biopsies, and 
measurements of rectal motility.  
Data will be kept in strict confidence.  No information will be given to anyone without permission from the 
subject. This statement guarantees confidentiality. Confidentiality is assured by use of identification codes. All 
data, whether generated in the laboratory or at the bedside, will be identified with a randomly generated 
identification code unique to the subject.  
 
B. Database Protection – The database is secured with password protection. The technologist 
conducting DNA analyses provides the statistician with only coded information, which is entered into the 
research database using the generated identification code unique to each participant ,  These precautions 
permit the objectives of the research to be conducted, specifically to determine the influence of susceptibility genes on the IBS and physiological/quantitative  endpoints, and to assess the association between the DNA 
and the quantita tive traits and the expression of relevant mRNA in the sigmoid mucosa.  Specifically, it is to be 
noted that the DNA and RNA -seq data are not entered into the patients’ medical record , thus protecting the 
patients participating in the study from any impact  of research (clinically unvalidated) information on the clinical 
management or insurability of the participant.   Electronic communication with outside collaborators involves 
only unidentifiable information.   
 
Sharing of DNA samples will be performed in accordance with NIH guidelines.   
 Confidentiality during AE Reporting – Adverse Event reports and annual summaries will not include 
subject -identifiable material. Each will include the identification code only.  
 IV. Adverse Event Information  
 
 Definition - An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject temporally associated with 
participation in the clinical study.  An adverse finding can include a sign, symptom, abnormal assessment (laboratory test value, vital signs, electrocardiogram finding, etc.) or any combination of these.  
A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any adverse event that results in one or more of the following outcomes:  
• Death 
• A life -threatening event  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• A persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• A congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• Important medical event based upon appropriate medical judgment  
Classification of AE Severity – AEs will be labeled according to severity which is based on their impact on the 
patient.  An AE will be termed  
• ‘mild’ if it does not have a major impact on the patient,  
• ‘moderate’ if it causes the patient some minor inconvenience and 
• ‘severe’ if it causes a substantial disruption to the patient’s well -being.  
AE Attribution Scale – AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they are related to the study 
intervention.  Specifically, they will be labeled either definitely, probably, possibly or unrelated to the study 
intervention.  
 
D. Expected Risks –  
Risks and/or 
Anticipated 
Adverse Events  Assessment 
measures  Individual 
doing 
assessment  Assessment 
intervals or 
frequency  Interventions to decrease or respond 
to risks  
Bruising at 
venipuncture site  Subject 
symptoms/  
vital signs  Study 
coordinator / 
RN Pt instructed 
to call study 
coordinator  To be expected rarely; participant 
information; Decrease with pressure 
and ice applied  by trained personnel  
Endoscopy: 
Sigmoidoscopy  Subject 
observation Study 
coordinator/ 
Endoscopy 
technologist, At time of 
procedure  
 Some discomfort expected; instruction 
to pass gas  
 
RN and 
Physicia n 
Sigmoid colon 
biopsy  Bleeding at 
biopsy site Endoscopy 
RN and 
Physician  
 
 Exclusion of patients with hemorrhagic 
disorder  
Physician assessment of medical 
history and current 
medications/supplements  
   
E. SAE Reporting 
 
 SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and/or possibly related to the study intervention will be reported 
to the Independent Monitor, IRB, and Clinical Research  Trials  Unit in accordance with requirements.  
Anticipated SAEs or those unrelated to the study intervention will be reported to the same individuals/entities in accordance with requirements.”  
 
If abnormal lab values are discovered during the study, the study group shall address this issue and attempt to 
correct it as early as possible.  
 V. Data Quality and Safety Review Plan and Monitoring  
 
 A. Data Quality and Management  
Description of Plan for Data Quality and Management –The PI will review all data collection f orms on an 
ongoing basis for data completeness and accuracy as well as protocol compliance.  A statement reflecting the 
results of the review will be sent to the IRB in the annual report.  
Frequency of Review  
 
Subject Accrual and Compliance  
1) Measurement and reporting of subject accrual, adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria – Review of the 
rate of subject accrual, adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur yearly during the 4.5 year recruitment phase.  Review will occur at the end of each recruitment wave to assure that participants meet 
eligibility criteria and ethnic diversity goals outlined in the grant proposal.   
2) Measurement and reporting of participant compliance to treatment protocol – compliance will be 
measured by number of returned tablets at end of treatment phase.  
 
Justification of Sample Size  – The application documents the justification of sample size for each specific 
aim in the proposal.  
 
Stopping Rules – This study will be stopped prior to its completion if adverse effects to the procedures that  
significantly impact the risk -benefit ratio have been observed  
 
     E. Designati on of an Independent Monitor  – Dr. David A. Katzka, M.D. (Mayo Clinic) will serve as 
independent monitor to perform an independent review of ongoing safety. In accordance with IRB review, we 
shall ask Dr . Katzka to constitute an independent DSMB if required. Colesevelam is an approved drug. Since 
we shall not be applying to FDA to market the drug for a new indication, an IND will not be required for the 
study.     
 Data type  Frequency of review  Reviewer  
Subject accrual (adherence to protocol 
regarding demographics, inclusion/exclusion)  Yearly  
 Principal Investigator, 
Independent Monitor  
Adverse event rates (injuries)  Yearly  Principal Investigator, 
Independent Monitor  
Stopping rules report regarding stat istical power 
implications of drop outs and missing data  Yearly  Principal Investigator, 
Independent Monitor  
 
Safety Revi ew Plan – Study progress and safety will be reviewed monthly (and more frequently, if needed).  
Progress reports, including patient recruitment, retention/attrition, and AEs will be provided to the Independent 
Monitor every year.  An annual report will be compiled and will include a list and summarization of adverse 
events.  In addition, the annual report will address:  
(1) whether adverse event rates are consistent with pre- study assumptions;  
(2) reason for dropouts from the study;  (3) whether all participants met entry criteria;  
(4) whether continuation of the study is justified on the basis that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of the study; and (5) conditions whereby the study might be terminated prematurely.   
  The annual report will be signed by the Independent Monitor and will be forwarded to the IRB and the 
CRTU on an annual basis.   
 
VI. Informed Consent  
Written informed consent will be obtained from each subject at entry into the study. Informed consent is 
obtained by the following process:  
 •  The subject will be asked to review the study consent form;  
 •  The PI or Co- Investigator (Co -I) approved as such by the IRB will meet with the subject to 
review the form, to confirm the subject’s understanding of the study, and to answer any questions that the subject might have; and  
•  Once the subject demonstrates understanding of the study and agrees to participate in the 
study, the consent will be signed   
 
LITERATURE  CITED  
 
1.  Lovell RM, Ford AC. Global prevalence of and risk factors for irritable bowel syndrome: a meta -analysis. 
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10:712 -21    PMID22426087 
 2.   Mayer EA, Tillisch K. The brain- gut axis in abdominal pain syndromes. Annu Rev Med 2011;62:381- 96   
PMC3817711  
 
3.  Camilleri M, McKinzie  S, Busciglio I, Low PA, Sweetser S, Burton D, Baxter K, Ryks M, Zinsmeister AR.  
Prospective study of motor, sensory, psychological and autonomic functions in 119 patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome.  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6:772- 781   PMC2495078 
 4.  Camilleri M, Lasch K, Zhou W. The confluence of increased permeability, inflammation, and pain in irritable 
bowel syndrome. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2012;303:G775- G785    PMID22837345 
 
5.  Wong BS, Camilleri M, Carlson P, McKinzie S , Busciglio I, Bondar O, Dyer RB, Lamsam J, Zinsmeister AR.  
Increased BA biosynthesis is associated with irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea.  Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2012;10:1009- 15, e3    PMC3565429 
 6.  Zucchelli M, Camilleri M, Nixon Andreasson A, Bresso F, Dlugosz A, Halfvarson J, Torkvist L, Schmidt PT, 
Karling P, Ohlsson B, Simren M, Lindberg G, Agreus L, Carlson P, Zinsmeister A, D’Amato M.  Association of 
TNFSF15 polymorphism with irritable bowel syndrome.  Gut 2011;60:1671 -7      PMC3922294 
 7.  Camilleri M, Carlson P, Zinsmeister AR, McKinzie S, Busciglio I, Burton D, Zucchelli M, D’Amato M.  
Neuropeptide S receptor induces neuropeptide expression and associates with intermediate phenotypes of functional gastrointestinal disorders.  Gastroenterology 2010;138:98- 107, e4    PMC2813358 
 
8.  Camilleri M, Carlson P, McKinzie S, Zucchelli M, D'Amato M, Busciglio I, Burton D, Zinsmeister AR. Genetic 
susceptibility to inflammation and colonic transit in lower functional gastrointestinal disorders: p reliminary 
analysis. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2011;23:935- e398    PMC3173581 
 
9.  Camilleri M, Kolar GJ, Vazquez -Roque MI, Carlson P, Burton DD, Zinsmeister AR.  Cannabinoid Receptor 
1 Gene and Irritable Bowel Syndrome: Phenotype and Quantitative Traits. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2013;304:G553- G560     PMC3602676 
 
10.  Camilleri M. Genetics of human gastrointestinal sensation. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2013;25:458- 466     
PMC3656127  
 11.  Mayer EA. Clinical practice. Irritable bowel syndrome. N  Engl J Med 2008;358:1692 -9    PMC3816529 
 12.  Fukudo S, Kanazawa M, Mizuno T, Hamaguchi T, Kano M, Watanabe S, Sagami Y, Shoji T, Endo Y, 
Hongo M, Itoyama Y, Yanai K, Tashiro M, Aoki M. Impact of serotonin transporter gene polymorphism on brain activatio n by colorectal distention. Neuroimage 2009;47:946 -51      PMID19426812 
 
13.  Mönnikes H. Quality of life in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. J Clin Gastroenterol 
2011;45(Suppl.):S98 -101    PMID21666428 
 
14.  Camilleri M.  Peripheral mechanisms in irritable bowel syndrome. N Engl J Med 2012;367:1626- 1635    
PMID23094724 
 
15.  Spiller RC. Is IBS caused by infectious diarrhea? Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 2007;4:642- 3    
PMID17984983       16.  Camilleri M. Physiological underpinnings of irritable bowel syndrome: neurohormonal mechanisms. J 
Physiol 2014;592(Pt 14):2967- 80     PMC4214653 
 
 
17.  Mawe GM, Hoffman JM. Serotonin signalling in the gut -functions, dysfunctions and therapeutic targets. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;10:473- 86     PM C4048923  
 
18.  Bertiaux -Vandaële N, Youmba SB, Belmonte L, Lecleire S, Antonietti M, Gourcerol G, Leroi AM, 
Déchelotte P, Ménard JF, Ducrotté P, Coëffier M. The expression and the cellular distribution of the tight 
junction proteins are altered in irritable bowel syndrome patients with differences according to the disease 
subtype. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106:2165- 2173     PMID22008894 
 
19.  Saito YA, Zimmerman JM, Harmsen WS, De Andrade M, Locke GR 3rd, Petersen GM, Talley NJ. Irritable 
bowel syndrome aggregates strongly in families: a family -based case control study. Neurogastroenterol Motil 
2008;7:790 -7     PMC2873036 
 
20.  Camilleri M, Katzka DA.  Irritable bowel syndrome: methods, mechanisms, and pathophysiology. Genetic 
epidemiology and pharmacogenetics in irritable bowel syndrome Am J Physiol 2012;302:G1075 -G1084    
PMC3362100  
 
21.  Camilleri M, Shin A, Busciglio I, Carlson P, Acosta A, Bharucha AE, Burton D, Lamsam J, Lueke A, 
Donato LJ, Zinsmeister AR. Genetic variation in GPBAR1 predisposes to quantitative changes in colonic transit and bile acid excretion. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2014;307:G508 -16     PMC4154122 
 22.  Swan C, Duroudier NP, Campbell E, Zaitoun A, Hastings M, Dukes GE, Cox J, Kelly FM, Wilde J, Lennon 
MG, Neal KR, Whorwell PJ, Hall IP, Spiller RC. Identifying and testing candidate genetic polymorphisms in the 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) : association with TNFSF15 and TNFα. Gut 2013;62:985 -94    PMID22684480 
 23.  Czogalla B, Schmitteckert S, Houghton LA, Sayuk GS, D´Amato M, Camilleri M, S Olivo- Diaz A, Spiller R, 
Wouters MM, Boeckxstaens G, Rappold GA, Lorenzo Bermejo J, Niesler B. A met a-analysis of immunogenetic 
association studies in irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015;27:717 -27    PMID25824902 
 
24.  Wouters MM, Lambrechts D, Knapp M, Cleynen I, Whorwell P, Agréus L, Dlugosz A, Schmidt PT, 
Halfvarson J, Simrén M, Ohlsson B, Karling P, Van Wanrooy S, Mondelaers S, Vermeire S, Lindberg G, Spiller R, Dukes G, D'Amato M, Boeckxstaens G. Genetic variants in CDC42 and NXPH1 as susceptibility factors for constipation and diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 2014;63:1103 -11     
 25.  Ek WE, Reznichenko A, Ripke S, et al  Exploring the genetics of irritable bowel syndrome: a GWA study in 
the general population and replication in multinational case- control cohorts. Gut. 2014 Sep 23. pii: gutjnl- 2014 -
307997. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl -2014- 307997. [Epub ahead of print]  
 26.  Wong BS, Camilleri M, Carlson PJ, Guicciardi ME, Burton D, McKinzie S, Rao AS, Zinsmeister AR, Gores 
GJ.  A klothoβ variant mediates protein stability and associates with colon transit in irritable bowel syndrome 
with diarrhea. Gastroenterology 2011;140:1934 -42     PMC3109206  
 
27.  Camilleri M, Acosta A, Busciglio I, Boldingh A, Dyer RB, Zinsmeister AR, Lueke A, Gray A, Donato LJ. 
Effect of colesevelam on faecal bile acids and bowel functions in diar rhoea- predominant irritable bowel 
syndrome.  Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;41:438 -48     PMC4493894 
 
28.  Oelkers P, Kirby LC, Heubi JE, Dawson PA. Primary bile acid malabsorption caused by mutations in the 
ileal sodium -dependent bile acid transporter gene (SLC10A2). J Clin Invest 1997;99:1880 -7     PMC 508012 
 29.  Montagnani M, Love MW, Rössel P, Dawson PA, Qvist P.  Absence of dysfunctional ileal sodium -bile acid 
cotransporter gene mutations in patients with adult -onset idiopathic bile acid malabsorption. Sc and J 
Gastroenterol 2001;36:1077- 80     PMID: 11589382 
 30.  Aerssens J, Camilleri M, Talloen W, Thielemans L, Göhlmann HWH, Van den Wyngaert I, Thielemans T, 
Andrews CN, Bharucha AE, Carlson PJ, Busciglio I, Burton DD, Smyrk T, Urrutia R, Coulie B.  Alterations in 
mucosal immunity identified in the colon reveal molecular signatures to diagnose irritable bowel syndrome.  
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6:194 -205   PMC2453689 
 
 
31.  Belmonte L, Beutheu Youmba S, Bertiaux -Vandaele N, Antonietti M, Lecleire S, Zalar A, Gourcerol G, 
Leroi A -M, Dechelotte P, Coeffier M, Ducrotte´ P  Role of Toll Like Receptors in Irritable Bowel Syndrome: 
Differential Mucosal Immune Activation According to the Disease Subtype PLOS One 2012;7:e42777     PMC3461726  
 32.  Coates MD, Mahoney CR, Linden DR, Sampson JE, Chen J, Blaszyk H, Crowell MD, Sharkey KA, 
Gershon MD, Mawe GM, Moses PL. Molecular defects in mucosal serotonin content and decreased serotonin reuptake transporter in ulcerative colitis and irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2004;126:1657- 64    
PMID15188158 
 
33.  Kerckhoffs AP, ter Linde JJ, Akkermans LM, Samsom  M.  SERT and TPH -1 mRNA expression are 
reduced in irritable bowel syndrome patients regardless of visceral sensitivity state in large intestine. Am J Physiol 2012;302:G1053 -G1060    PMID22323131  Free full text  
 34.  Villani AC, Lemire M, Thabane M, Belisle A, Geneau G, Garg AX, Clark WF, Moayyedi P, Collins SM, 
Franchimont D, Marshall JK. Genetic risk factors for post -infectious irritable bowel syndrome following a 
waterborne outbreak of gastroenteritis. Gastroenterology 2010;138:1502 -13      PMID20044998 
 
35.  Vazquez -Roque MI, Camilleri M, Smyrk T, Murray JA, O’Neill J, Carlson P, Lamsam J, Eckert D, Janzow 
D, Burton D, Ryks M, Rhoten D, Zinsmeister AR. Association of HLA -DQ gene with bowel transit, barr ier 
function and inflammation in irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Am J Physiol 2012;303:G1262 -9    
PMC3532460  
 36.  Camilleri M, Carlson P, Acosta A, Busciglio I, Nair AA, Gibbons S, Farrugia G, Klee E.  RNA sequencing 
shows transcriptomic changes in rectosigmoid mucosa in patients with irritable bowel syndrome- diarrhea: a 
pilot case- control study.  Am J Physiol 2014;306: G1089- 98     PMC4059976 
 
37.  Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M. RNA -Seq: a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet 
2009;10:57 -63    PMC2949280 
 38.  Camilleri M, Carlson P, Acosta A, Busciglio IA. Colonic m ucosal gene expression and genotype in i rritable 
bowel syndrome patients with n ormal or e levated fecal bile acid excretion. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver 
Physiol 2015;309:G10- 20     PMC4491506  
 39.  Valentin N, Camilleri M, Altayar O, Vijayvargiya P, Acosta A, Nelson AD, Murad MH. Biomarkers for bile 
acid diarrhea in functional gastrointestinal disorders with diarrhea: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Gut. 
2015 Sep 7. pii: gutjnl -2015- 309889. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl -2015 -309889. [Epub ahead of print]  
 
40.  Shin A, Camilleri M, Busciglio I, Carlson P, Burton D, Ryks M, Rhoten D, Lamsam J, Zinsmeister AR.  
Candidate gene association with bowel function, colonic transit and permeability and fecal BAs in health and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Gastroenterology 2013;144(Suppl.1):S122  (abstract)   
 
41.  Camilleri M, Busciglio I, Acosta A, Shin A, Carlson P, Burton D, Ryks M, Rhoten D, Lamsam J, Lueke A, 
Donato LJ, Zinsmeister AR. Effect of increased bile acid synthesis or fecal excretion in irritable bowel syndrome- diarrhea. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109:1621- 30     PMC25070056 
 
42.  Camilleri M, Klee EW, Shin A, Carlson P, Li Y, Grover M, Zinsmeister AR. Irritable bowel syndrome -
diarrhea: characterization of genotype by exome sequencing, and phenotypes of BA synthesis and colonic 
transit. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2014;306:G13- G26     PMC3920085 
 
43.  Camilleri M, Carlson P, Valentin N, Acosta A, O’Neill J, Eckert D, Na J, Klee EW, Murray JA. Small bowel 
mucosal gene expression in patients with irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Am J Physiol  (submitted)   
 
 
44.  Camilleri M, Nadeau A, Lamsam J, Linker -Nord S, Ryks M, Burton D, Sweetser S, Zinsmeister AR, Singh 
R.  Understanding measurements of intestinal permeability in healthy humans with urine lactulose and 
mannitol excretion. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2010;22:e15- 26   PMC2802677 
 
45.  Lostia AM, Lionetto L, Principessa L, Evangelisti M, Gamba A, Villa MP, Simmaco M. A liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry method for the evaluation of intestinal permeability. Clin Biochem 2008;41:887 -92     PMID18440311  F ree full text       
 46.  Rao AS, Camilleri M, Eckert DJ, Busciglio I, Burton DD, Ryks M, Wong BS, Lamsam J, Singh R, 
Zinsmeister AR.  Urine sugars for in vivo gut permeability: validation and comparisons in irritable bowel 
syndrome- diarrhea and controls.  Am J Physiol 2011;301:G919- 28     PMC3220318 
 47.  Grover M, Camilleri M, Hines J, Burton D, Ryks M, Wadhwa A, Sundt W, Dyer R, Singh RJ. 
13C-mannitol 
as a novel biomarker for measurement of intestinal permeability. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.1111/nmo. 12802. [Epub ahead of print].    PMID: 26914765  
 
48.  Vazquez -Roque MI, Camilleri M, Smyrk T, Murray J, Marietta E, O’Neill J, Carlson P, Lamsam J, Janzow 
D, Eckert D, Burton D, Zinsmeister AR.  Randomized, controlled trial of gluten- free diet in IBS -diarrhea: effect 
on bowel frequency, small and large intestinal functions. Gastroenterology 2013;144:903 -11    PMC3633663 
 49.  Deiteren A, Camilleri M, Bharucha AE, Burton D, McKinzie S, Rao A, Zinsmeister AR.  Performance 
characteristics of scintigraphic colon transit measurement in health and irritable bowel syndrome and 
relationship to bowel functions.  Neurogastroenterol Motil 2010;22:415- 423, e95   PMC2852474  
 50.  Cremonini F, Houghton LA, Camilleri M, Ferber I, Fell C, Cox V, Castillo E J, Alpers DH, Dewit OE, Gray E, 
Lea R, Zinsmeister AR, Whorwell PJ. Barostat testing of rectal sensation and compliance in humans: 
comparison of results across two centres and overall reproducibility. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2005;17:810- 20   
PMID16336496  
51.  Sauter GH, Münzing W, von Ritter C, Paumgartner G. BA malabsorption as a cause of chronic diarrhea: 
diagnostic  value of 7alpha- hydroxy -4-cholesten-3- one in serum. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:14 -9     PMID: 9952217  
 52.  Brydon WG, Nyhlin H, Eastwood MA, Merrick MV. Serum 7 alpha- hydroxy -4-cholesten-3- one and seleno-
homocholyltaurine (SeHCAT) whole body retention in the assessment of BA induced diarrhoea. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1996;8:117 -123      PMID8723414   
 53.  Camilleri M, Nadeau A, Tremaine WJ, et al.  Measurement of serum 7alpha- hydroxy -4-cholesten-3- one (or 
7alphaC4), a surrogate test for BA malabsorption in health, ileal disease and irritable bowel syndrome using 
liquid chromatography -tandem mass spectrometr y. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2009; 21:734- e43   PMC2705747 
 54.  Gälman C, Arvidsson I, Angelin B, Rudling M. Monitoring hepatic cholesterol 7alpha -hydroxylase activity 
by assay of the stable BA intermediate 7alpha -hydroxy -4-cholesten-3- one in peripheral blood. J Lipid Res 
2003;44:859 -866     PMID12562858   Free full text  
 
54B.  Walters JR, Tasleem AM, Omer OS, Brydon WG, Dew T, Le Roux CW. A new mechanism for BA 
diarrhea: defective feedback inhibition of BA biosynthesis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009;7:1189- 94   
PMID19426836 
 55.  Tagliacozzi D, Mozzi AF, Casetta B, Bertucci P, Bernardini S, Di Ilio C, Urbani A, Federici G. Quantitative 
analysis of BAs in human plasma by liquid chromatography -electrospray tandem mass spectrometry: a simple 
and rapid one -step method. Clin Chem Lab Med 2003;41:1633 -41    PMID14708888   
 56.  Shin A, Camilleri M, Vijayvargiya P, Busciglio I, Burton D, Ryks M, Rhoten D, Lueke A, Saenger A, 
Girtman A, Zinsmeister AR.  Bowel functions, fecal unconjugated primary and secondary BAs, and colonic 
transit in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11:1270- 5      PMC3778140 
 
 
57.  Tangerman A, Nagengast FM. A gas chromatographic analysis of fecal short -chain fatty acids, using the 
direct injection method.  Anal Biochem 1996;236:1- 8    PMID8619472 
 
58.  Talley NJ, Phillips SF, Wiltgen CM, Zinsmeister AR, Melton LJ 3rd. Assessment of functional 
gastrointestinal disease: the bowel disease questionnaire. Mayo Clin Proc 1990;65:1456 -79     PMID2232900 
 59.  Patrick DL, Drossman DA, Frederick IO, DiCesare J, Puder KL. Quality of life in persons with irritable 
bowel syndrome: development and validation of a new measure. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:400 -11     PMID9512138  
 60.  Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;67:361 -70     
PMID6880820  
60B.  Manabe N, Wong BS, Camilleri M, Burton D, McKinzie S, Zinsmeister AR.  Lower functional 
gastrointestinal disorders: evidence of abnormal colonic transit in a 287 patient cohort.  Neurogastroenterol Motil 2010;22:293 -e82    PMC2852497  
 
61.  Zinsmeister AR, Burton D, Camilleri M.  Pharmacodynamic and clinical endpoints for functional colonic 
disorders:  statistical considerations.  Dig Dis Sci 2013;58:509 -18     PMC3529760 
 
62.  Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA -Seq. Bioinformatics 
2009;25:1105 -11    PMC2672628 
 63.  Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory -efficient alignment of short DNA 
sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol.  2009;10(3):R25.
 doi: 10.1186/gb- 2009 -10-3- r25.  
PMC2690996  
 
64.  McKenna A, Hanna M, Banks E, Sivachenko A, Cibulskis K, Kernytsky A, Garimella K, Altshuler D, Gabriel 
S, Daly M, DePristo MA. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next -generation 
DNA sequencing data. Genome Research 2010;20:1297- 1303     PMC2928508 
 65.  Wang L, Wang S, and Li W. RSeQC: Quality Control of RNA -seq experiments Bioinformatics 
2012;28:2184 -2185   PMID22743226   Free full test  
 66.  Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression 
analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 2010;26:139- 140    PMC2796818   
 
67.  Anders S, Huber W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data.  Genome Biol 2010; 11:R106    
PMC3218662  
 68.  Hov JR, Keitel V, Laerdahl JK, et al . Mutational characterization of the bile acid receptor TGR5 in primary  
sclerosing cholangitis. PLoS One 2010;5:e12403      PMC2928275  
 
69.  Dames S, Durtschi J, Geiersbach K, Stephens J, Voelkerding KV  Comparison of the Illumina Genome 
Analyzer and Roche 454 GS FLX for resequencing of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy -associated genes.  J 
Biomol Tech 2010;21:73 -80     PMC2884316 
 
70.  Price AL, Pat terson NJ, Plenge RM, Weinblatt ME, Shadick NA, Reich D.Principal components analysis 
corrects for stratification in genome -wide association studies. Nat Genet. 2006;38:904 -9. 
 71.  Ionita -Laza I, Lee S, Makarov V, Buxbaum J, Lin X. Sequence kernel association tests for the combined 
effect of rare and common variants.  Am J Hum Genet 2013;92:841 -853     PMC3675243     
 
72.  Lee S, Emond MJ, Bamshad MJ, Barnes KC, Rieder MJ, Nickerson DA, NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing 
Project -ESP Lung Project Team, Christiani DC, Wurfel MM, Lin X. Optimal unified approach for rare var iant 
association testing with application to small sample case- control whole- exome sequencing studies.  Am J Hum 
Genet 2012;91:224- 37      PMC3415556  
 
 
73.  Lee S, Wu MC, Lin X. Optim al tests for rare variant effects in sequencing association studies.  Biostatistics 
2012;13:762 -75     PMC3440237 
 74.  Wu MC, Kraft P, Epstein MP, Taylor D, Chanock SJ, Hunter DJ, and Lin, X. Powerful SNP set analysis for 
case- control genome- wide association studies.  Am J Hum Genet 2010; 86:929- 42      PMC3032061    
 
75.  Wu MC, Lee, S, Cai T, Li Y, Boehnke M, Lin X.  Rare variant association testing for sequencing data using 
the Sequence Kernel Association Test (SKAT).  Am J Hum Genet  2011;89:82- 93      PMC3135811  
 
76.  Jolliffe IT. Principal Component Analysis,  2
nd ed. New York:Springer -Verlag, 2002  
 77.  Pruim RJ, Welch RP, Sanna S, Teslovich TM, Chines PS, Gliedt TP, Boehnke M, Abecasis GR, Willer CJ.  
LocusZoom: regional visualization of genome- wide association scan results. Bioinformatics 2010;26:2336- 7     
PMC 2935401  
 
78.  Wu MC, Lin X. Prior biological knowledge- based approaches for the analysis of genome -wide expression 
profiles using gene sets and pathways. Stat Methods Med Res. 2009;18:577- 93  PM C2827341  
 
79.  Chen H, Bell JM, Zavala NA, Ji HP, Zhang NR. Allele -specific copy number profiling by next -generation 
DNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res 2015;43:e23      PMC 4344483  
 80.  Storey JD, Tibshirani R. Statistical significance for genomewide studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2003;100:9440 -5     PMC170937 
 81.  R Development Core Team (2011), R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, 
Austria; the R Foundation for Statistical Computing. ISBN: 3 -900051- 07-0. Available online at http://www.R-
project.org/.  
 82.  Huang YT, Vanderweele TJ, Lin X. Joint analysis of SNP and gene expression data in genetic association 
studies of complex diseases. Ann Appl Stat 2014;8:352- 76     PMC3981558 
 83.  Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, Houghton LA, Mearin F, Spiller RC. Functional bowel 
disorders. Gastroenterology 2006;130:1480- 91     PMID16678561   
 
84.  Beskow LM, Burke W, Merz JF, Barr PA, Terry S, Penchaszadeh VB, Gostin LO, Gwinn M, Khoury MJ.  
Informed consent for population- based research invol ving genetics. JAMA 2001; 286:2315- 2321         
PMID11710898  
85.  Basra S, Verne GN, Zhou Q. Randomized placebo- controlled trial of glutamine for the treatment of 
diarrhea- predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2013;144(Suppl. 1):S160 (abstract)  
 86. Khemani D, Camilleri M, Roldan A, Nelson AD, Park S- Y, Acosta A, Zinsmeister AR.  Opioid analgesic use 
among patients presenting with acute abdominal pain and factors associated with surgic al diagnoses.  
Neurogastroenterol Motil (in press)  
 87. Martínez C, Lobo B, Pigrau M, Ramos L, González -Castro AM, Alonso C, Guilarte M, Guilá M, de Torres I, 
Azpiroz F, Santos J, Vicario M. Diarrhoea- predominant irritable bowel syndrome: an organic disorder with 
structural abnormalities in the jejunal epithelial barrier. Gut. 2013;62: 1160 -8 
 
88. Camilleri M, Carlson P, Valentin N, Acosta A, O'Neill J, Eckert D, Dyer R, Na J, Klee EW, Murray JA.. Pilot 
study of small bowel mucosal gene expression in patients with irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea.  Am J Physiol 2016 ;311: G365 -76. PMID: 27445342  
   
 