1 Abbreviated Title:  EPOCH -FR & CSA/MTX - Allo HSCT  
CC Protocol Number:  03 -C-0077        Amendment J  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Pilot Study of EPOCH -F/R Induction Chemotherapy       
and Reduced- Intensity, HLA -Matched, Related Allogeneic Hematopoietic                  
Stem Cell Transplantation for Refractory or Relapsed Hematologic      
Malignancies, with  Cyclosporine & Methotrexate for Graft -Versus -Host         
Disease Prophylaxis  
 
Principal Investigator:   Daniel Fowler, M.D.1 
     Telephone:  301-435-8641 
 
Lead Associate Investigator : Frances Hakim, Ph.D.1 
     Telephone:  301-402-3627 
 
Associate Investigators: 
 Michael R. Bisho p, M.D.1 
 Ronald Gress, M.D.1  
 Claude Sportes, M.D.1   
 Steven Pavletic, M.D.1  
 Juan Gea- Banacloche, M.D.1  
 Seth Steinberg, Ph.D.2   
            Susan Leitman, M.D.3 
 Paula Layton, R.N.1   
 
 1 Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch 
 Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute  
   
 2 Biostatistics and Data Management Section  
 Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute  
 
 3 Department of Transfusion Medicine  
 Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health  
 
Date of Revision:  January 27, 2011 
  
2 Precis  
 
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is potentially curative for refractory hematologic malignancies, but its application has been limited historically by morbidity and mortality from conventional transplant preparative regimens and graft -versus- host disease 
(GVHD).  Donor T cells mediate GVHD and also help to eradicate malignancies through an immune -dependent graft -versus- tumor effect.  Efforts to decrease preparative regimen toxicity 
have led to reduced -intensity, or “nonmyeloablative” regimens, facilitating the study of 
allogeneic HSCT in a broader population.  As a promising strategy for reducing GVHD, donor Th2 cells were shown to abrogate Th1 -mediated GVHD without impairing engraftment in 
murine models of  allogeneic HSCT.  These findings led to a phase I/II clinical study of donor 
Th2 cells for the prevention of GVHD during reduced- intensity allogeneic HSCT (CC 99 -C-
0143); preliminary results suggest that a randomized trial will be necessary to evaluate donor Th2 cells further.  In CC 99-C- 0143, a novel induction chemotherapy regimen, EPOCH -Fludarabine (EPOCH -F), 
was well tolerated and effective for sequential host immune depletion.  However, a significant proportion of patients failed to achieve satisfactory disease control before transplant, providing a basis for intensifying this induction regimen.  Furthermore, the initial 20 patients treated on this study experienced relatively high rates of acute GVHD and considerable morbidity associated with cyclosporine monotherapy for GVHD prevention, indicating that future studies should use 
more aggressive prophylaxis.  These observations warrant modifying our approach to allogeneic HSCT before undertaking a randomized study of donor Th2 cells.  We now propose a pilot study of HLA -matched, related, reduced -intensity allogeneic HSCT in 
refractory hematologic malignancies, using an intensified EPOCH -F induction chemotherapy 
regimen with rituximab added for patients with CD20+ malignancies (EPOCH -F/R).  This  
regimen will be evaluated for toxicity and disease control before transplantation.  GVHD prophylaxis will consist of a standard dual -agent regimen, cyclosporine/methotrexate; the impact 
of this change on hematopoietic recovery, donor/recipient chimerism, and the incidence of acute 
GVHD will be assessed.  
 Immune reconstitution following allogeneic HSCT is an important research interest among Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch investigators.  Current evidence suggests a critical role for inte rleukin- 7 (IL -7) in CD4+ T cell homeostasis, and interleukin- 15 (IL -15) 
appears crucial to CD8+ T cell and NK cell homeostasis.  The relationships between these cytokines and lymphocyte subpopulations have not been studied in the setting of allogeneic HSCT ; such analysis may enhance our understanding of engraftment kinetics, graft -versus -host 
disease, and immune reconstitution.  We will correlate serum IL -7 and IL -15 levels with changes 
in circulating T -cell and NK -cell subpopulations during EPOCH -F/R induction chemotherapy, 
after transplantation, and with the development of GVHD. 
3 Table of Contents 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  .......................................................................................................................... 5  
1.1 Study Objectives  
1.2 Background and Rationale  
1.3 Summary  
2.0 ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT AND ENROLLMENT ............................................................... 20  
2.1 Eligibility Criteria  
2.2 Research Eligibility Evaluation  
2.3 Patient Registration  
3.0 STUDY IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................... 26  
3.1 Study Design  
3.2 Stem Cell Mobilization and Collection  
3.3 Induction Chemotherapy  
3.4 Transplant Conditioning Regimen  
3.5 Graft -Versus- Host Disease Prophylaxis  
3.6 Treatment of Graft -Versus- Host Disease  
3.7 On Study Evaluation  
3.8 Pre-Transplant Evaluation  
3.9 Off Study Criteria  
3.10 Immunologic Studies  
3.11 Post Study Evaluation  
4.0 SUPPORTIVE CARE  ................................................................................................................... 35  
4.1 Infection Prophylaxis  
4.2 Menses Suppression and Contraception  
5.0 DATA COLLECTION AND EVALUATION  ............................................................................. 38  
5.1 Data Collection  
5.2 Response Criteria  
5.3 Toxicity Criteria  
5.4 Statistical Section  
6.0 HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTIONS  ....................................................................................... 44  
6.1 Rationale for Subject Selection  
6.2 Risks/Benefits Analysis  
6.3 Consent and Assent Process and Documentation  
7.0 DATA REPORTING  .................................................................................................................... 45  
7.1 Adverse Drug Reactions  
7.2 Record Keeping  
8.0 PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  ..................................................................................... 45  
8.1 Cyclophosphamide 
8.2 Mesna  
8.3 Filgrastim (G -CSF)  
8.4 Cyclosporine 
8.5 Fludarabine 
8.6 Etoposide, Doxorubicin, and Vincristine (in EPOCH) 
8.7 Prednisone  
8.8 Methotrexate  
8.9 Rituximab  
8.10 Diphenhydramine  
8.11 Acetaminophen  
8.12 Valacyclovir  
8.13 Fluconazole  
4 8.14 Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole  
8.15 Medroxyprogresterone Acetate  
8.16 Immune Globulin Intravenous  
9.0 APPENDICES  .............................................................................................................................. 58  
10.0 REFERENCES  ............................................................................................................................. 67  
 
5 1.0 Introduction 
1.1 Study Objectives:  
 
1.1.1 Primary Objectives:  
 
a) To evaluate the effectiveness of cyclosporine and mini -dose 
methotrexate (CSA/mini -MTX) as prophylaxis for acute graft -versus -
host disease (GVHD) following allogeneic HSCT, after induction 
chemotherapy with EPOCH -F/R and reduced- intensity conditioning 
with cyclophosphamide and fludarabine. 
 
1.1.2 Secondary Objectives:  
 
a) To study the toxicity of a modified induction chemotherapy regimen, EPOCH-Fludarabine/R ituximab (EPOCH -F/R), prior to allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).  This evaluation will be made informally in comparison with the toxicity observed for the EPOCH-F regimen employed in CC 99-C-0143. 
 b) To assess the impact on hematolog ic recovery and donor/recipient 
chimerism of cyclosporine and mini -dose methotrexate for GVHD 
prophylaxis in the setting of reduced- intensity allogeneic HSCT 
following sequential immunoablative chemotherapy.  
 
c) To evaluate the effectiveness of EPOCH -F/R with  respect to anti -
tumor activity and sequential host immune depletion prior to allogeneic HSCT.  
 
d) To correlate serum interleukin -7 and interleukin- 15 levels with in vivo  
changes in host lymphocyte subpopulations, both during sequential immunoablative chemoth erapy before allogeneic HSCT and during 
immune reconstitution after transplantation.  
 
e) To determine the overall response rate to salvage therapies administered for disease progression after allogeneic HSCT.  
 1.2 Background and Rationale: 
 
1.2.1 Reduced -Intensity Preparative Regimens in Allogeneic HSCT:   
Conventional transplantation regimens typically contain high doses of alkylating agents often in combination with total body irradiation.  The use of such regimens, which are considered myeloablative, was once perceived as essential both for eradication of malignant disease and for suppression of the host -versus- graft marrow rejection response; however, 
recent studies have challenged both of these assumptions.  The high frequency of relapse observed in the setting of T -cell-depleted allogeneic 
6 HSCT suggests that the curative potential of allogeneic HSCT results 
primarily from a T -cell-mediated graft -versus -tumor (GVT) effect, and not 
from the myeloablative doses of chemotherapy [1].  In addition, the 
delayed administration of donor lymphocytes can induce complete remissions remote from the preparative regimen; this clinical observation provides further evidence that an immune mechanism primarily mediates the anti -leukemic effects of allogeneic HSCT [2].  With respect to graft 
rejection, it is also now known that conventional myeloablative regimens do not consistently eliminate the host response to the allograft, even in recipients of HLA -matched allografts.  For example, 30 to 40% of patients 
will reject a T -cell-depleted, HLA -matched marrow graft after 
myeloablative conditioning [3].  These limitations of myeloablative 
preparative regimens, combined with the high levels  of morbidity and 
mortality associated with myeloablation, result in a low therapeutic index for this aspect of allogeneic HSCT.  It has therefore been a goal of clinical investigators to develop regimens that reduce treatment mortality yet maintain the efficacy of allogeneic HSCT, by establishing allo -
engraftment without myeloablation.  Recent allogeneic HSCT studies have demonstrated that fludarabine can contribute to the prevention of marrow rejection in reduced -intensity, or 
“nonmyeloablative”, transpla nt approaches [4, 5].  In the non-transplant 
setting, fludarabine can cause immunosuppression through its depletion of both CD4
+ and CD8+ T cells [6].  Importantly, patients receiving 
fludarabine- containing combination chemotherapy are susceptibl e to 
developing transfusion- associated graft -versus- host disease [7].  This 
observation illustrates the potential of fludarabine -based regimens for 
preventing the rejection of even HLA -disparate lymphoid cells; such 
regim ens may be considered “immunoablative”, in recognition of their 
relatively specific impact upon host cell -mediated immunity.  
 
Unfortunately, published reports indicate that allogeneic HSCT using such reduced -intensity regimens has been limited by incomplete donor 
chimerism or failure to engraft, which were associated with relapsed malignancy and higher rates of death due to progr essive disease [4, 5, 8] .  
For these reasons, we believe that attaining full donor chimerism early after transplantation is central to achieving an enhanced GVT effect, and that accomplishing th is goal with a reduced -intensity preparative regimen 
depends upon the degree of host immunosuppression at the time of HSCT. 
 
1.2.2 Donor Th2 Cells As a Strategy to Reduce Graft -Versus- Host Disease 
Following Allogeneic HSCT:   Donor T cells in the allograft are th e 
primary initiators of GVHD; this complication  can be prevented by 
depletion of T cells from the allograft, but such T -cell-depleted transplants 
are associated with a high rate of graft rejection.  As an alternative 
approach, we have evaluated whether donor T cells of defined cytokine 
7 phenotypes might differentially mediate allogeneic transplantation 
responses.  A type I immune response, mediated by CD4+, Th1 and CD8+, 
Tc1 cells, is characterized by the secretion of the pro -inflammatory 
cytokines IL -2 and IFN-gamma [9].  In contrast, the secretion of the anti -
inflammatory cytokines IL -4, IL -5, and  IL-10 characterizes a type II 
immune response, mediated by CD4+, Th2 and CD8+, Tc2 cells.  Given that acute GVHD is typical of a type I immune response (characterized by an initial phase of IL -2 production, and followed by IFN -γ secretion and 
cytolytic fu nction) [10] , we hypothesized that donor T cells of type I 
cytokine phenotype would generate acute GVHD, and that donor T cells 
of type II cytokine phenotype would regulate GVHD.  In murine models, we demonstrated that donor CD4
+ T cells of Th1 cytokine phenotype 
(defined by their secretion of IL -2 and IFN -γ) mediat ed GVHD.  In 
contrast, donor CD4+ T cells of Th2 phenotype (defined by their secretion 
of IL -4, IL -5, and IL -10) did not generate GVHD, and abrogated the 
ability of other donor T cell populations to initiate GVHD [11].  
Importantly, we also demonstrated in murine models that Th2- mediated 
regulation of GVHD was not associated with an increased rate of graft rejection [12].  Thus, the supplementation of marrow allografts with donor 
Th2 cells represents a strategy for reducing the detrimental aspect of allogeneic T cell administration (GVHD) while preserving the beneficial ability of donor T cells to prevent allograft rejection.  The clinical evaluation of this strategy  is ongoing in a phase II NCI trial (CC 99-C-
0143); we anticipate that a randomized study will follow for further assessment of the impact of donor Th2 cell administration on GVHD, engraftment, and anti -tumor effects.  An important aspect of the design for  
the current protocol proposal is the dual -agent GVHD prophylaxis 
regimen we will use (Section 1.2.8), which will serve as a control group for future randomized studies involving donor Th2 cells. 
 
1.2.3 Rationale for EPOCH -Fludarabine (EPOCH -F) Induction Prior t o 
Reduced -Intensity Conditioning in CC 99-C-0143:   The desire to achieve 
rapid and complete donor chimerism following allogeneic HSCT led our 
group to adopt a strategy of sequential immune depletion before transplant conditioning.  In CC 99-C- 0143, we developed a novel induction 
chemotherapy regimen consisting of fludarabine in combination with the agents contained in the EPOCH regimen.  The main purpose of administering this induction regimen was to achieve a high level of host immunosuppression prior to allogeneic HSCT, in order to attain rapid conversion to full donor chimerism and to facilitate the development of a GVT effect soon after transplantation.   Murine data indicate that very severe levels of host T cell depletion are required for the engraftment of fully -MHC mismatched allografts after fludarabine- based chemotherapy 
[13].   Thus, we believe the development of induction chemotherapy 
8 regimens that induce severe host T cell depletion without myeloablation is 
a desirable goal.  As a surrogate marker for the level of immune depletion necessary to achieve this goal in CC 99-C- 0143, we chose a peripheral 
blood CD4 count of less than 50 cells/ µl before administration of the 
transplant preparative regimen.  Our hypothesis was that this level of host CD4
+ T cell depl etion, which is associated with clinically significant 
immunosuppression and a reduced ability to reject allogeneic cells in patients with B cell malignancy [7, 14, 15], would predict for robust 
engraftment after allogeneic HSCT and be attainable with up to 3 cycles of induction chemotherapy before transplantation.   
 
Developed in the NCI Medical Oncology Clinical Research Unit, EPOCH is a well -tolerated chemotherapy regimen with established activity in 
refractory lymphoid malignancies [16-18] .  Fludarabine, which has 
modestly immunosuppressive effects when administered as a single agent, can be highly immunosuppressive when given in combination with steroids, alkylators, or topoisomerase II inhibitors [19-21] ; all of these 
categories of antineoplastic agents are represented in the EPOCH regimen.  These observations suggested that the combination of fludarabine and EPOCH c hemotherapy might result in severe host T cell depletion at the 
time of transplantation and have clinical activity in refractory hematologic malignancies.  
 
1.2.4 EPOCH -F Results in CC 99-C-0143 – Disease Control .  Through July 
2002, 48 patients with refractory a nd/or relapsed hematologic 
malignancies received EPOCH -F on CC 99-C-0143. 
 
Diagnosis  (n) 
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma  15 
Follicular NHL  6 
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia  
(1 prolymphocytic, 1 Richter’s) 6 
Multiple myeloma  6 
Mantle cell lymphoma  4 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma  3 
Chronic myelogenous leukemia  3 
Myelodysplasia  3 
Acute lymphocytic leukemia  1 
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis  1 
 Patients had received a median of 3 prior therapies before enrolling (range, 1-6).  20 patients had primary refractory dis ease; 22 were in relapse, of 
whom 18 were refractory.  Only 2 were in remission at study entry.  Responses to EPOCH-F induction are shown in the following table:  
9  (n) % 
Complete response  3 6 
Partial response  15 31 
Stable disease  15 31 
Mixed response  1 2 
Progressive disease  14 29 
 
Thus, EPOCH -F was associated with an overall response rate of 37% in 
this relatively chemoresistant patient population, while nearly one -third of 
patients developed progressive disease while receiving this induction regimen.   Analysis of the 15 patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma 
indicates that at study entry, 6 had primary refractory disease, 7 were in refractory relapses, and 2 were in complete remission.  After receiving EPOCH- F, 8 patients had disease progression, 5 had stable disease, and 1 
achieved a partial response.  1 patient remained in CR that existed before study entry.  Therefore, results in this subgroup were consistent with those of the overall study population.  
1.2.5 EPOCH -F Results in CC 99-C-0143 – Immune Depletion .  25 patients 
received 3 cycles of EPOCH -F before transplantation, the maximum 
number permitted by the protocol.  11 patients received only 2 cycles, and 12 patients received only 1 cycle.  Reasons for proceeding to transplantation after fewer than 3 cycles of EPOCH -F included:  having 
reached CD4 < 50/ µl (n=8); progressive disease on EPOCH -F (n=11); 
withdrawal from study (n=1, not transplanted); unacceptable toxicity from EPOCH- F (n=3).  The effect of EPOCH -F induction on circulating 
lymphocyte subpopulations is shown in the following table:  
   Median CD4 
(range)   Median CD8 
(range)  Median ALC 
(range)  
Baseline  283 (9 -1697)  261 (13 -3478)  837 (37 -282,854)  
Post cycle 1  212 (12 -1004)  117 (5 -1484)  582 (68 -196,770)  
Post cycle 2  151 (39 -388)  75 (17 -571)  487 (1 -177,742)  
Post cycle 3  97 (48 -309)  52 (2 -830)  393 (141 -171,952)  
Pre-transplant  89 (12 -452)  52 (2 -830)  380 (1 -171,952)  
 
Although the goal CD4 count of less than 50 cells/ µl was reached in only 
14 of 48 patients following induction, all patients who underwent 
transplantation demonstrated evidence of predominantly donor engraftment, with only one patient having < 95% donor chimerism at day +28 following transplantation.  Thus, the inability to reach a CD4 target of 
50 cells/µl in all patients was not an impediment to engraftment in CC 99 -
C-0143; in fact, 24 of these patients had CD4 counts > 100/ µl before 
receiving the transplant conditioning regimen.  This outcome suggests that as a surrogate marker for immune depletion, the  CD4 target of 50/ µl was 
lower than necessary to ensure early engraftment with full donor 
10 chimerism in the setting of a T -cell-replete, reduced -intensity allogeneic 
HSCT.  It therefore follows that some patients with stable or responsive 
disease received m ore cycles of immune -depleting induction 
chemotherapy than was required to ensure engraftment, resulting in delays before transplantation for these patients.  Choosing a higher CD4 target might permit some patients to proceed to transplant with fewer cycle s of 
induction therapy; this would be of particular benefit to patients with minimal disease or stable disease during EPOCH -F. 
 
1.2.6 EPOCH -F Results in CC 99-C-0143 – Toxicity .  EPOCH- F was a well -
tolerated regimen in this population, with no treatment -related deaths 
attributed to the induction therapy.  In 109 cycles of EPOCH -F, only 7 
patients experienced grade 4 non- hematologic toxicity, including anorexia 
(n=4), vomiting (n=1), catheter -related sepsis (n=1), and viral encephalitis 
(n=1).  Grade 4 hematologic  toxicity occurred in 16 patients and lasted a 
median of 4 days per episode (range, 2- 8 days).  These included 24 
episodes of neutropenia, of which 4 were associated with documented infections.  There were also 2 episodes of grade 4 thrombocytopenia.  Grade 3 non- hematologic toxicity affected 28 patients and lasted a median 
of 4 days, including 12 episodes of neutropenic fever and 6 documented infections (of which 2 coincided with grade 3 or 4 neutropenia).  Other grade 3 events were sporadic, including :  hypoxia, motor neuropathy, 
neuropathic pain, and hyperbilirubinemia (2 episodes each); sensory neuropathy, hyponatremia, syncope, anorexia, diarrhea, hypotension, urinary frequency, thrombotic microangiopathy, bone pain, rectal pain, pain-other (1 episode each).  
 To summarize, results from CC 99-C- 0143 indicate that the EPOCH -F 
induction regimen provides disease control or stability in a majority of patients with refractory or relapsed hematologic malignancies, with an acceptable toxicity profile.  However, the fact that nearly one- third of 
patients had disease progression while receiving EPOCH -F provides a 
strong rationale for attempting to intensify this induction regimen, given the importance of disease control before transplantation in the reduced-intensity setting.  The generally mild and reversible nature of toxicities 
observed with EPOCH -F suggests that intensification of this induction 
regimen could be achieved without an unacceptable increase in adverse events.  
 
1.2.7 EPOCH -Fludarabine/Rituximab (EPOCH -F/R) Induction for Disease 
Control and Sequential Immune Depletion before Reduced -Intensity 
Allogeneic HSCT:   Consistent with the above, in the current study we will 
pilot a new induction chemotherapy regimen based upon the EPOCH -F 
regimen used in CC 99-C- 0143.  In that protocol, the EPOCH component 
of the induction regimen was an attenuated version of EPOCH as used in 
11 previous NCI Medical Oncology Clinical Research Unit studies [16-18] .  
Specifically, our EPOCH regimen (as a part of EPOCH -F) differed from 
other EPOCH protocols in that the infusional component was reduced 
from  four days to three, prednisone was reduced from five days to four, 
and cyclophosphamide was given on day 4 (instead of day 5) at a 20% lower dose.  These changes were made to allow for the possibility of added toxicity from the addition of fludarabine to the EPOCH regimen.  
 The differences between the EPOCH -F induction regimen of CC 99-C-
0143 and the current proposal are outlined as follows, with changes underlined: 
 
CC 99 -C-0143  
EPOCH -F Current Proposal  
EPOCH -F/R 
 Rituximab 375 mg/m2 IV, day 1  
(for patients with CD20+ malignancies)  
Fludarabine 25mg/m2 IV QD, days 1 -3 Fludarabine 25mg/m2 IV QD, days 1 -4 
Etoposide 50 mg/m2 
Doxorubicin 10 mg/m2 
Vincristine 0.5 mg/m2 }CIV QD, days 1 -3 Etoposide 50 mg/m2 
Doxorubicin 10 mg/m2 
Vincristine 0.4 mg/m2 }CIV QD, days 1 -4 
Prednisone 60 mg/m2 PO QD, days 1 -4 Prednisone 60 mg/m2 PO QD, days 1 -5 
Cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 IV, day 4  Cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 IV, day 5  
 The increases in prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and the infusional component of EPOCH (etoposide, doxorubicin, and vincristine) are intended to achieve the full dose intensity of other NCI MOCRU protocols employing EPOCH chemotherapy.  Increasing fludarabine from three to four days of administration is expected to potentiate both disease control (many of the patients in CC 99-C- 0143 were fludarabine naïve) and 
immune depletion prior to transplantation.  We anticipate that the proposed increases in dose intensity (including the addition of rituximab) will not be associated with a significant increase in toxicity over what was seen with EPOCH -F in CC 99 -C-0143.  However, as a precaution our 
study design will allow for a reduction in dose intensity of the EPOCH -
F/R regimen if specified toxicity criteria are met (Section 3.3.6).  
 For patients with CD20+ malignancies, adding the monoclonal antibody rituximab to the regimen is expected to boost the rate of response to EPOCH- F without significantly increasing the regimen’s toxicity.  Such 
an effect has been demonstrated in other studies where rituximab was administered with EPOCH or CHOP.  In a phase II study, Wilson and colleagues administered dose- adjusted EPOCH plus rituximab to 38 
patients with previously untreated aggressive or relapsed/resistant CD20+ B-cell lymphomas.   An interim report indicates an 85% complete 
response rate among 34 evaluable patients; further, no patient in remission had progressed, with a median follow -up of 12 months.  Hematologic 
toxicit ies were consistent with the dose -adjusted paradigm employed with 
12 the EPOCH regimen, and non- hematologic toxicities were infrequent [22].  
Similarly, Vose and colleagues conducted a phase II trial of CHOP plus 
rituximab in 33 previously untreated patients with aggressive B -cell non-
Hodgkin’s lymphomas.  The overall response rate was 94%, with complete responses in 61%.  After a median observation time of 26 
months from remission, 29 of 31 patients who achieved CR or PR remained in remission.  Observed toxicities were similar to those seen in studies of CHOP alone [23].  In a randomized study of 399 elderly patients with diffuse large B -cell lymphoma, complete responses were seen in 76% 
of patients receiving CHOP plus rituximab, versus 63% of patients treated with CHOP.  Importantly, CHOP plu s rituximab improved event -free and 
overall survival compared with CHOP alone, with no clinically significant difference in toxicity between the two arms [24].   
 Rituximab has been used as part of a reduced -intensity transplant 
conditioning regimen, with no adverse effect on hematopoiet ic recovery 
and engraftment and no reported impact on GVHD [25] .  Ratanatharathorn 
and colleagues used rituximab to treat a patient with chronic GVHD and 
refractory immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), leading to improvement in the patient’s ITP and allowing the discontinuation of immunosuppression without progression of her chronic GVHD [26].  
Apart from this highly anecdotal report, no published clinical data suggest that rituximab has activity in the prevention or treatment of GVHD; moreover, our current understanding of  the pathophysiology of acute 
GVHD does not support a putative role for B -lymphocytes, so there is no 
rational basis for using rituximab to prevent or modulate GVHD.  In this protocol, patients will receive rituximab no closer than four weeks before underg oing allogeneic HSCT, reducing the likelihood of an effect on 
donor B-cells after transplantation.  For these reasons, we do not anticipate that combining rituximab with the EPOCH -F induction regimen (as 
EPOCH- F/R) will influence the primary GVHD endpoints  of the current 
study.  However, we will analyze for an effect of rituximab administration on hematopoietic recovery, donor/recipient chimerism, and the development of acute GVHD.  
1.2.8 Cyclosporine/Methotrexate as Graft -Versus- Host Disease Prophylaxis:   
Although the combination of cyclosporine and methotrexate represents the de facto  “gold standard” for acute GVHD prophylaxis in allogeneic 
HSCT, the use of cyclosporine monotherapy in CC 99-C- 0143 was based 
partly upon the early belief that the incidence of GVHD  might be lower 
following a reduced- intensity conditioning regimen [27].  In addition, 
there were concerns that more aggressive GVHD prophylaxis might compromise engraftment of donor stem cells, as the approach in CC 99-C-0143 had not previously been validated.  With single -agent cyclosporine, 
12 of the first 19 patients in CC 99-C- 0143 developed grades II – IV acute 
GVHD; these patients did not receive donor Th2 cells.  In six of these 
13 patients, acute GVHD was severe (grades III -IV); two deaths were 
attributed to GVHD, while 4 additional patients died with progressive 
disease and grade II or III acute GVHD.  Another 3 patients died of progressive disease with absent or grade I acute GVHD.  T hese 
observations suggest that cyclosporine monotherapy is inadequate immunosuppression in the face of relatively rapid and complete engraftment of donor lymphoid cells. 
 
Other studies of reduced- intensity allogeneic HSCT have also shown acute 
GVHD to contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality.  In an attempt to improve this clinical problem, this protocol will evaluate dual -
agent GVHD prophylaxis with cyclosporine and methotrexate as a potential strategy for preventing GVHD after reduced -intensity allogeneic 
HSCT.  This approach differs from our other strategy for modulating GVHD, combining cyclosporine and donor Th2 cells.  These two strategies (addition of methotrexate versus addition of donor Th2 cells) may have differential effects not only on GVHD modulation, but also on engraftment and anti -tumor effects.  To this extent, after establishing the 
cyclosporine and methotrexate approach in this protocol, it will likely be 
beneficial to compare these two approaches in a randomized study.  In the ongoing study involving Th2 cells, 23 patients have received allogeneic HSCT and Th2 cells.  Each of these patients achieved rapid full 
donor chimerism, with median day 14 donor chimerism of 100% (range, 85 to 100).  Recovery of hematopoiesis was rapid, with a median neutrophil recovery at day 9 post -SCT (range, 7 to 13 days) and median 
platelet recovery at day 11.5 pos t-SCT (range, 8 to 12 days).
  Immune 
reconstitution research data indicates that Th2 cells promote donor T cell expansion and donor T cell cytokine secretion following HSCT.  Acute GVHD severity in Th2 recipients has been Grade 0 (9/23 cases), Grade II (7/23 cases), and Grade III to IV (7/23 cases); these proportions are 
similar to those receiving allogeneic HSCT without Th2 cells.  Significant anti-tumor responses have been observed in Th2 recipients.  Of 22 
evaluable patients after HSCT, 1/22 patients had a minor response (25 to 
50% tumor reduction), 6/22 patients entered into a PR, and 15/22 patients 
entered into a CR.  This high response rate, occurring in a patient 
population demonstrated to be chemotherapy refractory, suggests that allogeneic HSCT with  Th2 cells is associated with a potent anti-tumor 
effect.  Overall, seven of 23 Th2 recipients have died post -SCT.  Three of 
these cases were associated with progressive disease, whereas 4 cases were not associated with progressive disease and were primarily related to transplant- related toxicity, GVHD, or immune suppression from GVHD 
therapy.  Sixteen of 23 recipients are currently alive at a median of 156 days post -SCT (range, 47 to 606 days).  This data from Th2 recipients, 
when combined with future data  generated from this protocol evaluating 
cyclosporine and methotrexate GVHD prophylaxis, will be used to 
14 determine if a randomized study comparing these two approaches might 
be warranted.  
 Studies comparing methotrexate with cyclosporine as single agent prophylaxis for GVHD showed the two agents to be roughly equivalent in 
their efficacy [28].  The methotrexate regimen administered in these 
studies was 15 mg/m
2 IV on day 1, then 10 mg/m2 IV on days 3, 6, 11, and 
every 7 or  14 days thereafter until day 102 after transplantation. 
Combination regimens with methotrexate plus cyclosporine or FK506 (tacrolimus) have been used successfully for GVHD prophylaxis in both myeloablative and reduced -intensity transplantation settings.  Storb and 
colleagues first compared the combination of cyclosporine and methotrexate with cyclosporine monotherapy, showing in a randomized trial that the combination reduced GVHD and improved survival [29, 30] .  
In this study, a short course of methotrexate was administered at doses of 15 mg/m
2 IV on day 1 and 10 mg/m2 IV on days 3, 6, and 11 after 
transplantation; however, acute toxicity (mainly mucositis and renal insufficiency) still prevented completion of the full course of methotrexate in 42% of patients.  Modified combination regimens with reduced methotrexate doses and/or shortened courses have subsequently been studied, although not in a prospective, randomized fashion; these appear to decrease the acute toxicity of methotrexate administration while preservi ng the benefits with respect to GVHD [31-34] .  A commonly used 
regimen that has emerged from these studies is “mini- dose” methotrexate, 
given as 5 mg/m
2 on days 1, 3, 6, and 11. 
 In the setting of reduced -intensity allogeneic HSCT, studies of 
combination regimens (cyclosporine or tacrolimus, with methotrexate) 
have not been associated with high rates of graft rejection.  GVHD outcomes in these studies have been inconsistent, with rates of grades III -
IV acute GVHD ranging from 5% to 29%; this varia bility may reflect 
differences in transplant conditioning regimens and other risk factors [25, 
35-37] .  It therefore appears that dual -agent GVHD prophylaxis regimens 
containing methotrexate do not inhibit engraftment in the reduced -
intensity transplant setting and may provide better prophylaxis of acute GVHD than cyclosporine monotherapy.  Considering these factors, we intend to use cyclosporine with a mini -dose methotrexate regimen for 
GVHD prophylaxis in the current protocol.  The evaluation of this regimen in the current study will serve as a platform for further evaluation of donor Th2 cells in a subsequent randomized study (see Section 1.2.2), with cyclosporine and methotrexate as a control arm versus cyclosporine and Th2 cells.  
 We believe (and other investigators have demonstrated) that the conversion to full donor chimerism after transplantation is a prerequisite for developing a GVT response [38].  Although engraftment kinetics and 
15 the development of a GVT effect could be altered by the use of 
cyclosporine and methotrexate in the current study, the robust engraftment seen in CC 99-C- 0143, with achievement of early donor chimerism in 
nearly all patients transplanted (Section 1.2.5), provides reassurance in the face of such concerns.  As a secondary endpoint, we will evaluate the effect of the combination GVHD prophylaxis regimen upon hematologic recover y and chimerism in this study.  
 1.2.9 Peripheral CD4 Lymphocyte Counts as a Surrogate Marker for Immune Depletion before Reduced -Intensity Allogeneic HSCT:   The robust 
engraftment results observed on CC 99-C- 0143 support the principle of 
sequential immune depletion with an induction regimen such as EPOCH -
F/R.  Engraftment occurred similarly in patients across a range of CD4 counts prior to transplantation, suggesting that pre -transplant immune 
depletion was adequate within that range.  Because no episodes of graf t 
rejection were observed, it is not possible to derive from our results a “threshold level” of CD4 lymphopenia that distinguishes between patients 
likely to engraft versus those likely to experience graft rejection.  In 
addition, the CD4 count may underes timate the level of 
immunosuppression after chemotherapy, as there may be functional abnormalities in residual CD4+ T cells after chemotherapy that reduce the likelihood of a host -versus- graft response and graft failure [39].  
Nevertheless, it is likely that some patients in CC 99 -C-0143 received 
induction cycles of EPOCH -F beyond the point at which engraftment 
would have occurred and without further benefit in terms of disease 
response.  For such patients (i.e., those in remission or with stable disease), additional cycles of EPOCH -F – administered with the goal of 
achieving a CD4 count less than 50/ µl – would have provided no clinical 
benefit and may have resulted in added toxicity.  
It is plausible that a higher CD4 level (e.g., 200/ µl or more) would be 
sufficient immune depletion to ensure engraftment; 90% of patients in CC 99-C- 0143 had a CD4 count below 200/ µl after EPOCH -F, and this level 
of CD4 lymphopenia corresponds to a demonstrable reduction in cell -
mediated immunity in other clinical settings (e.g., human 
immunodeficiency virus infection).  However, the addition of methotrexate to our GVHD prophylaxis regimen (see above) could increase the frequency of mixed chimerism after transplantation, as well as the risk of graft rejection.  In the setting of T -cell-depleted allogeneic 
HSCT, the CD4 level before reduced- intensity conditioning correlates 
inversely wi th levels of donor lymphoid chimerism after transplantation 
(M. Bishop, personal communication).  Balancing these considerations with the desire to minimize toxicity from the induction regimen, we have 
empirically chosen a CD4 level below 100 cells/ µl after induction therapy 
with EPOCH- F/R as a target for the current study.  Failure to reach this 
target after 3 cycles of induction therapy or due to disease progression will 
16 not, however, prevent patients from proceeding to transplantation.  As in 
CC 99 -C-0143, we will correlate the CD4 count after EPOCH -F/R with 
engraftment outcomes following transplantation, in a further effort to validate the CD4+ T cell count as a surrogate marker for immune depletion before transplantation. 
 
1.2.10 FDG- PET versus CT Scanning in Hodgkin’s and Non-Hodgkin’s 
Lymphoma:   After allogeneic HSCT for Hodgkin's disease and non -
Hodgkin's lymphoma, traditional imaging modalities such as computed tomography (CT) scanning are suboptimal for detecting residual or relapsed malignancy post -transp lant.  Restaging of patients with a history 
of bulky disease using CT scanning typically does not differentiate between a residual non -malignant mass (CR/unconfirmed; CRu [40]) or 
persistent malignant disease.  Fluorine- 18 fluorodeoxyglucose  positron 
emission tomography (FDG -PET) scanning, because it measures 
biologically active tumor, may allow one to distinguish patients with CRu from those with persistent malignancy [41].  In addition, because of its 
greater sensitivity compared with CT scanning, the use of FDG -PET may 
permit earlier detection of malignant disease progression post- transplant.  
The ability to distinguish CRu from persistent disease and to detect early relapse may improve transplant therapy, as patients with disease persistence or progression may benefit from transplant modulation such as early withdrawal of immune suppression or administration of  donor 
lymphocytes.  In this study, we will use both FDG -PET and CT scanning in the staging 
of patients with Hodgkin's and
 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.  These studies 
will be obtained at study entry; before admission for allogeneic SCT (after induction chemotherapy with EPOCH -F/R); and on days 28 and 100 after 
allogeneic HSCT.  Combined modality imaging will assist in distinguishing between CRu (PET negative) and persisent malignancy (PET positive) after transplantation.  In cases where patients enter in to CR 
after allogeneic HSCT, FDG -PET and CT will be obtained at 6 and 12 
months post- transplant to facilitate the earlier detection of disease relapse.  
 
1.2.11 Interleukin -7 and Allogeneic HSCT:   Immune reconstitution following 
allogeneic HSCT is a prolonged proc ess, influenced strongly by the age 
and corresponding thymic function of the transplant recipient, as well as the presence or absence of GVHD.  Natural killer cells recover to normal levels soon after immune -depleting therapy, followed closely by B -cells 
within 1 to 3 months.  Peripheral blood CD8+ T cells generally return to 
normal levels within 3 to 6 months, while CD4+ T -cell lymphopenia may 
persist for 24 months or longer [42].  Interleukin- 7 (IL -7) is a major 
cytokine regulator of B -cell development and T -lymphocyte homeostasis 
[43].  Several recent reports indicate that circulating levels of IL -7 
increase in response to lymphocyte or T -cell depletion in the setting of 
bone marrow transplantation, HIV infection, and cytotoxic chemotherapy 
17 [44-46] .  This homeostatic response appears to correlate most strongly 
with circulating numbers of CD4+ T cells, and it leads to increased thymic 
output and in particular to the thymic -independent peripheral expansion of 
mature T cells.  In animal models of bone marrow transplantation or cytotoxic chemotherapy, administration of IL -7 increases the rate of T -cell 
immune reconstitution [47-49].  In one murine allogeneic BMT model, 
this effect was not associated with exacerbation of GVHD [49].  However, 
Sinha recently reported the finding that IL -7 significantly potentiates 
GVHD after allogeneic BMT in mice, an effect that increased with the number of T cells in the allograft [50]. 
 
In CC 99-C- 0143, our group has studied the kinetics of CD4+ T -cell 
depletion in the setting of sequential immune depletion and reduced -
intensity allogeneic HSCT as outlined above (Section 1.2.5).  Other work by investigators in our branch has documented the variable recovery of CD4+ T cells following cytotoxic chemotherapy [39].  However, no 
published studies have specifically correlated serum IL -7 levels with 
lymphocyte subpopulations prior to transplantation and during immune recovery afterwards.  We will include such an analysis as a secondary endpoint of this study, hypothesizing that serum IL -7 levels will correlate 
strongly with changes in lymphocyte subpopulations, especially CD4+ T cells, during immun e-depleting chemotherapy and after reduced -intensity 
transplantation.  Additionally, we will assess the relationship between IL -7 
levels and the development of clinical GVHD, as this has not been determined previously. 
 
1.2.12 Interleukin -15 and Allogeneic HSCT:   A second cytokine that could play a 
key role in lymphocyte recovery in the post-transplant period is interleukin 15 (IL -15), an important cytokine in the differentiation, maintenance and 
expansion of NK and CD8+ T cells [51].  IL -15 is  constitutively and 
ubiquitously produced by antigen presenting cells [52].  Its production, 
moreover, is upregulated by a variety of stimuli that evoke an inflammatory response [53].  Kumaki has reported that serum levels of IL -
15 were elevated following transplant conditioning with myeloablative chemotherapy and total body irradiation [54]; furthermore, this elev ation 
was prolonged in patients who developed acute GVHD.  This work, however, did not assess any correlation between IL -15 levels and 
lymphocyte recovery in these patients.  
 IL-15 enhances CD8 production by thymopoiesis [55], but its main role 
appears to be in the periphery.  IL -15, like IL -7, can s timulate homeostatic 
expansion of CD8+ T cells, particularly memory CD8+ T cells [56, 57] .  
Evidence from IL -15 and IL -15Rα knock- out mice demonstrates that IL -
15 is critical to maintaining  CD8+ T cell memory populations [58, 59] .  
IL-15 also stabilizes activated human T cells, reducing their level of 
apoptos is [60].  Furthermore, IL -15 has been reported to reduce the high 
18 level of spontaneous apoptosis observed in post -transplant lymphocytes 
cultured in vit ro [61].  There is a marked dichotomy between the high 
frequency of CD8+ T cell apoptosis in vitro and the elevated CD8 
populations maintained in most post -transplant recipients in vivo.  The 
anti-apoptotic efficacy of IL -15 in vitro  would support the hypothesis that 
in vivo  IL-15 production may be maintaining CD8+ T cell viability.  
 
IL-15 may also play a role in the functional capacities of post -transplant 
CD8+ T cells.  IL -15 upregulates the expression of co -stimulatory 
receptors, such as NKG2D, on activated CD8+ T cells [62].  These 
receptors may be important in the cytotoxic responses to stress and to viral infection, both relevant in the post -transplant period [63].  The role of 
these receptors in the allogeneic responses of GVHD has not been studied.  IL-15 is also the central cytokine in the differentiation, expansion and 
activation of NK cells [64].  NK cells are the earliest of the lymphocyte 
populations to recover to pre -treatment levels following transplantation or 
chemotherapy [39].  Cytokines such as IL -4 and IFNγ produced by NK 
cells may play a critical role in initiating type I and type II T cell responses [64] .  Further, NK cells may be critical cytotoxic effectors in the 
graft -versus- leukemia response, without corresponding GVHD [65, 66] .  
IL-15 is the central cytokine supporting the differentiation of both the 
cytokine producing and the cytotoxic subpopulations of NK cells [59, 64, 67].  As is the case with CD8+ T cells, the expression levels of NK 
receptors involved in activating or inhibiting cytotoxicity may also be altered b y IL-15.  The repertoire of such receptors expressed by NK cells 
following transplantation may affect their function in GVHD or GVL [65].  
The role of IL -15 in the post transplant recovery of NK cells and in the 
repertoire of receptors expressed by these cells, however,  has never been 
explored.  These observations suggest an important physiologic role for IL -15 in the 
recovery and maintenance of NK and CD8+ T cells after immune depletion related to cytotoxic chemotherapy or HSCT, with potential implications for tumor -specific immune responses and immune 
reconstitution following transplantation.  The additional observation that IL-15 levels remained elevated in patients with acute GVHD raises the 
possibility of further interactions between IL -15 and lymphocyte 
subpopulations in the pathogenesis of GVHD.  We therefore intend to correlate serum levels of IL -15 with circulating CD8+ T cell and NK cell 
populations, during sequential immune depletion and after reduced -
intensity allogeneic HSCT during immune recovery.  The purpose of this analysis will be to explore potential relationships among IL -15, 
lymphocyte subpopulations, and the development of GVHD.  
19 1.3 Summary:  The strategy proposed in this protocol has several goals.  First, we will 
pilot an intensified induction chemotherapy regimen, EPOCH -F/R, by building on 
the EPOCH -F component used in CC 99-C- 0143 and adding rituximab for 
patients with CD20+ malignancies, in order to improve disease control and 
accelerate immune depletion to our CD4 target level of less th an 100 cells/ µl.  
Second, and most importantly, we will employ a dual -agent regimen of 
cyclosporine and methotrexate for GVHD prophylaxis, with the objective of 
improving upon the incidence of acute GVHD observed in CC 99-C- 0143.  Third, 
we will correlate serum levels of IL -7 and IL -15 with changes in circulating 
lymphocyte subpopulations during sequential immune depletion with EPOCH -
F/R and after reduced- intensity allogeneic HSCT, to contribute to our 
understanding of the immunologic mechanisms that underl ie immune ablation, 
activation and reconstitution in the transplant setting.  The stated goals will permit our group to refine our approach to reduced -intensity allogeneic HSCT for 
refractory and relapsed hematologic malignancies, setting the stage for sub sequent 
research efforts such as a randomized trial of donor Th2 cells. 
 
20 2.0 Eligibility Assessment and Enrollment  
2.1 Eligibility Criteria  
 
2.1.1 Inclusion Criteria – Patient (Recipient):  
a) Patients with hematologic malignancies, myelodysplasia, or 
myeloproliferative disorders, as summarized in the following table:  
Disease  Disease Status  Age 
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia a) Relapse post-fludarabine 
b) Non-CR after salvage regimen  18 to 75 
Hodgkin’s and Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma 
(all types, including Mantle Cell Lymphoma)  a) Primary treatment failure  
b) Relapse after autologous SCT 
c) Hepatosplenic gamma/delta T cell 
lymphoma 18 to 75 
Multiple Myeloma a) Primary treatment failure  
b) Relapse after autologous SCT 
c) Non-CR after salvage regimen  18 to 75 
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia a) In Complete Remission #1, with high-risk cytogenetics 
[abnormalities other than t(8;21), t(15;17), or inv(16)] 
b) In Complete Remi ssion #2 or 
greater  18 to 75 
Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia a) In Complete Remission #1, with high-risk cytogenetics  
[e.g., t(4;11), t(1;19), t(8;14); t(9;22) or bcr -abl rearrangement] 
b) In Complete Remission #2 or 
greater  18 to 75 
Myelodysplastic Syndrome a) RAEB  
b) RAEB -T (if blasts are < 10% in 
marrow and blood after induction chemotherapy) 18 to 75 
Myeloproliferative disorders a) Idiopathic myelofibrosis 
b) Polycythemia vera 
c) Essential thrombocytosis  
d) Chronic myelomonocytic 
leukemia  18 to 75 
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia a) Chronic phase CML 
b) Accelerated phase CML  50 to 75 
c) Not eligible for myeloablative 
allogeneic HSCT  18 to 50 
   
21 b) Patients 18 - 75 years of age.  Patients older than 75 years of age will 
be considered on an individual basis [68]. 
c) Consenting first degree relative matched at 6/6 HLA antigens (A, B, 
and DR). 
d) Patient or legal guardian must be able to give informed consent . 
e) All previous cytotoxic chemotherapy must be completed at  least 2 
weeks prior to study entry.  Any grade 3 or 4 non- hematologic toxicity 
of any previous therapy must have resolved to grade 2 or less, unless specified elsewhere in Section 2.1. 
f) ECOG performance status equal to 0, 1, or 2, and Karnofsky performance status greater than or equal to 60%. 
g) Life expectancy of at least 3 months.  
h) Patients with acute leukemia must be in hematologic remission, defined as less than 5% blasts present in blood or bone marrow. 
i) Left ventricular ejection fraction > 45% by either MU GA or 2 -D echo, 
obtained within 28 days of enrollment.  The cumulative dose of doxorubicin received by patients will not be considered, as the cardiac ejection fraction appears to indicate the safe cumulative doxorubicin dose in the setting of EPOCH- based chemotherapy [18]. 
j) DLCO > 50% of the expected value when corrected for Hb [69], 
obtained within 28 days of enrol lment.  
k) Creatinine < 1.5 mg/dl and creatinine clearance > 50 ml/min/1.73 m2. 
l) Serum total bilirubin less than 2.5 mg/dl, and serum ALT and AST values less than or equal to 2.5 times the upper limit of normal.  Values above these levels may be accepted, at the discretion of the PI or LAI, if such elevations are thought to be due to liver involvement 
by malignancy.  If these values do not normalize during induction chemotherapy, such patients will not be eligible for the transplant phase of the protocol, and will thus be taken off study. 
m) Minimum absolute neutrophil count of 1,000 cells /μl and minimum 
platelet count (without transfusion) of 20,000/mm
3.  Values below 
these levels may be accepted at the discretion of the PI or LAI, if 
thought to be due to bone marrow involvement by malignancy. 
 
2.1.2 Inclusion Criteria – Donor: 
a) First-degree relative with genotypic identity at 6/6 HLA loci (HLA - A, 
B, and DR). 
b) Ability to give informed consent.  For donors under 18 years of age, the donor must complete an assent form, and the donor’s legal guardian must complete an informed consent form. 
c) Age 12 – 75 years.  As the potential cerebrovascular and cardiac 
complications may potentially increase with age, age 75 has been chosen arbitrarily as the upper age limit.  However, if it is determined after initial accrual of patients in this upper age range t hat this 
procedure is relatively safe, the age range may be extended.  
22 d) Adequate venous access for peripheral apheresis, or consent to use a 
temporary central venous catheter for apheresis.  
e) Donors must be HIV negative, hepatitis B surface antigen negative, and hepatitis C antibody negative.  This is to prevent the possible 
transmission of these infections to the recipient.  
f) A donor who is lactating must substitute formula feeding for her infant during the period of cytokine administration.  Filgrastim may be secreted in human milk, although its bioavailability from this source is 
not known [70].  Limited clinical data suggest that short- term 
administration of filgrastim or sargramostim to neonates is not associated with adverse outcomes [71]. 
 
2.1.3 Exclusion Criteria: Patient  
a) Active infection that is not responding to antimicrobial therapy.  
b) Active CNS involvement by malignancy.  
c) HIV infection.  There is theoretical concern that the degree of immune 
suppression associated with the treatment may result in progression of HIV infection.   
d) Chronic active hepatitis B.  Patients may be hepatitis B core antibody positive but must be surface antigen negative and without evidence of active infection. 
e) Hepatitis C infection.  
f) Pregnant or lactating.  Patients of childbearing potential must use an effective method of contraception. The effects of the chemotherapy, 
the subsequent transplant and the medications used after the transplant are highly  likely to be harmful to a fetus.  The effects upon breast milk 
are also unknown and may be harmful to the infant. 
g) History of psychiatric disorder which may compromise compliance with transplant protocol, or which does not allow for appropriate informed consent (as determined by principal investigator or study chairman).   
 
2.1.4 Exclusion Criteria: Donor  
a) History of psychiatric disorder which may compromise compliance with transplant protocol, or which does not allow for appropriate informed consent.  
b) History of  hypertension that is not controlled by medication, stroke, or 
severe heart disease.  Individuals with symptomatic angina will be considered to have severe heart disease and will not be eligible to be a donor. 
c) No other medical contraindications to stem cell donation (i.e. severe atherosclerosis, autoimmune disease, cerebrovascular accident, prior malignancy) [72].  Patients with a history of coronary artery bypass 
grafting or angioplasty will receive a cardiology evaluation and be considered on a case -by-case basis.  Persons with a history of non-
hematologic malignancy must have undergone potentially curative 
23 therapy for that malignancy and (1) have had no evidence of that 
disease for 5 years, and/or (2) be deemed at low risk for recurrence (less than or equal to 20% at 5 years).  Such persons wi ll be considered 
eligible for stem cell donation at the discretion of the principal investigator, who will evaluate the possible benefit to the potential transplant recipient and the risk of disease transmission in consultation with Department of Transfusion Medicine staff.  Prospective donors with a history of non- hematologic malignancy who have received 
potentially curative therapy and are in remission, but whose estimated risk of recurrence is greater than 20% at 5 years, will be considered on an individual basis in consultation with the NCI IRB.  Any prospective transplant recipient whose donor has a history of malignancy will be counseled about the theoretical risk of transmission of cancer from the donor to the recipient. 
d) Donors must not be pregnant.  The effects of cytokine administration 
on a fetus are unknown.  Donors of childbearing potential must use an effective method of contraception. 
e) Anemia (Hb less than 11 gm/dl) or thrombocytopenia (platelets less 
than 100,000 per µl). 
 
2.2 Research Eligibility E valuation: 
2.2.1 The following clinical, laboratory and radiologic assessments must be performed in the patient (recipient) within 28 days before the initiation of induction chemotherapy (Section 3.3) to determine disease status: a) Complete medical history and phy sical examination.  
b) Nutritional assessment (initial consult).  
c) Dental consultation to assess need for teeth cleaning or removal. 
d) Social work consultation. 
e) Typing for HLA -A, -B, and –DR.  
f) Antibody screen for hepatitis A, B, and C; HIV, HTLV -I/II, CMV, 
adenovirus, EBV, HSV, Toxoplasma, and syphilis. 
g) PPD test (if considered to be in a high- risk group). 
h) PT, PTT, and ABO typing. 
i) Urinalysis.  
Items (j) through (l) should be obtained within 48 hours before starting induction chemotherapy. j) CBC with differential.  
k) Acute care panel, hepatic panel, and mineral panel.  
l) Urine βHCG in women of childbearing potential. 
m) Unilateral bone marrow aspirate and biopsy.  Flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular testing via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) should be performed on marrow aspirates as deemed clinically 
appropriate for specific diseases.  
n) Chest radiograph. 
o) Electrocardiogram.  
24 p) CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis (neck included if measurable 
disease is present).  
q) CT or MRI of the head. 
r) PET scan for recipients with non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma [41]. 
s) Skeletal survey (for multiple myeloma patients only).  
t) Other specific serum or urine diagnostic studies clinically appropriate for the evaluation of recipient’s malignancy (e.g., SPEP and UPEP for multiple myeloma).  
u) All biopsy specimens will be reviewed by the Laboratory of Pathology, CCR, NCI, for confirmation of the histologic diagnosis prior to initiation of therapy.  
v) Biopsy material or blood samples from patients with B -cell 
malignancies will be tested for CD20 expression, to confirm eligibility for rituximab with induction chemotherapy. 
 CD20 expression will be 
determined by immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry in the Laboratory of Pathology, CCR, NCI. 
w) Flow cytometric  analysis of peripheral blood for baseline measurement 
of CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD56 positive lymphocyte populations. 
x) Baseline determination of serum IL -7 and IL -15 levels, for correlation 
with NK and T -cell subpopulations (above). 
y) PCR test of DNA mini- satell ite regions for future determination of 
chimerism.  
2.2.2 The following clinical, laboratory and radiologic assessments must be performed in the donor within 28 days before study enrollment: a) Complete medical history and physical examination.  
b) Social work consultation. 
c) Typing for HLA -A, -B, and –DR.  
d) Antibody screen for hepatitis A, B, and C; HIV, HTLV -I/II, CMV, 
adenovirus, EBV, HSV, Toxoplasma, and syphilis. 
e) CBC with differential, PT, PTT, and ABO typing. 
f) Acute care panel, hepatic panel, and mineral panel.  
g) Urinalysis.  
h) Urine βHCG in women of childbearing potential. 
i) Chest radiograph. 
j) Electrocardiogram.  
k) PCR test of DNA mini- satellite regions for future determination of 
chimerism.  
2.3 Patient Registration: 2.3.1 The patient's entry date on protocol is considered to be the day that consent forms have been signed by both the donor and the recipient.  The treatment start date is considered to be the day the recipient begins his/her initial induction cycle (Section 3.5). 
2.3.2 Authorized staff must register an eligible c andidate with ORKAND no 
later than 24 hours after both the donor and patient (recipient) have signed consent forms.  To alleviate the burden of additional travel, donors may 
25 sign the donor consent form on a provisional basis while awaiting final 
determinat ion of donor and patient eligibility; thus, the date on which an 
eligible donor signs consent may precede the patient’s date of consent by up to four weeks, in some cases.  However, the patient may not sign consent before both the donor and patient have been determined to be eligible, and neither the donor nor the patient will be registered before both have signed consent.  Both the patient and the donor must be registered.  A registration checklist from the Web site must be completed and faxed to ORKAND at  301-480- 0757.  After confirmation of eligibility 
at ORKAND, ORKAND staff will call Pharmacy to advise them of the acceptance of the patient on the protocol prior to the release of any protocol pharmacotherapy.  For registration, authorized staff should ca ll 
301-402- 1732 between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday 
through Friday.  A recorder is available during non-working hours. 
26 Induction Chemotherapy  
(Recipient to receive 1 -3 cycles q21 days) 
 
a) Rituximab, 375 mg/m2/day IV, day 1 
(patients with CD20+ malignancies only) 
b) Fludarabine, 25 mg/m2/day IV, days 1-4 
c) Etoposide, 50 mg/m2/day CIV, days 1-4 
d) Doxorubicin, 10 mg/m2/day CIV, days 1-4 
e) Vincristine, 0.4 mg/m2/day CIV, days 1-4 
f) Cyclophosphamide, 750 m g/m2/day IV, day 5 
g) Prednisone, 60 mg/m2/day PO, days 1-5 
h) Filgrastim, 10 mcg/kg/day SC, day 6 until 
ANC > 1000 on 2 consecutive biweekly 
measurements post ANC nadir.  
(Section 3.3.2.f) 
 
Goal:  CD4 level < 100 cells/ µl 
Transplant Preparative Regimen Chemotherapy  
(To start within 7 -21 days after completing last cycle 
of induction chemotherapy) 
 a) Fludarabine, 30 mg/m
2/day IV x 4 days 
 (days –6, -5, -4, -3) 
b) Cyclophosphamide, 1200 mg/m2/day IV x 4 days 
 (days –6, -5, -4, -3) 
c) Mesna, 150 mg/m2 IV over 3 hours x 1 dose 
(Start 1 hour before cyclophosphamide, day –6.) 
d) Mesna, 1200 mg/m2/day CIV x 4 days 
 (days –6, -5, -4, -3) 
Day –1:  GVHD Prophylaxis (Cyclosporine)  
 
Cyclosporine 2 mg/kg IV Q12h, start day –1.  
Continue IV or PO until day +180. 3.0 Study Implementation  
3.1 Study Design:  
 
  Donor Stem Cell Collection  
 
a) Mobilizat ion:  Filgrastim 10 mcg/kg/day SC, 
beginning 4 days prior to collection. 
b) Collection :  Peripheral blood apheresis. 
c) Minimum dose :  ≥ 3 x 106 CD34+ cells/kg 
(recipient weight)  
Day +1:  GVHD Prophylaxis (Methotrexate)  
 
Methotrexate 5 mg/m2 IV, days +1, +3, +6, and +11.  Day 0:  Allogeneic Stem Cell Infusion  
 
Filgrastim 10 µg/kg/day SC, starting day 0. 
Continues until ANC > 5000 for 3 consecutive days.  
27 3.2 Stem Cell Mobilization and Collection : 
3.2.1 Donors will receive filgrastim for stem cell mobilization, at a dose of 10 
µg/kg/day by subcutaneous injection. The filgrastim will be given at 
approximately 7:00 am each day. 
3.2.2 Apheresis will start on the fifth day of filgrastim administration.  15 -25 
liters will be processed daily.  Apheresis and filgrastim administration will 
continue daily for up to 3 consecutive days until the target cell dose of > 4 
x 106 CD34+ cells/kg -recipient weight is obtained.  If the minimum cell 
dose of 3 x 106 CD34+ cells/kg -recipient weight is obtained during the 
first mobilization cycle, no further collection will be scheduled, and the 
patient will be eligible for transplantation.  Donors who do not reach the minimum number of 3 x 10
6 CD34+ cells/kg -recipient weight after thre e 
collections will discontinue filgrastim for a minimum of three weeks, after which the mobilization and collection will be attempted again.  If the minimum number of cells has not been reached at this time, the patient will be removed from the trial.  
3.2.3 Cells will be processed, cryopreserved, and stored in liquid nitrogen until 
the day of transplant.  If an ABO incompatibility exists between the donor and patient, the donor erythrocytes will be removed from the graft in the cell processing laboratory, accordi ng to standard procedures.  
3.3 Induction Chemotherapy: 3.3.1 After enrollment, chemotherapy will be initiated as an outpatient.  Adequate central venous access is required for all patients undergoing transplantation on this protocol. 
3.3.2 EPOCH- Fludarabine/Rituximab (EP OCH- F/R):  
Induction Chemotherapy Regimen 
Drug  Dose  Days  
Rituximab  375 mg/m2 IV infusion via specified rate titration.  
 (patients with CD20+ malignancies only) Day 1 only 
Fludarabine 25 mg/m2 per day IV 
Infusion over 30 minutes, 
Daily for 4 days  Days 1, 2, 3, 4 
Etoposide 50 mg/m2 per day continuous IV 
Infusion over 24 hours, 
Daily for 4 days  Days 1, 2, 3, 4 
Doxorubicin 10 mg/m2 per day continuous IV 
Infusion over 24 hours, 
Daily for 4 days  Days 1, 2, 3, 4 
Vincristine  0.4 mg/m2 per day continuous IV 
Infusion over 24 hours, 
Daily for 4 days  Days 1, 2, 3, 4 
Cyclophosphamide  750 mg/m2 IV Infusion over 30 minutes  Day 5 only  
Prednisone  60 mg/m2 per day orally, 
daily for 5 days  Days 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
28 a) Only patients with CD20+ B -cell malignancies will receive rituximab 
as part of the induction chemotherapy regimen.  The initial infusion 
should begin at a rate of 50 mg/hr; if no hypersensitivity  reaction is 
observed after the first 30 minutes, the infusion rate may be escalated in 50 mg/hr increments every 30 minutes, to a maximum rate of 400 mg/hr.  If a hypersensitivity reaction occurs, the infusion should be temporarily slowed or halted, with resumption at half the previous rate upon improvement in patient symptoms.  If the first infusion is tolerated well, infusions during subsequent cycles of EPOCH -F/R can 
begin at 100 mg/hr and be increased by 100 mg/hr increments at 30-minute intervals.  However, if the first infusion is not tolerated well, then the guidelines for the initial infusion should be followed for subsequent administration.  Premedication with acetaminophen 650 mg PO and diphenhydramine 50 mg IV will be administered 30 to 60 minute s prior to the beginning of each rituximab infusion.  Rituximab 
should be infused prior to the administration of fludarabine and the start of infusional EPOCH chemotherapy on the first day of each cycle.  
b) Fludarabine will be given immediately after the rituximab infusion is 
completed on day 1.  If venous access permits, fludarabine may be given concurrently with the start of infusional EPOCH chemotherapy on days 1 through 4 of each cycle (preferred); otherwise, fludarabine will be given before the start of EPOCH infusional agents on days 1-4. 
c) Etoposide, doxorubicin, and vincristine will be prepared and administered according to NIH Clinical Center Pharmacy standard guidelines (section 8.6).  
d) The total vincristine dose per cycle will not be capped, even if  it 
exceeds 2.0 mg over four days. 
e) Cyclophosphamide will be administered on day 5 of each cycle immediately after the prior day’s infusion is completed.   Hydration with 1 liter of 0.9% sodium chloride is recommended to begin one hour prior to cyclophosphamide, infused over two hours. 
f) Because immune depletion with EPOCH -F/R is a secondary endpoint 
of this study, patients should receive a consistent steroid regimen with each cycle of induction chemotherapy.  Therefore, steroids will not be used as an anti -emetic during EPOCH -F/R chemotherapy.  
g) Filgrastim will be initiated on day 6 at a dose of 10 µg/kg/day; it will 
be continued until the ANC is greater than 1000 cells/ µl on two 
consecutive biweekly measurements following the ANC nadir, or 
greater than 5000 cel ls/µl on 1 biweekly measurement.  Biweekly 
measurements are obtained at least 3 days apart (e.g., Monday and 
Thursday).  Only biweekly CBC values will be used to determine the Filgrastim  10 µg/kg per day subcutaneously Daily from day 6 
until ANC > 1000/ µl x 2 
following nadir 
(Section 3.3.2.f) 
29 duration of filgrastim administration during each cycle, even if 
additional CBC’ s are obtained.  
3.3.3 Determination of Number of Cycles of Induction Chemotherapy: a) Because a major goal of the induction chemotherapy is to establish severe host immune T cell depletion prior to the allogeneic HSCT, the number of induction chemotherapy cycles administered will be determined principally by the level of host T cell depletion achieved. 
b) The CD4 count will be measured by FACS analysis at least 48 hours after the cycle’s last dose of filgrastim and within three days before the next scheduled cycle (i.e . day 22).  FACS analysis will be performed 
by William Kopp, Ph.D. at FCRF using a CLIA certified flow cytometry methodology to determine the percentage of circulating CD4+ cells.  A simultaneous CBC will be drawn in order to calculate the absolute CD4 num ber. 
c) If a patient has fewer than 100 CD4 cells/ µl of blood on the final CD4 
determination of the induction chemotherapy cycle, then that patient will receive the transplant preparative regimen.  If there are >
 100 CD4 
cells/µl, an additional cycle of induc tion chemotherapy will be 
administered.  These criteria may be used for each induction chemotherapy cycle.  A minimum of one cycle of induction chemotherapy will be administered.  However, a maximum of three cycles of induction chemotherapy can be administ ered.  
d) Patients will receive the second cycle of chemotherapy on day 22 after the first cycle was initiated.  However, up to two weeks of additional recovery time may be provided if medically indicated before administration of the second cycle (e.g., for delay in neutrophil 
recovery to 1000 cells/ µl, documented infection or other complication 
resulting from the induction chemotherapy regimen). 
e) If a patient develops neutropenia of less than 500 cells/ µl on 4 or more 
consecutive biweekly CBC’s during any cycle  of induction 
chemotherapy administered at dose level 1 or lower, the patient will 
receive no further induction chemotherapy.  At that point, the patient will receive the transplant preparative regimen, even if the CD4 count 
is >
 100 cells/ µl.  Only biweekly CBC values (at least 3 days apart, 
e.g. Monday and Thursday) will be used to define the duration of 
neutropenia during each cycle, even if additional CBC’s are obtained. 
f) If the maximum of three cycles of induction chemotherapy has been administered, then patients will proceed to the transplant preparative 
regimen, even if the CD4 count is still >
 100 cells/ µl. 
g) Patients who develop progressive disease during the induction 
chemotherapy cycles will proceed to the transplant preparative regimen regardless of the CD4 count (see also Section 3.8.1.d). 
3.3.4 Dose Adjustment for Cycles 2 and 3 (for individual patients) 
a) Dose adjustments above starting dose level  (level 1) consist of a 20% 
escalation in the daily doses of etoposide, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide.   
30 b) Dose adjustments below starting dose level  (level 1) consist of a 20% 
reduction in the cyclophosphamide dose only. 
c) Drug doses are based on the duration of ANC nadir during the 
previous cycle, based upon consecutive biweekly CBC/differential ( > 
3 days apart).  Only biweekly CBC values will be used to determine dose adjustment, even if additional CBC’s are obtained. 
d) Rules for dose adjustment are summarized in the following table:  
 
3.3.5 Dose Reduction of EPOCH -F/R Induction Chemotherapy (for study 
population) a) The following dose reduction rules will apply only to cycles of EPOCH- F/R that are administered at dose level 1 or lower (see section 
3.3.4, above). 
b) If three patients experience either: (1) grade IV hematologic toxicity 
(ANC less than 500 cells/ µl) lasting for 4 or more consecutive 
biweekly measurements; or (2) any grade IV non -hematologic toxicity 
by the NCI Common Toxicity Cri teria, then fludarabine will be 
reduced from four days to three days of administration, without changing the daily dose of 25 mg/m
2. 
c) If, after such a change in the EPOCH -F/R regimen is made, three 
patients again experience:  (1) grade IV hematologic toxici ty (ANC 
less than 500 cells/ µl) lasting for 4 or more consecutive biweekly 
measurements; or (2) any grade IV non -hematologic toxicity, then the 
cyclophosphamide will be given on day 5 with a reduction in dose from 750 mg/m
2 to 600 mg/m2. 
d) If dose reductions  in the EPOCH -F/R regimen are made as described 
in Sections 3.3.6.a and 3.3.6.b (above), and three patients again experience:  (1) grade IV hematologic toxicity (ANC less than 500 
cells/µl) lasting for 4 or more consecutive biweekly measurements; or 
(2) an y grade IV non -hematologic toxicity, then the etoposide, 
doxorubicin, and vincristine will be reduced from four days to three 
days of administration, without a change in daily dose of these drugs.  In the event of this dose reduction, the cyclophosphamide will be 
given on day 4 of the cycle at a dose of 600 mg/m
2, and filgrastim will 
start on day 5.  The dose and schedule of prednisone administration will not change. If ANC < 500/ µl on 1 or fewer measurements   Increase 1 dose level above previous 
cycle.  
If ANC < 500/ µl on 2 measurements  Same dose level as previous cycle.  
If ANC < 500/ µl on 3 measurements 
  Decrease 1 dose level below previous 
cycle.  
If ANC < 500/ µl on 4 or more measurements, 
at dose level 1 or lower  Discontinue EPOCH -F/R; proceed to 
transplant conditioning regimen. 
31 3.4 Transplant Conditioning Regimen 
3.4.1 The patient may proceed to transplantation only if the minimum number of stem cells is collected (Section 3.2.2). 
3.4.2 On day 22 after the start of the last cycle of induction chemotherapy, patients will be eligible to start the transplant conditioning regimen.  Non -
hematologic toxicities of induction chemotherapy must resolve to < grade 
2 in order to proceed.  If more than 14 days of additional recovery time is required for resolution of toxicity or other medical complications (for example, prolonged neutropenia or documented infection), PI approval is required prior t o initiation of the transplant conditioning regimen. 
3.4.3 Fludarabine/Cyclophosphamide/Mesna: 
Transplant Conditioning Regimen 
Drug  Dose  Days 
Fludarabine 30 mg/m2 per day 
IV infusion over 30 minutes, 
daily for 4 days  Transplant Days –6, -5, -4, -3 
Mesna  150 mg/m2 
IV infusion over 3 hours, 
(start 1 hour before cyclophosphamide) Transplant Day –6 only 
Cyclophosphamide 1200 mg/m2 per day 
IV infusion over 2 hours, 
daily for 4 days  Transplant Days –6, -5, -4, -3 
Mesna  1200 mg/m2 per day 
Continuous IV infusion, 
daily for 4 days  Transplant Days –6, -5, -4, -3 
   
32 3.4.4 Hydration during the conditioning regimen: 
a) Hydration will be initiated 12 hours prior to cyclophosphamide infusion (on day –7 of the transplant), consisting of 0.9% sodium 
chloride supplemented with 10 mEq/liter potassium chloride (KCl) at 
an initial rate of 100 ml/hour.  For patients with poor oral intake, the rate of hydration may be increased as clinically indicated to meet fluid requirements.  Hydration will continue until 24 hours after the last cyclophosphamide dose has been completed. 
b) During hydration, serum potassium level will be monitored every 12 hours.  If serum potassium is > 4.5 mEq/l, KCl will be removed from the saline infusion.  If serum potassium is < 3.0, KCl concentration in the saline  will be increased to 20 mEq/l.  
c) During hydration, 20 mg of furosemide will be administered daily by IV route to maintain diuresis, with additional doses of furosemide to be given as needed for weight gain due to fluid retention.  In general, furosemide dos es should be separated by at least a four -hour 
observation interval. 
d) During hydration, if urine output is < 1.5 ml/kg/hour or if fluid intake exceeds urine output by greater than 500 ml during an 8- hour period, 
an additional 20 mg of furosemide will be adm inistered.  
e) Routine hematologic monitoring, cardiac monitoring, and urinalysis will be performed as deemed clinically necessary.  
3.5 Transplant Procedure:  Allogeneic Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation  
3.5.1 On day 0, the patient will receive cryopreserved PB SC.  The PBSC 
product will be administered intravenously immediately after thawing.  
3.5.2 Diphenhydramine and/or meperidine are preferred for the treatment of acute DMSO toxicities (e.g., chills, myalgias); steroids should be avoided. 
3.6 Graft -Versus -Host Disease P rophylaxis: 
3.6.1 Cyclosporine (CsA) will be initiated on the day –1 before the transplant.  
CsA will be administered by IV infusion at 2 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours; infusion will be over a 2- hour period.  Subsequently doses will be adjusted 
according to trough levels monitored biweekly and/or upon symptoms or alteration in renal function.  The target range for serum cyclosporine levels 
will be 200–250 µg/ml.  When the patient is able to take oral medications 
(typically two to three weeks after transplantation), cyclosporine will be 
converted to an equivalent oral dose.  The total daily dose will be divided into two equal doses, one dose given approximately every 12 hours. 
3.6.2 This dose of CsA will continue until day +100, and then will be tapered as long as the severity of GVHD is less than grade 2.  Cyclosporine will be tapered by reducing the dose by approximately 10% from the last dose administered each week to a dose of 25 mg/day. Cyclosporine will then be completely discontinued if there are no signs of GVHD. 
3.6.3 Meth otrexate will be given at 5 mg/m
2 IV over 15 minutes on days +1, +3, 
+6, and +11.  Each day’s dose of methotrexate will not be administered until approved that day by the transplant attending after the transplant team has evaluated the patient.  Doses will  be withheld for the 
33 development of grade III or IV mucositis or clinical evidence of veno -
occlusive disease.  Administration of the combination of trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole (i.e., Bactrim ) or non -steroidal anti- inflammatory 
drugs is contraindicated during methotrexate administration.   Methotrexate 
administration will be assessed on each planned day of administration, and 
dose adjustments will be based upon the following criteria: 
 
Creatinine   Total Bilirubin   Methotrexate Dose  
< 1.5 mg/dL  < 2.0 m g/dL   100% 
1.6 – 2.0 mg/dL 2.1 – 3.0 mg/dL 75% 2.1-2.5 mg/dL  3.1 – 4.0 mg/dL 50% > 2.5 mg/dL  > 4.0 mg/dL  Hold Dose 
 
3.7 Treatment of Mixed Chimerism, Bone Marrow Aplasia, or Persistent/Progressive Disease Post -Transplant 
3.7.1 Donor Lymphocyte Infusion a) Patients with persistent or progressive malignancy post -HSCT, or 
mixed chimerism that does not improve after tapering or discontinuing immune suppression, will be eligible to receive donor lymphocytes (donor lymphocyte infusion, or “DLI”) as a component of this study.  DLI may be administered alone or after chemotherapy.  
b) Donor lymphocytes will be collected by apheresis from the patient’s stem cell donor, either in steady state (i.e., no donor therapy) or after filgrastim administration.  The donor product will be divided into aliquots as follows: 
• 1 x 10
6 CD3+ T cells per kg of recipient weight (1 aliquot only, to 
use for treatment of mixed donor chimerism; not required if 
collection obtained for treatment of malignant disease)  
• 1 x 107 CD3+ T cells per kg of recipient  weight (1 aliquot) 
• 5 x 107 CD3+ T cells per kg of recipient weight (remainder of 
collection)  
c) DLI may be sequentially administered, with initial dosing at 1 x 106 
CD3+ T cells per kg of recipient weight for mixed chimerism, up to 1 x 
107 CD3+ T cells per k g for malignant disease.  Subsequent doses may 
be escalated to 1 x 108 CD3+ T cells per kg.  
3.7.2 Secondary Infusion of CD34+ Donor Stem Cells  
a) Certain clinical situations may require additional donor stem cells without donor lymphocytes (e.g., bone marrow aplasi a with 
established GVHD).  In such cases, consenting donors will undergo repeat filgrastim mobilization and stem cell collection according to the procedure in section 3.2.  However, the apheresis product will undergo positive selection of CD34
+ cells to achieve separation of donor stem 
cells and lymphocytes, according to standard DTM procedures using an FDA -approved device.  This procedure ordinarily achieves a 4-log 
depletion of CD3
+ cells in the CD34+ cell-selected product, relative to 
unmanipulated mobilized donor cells.  The CD34+ cell-selected 
34 fraction will typically be administered in its entirety to the transplant 
recipient in these cases, with or without initial cryopreservation.  The CD3
+ cell-enriched fraction may be divided into aliquots and 
cryopreserved for subsequent use if clinically indicated, as described in section 3.7.1(c). 
3.7.3 Other Post- Transplant Therapy  
a) In addition to DLI, persistent or progressive disease may be treated with any  approved therapy thought to be in the best interest of the 
patient, such as chemotherapy, cytokines, or monoclonal antibodies.  Alternatively, such patients may be offered therapy on other NCI protocols. 
3.8 Interim Evaluation During Induction Chemotherapy: 3.8.1 The following studies will be obtained in the patient (recipient) at the end 
of each cycle of EPOCH -F/R induction chemotherapy: 
a) Routine chemistry and hematology panels 
b) For patients with lymphoma:  computed tomography scans of chest/abdomen/pelvis (and neck, if clinically indicated)  
c) For patients with multiple myeloma:  serum protein electrophoresis; serum Ig level; 24h collection of urine for urine protein electrophoresis; B
2 microglobulin; immunofixation if M protein is 
undetectable; bone marrow biopsy. 
3.9 Pre-Transplant Evaluation: 
3.9.1 The following studies will be obtained in the patient (recipient) within 28 days before the initiation of the transplantation conditioning regimen to determine disease status:  
a) Routine chemistry and hematology panels 
b) Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy; flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies as clinically appropriate  
c) For patients with lymphoma or CLL:  computed tomography scans of chest/abdomen/pelvis (and neck, if clinically indicated); FDG -PET 
scan.  
d) For patients with multiple myeloma:  serum protein electrophoresis; serum Ig level; 24h collection of urine for urine protein electrophoresis; B
2 microglobulin; immunofixation if M protein is 
undetectable; bone marrow biopsy; skeletal survey. 
3.9.2 The following studies will be o btained  in the patient (recipient) within four 
weeks before the initiation of the conditioning regimen: a) Pulmonary function testing including DLCO 
b) 2-D echo or MUGA scan  
c) Serum creatinine, hepatic transaminases, total bilirubin  
d) Urine β-HCG for women of childbearing potential.  
3.10 Evaluation During Transplantation 3.10.1 The following studies will be obtained in the patient (recipient) during hospitalization for transplantation: a) CBC twice daily; differential count daily  
35 b) Acute care and mineral panels twice daily; hepatic panel and LDH 
daily  
c) Type and screen every 3 days  
d) Cyclosporine trough level twice weekly, starting day +1 
3.11 Off Study Criteria:  
3.11.1 The donor or recipient will be removed from protocol for any of the following reasons: a) Inadequate stem cell collection (Section 3.2. 2); this will result in the 
removal of both the donor and recipient. 
b) Unacceptable toxicity ( > grade 3) for the donor. 
c) Irreversible non -hematologic toxicity ( > grade 3) for the recipient 
while receiving induction chemotherapy (EPOCH- F/R).  
d) The donor or recipient refuses to continue therapy. 
e) In addition, the patient may at any time be removed from protocol at the principal investigator’s discretion, if the PI deems the patient to be at unacceptable risk to remain on study.  Reasons for this action may include (but are not limited to) disease progression with declining 
organ function/performance status before transplantation; inadequate family/caregiver support; noncompliance. 
3.11.2 Authorized physicians must notify ORKAND when a patient is taken off study.  
3.12 Post Study Evaluation: 3.12.1 After completion of therapy the patient will be followed for potential complications related to allogeneic SCT. The patient will be followed at least twice weekly in the outpatient setting until at least Day +100 after discharge from the hospi tal. 
3.12.2 The patient (recipient) will seen in follow -up at the Clinical Center to 
evaluate disease status and late problems related to allogeneic HSCT, at days +28 and +100; and at 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24 months post -transplant.  At 
these times patients will have  the following tests performed to determine 
clinical response:  
a) Routine chemistry and hematologic panels.  
b) Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy with flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies as clinically appropriate.  
c) For patients with lymphoma:  computed tomography scans of chest/abdomen/pelvis (and neck, if clinically indicated).  FDG -PET 
scan will be obtained 28 and 100 days post transplant in all patients with lymphoma.  For patients who enter into CR or CRu with negative PET, follow -up evaluation will include PET at 6 and 12 months post 
transplant.  Other time points may be included if clinically indicated.  
d) For patients with multiple myeloma:  serum protein electrophoresis with M protein; serum Ig level; 24h collection of urine for urinary protein excretion, protein electrophoresis and M protein; B
2 
microglobulin; immunofixation if M protein is undetectable; skeletal survey. 
36 3.12.3 Repeat pulmonary function testing will be performed at 100 days and 1 
year post transplant.  Repeat 2- D echocardiography or MU GA scan will be 
performed 100 days post transplant. 
3.13 Immunologic Studies  
3.13.1 Correlation between patient (recipient) T -cell subpopulations, serum IL -7 
and IL -15 levels (Hakim/Gress & Fry laboratories):  
a) Baseline evaluation of donor  NK and T cells:  40 ml of hepa rinized 
whole blood (4 10cc green top tubes) prior to filgrastim mobilization; aliquot of donor apheresis product with ~50 x 10
6 mononuclear cells.  
Performed in Hakim/Gress lab (10/5A07). 
b) Patient lymphocyte subpopulations:  60 ml heparinized whole blood (20 ml for FACS, 40 ml for RNA RT -PCR of NK receptors) to 
Hakim/Gress lab (10/5A07).  Baseline before start of EPOCH -F/R 
induction chemotherapy; at end of each cycle of EPOCH -F/R; day 0 
following administration of transplant preparative regimen; days +7, +14, +28, +60, +100; 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, 24 
months, and annually therafter. 
c) Patient IL -7 and IL -15 levels:  10 ml whole blood (1 10cc red top 
tube), to be sent to Frederick for storage.  IL -7 levels will be 
performed in Fry lab (10/13C210); IL -15 levels will be performed in 
Hakim/Gress lab (10/5A07).  Baseline before start of EPOCH -F/R 
induction chemotherapy; at end of each cycle of EPOCH -F/R; day 0 
following administration of transplant preparative regimen; days +7, +14, +28, +60, +100;  6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, 24 
months, and annually therafter.  Note
:  IL-7 levels will not include day 
+60 or time points after day 100. 
d) Lymphocyte subpopulations, IL -7, and IL -15 levels may be obtained 
at other time points of interest (e.g ., development of GVHD). 
3.13.2 Correlation of lymphocyte cytokine expression patterns with GVHD in patients: a) 40 ml of blood will be drawn in heparinized tubes each Thursday, starting from the second week post -SCT and extending until day 50 
post- transplant.  Samples will be sent to the Fowler Lab (10/12C210) 
to the attention of Jason Foley, 4- 4537.  These samples will be 
Ficolled, cultured overnight in media containing the golgi inhibitor monensin, and evaluated for monocyte surface markers and intracellular cytok ine markers for CD14 monocyte production of IL -1 
alpha, TNF alpha, and IL-15. 
b) 50 ml of blood will be drawn into green top heparinized tubes on day 6 and day 7 post -transplant.  Samples will be sent to the Fowler Lab 
(10/12C210) to the attention of Jason Foley, 4 -4537.  These samples 
will be Ficolled, and evaluated either fresh (day 7 sample) or after CD3, CD28 stimulation (day 6 sample) for T cell cytokine secretion profile.  This assay will be by cytokine capture flow cytometry, with surface markers of CD4  and CD8 evaluated.  Cytokine capture 
37 staining of these populations will evaluate both T1 (IL -2, IFN -γ) and 
T2 (IL -4, IL -10) cytokine secretion 
3.13.3 Donor/recipient chimerism studies:  
a) Baseline determination in donor and patient (prior to start of induction 
chem otherapy with EPOCH- F/R).  
b) After transplantation in patient: 
• Peripheral blood lymphoid, myeloid, and total chimerism on day 
+14.  Requires 10 ml of whole blood in EDTA. 
• Peripheral blood and bone marrow total chimerism on days +28, 
+100, and 12 months.  Lymphoid & myeloid subset chimerism will 
also be measured at these timepoints if donor chimerism was < 
95% on the previous study. 
• Chimerism may be measured at other timepoints if clinically 
indicated (e.g., to determine effect of manipulating immune 
suppression in order to increase donor chimerism). 
 
4.0 Supportive Care  
4.1 Infection Prophylaxis – See Appendix A  for detailed description. 
4.1.1 All patients will receive prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii  
pneumonia, beginning with the first cycle of EPOCH -F/R ind uction 
therapy, continuing until transplantation, and resuming at the time of platelet recovery.  PCP prophylaxis will continue until day +100 or until immunosuppression is discontinued.  Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is the preferred regimen.  See Appendi x A
, Section 9.1.1 for details.   
4.1.2 All patients will receive fluconazole for prophylaxis against yeast infections. Because of its interaction with vincristine, fluconazole should not be taken concurrently with EPOCH -F/R chemotherapy.  Therefore, 
fluconazole will start on day 6 of the first cycle of pre -transplant induction 
chemotherapy and will be held on days 1 through 5 of each subsequent cycle.  Fluconazole will then continue through transplantation until day +100 or until immunosuppression is discontinue d.  See Appendix A
, 
Section 9.1.2 for details. 
4.1.3 Antibiotic therapy for neutropenic patients will be managed in accordance with CDC guidelines.  Patients with neutropenia and fever that persists for longer than 5 days despite broad -spectrum antibiotics will receive empiric 
antifungal therapy with liposomal amphotericin B or with voriconazole, as described in Appendix A
, Section 9.1.3. 
4.1.4 All patients will receive valacyclovir for prophylaxis against herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus infection/reactivation.  This therapy will start on day 1 of pre -transplant induction chemotherapy, 
continuing through transplantation until day +100 or until immunosuppression is discontinued.  See Appendix A
, Section 9.1.4 for 
details.  
4.1.5 Patients with positive pre -transp lant serology for Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
and/or CMV -seropositive donors will be monitored for CMV reactivation 
by weekly testing for CMV antigenemia and clinical evaluation.  Positive 
38 antigenemia will be treated according to the schema in Appendix A , 
Sectio n 9.1.5.  Weekly monitoring will continue through day +100 (longer 
for patients at risk – see Appendix A). 
4.1.6 Patients receiving immunosuppression for chronic GVHD will receive 
pencillin V for prophylaxis against bacterial infections.  All patients will under go vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae  and Haemophilus 
influenzae , beginning 12 months after transplantation.  See Appendix A
, 
Section 9.1.6 for details. 
4.2 Management of Engraftment Syndrome 
4.2.1 Engraftment syndrome may occur at the time of neutrophil r ecovery.  Its 
clinical manifestations include noninfectious fever, rash, and vascular leak causing noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, weight gain, and renal insufficiency [73] .  Diagnostic criteria and a treatment schema for 
engraftment syndrome are included in Appendix B
. 
4.3 Treatment of Graft -Versus -Host Disease:  
4.3.1 In patients in whom GVHD is suspected, standard clinical criteria and biopsy findings (when clinically indicated) will be used to establish the diagnosis.  Acute GVHD will be graded by the Glucksberg criteria [74].  
See Appendix C
 for details concerning the grading and management of 
acute GVHD.  
4.3.2 Patients with clinical Stage 1 or 2 (Grade I) GVHD of the skin without any other organ involvem ent will be treated with a topical corticosteroid 
cream.  
4.3.3 In general, patients with ≥ Grade II acute GVHD will be treated with high -
dose, systemic corticosteroids. 
4.3.4 Patients who fail to respond satisfactorily to corticosteroids will be considered for second- line immunosuppressive therapy, e.g., tacrolimus, 
mycophenolic acid, monoclonal antibodies, or other experimental acute GVHD protocols, if they are available.  
4.4 Menses Suppression and Contraception – Pre-menopausal women who have not 
undergone hysterectomy w ill be placed on medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 
mg/day orally to suppress menses.  This therapy will begin with the first cycle of induction therapy and continue until platelet recovery after transplantation. (> 50,000/mm
3 without transfusion).  Female tra nsplant recipients will be advised to 
use contraception for at least 1 year after transplantation and to have their male partners use condoms.  Male transplant recipients will be advised to use contraception, preferably condoms, for 1 year after transplantation. 
4.5 Blood Product Support – Patients will receive packed red blood cells and platelets 
as needed to maintain Hb > 8.0 gm/dl, and plts > 10,000/mm3 (or higher, if 
clinically indicated).  All blood products with the exception of the stem cell 
product will be irradiated.  
4.5.1 Leucocyte filters will be utilized for all blood and platelet transfusions to decrease sensitization to transfused leukocytes and decrease the risk of CMV infection [75]. 
4.6 Nutritional Support – When mucositis or GVHD prevents adequate PO intake, 
parenteral hyperalimentation will be instituted and discontinued under the 
39 direction of the die tary service.  Oral intake will resume when clinically 
appropriate under the supervision of the dietary service of the Clinical Center. 
4.7 Anti-emetics – Anti-emetic usage will follow Clinical Center Guidelines as well 
as recommendations from the Pharmacy service.  
4.8 Hematopoietic Growth Factor Support – All patients will start G -CSF 
10µg/kg/day on day 0 starting after the stem cell infusion.  The dose will be given 
subcutaneously (SC).  G -CSF will be continued until the absolute neutrophil 
count (ANC) is > 5000/µl for three consecutive days and will be resumed if ANC 
drops below 1000/ µl. 
 
5.0 Data Collection and Evaluation 
5.1 Data Collection - Data will be prospectively collected and entered into the 
Medical Oncology Clinical Research Unit database.  
5.2 Response Criteri a 
5.2.1 Complete Response (CR):  
a) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma:  complete 
disappearance of all detectable signs and symptoms of lymphoma for a 
period of at least one month.  All lymph nodes and nodal masses must have regressed to normal size ( <
 1.5 cm in greatest transverse diameter 
for nodes > 1.5 cm before therapy). Previously involved nodes that were 1.1 to 1.5 cm in greatest transverse diameter before treatment must have decreased to <
 1 cm in their greatest transverse diameter 
after treatment o r by more than 75% in the sum of the products of the 
greatest diameters (SPD).  The spleen (or any other organ), if considered to be enlarged due to involvement by lymphoma before therapy and on the basis of a CT scan, must have regressed in size and must not be palpable on physical examination.  Any macroscopic 
nodules in any organs detectable on imaging techniques should no longer be present.  If bone marrow was involved by lymphoma before treatment, the infiltrate must be cleared on repeat bone marrow aspirate and biopsy of the same site [40]. 
b) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia:  complete resolution of all detectable signs and symptoms for at least 2 months, with peripheral blood 
lymphocytes <
 4K/µl, neutrophils > 1.5K/µl, platelets > 100K/µl, 
hemoglobin > 11g/dl (untransfused), bone marrow lymphocytes < 30% 
without lymphoid nodules. 
c) Chronic myelogenous leukemia:  Hematologic CR – normalization of 
peripheral blood counts (WBC < 10K/ µl, platelets < 450K/ µl), no 
immature cells on peripheral smear (blasts, promyelocytes, metamyelocytes).  Cytogenetic CR – hematologic CR, with 
cytogenetic studies negative for Philadelphia chromosome (Ph).  Molecular CR – hematologic and  cytogenetic CR, with PCR studies 
negative for bcr/abl . 
d) Other leukemias, myeloproliferative disorders, or myelodysplastic syndrome:  normalization of peripheral blood counts and bone marrow morphology, fewer than 5% blasts in bone marrow; absence of specif ic 
40 molecular or cytogenetic markers of disease that were previously 
present.  In the case of myeloproliferative disorders, there must be absence of bone marrow fibrosis with normal hematologic parameters. 
e) Multiple myeloma:  absence of urine and serum M -components by 
immunofixation and electopheresis; normalization of immunoglobulins is not required.  Clonal plasma cells in bone marrow  <1% by PCR or flow cytometry.  Normal serum calcium.  No new bone lesions; no enlargement of existing lesions. Vertebral collapse or other pathological fracture due to osteoporosis or existing lesion does not prevent categorization as CR. 
5.2.2 Complete Response/unconfirmed (CRu): a) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma:  A residual 
lymph node mass > 1.5 cm in greatest transver se diameter will be 
considered CRu if it has regressed by more than 75% in the SPD, does not change over at least one month, is negative by PET or gallium, and is negative on any biopsies obtained (biopsy not required).  Individual nodes that were previously confluent must have regressed by more than 75% in their SPD compared with the size of the original mass and be stable for at least one month.  Any residual lesions in involved organs must have decreased by more than 75% in the SPD or be < 1 cm, be clinically consistent with residual scarring, and be stable for at least one month.  Indeterminate bone marrow, if previously involved with lymphoma, will also be considered CRu. 
5.2.3 Partial Response (PR) : 
a) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma:  a 50% or greater 
decrease in SPD of all measured lesions lasting for a period of at least one month.  No individual lesion may increase in size, and no new lesions may appear [40]. 
b) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia:  a 50% or greater decrease in SPD of measured lymph nodes, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly lasting at least 
2 months, plus one or more of neutrophils >
 1.5K/µl, platelets > 
100K/µl, or hemoglobin > 11g/dl (or 50% improvement). 
c) Chronic myelogenous leukemia:  Hematologic PR – as for 
hematologic CR, except for (1) persistence of immature cells, or (2) platelets < 50% pretreatment level but > 450K/ µl, or (3) persi stent 
splenomegaly but > 50% of pretreatment size.  Cytogenetic PR – 
hematologic CR, with 1 -34% Ph- positive cells (major response).  
Cytogenetic minor response – hematologic CR, with 35 -90% Ph-
positive cells.  
d) Multiple myeloma:  reduction by > 75% in serum myeloma protein 
production, with decrease in Bence -Jones proteinuria by > 90%.  
Clonal marrow plasmacytosis < 5%.  No new lytic bone lesions. 
5.2.4 Stable Disease (SD):  
a) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma:  tumor 
measurements not meeting the criteria for CR, CRu, PR, or PD. 
41 b) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia:  response parameters not meeting 
criteria for CR, PR, or PD.  
5.2.5 Relapsed or Progressive Disease (PD) : 
a) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma:  a 25% or greater 
increase in SPD of all measured lesions  compared to the smallest 
previous measurements, or appearance of any new lesion(s). 
b) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia:  a 50% or greater increase in SPD of all measured lesions compared to the smallest previous measurements, or appearance of any new lesion(s);  a >
 50% increase in circulating 
lymphocytes; Richter’s syndrome. 
c) Chronic myelogenous leukemia:  Increase in the number of metaphases demonstrating Ph by cytogenetics or t(9:22) by FISH; return to PCR positivity for bcr/abl  after previously becoming 
negative.  
d) Other leukemias, myeloproliferative disorders, or myelodysplastic syndrome:  bone marrow and peripheral blood morphological features consistent with relapse or progression, including rising blast count and re-emergence of specific molecular or cytogenetic markers.  
e) Multiple myeloma (requires 2 of the following):  a n increase in serum 
M-protein to > 50% above the lowest level or a rise > 2 g/dl; an 
increase in urine light chain excretion to 50% above the lowest value (at least 250 mg/24 hours) or an incre ase >
 2 g/24 hours of light chain 
excretion; an increase in soft tissue plasmacytomas by 50% or new or increasing lytic bone lesions; the above protein criteria for relapse, plus hypercalcemia > 12 mg/dl, anemia with hemoglobin decrease > 2 g/dl, increased  bone marrow plasma cells by 50%, or generalized bone 
pain. 
5.2.6 Refractory  Disease:  
c) Disease progression at any time during treatment with EPOCH -F/R 
induction chemotherapy, or failure to achieve CR or PR after EPOCH -
F/R and/or allogeneic HSCT.  
5.3 Toxicity Criteria  
5.3.1 The NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (Version 2.0, available via NCI web site:  
http://ctep.info.nih.gov/CTC3/ctc.htm ) will be utilized for evaluation 
of toxicity during induction chemotherapy with EPOCH- F/R. 
a) For patients with leukemia or bone marrow infiltrative/myelophthisic processes, hematologic toxicities during induction chemotherapy with EPOCH- F/R will be graded according to the specified criteria in CTC 
Version 2.0. 
b) After patients begin the transplant  preparative regimen (transplant day 
–6), hematologic and other toxicities will be graded where applicable according to the criteria specified for bone marrow transplantation studies in CTC Version 2.0. 
5.4 Statistical Section:  
5.4.1 There are no gender or racial/ethnic restrictions on patient selection.  This protocol is open to all genders and racial/ethnic groups. 
42 5.4.2 Statistical Considerations  
5.4.3 The primary objectives of this study are to conduct an allogeneic HSCT 
protocol to identify if a more intensive GVHD prophyl axis regimen can be 
used with good results, and to assess the toxicity of a new induction chemotherapy regimen, EPOCH -F/R.  Secondary objectives are to study 
the efficacy of the new induction regimen, to evaluate the fractions of patients with complete and  mixed chimerism, and to study CD4 
lymphopenia as a surrogate marker for the degree of immunosuppression required for engraftment after transplantation, and to determine an approximate level of correlation between serum IL -7 and IL -15 levels and 
circulatin g lymphocyte subpopulations. 
5.4.4 The GVHD prophylaxis will primarily be evaluated in an overall fashion (i.e, in all patients enrolled on this trial); for this analysis, patients will not be stratified prospectively by induction chemotherapy received (i.e., wi th 
or without rituximab, actual dose level administered).  This analysis is appropriate because the induction regimen is not expected to influence the development of GVHD (Section 1.2.7); relevant clinical risk factors for acute GVHD include the transplant  conditioning and GVHD prophylaxis 
regimens, which are identical for all patients undergoing allogeneic HSCT in this study.  A post -hoc analysis will be performed to verify that no 
relationship is observed between rituximab administration with the induction regimen and the development of acute GVHD.  Data from CC 99-C- 0143 and elsewhere suggest that 25 to 45% of patients like those 
enrolling in this trial will ordinarily develop grade III or IV GVHD with cyclosporine monotherapy for GVHD prophylaxis.  We would like to determine if, with the GVHD prophylaxis regimen to be evaluated in this trial, we can obtain at least a slightly improved GVHD prophylaxis result in a limited number of subjects.  To do so, the protocol will follow a standard Simon two- stage op timal design, with alpha=0.10, beta=0.10, 
p
0=0.55 (aiming to rule out 55% without grade III or IV GVHD) and 
p1=0.80 (targeting 80% without grade III or IV GVHD).  Stage I will 
initially enroll 8 patients; if no more than 4 of the first 8 patients enrolled in the study avoid grade III or IV acute GVHD, then the study will be halted.  (In practice, a small number of additional patients may be accrued before the proportion of the first 8 patients experiencing grade III or IV acute GVHD can be determined.)  If 5 or more of the first 8 patients 
evaluated (62.5% or more) avoid grade III or IV GVHD, then the study will continue accrual to a total of 26 patients.  If 5 to 17 of 26 patients in the study avoid grade III or IV acute GVHD, this will be considered insuff icient to conclude that the GVHD prophylaxis regimen is potentially 
better than that used in CC 99-C-0143.  It should be noted, however, that it is unlikely that fewer than 14/26 patients will have acceptable GVHD, given that at least 5/8 were acceptable f rom the first accrual stage.  Should 
14-17 of 26 have less than grade III or IV GVHD, then we will use other 
information obtained from this trial and others to evaluate its potential utility. 
 However, if 18 or more of 26 patients avoid grades III -IV acute  
43 GVHD (69% or more), we will conclude that the GVHD prophylaxis 
regimen is potentially superior to that used in 99-C-0143.  An interim analysis of results through April 2004 suggested that the combination GVHD prophylaxis regimen being tested in this trial may 
demonstrate superiority over that used in 99 -C-0143.  As of this analysis, 
12 of 17 patients evaluable through 100 days post HSCT had avoided grade III or IV acute GVHD (71%).  Based upon these results, the accrual ceiling was increased by up to 6 additional patients in May 2004.  Currently, 16 of 21 patients evaluable through 100 days post HSCT have avoided grade III or IV acute GVHD (76%).  In view of these successful outcomes, the accrual ceiling will be increased so that up to 8 more patients may b e enrolled to undergo allogeneic HSCT on CC 03-C-0077.  
The increased accrual target will permit a more precise estimate of the incidence of grade III or IV acute GVHD and will enable us to collect additional data on the more frequent occurrence of mixed donor- recipient 
chimerism post HSCT that we have observed with this prophylaxis regimen.  In addition, the higher accrual capacity will support the continued development of our research program by extending this protocol’s availability for eligible patients  while our next allogeneic 
HSCT protocol is completing the process of regulatory approval. 
5.4.5 The induction chemotherapy regimen will differ for patients with CD20 positive and CD20 negative malignancies, as described in Section 3.3.  The main purpose of this  study is to determine the effectiveness of the 
GVHD prophylaxis regimen; with respect to the induction regimen, this is a pilot study only.  Our study population is expected to include patients with a broad range of characteristics, making it difficult to  draw reliable 
conclusions by comparing efficacy and toxicity with the results seen in CC 99-C- 0143.  For these reasons, our analyses of efficacy and toxicity will 
be exploratory and will serve as the basis for designing subsequent studies.  Subject to those provisos, we will determine the overall response rate of the induction regimen, with confidence intervals, as our principal evaluation of the EPOCH -F/R regimen’s efficacy.  This response rate will 
be compared informally with that observed with the EPOCH -F regimen in 
CC 99 -C-0143.  In addition, we will determine the response rate according 
to CD20 status and rituximab therapy, recognizing that the study design will not have sufficient statistical power to allow formal comparison of response between these subgroups.  Similarly, our analysis of toxicity will 
be predominantly descriptive, as varying patient risk factors will render more formal analysis difficult to interpret.  We will determine the worst overall toxicity per patient as well as the individual toxicities of each type 
per cycle and report these and other descriptive results; this analysis will be conducted primary in an overall fashion.  Although we do not predict that rituximab therapy will contribute significantly to toxicity, our analysis will be stratified according to the use of rituximab to explore any possible 
relationship. 
44 5.4.6 For patients with disease progression after transplantation who receive 
additional conventional therapies (chemotherapeutics, cytokines, or monoclonal antibodies) and/or  donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI), we will 
determine the overall response rate to such therapies, with confidence intervals.  Further evaluation of response rates may be performed according to the type of salvage therapy received (conventional agents, DLI, or both) and according to response to induction chemotherapy, if the 
number of patients receiving salvage therapy is sufficient to permit meaningful analysis. 
5.4.7 Based on results in CC 99-C- 0143, we anticipate that a high percentage of 
patients will engraft w ith early conversion to full donor chimerism.  Thus, 
we will compare the results obtained on this trial to those of the previous study and other relevant trials. The following stopping rule will be employed with regard to graft rejection or failure to engr aft: 
 
 Engraftment Failure or Graft Rejection  Action  Cumulative # events observed  
Patients 1 through 10  > 1 Suspend accrual  
Patients 11 through 20  > 2 Suspend accrual  
Patients 21 through 26  > 3 Suspend accrual  
 The fractions of patients with mixed chimerism and complete chimerism will be determined and reported with a 95% confidence interval.  These results will also be stratified according to the use of rituximab with induction chemotherapy, but will primarily be evaluated in an overall fashion.  I f graft rejection or mixed chimerism is seen, then CD4, CD8 and 
absolute lymphocyte counts will be compared between patients who engrafted or not using a Wilcoxon rank sum test, and we will consider using logistic regression to try to identify, in a limite d manner given the 
size of this study, which factors are best associated with successful engraftment, possibly adjusting for other clinical factors as appropriate.  In addition, Spearman correlation will be used to address the association between serum IL -7 levels, IL-15 levels, and lymphocyte subpopulations. 
5.4.8 It is expected that accrual to this protocol can be completed in 2 years if approximately 1 patient per month is enrolled. 
5.4.9 Kaplan -Meier estimates of overall and progression free survival will be 
determ ined, but will be interpreted with appropriate cautions given the 
small sample size of the study.  
5.5 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
5.5.1 In accordance with NCI IRB policies, this pilot study will not require independent monitors or review by a Data Safety and Monitoring Board.  
5.5.2 The PI and LAI will provide continuous, close monitoring, with prompt 
reporting of serious adverse events to the IRB (Section 7.1).  On a weekly basis, the PI, LAI, Protocol Research Nurse, and Transplant Coordinator 
will review clinical and  laboratory data from each of the transplant 
recipients.  A complete summary of patient outcomes will be provided 
45 annually to the IRB.  The Protocol Support Office of the Medical 
Oncology Clinical Research Unit, CCR, NCI will assist with annual internal auditing of subject case records.  After accrual of 3 subjects, the Protocol Support Office will also perform a protocol activation audit to review adherence to informed consent procedures, eligibility documentation, and initial treatment.  
5.5.3 The expected heter ogeneity of study participants with respect to 
malignancy and risk factors for toxic events renders these parameters impractical to evaluate in a statistical manner; accordingly, formal stopping rules will not incorporate toxic events but will instead be based upon the rate and severity of acute GVHD, as described in Section 5.4. 
 
6.0 Human Subject Protections  
6.1 Rationale for Subject Selection: Patients with refractory lymphoid malignancies, leukemia, myelodysplasia, and myeloproliferative disorders will be the subjects 
for this study.  Conventional chemotherapy is seldom curative for patients with the disorders selected for inclusion in this study (section 2.1.1).  Allogeneic HSCT represents a potentially curative treatment for these diseases, which occur most f requently in individuals greater than 40 years of age.  However, the 
considerable risk of early treatment -related mortality related to conventional 
preparative regimens increases with patient age.  The use of a reduced -intensity 
preparative regimen in pati ents with these conditions will potentially reduce 
treatment -related mortality without a reduction in efficacy.  
6.2 Risks/Benefits Analysis:  There is potential benefit to the transplant recipient, as demonstrated by the published literature documenting long -term disease- free 
survival for patients with refractory lymphoid malignancies, leukemias, myeloproliferative disorders, and myelodysplasia following allogeneic HSCT.  The use of a reduced -intensity preparative regimen may permit patients to 
undergo allogene ic HSCT with fewer toxicities than if a conventional preparative 
regimen were used; this potential benefit increases with the age of the transplant recipient (see section 6.1).  However, we do not anticipate any direct benefit to the other subject covered by this protocol, i.e., the stem cell transplant donor. 
6.2.1 The acute risks to the stem cell donor include those associated with venipuncture and apheresis. 
6.2.2 Potential risks to the transplant recipient have also been considered and are felt to be potentially le ss than would otherwise occur in conventional 
allogeneic HSCT.  The risk of both acute and chronic GVHD will be present, as discussed previously. 
6.2.3 Children under the age of 12 years will be excluded as potential donors, given the uncertain risks in this young population and the low likelihood that such potential donors will be encountered. 
6.3 Consent and Assent Process and Documentation: 6.3.1 The procedures and treatments involved in this protocol, with their attendant risks and discomforts, potential benefits, and potential alternative therapies will be carefully explained to the recipient.  Similarly, the procedures and treatments involved in this protocol, with their 
46 attendant risks and discomforts, will be carefully explained to the donor.  
A signed informed consent document will be obtained from both the recipient and the donor.  
6.3.2 Consent forms: The original signed informed consent documents will be kept with the patient's chart.  The Data Management Section will also retain a copy of the informed consent document.  A copy of the informed consent documents will also be given to the recipient and the donor. 
6.3.3 The Clinical Coordinator, Data Management Section, will ascertain the date of IRB approval before registering the first patient.  
 
7.0 Data Reporting 
7.1 Adver se Reactions - Reports of adverse reactions will be made using the Division 
of Cancer Treatment Common Toxicity Criteria (Version 2.0) for reference 
according to the guidelines published by the DCTD, NCI.  A copy of the CTC version 2.0 can be obtained from  the CTEP home page (http://ctep.info.nih.gov). 
These guidelines are summarized as follows:  
7.1.1 Report by telephone to NCI IRB within 24 hours (301-230-2330): a) All life -threatening events (i.e., grade 4, except for myelosuppression), 
which may be due to administration of the study drug(s). 
b) All failures to engraft, or occurrences of graft rejection. 
c) All fatal events (grade 5).  
7.1.2 A written report should follow within 10 working days to: 
NCI Institutional Review Board  
Center for Cancer Research  
National Cancer Institute  
Building 82, Room 117 Bethesda, MD  20892 
Serious adverse events that occur with commercially available agents will also be reported directly to the FDA through the MedWatch system (
http://www.fda.gov/me dwatch/ ). 
7.2 Record Keeping  
7.2.1 All patients (donor and recipient) must have signed an Informed Consent, and on- study confirmation of eligibility form will be filled out before 
entering on the study. 
 
8.0 Pharmaceutical Information 
8.1 CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (CTX, Cytoxan,  NSC -26271) 
8.1.1 Supply – Cyclophosphamide will be purchased by the NIH Clinical Center 
Pharmacy Department from commercial sources and is supplied as a 
lyophilized powder in various vial sizes. 
8.1.2 Preparation - will be reconstituted with sterile water for injection to yield a 
final concentration of 20 mg/ml as described in the package insert. 
8.1.3 Storage and Stability - The vials are stored at room temperature.  
Following reconstitution as directed, solutions of cyclophosphamide are stable for 24 hours at room temperature, or 6 days when refrigerated at 2-
8° C.  
47 8.1.4 Route of Administration - The cyclophosphamide used in this regimen 
will be mixed in 100 ml normal saline and given as an IVPB over 30 
minutes in the induction regimen (i.e. EPOCH -F/R; Section 3.3.2). In the 
preparative regimen (Section 3.4.4), it is given over two hours.  
8.1.5 Toxicities:  
a) Nausea and vomiting - variable; symptomatically improved with 
standard anti- emetics and/or benzodiazepines [e.g., lorazepam].  
b) Water retention – cyclophosphamide may rarely provoke the syndrome 
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion and resultant hyponatremia, usually manifested 12- 48 hrs after IV administration, 
necessitating frequent accurate assessment [q 1 -2 hrs] of intake, urine 
output and urine specific gravity.  This effect can be counteracted by 
furosemide.  Fluid restriction is not feasible during administration of high dose cyclophosphamide. 
c) Cardiomyopathy - cyclophosphamide may cause severe, sometimes 
lethal, hemorrhagic myocardial necrosis or congestive cardiomyopathy.  Patients may present with congestive cardiomyopathy as late as 2 weeks after the last dose of cyclophosphamide.  The clinical syndrome has been observed in patients receiving the dose of cyclophosphamide used in this protocol.  In an attempt to minimize this complication, patients with significant cardiac dysfunction are excluded from this protocol [see patient eligibility].  Congestive failure is managed according to standard medical therapeutics.  
d) Hemorrhagic cystitis – this is a serious, potentiall y life -threatening 
complication related to injury of the bladder epithelium by cyclophosphamide metabolites.  Although subclinical hematuria is not uncommon at this dose level, clinically significant hematuria or serious hemorrhage can usually be avoided b y maintaining a high 
urine volume and frequent voidings and the administration of Mesna.  Diuresis is maintained for 24 hrs after completion of last dose by parenteral infusions of normal saline with potassium chloride, as specified in section 3.4.4.  Careful monitoring of serum and urine electrolytes is mandated.  Furosemide may be required to ensure this diuresis.  Continuous bladder irrigation may be used for control of significant hematuria.  
e) Sterility  
f) Less common but serious complications include pulmonary fibrosis and secondary malignancies. Less common but reversible toxicities include alopecia and skin rash. 
8.2 MESNA (Sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate, Mesnum, Mesnex, NSC-113891) 8.2.1 Supply – Mesna will be will be purchased by the NIH Clinical Center 
Pharmacy  Department from commercial sources  and is supplied as a 
100mg/ml solution. 
8.2.2 Preparation – Dilute up to 20 mg Mesna/ml fluid in D5W or normal saline.  
Mesna should be started one hr prior to the cyclophosphamide in the 
48 preparative regimen (Section 3.6).  Bag #1 of the Mesna will be 150 
mg/m2 IV in 250 ml, given as a 3 hour infusion (thus stopping when 
cyclophosphamide ends).  Then immediately afterward, Mesna will be given at 1200 mg/m
2 in 500 ml by continuous IV infusion over 24 hour 
infusion for four doses (days -6, -5, - 4, and - 3). 
8.2.3 Storage and Stability – Intact ampules are stored at room temperature.  
Diluted solutions (1 to 20 mg/dl) are physically and chemically stable for at least 24 hours under refrigeration.  Mesna is chemically stable at room temper ature for 48 -72 hours in D5W, 48- 72 hour in D5W/0.45% normal 
saline, or 24 hours in normal saline. 
8.2.4 Administration - To be administered intravenously as continuous infusion. 
8.2.5 Toxicities - Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea.  A very rare complication is 
cough, dyspnea and fever with rapid progression to diffuse pulmonary fibrosis and death. 
8.3 FILGRASTIM (G- CSF, Neupogen) 
8.3.1 Supply – Commercially available as filgrastim injection in a concentration 
of 300µg/ml in 1ml (300 µg) and 1.6ml (480 µg) vials. 
8.3.2 Preparation – For subcutaneous administration, the appropriate prescribed 
dose is drawn up from the vial with no further dilution prior to administration.  For intravenous administration, the commercial solution for injection should be diluted prior to administration.  It is rec ommended 
that the prescribed dose be diluted with dextrose 5% in water to a 
concentration greater than 5 µg/ml.  Dilution of filgrastim to a final 
concentration of less than 5 µg/ml is not recommended at any time.  Do not 
dilute with saline at any time; product may precipitate .  Filgrastim diluted 
to concentrations between 5 and 15 µg/ml should be protected from 
absorption to plastic materials by the addition of Albumin (Human) to a 
final concentration of 2mg/ml.  When diluted in 5% dextrose or 5% dextrose plus Albumin (Human), filgrastim is compatible with glass bottles, PVC and polyolefin IV bags, and polypropylene syringes.  The dose may be “rounded down” to within 10% of patient’s calculated dose to use the drug cost- effectively.  
8.3.3 Storage and Stability – Filgrastim for injection should be stored in the 
refrigerator at 2o to 8oC (36o to 46oF).  Avoid shaking. 
8.3.4 Administration – Subcutaneous injection is preferred.  If clinically 
indicated, filgrastim may be administered as an intravenous infusion over 4 or 24 hours. 
8.3.5 Toxicities – Medullary bone or skeletal pain is the most commonly 
reported toxicity.  In addition, reversible elevations in uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase are common laboratory abnormalities.  Four cases of splenic ruptur e have been reported in healthy 
donors when given filgrastim or other myeloid growth factors for peripheral blood stem cell mobilization; 1 of these cases resulted in fatality.  Five additional cases of splenic rupture have been reported in cancer patients  undergoing chemotherapy or peripheral blood stem cell 
mobilization; splenic rupture may have contributed to deaths in 2 of these 
49 cases.  One additional death due to splenic rupture after filgrastim therapy 
was reported to the manufacturer without additional information.  According to the manufacturer, the reporting rate for splenic rupture with filgrastim is less than 1 in 486,000. 
8.4 CYCLOSPORINE (Gengraf, Sandimmune, Neoral)  
8.4.1 Supply – Cyclosporine will be obtained by the NIH Clinical Center 
Pharmacy Department from commercial sources and is available in capsules (25 mg and 100 mg), USP [MODIFIED], oral solution (100 mg/ml), USP [MODIFIED], and as a parenteral concentrate for injection (50 mg/ml).  When oral capsules are prescribed for this protocol, the cyclo sporine capsules, USP [NON-MODIFIED] should NOT be used. 
8.4.2 Preparation – For parenteral doses, each milliliter of concentrate 
(50mg/ml) should be diluted in 20 to 100ml of dextrose 5% in water or sodium chloride 0.9%.  Parenteral doses of cyclosporine will be prepared in non- PVC containers and infused with non- PVC administration 
sets/tubing (see Storage and Stability, section 8.4.2).  Oral cyclosporine solution may be mixed in orange juice or other beverages, but not milk. 
8.4.3 Storage and Stability – Capsules, oral solution, and ampules of parenteral 
concentrate bear expiration dates and are stored at room temperature and protected from light.  Cyclosporine concentrate for injection that has been diluted to a final concentration of approximately 2mg/ml is stable f or 24 
hours in 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride injection in glass, PVC or non-PVC plastic containers.  To minimize the potential for sorption to 
PVC plastic bags and tubing as well the leaching of phthalate plasticizer (DEHP) into the solution, only non- PVC plastic bags and intravenous 
administration sets should be utilized. 
8.4.4 Administration – Cyclosporine may be given intravenously over 2 hours 
or orally.  
8.4.5 Toxicities – Acute cyclosporine nephrotoxicity is usually manifested by a 
moderate decline in renal excretory function, which is readily reversible 
by a decrease in drug dosage.  Although some degree of transient renal dysfunction may occur in patients with therapeutic levels of cyclosporine, significant renal toxicity is associated with elevated trough levels.  In 
addition to an increase in BUN and creatinine, hyperkalemic hyperchloremic acidosis, low fractional excretion of sodium and the onset of hypertension with hypomagnesemia are seen with cyclosporine nephrotoxicity.  Hypertension occurs in up to 60% of patients.  Hypomagnesemia can be associated with neurologic symptoms, including seizures, cerebellar ataxia and depression.  Dose- related hepatotoxicity, 
manifested by elevation of serum transaminases and bilirubin, has been reported. 
8.5 FLUDARABINE (Fludara, Berlex Laboratories)  
8.5.1 Supply - Fludarabine monophosphate will be purchased by the NIH 
Clinical Center Pharmacy Department from commercial sources and is supplied as a white, lyophilized powder.  Each vial contains 50 mg of 
50 fludarabine phosphate, 50 mg of mannitol, and sodium hydroxide to adjust 
pH.  Fludara is stored at room temperature. 
8.5.2 Preparation - FLUDARA IV should be prepared for parenteral use by 
aseptically adding Sterile Water for Injection, USP.  When reconstituted with 2 ml of Sterile Wat er for Injection, each ml of the resulting solution 
will contain 25 mg of Fludarabine Phosphate, 25 mg of mannitol, and sodium hydroxide to adjust the pH to 7–8.5.  Fludarabine will be diluted in 100 to 125ml of either 5% dextrose in water or 0.9% sodium chloride, and infused IV over 30 minutes. 
8.5.3 Storage and Stability - Reconstituted FLUDARA IV is chemically and 
physically stable for 24 hours at room temperature or for 48 hours if refrigerated.  Because reconstituted FLUDARA IV contains no antimicrobial preservative, care must be taken to assure the sterility of the prepared solution; for this reason, reconstituted FLUDARA IV should be used or discarded within 8 hours. 
8.5.4 Administration - Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for 
particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration.  
8.5.5 Toxicities – Fludarabine toxicities include myelosuppression (dose 
limiting toxicity), fever, nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, diarrhea, gastrointestinal bleeding, anorexia, edema, skin rashes, myalgia, headache,  
agitation, hearing loss, transient episodes of somnolence and fatigue, auto-immune hemolytic anemia, auto -immune thrombocytopenia, paresthesias, 
peripheral neuropathy, renal, and pulmonary toxicity (intersititial pneumonitis).  Severe fatal CNS toxicity presenting with loss of vision and progressive deterioration of mental status were encountered almost exclusively after very high doses of fludarabine monophosphate.  Such toxicity has only rarely been demonstrated at the 25 -30 mg/m
2/day dosage 
of fludarabine.  Very rarely described complications include transfusion-associated graft -versus- host disease, thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, and liver failure.  Tumor lysis syndrome following fludarabine administration has been observed, especially in patients with advanced 
bulky disease.  Opportunistic infections (protozoan, viral, fungal, and bacterial) have been observed post -fludarabine, especially in heavily pre -
treated individuals, and in individuals receiving fludarabine combined with other agents. 
8.6 ETOPOSIDE, DOXORUBICIN, and VINCRISTINE (in EPOCH)  
8.6.1 Supply – Etoposide, doxorubicin, and vincristine will be purchased by the 
NIH Clinical Center Pharmacy Department from commercial sources.  
8.6.2 Preparation and Administration - Etoposide, doxorubicin, and vincristine  
will be combined in a single (‘3 -in-1’) admixture, diluted in a volume of 
0.9% Sodium Chloride (NS), Injection, USP, that is based on the amount of etoposide needed to complete one day of treatment: 
 
Etoposide 
Dose  Volume of Fluid 
Containing a 
Daily Dose  Volume of 
Overfill  
(fluid + drug)  Volume To Infuse  
(over 24 hours) Administration 
Rate 
≤150  mg 528 mL 25 mL 528 mL 22 mL/hour  
51 ≥151  mg 1056  mL 25 mL 1056  mL 44 mL/hour  
 
All 3 -in-1 admixtures dispensed from the Pharmacy will contain a 24-hour 
supply of etoposide, doxorubicin, and vincristine PLUS  25 mL overfill 
(excess) fluid and a proportional amount of drug to compensate for 
volume lost in administration set tubing.  
Befo re dispensing 3- in-1 admixtures, Pharmacy staff will [1] purge all air 
from the drug product container, [2] attach an administration set appropriate for use with a portable pump and the set will be [3] primed close to its distal tip and [4] capped with a L uer-locking cap.  Bags will be 
exchanged daily for 4 consecutive days to complete a 96-hour drug 
infusion. Portable pumps used to administer etoposide + doxorubicin + vincristine admixtures will be programmed to deliver one of two fixed volumes at one of two corresponding fixed rates based on the amount of etoposide and 
fluid that is ordered (see table, above).  At the end of an infusion, some residual fluid is expected because overfill fluid and drug were added; however, nurses are asked to return to the P harmacy for measurement any 
drug containers that appear to contain a greater amount of residual drug than expected.  
8.6.3 Storage and Stability - Studies conducted by the Pharmaceutical 
Development Service, Pharmacy Department, NIH Clinical Center, have demonstr ated that admixtures of vincristine, doxorubicin, and etoposide in 
0.9% Sodium Chloride for Injection (at concentrations, respectively, of 1, 25, and 125 mcg/ml; 2, 50, and 250 mcg/ml; and 2.8, 70, and 350 mcg/ml) are stable for at least 48 hours at room temperature when protected from 
light [76].   
8.6.4 Toxicities – 
a) Etoposide:  nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, diarrhea, neutropenia, 
thrombocytopenia, and alopecia.  Secondary AML has been associated with etoposide.  Bradycardia and hypotension are sometimes observed with etoposide administration.  
b) Doxorubicin:  Cardiotoxicity is particularly noted after cumu lative 
doses of greater than 550 mg/m
2.  Other toxicities include 
myelosuppression, nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, diarrhea, and alopecia.  Skin infiltration of doxorubicin causes tissue necrosis. 
c) Vincristine causes neurological toxicities such as paresthesias, jaw pain, ataxia, foot -drop, cranial nerve palsies, paralytic ileus, 
constipation, abdominal pain, and loss of deep tendon reflexes.  It is also a vesicant, and occasionally causes alopecia and myelosuppression. 
8.7 PREDNISONE  
8.7.1 Supply – Prednisone will be purchased by the NIH Clinical Center 
Pharmacy Department from commercial sources.  Prednisone is commercially available as tablets, in strengths of 1, 2.5, 5, 20, and 50 mg. 
52 8.7.2 Storage and Stability - Prednisone tablets should be stored in the container 
provi ded away from heat.  The product labeling bears the manufacturer's 
expiration dating for stability.  
8.7.3 Administration - Prednisone will be administered at a dose of 60 mg/m2 
orally on days 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of the induction chemotherapy regimen.  In 
patients unable to tolerate oral medication, methylprednisolone can be 
substituted at an equivalent dosage, diluted in a small volume (e.g. 25 -
50ml) of 5% dextrose in water or 0.9% sodium chloride and infused over 15 minutes.  To reduce gastrointestinal side effects, prednisone should be taken with food. 
8.7.4 Toxicities - Prednisone frequently causes gastritis, immunosuppression, 
muscle wasting, fluid retention, and hyperglycemia. 
8.8 METHOTREXATE (Methotrexate sodium, MTX, NSC -740) 
8.8.1 Supply – Methotrexate will be obtained commercially and is supplied as a 
25 mg/ml preservative -free isotonic solution for injection. 
8.8.2 Preparation – The desired dose will be diluted in 5% dextrose in water or 
0.9% sodium chloride. 
8.8.3 Storage and Stability – Methotrexate should be stored at room tempera ture 
and protected from light.  Once the prepared dose is diluted for administration, the solution is stable for 24 hours refrigerated or at room temperature when protected from light. 
8.8.4 Administration – Methotrexate will be given as IV infusion over 15 
minu tes. 
8.8.5 Toxicities - The toxicity associated with methotrexate primarily involves 
the gastrointestinal tract.  Severe mucositis can occur, particularly in patients who have received an intensive preparative regimen. Other gastrointestinal symptoms include nau sea, vomiting and diarrhea.  
Transient elevations in serum transaminases have been seen. The myelosuppression associated with methotrexate often results in delayed engraftment.  Folinic acid can effectively circumvent the enzymatic block produced by methot rexate.  
8.9 RITUXIMAB (Rituxan)  
8.9.1 Supply – Rituximab will be obtained commercially and is supplied as a 10 
mg/ml sterile, preservative -free solution for injection, in vials of 100 mg 
and 500 mg. 
8.9.2 Preparation – The desired dose will be diluted to a final concentration of 1 
to 4 mg/mL in either 0.9% Sodium Chloride or D5W. 
8.9.3 Storage and Stability – Rituximab vials should be stored at 2–8°C (36–
46°F) and should be protected from direct sunlight. 
8.9.4 Administration – First Infusion: The rituximab solution for infusion 
shoul d be administered intravenously at an initial rate of 50 mg/hr. 
Rituximab should not be mixed or diluted with other drugs.  If hypersensitivity or infusion reactions do not occur, escalate the infusion rate in 50 mg/hr increments every 30 minutes, to a maximum of 400 mg/hr.  If hypersensitivity (non- IgE-mediated) or an infusion reaction 
develops, the infusion should be temporarily slowed or interrupted. The 
53 infusion can continue at one -half the previous rate upon improvement of 
patient symptoms.  If the first infusion is tolerated well, infusions during 
subsequent cycles of EPOCH -F/R can begin at a rate of 100 mg/hr and be 
increased by 100 mg/hr increments at 30- minute intervals.  However, if 
the first infusion is not tolerated well, then the guidelines for the initial 
infusion should be followed for subsequent administration.  Premedication 
will routinely be administered 30 to 60 minutes prior to the beginning of each rituximab infusion, consisting of acetaminophen 650 mg PO and diphenhydramine 50 mg IV. 
8.9.5 Toxicities – The most serious adverse reactions caused by rituximab 
include infusion reactions, tumor lysis syndrome, mucocutaneous reactions, hypersensitivity reactions, cardiac arrhythmias and angina, and renal failure.  
a) Fatal and Severe Infusion Reaction s:  Deaths within 24 hours of 
rituximab infusion have been reported.  Approximately 80% of fatal infusion reactions occurred in association with the first infusion.  Severe reactions typically occurred during the first infusion with time 
to onset of 30 to 120 minutes.  Signs and symptoms of severe infusion reactions may include hypotension, angioedema, hypoxia or bronchospasm, and may require interruption of rituximab administration.  The most severe manifestations and sequelae include pulmonary infiltrates , acute respiratory distress syndrome, myocardial 
infarction, ventricular fibrillation, and cardiogenic shock.  In the reported cases, the following factors were more frequently associated with fatal outcomes:  female gender, pulmonary infiltrates, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia or mantle cell lymphoma.  Management of 
severe infusion reactions:  The rituximab infusion should be 
interrupted for severe reactions and supportive care measures instituted as medically indicated (e.g., intravenous fluids, vasopressors, oxygen, bronchodilators, diphenhydramine, and acetaminophen).  In most cases, the infusion can be resumed at a 50% reduction in rate (e.g., from 100 mg/hr to 50 mg/hr) when symptoms have completely resolved.  Patients requiring close monitoring during first and all subsequent infusions include those with pre -existing cardiac and 
pulmonary conditions, those with prior clinically significant cardiopulmonary adverse events and those with high numbers of circulating malignant cells (= 25,000/mm
3) with o r without evidence 
of high tumor burden. 
b) Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS):   Acute renal failure requiring dialysis 
with instances of fatal outcome has been reported in the setting of TLS following treatment with rituximab.  Rapid reduction in tumor volume follow ed by acute renal failure, hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, 
hyperuricemia, or hyperphosphatasemia, have been reported within 12 to 24 hours after the first rituximab infusion.  Rare instances of fatal outcome have been reported in the setting of TLS following t reatment 
with rituximab.  The risks of TLS appear to be greater in patients with 
54 high numbers of circulating malignant cells (= 25,000/mm3) or high 
tumor burden.  Prophylaxis for TLS should be considered for patients 
at high risk.  Correction of electrolyte abnormalities, monitoring of renal function and fluid balance, and administration of supportive care, including dialysis, should be initiated as indicated.  Following complete resolution of the complications of TLS, rituximab has been tolerated when re-a dministered in conjunction with prophylactic 
therapy for TLS in a limited number of cases.  
c) Severe Mucocutaneous Reactions:  Mucocutaneous reactions, some 
with fatal outcome, have been reported in patients treated with rituximab.  These reports include paraneoplastic pemphigus (an uncommon disorder which is a manifestation of the patient’s underlying malignancy), Stevens -Johnson syndrome, lichenoid 
dermatitis, vesiculobullous dermatitis, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.  The onset of the reaction in the reported cases has varied from 1 to 13 weeks following rituximab exposure.  Patients experiencing a severe mucocutaneous reaction should not receive any further infusions and seek prompt medical evaluation.  Skin biopsy may help to distinguish among different mucocutaneous reactions and guide subsequent treatment.  The safety of readministration of RITUXAN to patients with any of these mucocutaneous reactions has not been determined.  
d) Infusion reactions and lymphopenia are the most commonly occurring adverse  reactions.  Mild to moderate infusion reactions consisting of 
fever and chills/rigors occur in the majority of patients during the first rituximab infusion.  Other frequent infusion reaction symptoms included nausea, pruritus, angioedema, asthenia, hypote nsion, 
headache, bronchospasm, throat irritation, rhinitis, urticaria, rash, vomiting, myalgia, dizziness, and hypertension.  These reactions generally occur within 30 to 120 minutes of beginning the first infusion, and resolved with slowing or interruption of the rituximab infusion and with supportive care (diphenhydramine, acetaminophen, IV saline, and vasopressors).  In an analysis of data from 356 patients with relapsed or refractory, low -grade NHL who received 4 (N = 319) 
or 8 (N = 37) weekly infusions  of rituximab, the incidence of infusion 
reactions was highest during the first infusion (77%) and decreased with each subsequent infusion (30% with fourth infusion and 14% with eighth infusion). 
8.10 DIPHENHYDRAMINE  
8.10.1 Supply – Commercially available.  Diphenhydr amine HCl injection is 
available in an injectable solution at a 50mg/ml concentration in single dose ampules, syringes and vials as well as multi- dose vials from multiple 
manufacturers.  
8.10.2 Preparation – Diphenhydramine HCl may be given by direct intravenous 
injection without additional dilution.  Alternatively the prescribed dose 
may be diluted in a small volume (e.g. 25- 50ml) of 5% dextrose in water 
(D5W) or 0.9% sodium chloride (NS) and infused over 10-15 minutes. 
55 8.10.3 Storage and Stability – Store commercially available injectable product at 
controlled room temperature. 
8.10.4 Administration – Diphenhydramine HCl injection may be administered by 
direct IV injection (IV push) at a rate generally not exceeding 25mg/min.  
Alternatively, diphenhydramine HCl injection may be  diluted and given 
over 10-15 minutes (see Preparation). 
8.10.5 Toxicities – Sedation, sleepiness, dizziness, disturbed coordination, 
epigastric distress, thickening of bronchial secretions.  Diphenhydramine  can provide additive effects with alcohol or other CNS  depressants.  
Diphenhydramine can cause anticholinergic side effects (e.g. dry mouth, fixed or dilated pupils, flushing, urinary retention).  Diphenhydramine should be used with caution in patients with a history of bronchial asthma, increased intraocular  pressure, hyperthyroidism, cardiovascular disease or 
hypertension. 
8.11 ACETAMINOPHEN  
8.11.1 Supply – Commercially available as 325 mg or 500 mg tablets for oral 
administration from multiple manufacturers.  
8.11.2 Storage – Store at controlled room temperature. 
8.11.3 Administratio n – Oral.  For analgesia and antipyresis, the usual dose is 
650 to 1000 milligrams every 4 to 6 hours, to a maximum of 4 grams/day. 
8.11.4 Toxicities – No toxicities are anticipated to result from single doses of 
acetaminophen administered as premedication for ri tuximab infusions. 
8.12 VALACYCLOVIR (Valtrex
®) 
8.12.1 Supply – Commercially available as 500mg tablets and 1gm tablets.  Dose 
adjustment is necessary in patients with significant renal impairment (refer to the manufacturer's labeling for dose adjustment guidelines.) 
8.12.2 Pharmacology – Valacyclovir is the hydrochloride salt of L -valyl ester of 
the antiviral drug acyclovir. After oral administration, valacyclovir is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract and nearly completely converted to acyclovir and L- valine by first- pass in testinal or hepatic metabolism.  
8.12.3 Storage and Stability – Oral tablets should be stored at 15
o to 25oC (59o to 
77oF). 
8.12.4 Administration – Oral.  
8.12.5 Toxicities – Nausea and/or vomiting, headache, dizziness, abdominal pain, 
dysmenorrhea, arthralgia, acute hypersensit ivity reactions, elevations in 
liver enzyme laboratory values (e.g. AST).  Renal failure and CNS symptoms have been reported in patients with renal impairment who received valacyclovir or acyclovir at greater than the recommended dose. Dose reduction is recommended in this patient population (refer to the manufacturer's labeling for dose adjustment guidelines). 
8.13 FLUCONAZOLE (Diflucan
®) 
8.13.1 Supply – Commercially available as 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg and 200 mg 
tablets, or as a powder for oral suspension for reconstitution at a concentration of 10mg/ml or 40 mg/ml.  Parenteral fluconazole is available in a solution for injection at a concentration of 2 mg/ml in glass 
56 bottles and V iaflex® Plus plastic containers containing either 100ml (200 
mg) or 200ml (400 mg). 
8.13.2 Preparation – For parenteral administration, the commercial solution for 
injection is available in its final form for administration (concentration of 
2 mg/ml).  
8.13.3 Storage and  Stability – Oral tablets and oral suspension should be stored at 
temperatures below 30oC (86oF).  Store reconstituted oral suspension 
between 5o to 30oC (41o to 86oF) and discard unused portion after 2 weeks.  
Fluconazole for injection in glass bottles sh ould be stored between 5o to 
30oC (41o to 86oF).  Fluconazole for injection in Viaflex® Plus plastic 
containers should be stored between 5o to 25oC (41o to 77oF). 
8.13.4 Administration – Oral and parenteral.  Parenteral doses should be 
administered by an intraven ous infusion at a maximum rate of 200mg/hr. 
8.13.5 Toxicities – Nausea, vomiting, headache, skin rash, abdominal pain, 
diarrhea have been reported at an incidence of 1% or greater in clinical trials.  In combined clinical trials and marketing experience, there have been rare cases of serious hepatic reactions during treatment with fluconazole.  The spectrum of these hepatic reactions has ranged from mild transient elevation in transaminases to clinical hepatitis, cholestasis and fulminant hepatic failure, including fatalities.  
8.13.6 Drug Interactions – Fluconazole is a potent inhibitor of the cytochrome 
P450 3A4 isoenzyme system.  Coadministration of fluconazole with other drugs metabolized by the same enzyme system may result in increased plasma concentrations of the drugs, which could increase or prolong therapeutic and adverse effects.  Refer to the package literature or other drug information resources for additional information on identification and management of potential drug interactions. 
8.14 TRIMETHOPRIM/SULFAMETHOXA ZOLE (TMP/SMX, Cotrimoxazole, 
Bactrim, Septra)  
8.14.1 Supply – Commercially available as
 a single strength tablet  containing 
trimethoprim 80mg and sulfamethoxazole 400mg and a double strength (DS) tablet containing trimethoprim 160mg and sulfamethoxaole 800mg.  It is also available in a oral suspension at a concentration of 40mg of trimethoprim and 200mg sulfamethoxazole per 5ml.  Parenteral TMP/SMX is available in a solution for injection at a concentration of 80mg of trimethoprim and 400mg of sulfamethoxazole per 5ml.  
8.14.2 Preparation –
 For parenteral administration, the commercial solution for 
injection must be diluted prior to administration.  It is recommended that each 5ml of the solution for injection be diluted with 100- 125 ml or, if 
fluid restriction is requir ed, in 75ml of dextrose 5% in water.  Normal 
saline (0.9% sodium chloride) may be substituted as a diluent but the resulting solutions have reduced stability.  Consult with pharmacy for questions regarding diluent, volume, and expiration. 
8.14.3 Storage and Stabi lity –
 Oral tablets and oral suspension should be stored at 
15o to 30oC (59o to 86oF) in a dry place and protected from light.  
TMP/SMX for injection should be stored at room temperature between 15o 
57 to 30oC (59o to 86oF) and should not be refrigerated.  Stability of 
intravenous doses after final dilution is dependent on concentration and 
diluent.  Consult with pharmacy for questions regarding stability and expiration dating. 
8.14.4 Administration –
 Oral and parenteral.  Parenteral doses should be 
administered by  an intravenous infusion over 60 to 90 minutes. 
8.14.5 Toxicities – The most common adverse effects from TMP/SMX are 
gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting, anorexia) and allergic skin reactions (such as rash and urticaria).  Fatalities associated with t he 
administration of sulfonamides, although rare, have occurred due to severe reactions, including Stevens -Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, fulminant hepatic necrosis, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia and other blood dyscrasias.  For TMP/SMX injection, local reaction, pain and slight irritationon IV administration are infrequent.  Thrombophlebitis has rarely been observed.  
8.15 MEDROXYPROGESTERONE ACETATE (Provera)  
8.15.1 Supply – Commercially available as 2.5mg, 5mg, and 20mg tablets. 
8.15.2 Storage – Tablets sh ould be stored at controlled room temperature 20
o to 
25oC (68o to 77oF). 
8.15.3 Administration – Oral.  
8.15.4 Toxicities – nausea, breast tenderness or galactorrhea, sensitivity reactions 
(urticaria, pruritis, edema, rash), acne, alopecia, hirsutism, fluid retention, mental depression, cholestatic jaundice, changes in cervical erosion and 
cervical secretions, breakthrough bleeding or spotting, and thromboembolic phenomena. 
8.16 IMMUNE GLOBULIN INTRAVENOUS (IGIV)  
8.16.1 Supply – Commercially available (multiple sources) in a variety of 
formulations, including solution for injection and powder for injection in a variety of vial sizes.  
8.16.2 Preparation – Refer to the manufacturer’s package labeling for guidelines 
in preparation. 
8.16.3 Storage and Stability – Refer to the manufacturer’s package lab eling for 
storage and stability information.  
8.16.4 Administration – Intravenous infusion.  Refer to the manufacturer’s 
package labeling for recommendations on rate of administration. 
8.16.5 Toxicities:  
a) Infusion related toxicities may occur.  Symptoms may include flushi ng, feelings of tightness in the chest, chills, fever, dizziness, 
nausea, diaphoresis, backache, leg cramps, urticaria, and hypotension or hypertension.  Slowing or stopping the infusion usually allows the symptoms to disappear promptly.  Immediate anaphyl actic and 
hypersensitivity reactions are a remote possibility.  Patients with IgA deficiency who have developed antibodies to IgA have an increased risk of anaphylactic reactions when treated with IgA -containing IGIV 
products. 
58 b) Immune Globulin Intravenous products have been associated with 
renal dysfunction, acute renal failure, osmotic nephrosis, and death.  Patients predisposed to acute renal failure include patients with any degree of pre -existing renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, > 65 years 
of age,  volume depletion, sepsis, paraproteinemia, or patients receiving 
known nephrotoxic drugs. Especially in such patients, IGIV products should be administered at the minimum concentration available and the minimum rate of infusion practicable. While these re ports of renal 
dysfunction and acute renal failure have been associated with the use of many of the licensed IGIV products, those containing sucrose as a stabilizer accounted for a disproportionate share of the total number. 
c) Since Immune Globulin Intravenous products are made from human plasma, there is the risk of transmitting infectious agents such as viruses that can cause disease.  This risk has been reduced by screening plasma donors, testing for certain virus infections, and by inactivating a nd/or removing certain viruses. 
d) An aseptic meningitis syndrome has been reported to occur infrequently in association with IGIV treatment.  
e) There is also clinical evidence of a possible association between IGIV administration and thrombotic events. The exac t cause of this is 
unknown; therefore caution should be exercised in the prescribing and infusion of IGIV in patients with a history of cardiovascular disease or thrombotic episodes. 
  
59 9.0 Appendices  
 
9.1 Appendix A:  Prophylaxis and Treatment of Infectious Compli cations in 
Allogeneic HSCT  Recipients  
Note:  The practice guidelines included in this Appendix are based upon the best 
available clinical evidence and may change as additional data become available.  
9.1.1 Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia 
f) At the start of pre -transp lant induction chemotherapy, all patients will 
receive trimethoprim 160 mg/sulfamethoxazole 800 mg (TMP/SMX 160/800), one tablet PO BID on two days per week (e.g., on each Saturday and Sunday).  This will continue until completion of induction chemotherapy. 
g) Upon admission for the transplant conditioning regimen (day –7), all 
patients will receive TMP/SMX 160/800, one tablet PO BID, continuing daily through the evening of day –2. 
h) Prophylaxis is resumed when the absolute neutrophil count is greater 
than 1000/ µl and the platelet count is consistently above 50,000/mm3 
for two consecutive days without transfusion.  Note : TMP/SMX 
should not be resumed before the last day of methotrexate 
administration (day +11 – see Section 3.5.3).   The dose for post -
transplant prophylaxis is TMP/SMX 160/800, one tablet PO BID on 
two days per week, continuing for 6 months after transplantation or until the patient is off immunosuppression, whichever is longer.  For 
patients allergic to sulfa, see discussion in “Rationale”, below.  
 
FUNGAL PATHOGENS  
9.1.2 Yeast Infections  Rationale : 
• PCP is common (incidence 21 cases per 100 patients/year in the absence of prophylaxis), 
potentially lethal and preventable.  It is not known when it is safe to discontinue prophylaxis, 
but CDC guidelines recommend prophylaxis for 6 months after transplant unless there is 
persistent immunosuppression (i.e., steroids).  In a case series reported in 1996, late PCP happened only in patients receiving steroids for GVHD [77]7]. 
• The CDC reco mmends TMP/SMX 160/800 daily OR 80/400 daily OR 160/800 three 
days/week.  The “weekend” regimen has not been shown to be equivalent in RCT, but has been used widely in BMT and solid organ transplant. 
• Chronic GVHD in the absence of active immunosuppressive treatment probably does not 
require PCP prophylaxis.  A convenient alternative in this setting is TMP/SMX 80/400 daily, 
as this provides prophylaxis for PCP and bacterial infections. 
• The alternative regimens for PCP prophylaxis are less effective than TMP/SMX.  Pentamidine inhalation 300 mg/4 weeks is felt to be the least effective regimen [78]8] .  There is ample 
documentation in the HIV literature that pentamidine 300 mg q 2 weeks is more effective than 
monthly, so this may be considered an option in selected cases [79-81]1] .  Dapsone is the 
recommended alternative, but its use is often impractical due to occasional cross- reactivity with 
TMP/SMX . Also, dapsone has known hepatotoxicity, so it may be difficult to use in patients 
with already abnormal liver enzymes.   Atovaquone has been used successfully in liver 
transplantation [82]2] , HIV [83, 84]4]  and autologous BMT [85]5] . 
60 a) On day 6 of the first cycle of pre -transplant induction chemotherapy, 
all patients will begin fluconazole 400 mg PO daily.  Because of its 
interaction with vincristine, fluconazole will be discontinued during days 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of induction chemotherapy.  Fluconazole will then be restarted on day 6 of each cycle.  
b) Patients will continue fluconazole 400 mg PO daily throughout the transplant conditioning regimen (day –6) until 100 days after 
transplantation or until the patient is off immunosuppression, whichever is longer.  Intravenous dosing will be substituted when 
patients are unable to tolerate oral medications.  
Rationale : 
The CDC Guidelines recommend fluconazole until day 30 (or 7 days of ANC > 1000/ µl) only.  
However, the long- term follow -up [86] of the Seattle stu dy that showed decreased fungal infections 
and improved survival [87] suggests that fluconazole for 75 days protects from gut GVHD, 
dissemi nated candidal infections and candidiasis- related death.  For this reason we prefer to continue 
fluconazole administration until day 100 or the end of immunosuppressive treatment, whichever is 
longer.  
 
9.1.3 Mould Infections (including Aspergillus ) 
a) During Neut ropenia :  Neutropenic patients who are febrile for more 
than 5 days despite broad- spectrum antibiotics and have no clinical 
evidence of invasive fungal disease will receive liposomal amphotericin B (Ambisome) 5 mg/kg/day or voriconazole 6 mg/kg q12h for two doses and then 4 mg/kg q12h.  This therapy will continue 
until the patient attains an ANC > 500/ µl AND is afebrile for 24 hours.  
Fluconazole prophylaxis will be discontinued during this therapy. 
Rationale : 
The empirical use of antifungal therapy during neutropenia is controversial.  Less than 5% of patients 
with persistent fever during neutropenia have a documented fungal infection.  Only one RCT has 
shown decreased fungal infection- related death with the empirical addition of amphotericin B in 
neutropen ic fever, and this study actually failed to show an overall survival advantage [88].  The 
relevance of these results to patients with short neutropenia (median = 9 days) who are receiving 
fluconazole prophylaxis is questionable.  The most recent trial of empirical antifungal therapy in 
febrile neutropen ic patients showed 19 fungal infections in 837 patients at the time of initiating 
antifungal therapy and another 29 documented “breakthrough” invasive fungal infections during 
follow- up.  In the high -risk subgroup (relapsed leukemia and/or allogeneic bone marrow transplant), 
the prevalence of breakthrough fungal infections was higher (15/289) [89].  Our recommendations are 
based on the following reasoning:  if persistent fever during neutropenia is a manifestation of an occult 
fungal infection in our patients (severely immunosuppressed, with short neutropenia and long- term use 
of fluconazole), then the most likely pathogens (fluconazole -resistant Candida and Aspergillus) are 
probably better treated with high- dose liposomal amphotericin B (at least 5 mg/kg).  As all the 
allogeneic HSCT patients receive cyclosporine after transplantation, liposomal amphotericin B is the 
lipid formulation of choice.  Voriconazole is a valid alternative, and in the mentioned study was 
associated with significantly fewer breakthrough fungal infections than Ambisome [89]. 
 
VIRAL PATHOGENS  
61 9.1.4 Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) and Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV)  
a) All patients will receive valacyclovir 500 mg PO QD for suppression 
of HSV and VZV infection/reactivation.  This prophylaxis will begin 
when patients start induction chemotherapy (EPOCH -F/R) and 
continue throughout transplantation.  Valacylovir will continue for 6 months after transplantation or until the end of immunosuppression, whichever is longer.  If a patient cannot take oral medications, acyclovir 250 mg/m
2 IV q12h will be substituted for valacyclovir. 
Rationale : 
• HSV is an important cause of morbidity after high- dose chemotherapy.  Several effective regimens 
are available.  Every patient receives prophylaxis regardless of HSV serology because of the 
possibility of primary infection after the test, and the fact that valacyclovir may also prevent VZV 
reactivation.  There is no compelling reason to try to prevent HSV beyond the period of mucositis, 
but our patients will remain on valacyclovir for a minimum of 6 months. 
• VZV reactivates in a significant proportion of allogeneic HSCT recipients once antiviral agents 
are stopped (30 -60% in the first year).  The morbidity associated with VZV reactivation is high.  
Hence, prophylaxis with antiviral agents is accepted practice (“...this therapy could be considered 
for use among HSCT recipients with severe, long -term immunodeficiency” [90]).  Low -dose 
acyclovir (400 mg/d) administered until the end of immunosuppressive therapy has been reported 
to significantly decrease the incidence of reactivation [91].  It is not known which antiviral and 
what dose are best to prevent VZV, or for how long to administer it.  The universal experience seems to be that reactivation is unusual for as long as patients are on any prophylactic anti -
herpesvirus agent [92, 93] .  We prefer valacyclovir because of th e convenience of once daily 
dosing, although it is not FDA -approved for this indication.  
 
9.1.5 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
a) Preemptive Therapy Before Day +100 :  Patients with positive pre -
transplant serologies for CMV, or whose donors have positive serologies, will undergo weekly monitoring of CMV antigenemia.  
Antigenemia monitoring will begin at the time of engraftment after transplantation and continue through day +100.  If a patient has an 
ANC < 1000/ µl, CMV monitoring will be performed via polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) instead of antigenemia.  If antigenemia becomes 
positive (expressed as the number of positive cells per 400,000 white blood cells) before day +100, then patients will be treated with oral valganciclovir, IV ganciclovir, or IV foscarnet according to the following schema:  
  
62 # Of  
(+) cells  Rx: 
VALGANCICLOVIR  Rx: 
IV GANCICLOVIR  Monitoring  Reinduction  
Any Valganciclovir  
induction:  
900 mg PO q12h 
for 7 days , then 
maintenance:  
900 mg/24h  
until antigenemia is  
negative x 2 weeks*  Ganciclovir  
induction:  
5 mg/kg IV q12h 
for 7 days , then 
maintenance:  
5 mg/kg/24h 5 days/week 
until antigenemia is 
negative x 2 weeks*  Weekly 
antigenemia 1. If antigenemia 
becomes positive after being 
negative  
2. For doubling of antigenemia 
*I.e., on two consecutive weekly antigenemia tests.  This may include tests performed during the 
two-week period of induction therapy.  
 
NOTES :  
• Valganciclovir and ganciclovir may cause bone marrow suppression.  If ANC < 
1000:  Start filgrastim (G -CSF) 5 -10 µg/kg/d  
• Weekly IVIG infusion has no proven benefit in the setting of CMV reactivation without established infection.  Therefore, its use will be limited to patients with 
CMV pneumonitis (or other target organ infection, at the investigators’ discretion). 
 
Indications for IV ganciclovir:  
• GVHD with diarrhea or clinical suspicion of malabsorption  
Indications for foscarnet : 
• ANC < 500/μl despite G -CSF 
• Platelets < 20,000/mm
3 
• Resistance to ganciclovir :  rising antigenemia after 3 weeks with no response to 
ganci clovir reinduction. 
 
Dose Adjustments for Renal Insufficiency  
 
Valganciclovir   Ganciclovir  
Calculated 
CrCl  Induction  Maintenance   Calculated 
CrCl  Induction  Maintenance  
>60 900 mg q12h  900 mg q24h   >70 5 mg/kg q12h  5 mg/kg q24h  
40-59 450 mg q 12h  450 mg q 24h   >50-69 2.5 mg/kg q12h  2.5 mg/kg q24h  
25-39 450 mg q 24h  450 mg q 48h   25-49 2.5 mg/kg/24h  1.25 mg/kg/24h  
10-24 450 mg q 48h  450 mg 2x/week   10-24 1.25 mg/kg/24h  0.625 mg/kg/24h  
    <10 1.25 mg/kg 3x/wk  0.625 mg/kg 3x/wk  
 
b) Preemptive Therapy After  Day +100 :  Patients who remain at risk for 
CMV reactivation after day +100 will continue to have antigenemia 
(or PCR) monitoring performed weekly.  These patients include: 
• Patients with chronic GVHD and systemic steroid therapy  
• Patients undergoing transplantation from unrelated donors 
• Patients receiving T cell -depleted allogeneic HSCT  
63 Note that pre -emptive therapy after day +100 differs in both threshold 
and duration from that administered before day +100.  The treatment 
schema follows:  
 
# Of  
(+) cells  Rx: 
VALGANCICLOVIR  Rx: 
IV GANCICLOVIR  Monitoring  Reinduction  
1 cell  None  None  Repeat 
antigenemia 
in 3 days   
> 1 cell  Valganciclovir  
induction:  
900 mg PO q12h 
for 7 days , then 
maintenance:  
900 mg/24h  
until antigenemia is  
negative x 2 weeks*  Ganciclovir  
induction:  
5 mg/kg IV q12h 
for 7 days , then 
maintenance:  
5 mg/kg/24h 5 days/week 
until antigenemia is 
negative x 2 weeks*  Weekly 
antigenemia 1. If antigenemia 
becomes positive 
after being negative  
2. For doubling of antigenemia 
*I.e., on two consecutive weekly  antigenemia tests.  This may include tests performed during the 
two-week period of induction therapy. 
 
Rationale : 
Valganciclovir is has proven similar efficacy to IV ganciclovir in a randomized controlled trial of 
therapy for retinitis in AIDS [94].  Both drugs have NOT been shown to be equivalent in the setting of 
allogeneic HSCT, and the preferred treatment is IV ganciclovir as per the CDC guidelines [95].  In 
particular, when there is a strong concern with drug absorption, ganciclovir is the treatment of choice.  
Others and we have used valganciclovir successfully during the national shortage of ganciclovir, but 
there is still no strong evidence to support its use for this indication.  
 
9.1.6 Bacterial Pathogens  
a) Prophylaxis During Chronic GVHD :  All patients receiving treatment 
for chronic GVHD will receive penicillin V 500 mg PO BID until treatment for chronic GVHD is discontinued.  For penicillin -allergic 
patients, TMP/SMX 80/400 PO QD can be used.  For patients allergic to both penicillin and sulfa, clarithromycin 500 mg PO QD can be used. 
Rationale : 
There is an increased risk of infection caused by encapsulated organisms, particularly Streptococcus 
pneumoniae  in patients with chronic GVHD [96].  Functional hyposplenism has been considered, and 
some investigators have attempted to monitor it by ultrasound [97].  Current recomm endations support 
the use of antibiotic prophylaxis with penicillin to prevent these infections [90].  TMP/SMX could be 
substituted, but only when administered daily.  
 
b) Vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae  and Haemophilus 
influenzae :  All patients will receive Streptococcus pneum oniae  23-
valent polysaccharide vaccine (Pneumovax) at 12 and 24 months, and Hib vaccine at 12, 14 and 24 months after transplant.  An alternative 
64 vaccine against Streptococcus pneumoniae  may be adopted when it 
becomes available.  
Rationale : 
• The Hib vaccine has been shown to induce neutralizing antibodies effectively [98] . 
• The pneumococcal vaccine may be effective and is safe.  
  
65 9.2 Appendix B:  Management of Engraftment Syndrome (ES)  
 
Clinical Definition of Engraftment Syndrome  
 A constellation of clinical symptoms and signs has been observed during neutrophil recovery following HSCT, most commonly termed “engraftment syndrome” (ES), but interchangeably termed “capillary leak syndrome” and “autoaggression syndrome”.  Engraftment syndromes 
have been observed after both autologous and allogeneic HSCT; in the latter setting, the clinical sequelae of neutrophil recovery were historically attributed to an early, sometimes “hyperacute” graft -versus- host reaction.  Our current understanding of ES holds the overproduction of pro-
inflammatory cytokines at the time of neutrophil recovery to be the initiating event.  The study of ES has been somewhat hindered by the lack of uniform definition for t his clinical entity; 
therefore, the following criteria have been proposed [73]:  
Major criteria:  • Fever > 38.3° with no identifiable infectious etiology  
• Erythrodermatous rash involving more than 25% of body 
surface area and not attributable to a medication  
• Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, manifested by diffuse 
pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxia 
Minor criteria  • Hepatic dysfunction with either total bilirubin > 2 mg/dl 
or tran saminases levels > two times normal 
• Renal insufficiency (serum creatinine > two times 
baseline)  
• Weight gain > 2.5% of baseline body weight 
• Transient encephalopathy unexplainable by other causes 
 
A diagnosis of ES is established by the presence of all three major criteria, or two major criteria 
and one or more minor criteria; the clinical signs and symptoms should appear within 96 hours of neutrophil recovery, according to the above proposed definition.  
Treatment of Engraftment Syndrome:  
 
The mainstay of therapy for ES is high- dose corticosteroids.  This approach is derived from the 
literature on diffuse alveolar hemorrhage [99] in the setting of bone marrow transplantation – a 
complication that many investigators now believe to be part of the spectrum of ES.  Our group has adopted the following treatment schema for patients diagnosed with ES, with satisfactory results:  
 
Day 1:   Methylprednisolone 250 mg IV Q6 hours x 4 doses 
Day 2:   Methylprednisolone 250 mg IV Q8 hours x 3 doses 
Day 3:   Methylprednisolone 250 mg IV Q12 hours x 2 doses 
Day 4:   Methylprednisolone 125 mg IV Q12 hours x 2 doses 
Day 5:   Methylprednisolone 60 mg IV Q12 hours x 2 doses 
Day 6:  Methylprednisolone 30 mg IV Q12 hours x 2 doses 
Days 7 -8: Prednisone 60 mg PO QD x 2 days 
Days 9 -10: Prednisone 50 mg PO QD x 2 days 
66 Days 11 -12: Prednisone 40 mg PO QD x 2 days 
Days 13 -14: Prednisone 30 mg PO QD x 2 days 
Days 15 -16: Prednisone 20 mg PO QD x 2 days 
Days 17 -18: Prednisone 10 mg PO QD x 2 days 
Day 19: Discontinue prednisone 
 
In the event that symptoms or clinical signs of ES recur during the steroid taper, patients should be retreated with methylprednisolone at a minimum dose of 60 mg IV Q D.  This schema is 
intended to serve as a guideline and to promote consistency in our clinical practice; it may be modified for individual patients as clinical circumstances warrant. 
  
67 9.3 Appendix C:  Grading and Management of Acute Graft -Versus -Host Disease  
 
Clinical Staging of Acute GVHD [74] 
 
Stage  Skin  Liver  Gut 
+ Rash < 25% BSA  Total bilirubin 2 -3 mg/dl  Diarrhea 500 -1000ml/d  
++ Rash 25-50% BSA  Total bilirubin 3 -6 mg/dl  Diarrhea 1000 -1500ml/d 
+++ Generalized erythoderma  Total bilirubin 6 -15 mg/dl  Diarrhea >1500ml/d  
++++ Desquamation and bullae  Total bilirubin > 15 mg/dl  Pain +/ - ileus  
BSA = body surface area; use “rule of nines” or burn chart to determine extent of rash.  
 
Clinical Grading of Acute GVHD [74] 
 
 Stage  
Grade  Skin  Liver  Gut PS 
0 (none)  0 0 0 0 
I + to ++ 0 0 0 
II + to +++  + + + 
III ++ to +++  ++ to +++  ++ to +++  ++ 
IV ++ to ++++  ++ to ++++  ++ to ++++  +++ 
 
Treatment of Acute GVHD 
This schema is intended to serve as a guideline and to promote consistency in our clinical 
practice; it may be modified for individual patients as clinical circumstances warrant. 
 Grade 0 -I GVHD:  
1) Topical corticosteroids (usually 0.1% triamcinolone; 1% hydrocortisone to face) applied to 
rash BID.  
 
Grade II -IV GVHD:   
1) Methylprednisolone (MP) 62.5 mg/m2 per dose IV, BID for 4 consecutive days. 
2) If no response after 4 days, continue until response (7- day maximum trial).  
3) If response within 7 days, taper as follows: 
a) 50 mg/m2 per dose IV BID for 2 days. 
b) 37.5 mg/m2 per dose IV BID for 2 days. 
c) 25 mg/m2 per dose IV BID for 2 days. 
d) If clinically appropriate, change MP to oral prednisone 100 mg PO (or oral equivalent of IV dose) daily for 2 days.  MP may be converted to prednisone later in the taper at the investigators’ discretion. 
e) After this, steroids will be reduced by 10% each week until a dose of 10 mg/day is 
reached.  Subsequent reductions will be made at the investigators’ discretion. 
f) If GVHD worsens during taper, steroids should be increased to previous dose. 
g) During steroid taper, maintain cyclosporine at therapeutic levels (Section 3.5.1). 
4) If no response is observed within 7 days of MP treatment: 
a) Increase Methylprednisolone to 500 mg/m
2 per dose IV, BID for 2 days. 
68 b) If there is no improvement, consideration will be given to using second- line 
immunosuppressive therapy, e.g., tacrolimus, mycophenolic acid, monoclonal 
antibodies, or studies of investigational agents for acute GVHD, if they are available. 
5) Antifungal prophylaxis with agents effective against mould will be started when it is anticipated that the patient will be receiving steroids at >
 1 mg/kg/d of methylprednisolone 
(or equivalent) for >  2 weeks.  Voriconazole is the agent of choice, but liposomal 
amphotericin B (Ambisome) 5 mg/kg/d or amphotericin B lipid complex (Abelcet) 5 mg/kg/d are valid alternatives.  During prophylaxis with any of the above agents, fluconazole should 
be discontinued.  In patients with therapeutic cyclosporine levels at the initiation of voriconazole therapy, the cyclosporine dose should be decreased by approximately 50%. 
6) Determination of GVHD treatment response should be made within 96 hours of starting the 
treatment.  The following are criteria to determine definitions of response to GVHD treatment: 
a) Complete response:  Complete resolution of all clinical signs a nd symptoms of acute 
GVHD.  
b) Partial Response: 50% reduction in skin rash, stool volume or frequency, and/or total bilirubin.  Maintenance of adequate performance status (Karnofsky Score >
 70%).  
c) Non-responder: < 50% reduction in skin rash, stool volume or frequency, and/or total 
bilirubin.  Failure to maintain adequate performance status (Karnofsky Score ≤ 70%).  
d) Progressive disease:  Further progression of signs and symptoms of acute GVHD, and/or decline in performance status after the initiation of therapy.  
69 10.0 References  
 
1. Champlin, R.E., T-cell depletion for bone marrow transplantation: effects on graft rejection, 
graft- versus -host disease, graft- versus-leukemia, and survival. Cancer Treatment & Research, 
1990. 50 : p. 99-111. 
2. Giralt, S.A. and H.J. Kolb, Donor lymphocyte infusions. Current Opinion in Oncology, 1996. 
8(2): p. 96-102. 
3. Martin, P.J., et al., Graft failure in patients receiving T cell -depleted HLA-identical allogeneic 
marrow transplants. Bone Marrow Transplantation, 1988. 3(5): p. 445-56. 
4. Giralt, S., et al., Engraftment of allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cells with purine analog-
containing chemotherapy: harnessing graft- versus- leukemia without myeloablati ve therapy.  
Blood, 1997. 89 (12): p. 4531-6. 
5. Slavin, S., et al., Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to 
conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for the treatment of 
malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Blood, 1998. 91(3): p. 756-63. 
6. Cheson, B.D., Infectious and immunosuppressive complications of purine analog therapy. Journal 
of Clinical Oncology, 1995. 13(9): p. 2431-48. 
7. Williamson, L.M., et al., Fludarabine treatment and transfusion-associated graft- versus- host 
disease. [letter; comment.].  Lancet, 1996. 348 (9025): p. 472 -3. 
8. Khouri, I.F., et al., Transplant- lite: induction of graft -versus- malignancy using fludarabine -based 
nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic blood progenitor- cell transplantation as treatment for 
lymphoid malignancies. [see comments.]. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 1998. 16(8): p. 2817-24. 
9. Mosmann, T.R., et al., Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles 
of lymp hokine activities and secreted proteins. Journal of Immunology, 1986. 136 (7): p. 2348-57. 
10. Ferrara, J.L. and H.J. Deeg, Graft -versus- host disease. [see comments.].  New England Journal of 
Medicine, 1991. 324 (10): p. 667-74. 
11. Fowler, D.H., et al., Cell s of Th2 cytokine phenotype prevent LPS -induced lethality during murine 
graft- versus -host reaction. Regulation of cytokines and CD8+ lymphoid engraftment. Journal of 
Immunology, 1994. 152(3): p. 1004-13. 
12. Fowler, D.H., et al., Donor CD4 -enriched cells o f Th2 cytokine phenotype regulate graft- versus -
host disease without impairing allogeneic engraftment in sublethally irradiated mice. Blood, 1994. 84 (10): p. 3540-9. 
13. Petrus, M.J., et al., An immunoablative regimen of fludarabine and cyclophosphamide pre vents 
fully MHC -mismatched murine marrow graft rejection independent of GVHD. Biology of Blood 
& Marrow Transplantation, 2000. 6 (2A): p. 182-9. 
14. Briones, J., A. Pereira, and I. Alcorta, Transfusion- associated graft -versus -host disease (TA-
GVHD) in fluda rabine- treated patients: is it time to irradiate blood component? [letter; 
comment.].  British Journal of Haematology, 1996. 93(3): p. 739-41. 
15. Fenchel, K., et al., Clinical experience with fludarabine and its immunosuppressive effects in 
pretreated chro nic lymphocytic leukemias and low -grade lymphomas. Leukemia & Lymphoma, 
1995. 18 (5-6): p. 485-92. 
16. Wilson, W.H., et al., EPOCH chemotherapy: toxicity and efficacy in relapsed and refractory non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology., 1993. 11(8): p. 1573-82. 
17. Wilson, W.H., et al., Dose -adjusted EPOCH chemotherapy for untreated large B- cell 
lymphomas: a pharmacodynamic approach with high efficacy. Blood, 2002. 99 (8): p. 2685-2693. 
18. Gutierrez, M., et al., Role of a doxorubicin- containing regimen in relapsed and resistant 
lymphomas: an 8- year follow -up study of EPOCH. Journal of Clinical Oncology., 2000. 18 (21): 
p. 3633-42. 
19. O'Brien, S., et al., Results of fludarabine and prednisone therapy in 264 patients with chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia with multivariate analysis -derived prognostic model for response to 
treatment. [see comments.].  Blood, 1993. 82 (6): p. 1695-700. 
70 20. Zaja, F., et al., Combined therapy with Fludarabine and cyclophosphamide in relapsed/resistant 
patients with B- cell chron ic lymphocytic leukaemia and non- Hodgkin's lymphomas. European 
Journal of Haematology, 1997. 59(5): p. 327-8. 
21. McConkey, D.J., et al., Apoptosis sensitivity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia is determined by 
endogenous endonuclease content and relative expression of BCL -2 and BAX.  Journal of 
Immunology, 1996. 156(7): p. 2624-30. 
22. Wilson, W.H., et al., The role of rituximab and chemotherapy in aggressive B-cell lymphoma: a 
preliminary report of dose-adjusted EPOCH- R. Seminars in Oncology., 2002. 29(1 Suppl 2): p. 
41-7. 
23. Vose, J.M., et al., Phase II Study of Rituximab in Combination With CHOP Chemotherapy in 
Patients With Previously Untreated, Aggressive Non -Hodgkin's Lymphoma. J Clin Oncol, 2001. 
19(2): p. 389-397. 
24. Coiffier, B., et al., CHOP Che motherapy plus Rituximab Compared with CHOP Alone in Elderly 
Patients with Diffuse Large -B-Cell Lymphoma. N Engl J Med, 2002. 346(4): p. 235-242. 
25. Khouri, I.F., et al., Nonablative allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation as adoptive 
immunotherapy for indolent lymphoma: low incidence of toxicity, acute graft- versus -host disease, 
and treatment- related mortality.  Blood, 2001. 98 (13): p. 3595 -3599. 
26. Ratanatharathorn, V., Anti-CD20 chimeric monoclonal antibody treatment of refractory immune-
mediated throm bocytopenia in a patient with chronic graft- versus -host disease. Annals of 
Internal Medicine, 2000. 133(4): p. 275-9. 
27. Champlin, R., et al., Reinventing bone marrow transplantation. Nonmyeloablative preparative 
regimens and induction of graft -vs-maligna ncy effect.  Oncology (Huntington), 1999. 13(5): p. 
621-8; discussion 631. 
28. Storb, R., et al., Cyclosporine v methotrexate for graft -v-host disease prevention in patients given 
marrow grafts for leukemia: long -term follow -up of three controlled trials.  Blood, 1988. 71 (2): p. 
293-8. 
29. Storb, R., et al., Methotrexate and cyclosporine compared with cyclosporine alone for 
prophylaxis of acute graft versus host disease after marrow transplantation for leukemia. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 1986. 314(12):  p. 729-35. 
30. Storb, R., et al., Methotrexate and cyclosporine versus cyclosporine alone for prophylaxis of 
graft- versus -host disease in patients given HLA-identical marrow grafts for leukemia: long- term 
follow-up of a controlled trial. Blood, 1989. 73(6): p. 1729-34. 
31. Yau, J.C., et al., An effective acute graft -vs.-host disease prophylaxis with minidose methotrexate, 
cyclosporine, and single -dose methylprednisolone.  American Journal of Hematology., 1991. 
38(4): p. 288-92. 
32. Przepiorka, D., et al., T acrolimus and minidose methotrexate for prevention of acute graft -versus -
host disease after matched unrelated donor marrow transplantation. Blood., 1996. 88(11): p. 4383-9. 
33. Yau, J.C., et al., Methylprednisolone, cyclosporine and methotrexate for prophy laxis of acute 
graft- versus -host disease. Bone Marrow Transplantation, 1990. 5 (4): p. 269-72. 
34. Atkinson, K. and K. Downs, Omission of day 11 methotrexate does not appear to influence the 
incidence of moderate to severe acute graft -versus -host disease, chronic graft- versus -host 
disease, relapse rate or survival after HLA -identical sibling bone marrow transplantation.  Bone 
Marrow Transplantation, 1995. 16(6): p. 755-8. 
35. Giralt, S., et al., Melphalan and purine analog- containing preparative regimens: reduced -
intensity conditioning for patients with hematologic malignancies undergoing allogeneic 
progenitor cell transplantation. Blood, 2001. 97 (3): p. 631-7. 
36. Wasch, R., et al., Rapid achievement of complete donor chimerism and low regimen-related 
toxicity after reduced conditioning with fludarabine, carmustine, melphalan and allogeneic 
transplantation.  Bone Marrow Transplantation, 2000. 26(3): p. 243-50. 
71 37. Corradini, P., et al., Reduced -intensity conditioning followed by allografting of hematopoietic 
cells can produce clinical and molecular remissions in patients with poor-risk hematologic 
malignancies. Blood, 2002. 99(1): p. 75-82. 
38. Childs, R., et al., Engraftment kinetics after nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem 
cell transplantation: full donor T- cell chimerism precedes alloimmune responses.  Blood, 1999. 
94(9): p. 3234-41. 
39. Hakim, F.T., et al., Constraints on CD4 recovery postchemotherapy in adults: thymic 
insufficiency and apoptotic decline of expanded peripheral CD4 cells. Blood, 1997. 90(9): p. 
3789-98. 
40. Cheson, B.D., et al., Report of an international workshop to standardize response criteria for 
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. NCI Sponsored International Working Group. [erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 2000 Jun;18(11):2351.]. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 1999. 17(4): p. 1244. 
41. Kostakoglu, L. and S.J. Goldsmith, Fluorine -18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography in the staging and follow-up of lymphoma: is it time to shift gears? European Journal 
of Nuclear Medicine, 2000. 27(10): p. 1564-78. 
42. Mackall, C.L., T- cell immunodeficiency following cytotoxic antineoplastic therapy: a review.  
Oncologist, 1999. 4(5): p. 370-8. 
43. Fry, T.J. and C.L. Mackall, Interleukin -7: from bench to clinic. Blood, 2002. 99(11): p. 3892-
3904. 
44. Bolotin, E., et al., Enhancement of thymopoiesis after bone marrow transplant by in vivo 
interleukin -7. Blood, 1996. 88(5): p. 1887-1894. 
45. Fry, T.J., et al., A potential role for interleukin -7 in T -cell homeostasis. Blood, 2001. 97(10): p. 
2983-2990. 
46. Napolitano, L.A., et al., Increased production of IL -7 accompanies HIV -1-mediated T- cell 
depletion: implications for T -cell homeostasis.  Nature Medicine., 2001. 7(1): p. 73-9. 
47. Abdul-Hai, A., et al., Stimulation of immune reconstitution by interle ukin-7 after syngeneic bone 
marrow transplantation in mice. [erratum appears in Exp Hematol 1996 Nov;24(13):1540.]. 
Experimental Hematology, 1996. 24 (12): p. 1416-22. 
48. Mackall, C.L., et al., IL -7 increases both thymic -dependent and thymic-independent T- cell 
regeneration after bone marrow transplantation.  Blood, 2001. 97 (5): p. 1491-7. 
49. Alpdogan, O., et al., Administration of interleukin-7 after allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation improves immune reconstitution without aggravating graft- versus-host disease.  
Blood, 2001. 98 (7): p. 2256-65. 
50. Sinha, M.L., et al., Interleukin 7 worsens graft -versus- host disease.  Blood, 2002. 100(7): p. 2642-
2649. 
51. Waldmann, T., The contrasting roles of IL -2 and IL-15 in the life and death of lymphocytes: 
implications for the immunotherapy of rheumatological diseases. Arthritis Res, 2002. 4 Suppl 3 : 
p. S161-7. 
52. Neely, G.G., et al., Lipopolysaccharide- stimulated or granulocyte -macrophage colony -
stimulating factor -stimulated monocytes rapidly express biolo gically active IL -15 on their cell 
surface independent of new protein synthesis. J Immunol, 2001. 167 (9): p. 5011-7. 
53. Musso, T., et al., Human monocytes constitutively express membrane -bound, biologically active, 
and interferon- gamma -upregulated interle ukin-15. Blood, 1999. 93(10): p. 3531-9. 
54. Kumaki, S., et al., Prolonged secretion of IL- 15 in patients with severe forms of acute graft -
versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in children. Int J Hematol, 1998. 67 (3): p. 307-12. 
55. Thulesen, S., et al., Interleukin 15 is a growth factor for human thymocytes with preferential 
effect on CD8(+)cells.  Cytokine, 2000. 12 (6): p. 751 -5. 
56. Tan, J.T., et al., Interleukin (IL) -15 and IL- 7 jointly regulate homeostatic proliferation of mem ory 
phenotype CD8+ cells but are not required for memory phenotype CD4+ cells. J Exp Med, 2002. 195(12): p. 1523 -32. 
72 57. Zhang, X., et al., Potent and selective stimulation of memory -phenotype CD8+ T cells in vivo by 
IL-15. Immunity, 1998. 8(5): p. 591-9. 
58. Goldrath, A.W., et al., Cytokine requirements for acute and Basal homeostatic proliferation of 
naive and memory CD8+ T cells.  J Exp Med, 2002. 195 (12): p. 1515-22. 
59. Kennedy, M.K., et al., Reversible defects in natural killer and memory CD8 T cell li neages in 
interleukin 15- deficient mice.  J Exp Med, 2000. 191 (5): p. 771-80. 
60. Borthwick, N.J., et al., Loss of CD28 expression on CD8(+) T cells is induced by IL- 2 receptor 
gamma chain signalling cytokines and type I IFN, and increases susceptibility to activation -
induced apoptosis.  Int Immunol, 2000. 12 (7): p. 1005-13. 
61. Rutella, S., et al., Immune reconstitution after autologous peripheral blood progenitor cell 
transplantation: effect of interleukin -15 on T- cell survival and effector functions.  Exp Hematol, 
2001. 29 (12): p. 1503-16. 
62. Roberts, A.I., et al., NKG2D receptors induced by IL -15 costimulate CD28- negative effector CTL 
in the tissue microenvironment.  J Immunol, 2001. 167(10): p. 5527 -30. 
63. Groh, V., et al., Costimulation of CD8alphabeta T cells by NKG2D via engagement by MIC 
induced on virus -infected cells.  Nat Immunol, 2001. 2(3): p. 255-60. 
64. Cooper, M.A., T.A. Fehniger, and M.A. Caligiuri, The biology of human natural killer- cell 
subsets.  Trends Immunol, 2001. 22(11): p. 633-40. 
65. Ruggeri, L., et al., Effectiveness of donor natural killer cell alloreactivity in mismatched 
hematopoietic transplants. Science, 2002. 295 (5562): p. 2097 -100. 
66. Murphy, W.J., et al., Immunobiology of natural killer cells and bone marrow transplantation: 
merging of basic and preclinical studies. Immunol Rev, 2001. 181 : p. 279-89. 
67. Parrish -Novak, J., et al., Interleukin 21 and its receptor are involved in NK cell expansion and 
regulation of lymphocyte function. Nature, 2000. 408 (6808): p. 57-63. 
68. Popplewell, L.L. and S.J. Forman, Is there an upper age limit for bone marrow transplantation? 
Bone Marrow Transplantation., 2002. 29(4): p. 277 -84. 
69. Crawford, S.W. and L. Fisher, Predictive value of pulmonary function tests before marrow 
transplantation. [ see comments.].  Chest, 1992. 101 (5): p. 1257-64. 
70. Calhoun, D.A., et al., Granulocyte colony -stimulating factor is present in human milk and its 
receptor is present in human fetal intestine.  Pediatrics, 2000. 105(1): p. e7.  
71. Bernstein, H.M., D.A. Calhoun, and R.D. Christensen, Use of myeloid colony- stimulating factors 
in neonates with septicemia. Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 2002. 14(1): p. 91-4. 
72. Anderlini, P., et al., Allogeneic blood stem cell transplantation: considerations for donors. [see 
comments.].  Blood, 1997. 90 (3): p. 903-8. 
73. Spitzer, T.R., Engraftment syndrome following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone 
Marrow Transplantation, 2001. 27(9): p. 893-8. 
74. Glucksberg, H., et al., Clinical manifestations of graft- versus- host disease in human recipients of 
marrow from HL -A-matched sibling donors.  Transplantation, 1974. 18(4): p. 295-304. 
75. Bowden, R.A., et al., A comparison of filtered leukocyte -reduced and cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
seronegative blood products for the prevention of transfusion-associated CMV infection after 
marrow transplant. [see comments.].  Blood, 1995. 86(9): p. 3598-603. 
76. Wolfe, J.L., et al., Compatibility and stability of vincristine sulfate, doxorubicin hydrochloride, 
and etoposide in 0.9% sodium chloride injection.  American Journal of Health -System Pharmacy, 
1999. 56 (10): p. 985-9. 
77. Lyytikainen, O., et al., Late onset Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia following allogeneic bone 
marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplantation, 1996. 17 (6): p. 1057-9. 
78. Vasconcelles, M.J., et al., Aerosolized pentamidine as pneumocystis prophylaxis after bone 
marrow transplantation is inferior to other regimens and is associated with decreased survival 
and an increased risk of other infections. Biology of Blood & Marr ow Transplantation, 2000. 
6(1): p. 35-43. 
73 79. Girard, P.M., et al., Dapsone -pyrimethamine compared with aerosolized pentamidine as primary 
prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and toxoplasmosis in HIV infection. The 
PRIO Study Group.  New Engl and Journal of Medicine, 1993. 328(21): p. 1514 -20. 
80. Golden, J.A., et al., A randomized comparison of once- monthly or twice -monthly high-dose 
aerosolized pentamidine prophylaxis.  Chest, 1993. 104 (3): p. 743-50. 
81. Rizzardi, G.P., et al., Better efficacy of twice -monthly than monthly aerosolised pentamidine for 
secondary prophylaxis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients with AIDS. An Italian multicentric randomised controlled trial. The Italian PCP Study Group. Journal of Infection, 
1995. 31 (2): p. 99-105. 
82. Meyers, B., F. Borrego, and G. Papanicolaou, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia prophylaxis with 
atovaquone in trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole-intolerant orthotopic liver transplant patients: a 
preliminary study.  Liver Transpl, 2001. 7(8): p. 750 -1. 
83. Chan, C., et al., Atovaquone suspension compared with aerosolized pentamidine for prevention of 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in human immunodeficiency virus- infected subjects intolerant of 
trimethoprim or sulfonamides.  J Infect Dis, 1999. 180 (2): p. 369-76. 
84. El-Sadr, W.M., et al., Atovaquone compared with dapsone for the prevention of Pneumocystis 
carinii pneumonia in patients with HIV infection who cannot tolerate trimethoprim, sulfonamides, or both. Community Program for Clinical Research on AIDS and the AIDS Clinical Trials Group. N Engl J Med, 1998. 339(26): p. 1889-95. 
85. Colby, C., et al., A prospective randomized trial comparing the toxicity and safety of atovaquone 
with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole as Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia prophylaxis following 
autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.  Bone Marrow Transplant, 1999. 24 (8): p. 
897-902. 
86. Marr, K.A., et al., Prolonged fluconazole prophylaxis is associated with persistent protection 
against candidiasis- related death i n allogeneic marrow transplant recipients: long- term follow -
up of a randomized, placebo- controlled trial.  Blood, 2000. 96(6): p. 2055-61. 
87. Slavin, M.A., et al., Efficacy and safety of fluconazole prophylaxis for fungal infections after 
marrow transplantation --a prospective, randomized, double- blind study. J Infect Dis, 1995. 
171(6): p. 1545-52. 
88. Empiric antifungal therapy in febrile granulocytopenic patients. EORTC International 
Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group. Am J Med, 1989. 86 (6 Pt 1): p. 668-72. 
89. Walsh, T.J., et al., Voriconazole compared with liposomal amphotericin B for empirical 
antifungal therapy in patients with neutropenia and persistent fever. N Engl J Med, 2002. 346(4): 
p. 225-34. 
90. Guidelines for preventing opportuni stic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant 
recipients.  MMWR Recomm Rep, 2000. 49(RR-10): p. 1-125, CE1-7. 
91. Kanda, Y., et al., Long- term low -dose acyclovir against varicella -zoster virus reactivation after 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell  transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant, 2001. 28(7): p. 
689-92. 
92. Steer, C.B., et al., Varicella -zoster infection after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: 
incidence, risk factors and prevention with low-dose aciclovir and ganciclovir. Bone Marrow 
Transplant, 2000. 25 (6): p. 657-64. 
93. Koc, Y., et al., Varicella zoster virus infections following allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation: frequency, risk factors, and clinical outcome.  Biol Blood Marrow Transplant, 
2000. 6(1): p. 44-9. 
94. Martin, D.F., et al., A controlled trial of valganciclovir as induction therapy for cytomegalovirus 
retinitis.  N Engl J Med, 2002. 346(15): p. 1119-26. 
95. Dykewicz, C.A., Summary of the Guidelines for Preventing Opportunistic Infections among 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell T ransplant Recipients. Clin Infect Dis, 2001. 33(2): p. 139-44. 
74 96. Kulkarni, S., et al., Chronic graft versus host disease is associated with long -term risk for 
pneumococcal infections in recipients of bone marrow transplants.  Blood, 2000. 95(12): p. 3683-
6. 
97. Picardi, M., C. Selleri, and B. Rotoli, Spleen sizing by ultrasound scan and risk of pneumococcal 
infection in patients with chronic GVHD: preliminary observations. Bone Marrow Transplant, 
1999. 24 (2): p. 173-7. 
98. Vance, E., et al., Comparison of multiple immunization schedules for Haemophilus influenzae 
type b -conjugate and tetanus toxoid vaccines following bone marrow transplantation.  Bone 
Marrow Transplant, 1998. 22(8): p. 735-41. 
99. Metcalf, J.P., et al., Corticosteroids as adjunctive therapy for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage 
associated with bone marrow transplantation. University of Nebraska Medical Center Bone Marrow Transplant Group.  American Journal of Medicine, 1994. 96(4): p. 327 -34. 
 