 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effects of Sertraline on Bra in Connectivity in Adolescents w ith OC D 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
10/10/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PI: Gail A. Bernstein, M.D.  
Specific  Aims:  
Obsessive -compulsive  disorder  (OCD)  is a debilitating  anxiety  disorder  that afflicts  1-3% of youth,1,2  often  
causing  incapacitation  by obsessions  and compulsions.  Although  effective  treatments  are available,  not all 
patients  respond .3   This highlights  the need  for research  to develop  new treatments.   The groundwork  for such  
developments  will require  neurobiological  research  that will (a) further  elucidate  the neural  mechanisms  of 
disease,  (b) characterize  the specific  changes  that underlie  response  to established  treatments,  and (c) 
demonstrate  the specific  neurobiology  in patients  who do not respond  to established  treatments . Previous  
research  has suggested  that dysregulation  of the frontal -striatal -thalamic  circuitry  (FSTC)  is associated  with 
OCD.4 Functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  studies  in children  and adults  with OCD  compared  to 
controls  have  shown  decreased  activation  in FSTC  regions  during  tasks  involving  cognitive  control .5-13 Also,  
emerging  research  in OCD  using  resting -state  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (R-fMRI)14-16 and 
diffusion  imaging  (DI) has begun  to identify  alterations  in connectivity  (i.e., connections  within  networks)  within  
FSTC  and points  to alterations  in connectivity  between  the frontal  cortex  and striatum (caudate  and putamen).  
In our pilot study of 15 adolescents  with OCD (mostly  medicated)  and 12 controls,  we examined  22 specific  
connections  within  FSTC  (11 per hemisphere)  using  R-fMRI.  Findings  demonstrated  that in comparison  with 
controls,  adolescents  with OCD  show  significantly  lower  connect ivity and high effect  sizes  in 11 links.  Lower  
functional  connectivity  in 10 of these  segments   was associated  with significantly  higher   severity  on the 
Children’s  Yale-Brown  Obsessive  Compulsive  Scale  (CY-BOCS).17 Furthermor e, we examined  how specific  
dimensions  of OCD  would  map onto this circuitry.  We found  that bilaterally,  for cortical -subcortical  
connections,  the ordering/repeating  dimension  correlates  with orbitofrontal  cortex  (OFC) -subcortical  
connections,  the hoarding  dimension  correlates  with rostral  anterior  cingulate  cortex  (ACC) -subcortical  
connections,  and the forbidden  thoughts  dimension  correlates  with  caudal   ACC -subcortical   connections.  
These  data were  obtained  using  advances  in brain  imaging  acquisition  and analysis  that were  developed  at the 
University  of Minnesota  (UMN)  for the NIH-funded  Human  Connectome  Project (HCP).  We have  also begun  to 
show  that our imaging  tools  can reliably  and accurately  measure  structural  connectivity  within  deep  FSTC  
white  matter  connections  of interest.  Earlier  imaging  research  had limitations  (low spatial  and temporal  
resolution,  limited  ability  to resolve  crossing  white  matter  fibers,  and OFC  signal  drop)  that can be addressed  
with advances  at our site. Since  our pilot study  included  mostly  medicated  OCD  adolescents,  it is unclear  to 
what extent  the findings  reflect  effects  of disease,  treatment,  or both.  For example,  it may be that prior to 
medication  treatment,  group  differences  are even  larger  than what we detected,  and are then mitigated  by 
treatment.  Furthermore,  treatment  may alter some  parts  of FSTC  more  than others  and key changes  may 
underlie  treatment response,  which  are not seen  in non-responders.  
Selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  (SSRIs)  are the pharmacological  treatment  of choice  for pediatric  
OCD.18 Twelve  weeks  of sertraline,  an SSRI,  was found  to be moderately  effective  in decreasing  OCD  
symptoms  in the NIMH -funded  Pediatric  OCD  Treatment  Study  (POTS) .3 There  is some  fMRI  evidence  that 
SSRIs  reduce  brain  abnormalities  in patients  with OCD.19 We propose  to comprehensively  evaluate  FSTC  
using  a multi -modal  neuroimaging  approach  [R-fMRI  and high angular  resolution  diffusion  imaging  (HARDI)]  in 
25 unmedicated  adolescents  with OCD  and 25 matched  healthy  controls  to confirm  our pilot findings  at 
baseline  in unmedicated  adolescents  with OCD.  We will examine  how treatment  with sertraline  for 12 weeks  
impacts  FSTC  in this OCD  samp le. 
Specific  Aim #1: To examine  FSTC  using  advanced  multi -modal  imaging  techniques  (R-fMRI,  HARDI)  in 
25 medication -free youths  with OCD  (ages  8-17) in comparison  with 25 matched  healthy  controls.  
Hypotheses:  (A) Based  on our pilot data,  youths  with OCD  will show  lower  functional  connectivity  in FSTC  
at baseline  when  compared  with controls,  and , lower  functional  connectivity  in FSTC  will correlate  with 
greater  severity  on CY-BOCS.  (B) Youths  with OCD  will also show  abnormalities  in structural  connectivit y in 
FSTC  at baseline  when  compared  with controls,  and structural  and functional  connectivity  will be related.  (C) 
We will explore  relations  between  OCD  dimensions  and functional  connectivity  measures,  and predict  that the 
repeating/ordering  dimension  will correlate  with OFC  connections,  hoarding  will correlate  with rostral  ACC  
connections,  and forbidden  thoughts  will correlate  with caudal  ACC  connections.  
Specific  Aim #2 (Exploratory):  To investigate  how sertraline  impacts  functional  connectivity  in FSTC  in 
adolescents  with OCD.  Hypothesis:  After  12 weeks  of sertraline  treatment,  functional  connectivity  measures  
within  FSTC  for the OCD  group  will (on average)  increase  compared  to baseline  and will no longer  be 
significantly  different  when  compared  with controls. Non-responders  may show  a different  pattern  (i.e. failure  to 
show  these  changes).  
A. Background  and Significance:  OCD  is a debilitating  anxiety  disorder  with a prevalence  rate of 1% to 
3% in youth.1,2 Children  and adolescents  with OCD  are often  incapacitated  by obsessions  and compulsions.  
Up to 80% of OCD  cases  may begin  in childhood  or adolescence.20 Studying  youths  with OCD  (rather  than 
adults)  offers  the advant age of identifying  brain  differences  early  in development  when  confounding  factors  of 
chronicity  of symptoms  and interventions  (i.e., psychotropic  medications  and cognitive -behavioral  therapy  
[CBT])  are less likely  to be present.  FSTC  in OCD:  Neuroimaging  research  has implicated  FSTC  in OCD.  
This network  connects  neurons  in the frontal  cortex,  striatum  (i.e., caudate,  putamen),  thalamus,  and back to 
the frontal  cortex.4,21 See basic  diagram  of FSTC in Figure  1. Task  fMRI  studies  demonstrate  that participants  
with OCD  compared  to matched  healthy  controls  exhibit  lower  levels  of activation  of brain  regions  in FSTC  
regions .5-13 A review  of neuroimaging  studies  concluded  that results  from a variety  of imaging  techniques  
converge  to implicate  abnormalities  in FSTC  in pediatric  OCD.22 Theory  suggests  that abnormalities  in the 
FSTC  result in  obsessional  thoughts  and compulsive  behaviors.4 
Developmental  Framework  for 
Pediatric  OCD:  There  are clinical  and 
neuroimaging  differences  between  
childhood - and adult -onset  OCD.  
Pediatric  OCD  has male  predominance  
and is commonly  comorbid  with tic 
disorders  (30%) ,23 whereas  adult -onset  
is predominantly  female  and often  
comorbid  with depression.22 Childhood  
OCD is viewed  as a neurodevelopmental  
subtype  of OCD  based  on similarity  of its 
symptoms  to developmentally  normal  
childhood  rituals,24,25 and comorbidity  
with Tourette’s  disorder  (a 
neurodevelopmental  condition).  It is 
thought  to be related  to prefrontal -striatal  
abnormalities  that are 
neurodevelopmentall y  mediated.26 
Striatal  structures  mature  earlier  than 
prefrontal    regions    which    continue    to 
mature  into early  adulthood.27 During  development,  white  matter  changes  are primarily  due to increases  in 
myelination  which  fine-tune the connectivity  between  prefrontal  and subcortical  regions.27 Meta -analysis  of 
fMRI  studies  show  involvement  of OFC  and caudate  in adults  with OCD,28 whereas pediatric  OCD  studies  
indicate  involvement  of other  basal  ganglia  areas  (e.g.,  putamen)  and thalamus .29-31 Medication -naïve  youth  
with OCD  compared  with controls  demonstrate  greater  ACC  gray matter .30 These  differences  highlight  the 
importance  of utilizing  a developmental  approach  to studying  FSTC  in pediatric  OCD.  
Advanced  Neuroimaging  Technologies  for Connectivity:  Recent  advances  in neuroimaging  that 
assess  brain  “connectivity”  allow  for a sophisticated  understanding  of neural  networks.  Several  studies  have  
demonstrated  significant  differences  in connectivity  in the corticostriatal  link of this circuit  in adults14-16 and in 
youths  with OCD.14 We have  identified  specific  connections  within  this network  that show  significantly  lower  
functional  connectivity  in adolescents  with OCD  compared  with controls  (see Pilot Data).  We plan to evaluate  
brain  connectivity  in adolescents  using  two advanced,  noninvasive  technologies.  First,  R-fMRI  measures  the 
covariance  of blood -oxygen -level-dependent  (BOLD)  signals  between  brain  areas  (“functional  connectivity”).32 
Second,  HARDI33 is a rapidly  developing  technology  that includes  a number  of alternative  approaches  to 
inferring  fiber orientations  in white  matter.  Unlike  traditional  diffusion  tensor  imaging  (DTI),34 HARDI  
techniques  can resolve  complex  fiber architecture  within  a single  voxel  and permit  assessment  of 
microstructural  integrity  of white  matter  fiber tracts,33 indexing  the anatomical  strength  of connections  between  
brain  areas  (“structural  connectivity”).  Recently -developed  acquisition  schemes  at UMN35 enable  rapid  
collection  of both types  of connectivity  data to reduce  long acquisition  times  and minimize  motion  artifacts.  
Neuroimaging  Studies  Evaluating  Connectivity  in OCD:  Functional  Connectivity : Harrison  and 
colleagues15 found  reduced  functional  connectivity  between  the lateral  prefrontal  cortex  and dorsal  striatum  
and between  the ventral  striatum  and the midbrain  ventral  tegmental  area in 21 adults  with OCD (mostly  
medicated)  and 21 matched  healthy  controls.   Sakai  and associates16 used  R-fMRI  to study  20 medication -free 

adults  with OCD  and 23 matched  healthy  controls.  Significantly  greater  positive  functional  connectivity  was 
found  between  regions  of the frontal  cortex  and the ventral  striatum  in OCD  participants.  Fitzgerald  et al. 
examined  connectivity  between  OCD  and controls  in four developmental  age groups  [children  8-12 years  (n = 
11), adolescents  13-17 (n = 18), young  adults  18-25 (n = 18), and older  adults  26-40 (n = 13)].14 Half of the 
OCD  participants  were  on psychotropic  medications.  Across  all age groups,  OCD  patients  compared  with 
controls  showed  increased  connectivity  between  ventral  medial  frontal  cortex  and dorsal  striatum.  However,  
children  with OCD  showed  reduced  connectivity  between  rostral  ACC  and dorsal  striatum  (associated  with 
greater  OCD  severity),  and also between  dorsal  ACC  and medial  dorsal  thalamus.  No studies  have  report ed 
R-fMRI  results  on medication -free youths  with OCD.  Structural  Connectivity :  A handful  of studies  have  used  
DI to examine  white  matter  connectivity  in OCD,  with somewhat  mixed  findings.  The first DI study  in OCD  
found  that adult  patients  had lower  fractional  anisotropy  (FA) in the white  matter  of several  cortical  regions  
including  ACC,  parietal  cortex,  posterior  cingulate  gyrus,  and occipital  cortex.  No areas  of significantly  higher  
FA were  found  in patients  compared  with healthy  controls.36 Similarly,  another  study  found  significantly  
increased  FA in the genu  and body  of corpus  callosum  and white  matter  of right superior  frontal  gyrus  and 
corpus  callosum  in OCD  compared  with control  subjects,  and no areas   of significantly  decreased  FA.37 
However,  one study  found  reduced  fronto -callosal  fiber integrity  in unmedicated  OCD  adults  versus  controls .38 
No DI studies  have focused  on FSTC  connections,  and none  have  been  conducted  in pediatric  OCD.  
SSRI  Effects  in OCD:  Treatment -naïve  adults  with OCD (n = 13) exhibited  smaller  putamen  volume  which  
normalized  following  12 weeks  of SSRI  treatment .39 Treatment -naïve  children  with OCD  (N = 21) showed  
greater  thalamic  volume  which  normalized  after 12 weeks  of an SSRI .31 No studies  were found of SSRI  effects  
on connectivity  in pediatric  OCD.  SSRIs  have  been  demonstrated  to be efficacious  in reducing  pediatric  OCD  
symp toms  in multiple  randomized  placebo -controlled  trials .18,40  In POTS,  12 weeks  of sertraline  was effective  
in reducing  OCD  symptoms  (ES = 0.67) .3 Sertraline  was selected because  it was used  in POTS,  is FDA 
approved  for pediatric  OCD,  and Dr. Bernstein  has years  of experience  treating  OCD  youths  with sertraline.  
B. Innovation:  Given  that OCD  may have  a neurodevelopmental  etiology  and that the networks  of 
interest  in OCD  undergo  considerable  refinement  throughout  childhood  and adolescence,  examination  of OCD  
circuitry  in youth  is critical.  Furthermore,  studying  unmedicated  youth  allows  for identifying  brain  differences  
without  the confound  of current  pharmacological  treatme nt. The proposed  study  is cutting  edge  because  we 
will use innovative  advanced  data acquisition  methods  for fMRI  and HARDI  that have  been  developed  at the 
UMN  as part of the NIH-funded  HCP.  These  tools  allow  us to collect  data with much  higher  temporal  and 
spatial  resolution  than has been  standard.  These  advantages  are important  for OCD,  a disease  that involves  a 
complex  circuitry  involving  deep  brain  areas  and orbitofrontal  regions  that have  been  difficult  to study  using  
standard  techniques.  We will look at change  in functional  connectivity  measures  in OCD  participants  
compared  with controls  after OCD  participants  receive  12 weeks  of sertraline.  This innovative  approach  will 
allow  us to examine  sertraline  treatment  effects  on neural  circuitry  in OCD.  To our knowledge,  this has never  
been  done  and will represent  an important  advance.  We hope  to identify  specific  connections  in the FSTC  that 
normalize  with response  to SSRI  treatment  and identify  links that do not change  in treatment  refractory  
participants.  We will also explore  OCD  dimensions  and their relations  with functional  connectivity  links to 
identify  possible  differences  in FSTC  in OCD subtypes.  
C. Pilot  Data:  Functional  and Structural  Connectivity  in Adolescents  with OCD  Seventeen  
adolescents  with OCD  and 13 controls  were  scanned  using  a 32 channel  head  coil on the 3T Human  
Connectome  scanner  (http://www.humanconnectome.org/about/project/MR -hardware.html ). Three  scans  were  
eliminated  (1 subject  terminated  the scan  early  and 2 were  excluded  during  the “scrubbing”   process.41  
Anatomic  Acquisition : Whole  brain  anatomical  data with T1 contrast  were  acquired  in 5 minutes  using  an MP- 
RAGE  sequence  with 1 mm isotropic  resolution  (TR=2530  ms, TE=3.52  ms, TI=1100  ms, flip  angle=7  
degrees).  Processing  and Analysis : The T1 images  were  processed  using  FreeSurfer.  Regions  of interest  
(ROIs)  for each  structure  within  FSTC  were  identified  and later aligned  to both functional  and diffusion  images.  
R-fMRI:  Acquisitions : Resting  state  BOLD  data were  collected  using  a novel  multi -band  EPI pulse  
sequence  that allows  for the simultaneous  acquisition  of multiple  slices.35,42 Resting  scans  lasting  12 minutes  
were  acquired  (TR=1.15  seconds,  TE=30  ms, voxel  size=2  mm isotropic,  60 slices,  multiband=4,  echo  spacing  
0.57ms,  600 volumes)  to assess  functional  connectivity.  The subjects  were  instructed  to close  their eyes,  
remain  awake,  and not think  about  anything  in particular.  A field map scan  with identical  voxel  parameters  to 
the BOLD  acquisition  was also acquired  to allow  for correction  of geometric  distortion.  Processing  and 
Analysis :  FSL tools  were  used  to conduct  standard  preprocessing  steps,  including  skull removal,  distortion  
correction,  motion  correction,  and registration  to MNI space.  MELODIC  was applied  to each  dataset  to identify  
and remove  noise  components  using  fsl regfilt . To further  remove  confou nd due to transient  head  motion,  we 
utilized  the “scrubbing”  procedure  advocated  by Power  and colleagues,41 computing  their frame -wise 
displacement (FD)  and derivative  variance  (DVARS)  metrics.  Volumes  with FD>0.5mm  and/or DV ARS>8  were  
excluded  from analysis  along  with the previous  volume  and the two following  volumes.  Two subjects  had more  
than 33% of volumes  removed  with “scrubbing”  and were  eliminated  from analyses.  There  was no significant  
difference  between  the number  of volumes  excluded  from remaining  OCD  subjects  (n = 15, mean  = 68.5,  SD = 
70.2)  and control  subjects  (n = 12, mean  = 60.5,  SD = 70.7)  (F = .16, p = 0.76).  Twelve  FreeSurfer  ROIs  from 
the FSTC  circuit,  implicated  in OCD,  were  selected  for further  investigatio n. Frontal  regions  included  bilateral  
OFC,  rostral  ACC,  and caudal  ACC.  Subcortical  ROIs  were  bilateral  caudate,  putamen,  and thalamus.  The 
mean  time series  within  each  ROI was computed  from the scrubbed  data and cross -correlated.  These  r values  
were  conve rted to z scores  using  the fisher  transformation.  The resulting  z scores  were  used  to investigate  
group  differences  in functional  connectivity  and in correlation  analyses  with measures  of OCD  severity  (CY- 
BOCS)  and impairment [Child  Obsessive -Compulsive I mpact Scale -Revised  (COIS -R)].43 
Results : There  were  no significant  differences  between  OCD  and control  groups  on IQ, age, gender,  SES,  
or ethnicity.  Adolescents  with OCD  showed  lower  functional  connectivity  compared  with controls on 19 of 22 
connectivity  comparisons  (11 per hemisphere)  within  FSTC.  Eleven  of 22 connectivity  comparisons  were  
significant  at p < .05 (Table  1). Cohen’s  d effect  sizes  for significant  group  differences  were  large  (0.82  to 
1.10).  Our results  are consistent  with findings  of Fitzgerald  et al.14 that show  significantly  lower  functional  
connectivity  between  ACC  and striatum  and between  ACC  and thalamus  in children  with OCD  compared  with 
controls.  Correlations  between  age and connectivity  measures  in the OCD  sample  were  not significant.  Using  
data from OCD  participants,  the CY-BOCS  (OCD  severity)  demonstrated  significant  negative  correlations  with 
10 of 11 connectivity  segments.  Parent  COIS -R and child COIS -R (OCD  functional  impairment)  showed  
significant negative  correlations  with 5 of 11 and 3 of 11 of the connectivity  measures, respectively.  
 
Table  1.  Functional Connectivity  Measures  
 
 Mean Scores  (SD)  
 
 
Region   
OCD  
(n = 15)   
Control  
(n = 12)   
 
P  
Cohen’s  
D  
CY-BOCS  
r, p Parent  
COIS -R 
r, p Child  
COIS -R 
r, p 
R. OFC  – R. Caudate  0.31 (0.14)  0.46 (0.23)  .040 0.82 --- --- -.41, p=.04  
R. Caudal  ACC  – R. Caudate  0.54 (0.16)  0.71 (0.21)  .023 0.93 -.44, p=.02  --- -.41, p=.04  
R. Rostral  ACC  – R. Caudate  0.44 (0.09)  0.61 (0.23)  .013 0.99 -.48, p=.01  -.41, p=.05  -.48, p=.02  
R. Caudal  ACC  – R. Putamen  0.56 (0.18)  0.77 (0.24)  .017 0.98 -.46, p=.02  -.43, p=.04  --- 
L. Caudal  ACC  – L. Putamen  0.57 (0.16)  0.76 (0.25)  .024 0.91 -.41, p=.04  -.44, p=.03  --- 
R. Caudal  ACC  – R. Thalamus  0.60 (0.21)  0.81 (0.18)  .010 1.10 -.48, p=.01  --- --- 
L. Caudal  ACC  – L. Thalamus  0.59 (0.19)  0.75 (0.16)  .030 0.90 -.41, p=.04  -.60, p<.01  --- 
R. Rostral  ACC  – R. Thalamus  0.49 (0.17)  0.65 (0.20)  .042 0.82 -.42, p=.03  -.48, p=.02  --- 
R. Caudate  – R. Thalamus  0.60 (0.16)  0.81 (0.22)  .010 1.07 -.51, p<.01  --- --- 
R. Putamen  – R. Thalamus  0.57 (0.19)  0.75 (0.20)  .026 0.92 -.42, p=.03  --- --- 
L. Putamen  – L. Thalamus  0.55 (0.17)  0.72 (0.19)  .020 0.95 -.44, p=.02  --- --- 
 
HARDI : Acquisition : DI data were  collected  using  a novel  multi -band  EPI pulse  sequence  that allows  for 
the simultaneous  acquisition  of multiple  slices.35,42 DI scans  with left-right and right-left phase  encoding  were  
acquired  on each  subject  (128 volumes  with b=3000  and 9 volumes  with b=0, TR=2300ms,  TE=70ms,  2mm  
isotropic  voxel,  60 slices,  MB = 3, 5 minutes  each).  Preprocessing : Data  were  corrected  for eddy  currents  and 
the skull was removed.  FSL’s  topup  program  was used  to corre ct the DI for geometric  distortions.  The 
corrected  data were  then submitted  to FSL’s  bedpost  and probabilistic  tractography  was then conducted  
between  ROIs  using  FSL’s  probtractx.  
Results :  We demonstrate  rudimentary  examples  of tracking  within  FSTC  in one subject  in Figures  2-4. 
Refinements  to the tracking  procedure  are currently underway  prior to group  analyses.  
 
   
 
Pediatric  OCD  Dimensions  and Functional  Connectivity : We completed  an exploratory  factor  analysis  
(EFA)  of CY-BOCS  in 77 youths  with OCD  that revealed  4 OCD  dimensions  (58%  of variance):  
ordering/repeating,  contamination/cleaning,  hoarding,  and forbidden  thoughts.  Dimensional  structure  was 
similar  to previous  factor analyses  of CY-BOCS.44-47  Based  on the CY-BOCS  Checklist,  adolescents  with OCD  
(n = 15) were  given  a score  on each  of 4 dimensions  identified  in EFA.  Dimensional  scores  were  the sum of 
the number  of items  currently  endorsed  in each  of the CY-BOCS  categories  that loaded  most  strongly  on the 
given  dimension.  Significant  correlations  were  found  between  (1) ordering/repeating  dimension  scores  and 3 
OFC -subcortical  connections,  (2) hoarding  scores  and 3 rostral  ACC -subcorti cal connections,  and (3) 
forbidden  thoughts  scores  and 4 caudal  ACC -subcortical  connections.  We plan to explore  relations  between  
OCD  dimensions  and functional  connectivity in  FSTC  in this project.  
D. Approach:  The aims  of this protocol  are to examine  conne ctivity  in FSTC  using  R-fMRI  and HARDI  in 
medication -free adolescents  with OCD  in comparison  to controls  and to investigate  how sertraline  impacts  
FSTC  connectivity.  Our pilot studies  focus  on functional  connectivity.  Participants:  We will include  25 youth s 
(males  and females)  with OCD  ages  8-17 years  and 25 age- and gender -matched  healthy  controls  with 
no psychiatric  disorders  and without  a family  history  of OCD.  Inclusion  Criteria  for OCD  participants:  (1) OCD  
as the primary  DSM -IV diagnosis  based  on the Anxiety  Disorders  Interview  Schedule  (ADIS)  for DSM -IV, Child  
Version,48 and (2)  CY-BOCS49   score  of greater  than 15.  Exclusion   Criteria :  (1)  lifetime   diagnosis   of 
bipolar  disorde r, schizophrenia,  or substance  abuse/dependence  on ADIS,  (2) IQ < 80 on Wechsler  
Abbreviated Scales  of Intelligence  (WASI),50 (3) positive  urine  drug screen,  (4) MRI-incompatible  features  (e.g.,  
metal  implants,  claustrophobia ), (5) current  or recent  trial of psychotropic  medication  (within  the past 4 
weeks  or past 6 weeks  for fluoxetine),  (6) non-response  in > 2 SSRI  trials  of adequate  dose/duration,  (7) 
positive  pregnancy  test, (8) history  of seizure  disorder  or serious  head  injury.  Rationale  for 
Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria:  OCD  participants  will have  CY-BOCS  score  above  15 because  greater  
OCD  severity  correlated  with lower  functional  connectivity  in our pilot data.  With CY-BOCS  score  above  
15, all participants  will have  mode rate or severe  OCD.  While  I originally  suggested  excluding  MDD  and 
ADHD  due to connectivity  differences  in youth  with MDD  and ADHD  that might  confound  the differences  due 
to OCD,  these  comorbidities  are so common  that it is extremely  difficult  to find subjects with “pure”  OCD.  
A more  heterogeneous  sample  with respect  to comorbidity  will be more  generalizable  to all youth  with OCD.  
Further, recently  published  neuroimaging  studies  of youth  with OCD have  not excluded  participants  with lifetime 
MDD,  ADHD,  or autism (e.g.,  Weber  AM, Soreni  N, & Noseworthy  MD, 2014,  Progress  in Neuro -
Psychopharmacology  & Biological  Psychiatry , 53:129 -136).  I plan to include  participants  with lifetime  
diagnoses  of ADHD,  MDD,  and autism/pervasive  developmental  disorder.  
Recruitment:  For our pilot study,  we scanned  30 teenagers  (17 OCD  and 13 controls)  in 6 months.  Of 30 
scans,  one was excluded  because  the subject  could  not complete  the scan  and 2 were  excluded  due to 
excessive  motion  artifacts41 (10%  excluded).  In addition,  we will factor  in an attrition  rate of 10% during  
sertraline  treatment.  Therefore,  to have  40 sets of scans  for full data analyses,  we will plan to scan  50 
participants.   Participants  will be recruited  from Dr. Bernstein’s  Child  and Adolescent  Anxiety  Disorders  Clinic  
Figure 2: Caudate -ACC  tract 
Blue:  Left caudate  
Red: Left ACC  
Pink:  White matter  tract 
Figure 3: Caudate- 
pallidum  tract 
Blue:  Left caudate  
Red: Left pallidum  
Pink:  White matter  
tract 
Figure 4: Caudate - 
pallidum  
Blue:  Left caudate  
Red: Left ACC  
Pink:  White  
matter  tract 
that has evaluated  and treated  over 800 youths  with anxiety  disorders  over a 9-year period.  Review  of 24 
months  of Anxiety  Clinic  records  indicate  approximately  9 new anxiety  cases  per month,  of which  2 cases  per 
month  have OCD.   Approximately  50% of new cases  with OCD  are medication -free.  Therefore,  approximately  
1 case  per month  or 12 new cases  per year are diagnosed  with OCD  and are medication -free. To meet  our 
necessary  enrollment  of 1-2 OCD  cases  per month,  we will e-mail recruitment  information  to several  hundred  
mental  health  providers  and pediatricians  in the Minneapolis/St.  Paul metropolitan  area.  We will also use local 
newspapers,  Craig’s  List, and Facebook  which  were  successful  methods  of recruitment  in our pilot study.  
Additional  participants  will be recruited  via posters  in the community  and in clinics.  To facilitate  enrollment  of 
minorities,  we will actively  recruit  from Northpoint  Clinic  and Children’s  Hospitals  and Clinics  of Minnesota  that 
serve  underrepres ented  youths.   See letters  of support.  
Procedure:  After  written  informed  consent  and assent  are obtained,  a 2-3 hour diagnostic  assessment  
Including  Interviews  and rating  scales  as described  in the Assessment Instruments  section  will be administered  
by a trained  interviewer  with a master’s  degree  or above.  Participants  meeting  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  
based  on diagnostic  assessment  will undergo  neuroimaging  at the CMRR  within  the following  week.  
Assessment  instruments  and neuroimaging  will be obtaine d at baseline  and 12 weeks  later in all participants  
(OCD  and controls) . Families  will be offered  $30 for completion  of the diagnostic  assessment  and $45 for 
imaging  studies  at baseline  and again  at 12 weeks.  Before  the scans,  participants  will (1) provide  a urine  
sample  for drug screening  and (for females  who have  begun  their menstrual  periods ) pregnancy  testing;  and 
(2) complete  a screening  questionnaire  to ensure  MRI safety  (e.g.,  to exclude  subjects  with metal  implants).  
After  baseline  assessment  and scans, OCD participants  will receive  12 weeks  of treatment  with sertraline.  See 
Medication  Management section.  
Assessment  Instruments:  (1) ADIS , semistructured  interview,  will confirm  OCD  diagnosis  and define  
comorbid  diagnoses.  Psychometric  propert ies are good  to excellent .51-53 (2) CY-BOCS  and CY-BOCS  
Checklist , clinician -rated  semistructured  instrument  to assess  types  and severity  of obsessions  and 
compulsions.  Psychometric  properties  are satisfactory.17,54 (3) Tic Questionnaire , assesses  the presence  and 
severity  of motor  and vocal  tics. (4) CDI-II, evaluates  depressive  symptoms  in children  and self-report  
scale  to document  severity  of depression  symptoms . (5)  Tanner  Staging  will be obtained  for participants  
using  drawings  of Tanner  pubertal  stages .56,57 (6) COIS -R43 measures  functional  impairment  due to OCD  and 
has good  psychometric  properties.43 (7) WASI  provides  an abbreviated  measure  of cognitive  functioning  to 
ensure  participants  have  IQs > 79. (8) Family  Interview  for Genetic  Studies  (FIGS)58 documen ts family  
history  of OCD.  (9) MASC -II, assesses  the presence  of symptoms  related  to anxiety  disorders  in youth  aged  
8 to 19 years.  (10) Side Effects  Checklist  will be completed  at medication  management  appointments.   (11) 
Services  Questionnaire  will be completed  at the final assessment  in order  to assess  the presence  of any 
therapy  or medications  sought  by participants  throughout  the course  of the study.  
Washout  Period  for Participants  on Psychiatric  Medications:  For participants  on psychiatric  
medications  for OCD  (SSRI  or clomipramine)  who have  not had an adequate  response  to treatment  (i.e., CY- 
BOCS  score  of greater  than 15), Dr. Bernstein  will recommend  a safe schedule  to gradually  lower  the 
medication  dose  and then stop it. The washout  period  (no medic ation)  will be 4 weeks  for most  psychiatric  
medications  and 6 weeks  for fluoxetine.  During  the period  of lowering  and stopping  the medication  for OCD,  
there  is a potential  risk of discontinuation  symptoms  (for example,  headaches  or flu-like symptoms)  which  
should  be prevented  by the gradual  lowering  of medication  dose.  There  is also a risk of OCD  symptoms  
worsening  during  the washout.  If this occurs,  Dr. Bernstein  may recommend  withdrawal  from the study  and re- 
starting  the original  psychiatric  medication.  
Medication  Management:  After  baseline  assessment  and scans , OCD  participants  will receive  sertraline  
which  will be titrated  using  a flexible  dosing  schedule  and individualized  based  on maximizing  efficacy  and 
minimizing  side effects.  As in POTS,  we will aim to achieve  target  dose  by week  6 of the 12-week  trial. Target  
dose  will be 100-200 mg/day,  based  on age and weight  of the participant,  given  as a single  dose.  Sessions  
will be 30 minutes  every  week  for the first 4 weeks  then every  other  week  with Dr. Bernstein  who may provide  
support  and encouragement  but no CBT.  Sessions  will include  vital signs,  monitoring  of side effects  with a 
checklist,  and safety  evaluation.  Human  Subjects section  includes  discussion  of potential  side effects  and their 
management.  Compliance  will be monitored  with pill counts . Sertraline  level will be obtained  at week  12 to 
further  document  compliance  with taking  sertraline.  Independent  evaluators  (blind  to study  hypotheses)  will 
obtain  the CY-BOCS  with parent  and teenager  together  at baseline,  week  6, and week  12. 
No concurrent  therapies  (e.g.,  CBT,  family  therapy)  are permitted  during  medication  trial. At the end of 12 
weeks,  participants  can choose  to stay on sertraline  with follow  up in Dr. Bernstein’s  Anxiety  Clinic  or see 
another physician  (we will provide  a referral  letter),  or taper  off the medication.  Non- or partial -responders  can 
be referred  to the Anxiety  Clinic  for CBT and/or crosstaper to another  SSRI  or clomipramine.  
Neuroimaging  Data  Acquisition  and Procedures:   MRIs  will be obtained  at baseline  and 12 weeks  later 
in all participants  (OCD  and controls).  The MRIs  will take place  at the CMRR  using  a standard  Siemens  3T 
TIM Trio because  the Human  Connectome  scanner  (used  for pilot data collection)  has moved  to Washington  
University.  The HCP multi -band  fMRI  and DI sequences  are available  for the TIM; fMRI  and HARDI  data 
acquisition  for this new study  will use the multiband  sequence,35,59 advances  to which  have  recently  been  
developed  in CMRR  for the HCP.  The major  advantage  of the new sequences  includes  substantially  
accelerating  whole  brain  image  acquisition  times.   For fMRI  acquisitions,  TRs for comparable  acquisitions  are 
1.24 seconds  for the Trio, 1.15 seconds  for the Human  Connectome  Scanner,  and 4 seconds  for the Trio 
without  multi -band  acquisition.  We are currently  running  subjects  using  these  modified  sequences  (i.e., Cullen  
1R21  MH094558)  and obtaining  excellent  quality  data of similar  caliber  to the HCP  study and our pilot data.  
To ease  anxiety,  participants  will have  the option  of practicing  in the mock  scanner,  will be able to 
communicate  with staff between  acquisition  periods,  and will listen  to music  during  parts  of the scan.  
First,  a high-resolution  structural  image  will be collected  (parameters  as in Pilot Data).  These  data will be 
processed  using  FreeSurfer  to yield ROIs  within  FSTC.  A field map will be collected  to correct  for geometric  
distortions  in the fMRI  scans.   R-fMRI :  Subjects  will be instructed  to keep  eyes open  instead  of closed,  which  
is becoming  more  standard  in the field.  EPI images  with whole  brain  coverage  will be collected  with TR=1.32  
seconds,  multiband  factor=4,  voxel  size=2  mm isotropic  resolution,  TE=30  ms, 64 contiguous  AC-PC aligned  
axial slices  (12 minutes).  Such  dramatic  reduction  of TR in comparison  to standard  TRs (4 sec) can 
substantially  improve  statistical  significance  of resting  networks.35 HARDI : Diffusion  encoding  will  be 
performed  along 128 non-collinear  directions  (single  shell)  with single  shot EPI, multiband  factor=3,  
TR=3800ms,  TE=90ms,  2 mm isotropic  resolution,  106 matrix,  212mm  FOV,  66 contiguous  slices,  b 
value=3000,  total acquisition  time 9 min per scan  (one PE left-to-right and one PE right-to-left). The number of 
directions  and the high b value  here are optimal  for enhancing  the capacity  for resolution  of crossing  fibers.  In 
addition,  during  part of the scan,  the participant  will be asked  to complete  a task.   The participant  will be shown  
a set of three  numbers  on a projector,  and be asked  to press  one of three  buttons  depending  on the numbers  
he or she sees.  This scan will provide  information  about  areas  of the brain  that are activated  in OCD  versus  
control  participants  during  the task.  
If the quality  of the baseline  or 12-week  scan  is poor due to motion  artifacts  from small  head  movements,  
the participant  and his/her  parents  will be asked  to consider  returning  for a repeat  scan.  This is optional.  
Imaging  Data  Analysis:  Specifi c Aim #1:  Functional  and Structural  Connectivity  Analysis :  The objective  
of the neuroimaging  data analysis  is to test the hypothesis  that youth  with OCD  have  abnormal  functional  and 
structural  connectivity  within  FSTC.  Functional  Connectivity : First,  pre-processing  steps  will be conducted  as 
described  in Pilot Data,  to remove  effects  due to physiological  noise  and motion  and to correct  for geometric  
distortions.  Freesurfer  seed  regions  (medial  OFC,  rostral  ACC,  caudal  ACC,  caudate,  putamen,  and thalamus)  
will be aligned  to the fMRI  data.  Mean  time series  for spontaneous  fluctuations  in BOLD  signal  of ROI will be 
calculated,  correlations  will be determined  between  these  time series,  and correlation  values  will be normalized  
using  an r-z transformation.  Norm alized  values  are then used  for group  comparison  using  age as a covariate.  
Analysis  of covariance  (ANCOVA)  will be applied  to the data.  Correlations  will be calculated  to examine  the 
relations  between  functional  connectivity  in FSTC  and severity  on CY-BOCS .  Structural  Connectivity : The 
structural  connectivity  analysis  will be designed  to supplement  the functional  connectivity  analysis  by 
investigating  identical  connections.  The same  Freesurfer  ROIs  as above  will be aligned  to the data.  Following  
the method s of Lenglet  and colleagues60 at UMN  who have  mapped  human  basal  ganglia  and thalamic  
connectome  in healthy  adults,  we will delineate  FSTC  tracts  in all participants  with FSL software.  We will first 
estimate  fiber orientation s with a maximum  number  of 3 crossing  fibers  using  bedpostx  and then probabilistic  
tractography  (probtrackx)  will be used  to estimate  the connectivity  distribution  of pathways  within  FSTC.  We 
will then use connectivity  measures  (i.e., FA, mean  diffusivity,  and radial  diffusivity  within  tracts,  and number  of 
samples  passing  from seed  to target) to examine  effects  of group,  accounting  for the size of the seed  region  for 
each  individual.  ANCOVA  will be applied  to the baseline  connectivity  data to test the main  effect  of group  
using  age as a covariate.  Correlation  coefficients  will be calculated  to examine  the  relations   between  
functional  and structural  connectivity.  Relations  between  OCD  dimensions  and functional  connectivity  will also 
be explored  using  correlations.  Specific  Aim #2: Effects  of Sertraline  on Connectivity:  Change  in connectivity  
data from baseline  to 12 weeks  will be compared  between  OCD  and control  groups  using  repeated -measures  
ANCOVA  with group  as between -subject  main  effect,  time as within-subject  main  effect,  group  x time 
interaction  effect  and covariate  effects  of age. Group  differences  in connectivity  at 12 weeks  will be examined  
using  t- tests.  An OCD  responder  will be defined  as a participant  with a decrease  of 35% in total CY-BOCS  
score from baseline  to 12 weeks  because  the average  decrease  in OCD  symptoms  with SSRI  treatment  is 30- 
40%.40 Secondary  repeated  measures  ANCOVA  will be conducted  including  responder  groups  as a between - 
subject  main  effect  to explore  how change  over time differs  between  these  groups.  Finally,  baseline  
connectivity  differences  will be compared  between  OCD  responders  and non-responders  using  t-tests  and chi- 
square  tests  to explore  connectivity  differences  that are associated  with response  to sertraline  in youth  with 
OCD  (i.e. response  predictors).  
Power  Analyses/Sample  Size:   Specific  Aim #1:  The study  design  is powered  to accomplish  Specific  Aim 
#1. (a) Functional  Connectivity : Pilot data from 15 OCD  adolescents  and 12 control s provided  effect  sizes  for 
the functional  connectivity  power  calculation.  Effect  sizes  for significant  group  differences  between  OCD  and 
controls  ranged  from 0.82 and 1.10 (Table  1). Thus,  the effect  size of 0.82 can be considered  a conservative  
estimate  or “upper  bound”  of sample  size needed,  while  the effect  size of 1.10 can be considered  a “lower  
bound”  estimate  of sample  size needed.  For the upper  bound  estimate,  a sample  size of n = 25 per group  is 
needed  to detect  significant  group  differences  with power  of 80% at alpha  = .05. Using  the lower  bound  
estimate,  we would  require  a sample  size of n = 15 per group  to detect  significant  group  differences  with power  
of 80% at alpha  =.05.  (b) Structural  Connectivity : Feasibility  of finding  significant  group  differences  in 
structural  connectivity  with the proposed  sample  size is based  on a study  with smaller  sample  size (14 
depressed  adolescents  and 14 healthy  controls).61,62 Depressed  adolescents  had lower  FA in the fiber tract of 
interest  (tract  connecting  sgACC  to amygdala)  (p = 0.03,  effect  size d = 0.89),  standard  error  of difference  = 
0.01125.  Based  on this, minimum  difference  required  to show  a difference  in FA for the OCD  sample  using  a 
similar  approach  (tractography  to delineate  a desired  tract and measuring  FA) would  be at least  0.2205  units  of 
FA. Therefore,  we will require  a sample  of 20 per group  to have  power  of 80% to detect  a group  difference  at 
alpha  =0.05.  Specific  Aim #2 (Exploratory)  will generate  data (means,  SDs and test statistics)  that will inform  
effect  sizes  to calculate  power  and sample  size for a R01 study.  In the larger  trial, impact  of sertraline  
treatment  on the abnormalities  in functional  and structural  connectivity  will be formally  tested  in youths  with 
OCD.  
Risks  to Human  Subjects:  
 
Human  Subjects  Involvement and  Characteristics:  
 
Twenty -five participants  will meet  criteria  for OCD  on the ADIS.   We will also enroll  25 healthy  controls  without  
a family  history  of OCD  who are matched  on age and gender  to participants  with OCD.  All participants  (OCD  
and controls)  will have  two scanning  sessions,  one at baseline  and the second  12 weeks  later. OCD  
participants  will be treated  with 12 weeks  of sertraline,  an SSRI medication.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria : 
 
1. Ages  8-17 years . 
2. Female  or male.  
3. Meets  DSM -IV criteria  for OCD as the primary  diagnosis  based  on ADIS.  
4. CY-BOCS  score  greater than  15. 
 
Exclusion  Criteria : 
 
1. Lifetime    diagnosis  of bipolar  disorder,  schizophrenia,  or substance  abuse/dependence  on ADIS.  
2. IQ < 80 on WASI.  
3. Positive  urine  drug screen.  
4. History  of seizure  disorder  or significant head  injury.  
5. MRI-incompatible  features  (e.g., metal  implants  other than  dental  fillings,  claustrophobia).  
6. Fluoxetine  treatment  within  the past 6 weeks  or treatment  with a different  psychotropic  drug within  the 
past 4 weeks.  
7. Non-response  to 2 previous  SSRI trials  of adequate  dosage  and duration.  
8. Positive  pregnancy  test. 
9. Presence  of any psychiatric  disorder on  ADIS  (for control  subjects  only) . 
10. Family  history  of OCD (for control  subjects  only).  
11. Females  with OCD  who are unwilling  to use an acceptable  method  of birth control  if they are sexually  
active  will be excluded.  
 
Sources  of Research  Materials:  
 
Research  materials  obtained  from human  participants  include  clinical  interviews  and rating  scales.  In addition,  
neuroimaging  studies  (HARDI  and fMRI)  will be obtained.  These  materials  will be collected  for the purposes  of 
the research  study.  
 
Potential  Risks:  
 
Potential  risks of participating  in the study  include:  
 
1. Issues  related  to confidentiality.  
2. Gathering  of sensitive  information  during  interviews  and on rating  scales.  
3. Anxiety  about  having  MRI scans.  
4. Sertraline  side effects.  
 
SSRIs  are the pharmacological  treatment  of choice  for pediatric  OCD.18 They  are the first-line standard  
medication  treatment  for OCD  in children  and adolescents.  Sertraline,  an SSRI,  is generally  well tolerated ,; 
however,  side effects  can occur.  Potential  side effects  of sertraline  include  stom achaches,  insomnia,  
headaches,  and sexual  side effects.  In addition,  there  are psychiatric  side effects  including  motor  activation,  
suicidal  ideation/suicidal  behaviors,  and precipitation  of manic  symptoms.  All antidepressant  (including  
sertraline)  have  an FDA black  box warning  for children,  adolescents,  and young  adults.   The black  box warning  
is for the rare possibility  of suicidal  ideation  or suicidal  behavior  while  on an antidepressant.  This is based  on a 
meta -analysis  of 24 short -term,  placebo -control led randomized  trials  of antidepressants  for treatment  of 
pediatric  anxiety  disorders  (including  OCD)  or depressive  disorders.  The meta -analysis  included  >4,500  
children  and adolescents  and showed  a 2% risk of suicidal  ideation  or behavior  on placebo  and 4% on 
antidepressant s.63   There  were  no completed  suicides  in the 24 studies.  
 
Adequacy  of Protection  Against  Risks:  
 
Recruitment  Methods  and Informed  Consent:  
 
Recruitment  of participants  with OCD  will be through  the Princip al Investigator’s  Child  and Adolescent  Anxiety  
Disorders  Clinic  at the University  of Minnesota  Medical  School.  Dr. Bernstein  and her colleagues  have  
evaluated  and treated  over 800 youths  with anxiety  disorders  over a 9-year period.  Referrals  to the Clinic  are 
from school  personnel,  pediatricians,  child psychiatrists,  and psychologists.  We have  strong  connections  to 
school  personnel,  community  primary  care physicians,  and mental  health  practitioners.  Thus,  recruitment  for 
the proposed  study  will be through  well-established  referral  sources.  OCD  is one of the most  common  anxiety  
diagnoses  in our Clinic.  Approximately  2 new OCD  patients  are evaluated  in the Clinic  each  month  including  
approximately  one who is unmedicated.  
 
In addition,  we have  e-mail and addres s lists for several  hundred  pediatricians  and mental  health  providers  in 
the Minneapolis/St.  Paul metropolitan  area that will be used  for recruiting  children  with OCD.  Families  with a 
child with OCD  and healthy  controls  will also be recruited  through  flyers on bulletin  boards  in the community  
and in clinics,  radio  advertisements,  and advertisements  in newspapers.  In our pilot study,  we used  
advertising  in Facebook  which  was an effective  method  of recruiting.  A description  of the study  will be posted  
on the OCD  Twin  Cities  Chapter  and International  OCD websites.  
 
If the potential  participant  is being  seen  in the Child  and Adolescent  Anxiety  Disorders  Clinic,  the parents  and 
child will be asked  if they would  be interested  in being  included  in the study  at the conclusion  of their Clinic  
visit. Documentation  will be presented  at that time,  and parents  will have  time to ask any questions  about  the 
proposed  study.  Parents  will be encouraged  to take documentation  materials  with them  to consider  their 
child's  partic ipation,  and will be allowed  to bring  back  or mail back the signed  documentation.  If the potential  
participant  is a healthy  adolescent,  interested  parents  will be asked  to contact  research  personnel  through  ads 
in local newspapers  or Facebook,  or via flyers posted  on bulletin  boards.  
 
Written  informed  consent  from parents  and written  informed  assent  from adolescents  will be obtained.  Gail 
Bernstein,  MD, PI, Kathryn  Cullen,  MD, Co-I, and Alexandra  Zagoloff,  Ph.D.,  Co-PI will be obtaining  
informed  conse nt from participants  and their parents.  The project  coordinator  will also be obtaining  informed  
consent  after undergoing  training  from the PI in obtaining  informed  consent.  
 
Protections  Against  Risk:  
 
1. Issues  Related  to Confidentiality : All study  staff will complete  the U of MN HIPAA  training.  All data will 
be identified  with subject  number  and will be stored  in locked  file cabinets  with access  only to designated  
study  personnel.  Other  than research  staff directly  interfacing  with participants  (e.g.,  indepen dent 
evaluators),  only PI and Co-I will have  access  to subject  data and subject  identities.  This approach  is 
very likely  to be effective  in achieving  protection  of confidentiality.  
2. Gathering  of Sensitive  Information : The study  personnel  will be trained  to be sensitive  to the early  signs  
of distress,  to provide  support,  and to allow  the participant  the opportunity  to stop at any time should  
he/she  become  uncomfortable  or have  questions.   The PI or Co-I will always  be available  for consultation  
if necessary  and the subject  will be allowed  to withdraw  from the study  at any time.  
3. Anxiety  about  Scanning : The MRIs  will take place  at the CMRR,  where a mock  scanner is  available.  The 
mock  scanner  is a practice  scanner  that can be used  to prepare  the participants  for the MRI.  Participants  
who are anxious  about  the MRI will have  the option  of practicing  in the mock  scanner.  They  will be able 
to communicate  with the scanners  throughout  the scanning  session.  The participants  will have  the 
opportunity  to listen  to music  for relaxation  during  most  parts  of the scan.  In the event  that they are too 
uncomfortable  with the procedure, the subjects  will not be scanned.  
4. Sertraline  Side Effects : All participants  and their parents  will receive  psychoeducation  about  sertraline  
and the potential  risks and benefits.  They  will be encouraged  to ask questions  and will be engaged  in a 
dialogue  about  sertraline  and potential  risks and benefits.  Participants  will be seen  for 30 minutes  every  
week  for the first 4 weeks  then every  other  week  by Dr. Bernstein  for medication  management.  Weight  
and vital signs  will be obtained  at each  visit. There  is no need  for EKGs,  laboratory  studies,  and blood  
levels  when  treating  with sertraline  on a short -term basis.  Side Effects  Checklist  will be administer ed by 
Dr. Bernstein  at each  appointment.  Dr. Bernstein  will assess  for suicidal  ideation  at each  appointment.  
To minimize  the potential  for side effects,  treatment  will be initiated  with a low dose  of sertraline  followed  
by systematic  increases  based  on side effects  and clinical  response.  We will use a flexible  dosing  
schedule  which  is individualized  based  on minimizing  side effects  and maximizing  efficacy.  We aim to 
reach  target  dose  by week  6. Minor  side effects  may be managed  by dose  adjustments.  If any any 
adverse  medication  reactions  occur,  the sertraline  will be withdrawn  and Dr. Bernstein  will follow  the 
patient  closely  until the adverse  reaction  remits.  At the end of the 12 weeks,  participants  can choose  to 
stay on sertraline  and follow  up in Dr. Bernstein’s  Anxiety  Clinic  for medication  management  or with 
another  physician  (we will provide  a referral  letter),  or taper  off the medication.  Non- or  partial - 
responders  can be referred  to Dr. Bernstein’s  Clinic  for CBT and/or  crosstaper  to another  SSRI  or 
clomipramine.  If the family  would  like to taper  off the medication,  Dr. Bernstein  will supervise  a gradual  
taper  down  in order  to avoid  withdrawal  effects  and will monitor  for potential  recurrence  of OCD  
symptoms.  Dr. Bernstein  has years  of experience  treating  children  and adolescents  with sertraline.  She 
teaches  and supervises  residents  and fellows  who are prescribing  this medication  in the Child  and 
Adolescent  Anxiety  Clinic  at the UMN.  
 
In order  to protect  against  risk of harm  to youths , several  steps  will be taken.  Consent  will be obtained  
from parent(s)  and assent  from adolescents.  Youths  and parents will be allowed  to discontinue  
participation  at any time.  We believe  that adequate  protections  against  risks are in place  as docum ented  
earlier in  this section.  
 
Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed  Research  to Human  Subjects  and Others:  
 
The results  of the psychiatric  interviews  and rating  scales  can be shared  with families.  This information  could  
be beneficial  in the care of childre n and adolescents  with OCD.  The findings  will advance  knowledge  in the 
area of neuroimaging  for pediatric  OCD . In addition,  the study  will contribute  to the knowledge  about  
underlying  mechanisms  of obsessions  and compulsions  and site of action  of SSRIs.  
 
Participants  with OCD  will receive  12 weeks  of treatment  with sertraline.  They  will attend  medication  
management  appointments  with a child and adolescent  psychiatrist.  Potential  benefits  include  relief  of OCD  
symptoms  from the sertraline.  
 
 
Importance  of Knowledge  to be Gained:  
 
If our proposed  model  of dysfunction  in FSTC  is supported  by the neuroimaging  findings,  this will represent  an 
important  step in the effort  to understand  the neurobiology  of pediatric  OCD.  We hope  to delineate  specific  
neural  changes  that underline  response  to sertraline.  The findings  of this study  will inform  future  studies  about  
the neurobiology  of OCD  and treatment  response  to SSRI  medications.  This study  will yield information  
regarding  the connectivi ty in the FSTC  related  to OCD  and will move  the field closer  to understanding  the 
etiology  of pediatric  OCD.  
 
 
 
 
 
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan:  
Data  and safety  monitoring  will take place  continuously  throughout  the course  of the study.  The PI will be 
responsible  for coordinating  and overseeing  all data and safety  monitoring  efforts  which  include  (but are not 
limited  to) supervising  all recruitment  efforts;  evaluating  risks versus  benefits  for participants;  and monitoring  
the quality,  validity,  and reliability  of data gathered.  Some  data monitoring  efforts  will be delegated  to research  
staff;  however,  the PI will oversee  all monitoring  activities  through  regularly  scheduled  meetings  and review  of 
data summaries.  The PI has selected  two University  of Minnesota  faculty  members  (Andrew  Barnes,  M.D.,  
Department  of Pediatrics,  and Suma  Jacob,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  Department  of Psychiatry)  uninvolved  with the 
present  study  to serve  on a Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Board.  The Board  will review  the data and safety  of 
the study approximately  once  per year.  
 
All data collected  will remain  confidential  and will be in file folders  which  will be stored  in locked  file cabinets  in 
a locked  room.  File folders  will contain  only subject  identification  numbers.  Only the PI, Dr. Cullen, Co-I, and 
Project  Coordinator  will have  access  to the master  file containing  names,  identification  numbers,  and 
addresses.  The master  file will be kept separate  from the data collection  instruments  and from the data file on 
the computer  system  protecte d by password.  Information  given  to persons  other  than project  personnel  will 
occur  only with written  parental  consent  and for the specific  purpose  documented  on the release  of information  
form.  The imaging  data will be completely  de-identified.  All imagin g data will be stored  in the CMRR  which  is 
highly  secure.   All processing  will be conducted  using  the Minnesota  Supercomputing  Institute  resources.  
 
Potential  Adverse  Events:  
 
The possibility  of the following  adverse  events  is low. We will monitor for:  
 
1. Suicidal  or homicidal  ideation  or behavior.  
2. Worsening  of clinical  condition  of children  with OCD  (i.e., symptoms  become  severe  so that assessment  
for possible  psychiatric  hospitalization  is needed).  
3. Suspected  child abuse.  
 
 
Protoc ols for Managing  Adverse  Events:  
 
Project  staff (including  project  coordinator  and independent  evaluators)  will be trained  by Drs. Bernstein  and 
Cullen  about  how to assess  for suicidal  and homicidal  ideation,  how to identify  deterioration  of an adolescent’s  
clinical  condition,  and what clinical  situations  raise  concern  about  suspected  child abuse  or neglect:  
 
1. If a child is identified  as suicidal  or homicidal,  this will be reported  to Dr. Bernstein,  PI, or Dr. Cullen,  
Co-I, who will evaluate  the patient  and provide  psychiatric  care as needed.  If suicidal  ideation  or 
suicidal  behavior  is determined  to be secondary  to sertraline,  the sertraline  will be discontinued  and 
psychiatric  care will be provided  by the PI or Co-I. If necessary,  the adolescent  will be referred to the 
Emergency  Room , or Behavioral  Evaluation  Center  at the University  of Minnesota  Medical  Center  – 
Fairview,  as deemed  appropriate,  based  on clinical  information.  If evaluation  results  in 
recommendation  for inpatient  hospitalization,  this can be arranged  at the Child  and Adolescent  
Psychiatry  Inpatient  Unit at the University  of Minnesota  Medical  Center  – Fairview.  
 
2. If worsening  of clinical  condition  is  noted  by a research  staff member,  it will be reported  to Dr. 
Bernstein,  PI or Dr. Cullen,  Co-I. They  will provide  psychiatric  care as needed  and/or facilitate the child 
being  evaluated  in a local mental  health  clinic , the Emergency  Room , or Behavioral  Evaluation  Center  
at the University  of Minnesota  Medical  Center  – Fairview,  as deemed  appropriate,  based  on clinical  
information.  If the evaluator  recommends  inpatient  hospitalization,  admission  to the Child  and 
Adolescent  Psychiatric  Unit at the University  of Minnesota  Medical  Center  – Fairview  can be arranged.  
 
3. If child abuse  is suspected,  the research  staff member  will immediately  report  to Dr. Bernstein  or Dr. 
Cullen  who will then assist the staff member in  reporting  to Child  Protection  and/or  police  immediately.  
Parents  will be given  office  phone  numbers  for the Project  Coordinator,  Dr. Bernstein  and Dr. Cullen  to call 
during  office  hours  in case  any of the clinical  situations  described  above  occur  and they will be given  Dr. 
Bernstein’s  cell phone  number  for after hours  and weekends.  
 
Reporting  Adverse  Events:  
 
All serious  adverse  events  (e.g.,  psychiatric  hospitalization)  that occur  during  the study  will be reported  within  
24 hours  by the PI to the Institutional  Review  Board (IRB) at the University  of Minnesota.  Yearly  written  reports  
regarding  data and safety  monitoring  will be provided  to the University  of Minnesota  IRB and the NIMH  Project  
Officer.  
1. Douglass  HM, Moffitt  TE, Dar R, McGee  R, Silva  P. Obsessive -compulsive  disorder  in a birth cohort  of 
18-year-olds:  Prevalence  and predictors.  J. Am. Acad . Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Nov 
1995;34(11):1424 -1431.  
2. Flament  MF, Whitaker  A, Rapoport  JL, et al. Obsessive  compulsive  disorder   in adolescence:  an 
epidemiological  study. J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Nov 1988;27(6):764 -771. 
3. March  J, Foa E, Gam mon P, The Pediatric  OCD  Treatment  Study  (POTS)  Team.  Cognitive -behavior  
therapy,  sertraline,  and their  combination  for children  and adolescents   with obsessive -compulsive  
disorder:  the Pediatric  OCD  Treatment  Study  (POTS)  randomized  controlled  trial. JAMA.  
2004;292:1969 -1976.  
4. Kalra  SK, Swedo  SE. Children  with obsessive -compulsive  disorder:  Are they just "little  adults"?  J. Clin. 
Invest.  Apr 2009;119(4):737 -746. 
5. Adler  CM, McDonough -Ryan  P, Sax KW, Holland  SK, Arndt  S, Strakowski  SM. fMRI  of neuronal  
activation  with symptom  provocation  in unmedicated  patients  with obsessive  compulsive  disorder.  J. 
Psychiatr.  Res. Jul-Oct 2000;34(4 -5):317 -324. 
6. Mataix -Cols D, Wooderson  S, Lawrence  N, Brammer  MJ, Speckens  A, Phillips  ML. Distinct  neural  
correlates  of washing,  checking,  and hoarding  symptom  dimensions  in obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  
Arch. Gen.  Psychiatry. Jun 2004;61(6):564 -576. 
7. Menzies  L, Chamberlain  SR, Laird  AR, Thelen  SM, Sahakian  BJ, Bullmore  ET. Integrating  evidence  
from neuroimaging  and neuropsychologic al studies  of obsessive -compulsive  disorder:  The 
orbitofronto -striatal  model  revisited.  Neurosci.  Biobehav.  Rev. 2008;32(3):525 -549. 
8. Woolley  J, Heyman  I, Brammer  M, Frampton  I, McGuire  PK, Rubia  K. Brain  activation  in paediatric  
obsessive  compulsive  disord er during  tasks  of inhibitory  control.  Br. J. Psychiatry.  Jan 2008;192(1):25 - 
31. 
9. Britton  JC, Rauch  SL, Rosso  IM, et al. Cognitive  inflexibility  and frontal -cortical  activation  in pediatric  
obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychia try. Sep 2010;49(9):944 -953. 
10. Gu BM, Park JY, Kang  DH, et al. Neural  correlates  of cognitive  inflexibility  during  task-switching  in 
obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  Brain.  Jan 2008;131(Pt  1):155 -164. 
11. Page  LA, Rubia  K, Deeley  Q, et al. A functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  study  of inhibitory  control  
in obsessive -compulsive  disorder. Psychiatry  Res. Dec 30 2009;174(3):202 -209. 
12. Remijnse  PL, Nielen  MM, van Balkom  AJ, et al. Reduced  orbitofrontal -striatal  activity  on a reversal  
learning  task in obsessive -compuls ive disorder.  Arch. Gen.  Psychiatry. Nov 2006;63(11):1225 -1236.  
13. Roth  RM, Saykin  AJ, Flashman  LA, Pixley  HS, West  JD, Mamourian  AC. Event -related  functional  
magnetic  resonance  imaging  of response  inhibition  in obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  Biol. Psychiatry . 
Oct 15 2007;62(8):901 -909. 
14. Fitzgerald  KD, Welsh  RC, Stern  ER, et al. Developmental  alterations  of frontal -striatal -thalamic  
connectivity  in obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Sep 
2011;50(9):938 -948 e933.  
15. Harrison  BJ, Soriano -Mas C, Pujol  J, et al. Altered  corticostriatal  functional  connectivity  in obsessive - 
compulsive  disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry.  Nov 2009;66(11):1189 -1200.  
16. Sakai  Y, Narumoto  J, Nishida  S, et al. Corticostriatal  functional  connectivity  in non-medicat ed patients  
with obsessive -compulsive  disorder. European  Psychiatry.  Nov 8 2011;26(7):463 -469. 
17. Storch  EA, Murphy  TK, Adkins  JW, et al. The Children's  Yale-Brown  Obsessive -Compulsive  Scale:  
Psychometric  properties  of child- and parent -report  formats. J. Anxiety Disord. 2006;20(8):1055 -1070.  
18. Geller  DA, March  J, AACAP  Committee  on Quality  Issues  (CQI).  Practice  Parameter  for the 
Assessment  and Treatment  of Children  and Adolescents  with Obsessive -Compulsive  Disorder.  J. Am. 
Acad.  Child  Adolesc. Psychiatry.  2012 ;51(1):98 -113. 
19. Rubia  K, Cubillo  A, Smith  AB, Woolley  J, Heyman  I, Brammer  MJ. Disorder -specific  dysfunction  in right 
inferior  prefrontal  cortex  during  two inhibition  tasks  in boys with attention -deficit  hyperactivity  disorder  
compared  to boys with obsessiv e-compulsive  disorder.  Hum. Brain  Mapp. Feb 2010;31(2):287 -299. 
20. Pauls  DL, Alsobrook  JP, 2nd, Goodman  W, Rasmussen  S, Leckman  JF. A family  study  of obsessive - 
compulsive  disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry. Jan 1995;152(1):76 -84. 
21. Rockhill  CM. In this issue:  Connect ing neuronal  circuitry  to child psychiatry  practice.  J. Am. Acad. Child  
Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Feb 2011;50(2):101 -102. 
22. Huyser  C, Veltman  DJ, de Haan  E, Boer  F. Paediatric  obsessive -compulsive  disorder,  a 
neurodevelopmental  disorder?  Evidence  from neuroimagi ng. Neurosci.  Biobehav.  Rev. Jun 
2009;33(6):818 -830. 
23. Mancebo  MC, Garcia  AM, Pinto  A, et al. Juvenile -onset  OCD:  clinical  features  in children,  adolescents  
and adults. Acta Psychiatr.  Scand.  Aug 2008;118(2):149 -159. 
24. Muris  P, Merckelbach  H, Clavan  M. Abnorma l and normal  compulsions.  Behav.  Res. Ther.  Mar 
1997;35(3):249 -252. 
25. Evans  DW, Lewis  MD, Iobst  E. The role of the orbitofrontal  cortex  in normally  developing  compulsive - 
like behaviors  and obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  Brain  Cogn.  Jun 2004;55(1):220 -234. 
26. Rosenberg  DR, Keshavan  MS. A.E. Bennett  Research  Award.  Toward  a neurodevelopmental  model  of 
of obsessive --compulsive  disorder.  Biol. Psychiatry. May 1 1998;43(9):623 -640. 
27. Casey  BJ, Getz  S, Galvan  A. The adolescent  brain.  Dev. Rev. 2008;28(1):62 -77. 
28. Whitesi de SP, Port JD, Abramowitz  JS. A meta -analysis  of functional  neuroimaging  in obsessive - 
compulsive  disorder. Psychiatry  Res. Nov 15 2004;132(1):69 -79. 
29. Rosenberg  DR, Keshavan  MS, O'Hearn  KM, et al. Frontostriatal  measurement  in treatment -naive  
children  with obsessive -compulsive  disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry.  Sep 1997;54(9):824 -830. 
30. Szeszko  PR, MacMillan  S, McMeniman  M, et al. Brain  structural  abnormalities  in psychotropic  drug- 
naive  pediatric  patients  with obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  Am. J. Psychiatry.  Jun 2004;161(6):1049 - 
1056.  
31. Gilbert  AR, Moore  GJ, Keshavan  MS, et al. Decrease  in thalamic  volumes  of pediatric  patients  with 
obsessive -compulsive  disorder  who are taking  paroxetine.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry.  May 2000;57(5):449 - 
456. 
32. Biswal  B, Yetkin  FZ, Haughton  VM, Hyde  JS. Functional  connectivity  in the motor  cortex  of resting  
human  brain  using  echo -planar  MRI.  Magn.  Reson.  Med. Oct 1995;34(4):537 -541. 
33. Tuch  DS, Reese  TG, Wiegell  MR, Wedeen  VJ. Diffusion  MRI of complex  neural  architecture.  Neuron.  
Dec 4 2003;40(5):885 -895. 
34. Mori S, Zhang  J. Principles  of diffusion  tensor  imaging  and its applications  to basic  neuroscience  
research.  Neuron.  Sep 7 2006;51(5):527 -539. 
35. Feinberg  DA, Moeller  S, Smith  SM, et al. Multiplexed  echo  planar  imaging  for sub-second  whole  brain 
FMRI  and fast diffusion  imaging.  PLoS  One.  2010;5(12):e15710.  
36. Szeszko  PR, Ardekani  BA, Ashtari  M, et al. White  matter  abnormalities  in obsessive -compulsive  
disorder: a diffusion  tensor  imaging  study.  Arch.  Gen. Psychiatry.  Jul 2005;62(7):782 -790. 
37. Li F, Huang  X, Yang  Y, et al. Microstructural  brain  abnormalities  in patients  with obsessive -compulsive  
disorder: diffusion -tensor MR imaging  study  at 3.0 T. Radiology.  Jul 2011;260(1):216 -223. 
38. Oh JS, Jang  JH, Jung  WH, et al. Reduced  fronto -callosal  fiber integ rity in unmedicated  OCD  patients:  A 
diffusion  tractography  study.  Hum. Brain  Mapp.  Sep 16 2011.  
39. Hoexter  MQ, de Souza  Duran  FL, D'Alcante  CC, et al. Gray  matter  volumes  in obsessive -compulsive  
disorder  before  and after fluoxetine  or cognitive -behavior  thera py: a randomized  clinical  trial. 
Neuropsychopharmacology.  Feb 2012;37(3):734 -745. 
40. Geller  DA, Biederman  J, Stewart  SE, et al. Which  SSRI?  A meta -analysis  of pharmacotherapy  trials  in 
pediatric  obsessive -compulsive  disorder.  Am. J. Psychiatry.  Nov 2003;160(1 1):1919 -1928.  
41. Power  JD, Barnes  KA, Snyder  AZ, Schlaggar  BL, Petersen  SE. Spurious  but systematic  correlations  in 
functional  connectivity  MRI networks  arise  from subject  motion.  Neuroimage.  Feb 1 2012;59(3):2142 - 
2154.  
42. Moeller  S, Yacoub  E, Olman  CA, et al. Multiband  multislice  GE-EPI at 7 tesla,  with 16-fold acceleration  
using  partial  parallel  imaging  with application  to high spatial  and temporal  whole -brain  fMRI.  Magn.  
Reson.  Med. May 2010;63(5):1144 -1153.  
43. Piacentini  J, Peris  TS, Bergman  RL, Chang  S, Jaffer  M. Functional  impairment  in childhood  OCD:  
Development  and psychometrics  properties  of the Child  Obsessive -Compulsive  Impact  Scale -Revised  
(COIS -R). Journal  of Clinical  Child  and Adolescent  Psychology.  Oct-Dec 2007;36(4):645 -653. 
44. Delorme  R, Bille A, Betan cur C, et al. Exploratory  analysis  of obsessive  compulsive  symptom  
dimensions  in children  and adolescents:  a prospective  follow -up study.  BMC  psychiatry.  2006;6:1.  
45. Mataix -Cols D, Nakatani  E, Micali  N, Heyman  I. Structure  of obsessive -compulsive  symptoms  in 
pediatric  OCD. J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc. Psychiatry. Jul 2008;47(7):773 -778. 
46. Stewart  SE, Rosario  MC, Baer  L, et al. Four-factor  structure  of obsessive -compulsive  disorder  
symptoms  in children,  adolescents,  and adults.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychi atry. Jul 
2008;47(7):763 -772. 
47. Stewart  SE, Rosario  MC, Brown  TA, et al. Principal  components  analysis  of obsessive -compulsive  
disorder  symptoms  in children  and adolescents.  Biol. Psychiatry. Feb 1 2007;61(3):285 -291. 
48. Silverman  WK, Albano  AM. Anxiety  Disorde rs Interview  Schedule  for DSM -IV, Child  and Parent  
Versions.  San Antonio,  TX: Psychological  Corporation;  1996.  
49. Scahill  L, Riddle  MA, McSwiggin -Hardin  M, et al. Children's  Yale-Brown  Obsessive  Compulsive  Scale:  
Reliability  and validity.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Jun 1997;36(6):844 -852. 
50. Wechsler  D. Wechsler  Abbreviated  Scale  of Intelligence  (WASI).  San Antonio,  TX: Harcourt  
Assessment; 1999.  
51. Silverman  WK, Saavedra  LM, Pina AA. Test-retest  reliability  of anxiety  symptoms  and diagnoses  with 
the Anxiety Disorders  Interview  Schedule  for DSM -IV: Child  and parent  versions.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  
Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Aug 2001;40(8):937 -944. 
52. Lyneham  HJ, Abbott  MJ, Rapee  RM. Interrater  reliability  of the Anxiety  Disorders  Interview  Schedule  
for DSM -IV: Child  and parent  version.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Jun 2007;46(6):731 - 
736. 
53. Wood  JJ, Piacentini  JC, Bergman  RL, McCracken  J, Barrios  V. Concurrent  validity  of the anxiety  
disorders  section  of the Anxiety  Disorders  Interview  Schedule  for DSM -IV: Child and parent  versions.  
Journal  of Clinical  Child  & Adolescent  Psychology.  Sep 2002;31(3):335 -342. 
54. Yucelen  AG, Rodopman -Arman  A, Topcuoglu  V, Yazgan  MY, Fisek  G. Interrater  reliability  and clinical  
efficacy  of Children's  Yale-Brown  Obsessive -Compulsive  Scale in an outpatient  setting.  Compr.  
Psychiatry.  Jan-Feb 2006;47(1):48 -53. 
55. Leckman  JF, Riddle  MA, Hardin  MT, et al. The Yale Global  Tic Severity  Scale:  Initial  testing  of a 
clinician -rated  scale  of tic severity.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Jul 1989;28(4):566 -573. 
56. Brooks -Gunn  J, Warren  MP, Rosso  J, Gargiulo  J. Validity  of self-report  measures  of girls' pubertal  
status.  Child  Dev. Jun 1987;58(3):829 -841. 
57. Schlossberger  NM, Turner  RA, Irwin CE, Jr. Validity  of self-report  of pubertal  maturation  in early 
adolescents.  J. Adolesc.  Health.  Mar 1992;13(2):109 -113. 
58. Maxwell  ME. Family  Interview  for Genetic  Studies  (FIGS):  Manual  for FIGS.  Bethesda,  MD: Clinical  
Neurogenetics  Branch,  Intramural  Research  Program,  National  Institute  of Mental  Health; 1992.  
59. Moeller S, Auerbach  E, van de Moortele  P-F, Adriany  G, Ugurbil  K. fMRI  with 16 fold reduction  using  
multibanded  multislice  sampling. Paper presented  at: Proc Int Soc Magn  Reson  in Med2008.  
60. Lenglet  C, Abosch  A, Yacoub  E, De Martino  F, Sapiro  G, Harel  N. Compre hensive  in vivo mapping  of 
the human  basal  ganglia  and thalamic  connectome  in individuals  using  7T MRI.  PLoS  One.  
2012;7(1):e29153.  
61. Cullen  KR, Gee DG, Klimes -Dougan  B, et al. A preliminary  study  of functional  connectivity  in comorbid  
adolescent  depression.  Neurosci.  Lett. Sep 4 2009;460(3):227 -231. 
62. Cullen  KR, Klimes -Dougan  B, Muetzel  R, et al. Altered  white  matter  microstructure  in adolescents  with 
major  depression:  a preliminary  study.  J. Am. Acad.  Child  Adolesc.  Psychiatry.  Feb 2010;49(2):173 -183 
e171.  
63. Goodman  WK, Murphy  TK, Storch  EA. Risk of adverse  behavioral  effects  with pediatric  use of 
antidepressants.  Psychopharmacology  (Berl). Mar 2007;191(1):87 -96. 