TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 1  
Ticagrelor Antiplatelet Therapy to Reduce Graft 
Events and Thrombosis (TARGET Trial):  
Does Ticagrelor Improve Graft Patency after 
Coronary Bypass?  
  
 
 
 
Study Number – Brilinta ISSBRIL0220  
Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
  
 
Principal Investigator:  Alexander Kulik, MD MPH 
Lynn Heart and Vascular Institute  
Boca Raton Regional Hospital  
800 Meadows R oad 
Boca Raton, Florida, 33486  
 
Drug Manufacturer :  AstraZeneca  LP 
1800 Concord Pike  
    Wilmington, Delaware, 19850  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 2 Introduction  
 
Background  
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) is the definitive surgical approach 
for the treatment of ischemic heart disease, with >400,000 procedures performed 
annually in the United States al one [1].  Despite the increasing use of arterial 
grafts  during CABG, the saphenous vein remains an important conduit that is still 
used for more than 70% of grafts, due to its  ease of use and ready availability  [2].  
While co nvenient as a c onduit however, the saphenous vein is severely limited 
by the progressive development of saphenous vein graft disease.  With important 
clinical sequalae, saphenous vein graft disease remains an unresolved medical 
problem, as up to 20% of venous grafts occl ude in the first year after bypass 
surgery [3].  Between 1 and 6 years, the graft attrition rate is 1% to 2% per year, 
and between 6 and  10 years it rises to 4% per year.  By 10 years after surgery, 
only 60% of grafts are patent and only 50% of patent vein grafts are free of 
significant stenosis.  In addition, native coronary artery disease  (CAD)  
progresses in 5% of patients annually [4-7].  As a result of graft and native vessel 
attrition, this population is at high risk for subsequent ischemic events, including 
myocardial infarction (MI) and death [6].  Further revascularization, either 
reoperation or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), is required in 4% of 
patients by 5 years, 19% of patients by 10 years , and 31% of patients by 12 
years after the initial bypass surgery [2, 8] . 
 
Saphenous vein graft disease is composed of three discrete stages: thrombosis, 
intimal hyperplasia, and atherosclerosis.  These processes are interlinked 
pathologically in the evolution of vein graft disease [5-6, 8-10].  Early thrombosis 
is a major cause of vein graft attrition during the first month after CABG.  Even 
when preformed under optimal conditions, the harvesting of venous conduits is 
associated with f ocal endothelial disruption that results in the accumulation of 
fibrin on the luminal surface, the adherence and aggregation of platelets, and the 
activation of the extrinsic coagulation cascade by subendothelium tissue factor 
[11-12].  Grafts that survive this early period develop a progressive thickening of 
the media with neointimal formation that begins within days of implantation.  This 
continues over the subsequent months, and forms a template for the  
deve lopment of superimposed atherosclerotic changes [9-10]. 
 
Aspirin is recommended for s econdary prevention after CABG because of its 
effects on early patency and reduction in cardiac events [13-16].  By decreasing 
thromboxane -A2 production, aspirin prevents platele t aggregation [14].  When 
administered within 48 hours following cardiac surgery, aspirin is associated with 
a lower risk  of death and ischemic complications of the heart, brain, kidneys, and 
gastrointestinal tract [17].  Several randomized controlled trials have 
demonstrated that aspirin significantly improves graft patency after CABG [18-
21].  In the largest trial on the subject, the Veterans Administration Cooperative 
Study enrolled 772 CABG patients, noting that , compared to placebo, as pirin at a 
dose of 325 mg/day or higher increased vein graft patency both at 60 days [22] 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 3 and 1 year after surgery  [23].  Despite its established benefit in patients with 
CAD , aspirin therapy does have limitations.  It is a relatively weak an tiplatelet 
agent and does not inhibit platelet aggregation by thromboxane A2 -independent 
pathways (e.g. ADP or collagen stimulation).  Even with aspirin therapy for 
secondary prevention, a large number of recurrent events occur [24].  Moreover, 
a significant proportion of patients undergoing CABG may be aspirin resistant, as 
defined as undetectable platelet inhibition after 1 week of therapy [25-26].   
Depending on the population studied and the specific definition of aspirin 
resistance, anywhere from 10 -40% of patients have an inadequate antiplatelet 
response to aspirin [25, 27] .  Such patients appear to be at increased risk for the 
development of vascular events.  In theory, these aspirin -resistant patients may 
derive particular benefit from alternative antiplatelet therapy (such as ticagrelor) 
instead of aspirin [28]. 
 
Because of the conc erns regarding aspirin resistance [25, 27] , and the high vein 
graft occlusion rate no ted in recent trials [3], several investigators have sought to 
evaluate the role of clopidogrel after CABG.  A  thienopyridine that irreversibly 
inhibits the platelet P2Y 12 adenosine diphosphate receptor, clopidogrel has been 
shown to have  important  antithrombotic effects [29] and clinical benefits in 
several CAD trials [30-31].  Following CABG surgery however,  observational and 
clinical trials have failed to convincingly demonstrate that its use improves clinical 
outcomes [32-35] or postoperative graft patency [36-39] compared to aspirin 
therapy.  To date, 4 clinical trials involving 659 patients have evaluated the 
impact of clopidogrel on the process of vein graft disease after CABG (with 
cardiopulmonary  bypass ) [36-39].  Only one of these trials found a benefit in 
terms of  vein graft patency with clopidogrel treatment .  Nevertheless,  this study 
was limited by t he lack of blinding  and placebo -control, and the control arm 
received a fairly low dose of  aspirin  (100 mg) [38].  Using a higher dose of 
aspirin, Kulik et al. performed a randomized double -blind placebo -controlled trial 
comparing 162 mg aspirin daily to aspirin 162 mg plus clopidogrel 75 mg daily, 
and no difference in vein graft patency was noted [39]. 
 
Overall, the experience with clopidogrel after CABG has been unimpressive in 
terms of improving graft patency or clinical outcomes.   In keeping with the 
American Heart Association guidelines [40-41], the current standard of care for 
postoperative antiplatelet therapy is isolated aspirin therapy, in doses of 100 -325 
mg daily.   Interestingly , a favorable experience with ticagrelor was recently noted 
after CABG.  Like clopidogrel, ticagrelor inhibits the platelet P2Y 12 adenosine 
diphosphate receptor, but has a more rapid onset of action and more consistent 
and pronounced platelet inhibition than clopidogrel [42-43].  In the PLATO study, 
18,624 patients with acute coronary syndrome were randomized for 1 -year 
treatment with aspirin plus ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily or aspirin plus clopidogrel 
75 mg daily.  The pr imary end point of the study (cardiovascular death, MI, or 
stroke) was significantly reduced by ticagrelor compared to clopidogrel (9.8% 
versus 11.7%, ticagrelor versus clopidogrel, P<0.001) [42].  In a sub sequent sub -
group analysis of  the 1,261 PLATO patients who underwent CABG , ticagrelor 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 4 treatment led to a non -significant reduction in the primary end -point at 1 year 
(10.6% versus 13.1%, ticagrelor  versus clopidogrel, P=0.29), and a significant 
reduction in cardiovascular mortality (4.1% versus 7.9%, ticagrelor  versus 
clopidogrel, P<0.01) [43]. 
 
To date, no data is available regarding the impact of ticagrelor on saphenous 
vein graft patency following CABG.  Even with routine aspirin use after CABG, 
10-20% of vein grafts occlude within 1 year after surgery, placing these patients 
at high risk for future myocardial events.  In contrast to  clopidogrel, ticagrelor 
treatment leads to  a more pronounced platelet inhibition, and may substantially 
improve graft patency following CABG compared to aspirin therapy .  We 
therefore propose a randomized controlled trial to compare  postoperative graft 
patency between patients treated after CABG with aspirin therapy, the current 
standard of care, to those treated with ticagrelor starting in the early 
postoperative period.  
 
Research Hypothesis  
The hypothesis of this clinical trial is that ticagrelor  treatment  will improve 
postoperative saphenous vein graft patency 1  and 2 years after CABG  surgery , 
as compared to standard aspirin therapy.  
 
Study Rationale  
Saphenous vein graft disease remains an unresolved medical problem .  Many 
vein grafts occlude i n the first year after bypass surgery , leading to adverse 
cardiovascular outcomes, including recurrent angina, myocardial infarction, and 
the need for repeat coronary intervention.  While aspirin is the standard 
antiplatelet treatment after  CABG surgery, 10 -20% of vein grafts  continue to 
occlude despite contemporary  secondary preventative therapy. Compared to 
aspirin and other antiplatelet therapies like clopidogrel, ticagrelor treatment leads 
to a more pronounced platelet inhibition, and ma y substantially improve graft 
patency following CABG compared to aspirin.  No data has yet to be collected 
regarding the impact of ticagrelor on saphenous vein graft patency following 
CABG.   In this context, we seek to compare vein graft patency between pa tients 
randomized to receive a spirin therapy, the current standard of care, or ticagrelor  
treatment, starting in  the early postoperative period, and continuing for 2 years 
after CABG . 
 
Benefits, Risks and Ethical Assessment  
It is anticipated that ticagrelor will improve vein graft patency in this clinical trial.  
To maximize the benefits and minimize the risks associated with ticagrelor, 
concomitant aspirin treatment will not be administered to patients randomized to 
receive ticagrelor  in order to prevent bleeding complications associated with dual 
antiplatelet therapy.  P atients who are randomized to aspirin treatment will  
receive 162 mg daily in keeping with current clinical guidelines, since a lower 
daily dose of 81 mg  daily may be under -treatment and insufficient for antiplatelet 
therapy after CABG.   In addition to graft patency at 1 and 2 years after surgery, 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 5 major adverse cardiovascular events and adverse bleeding events will be 
recorded in the 2-year interval after surge ry.  The study will be conducted  with 
the highest ethical standards, in accordance with the applicable  United States 
Food and Drug Administration  (FDA) regulations and institutional review board  
requirements.   This trial will be submitted to the FDA for review .  Moreover, 
research ethics approval will be sought from the Western Inst itutional Review 
Board (WIRB).  
 
 
Study Objectives  
 
Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this clinical trial will be to evaluate whether , as compared 
to usual aspirin trea tment, ticagrelor early after CABG prevent s saphenous vein 
graft occlusion  1 year after surgery , as assessed by computed tomography (CT) 
coronary angiography , as well as 2 years after surgery  via study extension . 
 
Secondary Objective  
The secondary objective of this clinical trial will be to evaluate whether , as 
compared to usual aspirin treatment, ticagrelor early after CABG prevent s 
saphenous vein graft stenosis,  defined as >50% narrowing of the graft,  1 year after 
surgery, as assessed by computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography , as 
well as 2 years after surgery  via study extension.  
 
Exploratory O bjectives  
Additional exploratory obje ctives of this clinical trial will include the impact of 
ticagrelor treatment, as compare to  aspirin, on the incidence of major adverse 
cardiovascular events (mortality, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accident, 
hospitalization for coronary ischemia, and need for coronary intervention) a nd 
bleeding events in the first year and second year study  after CABG  (Appendix B).  
It is recognized  that the study will be under -powered in the evaluation of these 
outcomes, which will be defined using the previously published definitions from the 
CURE and CASCADE trials  [30, 39, 44] .  Specifically, major bleeding episodes will 
be defined as substantially disabling bleeding, intraocular bleeding leading to the 
loss of vision, or bleeding necessitating the transfusion of at least 2 units of blood.  
Major bleeding is classified as life -threatening if the bleeding episode is fatal, leads 
to a reduction in the hemoglobin level of at least 5 grams per deciliter or to 
substantial hypotension requiring the use of intravenous inotropic agents, if it 
necessitates a surgical intervention, if it is a symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, 
or if it necessitates the transfusion of four or more units of blood.  Minor bleeding 
episodes will include other hemorrhages (i.e. nose bleeds) that lead to the 
interruption of the s tudy medication.  
 
 
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 6 Study Plan and Procedures  
 
Overall Study Design  
 
This clinical trial will be a randomized double -blind study  comparing two 
postoperative antiplatelet regi mens after CABG.   The trial will be conducted over 
a 4 year period in order to achieve the study objectives.  Patients will be recruited 
during the first and second years of the study.  Graft evaluation will be performed 
during the second, third and fourth years of the st udy.  Each patient will 
participate in the trial for  1 year following surgery , at which point a CT coronary 
angiogram  will assess graft patency.  Patients will then be invited to  continue 
participat ing in the study for a second year (study extension) .  A C T coronary 
angiogram will subsequently asses 2 -year graft patency.  
 
AstraZeneca LP ( Wilmington, Delaware) will provide the ticagrelor tablets for the 
study  (Appendix C) .  The ticagrelor tablets will be submitted by AstraZeneca to 
Compounding Docs Pharmacy (Boca Raton, Florida), a pharmaceutical custom 
compounding company.   The aspirin drug for the study will be provided by 
Compounding Docs .  The ticagrelor and aspirin study drug will be crushed and 
compounded into capsules for the trial.  T he compounding process does not 
affect the bioavailability of ticagrelor  or aspirin , and the bioavailability of the 
capsules will be confirmed through independent biochemical analysis.   A bullet 
pulverizer will be used to crush a pool of 300 tablets  at a time (aspirin or 
ticagrelor).  A ProFiller 3600 capsule filling system will then prepare 300 capsules 
containing the active powder (aspirin or ticagrelor), with inert microcrystalline 
cellulose used to fill the remaining capsule space.   The crushed tablets will not 
be used beyond the expiration of the original product.  
 
Compounding Docs will prepare identical capsules containing  either  81 mg of 
aspirin or 90 mg of ticagrelor.   These prepared capsules will appear identical for 
the purpose of blinding in this study.  Patients in the trial will be assigned to 
receive either one aspirin 81 mg capsule 2 times per day (Arm A – aspirin) or one 
ticagrelor 90 mg capsule 2 times per day (Arm B – ticagre lor).  Compounding 
Docs will prepare pill bottles containing 180 capsules to cover for a 3 -month 
supply.  The blinded capsules will be stored at room temperature (25°C), as 
indicated on the bottle container label.   These pill bottles will then be submitted  to 
the Boca Raton Regional Hospital (BRRH) pharmacy.   Ordering and dispensing 
of the blinded study medication will be coordinated by the BRRH pharmacy.  
Shipment of study medication to the  second recruitment site at the University of 
Ottawa Heart Institut e (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) will also be coordinated by the 
BRRH pharmacy.  After surgery, each trial participant will be provided with a 3 -
month supply of study medication, and a new pill bottle will be provided to each 
patient every 3 months over the cou rse of the 1- or 2-year trial enrollment.  
  
The study population will include all patients undergoing CABG over the study 
period at the Lynn Heart and Vascular Institute  of the Boca Raton Regional 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 7 Hospital in Boca Raton, Florida, and the University of Otta wa Heart Institute in 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.  Patients undergoing on -pump or off -pump CABG will 
be eligible for this study, as long as at least one saphenous vein graft is used.  
Patients undergoing concurrent valve repair or replacement surgery will als o be 
eligible, unless postoperative warfarin anticoagulation is anticipated (i.e. 
mechanical prosthetic valve).  CABG patients will b e pre-screened and  evaluated 
for study eligibility in the perioperative period  (Appendix A ).  Study eligible  
patients will be selected and approached by the study coordinator to explain the 
trial.  Consent and r andomization will occur within 5 days after surgery .  
Randomization will be stratified based on the surgical site, the presence of 
diabetes mellitus, and  the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (on -pump or off -
pump).  
 
Prior to trial enrollment, in the early postoperative period, patients will be treated 
with usual aspirin antiplatelet therapy  (typically 325 mg daily)  starting within 24 
hours after surgery, in ke eping with current clinical guidelines  [41].  At the time of 
randomization  following surgery , this standard aspirin treatment will be 
discontinued .  Patients will be randomized into an aspirin group ( Arm A - aspirin 
81 mg bid ) or a ticagrelor group ( Arm B - ticagrelor 90 mg bid).   The study 
capsules will be  identical  to ensure blinding.  Medication administration and data 
collection will be performed in a double -blind manner, such that neither the 
patient nor the healthcare personnel will be aware of the medication assignment.  
 
Recruitment and written consent will be performed either prior to surgery or 
within 5 days after surgery .  This interval of time after surgery will enable subjects  
to recover from anesthesia and the occasional confusion associated with 
postoperative narcotic use, in order  to provide informed consent.  Randomization 
will occur following surgery.  Patients who are requiring high levels of 
hemodynamic support (more than 2 inotropes) within 48 hours after surgery will 
not be randomized into the study.   Patients requiring posto perative 
antico agulation with warfarin will also not be recruited.  Following surgery, the 
study medication will be administered daily via nasogastric tube (if patient is 
intubated) or orally, starting on postoperative days 1 -5, for the duration of 1-2 
years. 
 
Treatment will continue for 1 year, at which time patients will undergo a CT 
coronary angiogram to assess graft patency.  Patients will then be invited to 
continue participating in the trial for 1 more year with the same study treatment.  
A repeat CT coronary angiogram will  subsequently be performed for another 
graft evaluation at the 2 -year time point after surgery.   Because cholesterol levels 
can impact postoperative graft patency, current clinical guidelines recommend 
lipid-lowering therapy after CA BG to achieve low -density lipoprotein (LDL) levels 
<100 mg/dL  [41].  As such, patients in this trial will undergo lipid level evaluation 
at baseline before surgery and every 3 months during study  enrollment.   This 
information will be made available to clinicians involved in the care of study 
subjects to facilitate modification of lipid -lowering therapy, as needed, in keeping 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 8 with guideline recommendations.   A creatinine level will be obtained bef ore the 
1-year and 2 -year CT coronary angiogram, given the potential renal toxic effects 
associated with  intravenous contrast.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 9 Trial Timeline  
 
CABG Patient Consented Pre -op or Within 5 Days after Surgery  
 
Double -Blind Randomization based on Stratification factors  
 
Initiate Aspirin 81 mg bid or Ticagrelor 90 mg bid  
Within 5 days post -CABG  
 
Discharge from hospital  
With supply of meds for 3 months  
 
Physician follow -up  
Within 1 month  
 
Research Coordinator follow -up  
Lipid profile  
Assessment of major adverse cardiovascular and safety events  
Resupply study medication  
At 3, 6, 9 and 12 months  
 
CT coron ary angiogram, Creatinine level  
Consent for study extension (year 2)  
At 12 months  
 
Research Coordinator follow -up  
Lipid profile  
Assessment of major adverse cardiovascular and safety events  
Resupply study medication  
At 15, 18, and 21 months  
 
Lipid profile  
Assessment of major adverse cardiovascular and safety events  
CT coronary angiogram, Creatinine level  
At 24 months  
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 10 Rationale for Study Design  and Doses  
The TARGET study will be a randomized double -blind controlled trial, which will 
generate the highest quality data regarding the potential patency benefits 
associated  with ticagrelor after CABG.  The study design will e nsure that ticagrelor 
patients do not receive aspirin, to prevent bleeding complications  associated with 
dual antiplatelet therapy.  For the control patients who receive aspirin, 81 mg bid 
(162 mg daily)  will be used.  This relates to the fact that post -CABG patients have 
relative aspirin resistance postoperatively,  and 81 mg of aspirin daily may be 
insufficient as the sole antiplat elet therapy.  This relative aspirin resistance of post -
CABG patients cons titutes yet another biologic basis for investigating of the use of 
ticagrelor after bypass surgery.  A higher dose of aspirin (162 mg  daily) will ensure 
that aspirin patients receive adequate antiplatelet treatment after CABG, in keeping 
with current clini cal guidelines  [41].  At 1 - and 2 -years after surgery, graft patency 
will be evaluated by CT coronary angiography.  Compared to conventional 
coronar y angiography, CT angiography is a non -invasive diagnostic test that does 
not require an arterial puncture or catheter manipulation within the aorta, native 
coronary arteries, or bypass grafts.  In a meta -analysis of 14 studies, CT coronary 
angiography was  shown to have a sensitivity of 97.6% and a specificity of 98.5% 
for the assessment of graft occlusion, as compared to conventional coronary 
angiography [45]. 
 
Subject Selection Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
For inclusion in the study , subjects should fulfill the following criteria:  
1. Provision of informed consent prior to any study specific procedures  
2. Female and/or male  patients aged 18 -90 years  
3. Patients undergoing first -time CABG with at least 1 saphenous vein graft, 
irrespective of concurrent valve surgery  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects should not enter the s tudy if any of the following exclusion criteria are 
fulfilled:  
1. Inability to provide informed consent  
2. Pregnancy  or seeking pregnancy  
3. Patients undergoing redo -CABG  
4. Serum creatinine >1.8 mg/dL (need for contrast with CT coronary angiogram)  
5. Hypersensitivity or a llergy to aspirin or ticagrelor  
6. Anticipated need for postoperative anticoagulation with coumadin, dabigatran 
or rivaroxaban ( mechanical valve, chronic atrial fibrillation, DVT/PE)  
7. History of gastrointestinal  hemorrhage  
8. Active pathological bleeding  
9. History of intracranial hemorrhage  
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 11  
10. Severe hepatic impairment  
11. Current or anticipated use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g. ketoconazole, 
clarithromycin, nefazadone, ritonavir, and atazanavir)  
 
Study Conduct  
Restrictions during  the S tudy  
Patients who require long -term anticoagulation (chronic atrial fibrillation, 
mechanical valve) will not be recruited into the TARGET trial, due to the higher 
risk of bleeding complications associated with the combination of both ticagrelor  
and coumadin.  Despite this exclusion, subjects who are recruited into the trial 
may subsequently develop an indication for anticoagulation after study 
enrollment.  As an example, anticoagulation may be necessary starting 10 days 
after surgery for a TARGE T participant who has developed new -onset 
postoperative atrial fibrillation or deep vein thrombosis.  In this scenario, the trial 
subject will discontinue the blinded study medication (aspirin or ticagrelor) and 
receive open label treatment as indicated by  the clinicians involved in the 
patient’s care (i.e. open label 81 mg aspirin daily plus coumadin).  When 
anticoagulation is no longer needed (resolved atrial fibrillation), or the course of 
coumadin has been completed, open label treatment will cease, and  the trial 
subject will resume the blinded study medication.   The subject will continue to 
followed as part of the trial and undergo CT graft evaluation irrespective of study 
medication interruptions.  
 
In the case of a serious bleeding event (i.e. gastroi ntestinal bleeding requiring 
hospitalization) while enrolled in TARG ET, a study subject will permanently 
discontinue the study medication.  The patient will continue to be followed for the 
duration of trial enrollment , but the subject will receive open lab el treatment as 
indicated by the clinicians involved in the patient’s care (i.e. open label 81 mg 
aspirin daily).  
 
Subject Enrollment and Randomization  
CABG patients will be evaluated by the study coordinator for pre-screening and 
trial eligibility in the perioperative period.  Consent and randomization will occur 
within 5 days after surgery .  Randomization will be stratified based on the 
surgical site, the presence of diabetes mellitus, and the use of cardiopulmonary 
bypass (on -pump or off-pump).  A block randomization technique will ensure an 
equal distribution of diabetic patients in both arms of the trial, in addition to an 
equal distribution of on -pump and off -pump CABG patients.  The randomization 
schedule will be generated using SA S 9.1 software (SAS, Cary, NC).  All patients 
and study personnel will be blinded to the treatment assignment which will be 
performed by hospital pharmac ies at the Boca Raton Regional Hospital or 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 12 University of Ottawa Heart Institute.  While consent may be performed before 
surgery, randomization will not be performed until after surgery when clinical 
stability has been ensured (patients who are requiring high levels of 
hemodynamic support and are at high risk of perioperative death will not be 
randomized int o the study).  At the time of randomization following surgery, 
standard aspirin treatment will be discontinued.  Patients will be randomized into 
an aspirin group (Arm A - aspirin 81 mg bid) or a ticagrelor group (Arm B - 
ticagrelor 90 mg bid).   
 
Procedur es for Randomization  
Once a patient has been identified and consented , the pharmacy will be notified 
that the patient needs to be randomized.   A Randomization Form will be 
completed and faxed to the pharmacy.   In addition, protocol orders will be 
entered into the patient’s medical record.   The hospital pharmacist will refer to 
the randomization schedule and assign the patient to the appropriate group.   In 
addition, a second pharmacist will be required to sign off on the Randomization 
Form to confirm that t he patient was assigned to the appropriate group.  
 
Procedures for Handling Subjects I ncorrectly Randomized  
The Randomization Form will be designed in a manner that the subgrou ps will be 
clearly identified.   In addition, the process of utilizing a second pharmacist during 
the randomization phase will avoid incorrect assignments.   If a subject has been 
incorrectly enrolled , the unblinded pharmacist will be notified and the 
randomization number will be corrected.   The patient will remain on the same 
blinded study medication . 
  
Blinding and Procedures for Unblinding the Study  
The study personnel will be blinded, with the exceptio n of the pharmacy staff 
involved in  randomizing the trial subjects .  Only unblinded pharmacy personnel 
will have access to any unblinded patient logs.   Unblinded pharmacy personnel 
will be notified by the Principal Investigator or his designee that a patient requires 
unblinding.   A patient should not be unblinded without the authorization of the 
Principal Investigator.   Any reques ts for unblinding should be directed to the 
Principal Investigator and/or the research coordinator.   Upon approval of the 
Principal Investigator, a patient may be unblinded if this information is essential in 
determining the continued care of the patient.  
 
Methods for Ensuring B linding  
The study personnel will not have access to any of the unblinded patient logs.   
This includes patient assignment logs and/or drug accountability logs.   These 
logs will be maintained in the pharmacy.  
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 13 Treatments  
 
Investigational 
product  Dosage form and 
strength  Provider  
Aspirin  81 mg PO bid  Compounding Docs  
Ticagrelor (Brilinta)  90 mg PO bid  AstraZeneca  
 
Doses and Treatment Regimens  
Patients randomized into Arm A will be treated twice daily with blinded aspirin 
capsules containing aspirin 81 mg.  Patients randomized into Arm B will be 
treated twice daily with blinded ticagrelor capsule s containing ticagrelor 90 mg.  
Labeling  
The label will include the following information:  Facility Name,  Patient Name, 
Dose (1 cap sule bid) , Prescription Number, and Dispensing Date.   In addition, 
the drug name will be included as “Investigational  Drug:  Ticagrelor 90 mg versus  
Aspirin  81 mg ”.  The bottle container label will also note that the capsules need to  
be stored at room temp erature (25°C).  
 
Storage  
The investigational drug will be stored in the hospital pharmacy.   This area has 
limited and restricted access.  
 
Concomitant and Post -Study Treatments  
Patients will receive concomitant therapies in both groups as recommended by 
the current American College of Cardiology / American Heart Association 
guidelines.  This will include smoking cessation counseling and the 
administration of beta blockers, angiot ensin converting enzyme inhibitors, and 
lipid-lowering medications as indicated  [41, 46 -47].  Target LDL values (less than 
100 mg/dL) will be those recommended as per current guidelines.  In the 
absence of specific contraindications, all patients will be on postoperative lipid 
lowering therapy, and lipid profiles will be assessed ev ery 3 months following 
surgery.  Diabetic patients will have aggressive perioperative glycemic control, 
including an intravenous insulin infusion both in the operating room and in the 
intensive care unit, and a subcutaneous insulin sliding scale while reco vering on 
the surgical ward.  Once drinking well, diabetic patients will be restarted on their 
original preoperative diabetic regimens (oral agents and/or insulin therapy).  The 
treatment of diabetes during this study will be closely monitored in collabora tion 
with endocrinologists.  
 
Treatment Compliance  
The research coordinator s involved in the trial and the Principal Investigator will 
answer questions, assess patient compliance with the trial protocol, and evaluate 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 14 safety issues throughout trial enrollment .  Telephone calls by the research  
coordinator  will be performed every 3  months  after surgery.   Additional ly, trial 
participants will meet with a research coordinator every 3 months to receive a 
new 3 -month supply of the study medication.  These visits and telephone calls 
will help in the retention of study subjects.  Patient compliance will be evaluated 
through personal interviews and the counting of remaining pills at 3 -month 
intervals (at the time that new study medication is provided to patien ts). 
 
Accountability  
The research coordinator will count remaining investigational drug a t the time of 
study drug return.   This information will be maintained in the study patient ’s chart.   
In addition, patient assignment logs and drug accountability logs will be  
maintained in the hospital pharmacy.   These logs will be maintained by unblinded 
pharmacy personnel.  
 
Discontinuation of Investigational Drug  
A recruited subject who subsequently develops an indication for anticoagulation 
(i.e. new -onset postoperative atrial fibrillation or deep vein thrombosis) will be 
asked to discontinue the TARGET blinded study medication.  The participant will 
then receive open label treatment as indicated by the clinicians involved in the 
patient’s care (i.e. open la bel 81 mg aspirin daily plus coumadin).  When 
anticoagulation is no longer needed (resolved atrial fibrillation), or the course of 
coumadin has been completed, open label treatment will cease, and the trial 
subject will be asked to resume the blinded study  medication.  
 
In the case of a serious bleeding event (i.e. gastrointestinal bleeding requiring 
hospitalization) while enrolled in TARG ET, a study subject will permanently 
discontinue the study medication.  
 
Procedures for Discontinuation of a Subject from Investigational Drug   
If it is determined that a patient will be discontinue d from the investigational drug, 
then alternate medication wil l be prescribed , if applicable, by the P rincipal  
Investigator or the patient’s health care provider.   Attempts will be made to obtain 
any remaining i nvestigational drug in the patient’s possession.  
 
Withdrawal from  Study  
A patient may be withdrawn from study medication at any time by the study 
doctor or the sponsor without the patient’ s consent.   For examp le: if it is in the 
patient’s best interest, if the patient has problems complying with study 
procedures, if the patient becomes pregnant, if the patient does not consent to 
continue in the study after being told of changes in the research, if the patient 
makes a request , if the patient has a serious adverse event (GI bleed), or for any 
other reason.  
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 15  
Collection of  Study Variables  
Recording of Data 
Case report forms will be designed and utilized  to collect all pertinent data.  
 
Data Collection at Enrollment  and Follow -up 
Saphenous vein graft patency and stenosis will be assessed by CT coronary 
angiography at 1 year and 2 years after CABG.  The incidence of major adverse 
coronary events and safety outcomes will be documented during postoperative 
visit at 1  month after surgery and every 3 months thereafter .  A research 
coordinator will phone each patient every 3 months to document any other events 
and ensure study drug compliance.   This data will be recorded on the case report 
forms.  
Enrollment  Procedures  
Patients undergoing CABG procedures will be pre-screened for eligibility in the 
study.   Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed.   The research 
coordinator  will consult with the Principal  Investigator or sub -investigator(s) 
regarding patient’s eligi bility prior to enrollment.   Once a patient is deemed 
eligible for the study, the patient will be invited to participate.  
Follow -up Procedures  
Patients will be contacted by the research coordinator for all  follow -up visits.   
Appointments will be scheduled and lab oratory tests  and/or CT scan will be 
completed.   Patients will receive a resupply of study drug at these appointments, 
if applicable.   The Principal Investigator and/or sub -investigator(s) will be 
informed of the patient’s status.  
 
 
Safety  
Definition of A dverse Events  
An adverse event (AE) is the development of an undesirable medical condition or 
the deterioration of a pre -existing medical condition following or during exposure 
to a pharmaceutical product, whether or not considered causally related to the 
product.  An undesirable medical condition can be symptoms (e .g. nausea, chest 
pain), signs (e .g. tachycardia, enlarged liver) or the abnormal results of an 
investigation (e .g. laboratory findings, electrocardiogram).  In clinical studies, a n 
AE can include an undesirable medical condition occurring at any time, even if no 
study treatment has been administered.   The term AE is used to include both 
serious and non -serious AEs.  
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 16 Definitions of Serious A dverse Event 
A serious adverse event is an  AE occurring during any study phase (i .e. follow -
up) that fulfils one or more of the following criteria:  
 Results in death  
 Is immediately life -threatening  
 Requires in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
 Results in persisten t or significant disability/incapacity or substantial 
disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions  
 Results in a congenital abnormality or birth defect  
 Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the subject or may require 
medical intervention to prevent o ne of the outcomes listed above  
The causality of serious adverse events ( SAEs ) and their relationship to the 
study treatment  will be assessed by the investigator s and communicated to 
AstraZeneca.  
 
Causality Assessment of Adverse Ev ent to Treatment  
The investigator will assess the relationship of any AE to the use of the study 
drug, based on available information, using the following guidelines:  
 
Unlikely related – no temporal association, or the cause of the event has been 
identified, or the drug, biological or device cannot be implicated  
 
Possibly related – temporal association, but other etiologies are likely to be the 
cause; however involvement of the drug, biological, or device cannot be excluded  
 
Probably related – temp oral association and other etiologies are possible but 
unlikely  
 
 
Recording of A dverse Events  
Adverse events will be recorded for study subjects while they are enrolled in the 
trial (maximum 2 year enrollment ).  Serious adverse events that occur at any 
time after the inclusion of the subject in the study (defined as the time when the 
subject is randomized) up to 30 days after the subject completed or discontinued 
the study medication must be reported.  The subject is considered to have 
completed the study e ither after the completion of the last visit or contact (e.g. 
phone contact with the investigator or designee), or 30 days after the last dose of 
the study medication, whichever is later.  
As noted above , the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events ( mortality, 
myocardial infarction , cerebrovascular accident, hospitalization for coronary 
ischemia, and need for coronary intervention) a nd bleeding events will be 
recorded (and noted as a dverse events)  for trial subjects in the 2 year period 
after CABG.  If , during trial enrollment , a participant develops a major adverse 
cardiovascular event or major bleeding event, the TARGET blinded study 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 17 medication will be discontinued .  The  participant will then rec eive open label 
treatment as indicated by the clinicians involved in the patient’s care.  
The following variables will be collected for each AE:  
 Adverse event description  
 The date when the AE started and stopped  
 Whether the AE is serious or not  
 Investigator causality rating against the study medication  
 Action taken with regard to  study medication  
 Whether  AE caused subject’s withdrawal from study  
 Patient outcome  
 
In addition, the following variables will be collected for SAEs:  
 Date AE met criteria  for serious AE  
 Date investigator became aware of serious AE  
 Reason AE is serious (i.e. hospitalization , probable cause of death)  
 Dates of hospitalization, discharge, and/or death  
 Whether a utopsy performed  
 Investigator causality rating against the study me dication or other 
medications  
 
Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
Investigators and other site personnel will inform the FDA, via a MedWatch  form, 
of any serious, unexpected , possibly related adverse events that occur in 
accordance with the reporting obl igations of 21 CFR 312.32, and will concurrently 
forward all such reports to AstraZeneca .  A copy of the MedWatch report will be 
faxed to AstraZeneca at the time the event is reported to the FDA.  It is the 
responsibility of the investigator to compile all  necessary information and ensure 
that the FDA receives a report according to the FDA reporting requirement 
timelines and to ensure that these reports are also submitted to AstraZeneca at 
the same time.  
 
When reporting to AstraZeneca, a cover page  will accompany the MedWatch  
form indicating the following:  
 Investigator Sponsored Study (ISS)  
 The investigator IND number assigned by the FDA  
 The investigator’s name and address  
 The trial title and AstraZeneca ISS reference number  
 
The i nvestigative site will also indicate, either in the SAE report or the cover 
page, the causality  of events in relation to all study medications  as determined by 
the principal investigator.  
 
The SAE report and accompanying cover page will be sent by way of fax to 
AstraZeneca’s de signated fax line: 1 -866-984-7229 . 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 18 Serious adverse events  that do not require expedited reporting to the FDA will be 
reported to AstraZeneca using the MedDRA coding langua ge for serious adverse 
events.  
 
All SAEs will be reported to AstraZeneca, whether or not considered causally 
related to the study drug .  All SAEs will be documented.  
 
The investigator will be  responsible for informing the  institutional review board 
(IRB) as soon as possible, in accordance with local laws  and regulations.   All 
SAEs will be reported to the Western Institutional Review Board ( WIRB).  The 
development of serious adverse events that might be attributable to the study 
medication will lead to the termination of the study drug.   
 
 
 
Ethical and Regulatory R equirements  
Ethical Conduct of the Study  
The TARGET trial will  adhere to the highest research ethics standards, in 
accordance with the applicable FDA regulations and IRB requirements.  The 
study protocol will be reviewed by the Research Committ ee of the Boca Raton 
Regional Hospital.  Thereafter , the protocol, the Informed Consent Form (ICF), 
and relevant supporting information will be submitted to the Western Institutional 
Review Board (WIRB) for human research ethics approval.  The trial protoc ol will 
also be submitted to the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to 
obtain exemption status from Investigational New Drug Application (IND) 
regulations.  
 
Patients will be approached before or after CABG surgery for enrollment in the 
trial.  As part of the consent process, patients will be explained the rationale of 
the trial and the potential adverse side effects associated with enrollment.  
Patients will be reminded that they are free to choose to e ither participate or not 
participate in the study.  
 
Ethics and R egulatory Review  
The TARGET trial will not begin subject recruitment until approval has been 
granted by WIRB and the FDA.  The investigator will be responsible for reporting 
to WIRB of the pro gress of the study at least once per year or as required.  In 
addition, the Investigator will be responsible for obtaining WIRB approval for any 
changes made to the protocol or Informed Consent prior to implementation, 
except where study subject safety is affected.  
The Investigator will promptly notify WIRB , AstraZeneca,  and the FDA of all 
serious, unexpected , possibly related adverse events.  
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 19 Informed Consent  
The Informed Consent will be approved by WIRB prior to subject enrollment. 
Patients will be consented in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines , 
prior to enrollment in the trial.  
Changes to the Protocol  and Informed Co nsent Form 
The Investigator will be responsible for obtaining WIRB approval for any changes 
made to the protocol or Inf ormed Consent prior to implementation , except where 
the study subject safety is affected.  AstraZeneca will be notified of any changes 
to the Protocol and/or Informed Consent.  
Audits and Inspections  
AstraZeneca will be notified of any audits or inspections conducted at the study 
location s.  The Principal  Investigator and study staff will make themselves 
available, in accordance with federal guidelines.  
 
 
 
Study M anagement  
Training of Study Site Personnel  
All personnel will be properly trained in the protocol  and procedures expected of 
them.   In addition, refresher training may be conducted, as needed.   Training 
logs will be kept in the study regulatory binders.  
Monitoring of the S tudy  
The site s will perform self monitoring of this study.  
Source Data 
All source documents will be maintained in the research chart for each subject.   
In addition, electronic medical records (EMR) may also be  utilized by the study 
facility.   It is the practice of the research facility to allow EMR access to monitors 
or auditors,  if requested.  
Study T imetable and End of Study  
Patient recruitment is expected to be completed within 2 years of initiating the 
study. Once the final patient has been recruited, follow -up will last for 2 additional 
years.  The study duration is estimated a t 4 years.  
 
During the time of enrollment, patients will be seen every three months. This 
includes the 3 month visit, 6 month visit, 9 month visit, and 12 month visit.   At the 
12 month visit, patients will be given the opportunity to continue in the study for 
an addition al 12 months.   This would include the 15 month visit, 18 month visit, 
21 month visit, and 24 month visit.  
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 20 Data Management  
All data will be recorded on preprinted case report forms (CRF) suitable for 
electronic data capture. The case report forms will be kept in the patient’s 
research chart.   The research charts will be stored in a locked, secure location. 
Data will be entered by qualified personnel at the conclusion of study.  
 
 
Statistical Methods  
 
Sample Size  
This trial will be a pilot study.  Outcome estimates will form the basis for assessing 
the feasibility of designing a future large and definitive trial.  One hundred fifty 
patients in each study arm will be enrolled (300 total patients).  Since each patient 
will receive 2 vein graft s, on average, there will be approximately 300 vein grafts 
in each group (600 vein grafts total).  This sample size will be large enough to 
detect whether a clinically important difference exists in terms of vein graft patency 
between the groups, but small  enough that subject recruitment can be performed 
in an expedient manner, likely within the first 24 months of the study.  
 
This trial will not be designed or powered as a definitive clinical trial.  Based on 
several previously published clinical trials, it  is anticipated that 10 -20% of vein 
grafts will be documented as occluded at the 1 -year time point after CABG.  Should 
ticagrelor improve graft patency and reduce vein occlusion from 20% to 10%, 
power calculations suggest that this pilot trial will have 96 % power to detect a 
significant difference (P<0.05) between the groups.  Alternatively, if ticagrelor were 
to decrease the occlusion rate from 15% to 10%, the power will be approximately 
58%.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
All study data will be collected in  a blinded fashion during the course of the trial.  
At 1- and 2 -years after surgery, the CT coronary angiograms will be read and 
interpreted by board -certified radiologists with expertise in cardiac CT imaging.  
The radiologists will be blinded to study treatment  assignment.  The data analysis 
will also be performed in a blinded fashion, with un -blinding at the conclusion of 
the analysis.  Study outcomes will be compared on an intention -to-treat basis 
according to the randomization study -group assignment.  Vein gr aft occlusion, the 
primary outcome of the study, will be compared between the two randomization 
groups using a Fisher’s exact test.  To account for within -patient correlation and 
the possibility of multi -graft occlusion within individual patients, vein gra ft data will 
also be analyzed using logistic regression fit with generalized estimating equations 
methods.  For secondary outcomes, continuous data will be compared between 
the two groups using two -sided Student’s t tests, two -sample Wilcoxon rank -sum 
tests, or ANOVA, and a Fisher’s exact test will be used for categorical data.  Time 
to major adverse cardiovascular event will be determined for the study groups 
using the Kaplan -Meier method, and groups will be compared with a log -rank test.  
In accordance wi th intention -to-treat analysis, clinical and safety data will be 
analyzed for all randomized patients in the study.  This will include data collected 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 21 from subjects who have dropped out of the trial or who refuse postoperative CT 
coronary angiography (5% ex pected refusal).  
 
Study analysis will be performed at the 1 -year and 2 -year time -points.  The first 
analysis will be conducted when the last recruited patient has passed the 1 -year 
time interval after surgery and has undergone CT angiography.  The second 
analysis will be performed when all recruited patients have crossed the 2 -year 
time-point after surgery.  
 
 
 
Important Medical Procedures to be followed by the Investigator  
 
Overdose  
If an overdose on an AstraZeneca study drug occurs in the course of the study, 
then the investigators or other site personnel will inform appropriate AstraZeneca 
representatives within  one day  (i.e. immediately but no later than the end of the 
next busines s day ) of when he or she becomes aware of it.  
 
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work  with the Investigator to 
ensure that all relevant information is provided to the AstraZeneca  Patient Safety  
data entry site.  
Pregnancy  
Patients who are p regnan t or seeking to become pregnant will be excluded from 
trial recruitment.  A ll outcomes of pregnancy , should they occur, will be reported 
to AstraZeneca.  
 
 
References  
1. American Heart Association: Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics  - 2011 Update. 
Circulation. 2011;123:e1 -e192.  
2. Weintraub WS, Jones EL, Craver JM, Guyton RA. Frequency of repeat coronary 
bypass or coronary angioplasty after coronary artery bypass surgery using 
saphenous venous grafts. Am J Cardiol. 1994;73:103 -12. 
3. Alexander JH, Hafley G, Harrington RA, et al. Efficacy and safety of edifoligide, 
an E2F transcription factor decoy, for prevention of vein graft failure following 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: PREVENT IV: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 2005 ;294:2446 -54. 
4. Campeau L, Enjalbert M, Lesperance J, et al. The relation of risk factors to the 
development of atherosclerosis in saphenous -vein bypass grafts and the 
progression of disease in the native circulation. A study 10 years after 
aortocoronary bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 1984;311:1329 -32. 
5. Bourassa MG. Fate of venous grafts: the past, the present and the future. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:1081 -3. 
6. Fitzgibbon GM, Kafka HP, Leach AJ, Keon WJ, Hooper GD, Burton JR. Coronary 
bypass graft fate and patient outcome: angiographic follow -up of 5,065 grafts 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 22 related to survival and reoperation in 1,388 patients during 25 years. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1996;28:616 -26. 
7. Alderman EL, Corley SD, Fisher LD, et al. Five -year angiographic follow -up of 
factors a ssociated with progression of coronary artery disease in the Coronary 
Artery Surgery Study (CASS). CASS Participating Investigators and Staff. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:1141 -54. 
8. van Brussel BL, Ernst JM, Ernst NM, et al. Clinical outcome in venous coro nary 
artery bypass grafting: a 15 -year follow -up study. Int J Cardiol. 1997;58:119 -26. 
9. Motwani JG, Topol EJ. Aortocoronary saphenous vein graft disease: 
pathogenesis, predisposition, and prevention. Circulation. 1998;97:916 -31. 
10. Bryan AJ, Angelini GD . The biology of saphenous vein graft occlusion: etiology 
and strategies for prevention. Curr Opin Cardiol. 1994;9:641 -9. 
11. Roubos N, Rosenfeldt FL, Richards SM, Conyers RA, Davis BB. Improved 
preservation of saphenous vein grafts by the use of glyceryl trinitrate -verapamil 
solution during harvesting. Circulation. 1995;92:II31 -6. 
12. Verrier ED, Boyle EM, Jr. Endothelial cell injury in cardiovascular surgery. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 1996;62:915 -22. 
13. Fuster V, Dyken ML, Vokonas PS, Hennekens C. Aspirin as a th erapeutic agent 
in cardiovascular disease. Special Writing Group. Circulation. 1993;87:659 -75. 
14. Collaborative meta -analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for 
prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. Bm j. 
2002;324:71 -86. 
15. Johnson WD, Kayser KL, Hartz AJ, Saedi SF. Aspirin use and survival after 
coronary bypass surgery. Am Heart J. 1992;123:603 -8. 
16. Farooq V, Serruys PW, Bourantas C, et al. Incidence and multivariable correlates 
of long -term mortality in patients treated with surgical or percutaneous 
revascularization in the synergy between percutaneous coronary intervention 
with taxus and cardiac surgery (SYNTAX) trial. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:3105 -13. 
17. Mangano DT. Aspirin and mortality from coronary bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2002;347:1309 -17. 
18. Chesebro JH, Clements IP, Fuster V, et al. A platelet -inhibitor -drug trial in 
coronary -artery bypass operations: benefit of perioperative dipyridamole and 
aspirin therapy on early postoperative v ein-graft patency. N Engl J Med. 
1982;307:73 -8. 
19. Chesebro JH, Fuster V, Elveback LR, et al. Effect of dipyridamole and aspirin on 
late vein -graft patency after coronary bypass operations. N Engl J Med. 
1984;310:209 -14. 
20. Fremes SE, Levinton C, Naylor CD, Chen E, Christakis GT, Goldman BS. 
Optimal antithrombotic therapy following aortocoronary bypass: a meta -analysis. 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1993;7:169 -80. 
21. Lim E, Ali Z, Ali A, et al. Indirect comparison meta -analysis of aspirin therapy 
after corona ry surgery. Bmj. 2003;327:1309.  
22. Goldman S, Copeland J, Moritz T, et al. Improvement in early saphenous vein 
graft patency after coronary artery bypass surgery with antiplatelet therapy: 
results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. Circulatio n. 
1988;77:1324 -32. 
23. Goldman S, Copeland J, Moritz T, et al. Saphenous vein graft patency 1 year 
after coronary artery bypass surgery and effects of antiplatelet therapy. Results 
of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. Circulation. 1989;80:1190 -7. 
24. Bhatt DL, Topol EJ. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy in the secondary 
prevention of ischemic heart disease. Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:163 -79, ix.  
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 23 25. Helgason CM, Bolin KM, Hoff JA, et al. Development of aspirin resistance in 
persons with pre vious ischemic stroke. Stroke. 1994;25:2331 -6. 
26. Gum PA, Kottke -Marchant K, Welsh PA, White J, Topol EJ. A prospective, 
blinded determination of the natural history of aspirin resistance among stable 
patients with cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardio l. 2003;41:961 -5. 
27. Buchanan MR, Brister SJ. Individual variation in the effects of ASA on platelet 
function: implications for the use of ASA clinically. Can J Cardiol. 1995;11:221 -7. 
28. Chopra V, Marmur JD, Cavusoglu E. The role of clopidogrel in the m anagement 
of patients with ischemic heart disease. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2003;17:467 -77. 
29. Cadroy Y, Bossavy JP, Thalamas C, Sagnard L, Sakariassen K, Boneu B. Early 
potent antithrombotic effect with combined aspirin and a loading dose of 
clopidogrel on  experimental arterial thrombogenesis in humans. Circulation. 
2000;101:2823 -8. 
30. Yusuf S, Zhao F, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, Tognoni G, Fox KK. Effects of 
clopidogrel in addition to aspirin in patients with acute coronary syndromes 
without ST -segment elev ation. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:494 -502. 
31. Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, Mann JT, 3rd, et al. Early and sustained dual oral 
antiplatelet therapy following percutaneous coronary intervention: a randomized 
controlled trial. Jama. 2002;288:2411 -20. 
32. Fox KA, Meh ta SR, Peters R, et al. Benefits and risks of the combination of 
clopidogrel and aspirin in patients undergoing surgical revascularization for non -
ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: the Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to 
prevent Recurrent ischemic Events  (CURE) Trial. Circulation. 2004;110:1202 -8. 
33. Saw J, Topol EJ, Steinhubl SR, Brennan D, Berger PB, Moliterno DJ. 
Comparison of long -term usefulness of clopidogrel therapy after the first 
percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting versus 
that after the second or repeat intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:623 -5. 
34. Kim DH, Daskalakis C, Silvestry SC, et al. Aspirin and clopidogrel use in the 
early postoperative period following on -pump and off -pump coronary artery 
bypass gr afting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138:1377 -84. 
35. Sorensen R, Abildstrom SZ, Hansen PR, et al. Efficacy of post -operative 
clopidogrel treatment in patients revascularized with coronary artery bypass 
grafting after myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Car diol. 2011;57:1202 -9. 
36. David JL, Limet R. Antiplatelet activity of clopidogrel in coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery patients. Thromb Haemost. 1999;82:1417 -21. 
37. Sun JC, Teoh KH, Lamy A, et al. Randomized trial of aspirin and clopidogrel 
versus aspi rin alone for the prevention of coronary artery bypass graft occlusion: 
the Preoperative Aspirin and Postoperative Antiplatelets in Coronary Artery 
Bypass Grafting study. Am Heart J. 2010;160:1178 -84. 
38. Gao G, Zheng Z, Pi Y, Lu B, Lu J, Hu S. Aspirin plu s clopidogrel therapy 
increases early venous graft patency after coronary artery bypass surgery a 
single -center, randomized, controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1639 -43. 
39. Kulik A, Le May MR, Voisine P, et al. Aspirin plus clopidogrel versus asp irin 
alone after coronary artery bypass grafting: the clopidogrel after surgery for 
coronary artery disease (CASCADE) Trial. Circulation. 2010;122:2680 -7. 
40. Smith SC, Jr., Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF Secondary Prevention 
and Risk Reduction The rapy for Patients with Coronary and other Atherosclerotic 
Vascular Disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association 
and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 2011;124:2458 -73. 
41. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary 
Artery Bypass Graft Surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 24 Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2011;124:e652 -735. 
42. Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al. Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients 
with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1045 -57. 
43. Held C, Asenblad N, Bassand JP, et al. Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients 
with acute coronary syndromes undergoing coronary artery  bypass surgery: 
results from the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes) trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2011;57:672 -84. 
44. Kulik A, Le May M, Wells GA, Mesana TG, Ruel M. The clopidogrel after surgery 
for coronary artery disease (CASCADE) randomized controlled trial: clopidogrel 
and aspirin versus aspirin alone after coronary bypass surgery [[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]]. 
Curr Control Trials Cardiovasc Med. 2005;6:15.  
45. Jones CM, Athanasiou T, Dunne N, et al. Multi -detector computed tomography in 
coronary artery byp ass graft assessment: a meta -analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;83:341 -8. 
46. Eagle KA, Guyton RA, Davidoff R, et al. ACC/AHA 2004 guideline update for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Associa tion Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
(Committee to Update the 1999 Guidelines for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft 
Surgery). Circulation. 2004;110:e340 -437. 
47. Smith SC, Jr., Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary 
prevention for patients  with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease: 
2006 update: endorsed by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 
Circulation. 2006;113:2363 -72. 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 25 Appendix A - Study Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 
- Patients undergoing first-time CABG with at 
least one saphenous vein graft  
 
- Female or male patients aged 18 -90 years  
 
- On-pump or off -pump CABG  
 
- Concurrent valve repair or replacement  
 
 
 Reason:  
 
- The population of clinical interest  
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
- Redo CABG  
 
 
- Serum creatinine >1.8 mg/dL  
 
 
- Hypersensitivity or a llergy to aspirin or 
ticagrelor  
 
- Anticipated need for postoperative 
anticoagulation  with coumadin , dabigatran or 
rivaroxaban (mechanical valve, chronic atrial 
fibrillation, DVT/PE)  
 
- History of gastrointestinal hemorrhage  
 
- Active pathological bleeding  
 
- History of intracranial hemorrhage  
 
- Severe hepatic impairment  
 
- Pregnancy or seeking pregnancy  
 
- Current or anticipated use of strong 
CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g. ketoconazole, 
clarithromycin, nefazadone, ritonavir, and 
atazanavir)  
 
- Inability to provide  informed consent  
 
- Postoperative low cardiac output syndrome 
requiring more than 2 inotropes 48 hours after 
surgery  Reason:  
 
- Higher risk of graft occlusion and poor long -
term outcome  
 
- Contraindication to use of postoperative  CT 
coronary angiography  
 
- Contraindication to use of aspirin or ticagrelor  
 
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
 
 
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
- Contraindication to use of ticagrelor  
 
 
 
 
- Ineligible for research study enrollment  
 
- Unstable patient unlikely to  benefit from 
treatment  
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 26 Appendix B – Definitions of Outcomes  
As per the and CASCADE  and CURE Trials [30, 39, 44]  
 
Death from Cardiovascular Cause  
Death from cardiovascular cause is defined as any death for which there is no clearly 
documented nonvascular cause.  
 
Myocardial Infarction  
Myocardial infarction is defined by the presence of at least two of the following: ischemic 
chest pain, the elevation of the serum levels of cardiac markers or enzymes (troponin, 
creatinine kinase, creatinine kinase MB isoenzyme, or other cardiac enzymes) to at least 
twice the upper limit of the normal referen ce range or three times the upper limit of normal 
within 48 hours after percutaneous coronary intervention or CABG (or to a level 20% 
higher than the previous value if the level has already been elevated because of an earlier 
myocardial infarction), and el ectrocardiographic changes compatible with infarction.  
 
Cerebrovascular Accident  
Stroke is defined as a new focal neurologic deficit of vascular origin lasting more than 24 
hours.  Stroke is further classified as the result of intracranial hemorrhage, isch emia (if a 
computed tomographic or magnetic resonance imaging scan is available), or uncertain 
cause.  
 
Angina  
Recurrent angina after surgery is defined by the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) 
classification and the need for anti -angina agents (i.e. ni trates).  Refractory ischemia after 
surgery is defined by re -hospitalization lasting at least 24 hours for unstable angina, with 
ischemic electrocardiographic changes.  
 
Bleeding  
Major bleeding episodes are defined as substantially disabling bleeding, intra ocular 
bleeding leading to the loss of vision, or bleeding necessitating the transfusion of at least 
2 units of blood.  Major bleeding is classified as life -threatening if the bleeding episode is 
fatal, leads to a reduction in the hemoglobin level of at le ast 5 grams per deciliter or to 
substantial hypotension requiring the use of intravenous inotropic agents, if it necessitates 
a surgical intervention, if it is a symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, or if it necessitates 
the transfusion of four or more uni ts of blood.  Minor bleeding episodes included other 
hemorrhages that lead to the interruption of the study medication.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 27 Appendix C – Ticagrelor Drug Information  
 

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 28  

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 29  

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 30  

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 31  

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 32  

TARGET Trial - Brilinta ISSBRIL0220   Version  4 – October 17, 2013  
 33  
