Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and 
Trem elimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date29June 2020
A Phase III Randomized, Open -label, Multi -center, Global Study 
of MEDI4736 Alone or in Combination with Tremelimumab versus 
Standard of Care in the Treatment of First -line Recurrent or 
Metastatic Squamous Cell Head and Neck  Cancer Patients
Sponsor:
AstraZeneca AB, 151 85 Södertälje, Sweden
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tr emelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
2(199)VERSION HISTORY
Version 12.0, 2 9June 2020
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Change of primary objective from MEDI4736 monotherapy versus Standard of 
Care (SoC) in patients who are at low risk of early mortality based on baseline 
laboratory values according to a model developed by AstraZeneca in terms of SoC, to MEDI4736 versus SoC in a biomarker- selected population (PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgrou p) in terms of overall survival (OS).
The primary  object ive of the study  has been changed from MEDI4736 monotherapy  
versus SoC in patients who are at low risk o f early  mortali ty based on baseline 
laboratory  values according to a specific prognostic model d eveloped by AstraZeneca 
 to MEDI4736 versus SoC in a bio marker -selected 
subgroup (PD -L1 TC/IC high) in terms of OS. MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in 
the popul ation at l ow ri sk of early  mortali ty will be incl uded as a secon dary object ive in 
order to maximize the informat ion generated on the utilit y of this model. The mult iple 
testing procedure (MTP) has been updated accordingly to reflect this change. In line 
with the changes to the primary  object ive, the analysis o f OS will be perform ed when 
approximately  147 death events have occurred in approximately  172 pati ents (85% 
maturit y) across the MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC treatment groups in the 
biomarker -selected popul ation (PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup).
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes. This includes the Synopsis, Section 1.2.5 (Study  popul ation rati onale), Secti on 1.2.6 
(Rati onale for endpoints), Section 2.1 (Primary  objective), Secti on 2.2 (Secondary  
objectives), Section 2.3 (Safet y object ive), Secti on 8.2 (Sample size est imate), Section 
8.3 (Definit ions of analysis sets) , 8.4 (Outcome measures for analysis) and Secti on 8.5 
(Methods for statistical analysis).
This revisio n to the primary object ive to focus on the PD -L1 hi gh subgroup (TC/IC) i s 
intended to address feedback from the US FDA regarding the use of the prognostic 
model to define a primary analysis populat ion in KESTREL . The resulting changes are 
inform ed based on data external to the KESTREL study . Specifically, the phase 3 
KEYNOTE -048 study , which dem onstrated that pembrolizumab monotherapy  improved 
OS when compared wit h the EXTREME regimen in patients whose tumors had PD -L1 
expressio n ≥1 and ≥20 by  Combined Posi tive Score (CPS) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.78 
(0.64 –0.96 ), P=0.0086 and HR 0.61 (0.45 –0.83), P=0007, respectively] ( Burtness et al., 
2019). The PD -L1 high cut -point (TC50/IC25) was previously defined (see KESTREL 
CSPv7.0). Additional data analysis from the Sponsor’s Phase 3 D4193C00002 
(EAGLE) study  in second line squamous cell head and neck cancer ( HNSCC )appear to 
further support the utilit y of PD-L1 to sel ect pati ents wi th improved outcome when 
treated with MED I4736.  
 
Whe n 
controlling for prognostic factors, the mult ivariate analysis of pat ients treated with 
MEDI4736 shows a tendency to better OS in the PD -L1 high (TC/IC) vs PD -L1 low 
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
3(199)subgroup [HR=0.80 (95% CI 0.58 –1.09)]. The primary object ive will include the 
MEDI4736 mo notherapy  arm vs SoC (EXTREME), as the body  of evidence described 
above supports that the primary utilit y of PD -L1 blockade in treatment of recurrent or 
metastati c HNSCC appears to be as in patients whose tumors express sufficient levels o f 
PD-L1. 
Changes not related to the analysis of the primary objective include the following:
Synopsis, Section 8.5 (Methods for statistical analysis). These sect ions have been 
updated to include OS analysis in MEDI4736 + tremelimumab ctDNA TMB ≥16 
mut/Mb as the fourth tier in the MTP based on ctDNA TMB results fro m the EAGLE 
study  (Li et al  2020 ) and growing evidence of the value of this bio marker for ident ifying 
patients who may  benefi t from MEDI4736 + trem elimumab treatm ent.
Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 2.2 (Secondary 
objectives), Section 8.2 (Sample size estimate), Section 8.3 (Definition of analysis 
sets), Section 8.5 (Methods for statistical analysis). These sect ions have been updated 
to rem ove OS noninferiorit y analysis for MEDI4736 versus SoC in all rando mized 
patients (all -comers) as a secondary  object ive and as the second level of the MTP. 
Synopsis, Section 2.3 (Safety objective), 8.3 (Definition of analysis sets), 8.5 
(Methods for statistical analysis). These secti ons have been updated to include the low 
risk of early  mortali ty subgroup in the safet y objectives. 
In addit ion to the changes listed above, minor administrative corrections have been 
made throughout the protocol and are not detailed here further .
Version 11.0, 04 October 2019
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Change of primary objective from MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC in all randomized patients (all -comers) in terms of OS to MEDI4736 monotherapy versus 
SoC in patients who are at low risk of early mortality based on baseline 
characteristics in terms of OS.
The primary  object ive of the study  has been changed from MEDI4736 monotherapy  
versus SoC in all randomized patients (all- comers) to MEDI4736 monotherapy versus 
SoC in patients who are at l ow ri sk of early  mortali ty based on baseline characterist ics 
(hereafter referred to as “primary  analysis popul ation”) in terms of OS. The primary 
analysis population consists of patients ident ified by a model devel oped by  AstraZeneca 
as having low risk of early  mortali ty. The mul tiple testing procedure has been updated 
accordingly to reflect this change.  In line with the changes to the primary object ive, the 
analysis of OS will be performed when approximately 254 death events have occurred in 
approximately  304 pati ents (84% m aturity) across the MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC 
treatm ent groups in the primary analysis populat ion.
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes. This includes the Synopsis, Sec tion 1.2 (Rati onale for study  design, doses and control 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
4(199)groups), Section 1.2.5 (Study  populati on rati onale), Secti on 1.2.6 (Rati onale for 
endpo ints), Section 2.1 (Primary  object ive), Section 2.2 (Secondary  object ives), Section 
8.2 (Sam ple size est imate), S ection 8.3 (Definit ions of analysis sets) and Section 8.5 
(Methods for statistical analysis).
This change has been made based on emerging data that are external to the KESTREL 
study . Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are profoundly  changing the treatm entof 
many ty pes of  cancer, including melanoma, non -small  cell lung cancer (NSCLC), renal 
cell carcino ma (RCC), squamous cell carcino ma of the head and neck (SCCHN), 
urothelial carcino ma (UC), and Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and have been associated with 
long-lasting tum or responses. However, an early mortalit y (EM) phenom enon has been 
observed in many rando mized clinical trials comparing ICIs with active co mparator 
arms in advanced or metastatic cancer patients, even wit h overall benefit ult imately 
favoring ICI ther apy (Cham piat et al2018). While the precise et iology of this 
pheno menon is not clearly  established, i t is characteri zed by  what seems to be 
disproporti onately  higher m ortalit y in the early  treatm ent peri od favoring the active 
control  arm, followed by subsequent benefit in overall survival (OS) favoring the ICI 
treatm ent arm . This is often reflected in the clinical data by  the “crossing of the Kaplan -
Meier curves” suggest ing a subpopulation of pat ients at a higher risk of EM whose 
advanced rate of tumor growth may require the cy totoxi c tum or-debulking effect of 
chemotherapy. Accordingly, it is of great therapeutic interest to better predict the risk of early  mortali ty for a given patient to better inform the appropriate treatment for their 
individual clinical state. To aid in this object ive, AstraZeneca has developed and 
implemented a model that predicts a patient’s risk of early mortalit y to optimize the 
benefit:risk profi le for treatm ent of pati ents wi th ICIs.
Changes not related to the analysis of the primary objective include the following: 
Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 2.2 (Secondary 
objectives), Section 8.2 (Sample size estimate), Section 8.3 (Definition of analysis 
sets), Section 8.5 (Methods for statistical analysis). These sect ions have been updated 
to include OS noninferiorit y analysis for MEDI4736 versus SoC in all rando mized 
patients (all -comers) as a secondary  object ive and as the s econd l evel of the MTP. 
Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 2.2 (Secondary 
objectives), Section 8.2 (Sample size estimate), Section 8.3 (Definition of analysis 
sets) and Section 8.5 (Methods for statistical analysis). These sect ionshave been 
updated to include OS analysis in the ctDNA Tumor Mutation Burden (TMB) subgroups 
for MEDI4736 versus SoC as the third level o f the MTP and to specify  the cutoff value 
for the ctDNA TMB high subgroup. 
In addit ion to the changes listed above, minor administrative corrections have been 
made throughout the protocol and are not detailed here further.
Version 10.0, 25 January 2019
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
5(199)Change of primary objective from MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination 
therapy versus SoC in a biomarker -selected subgroup (PD -L1 TC/IC), to 
MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC in all randomized patients (all -comers) in 
terms of OS.
The primary  object ive of the study  has been changed from MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion thera py versus SoC in a bio marker -selected subgroup (PD -L1 TC/IC), to 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in all rando mized pat ients (all -comers) in terms of 
OS. The mult iple testing procedure has been updated accordingly.  In line wit h the 
changes to the primary  object ive, the analysis of OS will be performed when 
approximately  336 death events have occurred in 380 patients (88% maturit y) across the 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC treatm ent groups in the all -comers populat ion, and 
also when approximately  147 death eve nts from the PD -L1 TC/IC subgroup have 
occurred in 172 patients (85% maturit y) across the MEDI4736 monotherapy  therapy  and 
SoC treatment groups .  
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes.  
This includes the Synopsis, Section 1.2 (Rationale for study  design, doses and control 
groups), Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 1.4 (Study  design), Secti on 2.1 
(Primary object ive), Section 2.2 (Secondary  objectives), Secti on 8.1 (Stati stical 
considerations) , Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple size est imate), Section 8.5 (Methods for statist ical 
analysis).
This change has been made based on emerging data in the field that are external to the 
KESTREL study , specifically  recent ly announced results from a phase 3 study  in 2nd
line recurrent/metastatic HNSCC patients (EAGLE). 
Changes not related to the analysis of the primary endpoints include the following: 
Synopsis, Section 1.2.5 (Study Population Rationale), Section 2.2 (Secondary 
objectives), Section 2.4 (Exploratory Objectives), Section 5.5.2.1  
, Section 8.3 (Definition of Analysis Sets). Section 8.5 (Methods for 
Statistical Analysis)
These sections have been updated to include ctDNA Tumor Mutational Burden (TMB) 
as a secondary analysis to inve stigate TMB as a marker of response to MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy . This analysis has 
been changed fro m an exploratory  objective to a secondary object ive. 
Section 2.4 (Exploratory objectives), Section 5.5.2.1 
 
Section 6.3.9 (Safety data to be collected following the final dat a cut -off of the 
study) and Section 7.2.2 (Duration of treatment (post final data cut -off)
These sections have been updated to clarify procedures fo llowing final data cut -off o f 
the study .
Section 6.7.2 (Specific toxicity management and dose modification information –
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy)
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
6(199)This sect ion has been updated to clarify that the Toxicit y Management Guidelines 
(TMGs) for durvalumab and tremelimumab will be provided to invest igative sites as an 
Annex to the protocol document. 
In addit ion to the changes listed above, minor administrative corrections have been 
made throughout the protocol and are not detailed here further.
Version 9.0, 03 October 2018
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Change of Overall Survival in the all -comer population from primary objective to 
secondary objective 
OS in the all-comer populat ion has been changed from a co -primary objective to a 
secondary object ive o f the study . OS in the PD -L1 TC/IC subgroup remains as the sole 
primary  object ive. The mult iple testing procedure has been updated accordingly. In line 
with the changes to the primary  object ive, the requirement for OS analysis to be 
perform ed when 495 death events from the all -comers popul ation have occurred in 570 
patients (87% m aturity) has been rem oved. OS analysis will be performed when 
approximately  213 death events from  the PD-L1 TC/IC subgroup populat ion have 
occurred in 257 patients (83% maturit y) across the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  and SoC treatm ent groups and al so when approximately 147 death 
events from the PD -L1 TC/IC subgroup populat ion have occurred in 172 patients (85% 
maturit y) across the MEDI4736 monotherapy  therapy  and SoC treatm ent groups.   
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes.  
This includes the Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpo ints), Section 2.1 (Primary 
objective), Section 2.2 (Secondary  objectives), Secti on 2.3 (Safet y objective), Section 
8.2 (Sam ple size est imate), Section 8.3 (Definit ions of analysis sets), Section 8.4 
(Outcom e measures for analysis), Section 8.5 (Methods for statist ical analysis), Secti on 
11 (References).
This change has been made based on emerging data in the field that are exte rnal to the 
KESTREL study . Specifically , recently  announced interim analysis results from a phase 
3 study  in 1stline recurrent/metastatic HNSCC patients (KEYNOTE -048) demonstrated 
that the PD- 1 inhibitor Pembrolizumab mo notherapy  in pat ients with PD-L1 ex pressi on 
(Combined Positive Score (CPS) ≥ 20) resulted in significant ly longer OS compared to 
the current standard of care for HNSCC in the first -line treatment setting. At the time of 
the interim analysis, the dual -primary endpoint of PFS for patients who se tum ors 
expressed PD -L1 (CPS ≥ 20) had not been reached. In addit ion, recent analysis o f 
mature HAWK (D4193C00001)/CONDOR (D4193C00003) data using the TC50/IC25 
algorithm confi rmed that OS was signicantly improved in the PD -L1 (TC50/IC25) 
popul ation. 
Changes not related to the analysis of the primary endpoints include the following: 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
7(199)Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 2.2 (Secondary 
objectives), Section 8.3 (Definition of analysis sets) and Section 8.5 (Methods for 
statistical ana lyses)
These sections have been updated to include DoR, BoR, TFST, TSST, APF6 and APF12 as secondary  objectives to assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 monotherapy  com pared to 
SoC. Thi s change has been made to aid clinical int erpretati on of  the MEDI4736 
monotherapy  data foll owing the update to the mult iple testing procedure, and for 
consistency wit h the secondary  efficacy  objectives for the MEDI4737 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy .
Section 1.3.2.1 (MEDI4736), Section 4 (Study plan and timing of proced ures), 
Section 6.7.1. (MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy adverse events of special interest), Section 6.7.2 (Specific toxicity 
management and dose modification information – MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combination therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy)
These sections have been updated to inform Investigators that the Toxicit y Management 
Guidelines (TMGs) for durvalumab and tremelimumab have been removed from the 
protocol  (Table 8) and have beco me a standalo ne docum ent. The m ost current version of 
these guidelines is to be maintained wit hin the Site Master File. In addit ion, a version o f 
the current TMG is available via 
https://tmg.azirae.com
Section 8.3.1 (PD- L1 TC/IC subgroup analysis)
This se ction has been updated to clarify the definit ion of PD -L1 high and PD -L1 low. 
Section 11 (References)
The fo llowing reference was removed in order to be consistent with changes made 
elsewhere in the protocol:  Burman et al 2009.
In addit ion to the change s listed above, minor administrative corrections have been 
made throughout the protocol and are not detailed here further.
Version 8.0, 13 Feb 2018  
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Change of Progression Free Survival from primary objective to secondary 
objective
PFS in the all- comer populat ion has been changed fro m a primary  object ive to a 
secondary object ive o f the study .  Accordingly, the primary  analysis of the secondary  
objective of PFS will now be conducted using investigator assessments and the 
sensit ivity analysis will now be conducted by  BICR.
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes. 
This includes the Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpo ints), Section 1.4 (Study 
desig n), Section 2.1 (Primary  object ive), Section 2.2 (Secondary  objectives), Section 8.2 
(Sam ple size), Secti on 8.4.1 (Calculat ion or derivation of efficacy variables) and Section 
8.5 (Methods for statistical analyses ).  Table 12 (Summary  of stati stical assump tions) 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
8(199)has been updated.  Appropriate changes have been made throughout Section 8.5 
(Methods for statistical analysis), including revisio n of the mult iple testing procedure 
(Figure 6) and rem oval of PFS analyses based on subgroups within the full analysis set.  
This change has been made based on emerging data in the field that are external to the 
KESTREL study .  Specifically, recently published data from 2 phase 3 trials in 2ndline 
R/M HNSCC patients demonstrated that despite showing improvements for PD -1 
inhibitors compared to standard of care in terms of OS, there was no such improvement 
for PD -1 for PFS (Ferris et al, N Engl J Med 2016, 375:1856- 1867; Cohen et al, Annals 
of Onco logy 2017, 28(suppl _5):v372 -v394).  Numerically similar results were obtain ed 
in two phase 2 studies with durvalumab in a similar patient populat ion (Zandberg et al, 
Annals o f Oncol ogy 2017, 28(suppl _5):v372 -v394;  data on file).  Consequent ly, PFS is 
not consi dered to be a useful primary endpoint in this disease setting with suc h 
therapi es. Invest igator assessments are considered acceptable for secondary object ives 
and therefore the outcome measure for PFS has been changed fro m BICR to invest igator 
assessments.   
Removal of interim analysis for Overall Survival 
The interim an alysis for overall survival has been removed.  All relevant sections 
throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect this change. This includes the 
Synopsis, Section 8.2 (Sample size), Section 8.4.1 (Calculat ion or deri vation of  efficacy  
variables) an d Secti on 8.5 ( Methods for statist ical analyses ); and Secti on 8.5.8 (Interim 
analysis).   Table 12 (Summary  of stati stical assumpti ons) has been updated to reflect 
the stati stical assumpt ions for the primary object ives fo llowing the removal o f the 
interim analysis for OS.  This change has been made in order to allocate the full alpha 
on the final OS analysis, which is considered optimal when comparing against an active 
standard of care regimen. 
Increase in maturity level for the analysis of Overall Surviv al
The timing of the analysis of overall survival remains event driven.  In order to increase 
the maturit y of overall survival events to ~85% in both the all -comers and the PD -L1 
TC/IC subgroup, the number of events required for the analysis has been incre ased 
(thereby  increasing the power for the assumed average HR). All relevant sections 
throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect this change. This includes the 
Synopsis , Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple size), Secti on 8.4.1 (Calculat ion or deri vation of  effic acy 
variables) and Section 8.5 ( Methods for statist ical analyses ). This change has been 
made in order to maximize the amount data available for the analysis of overall survival, 
which is considered optimal for immune checkpo int inhibitors which appear to be 
associ ated wi th long term  clinical  benefi t.  
Changes not related to the analysis of the primary endpoints include the following:
Synopsis, Section 2.2 – Secondary objectives, Section 8.4.1.2 – RECIST -based 
secondary endpoints, and Section 8.5 –Methods for statistical analysis
These sections have been updated to reflect that investigator assessments, rather than 
BICR, will be used to derive the secondary objectives of ORR, DoR, BoR, APF6 and 
APF12.  In accordance with this change, the sensit ivityanalysis for PFS has been 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
9(199)updated to reflect that it is now based on BICR assessment rather than investigator 
assessment.  The change fro m BICR to investigator assessments was made to align with 
the outcom e measure of the secondary  object ive of PFS.   
Synopsis, Section 2.2 – Secondary objectives, and Section 8.4.1.2 –RECIST -based 
secondary endpoints
These sections have been updated to include APF6, OS12 and OS18 as secondary  
objectives, as the proportion of patients alive, or alive and progression free, at these time 
points i s considered to be a clinically meaningful object ive.  
Section 1.3.2 – Identified and potential risks
The i dentified and potential risks associated with MEDI4736, tremelimumab, and 
MEDI4736 in co mbinat ion with trem elimumab have been updated in order to align with 
the recent ly revised Invest igator Brochures (MEDI4736 IB edit ion  12, 03 November 
2017; tremelimumab IB edit ion 8, 02 November 2017)
Section 3.10.3 – Survival status for withdrawn consent and lost to follow up 
patients
This sect ion has been updated to clarify the reasons patients should be documented as 
“lost to fo llow-up” or “withdrawal o f consent”, and that in order to support the primary 
endpo int of OS, the survival status of all pat ients should be re -checked and the case 
report forms updated if appropriate.  
Section 6.7.1 – MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy adverse events of special interest
This sect ion has been updated to include the fo llowing as adverse events of special 
interest for MEDI4736 as m onotherapy  or in co mbinat ion with tremelimumab:   
myocardi tis, my ositis/polymyo sitis, and other inflammatory  responses that are rare but 
with a potenti al immune mediated aeti ology.  In addi tion, the AESI of colit is was 
expanded to includ e diarrhea and intest inal perforation and the AESI of 
endocrinopathies was expanded to include hypopituitarism and ty pe I di abetes m ellitus.  
These changes were made in order to align wit h the recent ly revised Invest igator 
Brochure (MEDI4736 IB edit ion 12, 03 November 2017).
Section 6.7.2 – Specific toxicity management and dose modification information –
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI473 monotherapy
This sect ion has been updated to inform investigators that the most current versio n of
the Toxi city Management Gui delines (TMGs) is also available through the fo llowing 
link: https://tm g.azi rae.com .In addit ion, clarificat ion has been provided regarding the 
importance of thoroughly evaluat ing patient s for potenti al alternate eti ologies when 
assessing immune -mediated adverse events, and that in the absence of a clear alternative 
etiology, events should be considered potentially immune related.
Table 8 has been updated to include toxicit y management gu idelines for events of 
myocardi tis, my ositis/polymyo sitis, as well as for hepat itis-related events in patients 
with hepatocellular carcino ma; pediatric considerations are also included, although these 
are not rel evant to the current study  popul ation.  In a ddition, the toxi city management 
guidelines have clarified that study  drug/study  regimen shoul d be perm anent ly 
discontinued for Grade 3 events with high likeliho od for morbidit y and/or m ortali ty, 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
10(199)even if they are not currently noted in the guidelines.  It has also been clarified that 
perm anent discont inuat ion of study  drug is not required for Grade 4 events of 
hyperthy roidism, hypothy roidism, or Ty pe 1 di abetes m ellitus.  These changes have 
been made in order to align wit h the toxi city managem ent gui delines across the 
durvalumab development program.
Section 7.2.2 – Duration of treatment
This sect ion has been updated to clarify that patients who continue to receive benefit 
from their assigned treatm ent at the time of database closure may cont inue to receive 
treatm ent for as l ong as they  are gaining clinical benefit, and that such patients are 
recommended to continue scheduled site visit s and be monitored in order to manage 
AEs in accordance with the toxicit y management guidelines.  In addit ion, any pat ient 
that may  be proposed to m ove to a safet y extensio n or roll -over study  woul d be given a 
new Informed Consent Form.Section 8.3.2 – PD-L1 TC/IC subgroup analysis set
This sect ion has been updated to clarify that the assay used to define patients in the PD -
L1 TC/IC subgroup analysis set is the analyt ically validated VENTANA PD -L1 (SP263) 
assay.
Section 8.5.2.4 –Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 6 and 12 
months
This sect ion has been updated to to clarify that proportion of patients alive and
progression free at 6 and 12 months will be summarized using the Kaplan -Meier curve.  
This change was made to be consistent with standard statist ical methodol ogy.
Section 8.5.2.7 –Proportion of OS 12, 18, and 24
This sect ion has been updated to clarify that the proporti on of  patients alive at 12, 18 
and 24 m onths will  be summarized using the Kaplan -Meier curve.  Thi s change was 
made to be consistent with standard statist ical methodol ogy.
Section 11 –References
The fo llowing references were removed in o rder to be consistent with changes made 
elsewhere in the protocol:  Klein 2007, Lan and DeMets 1983, Pazdur 2008, Sun and 
Chen 2010, and Whitehead and Whitehead 1991.
In addit ion to the changes listed above, minor administrative corrections have been 
made throughout the protocol and are not detailed here further.
Version 7.0, 10 May 2017  
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Addition of Primary Objective for Overall Survival in a Biomarker Selected 
Subgroup 
A primary  objective has been added forOS in a PD-L1 TC/IC -selected subgroup, 
defined as those patients having PD- L1 expressio n at any  intensity in ≥ 50% of tumor 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimu mab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
11(199)cells or ≥25 % of tumor -associated immune cells (PD-L1 TC/IC subgroup; TC ≥50 
or IC ≥25) . In order to control the family wise er ror rate, the MTP has been adjusted.  
The wording to describe the primary  endpoints has al so been adjusted to avoid using the 
term “co-primary” (as this is more correctly applied only for situations where all the 
primary  endpoints need to be significant, w here-as we have used an MTP that enables a 
claim if only one is significant).  Furthermore, secondary  objectives assessing the same 
endpo ints for the all -comers have been added for the PD -L1 TC/IC -selected subgroup. 
The timing of the PFS analysis has been moved to coincide wit h the same t ime as the 
80% of death events interim analysis of OS, thereby  removing the fi rst interim  analysis 
of OS fro m the protocol .
All relevant sections throughout the protocol have been updated to reflect these changes. 
This inc ludes the Synopsis, Section 1.2.6 (Rationale for endpoints), Section 1.4 (Study  
design), Section 2.1 (Primary  object ive), Section 2.2 (Secondary  objectives) and Sect ion 
2.3 (Safet y object ive), which have been updated to reflect the PD- L1 TC/IC subgroup as 
an addit ional populat ion for the OS primary  objective and various secondary  object ives; 
Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple size), where the statist ical assum ptions around the PD -L1 TC/IC -
selected subgroup have been added; and Sections 8.2, 8.5 ( Methods for statist ical 
analyses ) and 8.5.8 (Interim analysis), where the timing of the PFS has been adjusted 
(thereby  removing the first interim of OS) and the timing of the final OS analysis has 
been adjusted to allow for the required number of events in the PD -L1 TC/IC -selected 
subgroup. Section 8.3.2 has been adjusted to include the definit ion of the PD -L1 TC/IC -
selected subgroup. Table 12 (Summary  of statist ical assumpti ons) has been updated to 
include the assumpt ions regarding the PD -L1 TC/IC -selected subgroup, to remove the 
entries for the PD -L1 negat ive subgroup, and also to adjust the monotherapy versus 
SOC entries to reflect the same target hazard ratio as for the combination versus SOC comparisons. Appropri ate changes have been made throughout Section 8.5 (Methods for 
statistical analysis). These include updating o f the mult iple testi ng procedure (Figure 6), 
detailing the new statistical analyses incorporating the PD -L1 TC/IC -selected subgroup 
(Secti on 8.5.1.2 Overall survival, Section 8.5.1.3 Subgroup analyses o f PFS and O S, 
Secti on 8.5.2 Analysis o f the secondary  variables, Secti on 8.5.4 Safet y data) and 
removal of the fi rst interim  analysis of OS (Secti on 8.5.8 Interim analysis). 
These changes have been made based on emerging data in the field that are external to 
the KESTREL study .  Specifically, recent ly published data in 2
ndline R/M HNSCC 
patients suggest that PD -L1 expressio n on both tumor cells and tumor -associated 
immune cells may  be associ ated wi th greater clinical benefit to immune checkpo int 
inhibitors ( Chow et al 2016 ; Ferris et al, 2017).  PD -L1 expressio n on both tumor and 
tumor-associated immune cells was evaluated in patient samples from two phase 2 
studi es, D4193C00001 (HAWK) and D4193C00003 ( CONDOR).  These uncontrolled 
studi es evaluated MEDI4736 alone or in combinat ion with tremelimumab in 2ndline 
R/M SCCHN patients whose tumors expressed different levels o f PD-L1 expressio n 
(HAWK: ≥25% PD -L1 tum or cell expressio n; CONDOR: <25% PD -L1 tumor c ell 
expressio n).  Preliminary overall survival data from a pooled population o f patients 
treated with MEDI4736 monotherapy  across the HAWK and CONDOR studies was 
used to i dentify patients who appeared to be more likely to derive clinical benefit from 
MEDI4 73 treatment based on the level of PD -L1 expressio n in both tumor and tumor -
associ ated immune cells.  Based on this analysis, the bio marker -selected subgroup to be 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
12(199)evaluated for the primary  object ive of overall survival in the KESTREL study is defined 
as those patients whose tumors have PD-L1 expression of ≥50% in the tumor cells or 
≥25% in the tumor -associ ated immune cells [PD -L1 TC/IC subgroup; TC ≥50% or IC 
≥25%]. 
Other changes not related to the addition of the PD-L1 TC/IC- selected subgroup  
include t he following:
Synopsis, Section 2.2 – Secondary objectives, Section 8.5 – Methods for statistical 
analysis (Table 16)
These sections have been updated to include the secondary  object ives of Best object ive 
response, Time to first subsequent therapy , and Ti me to second subsequent therapy , in 
order to be consistent with the exist ing secondary endpo ints described in Section 8.4.1.4. 
Section 3.10.3 – Survival status for withdrawn consent and lost to follow up 
patients
This new sect ion has been created to clar ify that at the time of PFS and OS analyses, site 
personnel should attempt to obtain the survival status for all pat ients in the full analysis 
set and the safet y analysis set who had previously withdrawn consent or were considered 
lost to foll ow-up using publicly available resources.
Section 5.1 –Efficacy assessments
This sect ion has been updated to ensure consistency within the protocol and reflect that 
the baseline assessment should be performed no more than 28 days before 
rando mizat ion, rather than start of IP.
Section 7.1.1 – MEDI4736
This sect ion has been updated to include instructions for preparation o f MEDI4376 
doses for patients whose weight falls to <30 kg during the study .
Section 7.1.2 – Tremelimumab
This sect ion has been updated to include instructions for preparation o f tremelimumab 
doses for patients whose weight falls to <30 kg during the study .
Section 7.2.1 – Dose and treatment regimens
This sect ion has been updated to clarify the appropriate dosing procedures to be 
followed if a pat ient’s weight falls below 30 kg during the study . 
Section 7.7 –Concomitant and other treatments
This sect ion has been updated to clarify that the restrict ion on the use of monoclonal 
antibodies against PD -1, PD -L1 or CTLA -4 no l onger applies to th e 90 day  period af ter 
the pati ent has discont inued IP.  This change is implemented in order to be consistent 
with the durvalumab program and to ensure that patients who are randomized to the 
SOC arm are not denied approved therapies in the 2ndline recurre nt/metastatic setting 
which have previously  dem onstrated a survival  benefi t.
Section 8.4.1.2 –Primary endpoint (PFS) and Section 8.5 –Methods for statistical 
analysis
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
13(199)These sections have been updated to indicate that the sensit ivity analysis o f PFS based
on RECIST 1.1 modified for confirmat ion of progressio n will be performed using site 
Invest igator assessments, rather than BICR assessments.
Section 8.4.3.1 –EORTC QLQ -C30 
The populat ion for the analysis of time to symptom deterioration has been updated to 
reflect those patients who have baseline scores of ≤90, in order to accommodate an 
increase of at least 10 points which is the minimum deterioration considered to be 
clinically meaningful.
The populat ion for the analysis of time to QoL/function deteri oration has been updated 
to reflect those patients who have baseline scores of ≥10 in order to accommodate a 
decrease of at least 10 points, which is the minimum deteri oration considered to be 
clinically meaningful.
Section 8.4.4 – Calculation or de rivation of pharmacokinetic variables
This sect ion has been updated to reflect that PK parameters, such as peak and trough 
concentration of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab, will be derived from raw data 
measurements and that no formal non-compartmental PK analys is methods will be used 
as only sparse PK is being co llected in this study. 
Section 8.5.7 – Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic relationships
This sect ion has been removed because the PK/PD modeling is already covered in 
Secti on 8.4.4.1.
Appendix E –Guide lines for Evaluation of Objective Tumor Response Using 
RECIST 1.1 Criteria (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors)
This sect ion has been updated to ensure consistency with the protocol and reflect that 
the baseline assessment should be performed no more than 28 days before 
rando mizat ion, rather than start of IP.
In addit ion, minor administrative corrections have been made throughout the protocol 
and are not detailed here further.
Version 6.0, 31 August 2016  
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Synopsis, Section 8.2 –Sample Size Estimate
The sample size has been increased in order to power the co- primary endpo int of overall 
survival to 90%.  The revised sample size requires approximately 1016 pat ients to be 
screened in order t o randomize 760 patients across the three treatment arms. The 
requi rement for a minimum number of pat ients with PD-L1-negative di sease has been 
removed because the primary  endpoints are based on natural PD -L1 prevalence and the 
increased sample size ensure s a sufficient number of PD -L1-negat ive pat ients will be 
enrolled to allow sufficient power for the secondary analyses.  
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
14(199)The sect ion has also been updated to reflect a change in the alpha split between the PFS 
and OS co -primary endpo ints, such that an al pha l evel of 0.01 will be used for PFS 
analysis and an alpha level o f 0.04 will be used for OS analysis.  This change has been 
made to ensure both OS and PFS are powered to 90% while minimizing the number of 
patients exposed.  As a consequence, most of the alpha is spent on OS which is now 
considered to be the most important endpoint.   
The recrui tment peri od has been updated to 13 months to reflect the current rate of 
enrolment into the trial, and the fo llow-up peri od and expected analysis t imefr ames have
been updated accordingly .  
The 18 m onth l andmark OS analyses have been replaced wit h 24 m onth l andmark OS 
analyses to be consistent with other trials.  
Synopsis, Section 8.2 –Sample size estimate, Section 8.5 –Methods for statistical 
analysis
The text has been updated to reflect that the primary PFS analysis will not require a 
minimum number of progression/death events in the PD -L1-negat ive populat ion, as thi s 
secondary  endpoint has been removed from the mult iple testing procedure.
Section 1.3.2.1 – Potential Risks, MEDI4736  
This sect ion has been updated based on recent data reviews to reflect the identified and 
potenti al risks associated wi th MEDI4736; this section is now consistent with available 
data.
Section 1.3.2.2 –Potential Risks, Tremelimuma b  
This sect ion has been updated based on recent data reviews to reflect the identified and 
potenti al risks associated wi th trem elimumab m onotherapy; this sect ion is now 
consistent with available data.
Section 1.4 – Study Design 
This sect ion has been updated to clarify that the specified PD -L1 expression cut -off 
level will be used for the purpose of stratificat ion; however, the cut -off level to be used 
for the subgroup analyses by  PD-L1 status and for determining the PD -L1-negat ive 
subgroup in the MTP may be different and will be determined fro m emerging data 
outsi de of  this trial.  This sect ion has also been updated to reflect the revised sample size 
for both enrolled and rando mized pat ients, as well as to remove the requirement f or a 
minimum number of patients with PD -L1-negat ive disease accordingly.  Finally, Figure 
1 has been revised to reflect the increased sample size (n=760). Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures  
This sect ion has been modified to clarify when do sing may resume after a delay for 
either treatm ent-related toxicit y or reasons other than treatment -related toxicit y.  The 
timing of tumor efficacy (RECIST) assessments have been clarified in the text, 
consistent with the timings provided in Tables 2 and 3 .   In addition, this sect ion has 
been updated to include an explanat ion of how patients who remain on treatment at the 
time of final OS analysis will be fo llowed, in order to provide clarit y on data entry  and 
SAE reporting processes when this occurs.  
 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 20 20
15(199)  Footnote ‘f’ in Table 2 has been updated to clarify  
that for patients on the MEDI4736+tremelimumab combinat ion treatment arm, ADA 
samples co llected at cycle 7 will be for MEDI4736 only. Footnote ‘g’ in Table 2 has 
been updated to clarify that pre -dose pharmacokinetic samples for both MEDI4736 and 
tremelimumab may be obtained wit hin 60 minutes prior to the start o f the trem elimumab 
infusio n; thi s change has been made to simplify  the procedures at the site on days of PK 
sample collect ion.  In addi tion,  footnotes have been added in Table 2 and 3 to clarify  
that the +/ -3 day  window i s relat ive to the day o f dosing a nd that the PGIC patient -
reported outcome assessment will not be collected at screening or at cy cle 1 as thi s 
questionnaire refers to a change from baseline status.  The tumor assessment schedule in 
Table 4 has been corrected to reflect that assessments wi ll be perform ed every  6 weeks 
for the first 24 weeks relat ive to the date of randomizat ion and every 8 weeks thereafter, 
until a pat ient has confirmed disease progression; this correction is made to align Table 
4 with the text in Secti on 5.1.
Section 5.1 –Efficacy Assessments 
The cri teria for confi rming radi ographic progressi on have been clarified and aligned 
across the MEDI4736 program.  Specifically, the text now clarifies that new lesio ns 
ident ified at the previous scan timepo int are considered non -target lesio ns at the 
confirmatory  scan t imepo int.
Section 5.1.1 – Central reading of scans 
The list of guidelines available to sites for the central reading of scans has been updated.  
In addit ion, the text has been updated to reflect that results of eit her invest igator 
assessments or of blinded central reviewer assessments will not be shared with the other 
party; this has been done for clarit y around the central  review process.  
Section 5.5.1 – Collection of exploratory biomarker data  
Section 5.5.2.1 –Collection of exploratory biomarker data,  
 
 
Section 6.7.2 – Management of IP -related toxicities; MEDI4736 + tre melimumab 
combination therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy   
Table 8 has been updated to reflect the most current toxicit y management guidelines for 
MEDI4736 +/ -tremelimumab.  Specifically, references to “next scheduled treatment 
date” and “next scheduled dos e”, and “once 5 -7 days have passed” in regard to steroid 
completion, have been removed and instead the corresponding language has been 
updated to reflect that study  drug/study  regimen may  be resumed if toxicit y improves to 
Grade ≤1 (or baseline in so me cas es) af ter com pletion of steroi d taper.  Im portantly, the 
guidelines cont inue to be based on the maximum grade of each dist inct toxicit y 
observed.  In addit ion, it has been cl arified in Table 8 that prednisone can be given 
orally  (PO).
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
16(199)Section 7.7 –Concom itant and other treatments  
The table o f prohibited medicat ions has been updated to indicate that short term use o f 
immunosuppressive medicat ions, including corticosteroids, for the acute management of 
non-IP-related emergencies (e.g., COPD, asthma, etc) is permitted.
Section 8.2 –Sample size estimate 
The text describing the PFS analyses being conducted under alpha control for both the 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  versus SoC in the PD -L1-negat ive 
popul ation and the MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC i n all-comers has been deleted 
because these co mpar isons have been remo ved from the mult iple testi ng procedure.  The 
text describing the OS analysis for monotherapy  MEDI4736 versus SoC in all -comers 
has been deleted because this comparison is not part of the init ial levels o f the MTP and 
this will instead be described in the statistical analysis plan.  The target hazard ratios, 
critical values, number of events, maturity , and power for the co -primary and secondary 
endpo ints have been updated in Table 12 to reflect the values associated with an 
increased sample size.  
Section 8.3.2 – Definition of analysis sets; PD -L1-negative analysis set 
The definit ion of the PD -L1-negat ive analysis set has been updated to clarify that the 
cut-off level for PD -L1 status may be different from that used for stratification purposes, 
and that it will be determined fro m emerging data outside o f this trial and i ncluded in the 
SAP pri or to database lock.  
Section 8.3.4 – Definition of analysis sets; PK analysis set  
The definit ion of the PK analysis set has been updated to reflect that all pat ients who 
receive at least 1 dose of IP and for whom any post -dose da ta are available will be 
included.  Section 8.5 –Methods for statistical analysis   
Table 16 has been updated to indicate that both stratified log -rank tests and Cox 
proporti onal method will be used for both PFS and OS endpoints, and that Duration of 
Response will be analyzed using descript ive statistics and Kaplan -Meier pl ot, in order to 
be consistent with changes in Section 8.5.1.    
The Mult iple Test ing Procedure has been updated to depriorit ize the PFS analyses for 
the com parisons of MEDI4736 + tr emelimumab combinat ion therapy  vs. SoC in the PD -
L1-negative populat ion and the MEDI4736 monotherapy vs. SoC in the all -comer 
popul ation, rel ative to the OS analyses.  In addition, it has been clarified that only the 
initial levels o f the MTP are included in the protocol and that a full descript ion of the 
detailed MTP, including the comparison of MEDI4736 monotherapy  vs. SoC, is 
provi ded in the SAP. This sect ion has also been updated to clarify that the comparisons 
of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion the rapy vs. MEDI4736 m onotherapy  will 
not be included in the MTP and therefore will not be conducted under strict alpha 
control .
Section 8.5.1.1 –Analysis of the co- primary endpoints; Progression -free survival  
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
17(199)The m ethods for PFS analysis have been updated to reflect that a stratified unadjusted 
Cox regression will be used to estimate the HR, along with a (1 -α)% confidence interval, 
with the stratified log rank test being used to create the p -value only.  This a pproach i s 
consistent with how such endpo ints are normally analyzed.    
Section 8.5.1.2 –Analysis of the co- primary endpoints; Overall survival  
Descript ion of a sensit ivity analysis for OS, examining the censoring patterns to rule out 
attrition bias, h as been m oved into thi s secti on from elsewhere in the protocol, for 
clarity.
Section 8.5.1.3 –Analysis of the co- primary endpoints; subgroup analysis of PFS 
and OS   
The age at randomization subgroups have been further divided into 3 separate groups, inorder to be consistent with other phase 3 clinical trials (<65, ≥65 to <75, and ≥75).  The 
following subgroups have been added to this sect ion based on potential prognostic 
implicat ions:  ECOG performance status (0, 1) and Extent of Disease (only 
locoregi onally  recurrent, m etastati c with or wi thout locoregi onal recurrence).  Methods 
for subgroup analyses have been updated to reflect that a forest plot will be presented for 
the subgroup comparisons between MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  
versus SoC in all -comers. 
Section 8.5.2.2 –Analysis of secondary variables; Duration of response  
The m ethods for analysis for duration of response have been updated to reflect that 
descript ive data will be provided rather than formal statist ical analysis as the number of 
responders is expected to be small.
Section 8.5.3.1– Patient -reported outcomes; EORTC QLC -30 
The m ethods of analysis, and number of scales being analyzed for both time to symptom 
deteri oration and time to HRQoL/funct ion deterioration fro m the EORTC QLQ -C30, 
have been updated.  These revisio ns have been made to reduce the number of analyses 
and ensure the protocol is consistent with the statistical analysis plan.Section 8.5.3.2 –Patient -reported outcomes; EORTC QLQ- H&N35
The m ethods of ana lysis, and the number of scales being analyzed for both time to 
symptom  deteri oration and symptom  improvem ent from the EORTC QLQ -H&N35 have 
been updated.  These revisio ns have been made to reduce the number of analyses and 
ensure the protocol is consistent with the statistical analysis plan.
Section 8.5.9 – Interim analysis  
The expected amount of full death informat ion and events to have occurred at the time 
of OS interim analyses, in both the all -comer and PD -L1-negat ive populations, have 
been updated to reflect the increased sample size. The 2 -sided alpha level to be applied 
at the interim and final analyses have been updated as a result of the overall increase in 
alpha applied to the co -primary endpo int of OS.  This section has been modified in order 
to clarify  that the final  OS analysis is dependent only  on a specific number of death 
events that would have occurred in the all -comer populat ion across the MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  and the SoC treatment groups, rather than the all -
comerand PD -L1-negat ive populations.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
18(199)Appendix E –Guidelines for Evaluation of Objective Tumor Response Using 
RECIST1.1 Criteria
The fo llowing i tems have been added for clarit y; 1) definit ion of the short axis, 2) 
statement that lymph nodes are collect ively c onsidered as a single organ, 3) A bilateral 
organ is considered a single organ for purposes of target lesio ns, 4) criteria for 
confirmat ion of progression have been updated to be consistent with main body  of 
protocol , 5) details regarding which guidelines will be prepared for study  sites, 6)  a list 
of guidelines available to sites for the central reading of scans has been updated, and 7) 
updated text to reflect that results of either invest igator assessments or of BICR 
assessments will not be shared with t he other party.
In addit ion, minor administrative corrections have been made throughout the protocol 
and are not detailed here further.
Version 5.0, 02 March 2016
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Protocol  Synopsi s: This sect ion has been modified to clarify the pat ient population and 
eligibilit y criteria.  Addi tionally, this sect ion has been updated to clarify that patients 
with progressive disease (PD) in target lesio ns that had previously shown an objective 
response are not eligible to continue immunotherapy  treatm ent.  Text has also been 
added to clarify  when radi ographic docum entati on of  PD is requi red.  Thi s secti on has 
also been updated to reflect that patients must commence study drug within 5 working 
days of rando mizat ion.  The definit ions of progression -free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS) have been added.  Addit ionally , the text has been modified to reflect that 
Response Evaluat ion Cri teria in Solid Tumors versio n1.1 (RECIST 1.1), according to 
Blinded Independent Central Review (BICR) assessments, will be used instead of 
Invest igator assessments to derive the co -primary variable of progression -free survival 
(PFS) and the secondary  variables of PFS, object ive response rate (ORR), dur ation of 
response (DoR), and proportion of patients alive and progression free at 12 months 
(APF12).  Addit ionally, the timing and details pertaining to the two interim analyses for 
OS and for the final analysis o f PFS and OS have been updated.  Non -inferi ority 
analysis has been removed fro m this sect ion.  The secondary object ives have been 
updated to add MEDI4736 monotherapy  as a com parison to Standard of Care (SoC) in 
regard to the assessment of disease -related symptoms and healt h-related quali ty of life.  
Furtherm ore, in the outcom e measures for secondary  objectives, various items in the 
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 30 -item Core 
Qualit y of Life Quest ionnaire ( QLQ -C30) and the 35 -item Head and Neck Qualit y of 
Life Ques tionnaire (QLQ -H&N35) m odule have been priorit ized.  Finally, specific 
instructi ons as to how the 440 PD -L1 negative patients will be distributed among the 
treatm ent arm s have been removed. 
Secti on 1.1.3 (MEDI4736 [Durvalumab]): This section has been upda ted to included 
“durvalumab,” the generic name for MEDI4736.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
19(199)Secti on 1.1.6 (Rati onale for Conducting this Study): This sect ion has been modified to 
clarify the patient populat ion and eligibilit y criteria.
Secti on 1.2 (Rati onale for Study  Design, Doses, and Control Groups): This sect ion has 
been modified to clarify  the pat ient populat ion and eligibilit y criteria.  OS has al so been 
added to the efficacy  analysis in order to remain consistent with the rest of the protocol.
Secti on 1.2.5 (Study  Populati on Rat ionale): This section has been modified to clarify the 
patient popul ation and eligibilit y criteria.
Secti on 1.2.6 (Rati onale for Endpoints):  
Secti on 1.4 (Study  Design): This sect ion (including Figure 1) has been modified to 
clarify the patient populat ion and eligibilit y criteria.  Addi tionally, the requi rement for 
human papillo ma virus (HPV) testing to be done exclusively using the p16 
immunohistochemistry  (IHC) assay  has been updated to also allow testing according to 
local standards.  Furthermore, this sect ion has been updated to clarify that patients with 
PD in target lesio ns that h ad previously  shown an obj ective response are not eligible to 
continue immunotherapy  treatment .  The text has also been modified to reflect that 
BICR assessments according to RECIST 1.1 will be used instead of Invest igator 
assessments to derive the co -primary variable of PFS and the secondary variables of 
PFS, ORR, DoR, and APF12.  Furthermore, the sensit ivity analyses of RECIST 1.1 
measurements per BICR has been remo ved fro m this section.   Figure 3 has been updated 
to reflect that soluble programmed cell d eath ligand 1 (sPD -L1) testing is no longer 
requi red.  Fi gure 3 has also been modified to clarify  the timing of the baseline tumor 
assessment for patients restarting treatment.  Finally , specific instructi ons as to how the 
440 PD -L1 negative pat ients will be distributed among the treatment arms have been 
removed.
Secti on 2.1 (Primary  Object ive):  The text has been updated to reflect that BICR 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 will be used instead of Invest igator assessments 
to measure the co -primary objec tive of PFS.
Secti on 2.2 (Secondary  Object ives): The text has been modified to reflect that BICR 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 will be used instead of Invest igator assessments 
to measure the secondary  object ives of PFS, ORR, DoR, and APF12.  In the o utcome 
measures for secondary  objectives, various items in the EORTC QLQ -C30 and 
QLQ -H&N35 module have been priorit ized.
Secti on 2.4 (Expl oratory  Object ives):  
 
Secti on 3.1 (Incl usion Cri teria): This secti on has been m odified to clarify  the pat ient 
popul ation and eligibilit y criteria.  Addi tionally, the requi rement for HPV testing to be 
done exclusively using the p16 IHC assay  has been rem oved.  The SI val ues for pl atelet 
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
20(199)count and ab solute neutrophil count have also been added to this sect ion.  Finally, age -
specific requirements for evidence of post- menopausal status have also been updated.
Secti on 3.2 (Excl usion Criteria): This sect ion has been modified to clarify  the pat ient 
popul ation and eligibilit y criteria.  The excl usion of pat ients who have received prior 
systemic therapy  for recurrent or m etastati c SCCHN has been removed as it duplicates 
the corresponding inclusio n criterion.  The permissibilit y of steroi d usage by  patients in
the SoC arm has also been updated.  The exclusio n criteria have also been modified to 
include pat ients with active tuberculosis, as well as those who have been invo lved in the 
planning/conduct of the study .
Secti on 3.3 (Pati ent Enrollment and Rando mizat ion): The requirement for HPV testing 
in patients with oral cavit y tum ors has been remo ved and it has been clarified that HPV 
resul ts can be collected from historical medical records of any  age. Addit ionally , the 
requi rement for HPV testing to be done exclu sively using the p16 IHC assay  has been 
updated to also allow testing according to local standards.  A definit ion of pack -year has 
been added.  This sect ion has also been updated to reflect that patients must commence 
study  drug wi thin 5 working days o f randomizat ion.
Secti on 3.9.1 ( Procedures for Discontinuation of a Patient fro m Invest igational Product 
[IP]): This sect ion has been modified to clarify the procedures that take place when a 
patient discont inues the IP.
Secti on 4 (Study  Plan and Timing of Pro cedures): Addit ional instructi ons pertaining to 
the timing of screening, rando mizat ion, dose delays, baseline, and laboratory procedures 
have been added to this section.  This sect ion has also been updated to reflect that 
patients m ust commence study  drug within 5 working days of rando mization.  The 
timing of various laboratory assessments has been updated in Table 2.  Tables 2, 3, and 
4 have been modified to reflect that either reflex free triiodothy ronine (T3) or free 
thyroxine (T 4) will be measured (and not both) if thyroid -stimulat ing horm one (TSH) i s 
abnorm al.  Furtherm ore, the requi rement to have urea and TSH results available prior to 
study  drug infusi on has been rem oved from  Table 2. In addi tion, Table 3 has been 
updated to reflect that only  TSH, and not free T 3and T 4, should be measured in pat ients 
who do not complete treatment through Cy cle 5.  In Tables 2 and 3, the requirement for 
HPV testing to be done exclusively  using the p16 IHC assay and the requirement to have 
HPV testing completed within t he 28 day  screening window have been removed.  Tables 
2 and 3 have also been updated to reflect that sPD -L1 testing is no longer required.  
 
 Additionally, the window for Cy cle 1 Day  1 in both 
Tables 2 and 3 has been changed to “not applicable,” and a window of ±3 days has been added for Cy cles 7 until PD in Table 3.  Furthermore, text has been added to Tables 2 
and 3 to cl arify when radiographic documentati on of  PD is requi red.  The frequency  and 
timing of pharmacokinet ic and ADA assessments has been modified in Tables 2 and 4.  
Tables 2, 3, and 4 have also been updated to decrease the frequency o f electroni c 
patient-reported outcome (ePRO) asses sments.
Secti on 5.1 (Efficacy Assessments): Text related to the schedule of confirmat ion of 
objective tumor response has been deleted.  Addit ionally, text has been added to clarify 
when radiographic documentation of PD is required.  This section has also b een 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
21(199)modified to clarify  that RECIST 1.1 will be used to determine PFS, ORR, DoR, and 
APF12 using BICR assessments (as well as Invest igator assessments for sensit ivity 
analysis of PFS). 
Secti on 5.1.1 (Central  Reading of Scans): This sectio n has been update d to reflect that a 
full BICR will be performed for the PFS and ORR endpo ints, rather than a sample BICR 
assessment.  The text has also been updated to clarify that the results of independent 
radiologic reviews will not be made available to Investigators, and the management of 
patients will  be based upon Invest igator assessments.
Secti on 5.2.1 (Laboratory  Safety Assessments): The procedures invo lved in clinical 
laboratory  safety tests have been updated (regarding pregnancy  and TSH tests in 
particular).  Tab le 5 has been updated to include the schedule of bicarbonate and 
chloride testing as well as to remove uric acid from the clinical chemistry  laboratory  
variables that will be measured during this study .  The hematol ogy laboratory  variables 
to be m easured t hat are listed in Table 6 have also been updated.  Finally, the timing o f 
urinalysis testing has been clarified in Table 7.
Secti on 5.2.4 (Vi tal Signs): This sect ion has been modified to include separate 
procedures for the first infusio n and subsequent inf usions of  MEDI4736 and/or 
tremelimumab.
Secti on 6.7 (Management of IP -related Toxi cities): Specific guidelines related to 
toxicity management have been remo ved from this section.  Addit ionally, text has been 
added regarding guidelines in case of allergic r eactio ns to dose administration.
Secti on 6.7.1 (MEDI4736 + Tremelimumab Combinat ion Therapy and MEDI4736 
Monotherapy  Adverse Events of Special Interest): Language related to the adverse 
events of special interest has been updated. Secti on 6.7.2 (MEDI4736 + Tremelimumab Combinat ion Therapy and MEDI4736 
Monotherapy ): The ti tle of this subsect ion has been updated to reflect the con tent.  
Language related to immune -related adverse events has been remo ved fro m this secti on; 
specific guidelines related to toxici ty management have been added to this section.  
Table 8 ( Dosing modificat ion and toxicit y management guidelines for 
immune -mediated, infusio n-related, and non -immune -mediated reactions) has been 
updated according to the current Toxicit y Management Guidelin es.
Secti on 6.8 (Study  Governance and Oversight): This section has been updated to modify 
the timing of the Independent Data Monitoring Committee meetings.
Secti on 7.2.1 (Treatm ent Regimens): This section has been updated to clarify  that 
patients wi th PD i n target lesio ns that had previously shown an object ive response are 
not eligible to continue treatment. Addit ionally , text has been added to cl arify when 
radiographic documentation of PD is required.
Secti on 7.2.3 (Cri teria for Retreatm ent for Pati ents i n the MEDI4736 + Tremelimumab 
Arm): The t iming o f the baseline tumor assessment for patients restarting treatment has 
been clarified.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
22(199)Secti on 7.7 (Concomitant and Other Treatments): The first table in this sect ion has been 
updated to clarify  the usage of investigational ant icancer therapy  concurrent with those 
under invest igation in this study  as well as radiat ion and immunosuppressive steroids 
during the course of this study .
Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple Si ze Estimate): The timing and details pertaining to the 2 pl anned 
interim analyses have been updated.  Updates have been made to the text pertaining to 
sizing superiorit y analysis; non -inferi ority analysis has been removed fro m this sect ion.  
Text pertaining to the s izing for PFS of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus Stan dard of 
Care (SoC) has also been added.   Finally, specific instructions as to how the 440 PD-L1 
negat ive pat ients will be distributed among the treatment arms have been removed.
Secti on 8.3.2 (PD -L1-negative Analysis Set): This sect ion has been modified to include 
a quant itative definit ion of PD -L1-negat ive status. 
Secti on 8.4.1.1 (RECIST 1.1 -based Endpo ints): This section has been updated to reflect 
that RECIST 1.1 will be used to determine PFS, ORR, DoR, and APF12 based on BICR 
assessments, rather than i nvest igator assessments.  The sample BICR assessment has 
been remo ved. 
Secti on 8.4.1.2 (Co -primary Endpo int [PFS]): This section has been updated to clarify 
that the co -primary endpo int PFS will be assessed by RECIST 1.1 using BICR 
assessments, whereas a sensi tivity analysis o f PFS will be performed using Invest igator 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1.  In addit ion, a sensit ivity analysis o f PFS based 
on RECIST 1.1 modified for confirmation of progression will be performed using 
BICR assessments.
Secti on8.4.1.4 (Secondary  Endpo ints): Thi s secti on has been updated to clarify that 
ORR by irRECIST 1.1 criteria using BICR assessments will not be reported as a 
secondary  endpoint.   Thi s sect ion has also been modified to clarify that RECIST 1.1 
will determine ORR, DoR, APF12, and best objective response using BICR 
assessments.  Text has also been added regarding time fro m rando mizat ion to the second 
subsequent therapy  or death.
Secti on 8.5 (Methods for Statist ical Analyses): The number of patients with PD-L1-
negative tumors across the MEDI4736 +tremelimum ab combinati on therapy  and SoC 
treatm ent arm s needed at the time of the PFS and OS analyses has been corrected.  The 
text has also been updated to clarify that PFS will be assessed by RECIST 1.1 using 
BICR asse ssments.  Table 16 has been updated to clarify that PFS, ORR, and DoR will 
be assessed by  RECIST 1.1 using BICR assessments rather than invest igator 
assessments; a sensit ivity analysis o f PFS will be performed using Invest igator 
assessments according to RE CIST 1.1 rather than a sample BICR assessment, and a 
sensit ivity analysis of PFS will be performed using BICR assessments according to 
RECIST 1.1 modified for confirmation of progression .  Vari ous pati ent-related 
outcom e (PRO) endpoints have also been remo ved fro m Table 16.  The MTP has been 
simplified (both the text and Figure 6) and includes addit ional detail regarding the 
timing and assignment of alpha for two interim analyses of OS.  Addit ionally , 
non-inferiorit y analysis and the comparisons of the combination arm versus 
monotherapy  arm for both PFS and OS have been removed from the mult iple testing 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
23(199)procedure (MTP). Finally, subsect ions 8.5.1 through 8.5.4 have been co mbined to reflect 
analysis of the co -primary endpo ints, and subsequent subsections of 8 .5 have been re -
numbered accordingly.
Secti on 8.5.1.1 (Progression -free Survival): This section has been updated to clarify that 
the primary  PFS analysis will  be assessed by  RECIST 1.1 using BICR assessments, that 
secondary  analyses for PFS using BICR asse ssments will  be perform ed for the 
comparisons of the combinat ion versus SoC and the combinat ion versus monotherapy  in 
PD-L1-negat ive pat ients, and the comparison of monotherapy  vs SOC in all co mers.  
Secti on 8.5.1.2 (Overall Survival): The parameters for the analyses of OS have been 
clarified.
Secti on 8.5.1.3 (Subgroup Analysis of PFS and OS): This sect ion has been updated to 
clarify that PFS will be assessed by RECIST 1.1 using BICR assessments.
Secti on 8.5.2.1 (Obj ective Response Rate): This section has been updated to clarify that 
ORR will be assessed by RECIST 1.1 using BICR assessments.  Details pertaining to 
the parameters and populat ion to be studied in this analysis have also been clarified.
Secti on 8.5.2.2 (Durati on of  Response): This sect ion has b een updated to clarify that 
DoR will be assessed by  RECIST 1.1 using BICR assessments.
Secti on 8.5.2.4 (Time from Rando mizat ion to PFS2): A definit ion of second progression 
has been added to this sect ion.
Secti on 8.5.2.5 (Time from Rando mizat ion to Fi rst and Second Subsequent Therapy  or 
Death): The text has been updated to reflect that time to the start of the first andthe 
second therapy  or death will be analyzed.
Secti on 8.5.3 (Patient -reported Outcomes): Details pertaining to the analysis o f PRO 
endpo ints have been added.
Secti on 8.5.9 (Interim Analysis): Text has been updated to reflect that there will be 
2interim analyses for OS performed for superiority .  Details regarding the parameters 
for the interim analyses and potential outcomes have been added.   
Secti on 11 (Li st of References): References that are not cited in the protocol have been 
removed; newly cited references have been added.
Appendix E (Guidelines for Evaluat ion of Object ive Tumor Response Using RECIST 
1.1 Cri teria): This appendix has bee n updated to reflect changes to the criterion for 
non-measurable lesio ns.  Preferences for computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging scans have been updated as well.  Addit ionally , text pertaining to the timing of 
the imaging for confirmat ion of r esponse has been removed fro m this appendix.
Appendix F (Patient -Reported Outcomes): The PRO Commo n Termino logy Cri teria for 
Adverse Events questionnaire has been updated to remove certain symptoms and side 
effects fro m the questionnaire.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
24(199)Version 4.0, 1stDecember 2015 ( D419LC00001CSP Amendment 3 )
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Protocol  Synopsi s: Per Vol untary  Harm onisati on Procedure (VHP) review, an interim 
analysis for OS at the time of PFS analysis has been added.  The MTP has also been 
modified to include 1 interim analysis o f OS.
Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple Si ze Estimate): Per VHP review, an interim analysis for OS at the 
time of PFS anal ysis has been added.  The MTP has also been modified to include 1 
interim analysis o f OS.
Secti on 8.5 (Methods for Statist ical Analyses): Per VHP revi ew, an interim analysis for 
OS at the time o f PFS analysis has been added.  The Mult iple Testing Procedure has also 
been modified to include 1 interim analysis of OS, and Figure 6 has been updated to reflect this change.
Secti on 8.5.12 (Interim Analysis): Per VHP review, an interim analysis for OS at the 
time of PFS analysis has been added.  The MTP has also b een m odified to include 1 
interim analysis o f OS.
Version 3.0, 9thNovember 2015 ( D419LC00001CSP Amendment 2)
Changes to the protocol are summarized below.
Secti on 3.1 (Incl usion Criteria): In response to VHP review comments, the creatinine 
clearance requi rement for pati ents who will be treated wit h cisplat in on the SoC arm has 
been revised to a minimum of 60 mL/min.  The age specific requirements for 
post-menopausal female pat ients have also been clarified wit h respect to pregnancy 
testing.
Secti on 3.2 (Excl usion Criteria): In response to VHP revie w comments, the time frame 
allowed for receipt of prior invest igational ant icancer therapy has been revised to be 28 
days or 5 half -lives, whichever is longer, prior to first study  treatm ent.  Al so in response 
to VHP revi ew comments, contraception requirem ents have been modified such that 
female patients of childbearing potential must agree to use highly effect ive method of 
birth control and nonsterilized male pat ients who are sexually  active wi th a partner of 
childbearing potential must agree to use condom s with spermicide.
Secti on 3.3 (Pati ent Enrollment and Rando mizat ion): The process for defining SoC at 
time of rando mizat ion has been clarified.
Secti on 3.8 (Restri ctions): In response to VHP review comments, Table 1 has been 
updated to include only  highly effect ive methods of contraception.
Secti on 4 (Study  Plan and Timing of Procedures): In response to VHP review 
comments, the timing of scheduled pregnancy  testing in Table 2 has been modified to 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
25(199)reflect that patients assigned to either the MEDI4736 + trem elimumab or MEDI4736 
monotherapy  arms will  undergo pregnancy  testing at each study  visit when IP i s 
administered.
Secti on 5.2.1 (Laboratory  Safety Assessments): In response to VHP review co mments, 
the timing of scheduled pregnancy testing has been modified to refl ect that pati ents 
assigned to either the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab or MEDI4736 monotherapy  arms will 
undergo pregnancy  testing at each study  visit when IP is administered.
Version 2.0, 10thSeptember 2015 ( D419LC00001CSP Amendment 1)
Changes to the protocol are summarized below, 
Title Page: The ti tle has been updated to reflect the 3- arm design of the trial in response 
to regulatory  feedba ck.
Protocol  Synopsi s: The text has been modified to clarify the distribut ion of programmed 
cell death ligand 1 (PD -L1) negative patients across the treatment arms and to reflect 
that pati ents in any treatment arm, not only  the immunom odulatory  therapy  (IMT) arms, 
will not be permitted to continue therapy  if they  devel op PD in a target l esion after a 
clear response to therapy .  The defini tion of  smoking history  has also been clarified.  
Addit ional detail on the Ventana assay has also been added.  The SoC do sing regimen 
has been updated to correct minor inconsistencies within the text.  Also, the timing of 
confirmatory  scans has been updated to be consistent across all treatment arms.  The 
contact informat ion of the Co -International Coordinat ing Invest igators has also been 
updated.  Finally, the tit le has been updated to reflect the 3 -arm design of the trial in 
response to regulatory  feedback.
Secti on 1.3.2.1 (MEDI4736): The potential risks of nephrit is and pancreatit is for 
MEDI4736 have been updated to align with the most recent Investigator’s Brochure.
Secti on 1.4 (Study  Design): This text in this section has been updated, along with Figure 
2, to clarify  tumor biopsy  collect ion procedures.  The text has also been modified to
clarify the distribut ion of PD -L1 negative patients across the treatment arms.  Figure 3 
has been updated to clarify  that retreatm ent tum or assessments are relative to restarting 
study  treatm ent.  Addi tionally , the text has been modified to reflect that patients in any  
treatm ent arm , not o nly the IMT arms, will not be permitted to continue therapy  if they  
develop PD in a target lesio n after a clear response to therapy .  The SoC dosing regimen 
has been updated to correct minor inconsistencies within the text.
Secti on 3.1 (Incl usion Criteria): This secti on has been m odified to change the required 
PD-L1 tumor biopsy sample to a formalin -fixed and paraffin -embedded recent ly 
acqui red tissue sam ple (preferred) or an archival t issue <3 years old and to clarify 
related tum or biopsy  collecti on proced ures.  Additionally, the text has been modified to 
reflect that patients in any treatment arm, not only the IMT arms, will not be permitted 
to con tinue therapy  if they devel op PD in a target l esion after a cl ear response to 
therapy .  Addi tional detail  on the Ventana assay has also been added.  This sect ion has 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
26(199)also been revised to clarify  that SoC procedures prior to informed consent are not study  
procedures for this study .
Secti on 3.2 (Excl usion Criteria): An additional exclusi on criterion that cl arifies 
minimum pat ient weight needed for this study  has been added.
Secti on 3.3 (Pati ent Enrollment and Rando mizat ion): This sect ion has been updated to 
clarify tum or biopsy  collect ion procedures.  The definit ion of smoking history  has also 
been clarified.  This s ection has also been revised to clarify that patients should have no 
obvious exclusion parameters before a tumor sample is obtained.  The instances in 
which HPV status will be determined have also been clarified.  
Secti on 3.5 (Methods for Assigning Treatm ent Arms): The definit ion of smoking history  
has been clarified.  Addit ional detail on the Ventana assay has also been added.
Secti on 3.8 (Restri ctions): The contraception restrictions have been updated to be in 
alignment across the MEDI4736 development pr ogram .
Secti on 4 (Study  Plan and Timing of Procedures): In Table 2, TSH has been added to the 
assessments that must be available before commencing an infusio n. Table 2 has also 
been updated to clarify that the first treatment period continues until PD and that SoC 
procedures prior to informed consent are not study procedures for this study .  In Table 3, 
the SoC dosing regimen has been updated to correct minor inconsistencies wit hin the 
text. Table 3 has been further modified to include an assessment on Cy cle1, Day 1, 
Week 0 for the PRO measures in the SoC arm.  Furthermore, Tables 2 and 3 have been 
modified to change the required PD -L1 tum or biopsy  sample to a form alin-fixed and 
paraffin -embedded recent ly acquired t issue sample (preferred) or an archival t issue <3 
years o ld and to clarify related tumor biopsy co llection procedures.  Also, Tables 2 and 3 
have been updated to clarify which assessments performed 3 days pri or to Day  1 do not 
need to be repeated at Day  1 and to cl arify the timing of pregnancy  testing in response to 
regul atory  feedback.  Table 4 has been modified to clarify that pharmacokinet ics should 
only be collected for the IMT arms at follow-up.
Secti on 4.1 (Enrollment/Screening Period): This section has been updated to clarify 
tumor biopsy  collection procedures.
Secti on 5.1 (Efficacy Assessments): The timing of confirmatory  scans has been updated 
to be consistent across all treatment arms.
Secti on 5.2.1 (Laboratory  Safety Assessments): Table 5 has been modified to clarify  that 
bicarbonate will not be evaluated at South Korean sites.Secti on 5.5.1 (Collect ion of Patient Samples for Stratification by PD -L1): This section 
has been modified to change the required PD- L1 tum or biopsy  sample to a form alin-
fixed and paraffin- embedded recent ly acquired tissue sample (preferred) or an archival 
tissue <3 y ears ol d and to cl arify related tum or biopsy  collect ion procedures.  Addit ional 
detail on the Ventana assay has also been added.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
27(199)Secti on 5.5.2.2
Secti on 6.7.2 (Immune Related Adverse Events): An error in the definit ion of 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumo nia has been corrected in Table 8.
Secti on 7.2.1 (Treatm ent Regimens): The SoC dosing regimen has been updated to 
correct minor inconsistencies within the text.  The timing of confirmatory scans has also 
been updated to be consistent across all treatment arms.
Secti on 8.2 (Sam ple Si ze Estimate): The text has been modified to clarify the 
distribut ion of PD -L1 negat ive pat ients across the treatment arms.  Addit ionally , hazard 
ratio val ues have been corrected for the MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in all -
comers noninferiorit y analysis.
Secti on 8.3.2 (PD -L1-negative Analysis Set ): Additional detail on the Ventana assay has 
been added.Secti on 8.4.1.4 (Secondary  Endpo ints): A definit ion and description for the analysis of 
time fro m rando mizat ion to the first subsequent therapy  or death has been added.
Secti on 8.5.5.5 (Time from Ra ndomizat ion to the First Subsequent Therapy  or Death): A 
definit ion and descript ion for the analysis o f time from  rando mizat ion to the first 
subsequent therapy  or death has been added. 
Version 1.0, 6thJuly 2015
Initial creat ion
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Edition Number 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
28(199)This submission document contains confidential commercial information, disclosure of 
which is prohibited without providing advance notice to AstraZeneca and opportunit y to 
object.
This Clinical Study  Protocol  has been subject to a peer review according to AstraZeneca 
Standard procedures.  The clinical study  protocol  is publicly  registered and the results are 
disclosed and/or publishe d according to the AstraZeneca Global Policy  on Bi oethics and in 
compliance wi th prevailing laws and regulat ions.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
29(199)PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS
A Phase III Randomized, Open -label, Multi -center, Global Study 
of MEDI4736 Alone or in Combination with Tremelimumab 
versu s Standard of Care in the Treatment of First -line Recurrent 
or Metastatic Squamous Cell Head and Neck  Cancer Patients
Co-International Coordinating Investigators
 
 
Study site(s) and number of p atients planned
This study  will enroll approximately 1016 patients with recurrent or metastatic (R/M) 
squamous cell carcino ma of the head and neck (SCCHN) who are not amenable to local 
curative therapy  and who have not received prior systemic therapy  for recurrent/metastatic 
disease.  Approximately  760 patients will be identified globally and will be randomized in 
a 2:1:1 ratio (380:190:190 patients) to receive MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion 
therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or Standard of Care (SoC). 
Study period Phase of development
Estimated date of first patient enrolled Q4 2015 III
Estimated date of last patient completed Q1 2021 III
QQuarter.
Study design
This is a rando mized, open -label, mult i-center, 3 -arm, global Phase III study  to determine 
the efficacy and safet y of MEDI4736 +/ -tremelimum ab versus SoC (EXTREME regimen) 
in the treatment of patients with R/M SCCHN who are not amenable to local curative 
therapy  with surgery  or radi ation and who have not received prior systemic therapy  for 
recurrent/metastatic disease, unless it was given as part of mult imodality treatment for 
locally advanced or locally  recurrent disease.  Patients will undergo a screenin g assessment 
on their tumor tissue sample to determine PD -L1 expressio n status (defined by an 
analyt ically validated immunohistochemistry  assay devel oped by VENTANA in which 
≥25% PD -L1 membrane expression in tumoral tissue is considered posit ive and <25% i s 
considered negat ive for purposes of stratificat ion; referred to hereafter as patients with PD-
L1-positive or –negative tumors, respectively).  Patients will be randomized in a 2:1:1 ratio 
to MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 m onothera py, or SoC in 
a stratified manner according to PD -L1 tumor expressio n status (as described above), 
PPD
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
30(199)tumor locati on (oropharyngeal cancer [OPC] or non -OPC), and smoking history  (>10 vs 
≤10 pack- years) to receive treatment with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combina tion 
therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or SoC therapy .  Pati ents wi th OPC will be further 
stratified by their human papillo ma virus status (posit ive or negative).
Patients in all arms will cont inue therapy until progressio n.  Patients in all arms should 
conti nue receiving therapy  in the setting of equivocal progressive disease (PD), at the 
Invest igator’s discret ion, until PD is confirmed.  Assessments in all arms should continue 
as per schedule unt il confirmat ion of PD.  Patients in all arms with confirmed PD by 
Response Evaluat ion Cri teria in Solid Tumors versio n 1.1 (RECIST 1.1) who, in the 
Invest igator’s opinio n, continue to receive benefit fro m their assigned treatm ent and who 
meet the criteria for treatment in the setting of PD may cont inue to receive thei r assi gned 
treatm ent.  However, pati ents in the immunotherapy  arms will  not be permi tted to continue 
immunotherapy  if progressi on occurs after obj ective response (defined by RECIST 1.1) to 
immunotherapy  treatm ent in the target l esions.  Patients who have d iscont inued treatment 
due to toxicit y or symptom atic deterioration, clinical progression, or who have co mmenced 
subsequent ant icancer therapy, will be fo llowed up until confirmed disease progression 
and for survival.
Tumor assessments will be performed on computed tom ography scans or m agnet ic 
resonance imaging scans, preferably wit h intravenous (IV) contrast.  Efficacy  for all  
patients will  be assessed by  objective tum or assessments every  6weeks for the first 
24weeks, then every 8 weeks thereafter (relat ive to the date of rando mizat ion) unt il 
treatm ent discont inuat ion due to progression or toxicit y.  All pat ients will be fo llowed 
every 3 m onths for survival after progression is confirmed.  If an unscheduled assessment 
is performed, and the patient has not progressed, every attempt should be made to perform 
the subsequent assessments at their scheduled visit s, but scans would not need to be 
repeated if obtained within 2 weeks of the scheduled assessment.  Patients with confirmed 
PD who di scontinue treatm ent shoul d have scans conducted according to local practice.
The primary  object ive of the study  is:
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC (EXTREME) in a 
prespecified bio marker -selected subgroup of patients (PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup) in ter ms of overall survival (OS)
The primary  endpoint of the study  is OS which will be assessed in a prespecified 
biomarker -selected subgroup of patients with tumors expressing PD -L1 in ≥50% of tum or 
cells (TC) or in ≥25% of tum or-associated immune cells (IC) (PD-L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup; TC ≥50 or IC≥25) using the VENTANA PD- L1 SP263 assay.
Categorization of object ive tumor response assessment at each post -screening imaging 
timepo int will be based on RECIST 1.1: complete response, partial response, stable disease 
(SD), and PD.  Investigator assessments according to RECIST 1.1 will be used to 
programmat ically derive the secondary  variables of progression -free survival (PFS), 
objective response rate (ORR), duration of response (DoR), best objective response ( BoR), 
time to response (TTR) and proportion of pat ients alive and progression free at 6 (APF6) 
and 12 m onths (APF12). Addit ional secondary  objectives will include proportion of 
patients alive at 12 (OS12), 18 (OS18) and 24 months after randomizat ion (OS24) , second 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
31(199)progression (PFS2), safet y and tol erabilit y, pharm acokinet ics (PK), anti -drug ant ibody  
(ADA), and health -related quali ty of life.  Exploratory  objectives will also be assessed.
Timepo int assessments showing PD for patients in the immuno modulatory  therapy  
treatm ent arms shoul d be confirmed preferably  at the next scheduled imaging visit and no 
earlier than 4 weeks after the preceding assessment of PD in the absence of clinically 
significant deteri oration.  Timepoint assessments showing PD for patient s in the SoC arm 
shoul d be confirmed preferably  at the next scheduled imaging visit and no earlier than 4 
weeks after the preceding assessment of PD in the absence of clinically significant 
deteri oration, if clinically feasible.  Treatment with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  or MEDI4736 m onotherapy  will cont inue between the assessment of 
progression and its confirmation.  If progression is not confirmed, then the patient should continue receiving study  treatm ent and parti cipat ing in study asses sments.  For patients 
rando mized to the SoC arm in who m equivocal findings of progression are observed (eg, 
very small  and uncertain new l esions, cystic changes, or necrosis in exist ing lesions), 
treatm ent shoul d continue until the next scheduled assessmen t.  Patients wi th clinical  
evidence of progression who do not meet PD criteria by  RECIST 1.1 shoul d have 
radiographic documentation of PD.
Objectives
Primary Objectives: Outcome Measure:
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 
monotherapy compared to SoC (EXTREME) in terms of OS  OS in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup
Secondary Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To further assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 monotherapy compared to SoC (EXTREME) in terms of OS, PFS, ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST, TSST, APF6, APF12, PFS2, OS12, 
OS18 and OS24 OS in low risk of early mortality (EM) subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -
comers
OS12, OS18, OS24 in the PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers
PFS, ORR, APF6 and APF12 using site investigator 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, 
ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -
comers 
DoR, BoR and TTR, using site investigator 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
PFS2 using local standard clinical practi ce in the PD-
L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
TFST and TSST in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup 
and all -comers
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
32(199)Secondary Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab combination therapy compared 
to SoC (EXTREME) in terms of OS, PFS, 
ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST , TSST, APF6, 
APF12, PFS2, OS12, OS18 and OS24OS,OS12, OS18, OS24 in the PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all comers
PFS, ORR, APF6 and APF12 in the PD -L1 TC/IC 
high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA 
TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -comers 
using site investigator assessments according to RECIST 1.1
DoR, BoR and TTR, using site investigator 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
PFS2 usi ng local standard clinical practice in the PD -
L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
TFST and TSST in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup 
and all -comers
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab combination therapy compared to MEDI4736 monotherapy in te rms of PFS, 
ORR, and OS PFS and ORR using site investigator assessments 
according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD-L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers 
OS in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk o f 
EM subgroup , ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 
mut/Mb) and all -comers
To assess disease -related symptoms and 
health -related quality of life in patients treated 
with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination 
therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy 
compared to SoC (EXTREME) using the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 30- item Cor e 
Quality of Life Questionnaire ( QLQ -C30) 
version 3 and the 35- item Head and Neck 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ -H&N35) 
moduleEORTC QLcQ- C30: global health QoL, functioning 
(physical) and symptoms (fatigue) in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
EORTC QLQ -H&N35: symptoms (pain, swallowing) 
in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
Changes in World Health Organization/EasternCooperative Oncology Group performance status in 
the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup all -comers
To assess the PK of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapyConcentration of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab in blood and PK parameters, such as peak concentration 
and trough (as data allow; sparse sampling) 
To investigate the immunogenicity of MEDI4736 and tremelimumabPresence of ADAs for MEDI4736 and tremelimumab
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
33(199)Safety Objective: Outcome Measures:
To assess the safety and tolerability profile of 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination 
therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy 
compared to SoC (EXTREME) in the first -line 
setting for treatment of SCCHNAdverse events, physical examinations, laboratory findings (inc luding clinical chemistry, hematology, 
and urinalysis), vital signs (including blood pressure and pulse), and electrocardiograms in PD -L1 TC/IC 
high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup and all -
comers.
Target patient population
Males and females aged 18 and over wi th histol ogically or cy tologically  confirmed 
PD-L1-positive or -negative, recurrent or metastatic SCCHN (oral cavit y, oropharynx, 
hypopharynx, or larynx) and who are not amenable to local curat ive therapy with surgery 
or radi ation and who have not received prior sy stemic therapy  for recurrent/m etastati c 
disease, unless it was given as part of mult imodalit y treatm ent for locally  advanced or 
locally recurrent disease .
Duration of treatment
Treatment with MEDI4736 +tremelimumab combinat ion therapy , ME DI4736 
monotherapy , or SoC will co mmence wit hin 5 working days of rando mization and 
continue until confi rmed progressi on, ini tiation of alternat ive cancer therapy, unacceptable 
toxicity, withdrawal  of consent, or another discont inuat ion criterion is m et at the 
Invest igator’s discret ion.  Patients in the SoC arm will be treated with SoC for a maximum 
of six 3 -week cycles of cetuximab, a plat inum, and 5- fluorouracil (5FU), with continuat ion 
of maintenance cetuximab in patients who have achieved SD or better u ntil confirmed PD, 
initiation of alternat ive cancer therapy, unacceptable toxicit y, withdrawal of consent, or 
another discont inuat ion criterion is met.
A further descript ion of treatm ent durati on and retreatment options is provided in the 
Study  Design sect ion of this synopsis.
Patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  group m ay be eligible to 
receive retreatment with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbination therapy if they meet 
certain criteria as stated in Section 3.1.
Investigational product , dosage, and mode of administration
MEDI4736 monotherapy : (1500 mg) will be administered via IV infusion every 4 weeks 
(q4w) until PD.
MEDI4736 + tr emelimumab co mbinat ion therapy : Trem elimumab (75 mg) will be 
administered via IV infusion q4w for a maximum of 4 doses, and MEDI4736 (1500 mg) 
will be administered via IV infusio n q4w unt il PD.
SoC (EXTREME): Either cisplatin (at a dose of 100 mg/m2of body surface area as an IV 
infusio n) or carboplat in (at an area under the curve of 5 mg/mL/min as an IV infusion) on 
Day 1 of up to six 3 -week cy cles, and an infusio n of 5FU (at a dose of 1000 mg/m2/day on 
Days 1 through 4) every  3weeks , along wi th 400 mg/m2of cetuximab on Cycle 1 Day  1 
and 250 mg/m2weekly for up to 6 cy cles and m aintenance cetuximab at 250 mg/m2
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
34(199)administered via IV infusion weekly thereafter in patients who achieve SD or better upon 
completion of chemotherapy  until  PD, toxi city, or wi thdrawal of consent.  
Statistical methods
The primary  object ive of this study  is to assess the efficacy  of MEDI4736 m onotherapy  
treatm ent com pared wi th SoC (EXTREME) in terms of OS in a prespecified bio marker -
selected subgroup of patients with tumors expressing PD -L1 in ≥50% of tum or cells or  
≥25% of tum or-associated immune cells (PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup), who have not 
received prior sy stemic therapy  for recurrent/m etastati c disease, unless it was given as part 
of multimodali ty treatm ent for locally advanced or locally  recurrent di sease.
OS will be defined as the time fro m the date of randomizat ion unt il death due to any cause.  
Secondary  efficacy variables include
OS (assessed in the low risk o f EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 
mut/Mb) and all-comers), PFS, ORR, APF6, APF12, OS12, OS18 and OS24 
(assessed in the  PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk o f EM subgroup, ctDNA 
TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and in all -comers), PFS2, DoR, BoR, TTR, 
TFST, TSST (assessed in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgro up and all -comers) for 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC
OS, PFS, ORR, APF6, APF12, OS12, OS18 and OS24 (assessed in the  PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 
mut/Mb) and in all -comers), PFS2, DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST and TSST (assessed in 
the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers) for MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  versus SoC
OS, PFS and ORR (assessed in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM 
subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and in all-comers) for 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab versus MEDI4736 monotherapy . 
PFS (per RECIST 1.1 using site invest igator assessment) will be defined as the time fro m 
the date of rando mizat ion until the date of objective disease progression or death (by  any 
cause in the absence of progression) regardless o f whether the patient discont inues therapy 
or receives another ant icancer therapy  prior to progressio n.  A sensit ivity analysis o f PFS 
will be performed based on data from blinded independent central review (BIC R) 
assessments.
Efficacy data will be summarized and analyzed on an intent -to-treat (ITT) basis and the 
treatm ent groups will be co mpared on the basis o f rando mized treatment, regardless of the 
treatm ent actually received.  Patients who were randomized but did not subsequent ly go on 
to receive study  treatm ent are included in the ITT populat ion.
Approximately  760 pati ents will be rando mized in a 2:1:1 ratio (380:190:190 patients) to 
receive MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy, MEDI4736 monotherapy , or 
SoC to assess OS (primary endpoint) in each treatment comparison.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
35(199)The primary  analysis of OS will be performed when approximately 147 death events have 
occurred in approximately 172 patients (85% maturity ) across the MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and SoC treatmen t groups in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup . All other 
endpo ints will be analysed at this time.  No interim analyses will be performed for any  
efficacy  endpoint.
The primary analysis of OS will test MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high sub group at a two -sided 5% l evel.  If superi ority over SoC i s found, a 
hierarchical mult iple testing procedure will be employed to strongly control for the overall 
typeI error at the 5% level (two -sided). Subsequent hypotheses in the hierarchy will be to 
test MEDI4736 m onotherapy  versus SoC   for the low risk of EM subgroupand ctDNA 
TMB high subgroup). Should these tests show  statist ical significant evi dence of 
superi ority, MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinatio n therapy  versus SoC will be tested in 
the ctDNA TM B high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb), fo llowed by  MEDI4736 monotherapy  
versus SoC  for all -comers. The final hypothesis to be tested, should all previous tests 
show statist ical significant evidence of superiorit y, will be to test MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  versus SoC for all -comers. All tests will be at the two -
sided 5% l evel and the procedure will stop at the first failure to find statistically  significant 
evidence of superiorit y or if tests of all hypotheses show superiorit y over SoC.
If OS in th e PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup at 24 months was 30% with MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and 12% wi th SoC (wi th a 10.1 -month m edian OS), and assuming the true 
average OS HR is 0.59, the trial will have approximately 90% power to demonstrate 
statist ical significance at t he 5% level (using a 2- sided test) for the comparison of 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup , with the smallest 
treatm ent difference that could be statist ically significant being an average HR of 0.72  
With a 17- month recruitme nt period and a minimum fo llow-up peri od of  23.6 months, it is 
anticipated that the analysis will be performed approximately 40.6 months after the first 
patient has been recruited.
The primary  analysis of OS will use a stratified log- rank test (stratified for PD-L1 
expressio n tum or status [PD-L1 posit ive vs PD -L1 negat ive], tum or locati on [OPC vs non -
OPC, with a subsequent adjust ment for HPV status in pat ients with OPC], and sm oking 
history  [>10 vs ≤10 pack- years] as entered in the IVRS system).  The effect of treatment 
will be estimated by the HR together with corresponding 95% confidence interval and p -
value.  
Safety data will be summarized descript ively.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
36(199)TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
TITLE PAGE ...................................................................................... 1
VERSION HISTORY ......................................................................... 2
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS ...................................................................29
TABLE OF CONTENTS ...................................................................36
LIST OF ABBREVIATION S AND DEFINITION OF TERMS .........43
1. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................48
1.1 Background and rationale for conducting this study ...........................48
1.1.1 Squam ous cell carcino ma of the head and neck ..................................48
1.1.2 Immunotherapi es...............................................................................49
1.1.3 MEDI4736 (Durvalumab) ..................................................................50
1.1.4 Trem elimumab ...................................................................................50
1.1.5 MEDI4736 in co mbinat ion with trem elimumab ..................................51
1.1.6 Rationale for conducting this study ....................................................51
1.2 Rationale for study  design, doses, and control groups .........................52
1.2.1 MEDI4736 monotherapy  dose rati onale .............................................53
1.2.2 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  dose r ationale.......54
1.2.3 Rationale for fixed dosing ..................................................................56
1.2.4 Standard of Care dose rati onale ..........................................................57
1.2.5 Study  popul ation rati onale ..................................................................57
1.2.6 Rationale fo r endpo ints......................................................................59
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessment ....................................................60
1.3.1 Potenti al benefits ................................................................................61
1.3.1.1 MEDI4736 .........................................................................................61
1.3.1.2 Trem elimumab ...................................................................................61
1.3.1.3 MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy ..............................61
1.3.2 Ident ified and Potential risks ..............................................................62
1.3.2.1 MEDI4736 .........................................................................................62
1.3.2.2 Trem elimumab ...................................................................................63
1.3.2.3 MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy ..............................63
1.3.3 Overall benefit/risk and ethical assessm ent.........................................64
1.4 Study  design ......................................................................................64
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES ......................................................................68
2.1 Primary object ive...............................................................................68
2.2 Secondary object ives..........................................................................69
2.3 Safety objective..................................................................................70
2.4 Exploratory  objectives .......................................................................71
3. PATIENT SELECTION, E NROLLMENT, RANDOMIZA TION,
RESTRICTIONS, DISCONTINUATION, AND WITHD RAWAL ....71
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
37(199)3.1 Inclusio n criteria................................................................................ 72
3.2 Exclusio n criteria...............................................................................75
3.3 Patient enrollment and rando mizat ion................................................77
3.4 Procedures for handling incorrectly enro lled patients .........................79
3.5 Methods for assigning treatment arms ................................................79
3.6 Methods for ensuring blinding (not applicable) ..................................79
3.7 Methods for unblinding (not applicable) .............................................79
3.8 Restrictions ........................................................................................80
3.9 Discontinuati on of  investigat ional product .........................................81
3.9.1 Procedures for discont inuat ion of a patient fro m investigational 
product ...............................................................................................81
3.10 Criteria for wi thdrawal  of the pati ent from the study ..........................82
3.10.1 Screen failures ...................................................................................82
3.10.2 Withdrawal o f the inform ed consent ...................................................82
3.10.3 Survival status for withdrawn consent and lost to follow up patients ..83
3.11 Discontinuati on of  the study ...............................................................83
4. STUDY PLAN AND TIMING OF PROCED URES ...........................84
4.1 Enrollment/screening period ..............................................................95
4.2 Treatment period ................................................................................95
4.3 Follow-up peri od................................................................................95
5. STUDY ASSESSMENTS ..................................................................95
5.1 Efficacy assessments ..........................................................................96
5.1.1 Central  reading of scans .....................................................................98
5.1.2 Survival assessments ..........................................................................98
5.2 Safety assessments .............................................................................98
5.2.1 Laboratory  safet y assessments ............................................................98
5.2.2 Physical examinat ion....................................................................... 101
5.2.3 Electrocardiograms .......................................................................... 101
5.2.4 Vital signs ........................................................................................ 102
5.2.5 Other safet y assessments .................................................................. 103
5.3 Other assessments ............................................................................ 103
5.3.1 Patient-reported outcomes ................................................................ 103
5.3.1.1 EORTC QLQ -C30........................................................................... 103
5.3.1.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35 ..................................................................... 104
5.3.1.3 ................................................................................... 104
5.3.1.4 ................................................................................................ 104
5.3.1.5 ........................................................................................ 104
5.3.2 Administrati on of  the pati ent-reported outcome questionnaires ........ 105
5.3.3 WHO/ECOG performance status ...................................................... 106
5.4 Pharmacokinet ics............................................................................. 106
5.4.1 Collect ion of samples and determinat ion of drug concentration ........ 106
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
38(199)5.4.2 Collect ion of samples to measure for the presence of ant i-drug 
antibodies ......................................................................................... 106
5.4.3 Storage and destruction of pharmacokinet ic/ant i-drug antibody  
samples ............................................................................................ 107
5.5 Biomarker analysis ........................................................................... 107
5.5.1 Collect ion of pat ient samples f or stratification by  PD-L1................. 107
5.5.2 Collect ion of exploratory  biomarker data ......................................... 109
5.5.2.1 ................................................................... 109
5.5.2.2 ................................................................................. 110
5.5.3 Management of bio marker data ........................................................ 110
5.5.4 Storage, re -use, and destruction of bio logical samples ...................... 110
5.5.5 Labeling and shipment of bio logical  samples ................................... 111
5.5.6 Chain o f custody  of biological samples ............................................ 111
5.5.7 Withdrawal o f informed consent for donated bio logical samples ......111
5.6 Pharmacogenet ics (not applicable) ................................................... 111
5.7 Pharmacodynamics (not applicable) ................................................. 112
6. SAFETY REPORTING AND MEDICAL MANAGEMENT ........... 112
6.1 Definit ions of serious adverse events ................................................ 112
6.2 Recording of adverse events ............................................................. 112
6.2.1 Time period for collect ionof adverse events .................................... 112
6.2.2 Follow-up of  unreso lved adverse events ........................................... 112
6.2.3 Variables .......................................................................................... 113
6.3 Definit ion of adverse events ............................................................. 114
6.3.1 Causalit y collection .......................................................................... 114
6.3.2 Relationship to protocol procedures ................................................. 114
6.3.3 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms .................................. 114
6.3.4 Adverse events based on examinat ions and tests .............................. 115
6.3.5 Hy’s Law ......................................................................................... 115
6.3.6 Disease progressi on.......................................................................... 115
6.3.7 New cancers ..................................................................................... 115
6.3.8 Deaths .............................................................................................. 115
6.3.9 Safety data to be collected following the final data cut -off of the 
study ................................................................................................ 116
6.4 Reporting of serious adverse events ................................................. 116
6.5 Overdose .......................................................................................... 117
6.6 Pregnancy ........................................................................................ 117
6.6.1 Maternal exposure ............................................................................ 117
6.6.2 Paternal  exposure ............................................................................. 118
6.7 Management of IP -related toxicit ies................................................. 118
6.7.1 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  and MEDI4736 
monotherapy  adverse events of special interest ................................. 119
6.7.2 Specific toxicit y management and dose modificat ion informat ion -
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  and MEDI4736 
monotherapy .................................................................................... 120
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
39(199)6.7.3 Management of toxicit y attributable to agents in the Standard of Care 
arm.................................................................................................. 121
6.8 Study  governance and oversight ....................................................... 121
7. INVESTIGATIONAL PROD UCT AND OTHER TREATM ENTS .121
7.1 Ident ity of investigational product .................................................... 121
7.1.1 MEDI4736 ....................................................................................... 122
7.1.2 Trem elimumab ................................................................................. 123
7.1.3 Standard of Care treatment ............................................................... 124
7.2 Dose and treatment regimens ........................................................... 124
7.2.1 Treatment regimens .......................................................................... 124
7.2.2 Durati on of  treatm ent....................................................................... 126
7.2.3 Criteria for Retreatment for Patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
arm.................................................................................................. 127
7.3 Labeling ........................................................................................... 128
7.4 Storage ............................................................................................. 128
7.5 Com pliance ...................................................................................... 128
7.6 Accountabilit y.................................................................................. 128
7.7 Concomitant and other treatments .................................................... 129
7.7.1 Other concomitant treatment ............................................................ 130
7.8 Post study access to study  treatm ent................................................. 130
8. STATISTICAL ANALYSES BY ASTRAZENECA ........................ 130
8.1 Statistical considerat ions.................................................................. 130
8.2 Sample size est imate ........................................................................ 130
8.3 Definit ions of analysis sets ............................................................... 132
8.3.1   Full Analysis Set ............................................................................ 132
8.3.2    Safet y Analysis Set ....................................................................... 132
8.3.3 PD-L1 TC/IC Analysis Set ............................................................... 132
8.3.4   PK Analysis Set ..................................................................................... 133
8.3.5   ctDNA TMB Analysis Set ..................................................................... 133
8.3.6  Low Risk of Early  Mortali ty (EM) Analysis Set ..................................... 133
8.4 Outcom e measures for analyses ........................................................ 133
8.4.1 Calculation or derivat ion of efficacy variables .................................. 133
8.4.1.1 Primary and secondary endpoint (OS) .............................................. 133
8.4.1.2 RECIST 1.1 -based endpo ints........................................................... 133
8.4.1.3 Secondary   endpo ints....................................................................... 134
8.4.2 Calculation or derivat ion of safet y variables ..................................... 137
8.4.2.1 Adverse events ................................................................................. 137
8.4.2.2 Safety assessments ........................................................................... 138
8.4.3 Calculation or derivat ion of patient -reported outcome variables .......138
8.4.3.1 EORTC QLQ -C30........................................................................... 138
8.4.3.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35 ..................................................................... 141
8.4.3.3 ............ 142
8.4.4 Calculation or derivat ion of pharmacokinetic variables .................... 142
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
40(199)8.4.4.1 Popul ation pharmacokinet ics and exposure- response/safet y analysis 142
8.4.4.2 Pharmacokinet ic analysis ................................................................. 142
8.4.4.3 Immunogenicit y analysis .................................................................. 142
8.5 Methods for statist ical analyses ........................................................ 143
8.5.1 Analysis of the primary  endpoint ...................................................... 147
8.5.1.1 Overall survival................................................................................ 147
8.5.1.2 Subgroup analysis of OS .................................................................. 148
8.5.2 Analysis of the secondary variable(s) ............................................... 149
8.5.2.1 Progression -free survival .................................................................. 149
8.5.2.2 Object ive response rate .................................................................... 150
8.5.2.3 Durati on of  response ........................................................................ 150
8.5.2.4 Best objective response .................................................................... 150
8.5.2.5 Time to response .............................................................................. 150
8.5.2.6 Proporti on of  patients alive and progression free at 6 and 12 months 151
8.5.2.7 Time fro m randomizat ion to PFS2 ................................................... 151
8.5.2.8 Time fro m randomization to first and second subsequent therapy  or 
death ................................................................................................ 151
8.5.2.9 Proporti on of  OS12, OS18 and OS24 ............................................... 151
8.5.3 Patient-reported outcomes ................................................................ 151
8.5.3.1 EORTC QLQ -C30........................................................................... 152
8.5.3.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35 ..................................................................... 153
8.5.3.3 Exploratory  patient-reported outcomes ............................................. 153
8.5.4 Safety data....................................................................................... 153
8.5.5 Pharmacokinet ic data ....................................................................... 154
8.5.6 Immunogenicit y data........................................................................ 154
8.5.7 Biomarker data ................................................................................. 154
8.5.8 Interim analysis ................................................................................ 154
9. STUDY AND DATA MANAGEMENT BY ASTRAZENECA .......154
9.1 Training of study  site personnel ....................................................... 154
9.2 Moni toring of the study .................................................................... 155
9.2.1 Source data ...................................................................................... 155
9.2.2 Study  agreem ents............................................................................. 155
9.2.3 Archiving of study  docum ents.......................................................... 155
9.3 Study  timetable and end of study ...................................................... 156
9.4 Data m anagement by  AstraZeneca ................................................... 156
10. ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY REQUIREMENTS ..................... 157
10.1 Ethical conduct of the study ............................................................. 157
10.2 Patient data protecti on...................................................................... 157
10.3 Ethics and regulatory  review ............................................................ 157
10.4 Inform ed consent ............................................................................. 158
10.5 Changes to the protocol and informed consent form ......................... 158
10.6 Audits and inspect ions..................................................................... 159
11. LIST OF R EFERENCES ................................................................. 160
41(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Highly Effectiveamethods of contraception .......................... 81
Table 2 Schedule of assessments for the MEDI4736 +tremelimumab 
combinat ion or MEDI4736 monotherapy  arms and opti onal 
retreatm ent peri od for MEDI4736 + trem elimumab 
combinat ion arm ...................................................................85
Table 3 Schedule of assessments for the Standard of Care treatment 
period....................................................................................89
Table 4 Schedule of assessments for patients who have discontinued
treatm ent wi th MEDI4736 +tremelimumab combinat ion 
therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or Standard of Care 
therapy ..................................................................................92
Table 5 Clinical chemistry  (serum  or pl asma) .................................. 100
Table 6 Hem atology........................................................................ 100
Table 7 Urinalysisa........................................................................... 101
Table 8 List of invest igational products for this study ...................... 121
Table 9 MEDI4736 temperature and infusio n time allowances ......... 123
Table 10 Trem elimumab tem perature and infusion t ime allo wances ...124
Table 11 Summary  of statist ical assumpt ions..................................... 131
Table 12 Summary  of outcom e variables and analysis populations .....132
Table 13 Mean change and visit response in healt h-related quali ty of 
life...................................................................................... 139
Table 14 Visit response for HRQoL and disease -related symptom s....141
Table 15 Pre-planned statist ical and sensit ivity analysis to be 
conducted ............................................................................ 144
Table16 Summary  of methods of assessment .................................... 180
Table 17 Evaluat ion of target lesio ns................................................. 184
Table 18 Evaluat ion of non -target l esions.......................................... 185
Table 19 Overall visit response .......................................................... 186
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Overall study  design ..............................................................66
Figure 2 Study  flow chart -treatm ent periods ......................................67
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
42(199)Figure 3 Study  flow chart –optional retreatm ent for MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab arm ................................................................ 68
Figure 4 Dosing scheme - MEDI4736 monotherapy .......................... 124
Figure 5 Dosing scheme -MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion 
therapy ................................................................................ 125
LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A Signatures ........................................................................... 169
Appendix B Addit ional Safet y Informati on............................................. 170
Appendix C IATA 6.2 Guidance Document ............................................ 173
Appendix D Actions Required in Cases of Co mbined Increases in Liver 
Biochemistry  and Evaluat ion of Hy’s Law .......................... 174
Appendix E Guidelines for Evaluation of Object ive Tumor Response Using 
RECIST 1.1 Criteria (Response Evaluat ion Cri teria in Solid 
Tumors).............................................................................. 179
Appendix F Patient-Reported Outcomes ................................................. 189
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
43(199)LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS
The fo llowing abbreviat ions and special terms are used in this study  Clinical Study
Protocol .
Abbreviation or 
special termExplanation
5FU 5-Fluorouracil
ADA Anti-drug antibody
AE Adverse event
AESI Adverse event of special interest
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
AST Aspartate aminotransferase
APF6 Proportion of patients alive and progr ession free at 6 months
APF12 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 12 months
AUC Area under the curve
AUC ss Area under the serum drug concentration -time curve at steady state
ASCO Amer ican Society for Clinical Oncology
BICR Blinde d Independent Central Review
BoR Best objective response
BP Blood pressure
BSC Best supportive care
CD Cluster of differentiation
CI Confidence interval
Cmax,ss Maximum serum concentration at steady state
CPS Combined Positive Score
CR Complete response
CRF Case report form
CSA Clinical study agreement
CSP Clinical study protocol
CSR Clinical study report
CT Computed tomography
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Event
ctDNA Circulating tumor DNA
CTLA -4 Cytotoxic T–lymphocyte -associated antigen 4
Ctrough,ss Trough concentration at steady state
DBL Database Lock
DCO Data Cut- Off
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
44(199)Abbreviation or 
special termExplanation
DCR Disease control rate
DLT Dose -limiting toxicity
DoR Duration of response
EBV Epstein -Barr virus
EC Ethics Committee, synonymous with Institutional Review Board (IRB)
ECG Electrocardiogram
ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
EDoR Expected duration of response
EGFR Epidermal growth factor receptor
eCRF Electronic case report form
EM Early Mortality
EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
ePRO Electronic patient -reported outcome
EU European Union
FAS Full Analysis Set
FDA Food and Drug Administration
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GMP Good Manufacturing Practice
hCG Hum an chorionic gonadotropin
HIV Hum an immunodeficiency virus
HNSCC Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
HPV Hum an papilloma virus
HR Hazard ratio
HRQoL Health-related quality of life
IB Investigator’s Brochur e
IC Tumor-associated immune cells
ICF Infor med consent form
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation
ICI Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor
IDMC Independent Data Monitoring Committee
IgE Immunoglobulin E
IgG Immunoglobulin G
IHC Immunohistochemistry
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
45(199)Abbreviation or 
special termExplanation
IL Interleukin
IMT Immunomodulatory therapy
IP Investigational product 
irAE Immune -related adverse event
IRB Institutional Review Board, synonymous with Ethics Committee (EC)
irRECIST 1.1 Immune -related response criteria updated with RECIST 1.1
ITT Intent -to-Treat
IV Intravenous
IVRS Interactive Voice Response System
IWRS Interactive Web Response System
mAb Monoclonal antibody
Mb Megabase
MDSC Myeloid -derived suppressor cell
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
miRNA Micro RNA
MMRM
MRIMixed effect model repeated measurementMagnetic resonance imaging
mRNA Messenger RNA
MTP Multiple testing procedure
NCI National Cancer Institute
NE Not evaluable
NSCLC Non-small cell lung cancer
OPC Oropharyngeal cancer
ORR Objective response rate
OS Overall survival
OS12 Proportion of patients alive at 12 months after randomization
OS18 Proportion of patients alive at 18 months after randomization
OS24 Proportion of patients alive at 24 months after randomization
PCR Polymerase chain reaction
PD Progressive disease
PD-1 Programmed cell death 1
PD-L1 Programmed cell death ligand 1
PFS Progression -free survival
PFS2 Second progression
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
46(199)Abbreviation or 
special termExplanation
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)
PR Partial response
PRO Patient -reported outcome
q2w Every 2 weeks
q3w Every 3 weeks
q4w Every 4 weeks
q6w Every 6 weeks
q8w Every 8 weeks
QC Quality check
QLQ -C30 v3 30-item core quality of life questionnaire, version 3
QLQ -H&N35 35-item head and neck quality of life questionnaire
QoL Quality of life
QTcF QT interval corrected for Fridericia’s formula
RCC Renal cell carcinoma
RECIST 1.1 Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1
RR Response rate
SAE Serious adverse event 
SAP Statistical analysis plan
SAS Safety Analysis Set
SCCHN Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
SD Stable disease
SoC Standard of Care
sPD-L1 Soluble programmed cell death ligand 1
T3 Triiodothyronine
T4 Thyroxine
TC Tumor cells
TC/IC high subgroup Patients with tumor expressing PD -L1 in TC ≥50 or IC≥25
TFST Time to the first subsequent therapy
TSST Time to second subsequent therapy
Th1 Helper T cell 
TMB Tumor Mutational Burden
TMG Toxicity management guidelines
TTR
TSHTime to responseThyroid -stimulating hormone
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
47(199)Abbreviation or 
special termExplanation
UC Urothelial cancer
ULN Upper limit of normal
WBDC Web Based Data Capture
WHO World Health Organization
w/v weight/volume
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Head and neck cancer is a collect ive term that encompasses the malignant tumors arising 
out of the oral cavit y, pharynx, and larynx.  Worldwide, over half a millio n new head and 
neck c ancer cases are diagnosed each year, accounting for approximately  5% of  all 
incident cancers.  Over 90% of these head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcino ma 
subtype (squam ous cell carcino ma of the head and neck [SCCHN]) with risk factors 
primarily at tributed to pri or alcoho l or tobacco use or exposure to human papillo ma virus 
(HPV).  HPV infect ion has been associated with oropharyngeal tumors specifically and is 
increasingly beco ming the predominant risk factor for oropharyngeal SCCHN in the 
Western w orld.
The m ajority of patients who present wi th SCCHN will be diagnosed with either localized 
disease or l ocally advanced disease.  SCCHN diagnosed at a localized stage (Stage I/II) 
can be effect ively treated with single -modality treatm ent (ei ther surgery  or radi ation) and 
has a 5 -year survival rate over 80%.  However, about 70% of SCCHN patients are 
diagnosed wi th locally  advanced disease and 10% with metastatic disease, for which the 
survival rates are poor ( Siegel et al 2014).  Pati ents wi th locally  advanced disease ty pically 
receive mult imodality treatm ent wi th curative intent, involving varied combinat ions of 
surgi cal resect ion, radi ation therapy , and chemotherapy .  Five -year survival rates of up to 
30% to 40% have been seen wit h this treatm ent.  However, most of these patients 
eventually relapse wit h either locoregional recurrence, metastatic disease (20% to 30% of 
patients), or both ( Vermorken and Specenier 2010).
For patients who rel apse wi th no localized salvage surgi cal or radi ation opti ons or who 
develop or present with metastatic disease, there is no likelihood of cure.  Standard 
treatm ent opti ons include a plat inum doublet with either carboplat in or cisplat in alo ng with 
a variety  of chemotherapy agents, such as 5 -fluorouracil (5FU) or taxanes.  In 2008, 
Verm orken et al  established the supe riority of the EXTREME regimen to these platinum 
doubl ets (Vermorken et al 2008).  The EXTREME regimen consists of triplet therapy  with 
cetuximab, a re combinant human/mouse chimeric mo noclonal antibody  (mAb) to the 
epidermal  growth factor receptor (EGFR), along wit h 5FU, and eit her carboplat in or 
cisplatin.  After complet ing six 3 -week cycles of triplet therapy , pati ents wi th no evi dence 
of progressive d isease (PD) were able to con tinue single -agent cetuximab until progression 
of disease.  In a Phase III randomized study  of cisplat in or carboplatin and 5FU co mpared 
to EXTREME, the EXTREME regimen was able to achieve an almo st 3-month 
improvement in overal l survival (OS) (10.1 months vs 7.4 months, hazard ratio 
[HR]= 0.80; 0.64 to 0.99; p=0.04 ), a 2 -month improvement in progression -free survival 
(PFS) (5.5 months vs 3.3 months; HR=0.54; p<0.001), and an increased response rate (RR) 
from 20% to 36% (p<0.001).   Based on these results, this regimen has beco me the standard 
first-line therapy for patients in the recurrent/metastatic setting.
While the toxicit ies o f EXTREME were similar to the chemotherapy  doublet, the rate and 
type of Grade 3 and 4 toxicit ies can make delivering these regimens especially challenging 
for the m ajority of head and neck cancer patients.  The most commo n Grade 3 or 4 adverse 
events (AEs) in the EXTREME arm were also commo n to chemotherapy  and included 
48(199)1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background and rationale for conducting this study
1.1.1 Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
It is increasingly understood that cancers are recognized by  the immune system , and, under 
some ci rcumstances, the immune system may  control  or even eliminate tumors 
(Dunn et al 2004).  Studi es in m ouse m odels of transplantable tumors have demonstrated 
that manipulat ion of co -stimulatory  or co -inhibitory signals can amplif y T-cell responses 
against tumors ( Peggs et al2009).  Thi s amplificat ion may be acco mplished by blocking 
co-inhibitory mo lecules, such as cy totoxi c T-lymphocy te-associ ated ant igen 4 (CTLA -4) 
or programmed cell death 1 (PD-1), from binding with their ligands, B7 or B7- H1 
(programmed cell death ligand 1 [PD -L1]).  Bio logically, SCCHN has attributes that 
suggest suscept ibility to immune checkpo int blockade .  Mul tiple lines of evidence suggest 
that SCCHN tum ors create a highly immunosuppressive environment and that the PD -
1/PD -L1 axis and inhibit ion of the activat ion of T cells play an important role, and may  be 
amenable to therapeutic intervent ion with immu ne-modulating agents ( Badoual et al2010, 
Badoual  etal2013, Larkin etal2015, Li twin et al  1998 , Lyford -Pike et al2013).  Vi rally 
driven tumors, including HPV -associ ated SCCHN, express vi ral antigens that may be 
recogni zed by  the immune system .  In HPV -associated cancers, the E6 and E7 tumor-
specific ant igens are known to be immunogenic, and studies have shown that HPV -specific 
T-cell responses form upon vaccinat ion with these prote ins (Kaufmann et al2002).
Administering an immunotherapeutic agent to patients with HPV -positive SCCHN m ay
resul t in an ant i-tumor immune response v ersus HPV tumor -specific antigens.  In patients
with HPV -negat ive SCCHN, the driving etio logy is thought to be tobacco use.  Data
suggest that cancers associated with smoking such as non -small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
small -cell l ung cancer, and SCCHN may carry  a high m utational burden ( Alexandrov
et al 2013, Vo gelstein et al2013).  Tum ors wi th high m utational burden produce
neoant igens, which may generate T -cell immunit y.  This hypothesis may  explain the
observat ion that patients with NSCLC with a history  of heavy  smoking may  be m ore prone
to respo nd to anti- PD-1 or anti -PD-L1 therapy  as com pared to light or never smokers ( Li et
al 2018 ; Norum  et al  2018 ).  Specifically, higher object ive response rates (ORRs)
following treatm ent wi th an ant i-PD-L1 mAb were observed in pat ients with NSCLC wit h
a history  of smoking as com pared to those wi thout a history  of smoking ( Champiat
49(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
anemia (13%), neutropenia (22%), an d thrombocy topeni a (11%) wi th sepsis seen in 9 of 
222 pati ents in the EXTREME group.  Addit ionally , cetuximab -specific toxi cities were 
observed, with Grade 3 skin react ions reported in 9% of patients and Grade 3 or 4 
infusio n-related reacti ons reported in 3% of  patients ( Vermorken et al 2008).  While an 
80% dose intensit y was noted wi th the regimen as a who le, in realit y, this regimen can 
only be effect ively delivered to younger, fitter patients with a 0 to 1 Eastern Cooperative 
Onco logy Group (ECOG) performance status.  Unfortunately, the majorit y of patients 
diagnosed wi th head and neck cancer are older wit h a m edian age of 62 and have mult iple 
comorbidities as a resul t of prior alcoho l and tobacco use, including co mpromised cardiac 
and pulmo nary functi on.  Furtherm ore, as a resul t of therapy  for this di sease, such as 
radiation and/or surgery  along with the disease i tself, many  also have com promised 
nutritional status that further makes delivering aggressive therapy  with a favorable 
outcom e difficul t.
This populat ion is therefore in need of therapies that are not only more efficacious in 
offering a longer survival benefit or even cure but can also be del ivered with less toxicit y 
than tradit ional chemotherapy  regimens such as EXTREME.
1.1.2 Immunotherapies
Trem elimumab is an immunomodulatory  therapy  (IMT) that is being developed by  
AstraZeneca for use in the treatment of cancer.  Tremelimumab is a human IgG2 mAb 
directed against CTLA -4, which is a cri tical regulatory  signal for T-cell expansio n and 
activat ion following an immune response and serves as a natural braking mechanism that
maintains T -cell ho meostasis.  During T -cell act ivation, T cells upregulate CTLA -4, which 
binds to B7 ligands on antigen -presenting cells, sending an inhibitory  signal that limits T -
cell act ivation.  Trem elimumab blocks the inhibitory  signal resul ting from CTLA -4 
binding to B7, leading to prolongation and enhancement of T- cell act ivation and 
expansio n.  Thus, the mechanism o f action of  tremelimumab is indirect and is applied 
through enhancing T -cell–mediated immune response.
An extensive program of non- clinical  and clinical  studi es has been conducted for 
tremelimumab both as monotherapy  and combination therapy  with conventi onal anticancer 
agents to support various cancer indicat ions using different dose schedules.  As of the data 
cut-off date of 12 November 2014 (for all studies except D4190C00006 [hereafter referred 
to as Study  006], which has a cut -off date of 4 December 2014), 973 patients have 
received tremelimumab mo notherapy  (not including 497 patients who have been treated in 
the blinded Phase 2b stud y, D4880C00003) and 208 patients have received tremelimumab 
in combinat ion with other agents.  Details on the safet y profile o f tremelimumab 
monotherapy  are summarized in Sect ion1.3.2.2 .  Refer to the current tremelimumab IB for 
a com plete summary  of non-clinical and clinical informat ion; see Sect ion6.7for guidance 
on management of tremelimumab -related toxi cities.  
50(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
etal 2014).  These data suggest that applicat ion of immune -modulating therapies in 
SCCHN m ay have a posi tive impact on clinical outcomes ( Badoual et al2010, Badoual 
et al 2013, Larkin etal2015, Lit win et al 1998, Lyford -Pike et al2013).  
1.1.3 MEDI4736 (Durvalumab)
MEDI4736 (durvalumab) is a human mAb o f theimmunoglobulin G (IgG) 1 kappa 
subclass that is being developed by AstraZeneca/MedImmune for use in the treatment of 
cancer (MedImmune is a who lly owned subsidiary of AstraZeneca; 
AstraZeneca/MedImmune will be referred to as AstraZeneca throughout this do cument.)  
The proposed mechanism o f action for MEDI4736 is interference of the interaction of PD -
L1, which is expressed on cancer cells and a subset of leukocy tes, wi th the PD -1 (cluster 
of different iation [CD] 279) and B7- 1 (CD80) mo lecules on ant igen-presenting cells and T 
cells.  By  binding to PD -L1 on tumor cells, the mechanism o f action of  MEDI4736 
includes stimulat ion of the patient’s ant i-tumor immune response.
MEDI4736 has been given to humans as part of ongoing studies as a single drug or in 
combinat ion with other drugs.  As of June 2014, 509 patients have been enrolled and 
treated in 10 ongoing clinical studies of MEDI4736 (5 emplo ying MEDI4736 as 
monotherapy  and 5 as co mbinat ion therapy ).  Details on the safet y profile of MEDI4736 
monotherapy  are summarized in Sect ion1.3.2.1 .  Refer to the MEDI4736 Invest igator’s 
Brochure (IB) for a complete summary  of non-clinical and clinical informat ion; see 
Secti on6.7for guidance on m anagement of MEDI4736- related toxicit ies.
1.1.4 Tremelimumab
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Patients wi th recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer are considered incurable.  Even 
with the established standard EXTREME regimen, consist ing of cetuximab, a pl atinum, 
and 5FU, the expected survival is only  10months wi th progressi on expected within 6 
months.  Hence, there is st ill a need for more efficacious therapies.  Furthermore, delivery 
of the EXTREME regimen can be challenging in a populatio n of pat ients who are older 
and have mult iple co morbidities.  Therefore, a regimen that is more efficacious and better 
tolerated woul d be of value.
SCCHN tumors, like many  other m alignancies, create a highly immunosuppressive 
environment and are amenable t o therapeuti c intervent ion with immune -modulating 
agents.  Clinical data fro m the Sponsor and competitor mo lecules indicate that anti –PD-
1/ant i-PD-L1 agents can effect ively achieve disease stabilizat ion and durable responses 
when administered as monotherap y in pretreated patients.  Efficacious intervent ions to 
initiate and sustain an immune response will likely require a number of agents that harness 
different immune mechanisms to successfully mount an immune response.  Two specific 
51(199)1.1.5 MEDI4736 in combination with tremelimumab
Targeting both PD -1 and CTLA -4 pathways may  have addi tive or synergist ic act ivity 
(Pardoll 2012 ), because the mechanisms o f action of  the CTLA -4 and PD -1 pathways are 
non-redundant and therefore ult imately lead to stimulat ion of an i mmune response.  
Support for this is seen in mouse syngeneic models of transplantable so lid tumors, 
demonstrating superior ant icancer activit y of the combinat ion therapy  com pared wi th 
monotherapy .  (Refer to the MEDI4736 IB for a full description o f these resul ts.)  
Furtherm ore, clinical data from the combination of CTLA -4and PD-1 blockades in 
melano ma have resulted in higher 1 -year survival and an ORR of 40% compared to either 
agent al one, wi th rapid, deep, and durable responses ( Wolchoket al 2013).  Recent data 
also demonstrate that inhibit ing both the PD -1 and CTLA -4 pathway s is associ ated wi th 
enhanced clinical act ivity in pat ients with PD-L1-negati ve disease co mpared to PD -1 
inhibit ion alo ne, wi th median PFS of 11.2 months in patients with PD -L1-negat ive tumors 
who received ipilimumab and nivo lumab compared to 2.8 months and 5.3 months for 
patients wi th PD-L1-negat ive tumors who received ipilimumab or nivol umab, respect ively 
(Larkin et al 2015).  Therefore, AstraZeneca is investigating the use of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  for the treatm ent of cancer.  
Study  006 i s a Phase Ib dose -escalat ion study  to establish safet y, pharmacokinet ic 
(PK)/pharmacodynamics, and preliminary  antitumor activit y of 
MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  in patients wi th advanced NSCLC.  
Preliminar y efficacy, safet y, and clinical data are summarized in Sect ions1.3.1.3 and 
1.3.2.3 demonstrate that the combinat ion can be safely co mbined, with evidence o f clinical 
activit y.  
The combinat ion of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab is currently being evaluated in mult iple 
ongoing Phase II and Phase III t rials in patients with NSCLC and SCCHN 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], and [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
Details on the safet y profile of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  is 
summarized in Sect ion1.3.2.3 .
1.1.6 Rationale for conducting this study
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
pathways, the PD -1–PD -L1axis and the CTLA -4 pathway , have been successfully 
targeted by  IMTs to obtain tum or reducti on.
MEDI4736, an antibody  that bl ocks the interacti on between PD -L1 and its receptors, may  
relieve PD -L1-dependent immunosuppressive effects seen in SCCHN tumors a nd, 
therefore, enhance the cy totoxi c act ivity of anti-tumor T-cells.  This hypothesis is 
supported by  emerging clinical data from other mAbs targeting the PD -L1/PD -1 pathway , 
which provide early  evidence of clinical activit y and a m anageable safet y profile in 
multiple tumor ty pes ( Brahmer et al2012 , Topalian et al 2012 ).  Currently available data 
from the first-time- in-human, single -agent study  (Study CD-ON-MEDI4736- 1108; 
referred to hereafter as Study 1108) in pat ients with advanced so lid tumors using 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  indicates encouraging RRs a nd durat ion of response (DoR) with 
a manageable safet y profile in pat ients with a variety  of solid m alignancies, including 
patients wi th SCCHN.  Preliminary  data in the SCCHN expansio n cohort demonstrated a 
confirmed ORR of 11% (7 out of 62 partial respons e [PR]) and a disease control rate 
(DCR) at 24 weeks of 15% (9 out of 62 patients) based on Response Evaluat ion Cri teria in 
Solid Tumors versio n1.1 (RECIST 1.1) ( Segal etal2015).  
The CTLA -4 and PD- 1 pathway s are non -redundant; therefore, while MEDI4736 
monotherapy  has shown efficacy in pretreated SCCHN patients, the combinat ion of 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab may have synergist ic activit y that m ay furthe r improve upon 
the RRs, clinical benefit, and PFS achieved wit h standard chemotherapy  (Pardoll 2012).  
Phase II and Phase III studies of MEDI4736 monot herapy and the combinat ion of 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab in the second -line recurrent/metastatic populat ion are being 
conducted to establish that this co mbinat ion is active and safe.  Clinical data from 
competitor molecules utilizing the combinat ion of CTLA -4and PD- 1 blockade in 
melano ma have demo nstrated enhanced efficacy of this approach co mpared with either 
monotherapy  agent ( Postow etal2015; Wolchoket al 2013) .  
Based on the preliminary clinical efficacy and safety  data observed in patients with so lid 
tumors, including advanced SCCHN, from Study 1108 wi th MEDI4736 m onotherapy  and 
the data fro m Study  006 of the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  in 
NSCLC, the Sponsor has a comprehensive program to develop MEDI4736 monotherapy  
and MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion therapy  for the treatm ent of SCCHN across 
multiple lines of therapy . The obj ective of earlier tri als in this program was to determine 
the activit y of MEDI4736 as monotherapy  and also to establish the role of MEDI4736 in 
combinat ion with tremelimumab in pat ients who had failed pl atinum -based therapy  for 
recurrent/metastatic SCCHN. As part of this comprehensive development program, this 
Phase III study  will determine the act ivity of MEDI4736 monotherapy  com pared to 
Standard of Care (SoC) in patients with PD- L1–posi tive and -negativ e R/M SCCHN who 
are not amenable to local curat ive therapy wit h surgery  or radi ation and who have not 
received prior sy stemic therapy  for recurrent/m etastati c disease, unless it was given as part 
of multimodali ty treatm ent for locally advanced or locally  recurrent di sease.
1.2 Rationale for study design, doses, and control groups
In thi s study , the efficacy  of MEDI4736 wi th or without tremelimimab in terms of OS 
compared to SoC i s being evaluated in SCCHN patients with R/M SCCHN who are not 
amenable to l ocal curative therapy wit h surgery  or radi ation and who have received no 
52(199)
A dose of MEDI4 736 1500 mg (corresponding to 20 mg/kg) every 4 weeks (q4w) is 
supported by  in-vitro, non -clinical, clinical PK/pharmacodynamics, bio markers, and 
activit y data f rom Study 1108 in pat ients with advanced solid tumors and fro m a Phase I 
trial performed in Jap anese pati ents wi th solid tumors ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).
PK/Pharmacodynamic data
Based on available PK/pharmacodynamic data from ongo ing Study 1108 with doses 
ranging from 0.1 to 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks (q2w) or 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks (q3w), 
MEDI4736 exhibited non-linear (dose -dependent) PK consistent with target -mediated drug 
disposi tion.  The PK approached linearit y at ≥3 mg/kg q2w, suggesting near complete 
target saturation (membrane -bound and so luble programmed cell death ligand 1 [sPD- L1]), 
and further show s that the MEDI4736 dosing frequency can be adapted to a particular 
regimen given the linearit y seen at doses higher than 3 mg/kg.  The expected half -life wi th 
doses ≥3 mg/kg q2w is approximately 21 days.  A dose -dependent suppression in 
peripheral  sPD -L1 was observed over the dose range studied, consistent with engagement 
of MEDI4736 with PD- L1.  Dose -related changes in a variet y of peripheral bi omarkers 
have been observed over the dose range of 0.1 to 15 mg/kg.  A low level o f 
immunogenicit y has been obse rved.  No pati ents have experienced immune -complex 
disease fo llowing exposure to MEDI4736.  Of the 220 patients who received MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and for who m PK/ant i-drug ant ibody (ADA) data were available as of 
14July 2014, five were ADA posit ive, with an impact on PK/pharmacodynamics reported 
in 1patient at the 3 mg/kg dose.  
Data from Study 006 also show an approximately  dose -proporti onal increase in PK 
exposure for MEDI4736 over the dose range of 3 to 20 m g/kg MEDI4736 q4w or q2w.  
(For further info rmation on PK observat ions in Study  006, please refer to Section 1.2.2 ).  
A population PK model was developed using the data from Study 1108 (doses =0.1 to 
10mg/kg q2w or 15 mg/kg q3w; Fairman et al 2014 ).  Mult iple simulat ions indicate that a 
similar overall exposure is expected fo llowing both 10 mg/kg q2w and 20 mg/kg q4w 
regimens, as represented by  area under the serum  drug concentration -time curve at steady  
state (AUC ss; 4weeks).  Median maximum serum concentration at steady  state (C max,ss) is 
expected to be higher with 20 mg/kg q4w (~1.5 fold) and m edian trough concentration at 
steady  state (C trough,ss ) is expected to be higher with 10 mg/kg q2w (~1.25 fold).  Clinical 
activit y with the 20 mg/kg q4w dosing regimen is ant icipated to be consistent with 
10mg/kg q2w, with the proposed dose of 20 mg/kg q4w expected to (a) achieve co mplete 
target saturation in majorit y of patients; (b) account for anticipated variabilit y in PK, 
pharmacodynamics, and clinical act ivity in diverse cancer populat ions; (c) maintain 
sufficient PK exposure in case of ADA impact; and (d) achieve PK exposure that yielded 
maximal antitumor activit y in animal models.
53(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
prior systemic therapy  for recurrent/m etastati c disease, unless it was given as part of 
multimodality treatm ent for locally  advanced or l ocally recurrent disease.  The 
contribution o f MEDI4736 m onotherapy  to the efficacy  of combinat ion treatment regimen 
and the efficacy of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  com pared to SoC 
will also be evaluated in a prospective, randomized fashio n.
1.2.1 MEDI4736 monotherapy dose rationale
The MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  doses and regimen selected for this 
study  are based on the goal of select ing an optimal combination dose of MEDI4736 and 
tremelimumab that woul d yield sustained target suppressio n (ie, sPD -L1), demonstrate 
promising efficacy, and have an acceptable safet y profile .  
PK/Pharmacodynamics data
In order to reduce the dosing frequency o f MEDI4736 to align with the q4w dosing of 
tremelimumab, while ensuring an acceptable PK/pharmacodynamics, safet y, and efficacy  
profile, cohorts in Study 006 were narrowed to 15 and 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 q4w.  PK 
simulat ions from  the MEDI4736 m onotherapy  data indicated that a similar AUC ss(4 
weeks) was expected fo llowing both 10 mg/kg q2w and 20 mg/kg q4w MEDI4736.  The 
observed MEDI4736 PK data fro m the Study  006 were well in line wit h the predicted 
54(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Clinical data
As of 8 April 2015, there is init ial safety  data for 16 pati ents receiving the 20 mg/kg q4w 
dosing regimen (12 patients f rom Study 1108 and 4 patients from the Japan Phase I trial).  
The toxi cities observed wit h 20 mg/kg q4w are consistent with the 10 mg q2w regimen, 
and there were no dose-limit ing toxicit ies (DLTs) observed.  Of the 12 patients in 
Study 1108, 42% of patients have experienced any grad e AE, with 2 being Grade 3 and 
above (17%).  None of the Grade 3 and higher events was considered treatment -related.  
No pati ents on the Japan Phase I trial have experienced a Grade 3 or above AE.  At 
present, the data do not suggest that the safety  profil e of MEDI4736 will be different in the 
20mg/kg q4w dosing regimen when compared to 10 mg/kg q2w regimen.  Data presented 
at the American Societ y for Clinical Onco logy (ASCO) Meeting 2015, with a cut- off date 
of 7April 2015, showed that MEDI4736 was well tolerated at a dose of 10 mg/kg q2w in 
the SCCHN subset of patients enrolled into Study  1108, wi th drug -related Grade ≥3 AEs 
reported in 10% of patients and no drug -related AEs leading to discont inuat ion or death.  
No drug -related colit is of any grade and no Grade ≥3 pneumo nitis were reported 
(Segal et al 2015 ).
Efficacy data on the SCCHN patients in Study  1108, presented at ASCO 2015 (cut -off 
date: 7 April2015), showed a DCR of 15% at 24 weeks (18% and 11% in patients with 
PD-L1-positive and -negat ive tumors, respectively) and ORR of 11% among 62 evaluable 
patients.  The ORR was higher (18%; 4 complete response [CR]/PR; n=22) in pat ients 
with PD-L1-positive tum ors, defined as those with >25% of tumor cells wit h membrane 
staining for PD -L1, compared to patients with PD -L1-negative tum ors (8%; 3 CR/PR; 
n=37) ( Segal et al 2015).
Given the available clinical data (the similar AUC ss [4 weeks], the modest differences in 
median C max,ss and C trough,ss , and the observat ion that both regimens maintain co mplete 
sPD-L1 suppressio n at trough), the 20 mg/kg (1500 mg) q4w and 10 mg/kg (750 mg) q2w 
regimens are expected to have similar efficacy and safet y profiles, supporting further 
development with a dose of 1500 mg q4w.
While treatment has been cont inued for a maximum o f 1 year in the majori ty of patients 
treated t o date wi th MEDI4736, dosing will cont inue until confirmed PD in this study  to 
ensure a balanced co mpar ison to the SoC arm.
1.2.2 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy dose rationale
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
monotherapy  PK data developed preclinically.  This demonstrates similar exposure of 
MEDI4736 20 mg/kg q4w and 10 mg/kg q2w, with no alterations in PK when MEDI4736 
and tremelimumab (doses ran ging from  1 to 3 m g/kg) are dosed together.  While the 
median C max,ss is expected to be higher with 20 mg/kg q4w (approximately 1.5 fold) and 
median C trough,ss is expected to be higher with 10 mg/kg q2w (approximately 1.25 fo ld), 
this is not expected to im pact the overall safet y and efficacy profile, based on exist ing 
preclinical and clinical data.
Monotonic increases in pharmacodynamic act ivity were observed with increasing doses of 
tremelimumab relat ive to the activit y observed in patients treated with MEDI4736 
monotherapy .  There was evidence of augmented pharmacodynamic act ivity relative to 
MEDI4 736 m onotherapy  with combinat ion doses containing 1 mg/kg tremelimumab, 
inclusive o f both the 15 and 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 plus 1 mg/kg tremelimumab 
combinat ions.  
Clinical data
As of 15 April 2015, a total of 102 patients with advanced NSCLC have been treate d in 
Study 006 ( Antoniaetal2015).  Vari ous dose combinat ions were explored, with doses of 
tremelimumab ranging from 1 to 10 mg/kg and doses of MEDI 4736 ranging from 3 to 
20mg/kg.  Sevent y-four of these pat ients were in the q4w dosing schedule and 28 patients 
were in the q2w dosing schedule, with the goal of ident ifying the dose combinat ion that 
best optimizes the risk:benefit profile in an acceptabl e range of PK and pharmacodynamic 
values.
Patients treated with doses of tremelimumab above 1 mg/kg had a higher rate of AEs, 
including discont inuat ions due to AEs, serious AEs (SAEs), and severe AEs.  The number 
of patients reporti ng any AE, Grade 3 AEs, SAEs, and treatment -related AEs was higher in 
the 10 mg/kg MEDI4736 + 3 mg/kg tremelimumab q2w cohort than the 10 mg/kg 
MEDI4736 + 1 mg/kg tremelimumab q2w cohort.  A similar pattern was noted in the q4w 
regimens, suggest ing that, as the dose of tremelimum ab is increased above 1 mg/kg, a 
higher rate of treatment -related events may be ant icipated.  Further, the SAEs frequently 
attributed to IMT, pneumonit is and co litis, were more commonly seen in cohorts using 
either 3 m g/kg or 10 mg/kg of tremelimumab compa red to the 1 -mg/kg dose cohorts.  
Together, these data suggest that a combinat ion using a tremelimumab dose of 1 mg/kg 
appeared to minimize the rate of toxicit y when combined with MEDI4736.  As a result, all 
combinat ion doses utilizing either the 3 or 10 -mg/kg doses of trem elimumab were 
eliminated in the final dose selection.In contrast, cohorts assessing higher doses of MEDI4736 with a constant dose of 
tremelimumab did not show an increase in the rate of AEs.  The data suggested that 
increasing doses of M EDI4736 m ay not impact the safet y of the combinat ion as much as 
the trem elimumab dose.  Further, safet y data between the 10 -mg/kg and 20 -mg/kg cohorts 
were similar.
In Study  006, of all treatm ent cohorts in which clinical act ivity was observed, the cohort of 
18patients treated in the 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 + 1 mg/kg tremelimumab group had the 
fewest AEs, Grade ≥3 AEs, SAEs, and treatment discontinuat ions due to AEs.  In this 
cohort, there was 1 treatment -related discont inuat ion due to sepsis, and no DLTs or 
treatment-related deaths were reported ( Antonia etal2015).  
55(199)
A population PK model was developed for MEDI4736 using monotherapy data fro m 
Study 1108 (Phase I study; N=292; doses=0.1 to 10 mg/kg q2w or 15 mg/kg q3w; so lid 
tumors).  Popul ation PK analysis indicated only a minor impact of body  weight on the PK 
of MEDI4736 (coefficient of ≤0.5).  The impact of body  weight -based (10 mg/kg q2w) 
and fixed dosing (750 mg q2w) of MEDI4736 was evaluated by  com paring predi cted 
steady -state PK concentrations (5th, median, and 95thpercentiles) using the population PK 
model.  A fixed dose of 750 m g was selected to approximate 10 mg/kg (based on a median 
body  weight of approximately  75 kg).  A total  of 1000 pati ents were simulated using a 
body  weight di stribut ion of 40 to 120 kg.  Simul ation resul ts dem onstrated that body  
weight-based and fixed dosing regimens yield similar median steady state PK 
concentrations, with slight ly less overall between -patient vari ability with the fixed dosing 
regimen.  
Similarly, a populat ion PK model was de veloped for trem elimumab using data from Phase 
I through III studies (N=654; doses=0.01 to 15 mg/kg q4w or every  90 days; m etastati c 
melano ma; Wang et al 2014).  A popul ation PK model indicated a minor impact of body  
weight on the PK of tremelimumab (coefficient of ≤0.5).  The body  weight -based (1 mg/kg 
q4w) and fixed dosing (75 mg q4w; based on a median body  weight of  approximately  75 
kg) regimens were compared using predicted PK concentrations (5th, median, and 95th
percent iles) using a populat ion PK model in a simulated population o f 1000 pati ents wi th a 
body  weight di stribut ion of 40 to 120 kg.  Similar to MEDI4736, simulat ions indicated that 
both bo dy weight -based and fixed dosing regimens of tremelimumab yield similar median 
steady -state PK concentrations, with slight ly less overall between -patient vari ability with 
the fixed dosing regimen.
Similar findings have been reported by  others ( Narwal  et al  2013 , Ng et al 2006, 
Wang etal2009, Zh anget al 2012).  Wang and colleagues invest igated 12 mAbs and 
found that fixed and body weight -based dosing perform similarly, with fixed dosing being 
superi or for 7 of 12antibodies ( Wang et al 2009).  In addi tion, they  invest igated 18 
56(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Preliminary clinical activit y of the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbination did not 
appear to change with increasing doses of tremelimumab.  The 10 -, 15- , and 20- mg/kg 
MEDI4736 q4w cohorts demonstrated objective responses at all doses of tremelimumab, 
and increasing doses of tremelimumab did not provide deeper or more rapid responses 
(Antoni aet al 2015 ).
Efficacy data suggested that the 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 + 1 mg/kg tremelimumab dose 
cohort may demo nstrate equivalent clinical act ivity to other dos e combinat ions.  A total  of 
8of 18patients in the 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 + 1 mg/kg tremelimumab cohort were 
evaluable for efficacy  with at least 16 weeks of follow -up.  Of these, 50% (4 out of 
8patients) had PR.  The DCR rate at 16 weeks was 50% ( Antoniaet al 2015).
All together, the data suggested that a 20 mg/kg (1500 mg) MEDI4736 + 1 mg/kg (75 mg) 
tremelimumab dose combinat ion shoul d be selected for fu rther development.
While treatment has been cont inued for a maximum o f 1 year in the majori ty of patients 
treated to date with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy , dosing will 
continue until confirmed PD in this study  to ensure a balanced compariso n to the SoC arm.
1.2.3 Rationale for fixed dosing
This study  will enroll pat ients with recurrent or metastatic SCCHN who are not amenable 
to local curat ive therapy wit h surgery  or radi ation and who have not received prio r 
systemic therapy  for recurrent/m etastatic di sease, unless it was given as part of 
multimodality treatm ent for locally  advanced or l ocally recurrent disease.  Approximately 
70% of newly diagnosed SCCHN cancer patients will be diagnosed with locally advanc ed 
or local disease that i s amenable to therapy  with radiation, surgery , chem otherapy , or 
combinat ion of the three.  However, for patients wit h recurrent disease that is not 
amenable to l ocalized therapy  or those who present with metastatic disease, no cur e is 
currently available even wit h the current SoC regimen, EXTREME.  An unmet medical 
need exists for this pat ient populat ion.
Current experience with single -agent studi es ut ilizing PD -1 or PD -L1 inhibitors suggests 
that clinical responses may be restrict ed to a subset of any  given pat ient populat ion and 
that it might be beneficial to enrich the patient populat ion by select ing patients likely to 
respond to therapy .  To date, no assay  has been established or validated, and no single 
approach has proven accurate for pati ent enri chment.  However, independent data from 
multiple sources using different assays and scoring methods suggests that PD -L1 
expressio n on tum or cells and/or tumor -infiltrat ing cells may be associated with greater 
clinical benefit.  
Data f rom ongoing studi es wi th MEDI4736 and other agents targeting the PD -1/PD -L1 
pathway  suggest, as shown in a number of tumor types (eg, NSCLC, renal cell carcino ma, 
and melano ma), that treatment with mo notherapy  may be associated with a higher ORR in 
patients who are PD -L1-posit ive.
Data presented by  AstraZeneca at the 2015 ASCO meet ing (Segal et al 2015) dem onstrate 
that treatment with MEDI4736 resulted in an ORR of 18% and 8% in pat ients with 
PD-L1-positive and -negat ive SCCHN tumors, respectively.  Therefore, it appears that the 
57(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
therapeuti c proteins and pept ides and showed that fixed dosing performed better for 12 of 
18 in terms of reducing the between -patient variability in PK/pharm acodynamics 
param eters ( Zhanget al 2012).  
A fixed dosing approach is preferred by the prescribing communit y due to ease of use and 
reduced dosing errors.  Given the expectation of similar PK exposure and varia bility, 
AstraZeneca considered it feasible to switch to fixed dosing regimens.  Based on an 
average body  weight of 75 kg, a fixed dose of 1.5 g q4w MEDI4736 (equivalent to 20 
mg/kg q4w) and 75 mg q4w tremelimumab (equivalent to 1 mg/kg q4w) is included in the 
current study .
1.2.4 Standard of Care dose rationale
Based on the significant 3 -month survival benefit established by the EXTREME regimen 
by Verm orken et al , this regimen will serve as the control therapy  for this study  
(Vermorken et al 2008).  As per the ori ginal  publicati on, the Invest igator will have the 
choice o f using eit her carboplat in or cisplat in for the plat inum co mponent and any drug 
within the tri plet regimen (cetuximab, a platinum, and 5FU) can be discont inued at any 
time due to t oxicity at the di scret ion of the Principal Invest igator.  
1.2.5 Study population rationale
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
select ion of patients based on PD -L1 expressio n levels wit hin the tum or microenvironment 
may improve the probabilit y and/or qu ality of responses to PD -1 pathway -targeting agents 
and, therefore, may  have m erit as a pati ent enri chment tool .  Com petitors have presented 
similar data with this class o f agents. Specifically, the phase 3 KEYNOTE -048 study , 
which demo nstrated that pembro lizumab monotherapy improved OS when co mpared with 
the EXTREME regimen in pat ients whose tumors had PD -L1 expressio n ≥1 and ≥20 by 
Combined Posit ive Score (CPS) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.78 (0.64 –0.96), P=0.0086 and HR 
0.61 (0.45 –0.83), P=0007, respectively] ( Burtness et al., 2019). 
 
Based on these 2 studies, durvalumab mo notherapy  
resul ts in better OS in the PD -L1 high subgroup (TC50/IC25) when compared to the PD-
L1 low popul ation (HR=0.70; p=0.039). Median survival was 9.8 months versus 5.4 
months in the PD -L1 high and PD -L1 low subgroups respectively. Addit ional data analysis 
from the Sponsor’s Phase 3 D4193C00002 (EAGLE) study  in second line HNSCC appear 
to further support the utilit y of PD-L1 to sel ect patients with improved outcome when 
treated with durvalumab.  
 
 When 
controlling for prognostic factors, the mult ivariate analysis of pat ients treated with 
durvalumab shows a tendency to better OS in the PD -L1 high (TC/IC) vs PD -L1 low 
subgroup [HR=0.80 (95% CI 0.58 –1.09)].
Nevertheless, PD- L1-negat ive pat ients still appear to derive clinical benefit fro m 
PD-L1-directed therapies.  Segal et al noted DCRs (stable disease [SD] or better) at 24 
weeks of 18% and 11% in PD -L1-positive and -negative pat ients, respectively 
(Segal et al 2015 ).  For pati ents in the late line of disease wit h a m edian PFS of only 3 
months and OS of 6 months, maintaining at least SD is clinically beneficial.  These data 
demonstrate that clinical benefit can be achieved in both PD -L1-positive and -negat ive 
SCCHN patients.
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  may further enhance RRs and clinical 
benefit rates in both PD -L1-negat ive and -positive patients and may  be able to improve the 
probabilit y and quali ty of response in PD -L1-negative pat ients compared to th ose who 
receive MEDI4736 alone.  As of 15 April 2015 from  Study 006 investigating the clinical 
activit y of combinati on of  MEDI4736 +tremelimumab in NSCLC, data show that across a 
range of doses , the addi tion of  tremelimumab to MEDI4736 results in an ORR of 27% in 
patients wi th PD-L1-negat ive NSCLC ( Antoni aetal2015).  This com pares favorably to 
the 5% ORR observed wit h MEDI4736 monotherapy  in pretreated PD -L1-negative 
NSCLC pat ients (Rizvietal2015).  Increases in ORR may also be achieved in pat ients 
with PD- L1-positive disease, as an ORR of 27% was observed with MEDI4736 
monotherapy  (Rizviet al 2015), while an ORR of 33% was observed over the range of 
doses evaluated for the combinat ion of MEDI4736 +tremelimumab ( Antoni aet al 2015).  
Acknowledging the limitat ions and necessary caveats associated with cross -trial 
comparisons, there appears to be an incremental benefit regardless of PD -L1 status in 
patients wi th NSCLC tr eated with the co mbinat ion therapy; however, this benefit appears 
to be greater in the PD -L1-negat ive populat ion.  Similar patterns are anticipated with 
SCCHN.  
58(199)
CCI
CCI
59(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Based on this informat ion, both PD -L1-negative and -positive SCCHN cancer patients 
with recurr ent or metastatic disease who are not amenable to local curat ive therapy wit h 
surgery  or radi ation and who have not received prior sy stemic therapy  for 
recurrent/metastatic disease may be enrolled in all arms of this study , as clinical benefit 
may be seen in both populat ions wi th monotherapy and combinat ion immunotherapy .
Immune checkpo int inhibitors (ICIs) are profoundly changing the treatment of many t ypes 
of cancer, including melano ma, NSCLC, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), SCCHN, urothelial 
carcino ma (UC), and Hodgkin’s lympho ma, and have been associated with long -lasting 
tumor responses. However, an early mortalit y (EM) phenom enon has been observed in 
many rando mized clinical trials co mpar ing ICIs with active comparator arms in advanced 
or metastati c cancer patients, even wi th overall  benefi t ultimately favoring ICI therapy  
(Champiat et al2018). While the precise et iology of this pheno menon is not clearly  
established, it is characterized by what seems to be disproportionately higher mortalit y in 
the early t reatm ent peri od favoring the active control arm, fo llowed by subsequent benefit 
in OS favoring the ICI treatment arm. This is often reflected in the clinical data by  the 
“crossing of the Kaplan -Meier curves” suggest ing a subpopulat ion of pat ients at a high er 
risk of EM whose advanced rate of tumor growth may require the cy totoxi c tum or-
debulking effect of chemotherapy. Accordingly, it is of great therapeutic interest to better 
predi ct the risk of early mortalit y for a given pat ient to better inform the appr opriate 
treatm ent for thei r individual clinical state. To aid in this object ive, AstraZeneca has 
developed and implemented a model that predicts a patient’s risk of early mortalit y to 
optimize the benefit:risk profile for treatment of patients with ICIs. Tumor mutational 
burden (TMB) has been associated with response in patients treated with PD -1 and CTLA -
4 inhibitors in several tumour ty pes ( Rizvi et al  2015b , Snyder et al 2014 ).  In a 
retrospective analysis o f HNSCC pat ients treated with pembro lizumab, TMB was 
significant ly associ ated wi th best overall response (BoR) ( Siewert et al  2018 ).  Hanna et al 
(2018) al so observed a significant difference in mutational lo ad between responders and 
non-responders to anti -PD-1/PD -L1 agents (17.7 mut/Mb versus 7.1 mut/Mb).  
Furtherm ore, TMB was correl ated wi th increased median overall survival.  In pat ients with 
TMB>10mut/Mb mOS was 20 months, compared to 6 months in pat ients with 
TMB<5mut/Mb, p=0.01).
There are numerous benefits o f minimally invasive, blood -based b iomarkers.  TMB assays 
using circulat ing tumour DNA (ctDNA) are under development.  Recently, in the 
MYSTIC study , high TMB m easured in ctDNA was associated with improved OS in 
NSCLC pat ients treated with durvalumab and tremelimumab ( Rizvi et al  2018 ).  There is 
no published data on the use of ctDNA TMB in HNSCC ( Oliva et al 2018 ), howe ver 
ctDNA i s present in the blood in detectable quantities in patients with head and neck 
cancers ( Bettegowda et al 2014 ).  In this study  patient plasma samples will be analysed for 
ctDNA TMB using the Guardant OMNI panel. 
1.2.6 Rationale for endpoints
The primary  aim of this study  is to determine the efficacy  of MEDI4736 m onotherapy  
versus SoC (EXTREME) in a pre -specified PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup in terms of OS.  
Testing for improvements in OS as a primary  endpoint provi des a non -biased assessment 
of direct clinical benefit to the patient ( FDA Guidance 2011 ).
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimuma b
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
60(199)Secondary efficacy endpo intsinclude the following:
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC: OS in the low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA 
TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers. PFS, ORR, APF6, APF12, 
OS12, OS18 and OS24 assessed in the PD- L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low ri sk of  
EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers. PFS2, 
DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST and TSST in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all-
comers.
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  versus SoC: OS, PFS, ORR, 
APF6, APF12, OS12, OS18 and OS 24 in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup , low 
risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers. 
PFS2, DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST and TSST in the PD- L1 TC/IC high subgroup and 
all-comers. 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab versus MEDI4736 monotherapy : PFS, ORR and OS 
in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high 
subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers.
 
 
 
  IrRECIST 1.1 will take into a ccount the unique kinet ics of responses 
that have been observed and well characterized with this class o f agents, including those 
observed in the ongo ing Study 1108.
The secondary  endpoints of healt h-related quali ty of life (HRQoL) assessments (the 
Europea n Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer [EORTC] 30 -item core 
qualit y of life quest ionnaire, versio n 3 [QLQ -C30 v3] and 35- item head and neck qualit y 
of life quest ionnaire [QLQ -H&N35]) will show the overall influence of the benefits and 
toxicityof the treatm ent from a pati ent’s perspect ive and will aid in the understanding o f 
the benefit/risk evaluat ion.  These patient -reported outcome (PRO) questionnaires are 
well-established instruments that have been previo usly included in cancer clinical stu dies.  
The PK and immunogenicit y of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  are 
being examined to assess the PK and immunogenicit y profiles of the combinat ion of both 
agents and to determine the impact of each on PK, pharmacodynamics, and safet y and 
efficacy parameters.  Bio logical samples will be used to explore potential bio markers in 
tumor, pl asma, and/or serum, which may influence the progression of cancer (and 
associ ated clinical characterist ics) and/or response.  
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessm ent
The fo llowing sect ions include summaries of the potential benefit s and risks associated 
with MEDI4736 m onotherapy , trem elimumab m onotherapy , and MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy , respect ively, prior to the overall benefit:risk 
assessment.
CCI
Patients are being enrolled in 10 ongoing clinical studies o f MEDI4736 (5 emplo ying 
MEDI4736 as monotherapy  and 5 as combinat ion therapy).  No studies have yet been 
completed.  Of the 414 patients treated with MEDI4736 (all dose l evels) in all tumor ty pes 
in Study 1108 as of 14 July 2014, a total of 169 patients were evaluable for response 
analysis, which included patients who had at least 24 weeks of fo llow-up as of 14 July  
2014 and had eit her at least 1 post-baseline tumor assess ment or experienced clinical PD 
or death.  Nineteen pat ients (11.2%) had a best overall response of confirmed and 
unconfirmed CR/PR.  The DCR (CR + PR + SD ≥12 weeks) was 32% (54 of 169 patients).  
PD-L1 status (based on VENTANA /MedImmune assay) was known for 143 of 
169evaluable patients, of who m 30had PD- L1-positive tum ors (defined by tumor staining 
≥25%).  A best overall response of CR/PR (confirmed and unconfirmed) was observed in 7 
of 30(23.3%) patients with PD -L1-positive tumors and in 6 of 113 (5.3%) pati ents wi th 
PD-L1-negat ive tumors.
Recent data are available for patients with SCCHN in the expansio n cohort of Study  1108 
(Segal et al 2015 ).  Si xty-two SCCHN patients were treated with MEDI4736 as 
monotherapy  at 10 mg/kg q2w and evaluable for disease assessments as of the data cut- off 
date of 7 April 2015.  Tissue sam ples were retrospectively tested for PD -L1 expressio n 
using an immunohistochemist ry (IHC) assay .  Of 62 SCCHN pati ents, an ORR of 11% 
was observed in the PD- L1-unselected populat ion and in 18% and 8% of patients with 
PD-L1-positive (n=22) and PD -L1-negat ive disease (n=37), respectively, wit h DCR at 
24weeks achieved in 18% and 11% of patients wi th PD -L1-positive and –negat ive 
disease, respect ively.  DoRs ranged from 41 to 53 weeks in pat ients with PD-L1 posit ive 
disease and 16 to 54 weeks in pat ients with PD-L1-negat ive disease, with responses noted 
in both HPV -positive and -negat ive pa tients and in smokers and non -smokers.
1.3.1.2 Tremelimumab
In a single -arm, Phase II study  (Study  A3671008) of tremelimumab administered at 
15mg/kg every 90 days to pati ents wi th refractory  melano ma, a RR of 7% and a median 
OS of 10 months in the second- line set ting (compared to approximately 6 months wi th best 
supportive care [BSC] reported from a retrospective analysis; Korn et al  2008 ) were 
observed ( Kirkwood et al 2010 ).  In a randomized, open -label, first -line Phase III study  of 
tremelimumab (administered at 15 mg/kg every 90 days) versus chemotherapy  
(dacarbazine or temozolo mide) in advanced melanoma (Study A3671009), results of the 
final analysis showed a RR of 11% and median OS of 12.58 months in the first -line set ting 
compared to 10.71 months wit h standard chemotherapy  (Ribas et al 2013 ).  Addi tionally, 
in a Phase II m aintenance study  in pat ients with NSCLC (St udy A3671015), PFS at 
3months was 22.7% in the tremelimumab arm (15 mg/kg) compared with 11.9% in the 
BSC arm .
1.3.1.3 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy
Preliminary efficacy data fro m Study  006 have demo nstrated that this co mbinat ion is 
clinically act ive and well tolerated.  As of 15 April 2015, 63 patients were evaluable for 
response across various MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  dose regimens.  
Of these, 27% (17 out of 63 patients) had a best response of PR and 41% (26 out of 
61(199)Potential benefitsRevised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
1.3.1
1.3.1.1 MEDI4736
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
62(199)63patients) h ad di sease control (CR, PR, SD >16 weeks).  In the MEDI4736 20 mg/kg 
plus tremelimumab 1 mg/kg q4w cohort, a total of 8 of 18 patients were evaluable for 
efficacy  with at least 16 weeks of fo llow-up.  Of these, both the ORR and DCR at 16 
weeks were 50% (4 out of 8 patients) ( Antoni aetal2015 ).  
A number of ongoing studies are assessing the act ivity of agents in pati ents wi th 
PD-L1-positive tumors.  T here is also an unmet medical need in pat ients with PD-L1–
negat ive tumors that needs to be addressed.  Data, as of 15 April 2015 from  Study 006,
show that wi th the addi tion of  trem elimumab to MEDI4736, the ORR of 27% was 
achieved in patients with PD -L1-negative NSCLC.  As patients with PD -L1-positive 
disease also appear to achieve higher ORR with the combinat ion (27% with MEDI4736 
monotherapy  com pared wi th 33% wi th MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion therapy; 
Antoni aet al 2015 ; Rizvi etal2015), this study  will enroll  all patients with SCCHN , with 
an emphasis on thos e determined to be PD- L1 negative.
1.3.2 Identified and Potential risks
Overall risks
Monoclonal  antibodies directed against immune checkpoint proteins, such as programmed 
cell death ligand 1 (PD -L1) as well as those directed against programmed cell death-1 
(PD-1) or cy totoxic T -lymphocy te ant igen-4 (CTLA -4), aim to boost endogenous immune 
responses directed against tumor cells. By  stimulating the immune system however, there 
is the potential for adverse effects on other tissues.Most adverse drug reactions s een wi th the immune checkpoint inhibitor class of agents are 
thought to be due to the effects of inflammatory  cells on specific t issues. These risks are 
generally events with a potential inflammatory  or immune mediated mechanism and which 
may require more frequent monitoring and/or unique intervent ions such as 
immunosuppressants and/or endocrine therapy . These immune mediated effects can occur 
in nearly any  organ system , and are m ost comm only seen as gastrointestinal AEs such as 
colitis and diarrhoea, pneum onitis/interst itial lung di sease (ILD), hepat ic AEs such as 
hepat itis and liver enzyme elevat ions, skin events such as rash and dermat itis and 
endocrinopathies including hypo -and hyper -thyroidism.
1.3.2.1 MEDI4736
Risks wit h MEDI4736 include, but are not limited to, di arrhea/coli tis and intest inal 
perforation, pneumo nitis/ILD, endocrinopathies (hypo -and hyper -thyroidism , type I 
diabetes m ellitus, hypophysi tis and adrenal insufficiency) hepat itis/increases in 
transaminases, nephrit is/increases in creatinine, pancr eatitis/increases in amylase and 
lipase, rash/pruritus/dermat itis, myocardi tis, my ositis/polymyosit is, other rare or less 
frequent inflammatory  events including neurotoxicit ies, infusio n-related reactions, 
hypersensit ivity react ions and infect ions/serious infect ions. 
For informat ion on all ident ified and potential risks with durvalumab please always refer to 
the current version of the MEDI4736 IB.
In monotherapy  clinical  studi es AEs (all  grades) reported very  comm only ( ≥ 10% of 
patients) are fat igue, nausea, decreased appet ite, dyspnea, cough, constipation, diarrhea, 
vomiting, back pain, py rexia, asthenia, anemia, arthralgia, peripheral edema, headache, 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
63(199)rash, and pruritus. Approximately 9% of patients experienced an AE that resulted in 
perm anent discon tinuation of durvalumab and approximately 6% of pat ients experienced 
an SAE that was considered to be related to MEDI4736 by  the study  invest igator.
The m ajority of treatm ent-related AEs were manageable wit h dose del ays, symptomat ic 
treatm ent, and in the c ase o f events suspected to have an immune basis, the use of 
established treatment guidelines for immune -mediated toxi city (see the Dosing 
Modificat ion and Toxi city Management Gui delines referenced in Sect ion 6.7.2).
A detailed summary  of MEDI4736 m onothera py AE data can be found in the current 
versio n of the MEDI4736 (Durvalumab) IB.
1.3.2.2 Tremelimumab
Risks wit h trem elimumab mo notherapy  include, but are not limited to, GI effects (colit is, 
diarrhoea, enterocolit is and intestinal perforation), endocrine disorders (hypo and 
hyperthy roidism, hypophysit is and adrenal insufficiency), skin effects (rash, and pruritus), 
elevations in lipase and amylase and clinical manifestations of pancreat itis, other 
gastrointestinal events e.g. ulcerat ive colit is, dehydrati on, nausea and vo miting; hepat ic 
events including hepat itis, and liver enzyme elevatio ns; pneumo nitis and ILD; nervous 
system  events including encephalit is, peri pheral  motor and sensory  neuropathi es, Guillain-
Barre and proximal muscle weakness; cy topenias including thrombocy topeni a, anemia and 
neutropeni a; infusio n-related reactions, anaphylaxis, and allergic react ions; renal events 
including renal failure, acute kidney injury, nephritis, nephrotic syndro me, autoimmune 
nephrit is and electrolyte abnormalit ies such as hypokal emia; autoimmune diseases 
including autoimmune arthrit is, Sjogren's syndro me and giant cell temporal arterit is; 
hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus; and py rexia. 
Further informat ion on these ident ified and potential risks can be found in the curren t 
versio n of the tremelimumab IB.
Using pool ed data from mo notherapy  clinical studies AEs (all grades) reported very  
commo nly (≥ 10% of pati ents)  were di arrhea, nausea, fatigue, pruritus, decreased appetite, 
rash,  vo miting, dyspnoea, const ipation, cough, pyrexia, abdo minal pain, decreased weight, 
headache, asthenia, and anaemia. Approximately  16% of  patients experi enced an AE that
resul ted in perm anent discont inuat ion of tremelimumab and approximately 45% of pat ients 
experienced an SAE.
A detailed summary of trem elimumab mo notherapy  AE data can be found in the current 
versio n of the tremelimumab IB. 
1.3.2.3 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy
The safet y of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combination therapy  was ini tially evaluated in 
the ongoi ng dose escalat ion and dose expansio n Study  006, in pat ients with NSCLC, and i s 
being studied in a number of other ongoing clinical trials, in a number of different 
indicat ions, and has to date shown a manageable safet y and tol erabili ty profile.  
The ty pes of  risks wi th the combinat ion of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab (based on an 
equivalent MEDI4736 dose of 20m/kg and a tremelimumab dose of 1mg/kg) are similar to those for MEDI4736 and tremelimumab mo notherapy . Em erging data fro m study  006, 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
64(199)other studi es evaluat ing the combinat ion,  and from combinat ions of other agents in the 
same class indicate an increased frequency and/or severit y of som e of these immune -
mediated toxicit ies.
For informat ion on all ident ified and potential risks with the MEDI4736+tremelimumab 
combinat ion please always refer to the current versio n of the MEDI4736 IB.
In MEDI4736+tremelimumab combinat ion studi es at the dose of MEDI4736 20mg/kg and 
tremelimumab 1mg/kg AEs (all grades) reported very  commo nly (≥ 10% of patients) are 
fatigue, diarrhoea, nausea, dy spnea , decreased appeti te, pruri tus, vomit ing, anaemia, 
constipation, cough, abdo minal pain, pyrexia, back pain, arthralgia, hypothy roidism , 
asthenia, oedema peripheral, weight, decreased hyponatraemia and rash. 
Approximately  15% of  patients experienced an AE that resul ted in perm anent 
discontinuat ion of study  drug and approximately 15% of patients experienced an SAE that 
was considered to be related to MEDI4736 and tremelimumab by the study  invest igator.
A detailed summary  of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab co mbinatio n AE data can be found in 
the current version of the MEDI4736 IB.
1.3.3 Overall benefit/risk and ethical assessment
There rem ains a significant unmet medical need for addit ional treatment options for 
patients wi th recurrent or metastatic SCCHN who are not amenable to local curat ive 
therapy  with surgery  or radi ation and who have not received prior systemic therapy  in the 
metastati c setti ng.
The study  design aims to minimize potential risks; intensive mo nitoring, including early 
safet y assessment, i s in place for those risks deemed to be most likely based on prior 
experience wit h the i nvest igational products ( IPs) (ie, MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 monotherapy , and SoC).
Based upon the available non -clinical and clinical safet y data, the limited survival benefit 
provi ded by the current ly available treatment options to patients, the limited life 
expectancy  due to m alignant di sease, and the strength of the scient ific hypotheses under 
evaluat ion, MEDI4736 monotherapy  and in combinat ion with tremelimumab proposed for 
evaluat ion in this study  may have the potenti al to provi de m eaningful  clinical  benefi t with 
a manageable safet y and tol erabili ty profile by generating durable clinical responses, 
thereby improving qualit y of life (QoL) an d potentially  extending survival.
Therefore, the invest igation of the potential therapeutic efficacy o f MEDI4736 
monotherapy   and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion in pat ients with PD-L1-
positive and -negat ive tumors is acceptable, and the overall benefi t/risk assessment 
supports the proposed study  design.
1.4 Study design
This is a rando mized, open -label, mult i-center, 3 -arm, global Phase III study  to determine 
the efficacy and safet y of MEDI4736 +/ -tremelimum ab com pared to SoC in the treatment 
of patients with recurrent or m etastati c SCCHN who are not amenable to local curative 
therapy  with surgery  or radi ation and who have not received prior systemic therapy  for 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
recurrent/metastatic disease, unless it was given as part of mult imodality treatment for 
locally advanced or locally recurrent disease.  A schemat ic diagram o f the overall study  
design i s shown in Figure 1, a fl ow chart of the study  design treat ment periods is presented 
in Figure 2, and a flow chart of the optional retreatment period for the MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  arm is presented in Figure 3.  
Patients will  undergo an assessment on their tumor tissue sample to determine PD -L1 
status.  Patients with tumoral PD -L1 expre ssion above or below a pre -specified cut -off 
level of ≥25%, as determined by an IHC assay (referred to hereafter as PD -L1–posi tive 
or -negative tumors, respectively), will be enrolled in the study.  If the patient has already 
been tested as a part of the s creening process for any AstraZeneca study  using the 
VENTANA assay, this test result can be used for the determinat ion of eligibilit y.  The 
specified expressio n cut -off level o f ≥25% in the tumor cells will be used for the purpose 
of stratificat ion and the refore included in the stratified log rank tests for OS and PFS.  
HPV status will be assessed according to local standards or by  the p16 IHC assay .  
Emerging data fro m 2ndline SCCHN studies suggests that PD -L1 expressio n on tum or 
tumor-infiltrat ing immun e, as well as tum or cells, may be associated with greater clinical 
benefit with PD -1/PD -L1 inhibitors compared to tumor cell expression alo ne (Chow et al  
2016, Ferris et al 2017).  The D4193C00001 and D4193C00003 studies were used to 
ident ify a subgroup of patients that may be more likely to benefit from MEDI4736 +/ -
tremelimumab treatm ent.  Based on this data, the pre -specified PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup used in this study  is defined as those p atients whose tumors express PD -L1 on 
≥50% of tum or cells OR ≥25% of tumor -associ ated immune cells (TC ≥50 or IC≥25) as 
assessed by  the VENTANA  PD -L1 (SP263) Assay .  
Patients will  be randomized in a 2:1:1 manner to either the MEDI4736 +tremelimumab 
combi nation arm , the MEDI4736 m onotherapy  arm, or the SoC arm .  Pati ents randomized 
to the MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion arm will receive tremelimumab 75 mg 
intravenous (IV) q4w for 4 doses and MEDI4736 1500 mg IV q4w until PD, those in the 
MEDI4736 monot herapy arm will receive MEDI4736 1500 mg IV q4w monotherapy unt il 
PD, while patients in the SoC arm will receive up to six 3- week cy cles consist ing of a 
platinum [cisplat in 100 mg/m2or carboplat in area under the curve (AUC) of 5 mg/mL/min 
IV] V] on  1, 5F U 1000 mg/m2/day on Days 1 through 4, and weekly  cetuximab.
Cetuximab will be administered at 400 mg/m2on Day  1 of Cycle 1, and then 250 mg/m2
weekly for up to six 3 -week cy cles and 250 m g/m2IV weekly for maintenance unt il
progression, init iation of alt ernat ive cancer therapy, unacceptable toxicit y, wi thdrawal of
consent, or another discont inuat ion criterion is met (see Secti on3.9).
Patients in all arms with confirmed PD by RECIST 1.1 who, in the Invest igator’s opinio n, 
continue to receive benefit from their assigned treatment and who meet the criteria for 
treatm ent in the setting of PD may cont inue to receive their assigned treatment (see 
Secti on7.2.3 ).  Since the pheno menon of pseudoprogression in patients tr eated with 
immunotherapy  is well  documented and the limitations of RECIST 1.1 in ident ifying those 
who are achieving clinical benefit wit h immunotherapies are known, patients enrolled in 
the IMT arm s will be permitted to continue therapy even in the presen ce of PD as per 
RECIST 1.1 (Weber et al2012).  However, patients in the immunotherapy  arms will not 
be permitted to continue immunotherapy  if progres sion occurs after obj ective response 
(defined by RECIST 1.1) to immunotherapy  treatment in the target lesio ns.  Pati ents in the 
65(199)
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
66(199)SoC arm may  continue therapy  in the setting of PD if they  remain clinically stable, meet 
criteria for treatm ent in the setting o f PD, and continue to receive some clinical benefit in 
the Invest igator’s opinio n.  
Patients in all arms with a symptomatic solitary lesio n, a brain lesio n, or a l esion of  clinical 
importance (eg, impending fracture, etc) may be treated with radiat ion after approval  from 
the Sponsor.  Non -irradiated l esions need to con tinue to be m easurable by  RECIST 1.1.  
The time interval between the last sy stemic treatm ent and radiat ion shoul d be 10 days, and 
systemic treatment can be resumed 1 week post radiat ion.
Patients who have discont inued therapy due to disease progression will enter follow -up 
until death (see Table 4).  Pati ents who have discont inued treat ment due to toxi city will be 
followed up until confirmed disease progression and for survival (see Table 4).
Tumor assessments will be performed on im ages from  com puted tom ography  (CT) or 
magnet ic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, preferably wit h IV contrast, at the times 
specified in Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4.  RECIST 1.1 assessments using th e invest igator 
assessments will be used to derive the secondary  variables o f PFS, ORR, DoR, and 
proporti on of  patients alive and progression free at 6 and 12 months (APF6 and APF12).  
 
 See Section 5.1and Appendix Efor further inform ation 
regarding RECIST 1.1 tumor assessments in this study .
This study  will enroll approximately 1016 patients with PD- L1-positive and -negative 
disease at si tes gl obally  to ob tain 760 patients who are likely  to be evaluable for the 
prim ary endpoint.  
Figure 1 Overall study design
OSOverall survival; PD -L1Programmed cell death ligand 1; PS Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
performance status; SCCHN Squamous cell cancer of the head and neck; SoC Standard of Care.
Target  Population
Patients with R/M 
SCCHN 
No prior systemic therapy  for R/M 
disease except if 
given as part of 
multimodality treatment for locally advanced  or locally 
recurrent d isease
 PS 0 to 1
Excludes 
nasopharyngeal 
cancer 
Excludes prior 
immunotherapy 
N = 760 patients
Primary
endpoint: 
OS
Randomization 
stratified for:
 PD-L1 Status
 Tumor location
 Smoking history
MEDI4736 + Tremelimumab
N=380
Cetuximab + Platinum*
+5-Fluorouracil
(SoC -EXTREME)
N=190
  MEDI4736 monotherapy
N=190
* Platinum: carboplatin or cisplatin
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
67(199)Figure 2 Study flow chart -treatment periods
aInformed consent of study procedures and tumor sample acquisition may be obtained prior to the 
28-day  screening window, if necessary, in order to permit tumor sample acquisition and analysis prior 
to randomization.  
bDisease progression requires confirmation for patients receiving IMT.  Disease progression in patients 
in the SoC arm should be confirmed if clinically feasible (see Section 5.1for more information).
cPatients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy arm who are eligible for retreatment 
will be treated according to Figure 3.
IMT Immunomodu latory  therapy; PD Progressive disease; RECIST 1.1 Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors version 1.1.

Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
68(199)Figure 3 Study flow chart –optional retreatment for MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab arm
aWith o r without confirmation.
bBefore restarting MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy, the Investigator should ensure that 
the patient does not have any significant, unacceptable, or irreversible toxicities that indicate that 
continuing treatment will not further benefit the pati ent, and that the patient still meets all of the 
inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria for this study including re -consenting to restart 
treatment.  To restart study treatment, the patient must not have received an intervening cancer therap y 
post study treatment discontinuation.  Patients should have a baseline tumor assessment within 28 days prior to restarting study treatment; all further scans should occur q8w until PD (relative to the date of restarting study treatment).
cPK, ADA, and M DSC assessments do not need to be collected during retreatment.
ADA Anti- drug antibody; MDSC Myleoid -derived suppressor cell; PK Pharmacokinetics; q8w Every 8 
weeks; RECIST 1.1 Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1.
2.STUDY OBJECTIVES
2.1 Prim ary objective
Primary Objectives: Outcome Measure:
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 
monotherapy compared to SoC in terms of OS OS in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup
OSOverall survival; SoC Standard of Care.

Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimum ab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
69(199)2.2 Secondary objectives
Secondary Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To further assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 
monotherapy compared to SoC (EXTREME) 
in terms of OS, PFS, ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, 
TFST, TSST, APF6, APF12, PFS2, OS12, 
OS18 and OS24 OS in low risk of early mortality (EM) subgroup, 
ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -
comers
OS12, OS18, OS24 in the PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers
PFS, ORR, APF6 and APF12 using site investigator 
assessments according to RECI ST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, 
ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -
comers 
DoR, BoR and TTR, using site investigator 
assessments according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
PFS2 using local standard clinical practice in the PD-
L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
TFST and TSST in thePD- L1 TC/IC high subgroup 
and all -comers
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab combination therapy compared to SoC (EXTREME) in terms of OS, PFS, 
ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST, TSST, APF6, 
APF12, PFS2, OS12, OS18 and OS24OS,OS12, OS18, OS24 in the PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all comers
PFS, ORR, APF6 and APF12 in the PD -L1 TC/IC 
high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA 
TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -comers 
using site investigator assessments according to 
RECIST 1.1
DoR, BoR and TTR, using site investigator assessments according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subg roup and all -comers
PFS2 using local standard clinical practice in the PD -
L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
TFST and TSST in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup 
and all -comers
To assess the efficacy of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy compared 
to MEDI4736 monotherapy in terms of PFS, 
ORR, and OS PFS and ORR using site investigator assessments 
according to RECIST 1.1 in the PD-L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB
high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb) and all -comers 
OS in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of 
EM subgroup , ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 
mut/Mb) and all -comers
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
70(199)Secondary Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To assess disease -related symptoms and 
health -related quality of life in patients treated 
with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination 
therapy and MEDI4736 monot herapy 
compared to SoC (EXTREME) using the 
European Organisation for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 30- item Cor e 
Quality of Life Questionnaire ( QLQ -C30) 
version 3 and the 35- item Head and Neck 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ -H&N35) 
moduleEORT C QLQ -C30: global health QoL, functioning 
(physical) and symptoms (fatigue) in the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers 
EORTC QLQ -H&N35: symptoms (pain, swallowing) 
in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
Changes in World Health Organization/E astern 
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status in 
the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup all -comers
To assess the PK of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab combination therapy and 
MEDI4736 monotherapyConcentration of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab in 
blood and PK parameters, such as peak concentration and trough (as data allow; sparse sampling) 
To investigate the immunogenicity of 
MEDI4736 and tremelimumabPresence of ADAs for MEDI4736 and tremelimumab
ADA Anti- drug antibody; APF6 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 6 months; 
APF12 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 12 months; BoR Best objective response; 
ctDNA Circulating tumor DNA; DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid; DoR Durat ion of response; ECOG Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group; EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer; 
HRQoL Health -related quality of life; IC tumor -associated immune cells; ORR Objective response rate; 
OSOverall survival; OS12 Proportion of patients alive at 12 months after randomization; OS18 Proportion 
of patients alive at 18 months after randomization; OS24 Proportion of patients alive at 24 months after 
randomization; PD -L1Programmed cell death ligand 1; PFS Progression -free su rvival; PFS2 Second 
progression; PK Pharmacokinetics; QLQ -C30 v3 30-item core quality of life questionnaire, version 3; QLQ -
H&N35 35-item head and neck quality of life questionnaire; QoL Quality  of life; RECIST 1.1 Response 
Evaluatio n Criteria in Solid Tum ors version 1.1; SCCHN Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck; 
SoC Standard of Care; TC tumor cells; TFST Time to first subsequent therapy; TMB Tumor mutation 
burden (The ctDNA TMB cutpoint of 16mut/Mb for MEDI4736+tremelimumab and MEDI4736 
monothera py was derived from the EAGLE study ( Li et al 2020 )Li W, Wildsmith S, Ye J, Si H, Morsli N, 
He P et al. Plasma -based tumor mutational burden (bTMB) as predictor for survival in phase III EAGLE 
study:  Durvalumab (D) +/ -tremelimumab (T) versus chemotherapy (CT) in recurrent/metastatic head and 
neck squamous cell carcinoma (R/M HNSCC) after platinum failure. J Clin Oncol 2020;38:15_suppl, 6511 -
6511. )).; TTR Time to response; TSST Time to second subsequent therapy; WHO World Health 
Organization.
2.3 Safety objective
Safety Objective: Outcome Measures:
To assess the safety and tolerability profile of MEDI4736 +tremelimumab combination 
therapy and MEDI4736 monotherapy 
compared to SoC in the first -line setting for 
treatment of SCCHNAEs, physical examinations, laboratory findings 
(including clinical chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis), vital signs (including BP and pulse), and 
ECGs in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of 
EM subgroup and all -comers
AEAdverse event; BP Blood pressure; ECG Electrocardiogram; IC tumor -associated immune cells;
SoC Standard of Care; TC tumor cells.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
71(199)2.4 Exploratory objectives
3.PATIENT SELECTION, E NROLLMENT, 
RANDOMIZATION, RESTR ICTIONS, 
DISCONTINUATION, AND WITHDRAWAL 
Each patient should meet all o f the inclusio n criteria (Secti on3.1) and none of the 
exclusio n criteria (Secti on3.2) for this study .  Under no circumst ances will there be 
exceptions to this rule.
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
72(199)3.1 Inclusion criteria
For inclusio n in the study , pati ents shoul d fulfill  the f ollowing cri teria:
SoC procedures obtained prior to informed consent for other purposes may  be used for 
screening if the pat ient/legal representati ve consents to allow use o f these procedures for 
screening purposes.
Patients m ust meet all of the fo llowing cri teria:
1. Age ≥18 years at the time of screening
2. Written inform ed consent and any  locally requi red authori zation (eg, Health 
Insurance Portabilit y and Accountabilit y Act in the United States, European Union 
[EU] Data Privacy Directive in the EU) obtained from the patient/legal representative 
prior to performing any  protocol -related procedures, including screening evaluat ions.  
(For pati ents aged <20 y ears and enrolling in Japan, a written informed consent 
shoul d be obtained from the patient and his or her legally acceptable representative.)
3. Histologically or cy tologically  confirmed recurrent or m etastati c SCCHN (oral  
cavit y, oropharynx, hy popharynx, or l arynx) not amenable to local curat ive therapy 
with surgery  or radi ation therapy .
4. No pri or sy stemic therapy  for recurrent/metastatic disease. Systemic therapy  given 
as part of mult imodalit y treatm ent for locally advanced or locally recurrent disease is 
allowed.
5. Able and willing to give valid written consent to provide newly acquired tumor tissue 
(preferred) or archival tissue (<3 y ears ol d) for the purpose of establishing PD -L1 
status.  Tumor lesio ns used for newly acquired bio psies should not be the same 
lesions used as RECIST 1.1 target lesio ns, unless there are no other lesio ns sui table 
for biopsy.
6. For pati ents wi th OPC only: known HPV status prior to randomization.
7. Confirmed PD -L1–posi tive or –negative SCCHN by the VENTANA SP263 IHC 
assay 
On newly acquired tumor tissue (preferred) or archival t issue (<3 years ol d)
If the patient’s PD -L1 status has already been assessed using the analyt ically 
validated VENTANA assay as a part of the screening process for another 
AstraZeneca/MedImmune stud y, this test result can be used for the determination 
of eligibilit y.  
Note: A posi tive PD -L1 sample is measured using a defined cut -off based on 
≥25% of tum or cells wit h membrane staining of any  intensity for PD -L1.  A 
negat ive PD -L1 sample is determined by 0% to 24% of tumor cells wit h 
membrane staining for PD -L1.
8. World Heal th Organizat ion (WHO)/ECOG performance status of 0 or 1 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 202 0
73(199)9. At least 1 lesio n, not previously irradiated, that can be accurately measured at 
baseline as ≥10mm in the longest diameter (e xcept lymph nodes, which must have a 
short axis ≥15mm) with CT or MRI and that is suitable for accurate repeated 
measurements as per RECIST 1.1 guidelines.  Lesions in a previously irradiated field 
can be used as measurable disease provided that there has been demo nstrated 
progression in the lesio n and the l esion measures at least 20 mm.
10. Patients m ust have no prior exposure to immune- mediated therapy , including 
anti-CTLA -4, ant i-PD-1, anti –PD-L1, or anti –programmed cell death ligand 2 
antibodies, excluding therapeuti c ant icancer vaccines.  Exposure to other 
investigat ional agents may be permitted after discussio n with the Sponsor.
11. Adequate organ and marrow funct ion independent of transfusio n for at least 7 day s 
prior to screening and independent of growth f actor support for at least 14 day s prior 
to screening, defined as fo llows:
Hem oglobin ≥9 g/dL
Absolute neutrophil count ≥1500/mm3(1.5 × 109/L)
Platelet coun t ≥100000/mm3(100 × 109/L)
Serum  bilirubin ≤1.5 ×the upper limit of normal (ULN).  This will not apply to 
patients wi th confirmed Gilbert’s syndrome (persistent or recurrent 
hyperbilirubinemia [predominant ly unconjugated bilirubin] in the absence o f 
evidence of hemo lysis or hepatic pathology ), who will  be allowed in consul tation 
with their physician.
ALT and AST ≤2.5 ×ULN; for patients with hepatic metastases, ALT and AST 
≤5×ULN
Calculated creatinine clearance >40 mL/min as determined by Cockcroft -Gaul t 
(using actual body  weight) (creatinine clearance of 60 mL/min is needed if 
cisplatin is used)
Males:
Creatinine Clearance = Weight (kg) × (140 –Age)
(mL/min) 72 × serum creatinine (mg/dL)
Fema les:
Creatinine Clearance = Weight (kg) × (140 –Age) × 0.85
(mL/min) 72 × serum creatinine (mg/dL)
12. Evidence of post -menopausal status or negat ive urinary or serum pregnancy test for 
female pre -menopausal pat ients.  Wom en will  be consi dered post -menopausal if they 
have been amenorrheic for 12 months without an alternat ive medical cause.  The 
following age -specific requirements apply: 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Criteria for retreatment in the MEDI4736 +tremelimumab arm
Patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  arm are eligible to 
receive retreatment with the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbination therapy provided 
progression occurred in the monotherapy  porti on of dosing and the patient meets all the 
criteria specified above for trea tment bey ond confirm ed progression.  Patients who 
discontinue treatm ent in 1 treatm ent arm  may not switch to treatm ent in a different group.
Addit ional details pertaining to retreatment are presented in Sect ion7.2.  Addit ional details 
pertaining to restrict ions are presented in Section 3.8.
74(199)Women ≥50 years of age would be considered post -menopausal if they have been
amenorrheic for 12 m onths or more fo llowing cessati on of  exogenous hormonal
treatm ents or if they  have l uteinizing horm one and fo llicle -stimulat ing hormone
levels in the post -menopausal range for the institutio n.
Women <50 years of age would be considered post- menopausal if they have been
amenorrheic for 12 m onths or more fo llowing cessati on of  all exogenous
horm onal treatm ents and if they  have luteinizing hormone and
follicle -stimulat ing horm one levels in the post -menopausal range for the
institution, or had radiation -induced oophorectomy with last menses >1 year ago,
or had chemotherapy- induced menopause wit h >1 year interval since last menses,
or underwent surgical sterilization (bilat eral oophorectomy  or hysterectomy ).
Criteria for continuation of treatment in the setting of progressive disease
For all patients who are treated through progression at the Invest igator’s discretion, the 
Invest igator should ensure that patients still meet all of the inclusio n criteria and none of 
the exclusio n criteria for this study , and that pati ents m eet the following specific criteria 
for treatm ent in the setting of PD:
1. Written inform ed consent to conti nue treatm ent or retreatm ent in the setting o f PD.
This consent document will specify that treatment beyo nd init ial evidence o f PD is
not the “standard- of-care” and that alternative treatment options, either locally
licensed treatments or other clinical trials, are available for this patient populat ion.
2. A bsence of clinical symptoms or signs indicat ing clinically significant disease
progression
3. No decline in WHO/ECOG performance status to >1
4. Absence of rapid disease progression or threat to vital organs or crit ical anatomical
sites (eg, central  nervous sy stem metastasi s, respi ratory  failure due to tumor
compressi on, or spinal cord compressio n) requi ring urgent alternative medical
intervent ion
The IP shoul d be discont inued if there is confirmed PD while receiving treatment
following a previous response (CR o r PR) to the IP in the target lesio ns (ie, the
response and progression events both occurred in the target lesions while receiving
the IP during the treatment period).
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
75(199)3.2 Exclusion criteria
Patients shoul d not enter the study  if any of the fo llowing exclusio n criteria are fulfilled:
1. Histologically or cy tologically  confirmed head and neck cancer of any  other primary  
anatomic locat ion in the head and neck not specified in the i nclusio n criteria 
including patients with SCCHN o f unknown primary  or non -squamous histo logies 
(eg,nasopharynx or salivary gland)
2. Tumor progressi on or recurrence within 6 months of last dose of plat inum therapy 
given as part of mult imodalit y treatm ent forlocally advanced or locally recurrent 
disease.
3. Receipt of any  radiotherapy  or horm onal therapy for cancer treatment within 30 days 
prior to fi rst dose of study  treatm ent.
4. Receipt of last dose of an approved (marketed) anticancer therapy  (chemotherapy , 
targeted therapy , biologic therapy , mAbs, etc) wi thin 21 days prior to the first dose of 
study  treatm ent.  If sufficient washout time has not occurred due to the schedule or 
PK properti es of an agent, a l onger washout period will be required, as agreed upo n 
by AstraZeneca and the Invest igator.
5. Receipt of any  investi gational ant icancer therapy  within 28 days or 5 half -lives, 
whichever i s longer, pri or to the first dose of study treatment.
6. Major surgi cal procedure (as defined by  the Invest igator) within 28 da ys prior to the 
first dose of IP.  Note: Local surgery  of isolated lesions for palliat ive intent is 
acceptable.
7. Any unreso lved toxicit y Nat ional Cancer Inst itute (NCI) Commo n Termino logy 
Criteria for Adverse Event (CTCAE) Grade ≥2 from previous ant icancer therapy  
with the excepti on of  alopecia, vi tiligo, lymphopenia, and the laboratory  values 
defined in the inclusio n criterion
Patients wi th Grade ≥2 neuropathy  will be evaluated on a case -by-case basis and 
may be included after consultation wit h the Study  Physician.  
Patients wi th a toxi city not reasonably expected to be exacerbated by  treatm ent 
with their assi gned IP (eg, hearing loss, gastrostomy  tube) m ay be included after 
consultation wit h the Study  Physician.
8. Current or prior use of immunosuppressive me dicati on wi thin 14 days before the first 
dose of their assigned IP.  The fo llowing are exceptions to this criterion unless 
otherwi se indicated:
Intranasal, inhaled, topical steroids, or local steroid injections (eg, intra-articular 
inject ion)
Systemic cort icosteroi ds at physio logic doses not to exceed 10 mg/day of 
prednisone or its equivalent
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
76(199)Steroi ds as pre -medication for hypersensi tivity reacti ons (eg, CT scan 
pre-medicat ion) and/or as anti -emet ics for the SoC arm
9. History  of allogeneic organ transplantati on
10. Active or prior documented autoimmune or inflammatory disorders (including 
inflammatory  bowel  disease [eg, colit is, Crohn’s disease], divert iculitis wit h the 
exception of a prior episode that has resolved or divert iculosis, celiac disease, or 
other seri ous gastroi ntestinal chronic condit ions associated with diarrhea; systemic 
lupus ery thematosus; Wegener syndro me [granulo matosis with po lyangiit is]; 
myasthenia gravis; Graves’ disease; rheumatoid arthrit is, hypophysit is, uveit is, etc) 
within the past 3 years pri or to the start of treatment.  The following are exceptions to 
this criterion:
Patients wi th vitiligo or al opecia
Patients wi th hypothy roidism  (eg, f ollowing Hashimoto syndrome) stable on 
horm one repl acement or psoriasis not requiring systemic treatm ent 
11. Uncontrolled intercurrent illness, including, but not limited to ongoing or active 
infect ion, symptomat ic congest ive heart failure, uncontrolled hypertension, unstable 
angina pectoris, cardiac arrhyt hmia, interstit ial lung disease, or psychiatric illness or 
social situations that woul d limi t com pliance wi th study  requi rements, substant ially 
increase the risk of incurring AEs fro m IP, or compromise the abilit y of the pati ent to 
give written informed consent
12. History  of another primary  malignancy  within the last 5 y ears except for the 
following:
Non-invasive malignancies, such as cervical carcinoma in situ or non-
melano matous carcino ma of the skin that has been surgically cured.  Other in situ 
carcino mas that have been adequately  treated m ay be permitt ed after detailed 
discussio n with the Sponsor.
13. Patients wi th a history  of brain metastases, spinal cord compressio n, or 
leptom eningeal carcino matosis, or involvement of any other anatomic area that, in 
the opi nion of the Invest igator, may cause significant symptom s if an inflammatory  
reacti on occurs
14. Mean QT interval corrected for heart rate ≥470 ms calculated fro m 
3electrocardi ograms (ECGs) using Fridericia’s Correction 
15. History  of active primary immunodeficiency 
16. Active tuberculosis
17. Active infection including hepati tis B, hepat itis C, or human immunodeficiency  virus 
(HIV)
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
77(199)18. Receipt of live, attenuated vaccine within 30 days prior to the first dose of IP.
Note: Patients, if enro lled, should not receive live vaccine during the study and up to
30 day s after th e last dose of IP.
19. Female pat ients of childbearing potential who are pregnant or breast- feeding or who
are not willing to emplo y a highly effective m ethod of bi rth control  from screening to
90 day s after the last dose of MEDI4736 m onotherapy  or 180 days af ter the l ast dose
of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion therapy  and non -sterilized male patients
who are sexually  active wi th a female partner of childbearing  potential who are not
willing to emplo y male condo m plus spermicide from screening to 90 days a fter the
last dose of MEDI4736 monotherapy  or 180 days after the l ast dose of MEDI4736 +
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy .  For pati ents rando mized to receive SoC
treatm ent, f ollow the local prescribing information relat ing to contraception, the time
limit for such precautions, and any addit ional restricti ons for agents in the SoC
treatm ent regimen.
20. Known allergy  or hy persensi tivity to IP or any  IP excipient
21. Any condit ion that, in the opinio n of the Invest igator, would interfere with evaluat ion
of the IP or interpretation of pat ient safet y or study resul ts
22. For pati ents randomized to the SoC arm, any  contraindicat ion to a specific SoC agent
as specified by the acco mpanying package insert or Summary o f Product
Characteristics
23. Patient wei ght of <30 kg
24. Involveme nt in the planning and/or conduct of the study (applies to both
AstraZeneca/MedImmune staff and/or staff at the study  site)
Procedures for withdrawal of incorrectly  enrolled pati ents are presented in Sect ion 3.4.
3.3 Patient enrollment and randomization
Invest igators should keep a record (ie, the patient screening log) of patients who entered 
screening (including assessment of PD -L1).  
At screening (Day s -28 to -1), the Invest igators or suitably trained delegate will:
1. Obtain signed informed consent before any study -specific procedures are performed.
(Informed consent of study  procedures m ay be obtained prior to the 28- day screening
window in order to pe rmit tumor sample acquisit ion, which must be analyzed prior to
rando mizat ion.)
2. Obtain a unique 7 -digit enrollment number (E -code) through the Interactive Voice
Response Sy stem  (IVRS)/Interacti ve Web Response Sy stem  (IWRS) in the following
format (ECCNNXXX: CCbeing the country  code, NN being the center number, and
XXX being the patient enrollment code at the center).  This number is the patient’s
unique identifier and is used to ident ify the pat ient on the electronic case report forms
(eCRFs).
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimu mab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
78(199)3. For any  patient who does not have obvious exclusion parameters, obtain tumor
sample and send for PD -L1 expressio n status evaluation.  (Obtaining the tumor
sample should be given the highest priorit y and, as such, the sample may  be obtained
and sent for PD -L1 expressio nstatus eval uation prior to the 28 -day screening
window in order to permit analysis prior to randomizat ion.)  The PD -L1 result must
be available prior to randomization.
4. Determine patient eligibilit y (see Sect ions 3.1and 3.2).  Define HPV status if the
location of the tumor is oropharyngeal (oropharynx).  HPV results can be collected
from histori cal medical  records of any  age.  HPV status will be assessed using l ocal
standards or using the p16 IHC assay .  If status i s unknown and/or unavailable
locally, archival or newly  acqui red ti ssue specimen must be submitted for testing at a
reference laboratory .  See Laboratory  Manual for detailed instructions in lieu of a
separate tum or sam ple.
At randomizat ion, once the patient is confirmed to be eligible, the Invest igator or suitably 
trained delegate will:
1. Define the SoC (cetuximab, a plat inum [ carboplatin or cisplatin ], and 5FU)
treatm ent (based on the most appropriate option for the patient) that the patient
woul d receive if rando mized to SOC therapy .  Thi s must be com pleted for all
patients.  The informat ion will be recorded in the IVRS/IWRS.
2. Record the patient’s P D-L1 status, tumor location (OPC or non -OPC), and smoking
history  (>10 vs ≤10 pack- years [1 pack- year = 1 pack of 20 cigarettes per day for 1
year or equivalent]) as stratification factors in the IVRS.  Include the HPV status
(posi tive or negative) if the tumor is OPC.
3. Obtain a unique rando mizat ion number via the IVRS/IWRS.  Numbers will start at
001 and will be assigned strict ly sequent ially by IVRS/IWRS as pat ients are eligible
for entry  into the study .  The system  will rando mize the eligible pat ient to 1 of the
3treatm ent arms.  (PD -L1 status results must be received fro m the central  laboratory
by the IVRS/IWRS prior to randomizat ion.)
If the patient is ineligible and not randomized, the IVRS/IWRS should be contacted to 
terminate the patient in the syste m.  
Every  effort shoul d be made to minimize the time between rando mizat ion and starting 
study  drug.  Study  drug m ust be administered within 5 working days of rando mizat ion 
(although i t is recommended that patients commence study  drug on the same day  as 
randomizat ion in the IVRS/IWRS if feasible).
Patients will  begin treatment on Day  1.  Pati ents must not be treated unless all eligibilit y 
criteria have been met.
If a patient discontinues participat ion in the study , then his or her enrollment or patient 
identification number cannot be reused.  Withdrawn patients will not be replaced.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
79(199)3.4 Procedures for handling incorrectly enrolled patients
Patients who fail to meet the eligibilit y criteria shoul d not, under any  circumstances, be 
enrolled or receive study  medicat ion.  There can be no except ions to this rule.  Patients 
who are enrolled but found not to meet all the eligibilit y criteria m ust not be randomized or 
initiated on treatment and must be withdrawn fro m the study as a screen failure.
Where a patient does not meet all the eligibilit y criteri a but i s rando mized in error or 
incorrectly  started on treatm ent, the Invest igator should inform the AstraZeneca Study 
Physician immediately , and a discussion shoul d occur between the AstraZeneca Study  
Physician and the Inv estigator regarding whether to continue or discont inue the patient 
from treatment.  The AstraZeneca Study  Physician m ust ensure all decisio ns are 
appropriately  docum ented.
3.5 Methods for assigning treatment arms
Patients m ust not be randomized unless all elig ibility  criteria have been m et.
At baseline, patients who satisfy all the entry  criteria will be centrally assigned to study  
drug by  the IVRS/IWRS, according to the randomization scheme generated by  the 
Biostati stics Group, AstraZeneca, or delegate.  
Patients enrolled in the study  will be randomized (2:1:1) to treatment with MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 monotherapy , or SoC (cetuximab, a 
platinum [carboplat in or cisplat in based on Invest igator’s choice], and 5FU).  Patients will 
be stratified by  PD-L1 status (posit ive or negative, based on the analyt ically validated 
VENTANA /MedImmune assay), tumor location (OPC or non -OPC), and smoking history  
(>10 vs ≤10 pack- years).  Pati ents wi th OPC will be further stratified by HPV status.
The a ctual  treatm ent given to patients will be determined by the rando mizat ion scheme in 
the IVRS/IWRS.  The rando mizat ion scheme will be produced by  a com puter software 
program that incorporates a standard procedure for generating rando mizat ion numbers.  
One randomizat ion list will be produced for each of the randomization strata.  A blocked 
rando mizat ion will be generated, and all centers will use the same list in order to minimize 
any imba lance in the number of patients assigned to each treatment arm.
Patients will be ident ified to the Centralized Randomizat ion Center per country  
regul ations.  Rando mizat ion codes will be assigned strictly sequentially, within each 
stratum , as pati ents beco me eligible for randomizatio n.  
If a patient discontinues participat ionin the study , then his/her enrollment/randomization 
code cannot be reused.  
3.6 Methods for ensuring blinding (not applicable)
Not applicable; this study  is not blinded.
3.7 Methods for unblinding (not applicable)
Not applicable; this study  is not blinded.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
80(199)3.8 Restr ictions
The fo llowing restri ctions apply while the patient is receiving study  treatm ent and for the 
specified t imes before and after:
1. Females of childbearing potential who are sexually active with a nonsterilized male
partner m ust use at least 1 highly  effect ive method of contraception (see Table 1)
from screening and must agree to continue using such precaut ions for 90 days after
the last dose of MEDI4736 monotherapy  or 180 days after the last dose of
MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy; cessat ion of birth control after this
point shoul d be discussed wit h a responsible physician.  Not engaging in sexual
activit y is an acceptable practice; however, occasional abst inence, the rhyt hm
method, and the withdrawal method are not acceptable methods of contraception.
Female pat ients should refrain fro m breast feeding and egg cell donat ion throughout
this peri od.  It i s strongly  recommended for the m ale partner of a female pat ient to
also use a male condo m plus spermicide throughout this peri od.
Females of childbearing potential are defined as those who are not surgically
sterile (ie, bilateral tubal ligat ion, bilateral oophorectomy, or complete
hysterectomy) or post -menopausal (defined as 12 mo nths wit h no menses without
an alternative med ical cause).
Highly effect ive methods of contraception are described in Table 1.A highly
effect ive method of contraception is defined as one that results in a low failure
rate (i e, less than 1% per y ear) when used consistent ly and correctly.
2. Nonsterilized male patients who are sexually act ive with a female partner of
childbearing potential must use male condom and spermicide fro m screening and for
90 day s after the last dose of MEDI4736 m onotherapy  or 180 days after the last dose
of MEDI4736 +tremelimumab combinat ion therapy .  Not engaging in sexual
activit y is an acceptable practice; however, occasional abst inence, the rhyt hm
method, and the withdrawal method are not acceptable methods of contraception.
Male patients should refrain fro m sperm  donat ion throughout the study  period and
through 180 days after the l ast dose of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion
therapy .  It is strongly recommended for the female partner of a male patient to also
use an effective method of contraception throughout this period.
3. SoC therapy : Follow the l ocal prescribing informatio n relating to contraception, the
time limit for such precautions, and any  addi tional restri ctions for agents in the SoC
treatm ent regimen.
4. Patients should not donate bl ood while participating in this study  and f or 3 m onths
following the last dose of study  treatm ent.
Restrictions relat ing to concomitant medicat ions are described in Sect ion 7.7.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
81(199)Table 1 Highly Effectiveamethods of contraception
Barrier/Intrauterine Methods Hormonal Methods
•Copper T intrauterine device
•Levonorgesterel -releasing intrauterine system 
(eg, Mirena®)b•Etonogestrel implants: eg, Implanon or Norplan
•Intravaginal device: eg, ethinylestradiol and 
etonogestrel
•Medroxy progesterone injection: eg, Depo -Provera
•Normal and low dose combined oral contra ceptive 
pill
•Norelgestromin/ethinylestradiol  transdermal 
system
•Cerazette (desogestrel)
aHighly  effective (ie, failure rate of <1% per year) 
bThis is also considered a hormonal method
3.9 Discontinuation of investigational product
An individual pat ient will not receive any further IP (MEDI4736 +tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or SoC [cetuximab, a plat inum, and 5FU]) 
if any of the fo llowing occur in the patient in questio n:
 Withdrawal o f consent fro m further treatment with IP.
 An AE th at, in the opinion o f the Invest igator or the Sponsor, contraindicates further 
dosing
 Any AE that meets criteria for discontinuation as defined in Sect ion 6
 Pregnancy or intent to beco me pregnant
 Non-compliance that, i n the opinio n of the Invest igator or Sponsor, warrants 
discontinuat ion of study  treatm ent (eg, refusal to adhere to scheduled visits)
 Initiation of  alternative anticancer therapy  including another invest igational agent 
unless specified in the protocol
 Confirmed PD and Invest igator determinat ion that the patient is no longer benefit ing 
from treatment wi th MEDI4736 + trem elimumab c ombinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 
monotherapy , or SoC
 Inabilit y to reduce corticosteroid to a dose of ≤10 mg of predniso ne per day  (or 
equivalent) within 12 weeks after last dose of study drug/regimen due to a 
treatm ent-related toxicit y
 Treatment interval o f ≥8weeks of MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbination therapy 
or MEDI4736 monotherapy  due to non -compliance.
3.9.1 Procedures for discontinuation of a patient from investigational 
product 
At any time, pati ents are free to discontinue the IP without prejudice to further treatment.  
A pat ient who decides to discont inue the IP will always be asked about the reason(s) for 
discontinuat ion and the presence of any  AEs.  If possible, they  will be seen and assessed 
by an Invest igator.  AEs will be fo llowed up (see Section 6).  The AstraZeneca Study  
Patients are free to withdraw from the study  at any time (IP and assessments) without 
prejudice to further treatment.
Patients who wi thdraw consent fo r further parti cipati on in the study  will not receive any  
further IP or further study  observat ion, wi th the excepti on of  follow-up for survival, which 
will cont inue unt il the end of the study unless the patient has expressly wit hdrawn his or 
her consent to survival fo llow-up.  Note that the patient may be offered addit ional tests or 
tapering of treatment to withdraw safely.
A pat ient who wi thdraws consent will always be asked about the reason(s) for withdrawal 
and the presence of any AE.  The Invest igator w ill follow up AEs outside of the clinical 
study .  The pati ent will return ePRO devices, if applicable.  
If a patient withdraws fro m participat ion in the study , then his or her randomizat ion or 
patient identificat ion number cannot be reused.  Wit hdrawn pat ients will not be replaced.
Patients will  be considered lost to follow -up only if no contact has been established by the 
time the study  is completed (see Section 3.11), such that there is insufficient information to 
determine the patient’s status at that time.  Patients who refuse to continue participation in 
the study , including telephone contact, should be documented as “wit hdrawal of consent” 
rathe r than “lost to follow -up.”  Investigators should document attempts to re- establish 
82(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Physician should be notified of any  ongoing AE that m ay delay treatm ent or necessitate 
perm anent discont inuat ion of treatment.
Patients who are perm anent ly discont inued from further receipt of IP, regardless of the 
reason, will be ident ified as having permanent ly discontinued treatment.  Patients who are 
perm anent ly discont inued fro m IP will enter fo llow-up and be asked to come i n for every  
protocol -specified visit and fo llow all protocol  procedures ,including imaging and 
electroni c pat ient-reported outcome (ePRO) quest ionnaires (see Table 4).  All pat ients will 
be followed up for survival until the end of the study .  Details of any  treatm ent for SCCHN 
(including surgery or radiat ion) after the last dose of study  treatm ent m ust be recorded in 
the eCRF, including the ident ity of subsequent anticancer therapies.  Patients who decline 
to return to the site for evaluat ions should be contacted by  telephone every 3 m onths as an 
alternat ive.  
Patients who are perm anent ly discont inued from receipt of IP should also be discont inued 
in the IVRS/IWRS.
3.10 Criteria for withdrawal of the patient from the study
3.10.1 Screen failures 
Screening failures are patients who do not fulfill the eligibilit y criteria for the study , and 
therefore m ust not be enrolled and rando mized.  These patients should have th e reason for 
study  withdrawal  recorded as “eligibilit y criteria not fulfilled” (i e, pati ent does not m eet 
the required inclusio n/exclusion criteria).  This reason for study  withdrawal  is only  valid 
for screen failures (ie, not randomized pat ients).  Patien ts can be re -screened a single t ime, 
but they  cannot be re -randomized.
3.10.2 Withdrawal of the informed consent
83(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
contact wi th missing patients throughout the study  period.  If contact with a missing 
patient is re -established, the patient should not be considered lost to follow -up and any 
evaluat ions shoul d resum e according to the protocol.
3.10.3 Survival status for withdrawn consent and lost to follow up patients
Patients will  be considered lost to follow -up only if no contact has been established by the 
time the study  is completed (see Section 9.3), such that there is insufficient information to 
determine the patient’s status at that time.  Patients who refuse to continue particip ation in 
the study , including telephone contact, should be documented as “wit hdrawal of consent” 
rather than “lost to follow -up.”  Investigators should document attempts to re- establish 
contact wi th missing patients throughout the study  period.  If contact with a missing 
patient is re -established, the patient should not be considered lost to follow -up and 
evaluat ions shoul d resum e according to the protocol.
In order to support the primary endpo int of OS, the survival status of all pat ients in the full 
analy sis and the safet y analysis sets should be re -checked, this includes those patients who 
withdrew consent or are classified as “lost to follo w up.”    
 Lost to Follow up – site personnel should check hospital records, the patients’ current
physician, and a publicly  available death regi stry (if available) to obtain a current
survival status. (The applicable CRF modules will be updated.)
 In the event that the patient has actively wit hdrawn consent to the processing o f their
personal data, the survival status of the patient can be obtained by site personnel
from publicly  available death registries (if available) where it is possible to do s o
under applicable local laws to obtain a current survival status. (The applicable CRF
modules will  be updated.)
3.11 Discontinuation of the study
The study  may be stopped if, in the judgment of the AstraZeneca, study  patients are placed 
at undue risk becaus e of clinically  significant findings that meet any  of the f ollowing 
criteria:
 Meet individual stopping criteria or are otherwise considered significant
 Are assessed as causally related to study  drug
 Are not considered to be consistent with cont inuat ion of the study
In addit ion, the study  may be stopped based on the findings of the interim safet y analysis 
conducted by  the Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) (see Section 6.8).
Regardless of the reason for terminat ion, all data available for the patients at the time of 
discontinuat ion or follow- up m ust be recorded in the eCRFs.  All reasons for 
discontinuat ion of treatm ent m ust be docum ented
In terminat ing the study, AstraZeneca will ensure that adequate considerat ion is given to 
the protection of the patients’ interests.  If this study is discont inued, all other studies 
involving MEDI4736 or tremelimumab will remain open to enrollment and screen ing, if 
deem ed appropri ate by AstraZeneca.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
84(199)4.STUDY PLAN AND TIMING OF PROCEDURES
The procedures for the screening and treatment periods in this study  for the 
MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  and MEDI4736 m onotherapy  arms are 
presented in Table 2, for the SoC group i s presented in Table 3, an d the procedures for the 
follow-up period are presented in Table 4.
Imaging and standard procedures performed before signing the informed consent form
(ICF) may  be used for screening purposes if the patient consents to the use of those results 
for screening purposes.  Screening procedures must be performed wit hin 28 days of 
rando mizat ion.  Rando mizat ion must occur within 28 day s of screening procedures and 
study  drug dosing must occur within 5 working days of randomizat ion.  Baseline 
procedures required for Cy cle 1, Day  1 need not be repeated if they  were perform ed wi thin 
3 day s prior to Cy cle 1, Day  1.
All visits shoul d be conducted based on the schedul es provi ded in Table 2through Table 4
below, unless otherwise indicated. 
 For pati ents on the immunotherapy  arms, if dosing m ust be del ayed due to a
treatm ent-related toxicit y, the toxi city management gui delines shoul d be fo llowed (as
referenced in Sect ion 6.7.2).  If dosing must be delayed for reasons other than
treatm ent-related toxicit y, dosing shoul d occur as soon as clinically  feasible.
 For pati ents on the standard of care arm, dosing may  be delayed for treatment -related
toxicity and subsequent ly resumed per the local standard clinical pract ice.  If dosing
must be delayed for reasons other than treatment -related toxicit y, dosing shoul d
occur as soon as clinically  feasible.
Tumor efficacy  (RECIST) assessments dates are not af fected by  dose delays and rem ain as 
originally scheduled, as they  are based on the date of rando mizat ion (not the date of 
treatm ent).  All other scheduled assessments must be performed relat ive to the day  of 
dosing (even if dosing is delayed); all laborato ry procedures requi red for dosing should be 
perform ed wi thin 3days pri or to dosing.
Following the OS analysis, patients still on randomized study  treatm ent will  cont inue to be 
supplied wit h study  medicat ion and will be managed at the discret ion of the Invest igator 
until discontinuation criteria are met.  The study database will be closed at this po int and 
only serious adverse event (SAEs) will be reported.
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
85(199)Table 2 Schedule of asses sments for the MEDI4736 +tremelimumab combination or MEDI4736 monotherapy 
arms and optional retreatment period for MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination arm 
Screening C1aC2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 until PD
Week
-4 to -1 0 4 8 12 16 20 2428, 32, 36, 40, 44 (+4-wk 
intervals)
Day
-28 to -1 1 29 57 85 113 141 169197, 225, 253, 281, 309 
(+28 -day intervals)
Window (days)* NA NA ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Informed consent Xb
Study procedures
Physical examination (full) X
Medical history, past and current X
Targeted physical examination (based on symptoms) X X X X X X X X
Vital signscX X X X X X X X X
ECGdX As clinically indicated
Concomitant medications <--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
->
Demography, including baseline characteristics and 
tobacco useX
HPV for oropharyngeal tumors onlyeXb
Eligibility criteria X
Pharmacokineticsf
MEDI4736 PK sample (serum) XhXgXg,hXg
Tremelimumab PK sample (serum; combination 
therapy  arm only)XhXgXg,h
Laboratory assessments
Clinical chemistry X XiX X X X X X X
Hematology X XiX X X X X X X
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
86(199)Screening C1aC2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 until PD
Week
-4 to -1 0 4 8 12 16 20 2428, 32, 36, 40, 44 (+4-wk 
intervals)
Day
-28 to -1 1 29 57 85 113 141 169197, 225, 253, 281, 309 
(+28 -day intervals)
Window (days)* NA NA ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
TSH (and reflex free T 3or free T 4)jX XiX X X X X X X
Urinalysis X As clinically indicated
Hepatitis B surface antigen, Hepatitis C antibody, and 
HIVX
Pregnancy testkX X X X X X X X X
WHO/ECOG performance status X X X X X X X X X
AE/SAE assessment <--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
->
Drug accountability X X X X X X X X
IP administration
Monotherapy arm
MEDI4736l X X X X X X X X
Combination therapy arm
MEDI4736 (combination therapy)l,m X X X X X X X X
Tremelimumabl,mX X X X
Patient -reported outcome assessmentsn,f
EORTC QLQ -C30, X X q8w (±3 days) relative to the date of Cycle 1 Day 1
EORTC QLQ -H&N35, X X q4w (±3 days) relative to the date of Cycle 1 Day 1
Other laboratory assessments and assays
Immunogenicity assessment (ADA sampling 
[including ADA neutralizing antibodies] to identify 
ADA responses in patient circulation) for MEDI4736 
and tremelimumabfX X X
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 an d Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
87(199)Screening C1aC2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 until PD
Week
-4 to -1 0 4 8 12 16 20 2428, 32, 36, 40, 44 (+4-wk 
intervals)
Day
-28 to -1 1 29 57 85 113 141 169197, 225, 253, 281, 309 
(+28 -day intervals)
Window (days)* NA NA ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Tumor biopsy or obtain archival tumor tissue <3 years 
old for PD -L1 statuspXb
Tumor evaluation (CT or MRI) (RECIST 1.1)q,rX First on -treatment scan at 6 weeks (+1 week) and then q6w (±1 week) for the first 
24 weeks relative to the date of randomization and then q8w (±1 week) thereafter
Health economics outcomes
*Window for visits is relative to day of dosing, even if dosing is delayed, unless otherwise specified.
aCycle 1 Day  1 procedures do not need to be repeated if the same procedures were performed for screening purposes 3 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1.
bInformed consent of study procedures and tumor sample acquisi tion may be obtained prior to the 28 -day screening window, if necessary, in order to permit tumor sample 
acquisition and analysis prior to randomization.  PD -L1 testing will be done from a newly acquired tumor biopsy (preferred) or archival tissue (<3 years old).  SoC 
procedures obtained prior to informed consent for other purposes may be used for screening if the patient/legal representativ e consents to allow use of these procedures 
for screening purposes.
cBody weight is recorded along with vital signs. See Section 5.2.4 of the CSP for specific guidelines for measuring vital signs.
dAny clinically significant abnormality detected requires a confir matory ECG.
eHPV status testing may be performed for oropharyngeal tumors only.  Local testing is acceptable and preferred.  If HPV status is unknown or unavailable locally, a newly 
acquired or archived tumor sample must be submitted for central testing a t a reference laboratory as described in the Laboratory Manual.
fFor patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy arm:  ADA samples collected at cycle 7 will be for MEDI4736 o nly.   For patients in the MEDI4736 
+ tremelimumab combination therapy group who go on to retreatment, the same assessments should be done as in the first treatment period with the excepti on of the PK 
and ADA assessments, which do not need to be collected for retreatment.  All PRO questionnaires and health resource us e should be completed q8w during retreatment.
gPre-dose (within 60 minutes prior to start of infusion).  For patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy arm:  p re-dose samples for both MEDI4736 
and tremelimumab can be taken within 60 minut es prior to the start of the tremelimumab infusion. 
hWithin 10 minutes of the end of infusion.
iIf screening assessments are performed within 3 days prior to Day 1 (first infusion day), they do not need to be repeated at Day 1.
jFree T 3or free T 4will only be measured if TSH is abnormal or if there is clinical suspicion of an AE related to the endocrine system.
kFor women of childbearing potential only.  A pregnancy test must be performed within 7 days before Cycle 1 Day 1.  A urine or serum preg nancy test is acceptable.
lResults for electrolytes, full blood count, and liver function tests must be available before commencing an infusion (within 3 days).
mDuring the combination portion of treatment, tremelimumab will be administered first; the ME DI4736 infusion will start approximately 1 hour (maximum 2 hours) after 
the end of the tremelimumab infusion.  If there are no clinically significant infusion reactions with the first cycle, then f or all other cycles, MEDI4736 can be given 
immediately afte r the tremelimumab infusion has finished.
nPatients will complete PROs using handheld devices at home.
o
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
88(199)pMEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy only: The collection of tumor biopsies at the time of progression prior to retreatment is mandated; the Investigator must 
consult with the Study Physician if such sampling is not feasible.
qRECIST 1.1 assessments will be performed using images from CT/MRI scans, preferably with IV contrast, of the neck (from base of skull) through the chest and 
abdomen (includes liver and adrenals).  Additional anatomy should be imaged based on signs and symptoms of individual patient s at baseline and follow -up.  Baseline 
assessments should be performed no more than 28 days before the date of randomization and, ideally, should be performed as cl ose as possible to the start of study 
treatment.  The scans for confirmation of progression should be performed preferably at the n ext scheduled visit and no less than 4 weeks after the initial assessment of 
PD (in the absence of clinically significant deterioration).  If an unscheduled assessment was performed and the patient has not progressed, every attempt should be made 
to perfor m the subsequent assessments at their next scheduled visit.  However, assessments do not need to be repeated if performed wit hin 2 weeks of a scheduled scan.  
Patients with clinical evidence of progression who do not meet PD criteria by RECIST 1.1 should h ave radiographic documentation of PD.
rPatients with confirmed PD in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy or MEDI4736 monotherapy arms who continue to re ceive clinical benefit may 
continue therapy at the discretion of the Investigator (followin g consultation with AstraZeneca) until a criterion in Section 3.9is met.  Patients will have scans done at 6 
weeks post randomization and then eve ry 6weeks up to and including 24 weeks and then every 8 weeks thereafter.  For retreatment patients in the MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab combination therapy arm, scans will be performed q8w post -initiation of therapy until PD.
s 
t          
Note: All assessments on treatm ent days are to be performed prior to infusion, unless otherwise indicated.
ADA Anti-drug antibody; AE Adverse event; C Cycle; CSP Clinical study protocol; CT Computed tomography;  
ctDNA Circulating tumo r DNA; ECG Electrocardiogram; ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer;  HIV Human immunodeficiency virus;  HPV Human 
papilloma virus; IP Investigational product; IV Intravenous; MDSC Myleoid- derived suppressor cell; miRNA micro RNA; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; 
mRNA Messenger RNA; NA Not applicable; PBMC Peripheral blood mononuclear cell; P CRPolymerase chain reaction; PD Progressive disease; PD-L1Programmed cell 
death ligand 1;  PKPharmacokinetics;  q4w Every 4 weeks; q6w Every 6 weeks; q8w Every 8 
weeks; QLQ -C30 30-Item core quality of life questionnaire; QLQ -H&N35 35-Item head and neck quality of life questionnaire; RECIST 1.1 Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors version 1.1; SAE Serious adverse event; SoC Standard of Care; TSH Thyroid -stimulating hormone; T 3Triiodothyronine; T 4Thyroxine; WHO World Health 
Organization.
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
89(199)Table 3 Schedule of assessments for the Standard of Care treatment period
Screening C1aC2 C3 C4 C5 C6 Cycles 7 until PDb
Week -4 to -1 0 3 6 9 12 15 q4w
Day -28 to -1 1 22 43 64 85 106
Window (days)* NA NA ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Informed consent Xc
Study procedures
Physical exam (full) X
Medical history, past and current X
Targeted physical exam (based on 
symptoms)X X X X X X q4w
Vital signsdX X X X X X X q4w
ECGeX As clinically indicated
Concomitant medications <----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- >
Demography, including baseline 
characteristics and tobacco useX
HPV for oropharyngeal tumors 
onlyfXc
Eligibility criteria X
Clinical chemistryg,hX X X X X X X q4w
Hematologyg,hX X X X X X X q4w
TSH (and reflex free T 3or free 
T4)jX XiWeek 24
Urinalysis X
Hepatitis B and C and HIV X
Pregnancy testkX As clinically indicated
WHO/ECOG performance status X X X X X X X q4w
AE/SAE assessment <----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- >
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
90(199)Screening C1aC2 C3 C4 C5 C6 Cycles 7 until PDb
Week -4 to -1 0 3 6 9 12 15 q4w
Day -28 to -1 1 22 43 64 85 106
Window (days)* NA NA ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
SoC administration
Cetuximabl,m400 mg/m2IV on Day 1 of Cycle 1, then 
250mg/m2IV weeklyMaintenance administration of 250 mg/m2IV weekly
5FUl1000 mg/m2/day IV on Day s 1 through 4 for 
up to six 3 -week cycles
Carboplatin or cisplatinl,nDay 1 of up to six 3 -week cycles
Patient -reported outcome assessmentso
EORTC QLQ -C30, X X q8w (±3 days) relative to the date of Cycle 1 Day 1
EORTC QLQ -H&N35, X X q4w (±3 days) relative to the date of Cycle 1 Day 1
Other laboratory assessments and assays
Tumor biopsy or obtain archival 
tumor tissue <3 years old for 
PD-L1 status Xc
Tumor evaluation (CT or MRI) 
(RECIST 1.1)qX First on -treatment scan at 6 weeks (+1 week) and then q6w (±1 week) for the first 24 weeks relative to the date of 
randomization and then q8w (±1 week) thereafter
*Window for visits is relative to day of dosing, even if dosing is delayed, unless otherwise specified.
aCycle 1 Day  1 procedures do not need to be repeated if the same procedures were performed for screening purposes 3 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1.
bPatient visits will change from q3w to q4w after completion of chemotherapy.
cInformed consent of study procedures and tumor sample acquisition may be obtained p rior to the 28 -day screening window, if necessary, in order to permit tumor sample 
acquisition and analysis prior to randomization.  PD -L1 testing will be done from a newly acquired tumor biopsy (preferred) or archival tissue (<3 years old).  
dPre-dose a nd as clinically indicated before every infusion or administration.
eAny clinically significant abnormality detected requires a confirmatory ECG.
fHPV status testing may be performed for oropharyngeal tumors only.  Local testing is acceptable and preferr ed.  If HPV status is unknown or unavailable locally, a newly 
acquired or archived tumor sample must be submitted for central testing at a reference laboratory as described in the Laborat ory Manual.
gTo be collected q3w prior to the start of infusion and as clinically indicated.  Electrolytes should be monitored with cetuximab therapy as per institution guidelines.
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
91(199)hIf screening assessments are performed within 3 days prior to Day 1 (first infusion day), they do not need to be repeated at Day 1.
iIf the patient does not complete treatment through Cycle 5, TSH should be obtained after the patient’s last cycle.
jFree T 3or free T 4will only be measured if TSH is abnormal or if there is clinical suspicion of an AE related to the endocrine system.
kFor women of childbearing potential only.  A pregnancy test must be performed within 7 days before Cycle 1 Day 1.  A urine or ser um pregnancy test is acceptable.
lPatients will receive a maximum of six 3- week cycles of cetuximab, 5FU, and carboplatin or cispl atin.  Cetuximab will be administered on Cycle 1 Day 1 at 400 mg/m2
and then weekly at 250 mg/m2.  5FU will be administered on Day 1 through 4 and carboplatin or cisplatin will be administered on Day 1 of each 3 -week cycle.  Patients 
with SD or better at t he end of chemotherapy will then receive weekly cetuximab administration until PD, initiation of alternative cancer therapy, unacceptable toxicity, 
withdrawal of consent, or another discontinuation criterion is met.
mPatients with SD at the end of these 6 cycles of chemotherapy should continue to receive cetuximab 250 mg/m2weekly until PD, initiation of alternative cancer therapy, 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or another discontinuation criterion is met.
nPatients will receive cisplatin 1 00 mg/m2IV on Day 1 or carboplatin AUC of 5 mg/mL/min IV on Day 1 of up to six 3 -week cycles.
oPatients will complete PROs using handheld devices at home.
p
qRECIST 1.1 assessments will be performed using images from CT/MRI scans, preferably with IV contrast, of the neck (from base of skull) through the chest and 
abdomen (includes liver and adrenals).  Additional anatomy should be imaged based on signs and symptoms of individual patients at baseline and follow -up.  Baseline 
assessments should be performed no more than 28 days before the date of randomization and, ideally, should be performed as cl ose as possible to the start of study 
treatment.  The sca ns for confirmation of progression should be performed preferably at the next scheduled visit and no less than 4 weeks after the initial assessment of 
PD (in the absence of clinically significant deterioration).  If an unscheduled assessment was performed and the patient has not progressed, every attempt should be made 
to perform the subsequent assessments at their next scheduled visit.  However, assessments do not need to be repeated if perf ormed within 2 weeks of a scheduled scan.  
Patients with clinical evidence of progression who do not meet PD criteria by RECIST 1.1 should have radiographic documentation of PD.
r 
s        
Note: All assessments on treatment days are to be performed prior to infusion or administration, unless otherwise indicated.
5FU 5-Fluorouracil; AEAdverse event; AUC Area under the curve; C Cycle; CT Computed tomography;  
ctDNA Circulating tumor DNA; ECG Electrocardiogram; ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer;  HIV Human immunodeficiency virus;  HPV Human 
papilloma virus; IV Intravenous; MDSC Myeloid- derived suppressor cells; mi RNA micro RNA; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; mRNA Messenger RNA; NA Not 
applicable; PBMC Peripheral blood mononuclear cell; PCR Polymerase chain reaction; PD Progressive disease;  
 q3wEvery 3 weeks; q4w Every 4 weeks; q6w Every 6 weeks; q8w Every 8 weeks; QLQ -C30 30-Item core quality of life questionnaire; QLQ -
H&N35 35-Item head and neck quality of life questionnaire; RECIST 1.1 Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1. 1; SAE Serious adverse event; SD Stable 
disease; SoC Standard of Care; TSH Thyroid -stimulating hormone; T 3Triiodothyronine; T 4Thyroxine; WHO World Health Organization.
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
92(199)Table 4 Schedule of assessments for patients who have disconti nued treatment with MEDI4736 +tremelimumab 
combination therapy, MEDI4736 monotherapy, or Standard of Care therapy
Time since last dose of IP
EvaluationDay (±3) Months (±1 week) 12 months (±2 weeks)
30 2 3 6 9
Physical examination (full) X
Vital signs (temperature, respiratory 
rate, BP, and pulse)X
Weight X
Pregnancy testaX As clinically indicated
AE/SAE assessment X X X
Concomitant medications X X X
WHO/ECOG performance status At timepoints consistent with tumor assessments; at 30, 60, and 90 days following time since the last dose of IP; and then at initiation 
of subsequent anticancer therapyb
Subsequent anticancer therapycand 
second progression assessmentd<---------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- >
Survival statusdX X X X (every 3 months)
Hematology X X X
Clinical chemistry X X X
TSH (and reflex free T 3or free T 4)eX
PK assessment for MEDI4736f
(MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy arms only)X
PK assessment for tremelimumabf
(MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combination therapy arm only)X
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
93(199)Time since last dose of IP
EvaluationDay (±3) Months (±1 week) 12 months (±2 weeks)
30 2 3 6 9
Immunogenicity assessment (ADA 
sampling [including ADA neutralizing 
antibodies] to identify ADA responses 
in patient circulation) for MEDI4736 
and tremelimumabf
(MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy arms only)X
If patients are not eligible for retreatment, all questionnaires and health resource use should be completed at Day 30, Month 2, and 
Month 3 from the date of confirmed PD and then stopped.
For patients in any group who discontinue their assigned IP for reasons other than disease progression (for example, due to 
toxicity or symptomatic deterioration) , all questionnaires should be completed relative to the date of treatment on Cycle 1 Day1 
as follows: q8w until confirmed PD.EORTC QLQ -C30g
EORTC QLQ -H&N35g
Tumor assessment (CT or MRI) q6w (±1 week) for the first 24 weeks relative to the date of randomization and then q8w (±1 week) thereafter until confirmed disease 
progression
aFor women of childbearing potential only.  A urine or serum pregnancy test is acceptable.
bWHO/ECOG performance status should also be collected at other site visits that the patient attends, if appropriate site staff are available to collect such 
information.  In addition, WHO/ECOG performance status should be provided when information on subsequent anticancer therapy is provided, where 
possible.
cDetails of any treatment for SCCHN (including surgery) post the last dose of study treatment must be recorded in the eCRF.
dPatients may be contacted in the week following data cut -offs to confirm survival status.  Details of any treatment for SCCHN (including surgery) post 
the last dose of study treatment must be recorded in the eCRF.  Patients who discontinue treatment due to PD will be checked for survival status ever y 
3months.  All patients will be followed for survival until the end of the study.  Patients who decline to return to the site f or evaluations should be 
contacted by telephone ever y 3 months as an alternative.  Scans conducted on patients with confi rmed PD in any treatment arm should be conducted 
according to local practice and are optional.
eFree T 3or free T 4will only be measured if TSH is abnormal or if there is clinical suspicion of an AE related to the endocrine system.
fFor patients with dis ease control (CR, PR, or SD) only.
gPatients will complete PROs using handheld devices at home.
h
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Proto col
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
94(199)i 
ADA Anti- drug antibody; AE Adverse event; BP Blood pressure; CT Computed tomography;  
ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; eCRF Electronic case report form; EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer; 
 IPInvestigational product; MRI Magnetic 
resonance imaging; PD Progressive disease;  q8w Every 8 weeks; QLQ -C30 30-
Item core quality of life questionnaire; QLQ -H&N35 35-Item head and neck quality of life questionnaire; SAE Serious adverse event; SCCHN Squamous 
cell carcinoma of the head and neck; TSH Thyroid-stimulating hormone; T 3Triiodothyronine; T 4Thyroxine; WHO World Health Organization.
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
A Web Based Data Capture (WBDC) system will be used for data collection and query 
handling.  The Invest igator will ensure that data are recorded on the eCRFs as specif ied in 
this study  protocol  and in accordance wit h the instructions provided.
The Investigator ensures the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the data recorded 
and the provisio n of answers to data queries according to the clinical study  agreement 
(CSA).  The Investigator will sign the completed eCRFs.  A copy  of the com pleted eCRFs 
will be archived at the study  site.
95(199)4.1 Enrollment/screening period
All screening and enro llment procedures will be performed according to the assessment 
schedule in Table 2and Table 3.  
Written inform ed consent and any  locally requi red privacy  act docum ent authori zation 
must be obtained prior to performing any  protocol -specific procedures, including 
screening/baseline eva luations.  All pat ients will be required to provide consent to supply a 
sample of their tumor (archival or recent ly obtained biopsy) for entry into this study.  This 
consent is included in the main pat ient inform ed consent form  (ICF).
All screening/baseline procedures m ust be performed within 28 days before the first dose 
of treatm ent (Days - 28 to -1).  Screening/baseline evaluat ions m ay be performed over 
more than 1 visit.  SoC procedures performed for other purposes prior to informed consent 
suitable for use as screening evaluations need not be repeated if the patient/legal 
representative consents to allow use of these procedures for screening purposes.  Informed 
consents of study  procedures and tum or sam ple acqui sition may be obtained pri or to the 
28-day screening window in order to permit tumor sample acquisit ion; results of PD -L1
testing must be available prior to randomizat ion.
4.2 Treatment period
All procedures to be conducted during the treatment period will be performed according to the assessment schedule (see Table 2and Table 3).  
Whenever vi tal signs, ECGs, and blood draws are scheduled for the same nominal t ime, 
the assessments should occur in the fo llowing order: ECG, vital signs, and then blood 
draws.  The timing of the assessments should be such that it allows the blood draw (eg, PK 
blood sample) to occur at the exact nominal t ime.
4.3 Follow -up period
All procedures to be conducted will be performed according to the assessment schedule (see Table 4).  
Whenever vital signs, ECGs, and blood draws are scheduled for the same no minal t ime, 
the assessments should occur in the fo llowing order: ECG, vital signs, and then blood 
draws.  The timing of the assessments should be such that it allows th e blood draw (eg, PK 
blood sam ple) to occur at the exact nominal t ime.
5.STUDY ASSESSMENTS
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 a nd Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
96(199)5.1 Efficacy assessments
RECIST 1.1 criteria will be used to assess pat ient response to treatment by  determining 
PFS, ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, AP F6 and APF12 using Invest igator assessments (as well as 
BICR assessments for sensit ivity analysis of PFS).  The RECIST 1.1 guidelines for 
measurable, non -measurable, target, and non -target lesio ns and the object ive tumor 
response criteria (CR, PR, SD, or P D) are presented in Appendix E .  Second progression 
(PFS2) will be defined by  local standard clinical practice.  OS, OS12, OS18 and OS24 will 
also be evaluated.
The m ethods of assessment of tumor burden used at baseline are CT and MRI scans, 
preferably wit h IV contrast, of the neck (including the base o f skull) through chest and 
abdo men (includes liver and adrenals).  Any other areas of disease invo lvement should be 
additionally  imaged based on the si gns and symptoms of indi vidual  patients.
The baseline assessment should be performed no more than 28 days before randomization 
of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or SoC, 
and ideally  as cl ose as possible to the start of the IP.  Efficacy  for all  patients will be 
assessed by  objective tum or assessments every 6 weeks (q6w) (±1 week) for the first 24 
weeks and then every 8weeks (q8w) (±1 week) thereafter, relat ive to the date of 
rando mizat ion (see Table 2and Table 3), until treatm ent discont inuat ion due to 
progression or toxicit y.  If an unscheduled assessment is performed, and the patient has not 
progressed, every  attem pt shoul d be m ade to perform  the subsequent assessments at their 
scheduled visits.  Unscheduled scans do not need to be repeated if performed wit hin 2 
weeks of a scheduled scan.  
For pati ents who discont inue therapy due to toxicit y in the absence of progression, 
objective tumor assessments should be continued q6w for the first 24 weeks (relat ive to the 
date of rando mizat ion) then q8w unt il confirmed clinical disease progres sion.  
Disease progressi on for pati ents in the IMT treatment arms should be confirmed according 
to RECIST 1.1; timepo int assessments showing PD should be confirmed preferably at the 
next scheduled imaging visit and no earlier than 4 weeks after the preced ing assessment of 
PD in the absence of clinically significant deterioration.  Disease progression in pat ients in 
the SoC arm should be confirmed by a scan obtained no earlier than 4 weeks after the 
initial assessment of PD and preferably at the next schedu led imaging visit, if clinically 
feasible.  Treatment in all arms will cont inue between the assessment of progression and 
its confirmat ion.  Patients with rapid tumor progressio n or with symptomat ic progression 
that requires urgent medical intervention (eg ,central  nervous system metastasis, 
respi ratory  failure due to tumor compressio n, or spinal cord compression) will not be 
eligible to continue to receive study  drug.
Radiographic progressi on woul d be considered confirmed if the fo llowing cri teria are m et:
≥20% increase in the sum diameters of target l esions compared with the nadir at
2consecutive scan timepo ints with an absol ute increase of 5 mm, and/or
Significant progression (worsening) of non -target lesi ons at the confirmatory  scan
timepo int compared w ith the first timepoint where progression of non -target l esions
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
In the absence of clinically  significant deteri oration, the Invest igator should cont inue study  
treatm ent until progressio n is confirmed.
If radiographic progression is not confirmed, then the pat ient shoul d continue on study  
treatm ent and on treatment assessments.
If a patient discontinues treatment (and/or receives a subsequent cancer therapy ) prior to 
progression, then the patient should st ill cont inue to be fo llowed unt il confirmed object ive 
disease progressi on.
Patients with clinical evidence o f progression who do not meet PD criteria by RECIST 1.1 
shoul d cont inue to be fo llowed unt il there is radiographic documentation of PD.
Patients in all arms with a symptomatic solitary lesio n, a brain lesio n, or a l esion of  clinical 
importance (eg, impending fracture, etc) may be treated with radiat ion after approval fro m 
the Sponsor.  Non -irradiated l esions need to con tinue to be m easurable by  RECIST 1.1.  
The time interval between the last sy stemic treatm ent and radiat ion shoul d be 10 days, and 
systemic treatment can be resumed 1 week post radiat ion.
Categorization of object ive tumor response assessment at each post -screening imaging 
timepo int will be based on the RECIST 1.1 criteria of response: CR, PR, SD, and PD.  
Target l esion progressi on will be calculated in comparison to when the tumor burden was 
at a minimum (ie, nadir; smallest sum of diameters previously  recorded on study ).  In the 
absence of progression, tumor response (CR or PR) and SD will be calculated in 
comparison to the baseline tumor measurements obtained before starting treatment.
If the Investigator is in doubt as to whether progression has occurred, particularly wit h 
response to non -target l esion or the appearance of a new lesio n, it is advisable to continue 
treatment until the next scheduled assessment or sooner if clinically indicated and reassess 
the pati ent’s status.  If repeat scans confirm progressio n, then the date of the init ial scan 
shoul d be declared as the date of progression.
To achieve “unequivocal progressi on” on the basis of non -target di sease, there must be an 
overall level o f substant ial worsening in non -target disease such that, even in presence of 
SD or PR in target disease, the overall tumor burden has increased sufficient ly to merit 
disconti nuation of therapy .  A m odest “increase” in the size of 1 or more non -target lesio ns 
is usually not sufficient to qualify for unequivocal progression status.
Following confirmed progression, patients should continue to be fo llowed up for survival 
every 3 m onths as outlined in the study plan (see Table 4).  Pati ents wi th confi rmed PD 
who discont inue MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 
monotherapy , or SoC shoul d have scans conducted according to local pract ice; the scans 
may also be submitted for centralized co llection and qualit y check (QC) and be held unt il 
the pati ent commences a new treatment (these scans are optional; see Table 4).
97(199)was i dentified (Note: new lesio ns ident ified at the previous scan t imepo int are 
considered non -target l esions at the confirmatory  scan t imepo int), and/or
Addit ional new unequivocal lesio ns at the confirmatory  scan timepo int.
Blood and urine samples for determinat ion of clinical chemistry , hematol ogy, and 
urinalysis will be taken at the times indicated in the assessment schedules (see Table 2, 
Table 3, and Table 4).
Clinical laboratory  safet y tests will be performed in a licensed clinical laboratory  
according to local standard procedures.  Hematology , clinical chemistry , and urinalysis 
tests will be performed by the hospi tal’s l ocal laboratory .  Uri ne pregnancy tests may be 
perform ed at the si te using a licensed test.  Sample tubes and sample sizes may vary  
depending on the laboratory  method used and routine practice at the site.  Clinically  
significant abnorm al laboratory  resul ts shoul d be repeated as soon as possible (preferably  
within 24 to 48 hours).
Addit ional safet y samples may  be collected if clinically indicated at the discret ion of the 
Invest igator.  The date, time of collection, and results (values, unit s, and reference ranges) 
will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF.
98(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
It is important to follow the assessment schedule as closely  as possible.  Pl ease refer to the 
study  plans ( Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4).
5.1.1 Central reading of scans
A BICR of radio logical scans will  be perform edfor a sensit ivity analysis for the PFS 
endpo int.  
This sensit ivity analysis will use all images, including unscheduled visit scans, collected 
prior to versi on 8 of the clinical study  protocol  (dated 13 Feb 2018), after which no further 
central  collect ionof the scans will be done.  All images, including unscheduled visit scans, 
will be co llected on an ongoing basis and qualit y checked and assessed centrally. 
Guidelines for image acquisit ion, anonymizat ion, submissio n to the imaging CRO, and 
local storage will be provided in a separate document.  The results of Invest igator 
assessments will not be communicated to the independent central reviewers, nor will the 
resul ts of independent reviews be co mmunicated to Invest igators, and the management of 
patients wi ll be based so lely upon the resul ts of the RECIST 1.1 assessment conducted by  
the Invest igator.
5.1.2 Survival assessments
Assessments for survival must be made every  3 months fo llowing treatm ent 
discontinuat ion and/or upon disease progression.  Survival informa tion may  be obtained 
via tel ephone contact with the patient, patient’s family , or by  contact wi th the pati ent’s 
current phy sician.  The details of first and subsequent therapies for cancer, after 
discontinuat ion of treatm ent, will be co llected.  
In addit ion, pati ents on treatm ent or in survival fo llow-up will be contacted fo llowing the 
data cut -off for the primary  analysis and all subsequent survival analyses to provide 
complete survival data.  These contacts should generally  occur wi thin 7 days of the dat a 
cut-off.
5.2 Safety assessments
5.2.1 Laboratory safety assessments
99(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
The l aboratory  variables to be measured are presented in Table 5(clinical chemistry ), 
Table 6(hematol ogy), and Table 7(urinalysis).  
Note: F or coagul ation parameters, activated partial thromboplast in time and international 
norm alized rati o are to be assessed at baseline and as clinically indicated.
Pregnanc y tests on either urine (human chorionic gonadotropin [hCG] ) or blood (serum  
β-hCG) samples will be performed for pre -menopausal wo men of childbearing potential at 
Screening and subsequent visits as specified in the assessment schedule (see Table 2, 
Table 3, and Table 4).  Tests will be performed by the hospital’s local laboratory  unless 
otherwi se specified.  If results are posit ive, the patient must not start or con tinue treatm ent.  
In the event o f a suspected pregnancy during the study , the test shoul d be repeated.
Other safet y tests to be performed at screening include assessment for hepatit is B surface 
antigen, hepatit is C ant ibodies, HIV ant ibodies, and thyro id-stimulat ing hormone (TSH).  
Free triiodothy ronine or free thy roxine will also be measured if the results of the TSH are 
abnorm al or if there i s clinical suspicio n of an AE rel ated to the endocrine system .
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
100(199)Table 5 Clinical chemistry (serum or plasma)
Albumin Glucose
Alkaline phosphataseaLactate dehydrogenase
ALTaLipase
Amylase Magnesiumb,c
ASTaPotassium
BicarbonatebSodium
Calcium Total bilirubina
ChloridebTotal protein
Creatinine clearancebUrea or blood urea nitrogen, depending on local practice
Creatinine
Gamma glutamyltransferaseb
aTests for ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin must be conducted and assessed 
concurrently.  If total bilirubin is ≥2 × upper limit of normal (and evidence of Gilbert’s syndrome) then 
fractionate into direct and indirect bilirubin.
bBicarbonate (w here available), chloride, creatinine clearance, gamma glutamyltransferase, and 
magnesium testing are to be performed at screening, on Day 1 (unless screening laboratory assessments 
are performed within 3 days prior to Day 1), and if clinically indicated.
cFor patients receiving cetuximab, magnesium monitoring and subsequent supplementation may occur more frequently as clinically indicated per site specific standards.
ALT Alanine aminotransferase; AST Aspartate aminotransferase
Table 6 Hematology
Eosinophils Neutrophils
Hematocrit Partial thromboplastin time
Hemoglobin Platelet count
International normalized ratio Red blood cell count
Lymphocy tes Total white cell count
Monocytes
Note: For coagulation parameters, activated partial thromboplastin time and international normalized ratio 
are to be assessed at baseline and as clinically indicated.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
101(199)Table 7 Urinalysisa
Bilirubin Ketones
Blood pH
Color and appearance Protein
Glucose Specific gravity
aUrinaly sis must be done at baseline and then as clinically indicated.
Note: Microscopy should be used as appropriate to investigate white blood cells and use the high power 
field for red blood cells.
If a patient shows an AST orALT ≥3×ULN together with total bilirubin ≥2×ULN, refer 
to Appendix D for further instructi ons.  These cases should be reported as SAEs if, after 
evaluat ion, they  meet the criteria for a H y’s Law case or if any  of the individual liver test 
param eters fulfill any of the SAE criteria.  All pat ients with an elevated AST, ALT, or 
bilirubin value (the latter at ≥1.5 × ULN) at the time of the last dose of study  treatm ent 
shoul d have a further liv er chemistry  profile (AST, ALT, bilirubin, and alkaline 
phosphatase) performed 30 days (±3 days) after permanent discont inuat ion of study  
treatm ent.
Any clinically  significant abnormal laboratory  values shoul d be repeated as clinically  
indicated and record ed on the eCRF.  Situations in which laboratory safet y resul ts shoul d 
be reported as AEs are described in Section 6.3.4 .
All patients with Grade 3 or 4 laboratory  values at the time o f completion or 
discontinuat ion from study  treatm ent m ust have further tests performed unt il the laboratory 
values have returned to Grade 1 or 2, unless these values are not likely to improve because 
of the underlying di sease.
5.2.2 Physical examination
Physical examinat ions will be performed according to the assessment schedules (see 
Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4) and will include clinically targeted assessments.  Hei ght 
will be measured at screening only.  Situations in which physical examinat ion results 
shoul d be reported as AEs are described in Sect ion 6.3.4.
5.2.3 Electrocardiograms
Resting 12 -lead ECGs will be recorded at screening and as clinically indicated throughout 
the study  (see Table 2and Table 3).  ECGs should be obtained after the patient has been in 
a supine posit ion for 5minutes and recorded while the patient remains in that positio n.  All 
ECGs m ust be obtained in triplicate.
At screening, a mean QT interval corrected for Fridericia’s formula (QTcF) will be 
calculated using 3 ECGs performed approximately 5 minutes apart.  The mean QTcF must 
be <470 ms for the patient to meet eligibil ity criteria.
In case of clinically  significant ECG abnorm alities, including a QTcF value >470 ms, 
2additional 12-lead ECGs should be obtained over a brief period (eg, 30 minutes) on the 
same day  or different day  to confi rm the finding.  
If the infusio n takes l onger than 60 minutes, then BP and pulse measurements should 
follow the principles as described above or be taken more frequent ly if clinically indicated.  
A 1-hour observat ion peri od is recommended after the first infusio n of MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab.  If no clinically significant infusio n reacti ons are observed during or after 
the first cy cle, subsequent infusio n observation periods can be at the Invest igato r’s 
discreti on (suggested 30 minutes after each MEDI4736 and tremelimumab infusio n).
Subsequent infusions of MEDI4736 or tremelimumab:
For subsequent infusions, BP, pulse, and other vital signs should be measured prior to the 
start of the infusio n.  Patients shoul d be carefully  monitored, and BP and other vital signs 
shoul d be measured during and after infusio n as per inst itution standard and as clinically 
indicated.  Any  clinically significant changes in vit al signs shoul d be entered into the 
unsched uled vital signs case report form (CRF).
Infusions of SoC
Patients in the SoC group will be monitored pre -dose and as clinically indicated per the 
institutional standard before and after every  administrati on.  
Situations in which vital signs results shoul d be reported as AEs are described in 
Secti on6.3.4 .  For any  AEs of  infusio n react ions, please enter the vital signs values into 
the CRF.
102(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Situations in wh ich ECG results should be reported as AEs are described in Sect ion 6.3.4 .
5.2.4 Vital signs
Vital signs (blood pressure [BP], pulse, temperature, and resp iration rate) will be evaluated 
according to the assessment schedules (see Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4).  Body  weight is 
also recorded along wit h vital signs.
First infusion of MEDI4736 or treme limumab:
On the first infusio n day , pati ents in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  
group and the MEDI4736 monotherapy  group will  be monitored pri or to, during, and after 
infusio n of IP as presented in the bulleted list belo w.
Supine BP will be measured after the patient has rested for at least 5 minutes.  BP and 
pulse will  be collected from  patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion 
therapy  group and the MEDI4736 monotherapy  group before, during, and after each 
infusio n of IP at the fo llowing times (based on a 60 -minute infusio n):
 Prior to the beginning of the infusion (measured once from approximately 30 minutes
before up to 0 minutes [ie, the beginning of the infusion])
 Approximately  30 minutes during the infusio n (halfway through infusio n)
 At the end of the infusio n (approximately 60 ±5 minutes)
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
PRO i s an umbre lla term  referring to all outcom es and symptom s that are di rectly reported 
by the patient.  PROs have beco me a significant endpoint when evaluat ing effectiveness of 
treatm ents in clinical trials.  The fo llowing PROs will be administered in this study : 
EORT C QLQ- C30 (core questionnaire), QLQ -H&N35 (head and neck- specific 
questionnaire),  
 see Appendix F ).
The PRO instruments will be co mpleted by  the patients at home using a handheld ePRO 
device.  All quest ionnaires should be completed according to the assessment schedules 
(see Table 2, Table 3and Table 4).  If  a pati ent does complete the questionnaires at a given 
visit, for example, at screening and at Cycle 1 Day 1, it is preferred that questionnaires be 
completed before any other study  procedures (l aboratory  tests or imaging) are conducted.  
However, if quest ionnaires cannot be administered prior to study  procedures for a given 
visit, all quest ionnaires must be completed prior to the patient receiving any results of 
laboratory  tests or imaging or m eeting with their study  nurse or physician.  
It takes approximately 30 to 45 minutes for patients to complete all quest ionnaires; 
therefore, the burden to the patient is moderate.  For patients receiving retreatment after 
confirmed PD (MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  only ), quest ionnaires
shoul d be com pleted according to the assessment schedule in Table 2.
5.3.1.1 EORTC QLQ -C30
The EORTC QLQ -C30 i s a 30 -item self-administered questi onnai re (se e Appendix F ).  
There are 9 mult iple item scales: 5 scales that assess aspects of funct ioning (physical, role, 
cogni tive, em otional, and soci al), 3 symptom  scales (fat igue, pain, and nausea and 
vomiting), and a global healt h status/QoL scale.  There are 5 single -item measures 
assessing addit ional symptoms commo nly reported by  cancer pati ents (dy spnea, l oss of 
appeti te, insomnia, const ipation, and diarrhea) and a single item concerning the perceived 
financial impact of the disease.  All but 2 questions have 4- point scales: “Not at all,” “A 
little,” “Quite a bit,” and “Very much.”  The 2 questions concerning glo bal health status 
and QoL have 7- point scales with ratings ranging from “Very  poor” to “Excellent.”  For 
each of the 15 do mains (9 multiple-item scales and 6 single item scales), final scores are 
103(199)5.2.5 Other sa fety assessments
Pregnancy tests on either urine (hCG) or blood (serum β- hCG) samples will be performed 
for pre -menopausal wo men of childbearing potential at the times specified in the 
assessment schedule (see Table 2).  Tests will be performed by the hospital’s local 
laboratory .  If resul ts are posi tive, the patient is ineligible and must be discont inued from 
the study .  In the event of a suspected preg nancy during the study , the test shoul d be 
repeated.
Other safet y tests to be performed at screening include assessment for hepatit is B surface 
antigen, hepatit is C ant ibodies, and HIV antibodies.
5.3 Other assessments
5.3.1 Patient -reported outcomes
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
transformed such that they  range fro m 0 to 100, where higher scores indicate greater 
funct ioning, greater QoL, or greater level o f symptom s (Aaronson et al 1993 ).
5.3.1.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35
The EORTC QLQ -H&N35 module is a 35 -item self-administered questionnaire (see 
Appendix F ).  There are 7 m ultiple item scales that assess pain in the mouth, problems 
with swall owing, senses, speech, social eat ing, social contact, and sexualit y.  There are 11 
single- item measures assessing addit ional symptoms commo nly reported by  head and neck 
cancer patients, including problems w ith teeth, problems wit h mouth opening, dry  mouth, 
sticky saliva, coughing, feeling ill, use of analgesics, use of nutrit ional supplements, use of 
a feeding tube, weight gain, and weight loss.  All but 5 questions have 4 -point scales: “Not 
at all,” “A litt le,” “Quite a bit,” and “Very much.”  The 5 questions concerning use of 
analgesics, use of nutrit ional supplements, use of a feeding tube, weight gain, and weight 
loss have 2 -point scales (“Yes” or “No”).  For each of the 18 domains (7 multip le-item 
scales and 11 single -item scales), final scores are transformed such that they  range from  0 
to 100, where higher scores indicate greater level of symptoms ( Singer et al 2013 ).
5.3.1.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.3.1.4
 
 
5.3.1.5
 
 
 
 
 
 
104(199)
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
105(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.3.2 Administration of the patient -reported outcome questionnaires
Patients will  com plete the PRO assessments by using a handheld ePRO device.
Each center must allocate the responsibilit y for the administration of the PRO devices to a 
specific individual (eg, a research nurse or study coordinator) and, if possible, assign a 
back-up person to cover if that individual is absent.  The PRO questionnaires must be 
completed per the schedule of assessments (see Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4).  Pati ents 
will be instructed to bring their handheld devices to every clinic visit.  In instances where 
the PRO assessments coincide with a clinic visit, the research nurse or study  coordinator 
shoul d verify that the questionnaire was co mpleted before the visit.  If not, the patient 
shoul d com plete the quest ionnaire prior to any  other study  procedures and before 
discussio n of disease progression to avoid biasing the pat ient’s responses to the questions.  
The fo llowing best practice guide lines should be followed when collecting PRO data via 
an electroni c device:
 The research nurse or appointed site staff must explain the value and relevance of
participat ion to pati ents and inform them that these questions are being asked in
order to find o ut from them  directly  how they  feel.  Thi s can help m otivate pati ents to
comply with data collect ion.  The research nurse or appointed site staff should also
stress that the informat ion is confident ial.  Therefore, if the patient has any medical
probl ems, he/she shoul d discuss them  with the doctor or research nurse separately
from the ePRO assessment.
 The research nurse or appointed site staff must train the patient on how to use the
ePRO device using the materials and training provided by the ePRO vendor, and also
provi de gui dance on whom  to call  if there are problems wit h the device.
 The research nurse or appointed site staff must remind patients that there are no right
or wrong answers and avo id int roducing bias by not clarifying items.  The patient
shoul d not receive help from relat ives, friends, or clinic staff to answer the PRO
questionnaires.
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
The presence of ADA will be assessed in serum samples taken according to the assessment 
schedules (see Table 2and Table 4).  
Samples will  be measured for the presence of ADAs and ADA -neutralizing ant ibodies for 
both IPs (MEDI4736 and tremelimumab) using validated assays.  Tiered analysis will be 
perform ed to include screening, confirmatory , and ti ter assay  com ponent s, and 
positive-negat ive cut points previously statist ically determined fro m drug-naïve validat ion 
samples will be emplo yed.  
106(199) The research nurse or appointed site staff must monitor compliance; minimizing
missing data is a key  aspect of study  success.  Compliance must be checked at eac h
study  visit and shoul d be checked m ore f requent ly to identify problems early.  If
compliance drops below 85%, a check- in call fro m the site to ask the patient if he/she
has any difficult ies is highly reco mmended.
5.3.3 WHO/ECOG performance status
WHO/ECOG perf ormance status will be assessed at the times specified in the assessment 
schedules (see Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4) based on the fo llowing:
0 = Fully  active; able to carry  out all  usual  activi ties wi thout restri ctions
1 = Restri cted in strenuous activit y but ambulatory and able to carry  out light work 
or work of a sedentary  nature, eg, light housework, office work
2 = Ambulatory  and capable of self- care but unable to carry  out any  work activit ies.  
Up and about more than 50% of waking hours
3 = Capable of only limited self -care; confined to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours
4 = Com pletely disabled; unable to carry  out any  self-care and totally  confined to bed 
or chair
Any signif icant changes fro m baseline or screening must be reported as an AE.
5.4 Pharmacokinetics
5.4.1 Collection of samples and determination of drug concentration
Blood sam ples f or determinat ion of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab concentration in serum 
will be obtained according to the assessment schedules (see Table 2and Table 4).  
Samples for determination of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab concentration in serum will 
be analyzed by  a designated thi rd party  onbehalf of AstraZeneca.  Samples will be 
collected, labeled, stored, and shipped as detailed in the Laboratory  Manua l.  Full details 
of the analy tical method used will be described in a separate Bioanalyt ical Validat ion 
Report.
5.4.2 Collection of samples to measure for the presence of anti- drug 
antibodies
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
107(199)5.4.3 Storage and destruction of pharmacokinetic/anti -drug antibody 
samples
PK and ADA samples will be disposed of a maximum of 10 y ears after the IPs are 
approved for market ing.
PK and ADA samples may  be disposed of or destroy ed and anonymized by pooling.  
Addit ional analyses m ay be conducted on the anonymized, pooled PK samples to further 
evaluate and validate the analyt ical method.  Re sults from such analyses may be reported 
separately  from the clinical  study  report (CSR).
Incurred sample reproducibilit y analysis, if any , will  be perform ed al ongside the 
bioanalysis o f the test sam ples.  The results from the evaluat ion will not be report ed in the 
CSR but separately in a Bioanalyt ical Validat ion Report.
 
 
5.5 Biomarker analysis
The patient’s consent to the use of donated bio logical  samples is m andatory .  Tissue 
samples will be obtained from all screened pat ients.
Pretreatment tumor PD -L1 expressio n will be evaluated in all rando mized patients.  Data 
will be co mpared between arms to determine if baseline PD -L1 status i s prognostic and/or 
predi ctive of outcomes associated with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  
or MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC.  Baseline tumor requirements ar e briefly 
described in Section 5.5.1 .
 
 
Details for collect ion, vo lumes, storage, and shipment of bio logic samples are presented in 
a separate Laboratory  Manual.
All samples co llected for bio marker analyses will be stored at the study  site, a reference 
laboratory ,or at AstraZeneca facilit ies and may  be used for subsequent research relevant 
to evaluat ing bio logical and/or clinical response to immunotherapy .
The results may be pooled with bio marker data from other MEDI4736 +tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  studi es to evaluate bi ological responses across indicat ions and to 
compare resul ts in m onotherapy  versus combination settings.
5.5.1 Collection of patient samples for stratification by PD -L1
At screening, there is a mandatory  provi sion of formalin -fixed and paraffin -embedded 
tissue to be used for determinat ion of eligibilit y.  For the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  arm only , there is a subsequent mandatory provision of tissue if 
CCI
CCI
108(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
retreatment is planned unless, after discussio n with Study  Physician, biopsy is not 
clinically feasible:
 MANDATORY: Provisio n of a newly   acquired tumor sample (preferred) OR
archival t issue obtained within 3 years.  ONLY 1 sample (either newly acquired or
archival t issue) will be used to assess PD -L1 status for purposes of eligibilit y.  Where
multiple samples have been submitted for the same patient, results fro m the most
recent evaluable sample will inform pat ient status for eligibilit y.
Samples shoul dbe collected via a core needle of 18 gauge or larger or be collected as
an excisio nal tum or biopsy  sample.  Where inst itutional pract ice, in thi s setting, uses
a smaller gauge needle, samples should be submitted in sufficient number to ensure
that availab ility of result can be achieved.
When t issue is newly obtained using an 18 -gauge needle for the purpose of entry  into
this study , 2 cores shoul d be pl aced in formalin and processed to a single paraffin -
embedded block, as described in the Laboratory  Manual.   When a smaller gauge
needle is used, the number of cores rises to 3 or 4.
The tum or specimen submitted to establish eligibilit y shoul d be of sufficient quantit y 
to allow for PD -L1 IHC analyses (see the Laboratory  Manual).  Sam ples wi th limited
tumor cont ent and fine needle aspirates are inadequate for defining tumor PD -L1
status.
Tumor lesi ons used for newly acquired biopsies should not be the same lesio ns used
as RECIST 1.1 target lesio ns, unless there are no other lesio ns suitable for biopsy.
In thi s instance, only  core needle (not exci sional/incisi onal) biopsy  is recommended.
For pati ents wi th a single target lesio n being used for a screening biopsy for PD -L1
testing, allow approximately  2 weeks before acquiring imaging scans for baseline
tumor assess ment.

 OPTIONAL: The co llection of addit ional archived tumor tissue block (formalin -
fixed paraffin -embedded) i s highly encouraged, where such samples exist in a
quant ity sufficient to allow for analysis.  This specimen may  be supplied at any  time
during the study .  Tum or tissue block is preferred.  If a tissue block is unavailable,
unstained sect ions from the ti ssue block may  be submi tted.  Pl ease consult the
Laboratory  Manual for specific instructions and guidelines regarding sect ions.
 OPTIONAL: The co llection of addit ional biopsies (other than the mandatory  tissue
biopsy required prior to retreatment for pati ents in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combinat ion therapy  arm) is strongly encouraged.
Addit ional tumor biopsies co llected as part of clinical care (eg, for mixed responses
or upon PD) can be submitted for further analysis.
CCI
5.5.2.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimuma b
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
See the Laboratory  Manua l for further details of requirements including sample QC and 
shipping.
 
 
The analyt ically validated VENTANA PD-L1 SP263 IHC assay  will be used to determine 
PD-L1 IHC status in this study  for the purposes of stratificat ion and for the analysis of the 
original
 diagnosti c sample.  
To m eet the requi rement of FDA approval o f a companio n diagnostic, sect ions of the 
tumor will  be retained at VENTANA for potential addit ional studi es, as requested by  the 
FDA, to support potential test approval.  
5.5.2 Collection of exploratory biomarker data
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
110(199)  
 
 
 
 
5.5.2.2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.3 Management of biomarker data
 
 
 
 
5.5.4 Storage, re -use, and destruction of biological samples
Samples will  be stored for a m aximum  of 15 y ears fro m the end o f study , after which they  
will be destroy ed.  The resul ts of this biomarker research m ay be reported in the CSR 
itself, as an addendum, or separately  in a scient ific report or publicat ion.  The results of 
thisbiomarker research may be pooled with bio marker data from other studies invo lving 
MEDI4736 to generate hy potheses to be tested in future research.
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
111(199)5.5.5 Labeling and shipment of biological samples
The Principal Invest igator will ensure that samples are labeled and shipped in accordance 
with the Laboratory  Manual and the Bio logical Substance, Category  B, Regulati ons 
(materials containing or suspected to contain infectious substances that do not meet 
Category  A criteria); see Appendix C“International Air Transportation Associat ion 6.2 
Guidance Docum ent.”
Any samples ident ified as Infect ious Category  A materi als will not be shipped, and no 
further samples will be taken fro m the invo lved patients unless agreed upon with 
AstraZeneca and a ppropri ate labeling, shipment, and containment provisions are approved.
5.5.6 Chain of custody of biological samples 
A full chain o f custody  will be m aintained for all sam ples throughout their life cycle.
The Principal Invest igator at each center will keep full traceabilit y of collected bi ological 
samples fro m the pati ents while in storage at the center until shipment or disposal (where 
appropriate) and will keep documentation of receipt of arrival.
The sample receiver will keep full traceabilit y of the samples while in storage and during 
use unt il used or disposed of or until further shipment and will keep documentation of 
recei pt of arrival.
AstraZeneca will keep oversight of the entire life cycle through internal procedures, 
monitoring of study  sites, and audi ting of external laboratory  provi ders.
Samples retained for further use will be registered in the AstraZeneca Biobank system 
during the ent ire life cycle.
5.5.7 Withdrawal of informed consent for donated biological samples 
If a patient withdraws consent to the use of donated bio logical samples, the sam ples will  
be disposed of or destroy ed and the act ion documented.  If samples have already been 
analyzed, AstraZeneca is not obliged to destroy  the resul ts of this research.
The Principal Invest igator will:
 Ensure t hat AstraZeneca is immediately notified of the patients’ wit hdrawal o f
inform ed consent to the use of donated samples
 Ensure that bio logical samples fro m that pati ent, if stored at the study  site, are
immediately  identified, disposed of or destroy ed and th e acti on docum ented
 Ensure that the laboratory (ies) ho lding the samples is/are immediately informed
about the withdrawn consent and that samples are disposed of or destroy ed, the
action is docum ented, and the signed document is returned to the study  site
 Ensure that the patient and AstraZeneca are informed about the sample disposal
5.6 Pharmacogenetics (not applicable)
Not applicable.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
During the course of the study , all AEs and SAEs shoul d be proactively  followed up for 
each patient.  Every  effort shoul d be made to obtain a resolut ion for all events, even if the 
events continue after discont inuat ion or study  com pletion.
Any AEs that are unresolved at the patient’s last visit in the study  are f ollowed up by  
the Invest igator for as long as medically indicated, but without further recording in the 
eCRF.  AstraZeneca retains the right to request addit ional inform ation for any  patient 
with ongoing AE(s)/SAE(s) at the end of the study, if judged necessary .
112(199)5.7 Pharmacodynamics (not applicable)
Not applicable.
6.SAFETY REPORTING AND MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
The Principal Invest igator is responsible for ensuring that all staff invo lved in the study  are 
familiar wit h the content of this sect ion.
6.1 Definitions of serious adverse events
An SAE is an AE occurring during any study  phase (i e, screening, treatm ent, washout, or 
follow-up) that fulfi lls one or more of the fo llowing cri teria:
 Results in death
 Is immediately life -threatening
 Requi res in -patient hospi talizat ion or prolongat ion of exist ing hospi talizati on
 Results in persistent or significant disabilit y or incapaci ty or substant ial disrupti on of
the abilit y to conduct normal life funct ions
 Is a congenital abnormalit y or birth defect
 Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the patient or may require medical
intervent ion to prevent one of the outcomes listed above
For further guidance on the definit ion of an SAE, see Appendix B .
6.2 Recording of adverse events
6.2.1 Time period for collection of adverse events 
AEs and SAEs will be co llected fro m the time of signature of informed consent throughou t 
the treatment period and including the fo llow-up peri od (up to 90 days after the last dose 
of IP or until init iation of another therapy ).  AEs and SAEs collected prior to 
rando mizat ion will be reported as pre -randomizat ion AEs and SAEs.  
6.2.2 Follow -up of u nresolved adverse events
The grading scales found in the revised NCI CTCAE versio n 4.03 will be ut ilized for all 
events with an assigned CTCAE grading.  For those events without assi gned CTCAE 
grades, the recommendat ion in the CTCAE criteria that converts mild, moderate, and 
severe events into CTCAE grades should be used.  A copy  of the CTCAE versio n 4.03 can 
be downloaded fro m the Cancer Therapy  Eval uation Program  websi te
(http://ctep.cancer.gov).
It is important to dist inguish between serious and severe AEs.  Severit y is a measure of 
intensity, whereas seriousness is defined by  the criteri a in Sect ion 6.1.  An AE of severe 
intensity need not necessarily be considered serious.  For example, nausea that persists for 
several hours may  be consi dered severe nausea, but it is not an SAE unless it meets the 
criteria shown i n Section 6.1.  On the other hand, a stroke that results in only  a limi ted 
degree of disabilit y may be considered a mild stroke, but it would be an SAE if it satisfies 
the criteria shown in Sect ion 6.1.
113(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
6.2.3 Variables 
The fo llowing variables will be collected for each AE:
 AE (verbat im)
 The date when the AE started and stopped
 The m aximum  CTCAE grade reported
 Changes in CTCAE grade
 Whether the AE is serious or not
 Invest igator causalit y rating against the IP (y es or no)
 Action taken with regard to IP
 Administrati on of  treatm ent for the AE
 Whether the AE caused the patient’s withdrawal from the study  (yes or no)
 Outcom e
Inaddition, the fo llowing vari ables will be collected for SAEs:
 Date the AE met criteria for SAE
 Date the Invest igator became aware of the SAE
 Seriousness criteria fulfilled
 Date of hospitalization
 Date of discharge
 Probable cause of death
 Date of death
 Whether an autopsy  was perform ed
 Causalit y assessment in relat ion to study  procedure(s)
 Descript ion of the AE
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
All AEs spontaneously reported by  the pati ent or reported in response to the open question 
from the study  personnel: “Have you had any healt h probl ems since the previous visit/y ou 
were l ast asked? ” or revealed by observat ion will be collected and recorded in the eCRF.  
When co llecting AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred, when possible, to recording 
a list of signs and symptoms.  However , if a diagnosis is known and there are other signs 
or symptoms that are not generally  part of the di agnosis, the diagnosis and each sign or 
symptom  will be recorded separately .
114(199)6.3 Definition of adverse events
An AE is the development of an undesirable medical condit ion or the deteri oration of  a 
pre-exist ing medical condi tion during or following exposure to a pharmaceut ical product, 
whether or not the condition is considered to be causally related to the product.  An 
undesirable medical condit ion can be a symptom (eg, nausea or chest pain), sign 
(eg,tachy cardia or enl arged liver) , or the abnormal result of an invest igation (eg, 
laboratory  findings or ECG).  In clinical studies, an AE can include an undesirable medical 
condi tion occurring at any  time, incl uding run -in or washout periods, even if no study  
treatm ent has been administ ered.
The term  ‘AE’ is used to include both serious and non -serious AEs.
6.3.1 Causality collection
The Investigator will assess the causal relat ionship between the IP and each AE and
answer “yes” or “no” to the question “Do you consider that there is a reasonab le possibilit y 
that the event may have been caused by  the invest igational product?”
For SAEs, causal relat ionship will also be assessed for other medicat ions and study  
procedures.  Note that, for SAEs that could be associated with any study procedure, the 
causal relat ionship is implied as “yes.”
A guide to the interpretation of the causalit y quest ion is found in Appendix B .
6.3.2 Relationship to protocol procedures
The Investigator is also required to provide an assessment of the rela tionship of SAEs to 
protocol  procedures on the SAE report form.  This includes both non -treatm ent–emergent 
(ie,SAEs that occur prior to the administration of IP) and treatment -emergent SAEs.  A 
protocol -related SAE m ay occur as a resul t of a procedure or intervention required during 
the study  (eg, blood collect ion).  The fo llowing guidelines should be used by  Investi gators 
to assess the relationship of SAEs to the protocol:
 Protocol  related: The event occurred due to a procedure or intervent ion that was
described in the protocol for which there is no alternat ive et iology present in the
patient’s medical record.
 Not protocol related: The event is related to an etiology other than the procedure or
intervent ion that was described in the protocol.  The alternat ive etio logy must be
docum ented in the study  patient’s medical record.
6.3.3 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
115(199)6.3.4 Adverse events based on examinations and tests
The results from protocol -mandated laboratory  tests and vi tal signs m easurements will be 
summarized in the CSR.  Deterioration as co mpared to baseline in protocol -mandated 
laboratory  values and vital signs should therefore only  be reported as AEs if they  fulfill 
any of the SAE criteria or are the reason for discontinuat ion of treatment with the IP.
If deteri oration in a laboratory  value or vi tal sign is associ ated wi th clinical  signs and 
symptoms, the sign or symptom will be reported as an AE and the associated laboratory  
resul t or vi talsign will  be considered as addit ional inform ation.  Whenever possible, the 
reporting Invest igator should use the clinical rather than the laboratory term (eg, anemia 
versus low hemoglo bin value).  In the absence o f clinical signs or symptoms, clinically 
relevant deteri orations in non -mandated parameters should be reported as AEs.
Deteri oration of  a laboratory  value that i s unequivocally due to disease progression should 
not be reported as an AE/SAE.
Any new or aggravated clinically relevant abnormal medica l finding at a physical 
examinat ion as co mpared with the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE.
6.3.5 Hy’s Law
Cases where a patient shows elevat ions in liver bio chemistry  may require further 
evaluat ion and occurrences of AST or ALT ≥3 × ULN together wit h total  bilirubin ≥2 
×ULN m ay need to be reported as SAEs.  Please refer to Appendix D for further 
instructi on on cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and evaluat ion of Hy’s law.
6.3.6 Disease progression
Disease progressi on can be considered as a worsening of a patient’s condit ion attributable 
to the di sease for which the IP is being studied.  It may be an increase in the severit y of the 
disease under study  and/or increases in the symptoms of the disease. The development of 
new or progression of exist ing metastasis to the primary cancer under study shoul d be 
considered as disease progression and not an AE.  Events, which are unequivocally due to 
disease progressi on shoul d not be reported as an AE during th e study .
6.3.7 New cancers
The development of a new cancer should be regarded as an SAE.  New primary  cancers 
are those that are not the primary  reason for the administrati on of  the study  treatment and 
have been ident ified after the patient’s inclusio n in this study .
6.3.8 Deaths
All deaths that occur during the study , or wi thin the protocol -defined fo llow-up peri od 
after the administration o f the last dose of study  treatm ent, m ust be reported as fo llows:
 Death cl early  resul ting fro m disease progression should be repo rted to the Study
Physician at the next monitoring visit and should be documented in the eCRF.  It
shoul d not be reported as an SAE.
 Where death is not due (or not clearly  due) to progressio n of the disease under study ,
the AE causing the death must be rep orted to the Study  Physician as an SAE within
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
All SAEs have to be reported, whether or not considered causally relat ed to the IP or to 
any study  procedure.  All SAEs will be recorded in the eCRF.
If any SAE occurs in the course of the study , then the Invest igator or other site personnel 
shoul d inform  the appropriate AstraZeneca representatives wit hin 1 day, ie, immediat ely 
but no later than 24 hours of when he or she becomes aware of it.
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that 
all the necessary  informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site 
within 1 calendar day of initial receipt for fatal and life -threatening events and within 5 
calendar days of initial receipt for all other SAEs.
For fatal  or life -threatening AEs in which important or relevant informat ion is missing, 
active fo llow-up is underta ken immediately.  The Investigator or other site personnel will 
inform  AstraZeneca representatives o f any fo llow-up informat ion on a previously reported 
SAE wi thin 1 calendar day , ie, immediately  but no later than 24 hours of when he or she 
beco mes aware o f it.
Once the Invest igator or other site personnel indicates that an AE is serious in the WBDC 
system , an autom ated e -mail alert i s sent to the designated AstraZeneca representative.
If the WBDC system is not available, then the Investigator or other stud y site personnel  
will report an SAE to the appropriate AstraZeneca representative by telephone.
The AstraZeneca representative will advise the Investigator or study  site personnel  how to 
proceed.
116(199)24hours.  The report should contain a comment regarding the co -involvement of PD, 
if appropriate, and should assign main and contributory  causes o f death.
 Deaths with an unknown cause should always be reported as an SAE.  A
post-mortem may be helpful in the assessment of the cause of death, and if
perform ed, a copy  of the post -mortem resul ts should be forwarded to AstraZeneca
Drug Safet y or its representati ve wi thin the usual  timeframes.
6.3.9 Safety data to be colle cted following the final data cut -off of the study
For pati ents continuing to receive IP treatment fo llowing the final data cut -off (DCO) and 
database closure, it is recommended that the patients continue the scheduled visits and 
investigators monitor the patient’s safet y laboratory results prior to and periodically during 
treatm ent wi th IP in order to manage AEs in accordance with the MEDI4736 Toxicit y 
Management Guidelines (Section 6.7.2). All data after the final DCO and database closure will be recorded in the patient notes but will not otherwise be reported for the purposes of 
this study , with the excepti on of  SAEs, overdoses and pregnancies. 
All SAEs, overdoses and pregnancies that occur in patients still receiving IP treatment (or within 90 days fo llowing the l ast dose of MEDI4736 treatment) after the final DCO and 
database closure must be reported as detailed in Section 6.4 via paper SAE forms. 
6.4 Reporting of serious adverse events
If a patient becomes pregnant during the course of the study , the IP shoul d be discont inued 
immediately .
Pregnancy itself is not regarded as an AE unless there is a suspicio n that the IP under study
may have interfered with the effect iveness of a contraceptive medicat ion.  Congenital 
abnorm alities or bi rth defects and spontaneous miscarriages should be reported and 
handled as SAEs.  Elect ive abortions without complicat ions should not be handled as AE s.  
The outcome o f all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elect ive terminat ion, ectopic 
pregnancy, normal birth, or congenital abnormalit y) should be fo llowed up and 
docum ented even if the patient was discontinued from the study .
117(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
The reference document for the definit ion of expectedness or listedness is the IB for 
MEDI4736 and tremelimumab.
The Principal Invest igator is responsible for ensuring that procedures and expertise are 
available to handle medical emergencies during the study .  Amedical emergency usually 
constitutes an SAE and is t o be reported as such.
6.5 Overdose
Use of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy or MEDI4736 monotherapy  in 
doses in excess o f those specified in the protocol are considered to be an overdose.  There 
is currently no specific treatment in the event of overdose of MEDI4736 or tremelimumab, 
and possible symptoms of overdose are not established.  
Please also refer to the local prescribing informat ion for the SoC agents (eg, cisplat in or 
carbopl atin prescribing informat ion, 5FU prescribing informat ion, cetuximab prescribing 
inform ation).
 An overdose with associated AEs will be recorded as the AE diagnosis or symptoms
in the relevant AE modules of the eCRF and in the Overdose eCRF module.
 An overdose without associated symptoms will only be reported in the Overdose
eCRF m odule.
If an overdose of an AstraZeneca study  drug occurs in the course of the study, then the 
Invest igator or other site personnel will inform appropriate AstraZeneca representatives 
immediately , or no later than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it.
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that 
all relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site.
For overdoses associated with an SAE, the standard rep orting timelines apply, see Section 
6.4.  For other overdoses, reporting must occur within 30 days.
6.6 Pregnancy
All pregnancies and outcomes of pregn ancy should be reported to AstraZeneca.
6.6.1 Maternal exposure
All toxicit ies will be graded according to NCI CTCAE, versio n 4.03.
As wi th any antibody , allergic reactions to dose administration ar e possible.  Appropriate 
drugs and medical equipment to treat acute anaphylact ic react ions must be immediately 
available, and study  personnel must be trained to recognize and treat anaphylaxis.  The 
study  site must have immediate access to emergency  resusc itation team s and equipment in 
addition to the abilit y to admit patients to an intensive care unit if necessary .
118(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and T remelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
If any pregnancy  occurs in the course of the study, then the Invest igator or other site 
personnel should inform the appropriate AstraZeneca representatives within 1 day, ie, 
immediately  but no later than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it.
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that 
all relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site wi thin 
1 to 5 calendar days for SAEs (see Section 6.4) and within 30 days for all other 
pregnancies.
The same timelines apply when outcome informat ion is available.
6.6.2 Paternal exposure 
Male patients should refrain fro m fathering a child or donating sperm d uring the study  and 
for 90days fo llowing the l ast dose of MEDI4736 mo notherapy  or 180 days following the 
last dose of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinatio n therapy .  Please fo llow the l ocal 
prescribing information relat ing to contraception and the time limi t for such precautions 
for the SoC agents.  
Pregnancy of the patient’s partner is not considered to be an AE.  However, the outcome of 
all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elective termination, ectopic pregnancy, normal birth, or congenital abnormali ty) shoul d, if possible, be followed up and documented.
The outcome o f any concept ion occurring fro m the date of the first dose until 90 days after 
the last dose of MEDI4736 monotherapy  or 180 days fo llowing the last dose of 
MEDI4736 +tremelimumab co mbina tion therapy  shoul d be f ollowed up and docum ented.  
Inform ation on the pregnancy  of a pati ent’s partner must be obtained direct ly from the 
patient’s partner.  Therefore, prior to obtaining information about the pregnancy, the 
Invest igator must obtain the c onsent of the patient’s partner.
6.7 Management of IP -related toxicities
The fo llowing general guidance should be fo llowed for m anagement of toxi cities.
 Treat each of the toxicit ies with maximum supportive care (including ho lding the
agent suspected of causing the toxi city if requi red).
 If the symptoms promptly resolve with supportive care, considerat ion should be
given to continuing the same dose of the assigned IP along wit h appropriate
continuing supportive care.  If medically appropriate, dose modificat ionsare
permitted.
 All dose modificat ions should be documented with clear reasoning and
docum entati on of  the approach taken.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
119(199)6.7.1 MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy adverse events of special interest
Adverse events of special interest (AESIs) are events of scientific and medical interest 
specific to the further understanding of the MEDI4736 and tremelimumab safet y profile 
and require close mo nitoring and rapid co mmu nicati on by the Investigator to AstraZeneca.  
MEDI4736 and tremelimumab AESIs m ay be serious or non -serious.  The rapi d reporting 
of these AESIs allows ongoing analysis o f these events in order to characterize and 
understand them in associat ion with the use of these IPs.
AESIs for MEDI4736 +/ -tremelimumab include but are not limited to events with a 
potenti al inflammatory  or immune -mediated mechanism and which may require more 
frequent monitoring and/or intervent ions such as steroids, immunosuppressants, and/or 
horm one repl acement therapy .  These AESIs are being closely mo nitored in clinical 
studi es wi th MEDI4736 m onotherapy  and combination therapy.  An immune -related 
adverse event (irAE) is defined as an AE that is associated with drug exposure and is 
consistent with an immune -mediated m echanism of action and where there is no clear 
alternate eti ology .  Serol ogic, immunol ogic, and histol ogic (biopsy ) data, as appropri ate, 
shoul d be used to support an irAE diagnosis.  Appropriate efforts should be made to rule 
out neoplast ic, infect ious, m etabo lic, toxin, or other etio logic caus es of the irAE. 
If the Investigator has any quest ions in regard to an AE being an irAE, the Invest igator 
shoul d prom ptly contact the Study  Physician.
AESIs observed with MEDI4736 +/- tremelimumab include the fo llowing:
 Diarrhea / Colitis and intestinal pe rforation
 Pneumo nitis / ILD
 Hepati tis/transaminase increases 
 Neuropathy /neurom uscular toxicit y (eg, Guillain- Barré, and myasthenia gravis)
 Endocrinopathy  (ie, events of hypophysit is/hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency, 
and hyper -and hypothy roidism  andtype I di abetes mellitus)
 Rash / Derm atitis
 Nephrit is / Blood creatinine increases
 Pancreat itis / serum lipase or amylase increases  
 Myocardi tis
 Myositis / Polymy ositis
 Other inflammatory  responses that are rare / less frequent with a potential immune -
mediated aeti ology include, but are not limited to, pericardit is, sarcoidosis, uveit is 
and other events invo lving the eye, skin, haematological and rheumatological events.
In addit ion, infusio n-related reacti ons and hypersensit ivity/anaphylact ic react ions wi th a 
different underlying pharmaco logical aetiology are al so consi dered AESIs.
Further informat ion on these risks (eg, present ing symptoms) can be found in the current 
versio ns of the MEDI4736 and tremelimumab IBs.  More specific guidelines for their 
Com prehensive toxi city management guidelines (TMGs) have been developed to assist 
investigators with the recognit ion and management of toxicit ies associ ated wi th use of  the 
immune -checkpo int inhibitors, durval umab [MED4736] (PD -L1 inhibitor) and 
tremelimumab (CTLA -4 inhibitor). Given the similar underlying mechanism o f toxicities 
observed wit h these two compounds, these TMGs are applicable to the management of 
patients receiving either drug as monotherapy  or bo th drugs in combinat ion. Addit ionally , 
these guidelines are applicable when either drug is used alone or both drugs are used in 
combinat ion and, al so other anti -cancer drugs (i.e., antineoplastic chemotherapy, targeted 
agents) are administered concurrent lyor sequent ially as part of a protocol -specific 
treatm ent regimen. The TMGs provide informat ion for the m anagement of immune -
mediated reactions, infusio n-related reactions, and non -immune mediated reactions that 
may be observed with checkpo int inhibitor mo notherapy  or combinat ion checkpo int 
inhibitor regimens, with specific instructions for checkpo int inhibitor -specific dose 
modificati ons (including discont inuat ion) and treatment intervent ions. Invest igators are 
advised however to use local pract ice guideli nes and consult local references for the 
management of toxicit ies observed wit h other anti -cancer treatment.
The m ost current version of the TMGs is provided to the invest igative site as an Annex to 
the Protocol document entit led “ Dosing Modificatio n and Toxicit y Management 
Guidelines for Immune -Mediated, Infusio n-Related, and Non -Immune -Mediated 
React ions MEDI4736 Monotherapy  or Combinat ion Therapy with Tremelimumab or 
Trem elimumab Monotherapy )” and i s maintained within the Site Master File. In addit ion, 
a current version of the guidelines is also available through the fo llowing link: 
https://tm g.azi rae.com .Please contact y our clinical trial associate for informat ion on how 
to gain access to this website.     
Patients should be thoroughly evaluated and appropri ate efforts should be made to rule out 
neopl astic, infecti ous, m etabo lic, toxin, or other etiologic causes of the imAE . Serologic, 
immuno logic, and histologic (biopsy) data, as appropriate, should be used to s upport an 
imAE diagnosis. In the absence of a clear alternative et iology, events should be considered 
potenti ally immune related.
In addit ion, there are certain circumstances in which MEDI4736 and tremelimumab should 
be permanent ly discontinued (see Section 3.9of this protoco l and the TMGs ).
Following the first dose of IP, subsequent administration of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab 
can be modified based on toxicit ies observed as described in the Dosing Modificat ion and 
Toxicit y Management Guidelines.  These guidelines have been pre pared by the Sponsor to 
assist the Investigator in the exercise o f his/her clinical judgment in treating these t ypes of 
toxicities.  These guidelines apply  to AEs considered causally related to MEDI4736 
120(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
evalu ation and treatment are described in detail in the Dosing Modificat ion and Toxicit y 
Management Guidelines (as referenced in Sect ion 6.7.2).  These guidelines have been 
prepared by  the Sponsor to assist the Invest igator in the exercise of his/her clinical 
judgment in treati ng these ty pes of  toxicities.  These gui delines apply  to AEs considered 
causally  related to the study  drug/study  regimen by the reporti ng Invest igator.
6.7.2 Specific toxicity management and dose modification information -
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy and MEDI4736 
monotherapy
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
121(199)monotherapy  and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy by the reporting 
Invest igator.
Dose reductions are not permitted.  In case of doubt, the Invest igator should consult with 
the Study  Physician.
6.7.3 Management of toxicity attributable to agents in the Standard of Care 
arm
IP-related toxicit y management, including dose delays, reductions, and adjust ments, for 
patients in the SoC group should be performed as indicated in the local prescribing 
inform ation for the rel evant agent.
6.8 Study governance and oversight
The safet y of all AstraZeneca clinical studies is closely monitored on an ongoing basis by 
AstraZeneca representatives in consultat ion with Patient Safet y.  Issues i dentified will be 
addressed; for instance, this could invo lve amendments to the study protocol and letters to 
Invest igators.
An IDMC co mprised of independent experts will be convened and will meet 
approximately  3months after the study has started or after the first 20 patients have been 
rando mized, whichever occurs first, fo llowed by 2 meet ings for safet y analysis 3 mo nths 
apart, and subseque nt meetings 6 m onths apart, to review safet y assessments and make 
recommendat ions to continue, amend, or stop the study  based on safet y findings.
Full details o f the IDMC procedures, processes, and interim analyses can be found in the 
IDMC Charter.
7.INVESTI GATIONAL PRODUCT AND OTHER 
TREATMENTS
7.1 Identity of investigational product
AstraZeneca will supply  MEDI4736 and trem elimum ab, while the SoC treatments 
(cetuximab, carboplat in or cisplat in, and 5FU) are expected to be supplied locally (see 
Table 8).
Table 8 List of investigational products for this study
Investigational product Dosage form and strength Manufacturer
MEDI4736 50mg/mL, solution, IV MedImmune
Tremelimumab 20 mg/mL, solution, IV MedImmune
Standard of Care
CetuximabaIV (as sourced locally) Various, depending upon the 
source
CarboplatinaIV (as sourced locally) Various, depending upon the source
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
122(199)Investigational product Dosage form and strength Manufacturer
CisplatinaIV (as sourced locally) Various, depending upon the 
source
5FUaIV (as sourced locally) Various, depending upon the 
source
aUnder certain circumstances when local sourcing is not feasible, a Standard of Care treatment may be 
supplied centrally through AstraZeneca.
5FU 5-Fluorouracil; IV Intravenous.
7.1.1 MEDI4736
MEDI4736 will be supplied by AstraZeneca as a 500- mg vial so lution for infusio n after 
dilution.  The solution contains 50 mg/mL MEDI4736, 26 mM 
histidine/hist idine-hydrochloride, 275 mM trehalose dihydrate, and 0.02% weight/vo lume 
(w/v) polysorbate 80; it has a pH of 6.0.  The no minal fill vo lume is 10 mL.  IP vials are 
store d at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) and must not be frozen .
Preparation of MEDI4736 doses for administration with an IV bag
The dose of MEDI4736 for administration must be prepared by  the Invest igator’s or site’s 
designated IP manager using asept ic technique.  Total time fro m needle puncture of the 
MEDI4736 vial to the start of administration should not exceed:
 24 hours at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F)
 4hours at room temperature
A dose of 1.5 g (for patients ≥30 kg in weight) will be administered using an IV bag 
containing 0.9% (w/v) saline or 5% (w/v) dextrose, with a final MEDI4736 concentration 
ranging from 1 to 20 mg/mL, and delivered through an IV administration set with a 0.2 -or 
0.22-μm in-line filter.  Remove 30.0 mL o f IV soluti on from the IV bag pri or to addition 
of MEDI4736.  Next, 30.0 mL of MEDI4736 (ie, 1.5 g of MEDI4736) is added to the IV 
bag such that final concentration is wit hin 1 to 20 mg/mL (IV bag vo lumes 100 to 1000 
mL).  Mix the bag by  gent ly inverting to ensure homogeneit y of the dose in the bag.
Weight -based dosing at 20 mg/kg (for patients whose weight falls to <30 kg during the 
study ) will be administered using an IV bag containing 0.9% (w/v) saline or 5% (w/v) 
dextrose, with a final durvalumab (MEDI4736) concentration ranging fro m 1 to 20
mg/mL, and delivered through an IV administration set with a 0.2 -or 0.22 -μm in-line 
filter(w/v).  Mix the bag by gently inverting to ensure homogeneit y of the dose in the bag.
Do not co -administer other drugs through the same infusio n line.
Standard infusi on time is 1 hour.  However, if there are interruptions during infusio n, the 
total allowed time shoul d not exceed 8 hours at room temperature.  Table 9summarizes 
time allowances and temperatures.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
123(199)Table 9 MEDI4736 temperature and infusion time allowances
Maximum time from needle puncture to start of 
administration4hours at room temperature, 24 hours at 2 °C to 
8°C
Maximum time for IV bag infusion, including 
interruptions8hours at room temperature
In the event that either preparation time or infusio n time exceeds the time limits outlined in 
the table, a new dose must be prepared from new vials.  MEDI4736 does not contain 
preservat ives, and any un used porti on m ust be discarded.
All details can be found in the Drug Handling Instructions.
7.1.2 Tremelimumab
Trem elimumab will be supplied by  AstraZeneca as a 400 -mg vial so lution for infusio n 
after dilut ion.  The solution contains 20 mg/mL tremelimumab, 20 mM histidine/hist idine 
hydrochloride, 222 mM trehalose dihydrate, 0.27 mM disodium edetate dihydrate, and 
0.02% (w/v) polysorbate 80; it has a pH of 5.5.  The no minal fill vo lume is 20 mL.  IP 
vials are stored at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) and must not be fro zen.
Preparation of tremelimumab doses for administration with an IV bag
The dose of tremelimumab for administration must be prepared by  the Invest igator’s or 
site’s designated IP manager using aseptic technique.  Total time fro m needle puncture of 
the tremelimumab vial to the start of administration should not exceed:
 24 hours at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F)
 4hours at room temperature
A dose of 75 mg (for patients ≥30 kg in weight) will be administered using an IV bag 
containing 0.9% (w/v) saline, with a final tremelimumab concentration ranging fro m 0.1 to 
10 m g/mL, and delivered through an IV administration set with a 0.2 -or 0.22 -μm in-line 
filter.  Remove 3.8 mL of IV sol ution from the IV bag prior to addit ion of tremelimumab.  
Next, 3.8 mL of tremelimumab (ie, 75 mg of tremelimumab) is then added to the IV bag 
such that the final concentration is wit hin 0.1 to 10 mg/mL (IV bag vo lumes of 50 to 
500mL).  Mix the bag by gent ly invert ing to ensure ho mogeneity of the dose in the bag.
Weight -based dosing at 1 mg/kg (for patients whose weight falls to < 30 kg during the 
study ) will be administered using an IV bag containing 0.9% (w/v) saline, with a final 
tremelimumab concentration ranging fro m 0.10 to 10 mg/mL, and delivered through an IV 
administration set with a 0.2- or 0.22 -μm in-line filter. 
Do not co -administer other drugs through the same infusio n line.
Standard infusio n time is 1 hour.  However, if there are interruptions during infusio n, the 
total allowed time shoul d not exceed 8 hours at room temperature.  Table 10summarizes 
time allowances and temperatures.  
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
124(199)Table 10 Tremelimumab temperature and infusion time allowances
Maximum time from needle puncture to start of 
administration4hours at room temperature, 24 hours at 2° C to 
8°C
Maximum time for IV bag infusion, including interruptions8hours at room temperature
In the event that either preparati on time or infusio n time exceeds the time limits outlined in 
the table, a new dose must be prepared from new vials.  Tremelimumab does not contain 
preservat ives, and any unused portion must be discarded.
All details can be found in the Drug Handli ng Instructi ons.
7.1.3 Standard of Care treatment
Each SoC agent will be sourced as commercially  available material/locally sourced, 
prescribed according to local regulat ions, and will be administered according to 
prescribing information or treatment guidance in general use by  the Invest igating site.  
Under certain circumstances when local sourcing is not feasible, a SoC agent will be 
supplied centrally  by AstraZeneca.  This will be labeled wit h local language translated text 
in accordance wit h regulatory  guideli nes.
7.2 Dose and treatment regimens
7.2.1 Treatment regimens
MEDI4736 monotherapy : Pati ents enrolled on the MEDI4736 monotherapy  arm of this 
study  will receive 1500 mg MEDI4736 q4w via IV infusio n beginning on Day  1 unt il PD 
(see Figure 4).  (N.B.  If a patient’s weight falls below 30 kg during the study , the pati ent 
shoul d receive weight -based dosing equivalent to 20 mg/kg of MEDI4736 Q4W unt il the 
weight improv es to ≥30 kg, at which point the patient should start receiving the fixed 
dosing of MEDI4736 (1500 mg Q4W.)
Figure 4 Dosing scheme -MEDI4736 monotherapy
Q4W Every 4 weeks.
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy:

Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
125(199)Patients enrolled on the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  arm of this 
study  will receive 75 mg tremelimumab via IV infusion q4w for 4 doses beginning on Day 
1 and 1500 mg MEDI4736 via IV infusio n q4w until PD (see Figure 5). (N.B.  If a 
patient’s weight falls to below 30 kg during the study , the pati ent shoul d receive weight -
based dosing equivalent to 20 mg/kg MEDI4736 Q4W and 1 mg/kg tremelimumab Q4W
until the weight improves to ≥30 kg, at which point the patient should start receiving the 
fixed dosing of MEDI4736 (1500 mg) plus tremelimumab (75 mg) Q4W.)
During the first infusio n of the combinat ion regimen, tremelimumab will be administered 
first; th e MEDI4736 infusio n will start approximately 1 hour (maximum 2 hours) after the 
end of the tremelimumab infusio n.  If there are no clinically significant infusio n reactions 
with the fi rst cy cle, then for all other cy cles, the MEDI4736 infusio n can begin 
immediately after the tremelimumab infusio n has finished.  
Figure 5 Dosing scheme -MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy
Q4W Every 4 weeks.
SoC (EXTREME): Patients in the SoC treatment arm will receive the EXTREME 
regimen consist ing of a maximum of six 3 -week cycles of cetuximab, a plat inum, and 
5FU, wi th continuat ion of cetuximab.  Patients in this arm will receive either cisplatin (at a 
dose of 100 mg/m2of body surface area on Day  1) or carboplat in (at an AUC of 5 
mg/mL /min on Day 1), at the discret ion of the Investigator and an infusio n of 5FU (at a 
dose of 1000 mg/m2/day on Days 1 through 4 of every  3-week cycle).  Cetuximab will be 
administered at an init ial dose of 400 mg/m2on Cycl e 1 Day  1, followed by subsequent 
weekly doses of 250 mg/m2.  Weekly m onotherapy with cetuximab should continue after 
the com pletion of  up to 6 cycles o f chemotherapy in patients who achieve SD or better.  
Any drug wi thin the tri plet regimen (cetuximab, a plat inum, and 5FU) can be discontin ued 
at any  time due to toxicit y at the di screti on of  the Principal Invest igator.

126(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Patients will  be treated wi th MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combination therapy , MEDI4736 
monotherapy , or SoC un til confirmed PD (unless, in the Invest igator’s opinio n, the pati ent 
continues to receive benefit fro m the treatm ent and after discussio n with the Sponsor), 
initiation of alternat ive cancer therapy, unacceptable toxicit y, withdrawal of consent, or 
another treatment discont inuat ion criterion is m et (see Section 3.9).  Pati ents wi th PD in 
target lesio ns after object ive response are not eligible to continue treatment.
Disease progressi on requi res confirmati on for patients receiving IMT.  All scans showing 
PD by RECIST 1.1 shoul d be confirmed, preferably at the next scheduled visit and no 
earlier than 4 weeks after the preceding assessment of PD in the absence of clinical 
deteri oration.  Disease progression in pat ients in t he SoC arm should be confirmed by a 
scan obtained no earlier than 4 weeks after the init ial assessment of PD and preferably at 
the next scheduled imaging visit, if clinically feasible.  Treatment in all arms will cont inue 
between the assessment of progress ion and its confirmation.  If progression is not 
confirmed, then the patient should cont inue receiving study  treatm ent and parti cipat ing in 
study  assessments.  If progression is confirmed and the patient continues to receive so me 
clinical benefit, treatmen t may be cont inued at the Invest igator’s discret ion.  Patients with 
clinical evidence of progression who do not meet PD criteria by RECIST 1.1 should have 
radiographic documentation of PD.
Patients who have discont inued treatment due to toxicit y or symptom atic deterioration, or 
who have co mmenced subsequent anticancer therapy, will be fo llowed up until confirmed 
disease progressi on and for survival (see Table 4).  Pati ents wi th confirmed progression in 
any arm cannot continue therapy  if the progressi on occurs in a target lesio n that has 
previously shown an objective response.
7.2.2 Duration of treatment
All treatment in all arms will be administered beginning on Day  1 unt il confirmed PD, 
unacceptable toxicit y, wi thdrawal of consent, or another discont inuation criterion is met (at 
the Invest igator’s discret ion), as described below.  Patients in all arms with a symptomatic 
solitary  lesion, a brain lesio n, or a l esion of  clinical importance (eg, impending fracture, 
etc) m ay be treated wi th radiation after approval from the Sponsor.  Non -irradiated l esions 
need to continue to be measurable by RECIST.  The time interval between the last 
systemic treatment and radiat ion shoul d be 10 day s, and systemic treatment can be 
resum ed 1 week post radiat ion.
Treatment through progression is permitted in all arms if, in the Invest igator’s opinio n, the 
patient conti nues to receive benefit from the treatment.  Treatment through progression is 
at the Invest igator’s discret ion, and the Invest igator should ensure that patients do not have 
any significant, unacceptable, or irreversible toxicities that indicate that continuing treatm ent will not further benefit the patient.  The Inves tigator shoul d ensure that patients 
will meet all o f the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusio n criteria for this study  and 
that these pat ients meet the following specific criteria for treatment in the setting of PD:
 Written inform ed consent to continue treatm ent or retreatm ent in the setting o f PD.
This consent document will specify that treatment beyo nd init ial evidence o f PD is
not the standard -of-care and that alternat ive treatment options, either locally licensed
treatm ents or other clinica l trials, are available for this pat ient populat ion.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI 4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
127(199) Absence of clinical symptoms or signs indicat ing clinically significant disease
progression and no decline in WHO/ECOG performance status to >1.
 Absence of rapid disease progression or threat to vital organs or crit ical anatomical
sites (eg, central  nervous sy stem  metastasi s, respi ratory  failure due to tumor
compressi on, or spinal cord compressio n) requi ring urgent, alternat ive medical
intervent ion.
Patients who the Sponsor and Invest igator determine may not continue treatment after 
confirmed PD will enter fo llow-up.  Pati ents who have discont inued treatment due to 
toxicity or symptom atic deteri oration, or who have commenced subsequent anticancer 
therapy , will  be followed f or confi rmed disease progression and survival.
Post final Data Cut Off (DCO)
Patients who con tinue to receive benefit fro m their assi gned treatm ent at the final DCO 
and database closure may continue to receive their assigned treatment for as long as they 
and their physician feel they are gaining clinical benefit. For patients continuing to receive 
durvalumab treatment fo llowing the final DCO and database closure, it is recommended 
that the patients continue the scheduled site visits and invest igators monitor the patient’s 
safet y laborator y resul ts pri or to and peri odically during treatm ent wi th durvalumab in 
order to manage AEs in accordance with the durvalumab toxicit y management guidelines 
(as referenced in  Section 6.7.2 ).
In the event that a roll -over or safet y extensio n study  is available after final analysis, 
patients currently receiving treatment with durvalumab may  be transi tioned to such a 
study , and the current study  woul d reach i ts end.  The roll -over or safet y extensio n study  
woul d ensure treatm ent continuat ion with visits assessment per i ts protocol .  Any pat ient 
that woul d be proposed to move to such study would be given a new Informed Consent. 
7.2.3 Criteria for Retreatment for Patients in the MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab arm
Patients who m eet the cri teria for retreatm ent may  only  receive retreatm ent once.  
Crossover within the study  will not be permi tted.  Pati ents m eeting the retreatment criteria 
below will fo llow the same treatm ent gui delines followed during the init ial treatment 
period, including the same dose and frequency o f treatm ents, and a similar schedule of 
assessments (see Table 2).
Patients randomized to MEDI4736 monotherapy  may not undergo retreatment.  
Patients randomized to MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy  may undergo 
retreatm ent in the clinical scenario described belo w:
1. Patients who com plete the 4 dosing cy cles of th e MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combinat ion therapy  porti on of  the regimen (wi th clinical benefit per Investigator’s
judgment) but subsequently have evidence o f PD during the MEDI4736
monotherapy  porti on of  the combinat ion regimen, with or without confirmat ion
according to RECIST 1.1, may restart treatment with the ent ire combinat ion regimen
(including mo notherapy  maintenance).
128(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
For pati ents in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  arm, before a pati ent 
restarts treatment, the Invest igator should ensure that the patient:
1. Does not have any  significant, unacceptable, or irreversible toxicit ies that indicate
continuing treatment will not further benefit the patient
2. Still fulfills the eligibilit y criteria f or thi s study , incl uding re -consent ing to restart
MED I4736 + trem elimumab co mbinat ion therapy
3. Has not have received an intervening systemic ant icancer therapy  after thei r assi gned
treatm ent discont inuat ion
4. Has had a baseline tumor assessment within 28 days prior to restarting their assigned
treatm ent; all further scans should occur with the same frequency as during the init ial
treatm ent (rel ative to the date of restarting treatment) until study treatment is stopped
5. Undergoes a tumor biopsy  as described in Sect ion 5.5.1
During the retreatment period, patients in the MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion 
therapy  arm will resume 75mg of tremelimumab q4w for 4 doses and MEDI4736 dosing at 
1500 mg q4w unt il PD.
7.3 Labeling
Labels will be prepared in accordance wit h Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and local 
regul atory  guidelines.  The l abels will fulfill GMP Annex 13 requirements for labelling.  
Label text will be translated into the local language.
Labels will be provided as either a single panel label or as mult i-language booklet labels.
7.4 Storage
All study  drugs shoul d be kept in a secure place under appropriate storage condit ions.  The 
IP label on the pack/bottle/carton specifies the appropriate storage.  Stor age is also 
described in the IB.
7.5 Compliance
The administration of all study  drugs (including IP) should be recorded in the appropriate 
sections of the eCRF.
Treatment compliance will be assured by reconciliation of site drug accountabilit y logs.
7.6 Accountabi lity
The study  drug provi ded for thi s study  will be used only as directed in the study  protocol .  
The study  personnel will account for all study  drugs 
Drug accountabilit y shoul d be performed unt il the patient stops study treatment 
completely.  Study  site personnel will account for all study  drugs received at the site, for 
all unused study  drugs, and for appropriate destruction of study  drugs.  Certificates of 
delivery , destructi on, and return should be signed.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
129(199)7.7 Concomitant and other treatments
The Investiga tor m ust be inform ed as soon as possible about any  medicat ion taken from 
the time o f screening unt il the end of the clinical phase of the study (final study visit).  Any 
concomitant medicat ion(s), including herbal preparations, taken during the study  will be 
recorded in the eCRF.
Restricted, prohibited, and permitted concomitant medicat ions are described in the 
following tables.  Refer to Section 6.7for guidance on m anagement of IP -related 
toxicities.
Prohibited medication/class of drug: Usage:
Additional investigational anticancer therapy 
concurrent with those under investigation in 
this studyShould not be given whilst the patient is on IP treatme nt (including SoC) 
mAbs against CTLA -4, PD -1, or PD -L1 Should not be given whilst the patient is on IP treatment (including SoC).
Any concurrent chemotherapy, local therapy 
(except palliative therapy for non -target 
lesions, eg, radiotherapy, surgery, radiofrequency ablation), biologic therapy, or 
hormonal therapy for cancer treatmentShould not be given whilst the patient is on IP 
treatment (including SoC).  (Concurrent use of 
hormones for non -cancer -related conditions 
[eg,insulin for diabetes and hor mone r eplacement 
therapy] is acceptable.  A symptomatic solitary lesion, a brain lesion, or a lesion of clinical importance (eg, impending fracture, etc) may be treated with radiation after approval from the 
Sponsor. )  
Immunosuppressive medications, incl uding, 
but not limited to: systemic corticosteroids at doses exceeding 10 mg/day of prednisone or 
its equivalent, methotrexate, azathioprine, and 
TNF -α blockers  Should not be given whilst the patient is on IP 
treatment (including SoC).  (Use of 
immunosup pressive medications for the management 
of IP -related AEs or in patients with contrast allergies 
is acceptable.  In addition, use of inhaled, topical, and intranasal corticosteroids is permitted.  Use of 
steroids as pre -medication for either hypersensitivi ty 
reactions (eg, CT scan pre -medication) or as 
anti-emetic prior to administration of SoC treatment 
is permitted.)  Short term use of immunosuppressive 
medications, including corticosteroids, for the acute management of non -IP-related emergencies (eg, 
COP D, asthma, etc) is permitted.
Live attenuated vaccines Should not be given through 30 days after the last 
dose of IP (including SoC) during the study
AEAdverse event; CTComputed tomography; CTLA -4Cytotoxic T -lymphocy te-associated antigen 4; 
IPInvesti gational product; mAb monoclonal antibody; PD -1Programmed cell death 1; PD -L1Programmed 
cell death ligand 1; SoC Standard of Care; TNF Tumor necrosis factor.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
130(199)Rescue/supportive medication/class of drug: Usage:
Concomitant medications or treatments (eg,acetaminophen or diphenhydramine) 
deemed necessary by the Investigator to provide adequate prophylactic or supportive care, except for those medications identified as 
“prohibited” as listed aboveTo be administered as prescribed by the Investigator
BSC (including antibiotics, nutritional support, 
growth factor support, correction of metabolic disor ders, optimal symptom control, and pain 
management [including palliative radiotherapy, 
etc])Should be used when necessary for all patients
BSC Best suppo rtive care.
7.7.1 Other concomitant treatment
Medicat ions other than those described in Sect ion7.7that are considered necessary  for the 
patient’s safet y and well -being may  be given at the discret ion of the Invest igator and 
shoul d be recorded in the appropriate sect ions of the eCRF.
7.8 Post study access to study treatment
After the efficacy analysis, AstraZeneca will continue to supply open -label drug to pat ients 
receiving MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  or MEDI4736 m onotherapy  
up to clinical disease progression (Section 7.2).
8.STATISTICAL A NALYSES BY ASTRAZENE CA
8.1 Statistical considerations
All statistical analyses will be performed by AstraZeneca or its representatives.  
A co mprehensive statist ical analysis plan (SAP) will be prepared and finalized within 3 
months of the first randomized patient and any subsequent amendments will be 
documented, wi th final amendments completed prior to reporting of the data.  The primary 
aim o f the study  is to com pare the efficacy and safety  of MEDI4736 m onotherapy  to SoC.
8.2 Sample size estimate
The study  will enroll approximately 1016 patients in order to randomize 760 eligible 
patients in a 2:1:1 ratio (380:190:190 patients) to MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , or SoC. The study  was ori ginally  sized to 
characterize the OS ben efit of MEDI4736 + trem elimumab combinat ion therapy  versus 
SoC in the all -comers popul ation.  Thesizing assumes a 3- monthdelay  in separati on of  the 
OS curves between each arm, hence the use of average HRs.
The primary  analysis of OS will be performed whe n approximately 147 death events have 
occurred in approximately 172 patients (85% maturity ) across the MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and SoC treatment groups in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, assuming that 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
131(199)45% of the patients rando mized are within this subgroup. No interim efficacy analyses will 
be perform ed in this study .
If OS at 24 months in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup was 30% with MEDI4736 
monotherapy  and 12% wi th SoC (wi th a 10.1 -month m edian OS), and assuming the true 
average OS HR is 0.59, the trial will have approximately 90% power to demonstrate 
statist ical significance at the 5% level (using a 2 -sided test) for the comparison of 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup , with the smallest 
treatm ent difference that could be statist ically significant being an average HR of 0.72.  
With a 17- month recrui tment peri od and a minimum fo llow-up peri od of  23.6 months from  
“last patient in” assumed, it is anticipated that the analysis will be performed 
approximately  40.6 months after the firs t pati ent has been recruited.
Table 11provides a summary of the statist ical assumptions for the first two levels of the MTP.
Table 11 Summary of stati stical assumptions
N ratio Ove
rall 
HRLandmarks at 24 monthsEvents (maturity)Power Critical valuesHR (landmarks)
Primary  
objective
OS: Mono 
versus SoC; 
PD-L1 TC/IC 
high subgroup86:86 0.59 30% vs 12% 147 (85%) 90% 0.72 (22%)
Secondaryobjectives: 
OS: Mono 
versus SoC; low risk of EM 
subgroup152:152 0.70 24% vs 12% 254 (84%) 81% 0.78 (19%)
Note: The sample size estimates in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup comparisons assume that 45% of the 
patients randomized are within this subgroup; The sample size estimate in the low risk of EM 
subgroup assume that 80% of the patients randomized are within this subgroup.
EM Early mortality; HRHazard ratio; IC tumor -associated immune cells; MonoMEDI4736 monotherapy; 
OSOverall survival; So C Standard of Care (EXTREME); TC tumor cells.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
132(199)8.3 Definitions of analysis sets
Definit ions of the analysis sets for each outcome variable are provided in Table 12.
Table 12 Summary of outcome variables and analysis populations
Outcome variable Populations
Efficacy Data
OS, PFS, ORR, APF6, APF12, OS12, OS18, OS24, PD-L1 TC/IC analysis set, low risk of EM 
analy sis set, ctDNA TMB analysis set and 
all-comers (FAS)
DoR, BoR, TTR, TFST, TSST, PFS2, PROs, and 
symptom endpointsPD-L1 TC/IC analysis set and all -comers 
(FAS) 
Demography PD-L1 TC/IC analysis set , and FAS (ITT 
populatio n)
PK data PK Analy sis Set
Safety Data
Exposure Safety Analysis Se t
AEs Safety Analysis Set
Laborato ry measurements Safety Analysis Set
Vital Signs Safety Analysis Set
AEAdverse event; APF12 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 12 months; BoR Best 
objective response; DoR Duration of response; EM Early  mortality ; FAS Full analysis set; IC tumor -
associated immune cells; ITT Intent -to-Treat; ORR Objective response rate; OS Overall survival; OS12 
Proportio n of patients alive at 12 months; OS18 Proportion of patients alive at 18 months; OS24 Proportion
of patients alive at 24 months after randomization ; PD-L1Programmed cell death ligand 1; PFS Progression -
free survival; PFS2 Second progression; PKPharmacokinetic; PRO Patient- reported outcome; TMB Tumor 
Mutation Burden (The ctDNA TMB cutpoint of 16mut/ Mb for MEDI4736+tremelimumab and MEDI4736 
monotherapy was derived from the EAGLE study (Li et al 2020)). ; TC tumor cells; TTR Time to response.
8.3.1   Full Analysis Set
The full analysis set (FAS) will include all rando mized pat ients (all -comers). Treatm ent 
groups will be co mpared on the basis of rando mized study treatment, regardless of the 
treatm ent actually received.  Patients who were randomized but did not subsequent ly go on 
to receive study  treatm ent are included in the analysis in the treatment gro up to which they 
were randomized.
8.3.2    Safety Analysis Set
The Safet y Analysis Set (SAS) will consist of all patients who received at least 1 dose of 
study  treatm ent.  Safet y data will not be formally  analyzed but summarized using the SAS 
for the all -comers (FAS), the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and the low risk of EM 
subgroup according to the treatment received, that is, erroneously treated patients (eg, 
those randomized to treatment A but actually given treatment B)will be summarized 
according to the treatment they  actually  received. 
8.3.3 PD-L1 TC/IC Analysis Set
The PD -L1 TC/IC analysis set will include the subset of patients in the FAS with PD -L1 
evaluable samples and available result s as determined by  the analy tically validated 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
133(199)VENTANA PD -L1(SP263) Assay. Subgroups are defined as PD -L1 high, low and 
unknown. 
PD-L1 high is defined as either ≥ 50% of the tumor cells (TC) or ≥ 25% of the immune 
cells (IC)  staining for PD -L1 at any intensit y if >1% of the tumor area c ontains IC, or ≥ 
50% of TC or 100% of IC staining for PD- L1 at any intensit y if 1% of the tumor area 
contains IC. PD -L1 low is defined as not meet ing any of the criteria for PD -L1 high.
The scoring algorithm was derived fro m data from two phase 2 studies, D4193C00001 
(HAWK, DCO September 2016) and D4193C00003 (CONDOR, DCO March 2017). 8.3.4   PK Analysis Set
All patients who receive at least 1 dose of IP per the protocol for who m any post -dose PK 
data are available.   
8.3.5   ctDNA TMB Analysis Set
The ct DNA TMB analysis set will include the subset of patients in the FAS with ctDNA 
TMB evaluable samples and available result. Subgroups are defined as ctDNA TMB high 
(≥16 mut/Mb), low (<16 mut/Mb). 
ctDNA TMB outputs will also incorporate the non -evaluable da ta set: Failed, Not Done, 
Not Provi ded, and No Call/not evaluable.   
8.3.6  Low Risk of Early Mortality (EM) Analysis Set
The l ow risk of EM analysis set consists of patients who are at low risk of early  mortali ty 
 based on laboratory  values according to a specific prognostic model 
. Further details will be provided in the SAP.
8.4 Outcome measures for analyses
8.4.1 Calculation or derivation of efficacy variables
8.4.1.1 Primary and secondary endpoint (OS)
OS is defined as the time fro m the date of rando mization until death due to any cause.  
Any pat ient not kn own to have died at the time of analysis will be censored based on the 
last recorded date on which the patient was known to be alive.  
Note: Survival cal ls will be made fo llowing the date of data cut- off for the analysis (these 
contacts should generally occur within 7 days o f the data cut- off).  If patients are 
confirmed to be alive or if the death date is post th e data cut- off date, these patients will be
censored at the date of data cut -off.  Death dates may be found by checking publicly 
available death registries.
8.4.1.2      RECIST 1.1 -based endpoints
The analysis of the other secondary  endpoints, PFS, ORR, DoR, BoR, TTR, APF6 and 
APF12, will be based on the i nvestigator assessments using RECIST 1.1.  In addition, 
PFS2 will be defined by local clinical pract ice.
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
Investigator RECIST 1.1- based assessments
All RECIST 1.1 assessments, whether scheduled or unscheduled, will be included in the 
calculat ions.  Thi s is also regardl ess of whether a patient discont inues study treatment or 
receives another ant icancer therapy.  
At each visit, patients will be programmat ically assigned a RECIST 1.1 visit response of 
CR, PR, SD, or PD depending on the status of their disease compared wi th baseline and 
previous assessments.  Baseline will be assessed wit hin the 28 days prior to enrollment.  If 
a pati ent has had a tum or assessment that cannot be evaluated, then the patient will be 
assigned a visit response of not evaluable (NE; unless there is evidence o f progression in 
which case the response will be assigned as PD).
Please refer to Appendix E for the definit ions of CR, PR, SD, and PD.
BICR -based assessments
A BICR of radio logical  imaging data will b e conducted according to RECIST 1.1 and used 
for a sensi tivity analysis for the secondary  object ive of PFS.  All radio logical  scans f or all  
patients (including those at unscheduled visit s or outside visit windows) obtained prior to 
versio n 8 of the clinica l study  protocol  (dated 13 Feb 2018) will be provided to the BICR.  
Prior radi otherapy  will also be provided to the BICR to allow the select ion of appropriate 
target lesio ns.
The imaging scans will be reviewed by 2 independent radio logists using RECIST 1.1 and 
will be adjudicated, if required.  For each patient, the BICR will define the overall visit 
response data (CR, PR, SD, PD, or NE) and the relevant scan dates for each time point (ie, for visits where response or progression is/is not ident ified).  If a pati ent has had a tum or 
assessment that cannot be evaluated, then the patient will be assigned a visit response of NE (unless there i s evidence of progression, in which case the response will be assigned as 
PD).  Sensit ivity analysis o f PFS will be derived f rom the overall visit response date and 
the scan dates.
 
Further details of the BICR will be documented in the Imaging Charter.
8.4.1.3 Secondary  endpoints
Progresson Free SurvivalPFS (per RECIST 1.1 as assessed by  the invest igator) will be defined as the time from the 
date of rando mizat ion unt il the date of object ive disease progression or death (by any 
cause in the absence of progression) regardl ess of  whether the patient discont inues therapy 
or receives another ant icancer therapy  prior to progressio n (ie, date of event or censoring –
date of rando mizat ion + 1).  Patients who have not progressed or died at the time of 
analysis will be censored at the time of the latest date of assessment fro m their last 
evaluable RECIST 1.1 assessment.  However, if the patient progresses or dies after 2 or 
more missed visits, the patient will be censored at the time of the latest evaluable RECIST 
1.1 assessment pri or to the 2 missed visit s.  If the patient has no evaluable visit s or does 
134(199)
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
135(199)not have baseline data, they  will be censored at Day  1 unless they  die wi thin 2 visi ts of 
baseline, then they  will be treated as an event with date of death as the event date.
The P FS time will always be derived based on scan/assessment dates and not visit dates.
RECIST 1.1 assessments/scans contributing toward a particular visit may be performed on 
different dates.  The fo llowing rules will be applied:
 For Invest igator assessments, the date of progression will be determined based on the 
earliest of the RECIST 1.1 assessment/scan dates of the co mponent that indicates 
progression.
 For BICR assessments, date of progression will be determined based on the earliest 
of the dates of the com ponent that triggered the progression on the first set of scans 
that indicates progression for the adjudicated reviewer select ing PD, or of either 
reviewer where both reviewers select PD as a timepoint response, and there is no adjudicat ion for central review (BICR) data.
 When censoring a patient for PFS, the patient will be censored at the latest of the dates contribut ing to a particular overall visit assessment.
Note: For target lesio ns, only the latest scan date is recorded out of all scans performed at 
that assessment for the target lesio ns, and similarly for non -target lesio ns, only the latest 
scan date is recorded out of all scans performed at that assessment for t he non -target 
lesions.
A sensit ivity analysis o f PFS will be performed using BICR assessments according to 
RECIST 1.1.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective response rate
ORR (per RECIST 1.1 using invest igator assessments) is defined as th e number (%) of 
patients wi th at least 1 visit response of CR or PR.  Data obtained up until progression, or 
the last evaluable assessment in the absence of progressio n, will be included in the 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
136(199)assessment of ORR.  Patients who go off treatment without prog ression, receive a 
subsequent therapy , and then respond will not be included as responders in the ORR.  
Duration of response
DoR (per RECIST 1.1 using invest igator assessments) will be defined as the time fro m the 
date of first documented response unt il the first date of documented progression or death in 
the absence of disease progression (ie, date of PFS event or censoring –date of first 
response +1).  The end of response should co incide with the date of progression or death 
from any cause used for the RECIST 1.1 PFS endpoint.  
The time of the init ial response will be defined as the latest of the dates contribut ing 
toward the first visit response o f CR or PR.  If a patient does not progress fo llowing a 
response, then their DoR will be censored at the P FS censoring t ime.  DoR will not be 
defined for those patients who do not have documented response.
Time from randomization to second progression (PFS2)
PFS2 will be defined as the time fro m the date of rando mizat ion to the earliest of the 
progression event subsequent to that used for the PFS endpo int or death.  The date of 
second progressi on will be recorded by  the Invest igator in the eCRF and defined according 
to local standard clinical practice and may  involve any of the fo llowing: obj ective 
radiological imaging, symptomat ic progression, or death.  Second progression status will 
be reviewed (every 6 weeks for the first 48 weeks relat ive to the date of rando mizat ion and 
then every  8weeks thereafter) following the progressio n event used for the primary 
variable PFS (the first progression) and status recorded.  Patients alive and for whom a 
second disease progression has not been observed should be censored at the last time 
known to be alive and wit hout a second disease progression, that is, censored at the latest 
of the PFS or PFS2 assessment date if the pat ient has not had a second progression or 
death.
Time from randomization to the first subsequent therapy or death 
Time to the first subsequent therapy  (TFST) or death will be defined as the time fro m the 
date of rando mizat ion to the earlier of either the start date of the first subsequent anticancer 
therapy  after discont inuat ion of rando mized treatment or the date of death (ie, the date of 
first subsequent cancer therapy , death, or censoring defined as the date of rando mizat ion + 
1day).  Any  patient not known to have received a first subsequent ant icancer therapy will 
be censored at the last date that the patient was known not to have received a first 
subsequent ant icancer therapy.  If a patient terminated the study before the first subsequent 
therapy  for a reason other than death, the patient will be censored at the earliest of either 
the pati ent’s l ast known date to be alive or the study  terminat ion date.
Time from randomization to the second subsequent t herapy or death
As a supportive summary  to PFS2, tim e to second subsequent therapy  (TSST) or death will 
be defined as the time from the date of rando mizat ion to the earlier of eit her the start date 
of the second subsequent ant icancer therapy after disconti nuation of first subsequent 
therapy , or the date of death.  Any pat ient not known to have had a second subsequent 
anticancer therapy  will be censored at the last date when the patient was known not to have 
received a second subsequent anticancer therapy .  If a patient terminated the study  for 
8.4.2.1 Adverse events
Safety and tol erabilit y will  be assessed in term s of AEs (including SAEs), deaths, 
laboratory  data, vi tal signs, ECGs, and exposure.  These will be co llected for all pat ients.  
Data from all cycl es of  treatm ent will  be combined in the presentation of safet y data.  “On 
treatm ent” will be defined as assessments between date of start dose and 90 day s following 
discontinuat ion of IP (ie, the last dose of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion therapy  
or MEDI4736 monotherapy).  For AEs, on treatment (or treatment -emergent AEs) will be 
137(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
reason other than death before second subsequent ant icancer therapy , the pati ent will  be 
censored at the earliest of the last known to be alive and terminat ion dates.
Proportion of patients alive and progression free at  6 and 12 months
The APF6 and APF12 will be defined as the Kaplan- Meier est imate of PFS (per RECIST 
1.1 as assessed by the investigator) at 6 months and 12 months respect ively.
Proportion of patients alive at 12, 18 and 24 months after randomization
The OS12, OS18 and OS24 will be defined as the Kaplan- Meier estimate of OS at 12, 18 
and 24 m onths respectively after randomizat ion.  
Best objective responseBest objective response (BoR) is calculated based on the overall visit responses fro m each 
RECIST 1.1 assessment, as described in 
Appendix E .  It is the best response a patient has 
had during their t ime in the study up unt il RECIST 1.1 progression or the last evaluable 
assessment in the absence of RECIST 1.1 progressio n.
Categ orization of  BoR will  be based on RECIST 1.1 ( Appendix E ) using the fo llowing 
response categories: CR, PR, SD, PD, and NE.
BoR will be determined programmat ically based on RECIST 1.1 using all invest igator 
assessments up until the first progressi on event.  For patients whose progression event is 
death, BoR will be calculated based upon all evaluable RECIST 1.1 assessments prior to 
death.
For pati ents who die wi th no evaluable RECIST 1.1 assessments, if the death occurs 
≤90days (i e,2 ×(6 weeks ±3 days)) after randomization, then BoR will be assigned to the 
progression (PD) category .  For pati ents who die wit h no evaluable RECIST 1.1 
assessments, if the death occurs >90 day s (ie, 2×(6 weeks ±3 day s)) after the date of 
rando mizat ion, then BoR will be assigned to the NE category .  
Progression events that have been censored due to them being >90 day s after the last 
evaluable assessment wil l not con tribute to the BoR derivat ion.
Time to response
Time to response (per RECIST 1.1 as assessed by  the invest igator) is defined as the time 
from the date of rando mizat ion unt il the date of documented response. The date of 
docum ented response shoul d coincide wit h that used for the RECIST 1.1 DoR endpoint. 
8.4.2 Calculation or derivation of safety variables
PRO questionnaires will be assessed using the EORTC QLQ -C30 and EORTC 
QLQ -H&N35.  All items/quest ionnaires will be scored according to published scoring 
guidelines.  All PRO analyses will be based on the FAS.
8.4.3.1 EORTC QLQ -C30
The EORTC QLQ -C30 consists of 30 questions that can be combined to produce 
5functional scales (physical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social), 3 symptom scales 
(fatigue, pain, and nausea/vo miting), and a global measur e of heal th status.  The EORTC 
QLQ -C30 will be scored according to the EORTC QLQ -C30 scoring manual ( Fayers et al  
1999).  An outcome variable consist ing of  a score fro m 0 to 100 will be derived for each of 
the symptom  scales, each of the funct ional scales, and the global healt h status scale in the 
EORTC QLQ -C30 according to the EORTC QLQ -C30 Scoring Manual.  Higher scores on 
138(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
defined as any  AEs that started after dosing or prior to dosing and which worsens 
following exposure to the treatment.
SAS will be used for reporting of safet y data.
A separa te data list ing of AEs occurring more than 90 days after discontinuation o f IP will 
be produced.  These events will not be included in AE summaries.  
8.4.2.2 Safety assessments
For the change fro m baseline summaries for vital signs, laboratory  data, ECGs, and 
physical examinat ions, the baseline value will be the latest result obtained prior to the start 
of study  treatm ent.  
QTcF will be derived during creation o f the reporting database using the reported ECG 
values (RR and QT) using the following formula:QTcF = QT/RR^ (1/3) where RR is in seconds
Corrected calcium product will be derived during creation of the reporting database using 
the following form ulas:
Corrected calcium (mmo l/L) = Total calcium (mmol/L) + ([40 – albumin (G/L)] × 0.02)
The deno minator used i n laboratory  summaries will only include evaluable patients, ie, 
those who had sufficient data to have the possibilit y of an abnorm ality.
For example:
 If a CTCAE criterion invo lves a change from baseline, evaluable patients would have
both a pre -dose and a t least 1 post -dose value recorded.
 If a CTCAE criterion does not consider changes from baseline to be evaluable, the
patient need only have 1 post -dose value recorded.
The deno minator in vital signs data should include only those patients with recorded da ta.
8.4.3 Calculation or derivation of patient- reported outcome variables
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
139(199)the global healt h status and functioning scales indicate better health status/funct ion, but 
higher scores on symptom scales represent greater symptom severit y.
The change from baseline in HRQoL will be assessed using the EORTC QLQ -C30 gl obal 
QoL scal e, which includes 2 items from the EORTC QLQ -C30: “How woul d you rate y our 
overall health during the past week? (Item 29) and “How would you rate your overall QoL 
during the past week? (Item 30).” 
Definition of clinically meaningful changes
Changes in score compared with baseline will be evaluated.  A minimum clinically 
meaningful change is defined as an abso lute change in the score from baseline of ≥10 for 
scales fro m the EORTC QLQ -C30 ( Osoba et al 1998 ).  For example, a clinically 
meaningful improvement in physical function (as assessed by  EORTC QLQ -C30) is 
defined as an increase in the score fro m baseline of ≥10, whereas a clinically meaningful 
deteri oration is defined as a decrease i n the score from baseline of ≥10.  At each post-
baseline assessment, the change in symptoms/functioning from baseline will be 
categori zed as improvement, no change or deterioration as shown in Table 3.
Table 13 Mean change and visit response in health- related quality of life
Score Change from baseline Visit response
EORTC QLQ -C30 Global quality 
of life score≥+10 Improvement
≥-10 Deterioration
Otherwise No change
EORTC QLQ -C30 symptom scales ≥+10 Deterioration
≤-10 Improvement
Otherwise No change
EORTC QLQ -C30 functional 
scales≥+10 Improvement
≥-10 Deterioration
Otherwise No change
EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer; QLQ -C30 30-item core quality of 
life questionnaire.
For each subscale, if <50% of the subscale items are missing, then the subscale score will 
be divided by the number of non -missing items and mult iplied by the total numbe r of items 
on the subscales ( Fayers et al 1999).  If  at least 50% of the items are missing, then that 
subscale will be treated as missing.  Missing single  items are treated as missing.  The 
reason for any  missing quest ionnaire will be ident ified and recorded.  If there is evidence 
that the missing data are sy stem atic, missing values will be handled to ensure that any 
possible bias is minimized.
Time t o symptom deterioration
For each of the symptoms scales in the EORTC QLQ -C30, tim e to symptom  deteri oration 
will be defined as the time fro m rando mizat ion until the date of the first clinically 
meaningful symptom deterioration (an increase in the score fro m baseline of ≥10) or death 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Treme limumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
140(199)(by any cause) in the absence of a clinically meaningful symptom deterioration, regardless 
of whether the patient discont inues study  treatm ent or receives another anticancer therapy  
prior to sym ptom  deteri oration.  Death will be included as an event only if the death occurs 
within 2 visits of the last PRO assessment where the symptom change could be evaluated.  
Patients whose symptoms (as measured by  EORTC QLQ -C30) have not shown a clinically  
meaningful deterioration and who are alive at the time of the analysis will be censored at 
the time o f their last PRO assessment where the symptom could be evaluated.  Also, if 
symptoms deteriorate after 2 or more missed PRO assessment visits or the patient dies 
after 2 or m ore missed PRO as sessment visits, the patient will be censored at the time of 
the last PRO assessment where the symptom could be evaluated.  If a patient has no 
evaluable visit s or does not have baseline data they will be censored at 0 day s.  The 
popul ation for the analysi s of time to sym ptom  deteri oration will  include a subset of the 
FAS who have baseline scores of ≤90.
Time to quality of life/function deterioration
For QoL, time to deterioration will be defined as the time fro m the date of rando mizat ion 
until the date of the first clinically meaningful deterioration (a decrease in the funct ion 
scales or the global healt h status/QoL from baseline of ≥10) or death (by  any cause) in the 
absence of a clinically  meaningful  deteri oration, regardl ess of whether the patient 
discontinues study  treatm ent or receives another ant icancer therapy  prior to QoL/funct ion 
deteri oration.  Death will be included as an event only  if the death occurs wi thin 2 visits of 
the last PRO assessment where the QoL/funct ion change could be evaluated.  
Patients whose QoL (as measured by  EORTC QLQ -C30) have not shown a clinically 
meaningful deterioration and who are alive at the time of the analysis will be censored at 
the time o f their last PRO assessment where the QoL/funct ion coul d be evaluated.  Also, if 
QoL deteriorates after 2 or more missed PRO assessment visits or the patient dies after 2 
or more missed PRO assessment visit s, the patient will be censored at the time of the last 
PRO assessment where QoL/funct ion coul d be evaluated.  If a patient has no evaluable 
visits or does not have baseline data they  will be censored at 0 days.  The populat ion for 
the analysis o f time to QoL/funct ion deterioration will include a subset of the FAS who 
have baseline scores of ≥10.
Symptom improvement rate
The sympto m improvement rate will be defined as the number (%) of patients with 
2consecutive assessments at least 14 days apart that show a clinically meaningful 
improvement (a decrease from baseline score ≥10 for EORTC QLQ -C30 symptom scales) 
in that symptom fro m baseline.  The deno minator will consist of a subset of the FAS who 
have a baseline symptom score ≥10.
QoL/function improvement rate
The QoL/function improvement rate will be defined as the number (%) of patients with 
2consecutive assessments at least 14 d ays apart that show a clinically meaningful 
improvement (an increase fro m baseline score ≥10 for EORTC QLQ- C30 functional scales 
and glo bal health status/QoL) in that scale from baseline.  The denominator will consist of 
a subset of the FAS who have a base line QoL/function score ≥10.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
141(199)8.4.3.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35
The QLQ- H&N35 is a head and neck cancer -specific m odule from the EORTC comprising 
35questions to assess head and neck cancer symptoms.  The head and neck cancer module 
includes 11 single items and 7 mult i-item scales that assess pain, swallowing, senses (taste 
and smell), speech, social eat ing, social contact, and sexualit y.  For all  items and scales, 
high scores indicate increased symptomatology /more probl ems.  
The scoring approach for the QLQ -H&N35 is identic al in principle to that for the symptom 
scales/single items o f the EORTC QLQ -C30.  As the wording is reversed on the 
QLQ -H&N35, higher scores represent greater symptom severit y.
Definition of clinically meaningful changes
Changes in score compared with bas eline will be evaluated.  A minimum clinically 
meaningful change is defined as a change in the score fro m baseline of >10 for 
scales/items fro m QLQ -H&N35 ( Bjordal  et al  2000 ).  For example, a clinically meaningful 
deteri oration or worsening in dry  mouth (as assessed by  QLQ -H&N35) i s defined as an 
increase in the score from baseline o f ≥10.  At each post- baseline assessment, the change 
in symptom s/functi oning fro m baseline will be categorized as improved, no change, or 
deteri oration, as shown in Table 14.
Table 14 Visit response for HRQoL and disease -related symptoms
Score Change from baseline Visit response
QLQ -H&N35 symptom scales and 
items≥+10 Deterioration
≤-10 Improved
Otherwise No change
HRQoL Health -related quality of life; QLQ -H&N35 35 -item head and neck quality of life questionnaire.
Time to symptom deterioration
For each of the symptom scales/items in the QLQ -H&N35, time to symptom deterioration 
will be defined as the time fro m the date of the first dose until the date of the first clinically  
meaningful symptom deterior ation (an increase in the score from baseline of ≥10) or death 
(by any cause) in the absence of a clinically meaningful symptom deterioration, regardless 
of whether the patient discont inues study  treatm ent or receives another anticancer therapy  
prior to sy mptom deteri oration.  Death will be included as an event only if the death occurs 
within 2 visits of the last PRO assessment where the symptom change could be evaluated.
Patients whose symptoms (as measured by  the QLQ -H&N35) have not shown a clinically 
meaningful deterioration and who are alive at the time of the analysis will be censored at 
the time o f their last PRO assessment where the symptom could be evaluated.  Also, if 
symptoms progress after 2 or more missed PRO assessment visit s or the patient dies after 2 
or more missed PRO assessment visit s, the patient will be censored at the time of the last 
PRO assessment where the symptom could be evaluated.  If a patient has no evaluable 
visits or does not have baseline data, they will be censored at 0 days.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
142(199)Symptom improvement rate
The symptom improvement rate will be defined as the number (%) of patients with 
2consecutive assessments at least 14 days apart that show a clinically meaningful 
improvement (a decrease from baseline score >10 for QLQ- H&N35 scales /items) in that 
symptom  from baseline.
8.4.3.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.4.4 Calculation or derivation of pharmacokinetic variables
8.4.4.1 Population pharmacokinetics and exposure -response/safety analysis
A population PK model may be developed using a non -linear mixed -effects m odeling 
approach for MEDI4736 monotherapy  and f or MEDI4736 in combinat ion with 
tremelimumab.  The impact of physio logically -relevant pati ent characteristics (covariates) 
and disease on PK of both agents may be evaluated.  The relationship between MEDI4736 PK e xposure or tremelimumab PK exposure and the effect on safet y and efficacy  end 
points m ay be evaluated.  The results of such analyses will be reported outside of the CSR.
8.4.4.2 Pharmacokinetic analysis
Pharmacokinet ic data analyses of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab wi ll be perform ed by  the 
MedImmune Glo bal Pharmacokinet ics Pharmacodynamics (PK -PD) & Bi oanalysis group 
or desi gnee. No formal non-compart mental (NCA) PK analysis will be conducted due to 
the sparse PK sampling scheme for MEDI4736 and tremelimumab, which doe s not allow 
for meaningful  determinat ion of PK parameters.  MEDI4736 and tremelimumab 
concentration data and summary statist ics will be tabulated by  treatm ent arm  and visi t.  PK 
param eters, such as peak and trough concentration of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab , will 
be derived from raw data measurements as data allow. 
8.4.4.3 Immunogenicity analysis
Immunogenicit y resul ts will  be analyzed descript ively by summarizing the number and 
percentage of patients who develop detectable ADAs against MEDI4736. The same 
analysis will be conducted for ADAs against tremelimumab.  The immunogenicit y titer 
will be reported for samples confirmed positive for the presence of ADAs.  The effect of 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
143(199)immunogenicit y on PK, pharm acodynamics, efficacy , and safet y may be evaluated as data 
allow.
8.5 Methods for statistical analyses
The formal statist ical analysis will be performed to test the main hypotheses: 
 H0: No difference between MEDI4736 m onotherapy  and SoC
 H1: Difference between MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC
The primary  object ive is OS in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup .  
The analysis of OS will be performed when approximately  147 death events have occurred 
in approximately 172 patients (85% maturit y) across the MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC 
treatm ent groups in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup . All other endpo ints will be analysed 
at this time.  No interim analyses will be performed for any efficacy endpoint.
Descript ive statistics will be used for all variables, as appropriate, and will be presented by 
treatm ent arm .  Continuous variables will be su mmarized by the number of observat ions, 
mean, standard deviat ion, median, minimum, and maximum.  Categorical variables will be 
summarized by  frequency counts and percentages for each category .  Unless otherwi se 
stated, percentages will be calculated out of the popul ation total for the corresponding 
treatm ent arm .  
Baseline will be the last assessment of the variable under consideration prior to the intake 
of the first dose of IP, except for efficacy variables.  For efficacy variables, baseline is 
defined a s the l ast vi sit prior to randomization.
PK data will be summarized and analyzed based on the PK Analysis Set.  Safet y data will 
be summarized on the safet y analysis set.
Results of all statist ical analyses will be presented using approximately -sized 95% C Is and 
2-sided p -values, unless otherwise stated.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29June 2020
144(199)Table 15 Pre-planned statistical and sensitivity analysis to be conducted
Endpoints Analyzed Notes
OS Stratified log- rank  tests and Cox proportional method for:
Primary  objectives
MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC in the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup 
(stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor location and smoking histor y)
Secondary objectives
-MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC in the low risk of EM 
subgroup (stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor location and smoking 
history )
-MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC in ctDNA TMB high 
subgroup ( ≥ 16mut/Mb)
-MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC in all -comers population
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus SoC in the 
PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup (stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor 
location and smoking history)
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus SoC in the low risk of EM subgroup (stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor 
location, and smoking history)
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus SoC in 
ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus SoC in  
all-comers (stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor location, and smoking 
history )
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus MEDI4736 monotherapy (PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of 
EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 mut/Mb ) and all -comers); 
stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor location and smoking history)
Sensitivity Analyses:
Sensitivity analysis using the Max -combo test
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
145(199)Endpoints Analyzed Notes
PFS Stratified log- rank tests and Cox proportional method for:
-Secondary objectives using investigator assessments (RECIST 1.1): 
MEDI4736 monotherapy versus SoC ( PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup, 
low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 mut/Mb) 
subgroup and all -comers) ; stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor 
locat ion and smoking history
-MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus SoC (PD -
L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB 
high ( ≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup and all -comers); stratified by PD -L1 
status, tumor location and smoking history
-MEDI473 6 + tremelimumab combination therapy versus 
MEDI4736 monotherapy (PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of 
EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup and all -
comers); stratified by PD -L1 status, tumor location and smoking 
history
Sensitivity analyses
-Sensitivity analysis using BICR assessments (RECIST 1.1)
-Sensitivity analysis based on RECIST 1.1 modified for 
confirmatio n of progression using site Investigator assessments 
Explo ratory  analy ses
-
OS12, OS18 and OS24 OS rates using the Kaplan -Meier estimates at 12, 18 and 24 months for the 
PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high 
(≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup and all -comers
ORR Logistic regression for:
Secondary objectives
-Seconda ry analy sis for the, PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup , low risk 
of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high (≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup
and all -comers using investigator RECIST 1.1 assessments
Explo ratory  analy ses
-  
DoR Descriptive statistics and Kaplan -Meier plot for the PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup and all -comers
BoR Descriptive statistics N (%) for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -
comers
TTR Descriptive statistics N (%) for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -
comers
TFST Stratified log- rank test for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
TSST Stratified log- rank test for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
APF6 and APF12 PFS rates using the Kaplan -Meier estimates of PFS at 6 and 12 months for 
the low risk of EM subgroup, ctDNA TMB high (≥16 mut/Mb), PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
Time from randomization to 
second progressionStratified log- rank test for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
146(199)Endpoints Analyzed Notes
Time to symptom 
deterioration (EORTC QLQ -
C30 and EORTC 
QLQ -H&N35 endpoints)Stratified log- rank test for the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup, and all -
comers
Improvement rate (EORTC 
QLQ -C30 and EORTC 
QLQ -H&N35 endpoints)Logistic regression
For all -comers and the PD -L1 TC/IC high subgroup populations
Average change from 
baseline (EORTC QLQ -C30 
and EORTC QLQ -H&N35 
endpoints)Mixed effect model repeated measurement (MMRM) analysis. Descriptive statistics including change fr om baseline for all -comers and the PD -L1 
TC/IC high subgroup populations. 
APF12 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 12 months; BICR Blinded Independent Central 
Review; BoR Best objective response; ctDNA circulating tumor DNA;  DCR Disease control rate; 
DoR Duratio n of response; EM Early mortality; EORTC European Organisation for Research and Treatment 
of Cancer; HR Hazard ratio; IC tumor -associated immune cells; irRECIST 1.1 Immune -related response 
criteria updated for RECIST 1. 1; ITT Intent -to-Treat; ORR Objective response rate; OS Overall survival; 
OS12 Proportion of patients alive at 12 months after randomization; OS18 Proportion of patients alive at 18 months after randomization; OS24 Proportion of patients alive at 24 months after randomization; PD -
L1Programmed death ligand 1; PFS Progression -free survival; QLQ -C30 30-item core quality of life 
questionnaire; QLQ -H&N35 35-item head and neck quality of life questionnaire; RECIST 1.1 Response 
Evaluatio n Criteria in Solid Tumor s version 1.1; TC tumor cells; TFST Time to first subsequent therapy; 
TMB Tumor Mutation Burden; TTR Time to response; TSST Time to second subsequent therapy.
Multiple testing procedure (MTP)
In order to strongly control the ty pe I error at 5% (2- sided), t he MTP shown in Figure 6 
will be used across the primary endpoint (OS), treatment comparisons (MEDI4736 
monotherapy  versus SoC and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbination therapy versus 
SoC), and across the analysis populat ions (PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM 
subgroup, ctDNA TMB high (≥16 m ut/Mb) subgroup, and all -comers). If the highest level 
hypothesis in the MTP is statist ically significant then the next hypothesis in the hierarchy 
will then be tested, and so on through the hierarchy  until a hypot hesis is not -statistically 
significant. Im plementati on of  this pre -defined ordered testing procedure will strongly 
control  type I error at 5% (2 -sided) am ong all  key hypotheses.
Of note, the com parison of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy  versus 
MEDI4736 monotherapy  and the com parison of MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination 
therapy  versus SoC ( in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup, and low risk of EM subgroup will 
not be included in the MTP, and therefore will not be conducted under strict alpha control .
The OS analysis will be performed when approximately 147 death events from the PD-L1 
TC/IC high subgroup have occurred in approximately 172 patients (85% maturit y) across 
the MEDI4736 monotherapy  and SoC treatment groups. All other endpoints will be 
analysed at thi s time.  No interim analyses will be performed for any  efficacy endpoint.
Figure 6 Multiple testing procedure for controlling the overall t ype 1 error rate
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
147(199)Combo MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combination therapy; ctDNA circulating tumor DNA; EM Early 
mortality ; IC tumo r-associated immune cells; OS Overall survival; PD -L1 Programmed death ligand 1; SoC 
Standard of Care; TC tumor cells; TMB Tumor Mutation Burden 
8.5.1 Analysis of the primary endpoint 
8.5.1.1 Overall survival
The analysis of OS will be done using a stratified log -rank test stratified by PD -L1 status 
(posi tive versus negat ive), tumor location (OPC versus non -OPC, wi th a subsequent 
adjustm ent for HPV status i n pat ients with OPC), and smoking history  (>10 versus ≤10 
pack -years) as entered in the IVRS system. Refer to Figure 6 for the mult iple testing 
procedure (MTP) with the primary object ive at the first row of the testing sequence.

148(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
The effect of treatment will be est imated by the HR together with its corresponding 95% 
CI and p- value, using a stratified Cox propotional hazards model.
Kaplan -Meier pl ots of  OS will be presented by  treatm ent arm .  Summaries of the number 
and percentage of patients who have died, those still in survival fo llow-up, those lost to 
follow-up, and those who have withdrawn consent will be provided along wit h the m edian 
OS for each treatment.
A sensit ivity analysis for OS will examine the censoring patterns to rule out attrit ion bias, 
achieved by a Kaplan -Meier pl ot of time to censoring where t he censoring indicator of OS 
is reversed.Cox proportional hazards modeling will be emplo yed to assess the effect of covariates on 
the HR estimate.  Details will be presented in the SAP.
Impact of switching (crossover outside of this study) to immunotherap ies (or other 
potentially active investigational agents) on OS analyses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.5.1.2 Subgroup analysis of OS
Subgroup analyses will be conducted comparing OS between MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
 
combinat ion therapy  versus SoC, MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC and ME DI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  versus MEDI4736 monotherapy  in the PD -L1 TC/IC 
high subgroup, ctDNA TMB high subgroup ( ≥16 mut/Mb), low risk of EM subgroup and 
the FAS (all -comers): 
 Sex (m ale, female)
 Age at randomizat ion (<65, ≥65-<75, ≥75 years of age)
 PD-L1 TC ≥25 status for stratificat ion (posi tive, negative)
 PD-L1 TC/IC expressio n (TC ≥50 or IC≥25 (High), TC<50 and IC<25 (Low))

 Tumor locati on/HPV ( OPC/Posit ive, OPC/Negative, non -OPC/Any HPV)
 Primary tumor site (orophary nx, oral  cavi ty, hypopharynx, larynx)
 Smoking history  (>10, ≤10 pack- years)
 Race (Asian, non -Asian)
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
149(199) ECOG Performance status (0, 1)
 Extent of Disease (only  locoregi onally  recurrent, metastati c with or wi thout 
locoregi onal recurrence)
Treatment effect will be est imated by the HR together with its cor responding 95% CI 
using an unstratified Cox model wit h treatment as the only covariate.
Other baseline variables may also be assessed if there is clinical just ificat ion or if an 
imbalance is observed between the treatment arms.  The purpose of the subgroup analyses 
is to assess the consistency  of treatm ent effect across expected prognostic and/or predict ive 
factors. Only the HR estimate along wit h 95% CI will be presented.
No adj ustment to the si gnificance level for testing of the subgroup and sensit ivity analyses 
will be made since all these analyses will be considered supportive of the analysis o f OS.
A forest pl ot will  be presented for the subgroups showing the comparison of MEDI4736 
+/-tremelimumab therapy  versus SoC in the PD -L1 TC/IC subgroup, low ris k of EM 
subgroup, all -comers and the ctDNA TMB ( ≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup. 
8.5.2 Analysis of the secondary variable(s)
8.5.2.1 Progression -free survival
The PFS analysis will be based on the programmatically derived RECIST 1.1 using the 
investigator assessments.  The analy sis will be perform ed wi th the,PD-L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup , ctDNA TMB high (≥16 m ut/Mb) subgroup and all -
comersusing a stratified log -rank test stratified by  PD-L1 status (posit ive versus negat ive), 
tumor locati on (OPC versus non -OPC, wi th a subsequent adj ustment for HPV status in 
patients wi th OPC), and sm oking history  (>10 versus ≤10 pack- years) as entered in the 
IVRS sy stem .  
The effect of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC treatment will be est imated by the HR 
together with its co rresponding 95% CI and p- value. The stratificat ion factors will be 
based on the values entered into IVRS at randomization even if it is subsequent ly 
discovered that these values were incorrect.
The hazard ratio (HR) of PFS, along with 95% confidence interv al (using the same strata 
inform ation as above) will be est imated using a stratified Cox model with treatment as the 
only covari ate.
A PFS analysis will also be performed to compare MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
combinat ion therapy  versus SoC as well as to compa re MEDI4736 + tremelimumab
combinat ion therapy  versus MEDI4736 monotherapy  for the  PD -L1 TC/IC high 
subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup , ctDNA TMB high (≥16 m ut/Mb) subgroup, and all -
comers.  These analyses will be performed using the same methodology  as described 
above. 
Kaplan -Meier pl ots of  PFS will be presented by  treatm ent arm  in the low risk of EM 
subgroup, all -comers, PD- L1 TC/IC high subgroup and ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 m ut/Mb) 
subgroup  where appropriate.  
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
150(199)A sensit ivity analysis will be performed by  analyzing the BICR assessments.  The 
stratified log -rank test will be repeated on these data.  The HR and CI will be presented.  
The m ethodol ogy will be docum ented in the SAP.
 
 
8.5.2.2 Objective respons e rate
The ORR will be based on the programmat ically derived RECIST 1.1 using invest igator 
assessment data .  The ORR will be co mpared between MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus 
SoC, MEDI4736 + tremelimumab versus SoC, and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab versus 
MEDI4736 m onotherapy  using l ogistic regression models adjust ing for the same factors as 
the primary  endpoint (PD -L1 status, tumor location, and smoking history).  The results of 
the analysis will be presented in terms of an odds ratio together with its associated pr ofile 
likelihood 95% CI and p- value (based on twice the change in log -likelihood result ing from 
the addi tion of  a treatm ent factor to the m odel).  This analysis will be performed on the 
PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup , low risk of EM subgroup and all -comers. The ORR will 
again be co mpared between MEDI4736 +/- tremelimumab versus SoC using logist ic 
regression models for the ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 mut/Mb) subgroup.
 
Summaries will be produced that present the number and percentage of patients with a 
tumor response (CR/PR).  Overall visit response data will be listed and summarized over 
time for all pat ients (ie, the FAS).  For e ach treatment arm, BoR will be summarized by n 
(%) for each category  (CR, PR, SD, PD, and NE).  No formal statistical analyses are 
planned for BoR.
8.5.2.3 Duration of response
Descript ive data will be provided for the DoR in responding pat ients, including the 
associated Kaplan -Meier curves (without any  formal com parison of treatment arms or 
p-value attached).
8.5.2.4 Best objective response
BoR based on site invest igator data (RECIST 1.1), for each treatment arm, BoR will be 
summarized by  n (%) f or each category  (CR, PR, SD, PD and NE). No formal statist ical 
analysis are planned for BoR.
8.5.2.5 Time to response
The TTR, based upon the site invest igator assessment of RECIST 1.1, will be summarised 
(ie, number of patients [%] based upon the number of responders) by the scheduled 
assessment timepoint that the response was first observed.  Addit ionally , descri ptive 
summary statist ics (ie, minimum , maximum, m edian, Q1 and Q3) will also be presented. 
CCI
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
151(199)8.5.2.6 Proportion of patients alive and progression free at 6 and 12 months
The APF6 and APF1 2 will be summarized (using the Kaplan -Meier est imate) and 
presented by treatment arm.  APF6 and APF12 will be compared between MEDI4736 
monotherapy  versus SoC and MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbination therapy versus 
SoC, PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup , low risk of EM subgroup , ctDNA TMB high ( ≥16 
mut/Mb) subgroup and all -comers by using the Kaplan -Meier est imate of PFS at 6 and 12 
months for each treatment.
8.5.2.7 Time from randomization to PFS2
PFS2 i s defined as the time from the date of randomizat ion to the earliest of the 
progression event subsequent to that used for the PFS endpo int.  PFS2 will be analyzed 
using a stratified log -rank tests, using the same methodology  as described for the prim ary 
PFS endpo int.  The effect of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC and MEDI4736 + 
tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy  versus SoC for the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and 
all-comers will be est imated by the HR together with its corresponding CI and p -value.  
Kaplan -Meier pl ots will be presented by  treatm ent arm .  Summaries of the number and 
percentage of patients who have an event as well as who were censored will be provided 
along wi th the medians for each treatment.  
8.5.2.8 Time from randomization to first and second su bsequent therapy or death 
For supportive purposes, the time to the start of the first and the second subsequent therapy  
or death will be analyzed for the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers using the 
same m ethodol ogy and m odel as that used for the an alysis of PFS .  The HR for the 
treatm ent effect together with its 95% CI will be presented.  In addition, a Kaplan -Meier 
plot of the time to the start of the first and the second subsequent therapy  will be presented 
by treatment arm, and the time between p rogression and start of the first and the second 
subsequent therapy  will be assessed.  This interval will be summarized per treatment arm, 
but no formal co mpar isons will be made.  
In pati ents who received subsequent anticancer therapy , asummary table of the first and 
the second subsequent ant icancer therapies by treatment arm will be provided, as well as 
response to the first and the second subsequent anticancer therapy  by treatment arm  (if 
available).
The number of pat ients prematurely censored will also be summarized.
8.5.2.9 Proportion of OS12, OS18 and OS24
OS12, OS18 and OS24 will be summarized (using the Kaplan -Meier est imate) and 
presented by treatment arm for the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup ,low risk of EM subgroup, 
ctDNA TMB high (≥16 m ut/Mb) and all -comers.
8.5.3 Patient -reported outcomes
The PRO endpo ints that have been ident ified as secondary object ives are EORTC QLQ -
C30 time to HRQoL deterioration for global health status, time to symptom deterioration 
for functi onal physical  dom ain, time to symptom deteriorat ion for fatigue, and QLQ -
H&N35 time to symptom deterioration for these 2 symptoms; pain and swallowing.  These are not part of the main MTP, and as supportive endpoints will need a Bonferroni 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
152(199)adjustm ent to the si gnificance level to aid interpretation.  The refore, these 5 endpo ints will 
be tested at a 1.0% significance level and 99% CIs will be produced.
The other time to symptom deterioration endpo ints will be tested at a 5% significance level 
and 95% CIs will be produced.
8.5.3.1 EORTC QLQ -C30
Time to symptom dete rioration in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all- comers will be 
analyzed for each of the 3 symptom scales (fat igue, pain, and nausea/vo miting). Time to 
HRQoL/funct ion deterioration in all -comers will be analyzed for the 5 function scales 
(physical, role, emotional, cogni tive, and soci al) and gl obal health status/QoL. These 
analyses will be done using a stratified log -rank test (at the 5% significance level), using 
the sam e methodol ogy as described for the primary  PFS endpoint.
The effect of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC will be est imated by the HR together 
with its corresponding CI and p- value, using an unstratified Cox model with treatment as 
the only covariate .   Time to deterioration will be presented using a Kaplan -Meier pl ot for 
each of the 3 symptom scales (fat igue, pain, and nausea/vo miting), 5 funct ional scales 
(physical, role, emotional, cognit ive, and social), and global healt h status/QoL by 
treatm ent arm .  Summaries of the number and percentage of patients who have an event as 
well as who were censored will be provided along with the medians for each treatment.
A summary  of the symptom  improvement rate for each of the 3 symptom scales (fat igue, 
pain and nausea/vo miting) will be produced.  Similarly , a summary  of QoL/f unction 
improvement rat e for each of the 5 funct ion scales (physical, role, emotional, cognit ive, 
and social) and global healt h status/QoL will be produced.  Symptom improvement rate 
and HRQoL/funct ion improvement rate will be analyzed by co mpar ing between treatment 
arms using a logistic regressio n model as described for the analysis of ORR.
Summaries of abso lute and change fro m baseline values for each of the 3 symptom 
scales/items (fatigue, pain, and nausea/vomit ing), 5 individual symptom items (dy spnea, 
insomnia, appetite loss, constipat ion, and diarrhea), 5 funct ional scales (physical, role, 
emotional, cogni tive, and soci al) and the global health status \QoLscore, and each 
funct ional do main will be reported by  visit for each treatment arm.  Graphical 
presentations may also be produced as appropriate.  
Analysis of HRQoL or symptom will also be carried out by  com paring mean change fro m 
baseline in the global healt h status/QoL, functions (physical, role, cognit ive, social and 
emotional) scores (from the EORTC QLQ -C30 questionnai re).
Change from baseline will be derived using a MMRM analysis of all the post -baseline 
scores for each visit.  The model will include treatment, visit, and treatment by  visit 
interact ion as explanatory  variables and the baseline score as a covariate. Adjusted m ean 
estimates per treatment group and corresponding 95% CIs will be presented along wit h an 
overall est imate of the treatment difference, 95% CI and p -value. An overall adjusted mean 
estimate will be derived that will est imate the average treatm ent effect over visits giving 
each visit equal weight using least squares means. 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC0 0001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
153(199)8.5.3.2 EORTC QLQ -H&N35
Time to symptom deterioration in the PD-L1 TC/IC high subgroup and all -comers for each 
of the 4 symptom scales/items in the QLQ- H&N35 ( pain, swallowing, sense s and speech)
will be co mpared between treatment arms using a stratified log -rank test (at the 5% 
significance l evel) as described for the primary analysis o f OS.
The effect of MEDI4736 monotherapy  versus SoC will be est imated by the HR together 
with its corresponding CI and p- value, using an unstratified Cox model with treatment as 
the only covariate.
For each of the above 4 symptom scales/items in the QLQ -H&N35, time to deterioration in 
symptoms will be presented using a Kaplan- Meier pl ot.  Summaries of t he number and 
percentage of patients experiencing a clinically meaningful deterioration or death, and the 
median time to deterioration, will also be provided for each treatment group.
A summary  of the symptom  improvement rate for each of the 4 symptom scal es/items 
ment ioned above will be produced.  The symptom improvement rate will be compared 
between treatment groups using a logistic regression model as described for ORR.  Summaries of abso lute and change fro m baseline values for each of the 7 symptom 
scales/items (pain, swallowing, senses, speech, social eat ing, social contact and sexualit y)  
and 11 single -item measures ( teeth, problems with mouth opening, dry  mouth, sti cky 
saliva, coughing, feeling ill, use of analgesics, use of nutritional supplements, use of a 
feeding tube, weight gain, and weight loss )  will be reported by  visit for each treatment 
group.  Graphical presentations may also be produced as appropriate.   The assessment of symptoms comparing mean change fro m baseline using the MMRM as 
descri bed for EORTC QLQ -C30 will be repeated for pain, swallowing, senses, and speech 
of the EORTC QLQ -H&N35.  All assumpt ions and outputs as described for the EORTC 
QLQ -C30 are applicable and the same approach from EORTC QLQ -C30 will be applied.
8.5.3.3 Exploratory p atient -reported outcomes
 
 
  
8.5.4 Safety data
Safety and tol erabilit y data will be presented by  treatm ent arm , for pati ents in the PD-L1 
TC/IC high subgroup, low risk of EM subgroup and all -comers , using the safet y analysis 
set.    
Data from all cycles of treatment will be combined in the presentation of safet y data.  AEs 
(both in terms o f Medical Dictionary  for Regul atory  Activi ties [MedDRA] preferred terms 
and CTCAE grade) will be listed individually  by pati ent.  The number of patients
experiencing each AE will be summarized by  treatment arm  and CTCAE grade.  
Addit ionally , data presentati ons of the rate of AEs per person -years at risk may be 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
154(199)produced.  Any  safety  summaries examining retreatment with MEDI4736 + tremelimumab 
will be produ ced separately.
Other safet y data will be assessed in terms of physical examinat ion, clinical chemistry , 
hematol ogy, vital signs, and ECGs.  Exposure to MEDI4736 + tremelimumab combinat ion 
therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , and SoC will be summarized.  Time on study , 
MEDI4736 + tremelimumab co mbinat ion therapy , MEDI4736 m onotherapy , and SoC 
dose delays and dose reductions in the SoC arm will also be summarized.  At the end of 
the study , appropri ate summaries of all safet y data will be produced, as defined in th e 
SAP.
8.5.5 Pharmacokinetic data
PK concentration data of MEDI4736 and tremelimumab will be listed for each patient and 
each dosing day with a matching PK sample, and a summary  will be provi ded for all 
evaluable pat ients.
8.5.6 Immunogenicity data
Immunogenicit y resul ts will  be listed by  patient, and a summary will be provided by the 
number and percentage of patients who develop detectable ant i-MEDI4736 and 
anti-tremelimumab ant ibodies.  The immunogenicity  titer and neutralizing ADA data will 
be listed for samples confi rmed posi tive for the presence of ant i-MEDI4736 and 
anti-tremelimumab ant ibodies.  
The effect of immunogenicit y as well as the effect of its neutralizing properties on PK, 
pharmacodynamics, efficacy , and safet y may be eval uated as data allow.  
8.5.7 Biom arker data
  
 
Subgroup analysis by HPV/EBV status may be performed, if data are available.
8.5.8 Interim analysis
Interim safet y monitoring will be conducted by  an IDMC.  Details o f the plan and 
communicat ion process will be provided in an IDMC Charter.
No interim analyses will be performed for any  efficacy  endpoint.
9.STUDY AND DATA MANAG EMENT BY ASTRAZENECA
9.1 Training of study site personnel
Before the first patient is enrolled in the study , an AstraZeneca representative will review 
and discuss the requirements of the clinical study  protocol  (CSP) and related documents 
CCI
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
155(199)with the invest igational staff and train t hem in any  study -specific procedures and 
IVRS/IWRS, WBDC, and any  ePRO system s to be utilized.
The Principal Invest igator will ensure that appropriate training relevant to the study is 
given to all o f these staff and that any  new informati on rel evant to th e perform ance of this 
study  is forwarded to the staff invo lved.
The Principal Invest igator will maintain a record of all individuals invo lved in the study  
(medical, nursing, and other staff).
9.2 Monitoring of the study
During the study , an AstraZeneca represe ntative will have regular contacts with the study  
site, including visits to
 Provi de inform ation and support to the Invest igator(s)
 Confirm that facilit ies remain acceptable
 Confirm that the invest igational team  is adhering to the protocol, data are being 
accurately and timely recorded in the eCRFs, bio logical samples are handled in 
accordance with the Laboratory  Manual , and study drug accountabilit y checks are 
being performed
 Perform  source data verification (a comparison of the data in the eCRFs with the 
patient’s medical records at the hospital or practice and other records relevant to the 
study ), including verificat ion of informed consent of participat ing patients.  This will 
requi re direct access to all original records for each patient (eg, clinic chart s).
 Ensure that withdrawal o f informed consent for the use of the patient’s bio logical  
samples is reported, bio logical samples are i dentified and disposed of or destroy ed 
accordingly, and the action is documented and reported to the patient
The AstraZeneca representati ve will be available between visit s if the Invest igators or 
other staff at the centers need informat ion and advice about the study  conduct.
9.2.1 Source data
Refer to the CSA for location of source data.
9.2.2 Study agreements
The Principal Invest igator a t each center should comply wit h all the terms, condit ions, and 
obligat ions of the CSA for this study .  In the event of any inconsistency  between this CSP 
and the CSA, the terms of CSP shall prevail with respect to the conduct of the study and 
the treatmen t of patients.  In all other respects not relat ing to study conduct or treatment of 
patients, the term s of the CSA shall prevail.
Agreements between AstraZeneca and the Principal Investigator should be in place before any study -related procedures can take place or before any pat ients are enrolled.
9.2.3 Archiving of study documents
The Investigator will fo llow the principles outlined in the CSA.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
156(199)9.3 Study timetable and end of study
The end o f the study  is defined as the “last visit of the last patient undergoing the study .”  
The Investigator will be notified by the Sponsor when recruit ment is complete.
The study  is expected to start in Q4 2015 and end by  Q3 2019.
The study  may be terminated at individual centers if the study  procedures are not being 
perform ed accordin g to Good Clinical Pract ice (GCP) or if recruit ment is slow.  
AstraZeneca may also terminate the entire study  prem aturely  if concerns for safet y arise 
within this study  or in any  other study  involving MEDI4736.
9.4 Data management by AstraZeneca
Data m anagemen t will  be perform ed by a chosen vendor accordi ng to the Data 
Management Plan .  AEs and medical/surgical history  will be cl assified according to the 
termino logy of the latest version of MedDRA.  Medicat ions will be classified according to 
the AstraZeneca Dr ug Di ctionary.  Classificat ion coding will be performed by the chosen 
vendor.
The data collected through third party  sources will be obtained and reconciled against 
study  data.
Data queri es will be raised for inconsistent, impossible, or missing data.  All entries to the 
study  database will be available in an audit trail.
The data will be validated as defined in the Data Management Plan.  Qualit y control  
procedures will be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable 
and have been processed correctly.  The Data Management Plan will also clarify the roles 
and responsibilit ies o f the various funct ions and personnel invo lved in the data 
management process.
When all data have been coded, validated, signed, and locked, a clean file will be declared.  
Any treatment -revealing data may be added thereafter, and the final database will be 
locked.
Serious adverse event reconciliation
SAE reconciliat ion reports are produced and reconciled wit h the Patient Safet y database 
and/or the invest igational site.  
Data management of genotype data
Any genoty pe data generated in this study  will be stored in the AstraZeneca genoty ping 
database or oth er appropriate secure system within AstraZeneca and/or a third party 
contracted to work with AstraZeneca to analyze samples.  The results from this genet ic 
research may be reported in the CSR for the main study  or in a separate report, as 
appropriate.
Some or all o f the clinical datasets from the main study  may be merged wi th the genet ic 
data in a suitable secure environment separate from the clinical database .
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
157(199)Data associated with human biological samples
Data associated with human bio logical  samples wil l be transferred from laboratories 
internal  or external  to AstraZeneca.
10.ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY REQUIREMENTS
10.1 Ethical conduct of the study
The study  will be perform ed in accordance with ethical principles that have their origin in 
the Decl aration of Helsinki and are consistent with International Conference on 
Harm onisat ion (ICH)/GCP, applicable regulatory  requi rements, and the AstraZeneca 
policy  on Bi oethics and Human Biological Samples.  
10.2 Patient data protection
The ICF will incorporate wording that complies with relevant data protection and privacy 
legislat ion.  In some cases, such wording will be in a separate accompanying document.
AstraZeneca will not provide individual genoty pe resul ts to patients, thei r family members, 
their general physician, any insur ance com pany, any  employer, or any  other thi rd party , 
unless required to do so by  law.
Precauti ons are taken to preserve confident iality and prevent genetic data from being 
linked to the ident ity of the patient.  In exceptional circumstances, however, cert ain 
individuals might see both the genet ic data and the personal ident ifiers of a patient.  For 
example, in the case of a medical emergency , an AstraZeneca Physician or an Invest igator 
might know a patient’s ident ity and might also have access to his or he r genetic data.  
Also, regulatory  authori ties may  require access to the relevant files.  Even so, the patient’s 
medical informat ion and the genet ic files would remain physically separate.
10.3 Ethics and regulatory review
An Ethi cs Committee (EC)/Inst itutional Review Board (IRB) should approve the final 
study  protocol , incl uding the final versio n of the ICF and any other written information 
and/or materials to be provided to the patients.  The Invest igator will ensure the 
distribut ion of these documents to the a pplicable EC/IRB and to the study  site staff.
The opinio n of the EC/IRB should be given in writ ing.  The Invest igator should submit the 
written approval  to AstraZeneca before enrollment of any  patient into the study .  
The EC/IRB should approve all advertising used to recruit patients for the study .
AstraZeneca should approve any  modificati ons to the ICF that are needed to meet local 
requi rements.
If required by  local regulat ions, the protocol should be re -approved by the EC/IRB 
annually.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
158(199)Before enro llment of any patient into the study , the final study  protocol , including the final 
versio n of the ICF, should be approved by the nat ional regulatory  authori ty or a 
notification to the nat ional regulatory  authori ty shoul d be approved, according to local 
regulations.
AstraZeneca will handle the distribut ion of these documents to the nat ional regulatory  
authori ties.
AstraZeneca will provide regulatory  authori ties, ECs/IRBs, and Principal Invest igators 
safet y updates or reports according to local requirements.
Each Principal Investigator is responsible for providing the EC/IRB with reports of any 
serious and unexpected adverse drug reactions from any  other study  conducted wi th the IP.  
AstraZeneca will provide this information to the Principal Invest igator so t hat he/she can 
meet these reporting requirements.
10.4 Informed consent
The Principal Invest igator(s) at each center will:
 Ensure that each patient is given full and adequate oral and written informat ion about 
the nature, purpose, possible risk, and benefit of the study
 Ensure that each patient is notified that he or she is free to discontinue from the study  
at any  time
 Ensure that each patient is given the opportunit y to ask questions and allowed time to 
consider the information provided
 Ensure that each patien t provi des a si gned and dated informed consent before 
conducting any  procedure specifically for the study
 Ensure that the original, signed ICF(s) is/are stored in the Invest igator’s Study  File
 Ensure that a copy  of the si gned ICF is given to the patient
 Ensure that any  incentives for patients who participate in the study  as well  as any  
provi sions for pati ents harmed as a consequence of study  parti cipat ion are described 
in the ICF that is approved by an EC/IRB.
10.5 Changes to the protocol and informed consent fo rm
For sites outside Japan
Study  procedures will not be changed without the mutual agreement of the Principal 
Invest igator and AstraZeneca.
If there are any substant ial changes to the study  protocol , then these changes will be 
docum ented in a study  protocol  amendment and, where required, in a new versio n of the 
study  protocol  (revised CSP).
The am endment i s to be approved by  the rel evant EC/IRB and, if applicable, the nat ional 
regul atory  authori ty, before implementati on.  Local  requirements are to be followed for 
revised protocols.
159(199)Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
AstraZeneca will distribute any subsequent amendments and new versio ns of the protocol 
to each Principal Investigator .  For distribut ion to EC/IRB, see Section 10.3.
If a protocol amendment requires a change to a center’s ICF, AstraZeneca and the center’s 
EC/IRB are to approve the revised ICF before the revised form is used.  
If required by  local regulat ions, any adm inistrative change will be co mmu nicated to or 
approved by  each EC/IRB.
For sites inJapan only
Study  procedures will not be changed without the mutual agreement of the Principal 
Invest igator and AstraZeneca.  If it is necessary for the study protocol to be amended, the 
amendment shoul d be submitted to the Head of the Study  Site and be approved by  its IRB.  
If applicable, AstraZeneca should submit a notification to the regulatory  authori ty before it 
is implemented.  If a protocol amendment requires a change to a particular center’s ICF, 
then AstraZeneca and the center's IRB should be notified by the Principal Invest igator .  
Approval o f the revised ICF by AstraZeneca and IRB is required before t he revised form is 
used.  If an administrative change is required, such a change should be notified to or 
approved by  each IRB according to local requirements .
10.6 Audits and inspections
Authori zed representatives of AstraZeneca, a regulatory  authori ty, or an EC/IRB may 
perform  audi ts or i nspect ions at the center, including source data verificat ion.  The purpose 
of an audit or inspect ion is to systematically and independently examine all study- related 
activit ies and documents, to determine whether these activit ies were conducted, and to 
determine if data were recorded, analyzed, and accurately  reported accordi ng to the 
protocol , GCPs, ICH gui delines, and any applicable regulatory  requi rements.  The 
Invest igator will contact AstraZeneca immediately if contacted b y a regulatory  agency 
about an inspect ion at the center.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
160(199)11. LIST OF R EFERENCES
Aaronson et al 1993
Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, Bullinger M, Cull A, Duez NJ, et al. The European Organizat ion for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ -C30: a qualit y-of-life 
instrum ent for use in internat ional clinical trials in oncology . J Natl  Cancer Inst 
1993;85(5):365 -76.
Alexandrov et al 2013
Alexandrov LB, Nik -Zainal S, Wedge DC, Aparicio SA, Behjat i S, Biankin AV, et al. 
Signatures of m utation processes in human canc er. Nature 2013;500(7463):415 -21.
Antonia etal 2015
Antoni a S, Gol dberg A, Balmanoukian A, Sanborn RE, Steele KE, Narwal R, et al. Phase 
1b study  of MEDI4736, a programmed cell death ligand -1 (PD -L1) antibody , in 
combinat ion with tremelimumab, a cy totoxi c t-lymphocy te-associ ated protein -4 (CTLA -4) 
antibody , in pati ents wi th advanced non -small  cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [abstract 3014]. 
Poster presented at the American Societ y of Clinical  Oncol ogy (ASCO) Annual Meet ing, 
Chicago, IL, 29 May  to 2 Jun 2015.
ASCO 2015
ASCO Educat ional Book 2015. Michael Postow MD. “Managing Immune Checkpo int 
Blocking Ant ibody  Side Effects.”
Badoual et al 2010
Badoual  C, Sandoval F, Pere H, Hans S, Gey  A, Merill on N, et al . Better understanding 
tumor-host interaction in head and ne ck cancer to improve the design and development of 
immunotherapeutic strategies. Head Neck 2010;32(7):946 -58.
Badoual et al 2013
Badoual  C, Hans S, Merillo n N, Van Ryswick C, Ravel P, Benhamouda N, et al. 
PD-1-expressing tumor -infiltrating T cells are a favorable prognostic bio marker in 
HPV -associ ated head and neck cancer. Cancer Res 2013;73(1):128 -38.
Basch et al 2009
Basch E, Ji a X, Heller G, Barz A, Sit L, Fruscione M, et al. Adverse symptom event 
reporting by  patients vs clinicians: relat ionship wit h clinical outcomes. J Natl Cancer Inst 
2009;101:1624-32.
Berry et al 1991
Berry  G, Ki tchin RM, Mock PA. A comparison of 2 simple hazard ratio estimators based 
on the l ogrank test. Stat Med 1991;10:749-55.
Bettegowda et al 2014
Bettegowda C., Sausen M, Leary RJ, Kinde I, Wang Y, Agrawal N, Bartlett BR et al
Detection of circulat ing tumor DNA in early and late -stage human malignancies Cancer 
2014; Vol 6 issue 224
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
161(199)Bjordal et al 2000
Bjordal  K, de Graeff A, Fayers PM, Hammerlid E, van Pottelsberghe C, Curran D, et al, 
for the EORTC Qualit y of Life Group. A 12 country  field study  of the EORTC QLQ -C30 
(versio n 3.0) and the head and neck cancer specific module (EORTC QLQ -H&N35) in 
head and neck patients. Eur J Cancer 2000;36(14):1796-807.
Brahmer et al 2012
Brahmer JR, Ty kodi SS, Chow LQM, Hwu WJ, Topalian SL, Hwu P, et al. Safet y and 
activit y of anti-PD-L1 ant ibody  in pat ients with advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 
2012;366(26):2455-65.
Breslow 1974
Breslow, NE. Covariance Analysis of Censored Survival Data. Bio metrics 1974;30:89 –99.
Burtness et al., 2019
Burtness B, Harrington KJ, Greil R, Soulières D, Tahara M, de Castro Jr G et al. Pembrolizumab alo ne or wi th chem otherapy  versus cetuximab wit h chemotherapy for 
recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcino ma o f the head and neck (KEYNOTE -048): a 
rando mised, open -label, phase 3 study . Lancet 2019; 394: 1915 –28. Published Online 
October 31, 2019 https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0140 -6736(19)32591 -7
Champiat et al 2014
Cham piat S, Ferte C, Lebel -Binay S, Eggerm ont A, Soria JC. E xomics and immunogenics: 
Bridging m utational l oad and immune checkpoints efficacy. Onco immuno logy 
2014;3(1):e27817.
Champiat et al 2018
Cham piat S, Ferrara R, Massard C, Besse B, Marabelle A, Soria JC, et al. 
Hyperprogressive disease: recognizing a novel p attern to improve pat ient management. 
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2018;15(12):748 -62.
Chow et al 2016
Chow LQM, Mehra R, Haddad RI, Mahipal A, Weiss J, Berger R, Eder JP, Burtness B, 
Tahara M, Keam B, Le Dt, Muro K, Geva R, Chung HC, Lin C -C, Ayers M, Aurora -Garg 
D, Lunceford JK, Cheng JD, Seiwert TY.  Bio markers and response to pembro lizumab 
(pembro) i n recurrent/metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcino ma (R/M HNSCC). J 
Clin Onco l 34, 2016 (suppl; abstr 6010).
Collett 2003
Collett D. Modelling survival data in medical research. 2nd ed. Chapman and Hall/CRC; 
2003.
D419LC00001CSP Amendment 1
d419l c00001- csp-amendment -1, Clinical Study  Protocol  Amendment 1, Doc ID 
002996664.
D419LC00001CSP Amendment 2
d419l c00001- csp-amendment -2, Clinical Study  Protocol  Amendmen t 2, Doc ID 
002999508.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimu mab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
D419LC00001CSP Amendment 3
d419l c00001- csp-amendment -3, Clinical Study  Protocol  Amendment 3, Doc ID 
003084678.
Dunn etal 2004
Dunn GP, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. The three Es of cancer immunoedit ing. Annu Rev 
Immunol 2004;22:329-60.
Ellis et al 2008
Ellis S, Carroll KJ, Pemberton K. Analysis o f durati on of  response in onco logy trials. 
Contem p Clin Trials 2008;29:456-65.
EuroQol Group 1990
EuroQol  Group. EuroQol  -a new facilit y for the measurement of health- related quali ty of 
life. Health Policy 1990;16:199-208.
EuroQol Group 2013EuroQol  Group. EQ -5D- 5L User Guide: Basic information on how to use the EQ -5D- 5L 
instrum ent, Versi on 2.0, October 2013. Available from: 
http://www.euroqol.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Documenten/PDF/Fo lders_Flyers/UserGui
de_EQ -5D- 5L_v2.0_October_2013.pdf. Accessed 21 November 2013.
Fairman etal 2014
Fairman D, Narwal R, Liang M, Robbins PB, Schneider A, Chavez C, et al. Pharmacokinet ics of MEDI4736, a fully  human anti -PD-L1 m onocl onal antibody , in 
patients wi th advanced so lid tumours. J Clin Onco l, 2014 ASCO Annual Meet ing 
Abstracts; 32(Suppl):abstr 2602.
Fayers et al 1999
Fayers P, Aaronson NK, Bjordal K, Curran D, Groenvo ld M on behalf o f the EORTC 
Qualit y of Life Study  Group. EORTC QLQ -C30 Scoring Manual: 2nd Edit ion 1999. 
Available on request.
Ferris et al., 2020
Ferris RL, Haddad R, Even C, Tahara M, Dvorkin M, Ciuleanu TE et al. Durvalumab wit h 
or wi thout trem elimumab in pat ients with recurrent or m etastati c head and neck squamous 
cell carcino ma (EAGLE): a randomized, open- label phase III study . Annals Oncol . 2020 
[in press].
FDA 2009
Food and Drug Administration (US). Guidance for Industry : drug -induced liver injury –
prem arket ing clini cal evaluat ion. July 2009.
FDA Guidance 2011
Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry : Clinical  trial endpoints for the 
approval  of non-small cell lung cancer drugs and bio logics. June 2011. Available from: 
URL: 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM259421.pdf. Accessed 
21May 2014.
162(199)
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
163(199)Ferris et al 2016
Ferris RL, Ferris RL, Blumenschein G Jr, Fay ette J, Gui gay J, Colevas AD, Licitra L, et al. 
Nivo lumab for recurrent squamous -cell carcino ma of the head and neck. NEngl J
Med 2016;375: 1856-1867
Ferris et al 2017
Ferris RL, Blumenschein G, Harrington K, Fayette J, Guigay J, Colevas AD, Licitra L, Kasper EE, Even C, Worden F, Saba NF, Vokes E, Ho C, Concha -Benavente F, 
Greenawalt D, Jim C, Lynch M, Tahara M, Haddad R, Monga M, Kao H, and Gillison ML.  Tum or-associated immune cell PD -L1 expression and peripheral immune profiling: 
Analyses fro m Checkmate 141.  Abstract CT021,  In: Proceedings o f the 107th Annual 
Meet ing of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2017 Apr 1 -5; Washington, 
DC.: AACR; 2017. Abstract CT021.
Ferris et al 2018
Ferris RL, Saba NF, Gitlitz BJ, et al .Effect of adding motolimod to standard combination 
chemotherapy and cetuximab treatment of patients with squamous cell carcino ma of the 
head and neck: the Act ive8 Rando mized Clinical Trial .JAMA Oncol .2018;4(11):1583-
1588.
Fleischer et al 2011
Fleischer F, Gaschler -Markefski B, Bluhm ki E. How is retrospective independent review 
influenced by Invest igator -introduced informat ive censoring: a quantitative approach. Stat 
Med 2011;30:3373-86.
Gail and Simon 1985
Gail M, Simo n R. Testing for qualitative interactions between treatment effect s and subject 
subsets. Bi ometrics 1985;41:361-72.
Hanna et al 2018
Hanna GJ., Lizotte P, Cavanaugh M, Kuo FC, Shivdasani P, Frieden A, Chau NG, Schoenfeld JD, Lorch JH, Uppaluri R, MacConaill LE, Haddad RI.  Fram eshift events 
predi ct anti -PD-1/L1 response in head and neck cancer. JCI Insight 2018; 3(4):e98811
Herdman etal 2011
Herdm an M, Gudex C, Llo yd A, Janssen M, Kind P, Parkin D, et al. Development and 
preliminary testing of the new five -level version of EQ -5D (EQ -5D- 5L). Qual Life Res 
2011;20:1727 -36.
Janssen et al 2008a
Janssen MF, Birnie E, Haagsma JA, Bonsel GJ. Com paring the standard EQ -5D three-
level system wit h a five -level versio n. Val ue Heal th 2008;11:275-84.
Janssen et al 2008bJanssen MF, Birnie E, Bonsel GJ. Quantificat ion ofthe level  descriptors for the standard 
EQ-5D three -level system and a five -level versio n according to two methods. Qual Life 
Res 2008;17:463-73.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
164(199)Kaufmann et al 2002
Kaufmann AM, Stern PL, Rankin EM, Sommer H, Neussler V, Schneider A, et al. Safet y 
and imm unogenici ty of TA-HPV, a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing modified 
human papillo mavirus (HPV) -16 and HPV -18 E6 and E7 genes, in wo men with 
progressive cervical cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8(12):3676 -85.
Kirkwood et al 2010
Kirkwood JM, Lorigan P, Her sey P, Hauschild A, Robert C, McDermott D, et al. Phase II 
trial of trem elimumab (CP -675,206) in pat ients with advanced refractory  or rel apsed 
melano ma. Clin Cancer Res 2010;16:1042 -8.
Kitano et al 2014
Kitano S, Postow MA, Ziegler CG, Kuk D, Panageas KS, Cortez C, et al. Computational 
algorithm-driven eval uation of  monocy tic myel oid-derived suppressor cell frequency for 
predi ction of clinical outcomes. Cancer Immuno l Res 2014;2:812 -21.
Korn et al 2008
Korn EL, Li u PY, Lee SJ, Chapman JA, Niedzwiecki D, Sum an VJ, et al. Meta -analysis o f 
Phase II cooperative group trials in metastatic stage IV melano ma to determine 
progression free and overall survival benchmarks for future Phase II trials. J Clin Onco l 
2008;26:527-34.
Larkin etal 2015
Larkin J, Chiarion -Sileni R, Gonzalez V, Grob JJ, Cowey  CL, Lao CD, et al. Co mbined 
nivolumab and ipilimumab or monotherapy  in untreated melano ma [published online 
ahead of print May 31, 2015]. N Engl J Med. doi :10.1056/NEJMoa1504030.
Li et al 2018
Li B, Huang X, Fu L. Im pact o f smoking on efficacy  of PD-1/PD -L1 inhibitors in non -
small cell lung cancer patients: a meta -analysis. OncoTargets and Therapy  2018: 11 3691 -
3696.
Li et al  2020
Li W, Wildsmit h S, Ye J, Si  H, Morsli N, He P et al. Plasma -based tumor mutational 
burden (bT MB) as predictor for survival in phase III EAGLE study : Durvalumab (D) +/-
tremelimumab (T) versus chemotherapy (CT) in recurrent/metastatic head and neck 
squamous cell carcino ma (R/M HNSCC) after platinum failure. J Clin Oncol 
2020;38:15_suppl, 6511 -6511.
Litwin et al 1998
Litwin MS, Lubeck DP, Henning JM, Carroll PR. Differences in urologist and patient 
assessments of health related qualit y of life in men with prostate cancer: results of the 
CaPSURE database. J Urol 1998;159:1988-92.
Lyford -Pike et al 2013
Lyford -Pike S, Peng S, Young GD, Taube JM, Westra WH, Akpeng B, et al. Evidence for 
a role of the PD -1:PD -L1 pathway in immune resistance of HPV -associ ated head and neck 
squamous cell carcino ma. Cancer Res 2013;73(6):1733-41.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
165(199)Meyer et al 2014
Meyer C, C agnon L, Costa -Nunes CM, Baumgaertner P, Mon tandon N, Leyvraz L, et al. 
Frequencies of circulat ing MDSC correlate with clinical outcome of melano ma patients 
treated with ipilimumab. Cancer Immuno l Immunother 2014;63:247 -57.
Narwal et al 2013
Narwal  R, Roskos LK, Robbie GJ. Population pharmacokinet ics of sifalimumab, an 
investigat ional ant i-interferonalpha m onocl onal antibody , in systemic lupus ery thematosus. 
Clin Pharmacokinet 2013;52:1017 –27.
NCI CTCAE 2009
NCI CTCAE versio n 4.03.
Ng et al 20 06
Ng CM, Lum  BL, Gimenez V, Kelsey S, Alliso n D. Rati onale for fixed dosing of 
pertuzum ab in cancer patients based on popul ation pharm acokinetic analysis. Pharm Res 
2006;23(6):1275–84.
Norum et al 2018
Norum  J, Ni eder C. Tobacco smoking and cessat ion and PD-L1 inhibitors in non -small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a review o f the literature. ESMO Open 2018; 3:e000406. 
Doi:10.1136/esmoopen -2018-000406.
Oliva et al 2018
Oliva M., Spreafico A., Taberna M., Alemany  L, Coburn B, Mesia R, Siu LL Immune 
biomarkers of response to immune -checkpo int inhibitors in head and neck squamous cell 
carcino ma. Annals o f Onco logy 2018:0:1 -11
Osoba et al 1998
Osoba D, Rodrigues G, Myles J, Zee B, Pater J. Interpreting the significance of changes in healt h-related qualit y-of-life sco res. J Clin Onco l 1998;16(1):139 -44.
Pardoll 2012Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpo ints in cancer immunotherapy . Nat Rev 
Cancer 2012;12(4):252 -64.
Peggs et al 2009
Peggs KS, Quezada SA, Allison JP. Cancer immunotherapy : co-stimulatory  agonists and
coinhibitory  antagoni sts. Clin Exp Immunol 2009;157:9 -19.
Pickard etal 2007
Pickard AS, De Leon MC, Kohlmann T, Cella D, Rosenbloo m S. Psy chometric 
comparison of the standard EQ -5D to a 5 level version in cancer patients. Med Care 
2007;45:259-63.
Postow etal 2015
Postow MA, Chesney J, Pavlick AC, Robert C, Grossmann K, McDermott D, et al. 
Nivo lumab and ipilimumab versus ipilimumab in untreated melano ma. N Engl  J Med 
2015;372:2006-17.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 Jun e 2020
166(199)Ribas et al 2013
Ribas A, Kefford R, Marshall MA, Punt CJA, Haanen JB, Marm ol M, et al . Phase III 
rando mized clinical trial co mpar ing trem elimumab wi th standard -of-care chemotherapy in 
patients wi th advanced melanom a. J Clin Onco l 2013;31:616-22.
Rizvi etal 2015
Rizvi N, Brahmer J, Ou S -H, Segal NH, Khleif SN, Hwu WJ, et al. Safety and clinical 
activit y of MEDI4736, an ant i-programmed cell death -ligand 1 (PD -L1) Antibody, in 
Patients wi th Non -small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) [abstract 8032]. Poster presented at 
the American Societ y of Clinical Oncol ogy (ASCO) Annual Meet ing, Ch icago, IL, 29 
May to 2 Jun 2015.
Rizvi et al 2015bRizvi NA, Hellmann MD, Snyder A., Kvistborg P., Makarov V., Havel JJ et al. Cancer 
Immunology. Mutati onal landscape determines sensit ivity to PD -1 blockade in non -small 
cell lung cancer. Science. 2015;348: 124-8
Rizvi et al 2018
Rizvi NA, Durvalumab with or without tremelimumab vs platinum -based chemotherapy  as 
first-line treatment for metastatic non -small  cell lung cancer: MYSTIC Abstr. 6. Annals of 
Onco logy, Vol ume 29, 2018 Suppl ement 10
Robins 1993
Robins JM. Inform ation recovery  and bias adj ustment in proporti onal hazards regressio n 
analysis of randomized trials using surrogate markers. Proc Biopharm Sect ion, Amer Stat 
Assoc 1993;24 -33.
Robins and Tsiatis 1991
Robins JM, Tsiat is AA. Correcting for non-compliance in rando mized trials using rank 
preserving structural failure t ime models. Commun Stat Theory  Methods 
1991;20:2609 -31.
Segal etal 2015
Segal  H, Ou S -HI, Balmanoukian AS, Fury MG, Massarelli E, Brahmer JR, et al. Safet y 
and efficacy  of MEDI4 736, an ant i-pd- l1 ant ibody , in pat ients from a squam ous cell  
carcino ma of the head and neck (SCCHN) expansion cohort [abstract 3011]. Poster 
presented at the American Societ y of Clinical  Oncol ogy (ASCO) Annual Meet ing, 
Chicago, IL, 29 May  to 2 Jun 2015.
Selke and Siegmund 1983
Selke T, Si egmund D. Sequential analysis of the proportional hazards model. Bio metrika 
1983;70:315-26.
Siegel et al 2014
Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statist ics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin 2014;64(1):9 -
29.
Siewert et al 2018
Siewert TY, Robert Haddad, Joshua Bauml, Jared Weiss, David G. Pfister, Shilpa Gupta, 
Ranee Mehra, Iris Gluck, Hyunseok Kang, Francis Worden, J. Paul Eder, Makoto Tahara, 
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
167(199)Barbara Burtness, Stephen V. Liu, Andrea Webber, Lingkang Huang, Robin Mogg, 
Razvan Cri stescu, Jonathan Cheng and Laura Q. Chow.  Bio markers predict ive of response 
to pembro lizumab in head and neck cancer (HNSCC). AACR meeting 2018. Abstr. 339
Singer et al 2013
Singer S, Arraras JI, Chie WC, Fisher SE, Galalae R, Hammerlid E, et al. Performa nce of 
the EORTC questionnaire for the assessment of qualit y of life in head and neck cancer 
patients EORTC QLQ -H&N35: a methodological review. Qual Life Res 2013;22(8):1927 -
41.
Snyder et al 2014
Snyder A, Makrarov V., Merghoub T, Yuan J, Zaretsky  JM, Desri chard A, et al . Genet ic 
basis for clinical response to DTLA- 4 blockade in melanom a. N Engl  J Med. 2014; 
371:2189-99
Sprangers and Aaronson 1992
Sprangers MA, Aaronson NK. The role of healt h care providers and significant others in 
evaluat ing the quali ty of life of pati ents wi th chronic disease: a review. J Clin Epidemio l 
1992;45:743-60.
Tham et al 2018
Tham T, Bardash Y, Herman SW, Costantino PD. Neutrophil -to-lymphocy te rati o as a 
prognosti c indicator in head and neck cancer; A systematic review and m eta-analysis. 
Head and Neck, 2018, 40 (11); 2546 -2557.
Topalian et al 2012
Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, et al. Safety, activit y, and immune correlates of ant i-PD-1 antibody  in cancer. N Engl J Med 
2012;366(26):2443-54.
Vermorken and Specenier 2010
Verm orken JB, Specenier P. Optimal treatment for recurrent/metastatic head and neck 
cancer. Ann Onco l 2010;21(Suppl  7):vii252-61.
Vermorken etal 2008
Verm orken JB, Mesia R, Rivera F, Remenar E, Kawecki A, Rottey  S, et al . Platinum -
based chemotherapy  plus cetuximab in head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 
2008;359(11):1116-27.
Vogelstein et al 2013
Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S, Diaz LA Jr, Kinzler KW. Cancer 
geno me landscapes. Science 2013;339(6127):154 6-58.
Wang etal 2009
Wang DD, Zhang S, Zhao H, Men AY, Parivar K. Fixed dosing versus body  size based 
dosing of mo noclonal  antibodies in adult clinical trials. J Clin Pharmaco l 
2009;49(9):1012-24.
Revised Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
168(199)Wang etal 2014
Wang E, Kang D, Bae KS, Marshall MA, Pavlo v D, Parivar K. Populat ion 
pharmacokinet ic and pharmacodynamics analysis of tremelimumab in pat ients with 
metastati c melano ma. J Clin Pharmaco l 2014;54(10):1108 -16.
Weber et al 2012
Weber JS, Kähler KC, Hauschild A. Management of immune -related advers e events and 
kinet ics of response with ipilimumab. J Clin Onco l 2012;30:2691 -7.
Wolchok etal 2013
Wolchok JD, Kluger H, Callahan MK, Postow MA, Rizvi NA, Lesokhin AM, et al. 
Nivo lumab plus ipilimumab in advanced melano ma. N Engl J Med 2013;369:122 -33.
Zhangetal 2012
Zhang S, Shi R, Li C, Parivar K, Wang DD. Fixed dosing versus body  size-based dosing of 
therapeuti c pept ides and proteins in adult s. J Clin Pharmaco l 2012;52(1):18 -28.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
169(199)Appendix A Signatures
Electronically approved.
Clinical Stu dy Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
170(199)Appendix B Additional Safety Information
Further Guidance on the Definition of a Serious Adverse Event (SAE)
Life threatening
“Life -threatening” means that the patientwas at immediate risk of death from the adverse 
event ( AE) as it occurred or it is suspected that use or continued use of the pro duct would 
resul t in the patient ’s death.  “Life -threatening” does not m ean that had an AEoccurred i n a 
more severe form  it might have caused death (eg, hepat itis that resolved without hepat ic 
failure).
Hospitalization
Outpati ent treatm ent in an emergency room is not in itself a serious AE , although the reasons 
for it may be (eg, bronchospasm, laryngeal edema).  Hospital admissio ns and/or surgical 
operati ons planned before or during a study  are not consi dered AEs if the illness or disease 
existed before the patientwas enrolled in the study, provided that it did not deteriorate in an 
unexpected way  during the study .
Important medical event or medical intervention
Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding wheth er a case i s seri ous in 
situations where important m edical events may  not be immediately life threatening or result in 
death, hospi talizat ion, disabilit y, or incapacit y but may jeopardize the patient or may require 
medical intervention to prevent 1 or more outcomes listed in the definit ion of serious.  These 
shoul d usually be considered as serious.
Simply stopping the suspect drug does not mean that it is an important medical event; medical 
judgement must be used.
Angioedema not severe enough to require int ubation but requiring intravenous 
hydrocortisone treatment
Hepatotoxicit y caused by paracetamo l (acetaminophen) overdose requiring treatment 
with N-acetylcysteine
Intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm
Blood dy scrasia s (eg, neutropenia or anemia requiring blood transfusio n, etc) or 
convulsio ns that do not result in hospitalizat ion
Development of drug dependency or drug abuse
A Guide to Interpreting the Causality Question
When making an assessment of causalit y, consider the following factors when deciding if 
there is a “reasonable possibilit y”that an AE m ay have been caused by the drug.
Clinical Stu dy Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
171(199) Time Course.  Exposure to suspect drug.  Has the patient actually received the suspect 
drug?  Di d the AE occur i n a reasonable temporal relationship to the administration of 
the suspect drug?
 Consistency wit h known drug profile.  Was the AE consistent with the previous 
knowl edge of the suspect drug (pharmaco logy and toxi cology) or drugs of the same 
pharmaco logical class?  Or could the AE be ant icipated from its pharmaco logical 
properties?
 De-challenge experience.  Di d the AE resolve or improve on stopping or reducing the 
dose of the suspect drug?
 No al ternative cause.  The AE cannot be reasonably  explained by another etio logy such 
as the u nderlying disease, other drugs, or other host or environmental factors.
 Re-challenge experi ence.  Di d the AE reoccur if the suspected drug was reintroduced 
after having been stopped?  AstraZeneca would not normally  recommend or support a 
re-challenge .
 Laboratory  tests.  A specific laboratory  invest igation (if performed) has confirmed the 
relationship .
In difficult cases, other factors could be considered such as:
 Is this a recogni zedfeature of overdose of the drug?
 Is there a known mechanism?
Causalit yof “related” is m ade if, fo llowing a review of the relevant data, there is evidence for 
a “reasonable possibilit y”of a causal relat ionship for the individual case.  The expression 
“reasonable possibilit y” of a causal relationship is meant to convey, in general , that there are 
facts (evidence) or arguments to suggest a causal relat ionship.
The causalit y assessment i s perform ed based on the available data including enough 
inform ation to m ake an informed judgment.  With limited or insufficient information in the 
case, i t is likely  that the event(s) will be assessed as “not related.”
Causal relat ionship in cases where the disease under study  has deteri orated due to l ack of 
effect shoul d be classified as no reasonable possibilit y.
Creatinine Calculation
Cockcro ft-Gault equation
Males:
Creatinine CL = Weight (kg) × (140 -Age)
(mL/min) 72 × serum creat inine (mg/dL)
Clinical Stu dy Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
172(199)Females:
Creatinine CL = Weight (kg) × (140 -Age) × 0.85
(mL/min) 72 × serum creat inine (mg/dL)
MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
There i s no information to date on drug -drug interactions wit h MEDI4736 or tremelimumab 
either pre -clinically or in pat ients.  As MEDI4736 and tremelimumab are monoclonal 
antibodies and therefore proteins, they will be degraded to small pept ides and amino acids and 
will be eliminated by  renal  and reti culoendothelial  clearance.  It is therefore not expected that 
MEDI4736 or tremelimumab will induce or inhibit  the m ajor drug m etabo lizing cytochro me 
P450 pathways.  As a result, there are no expected pharmacoki netic drug -drug interactions.  
No formal drug -drug interacti on studi es have been conducted with tremelimumab.  However, 
in renal cell carcino ma studies, acute renal failure has been reported with the combinat ion of 
tremelimumab and sunit inib.
The m echanism  of action of MEDI4736 invo lves binding to PD -L1, and the mechanism o f 
action of  tremelimumab invo lves binding to CTLA -4; therefore, significant pharmacodynamic 
drug interactions wit h the commo nly administered concomitant medicat ions are not expected.  
Despite this, appropriate clinical mo nitoring in all of the planned clinical studies will be 
conducted to evaluate any  potenti al drug -drug interact ions. 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix C
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
173(199)Appendix C IATA 6.2 Guidance Document
Labeling and Shipment of Biohazard Samples
International Airline Transportation Associat ion (IATA) classifies bio hazardous agents into 
3categori es.  For transport purposes the classificatio n of infect ious substances according to 
risk groups was removed fro m the Dangerous Goods Regulations (DGR) in the 46th edit ion 
(2005).  Infect ious substances are now classified either as Category  A, Category  B, or 
Exempt.  There is no direct r elationship between Risk Groups and categories A and B.
Category A Infectious Substances are infect ious substances in a form that, when exposure to 
it occurs, i s capable of causing permanent disabilit y, life-threatening or fatal  disease in 
otherwi se healt hy humans or animals.  Category  A pathogens are eg, Ebola, Lassa fever virus:
 are to be packed and shipped in accordance wit h IATA Instruction 602.
Category B Infectious Substances are infect ious Substances that do not meet the criteria for 
inclusio n in Category  A.  Category  B pathogens are eg, Hepatit is A, B, C, D, and E viruses, 
Hum an immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ty pes 1 and 2.  They  are assigned the following UN 
number and proper shipping name:
 UN 3373 –Biological Substance, Category  B
 are to be packed i n accordance with UN3373 and IATA 650
Exempt -all other materials wit h minimal risk of containing pathogens
 Clinical trial samples will fall into Category  B or exempt under IATA regulations
 Clinical trial samples will routinely be packed and transported a t ambient temperature in 
IATA 650 compliant packaging 
 Biological samples transported in dry ice require additional dangerous goods 
specification for the dry -ice content
 IATA co mpliant courier and packaging materials should be used for packing and 
transpor tation and packing should be done by  an IATA certified person, as applicable
 Samples routinely transported by  road or rail are subject to local regulations which 
requi re that they  are al so packed and transported in a safe and appropriate way  to contain 
any risk of infect ion or contaminat ion by using approved couriers and packaging / 
containment materials at all t imes.  The IATA 650 bio logical  sample containment 
standards are encouraged wherever possible when road or rail transport is used. 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
174(199)Appendix D Actions Required in Cases of Combined Increases in Liver 
Biochemistry and Evaluation of Hy’s Law
Introduction
This appendix describes the process to be fo llowed in order to ident ify and appropriately 
report cases of Hy’s Law.  It is not intended to be a comprehensive guide to the management 
of elevated liv er biochemistri es.  Specific guidance on the managing liver abnormalit ies can 
be found in Sect ions 5.2.1 and 6.7.2 of the protocol.
During the course of the study  the Invest igator will remain vigilant for increases in liver 
biochemistry .  The invest igator is responsible for determining whether a patient meets 
potenti al Hy’s La w (PHL) cri teria at any  point during the study .
The Investigator participates, together with AstraZeneca clinical project representatives, in 
review and assessment of cases meet ing PHL criteria to agree whether Hy’s Law (HL) criteria 
are met.  HL criteria are m et if there is no alternat ive explanat ion for the el evations in liver 
biochemistry  other than Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI) caused by  the Invest igational 
Medicinal Product (IMP). 
The Investigator is responsible for recording data pertaining to PHL /HL cases and for 
reporting Adverse Events (AE) and Serious Adverse Events (SAE) according to the outcome 
of the review and assessment in line with standard safet y reporting processes.
Definitions
Potential Hy’s Law (PHL)
Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) o r Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) ≥3 × Upper Limit of 
Norm al (ULN) together with Total Bilirubin (TBL) ≥2× ULN at any po int during the study  
following the start of study  medicat ion  irrespect ive of an increase in Alkaline Phosphatase 
(ALP).
Hy’s Law (HL)
AST or ALT ≥3× ULN together with TBL ≥2× ULN, where no other reason, other than the 
IMP, can be found to explain the combinat ion of increases, eg, elevated ALP indicating 
cholestasis, viral hepat itis, another drug.  
For PHL and HL the elevat ion in transa minases must precede or be coincident with (ie, on the 
same day ) the el evati on in TBL, but there is no specified timeframe within which the 
elevations in transaminases and TBL must occur.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimuma b
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
175(199)Identification of Potential Hy’s Law Cases
In order to i dentify  cases of PHL it is important to perform a comprehensive review of 
laboratory  data for any  patient who m eets any  of the fo llowing i dentificat ion criteria in 
isolation or in combinat ion:
 ALT ≥3× ULN
 AST ≥3× ULN
 TBL ≥2× ULN
If a central laboratory is used
When a pat ient meets any of the identificat ion criteria, in isol ation or in combination, the 
central  laboratory  will immediately  send an alert to the Invest igator (also sent to AstraZeneca 
representative). 
The Investigator will also remain vigilant for an y local  laboratory  reports where the 
ident ificat ion criteria are met, where this is the case the Investigator will:
 Request a repeat of the test (new blood draw) by  the central  laboratory
 Com plete the appropri ate unscheduled laboratory  CRF m odule(s) wi th the ori ginal  local 
laboratory  test resul t
When the identificat ion criteria are m et from central  or local laboratory  resul ts the Invest igator 
will wit hout del ay:
 Determine whether the patient meets PHL criteria (see Definit ionsof this appendix for 
definit ion) by  reviewing l aboratory  reports from  all previ ous visi ts (including both 
central  and l ocal laboratory  resul ts)
If a local laboratory is used
The Investigator will w ithout delay review each new laboratory  report and if the ident ificat ion 
criteria are met will:
 Determine whether the patient meets PHL criteria (see Definit ionsof this Appendix for 
definit ion) by  reviewing l aboratory  reports from  all previ ous visi ts
 Prom ptly enter the laboratory  data into the l aboratory  CRF
Follow -up
Potential Hy’s Law criteria not met
If the patient does not meet PHL criteria the Investigator will:
 Perform  follow-up on subsequent laboratory  resul ts according to the guidance provided 
in the Clinical Study  Protocol .
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
176(199)Potential Hy’s Law criteria met
If the patient does meet PHL criteria the Investi gator will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative who will then inform the central Study  Team  
The Study  Physician contacts the Invest igator, to provide guidance, discuss and agree an 
approach for the study  patients’ follow-up and the continuous review of data.  Subse quent to 
this contact the Invest igator will:
 Moni tor the pati ent until liver biochemistry  parameters and appropriate clinical 
symptoms and signs return to normal or baseline levels, or as long as medically 
indicated 
 Invest igate the etio logy of the event a nd perform diagnostic investigat ions as discussed 
with the Study  Physician.  If a central laboratory  is used, thi s includes deciding which 
the tests available in the Hy’s law lab kit should be used.
 Com plete the three Liver CRF Modules as information becom es available 
 If at any  time (in consultat ion with the Study  Physici an) the PHL case meets serious 
criteria, report it as an SAE using standard reporting procedures
Review and Assessment of Potential Hy’s Law Cases
The instructions in this Section should b e followed for all cases where PHL criteria are met.
No later than 3 weeks after the biochemistry  abnormalit y was ini tially detected, the Study  
Physician contacts the Invest igator in order to review available data and agree on whether 
there is an alternat ive explanat ion for meeting PHL criteria other than DILI caused by the 
IMP.  The AstraZeneca Medical  Science Director and Glo bal Safet y Physician will also be 
involved in this review together with other subject matter experts as appropriate.  
According to the outcom e of the review and assessment, the Invest igator will fo llow the 
instructi ons bel ow.
If there is an agreed alternat ive explanat ion for the ALT or AST and TBL elevat ions, a 
determinat ion of whether the alternat ive explanat ion is an AE will be made and subsequent ly 
whether the AE meets the criteria for a SAE:
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is notan AE, record the alternative explanation on the 
appropriate CRF
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is an AE/SAE, record the AE /SAE in the CRF accordingly 
and fo llow the AZ standard processes
If it is agreed that there is no explanat ion that would explain the ALT or AST and TBL 
elevations other than the IMP:
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
177(199) Report an SAE ( report term ‘Hy’s Law’) according to AstraZeneca standard processes. 
The ‘Medically  Important’ seri ous cri terion shoul d be used if no other serious 
criteria apply
As there is no alternat ive explanation for the HL case, a causalit y assessment of 
‘related’ shoul d be assigned.
If, there i s an unavo idable delay, of over 3 weeks, in obtaining the information necessary to 
assess whether or not the case meets the criteria for HL, then it is assumed that there is no 
alternat ive explanat ion unt il such time as an in formed decisio n can be made:
 Report an SAE (report term ‘Potential Hy’s Law’) applying serious criteria and causalit y 
assessment as per above
 Continue fo llow-up and review according to agreed plan.  Once the necessary  
supplementary  informat ion is obtained, repeat the review and assessment to determine 
whether HL criteria are met.  Update the SAE report according to the outcome of the 
review
Actions Required When Potential Hy’s Law Criteria are Met Before and After Starting 
Study Treatment
This sect ion is applicable to pati ents wi th liver m etastases who m eet PHL cri teria on study  
treatm ent having previously  met PHL cri teria at a study  visit prior to starti ng study  treatm ent.
At the first on study  treatm ent occurrence of PHL cri teria being met the Invest igator will:
 Determine if there has been a significant change in the patients’ condit ion#compared 
with the l ast visit where PHL criteria were met#
If there is no significant change no action is required
If there is a significant change notify  the AstraZeneca re presentative, who will 
inform  the central  Study  Team , then foll ow the subsequent process described in 
Potenti al Hy’s Law cri teria metof this Appendix
#A ‘significant’ change in the patient’s condit ion refers to a clinically  relevant change in any 
of the individual liver biochemistry  parameters (ALT, AST, or total bilirubin) in iso lation or 
in combinat ion, or a clinically relevant change in associated s ymptoms.  The determinat ion of 
whether there has been a significant change will be at the discret ion of the Invest igator; this 
may be in consultat ion with the Study  Physician if there is any uncertaint y.
Actions Required for Repeat Episodes of Potential Hy ’s Law
This sect ion is applicable when a patient meets PHL criteria on study treatment and has 
already met PHL cri teria at a previous on study  treatm ent visi t.
The requi rement to conduct fo llow-up, revi ew and assessment of a repeat occurrence(s) of 
PHL i s based on the nature of the alternat ive cause identified for the previous occurrence.  
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
178(199)The invest igator should determine the cause for the previous occurrence of PHL criteria being 
met and answer the fo llowing quest ion:
 Was the alternat ive cause for the pr evious occurrence o f PHL cri teria being met found to 
be the disease under study  e.g. chroni c or progressing malignant disease, severe 
infect ion or liver disease, or did the patient meet PHL criteria prior to starting study  
treatm ent and at their first on s tudy treatm ent visi t as described in Actions Required 
When Potenti al Hy’s Law Cri teria are Met Before and After Starting Study  Treatm ent?
If No: fo llow the process described in Potential  Hy’s Law cri teria met of this appendix
If Yes:
Determine if there has been a significant change in the patient’s condi tion#compared wi th 
when PHL criteria were previously met
 If there is no significant change no action is required
 If there is a significant change fo llow the process described in Potenti al Hy’s Law 
criteria m etof this appendix
#A ‘significant’ change in the patient’s condit ion refers to a clinically  relevant change in any 
of the individual liver biochemistry  parameters (ALT, AST or total bilirubin ) in isolati on or in 
combinat ion, or a clinically  relevant change in associated symptoms.  The determinat ion of 
whether there has been a significant change will be at the discret ion of the Invest igator; this 
may be in consultat ion with the Study  Physician if there is any uncertaint y.
References
FDA Guidance for Industry  (issued July  2009) ‘Drug -induced liver injury: Premarket ing 
clinical evaluat ion’: 
http://www.fda.gov/downl oads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatory Information/Guidances
/UCM174090.pdf
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
179(199)Appendix E Guidelines for Evaluation of Objective Tumor Response 
Using RECIST 1.1 Criteria (Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors)
Introduction
This appendix details the implementation o f Response Evaluat ion Cri teria in Solid Tumors 
(RECIST) 1.1 guidelines ( Eisenhauer et al 2009 ) for the D419LC00001 study wit h regards to 
Invest igator assessment of tumor burden including protocol -specific requirements for this 
study .
Definition of Measurable, Non -measurable, Target and Non -target Lesions
Only patients with measurable disease at base line shoul d be included in the study .  
Measurable disease is defined by  the presence of at l east 1 m easurable (by  RECIST 1.1) l esion 
which has not been previously irradiated.  A tumor lesio n in a previously irradiated field can 
be assessed as measurable di sease provi ded the lesio n has been deemed to demonstrate 
progression.
Measurable:
A lesio n, not previously irradiated per the protocol prior to enrollment, that can be accurately 
measured at baseline as ≥10 mm in the longest diameter (except lymph nodes wh ich must 
have short axis ≥15 mm1) with com puted tom ography  (CT) or m agnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) and that is suitable for accurate repeated measurements.  A tumor lesio n in a previously 
irradi ated field can be assessed as measurable disease provided the lesion has been deemed to 
demonstrate progression.
Non-measurable:
 All other lesio ns, including small lesio ns (lo ngest di ameter <10 mm or pathological 
lymph nodes with ≥10 mm to <15 mm short axis at baseline1).
 Truly non -measurable lesio ns include the following: bone l esions, l eptom eningeal 
disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusio n, inflammatory  breast di sease, lymphangit ic 
involvement of skin or lung, or abdominal masses/abdo minal organomegaly ident ified 
by physical examinat ion that i s not m easura ble by  CT or MRI.
 Previously  irradiated l esions that have not dem onstrated progression2
 Brain metastasis
1Nodes with <10 mm short axis are considered non -pathological and should not be recorded or followed as 
non-target lesions (NTLs). The short axis is defined at the longest axis perpendicular to the long axis of the 
tumour. 2Localized post -radiatio n chang es which affect lesion sizes may occur.  Therefore, lesions that have been 
previously irradiated and have not demonstrated progression will not be considered measurable and must be 
selected as NTL at baseline and followed up as part of the NTL assessment.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
180(199)Special cases:
 Lytic bone lesio ns or mixed ly tic–blast ic lesio ns, with ident ifiable so ft tissue 
components, can be considered measurable if the soft ti ssue com ponent m eets the 
definit ion of measurabilit y.  Bl astic lesio ns are considered non -measurable.
 Cystic metastases can be considered measurable lesions if they meet the criteria for 
measurabilit y from a radi ological  point of view, but if non -cystic lesions are present in 
the sam e pat ient, these should be selected as target lesio ns (TLs).
Target lesions:
A maximum of 5 measurable lesio ns (with a maximum o f 2 lesions per organ), representative 
of all lesio ns involved suitable for accurate repeated measur ement, shoul d be i dentified as TLs 
at baseline. Lymph nodes, in any locat ion, are collectively considered as a single organ, with a 
maximum o f 2 lymph nodes as TLs. A bilateral organ is considered as a single organ.
Non-target lesions:
All other lesio ns (o r sites of  disease) not recorded as TL should be ident ified as NTL at 
baseline.
Methods of Assessment
The same method of assessment and the same technique should be used to characterize 
each identified and recorded lesion at baseline and during follow -up visits.
A summary  of the m ethods to be used for RECIST assessment is provided in Table 16, and 
those excluded fro m tumor assessments for this study  are highlighted with the rationale 
provi ded.
Table16 Summary of methods of assessment
Target lesions Non-target lesions New lesions
CT (preferred)
MRICT (preferred)
MRI
Clinical examination 
X-ray, Chest X -rayCT (preferred)
MRI
Clinical examination 
X-ray, Chest X -ray
Ultrasound
Bone scan
FDG -PET
CT  Computed tomography; FDG -PET  18F-Fluoro -deoxyglucose positron emission tomography; MRI  Magnetic 
resonance imaging.
CT and MRI 
CT and MRI (both preferably wit h IV contrast) are generally considered to be the best 
currently available and reproducible methods to measure TL selected for response assessment 
and to assess NTL and ident ificat ion of any new lesions.  
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
181(199)In the D419LC00001 study , the m ethods of assessment of tumor burden used at baseline and 
follow-up visits are contrast -enhanced CT/MRI of the neck, chest, and abdomen (including 
liver and adrenal glands).  Any other areas of disease invo lvement should be addit ionally  
imaged based on the signs and symptoms of individual pat ients.  CT examinat ion with 
intravenous contrast media administration is the preferred method.  MRI should be used where 
CT is not feasible or it is medically contra -indicated.  For brain lesio n assessment, MRI is the 
preferred m ethod.
Clinical examination 
In the D419LC00001 stud y, clinical  examinat ion will not be used for assessment of TL.  
Clinically detected lesio ns can be selected as TLs if they are assessed by CT or MRI scans.  
Clinical examinat ion can be used to assess NTL and to ident ify the presence of new lesio ns.
X-ray
Plain X -ray 
In the D419LC00001 study  plain X -ray may be used as a method of assessment for bone NTL 
and to i dentify the presence o f new bone lesio ns.  
Ultrasound 
In the D419LC00001 study , ultrasound examinat ion will not be used for assessment of TL and 
NTL as i t is not a reproducible method, does not provide an accurate assessment of tumor size 
and it i s subjective and operator dependent.  Ultrasound examinat ion can, however, be used to 
ident ify the presence o f new lesio ns.  If new clinical symptoms occu r and an ultrasound is 
perform ed then new l esions shoul d be confirmed by  CT or MRI examinat ion.
Endoscopy and laparoscopy 
In the D419LC00001 study , endoscopy  and laparoscopy  will not be used for tum or 
assessments as they  are not validated in the context o f tumor assessment.
Tumor markers 
In the D419LC00001 study , tum or markers will  not be used for tum or response assessments as 
per RECIST 1.1.
Cytology and histology 
In the D419LC00001 study  histol ogy will not be used as part of the tumor response 
assessme nt as per RECIST 1.1.  
Isotopic bone scan 
Bone l esions i dentified on an isotopic bone scan at baseline and confirmed by CT, MRI, or 
X-ray at baseline should be recorded as NTL and followed by  the same method as per baseline 
assessment.  
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
182(199)In the D419LC000 01 study , isotopi c bone scans may  be used as a method of assessment to 
ident ify the presence o f new bone lesio ns at fo llow-up vi sits.  New l esions will be recorded 
where a positive hot -spot that was not present on the baseline bone scan assessment is 
ident ified on a bone scan performed at any t ime during the study .  The Invest igator should 
consider the posit ive hot -spot to be a significant new site of malignant disease and represent 
true disease progression in order to record the new lesion.  Confirmat ion by CT, MRI and 
X-ray is recommended where bone scan findings are equivocal.
FDG -PET scan
In the D419LC00001 study , 18F-Fluoro -deoxyglucose positron emissio n tom ography  
(FDG -PET) scans may be used as a method for ident ifying new lesio ns, according with the 
following algori thm: New lesi ons will  be recorded where there is posit ive 
18F-Fluoro -deoxyglucose uptake3not present on baseline FDG -PET scan or in a location 
corresponding to a new lesio n on CT/MRI at the same fo llow-up visit.  If there is no baseline 
FDG -PET scan available, and no evidence of new lesions on CT/MRI scans then fo llow-up 
CT/MRI assessments should be continued, scheduled as per protocol or clinical indicated, in 
order to confirm new lesio ns.
Tumor Response Evaluation 
Schedule of evaluation
RECIST 1.1 assessments will be performed using contrast -enhanced CT/MRI assessments of 
chest, abdomen, and pelvis .  Addi tional anatomy shoul d be imaged based on signs and 
symptoms of individual patients at baseline and fo llow-up.  Baseline assessments shoul d be 
perform ed no m ore than 28 days before randomization, and ideally should be performed as 
close as possible prior to the start of study  treatm ent (see Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4of the 
Clinical Study  Protocol ).  Follow -up assessments will be perform ed every  6weeks ±1 week 
for the first 24 weeks relat ive to the date of randomizat ion and then every  8weeks ±1 week 
thereafter until confirmed object ive disease progressio n as defined by RECIST 1.1 
(irrespect ive of the reason for stopping treatm ent or subsequent therapy ).
Addit ional assessments will be performed post confirmed object ive disease progression for 
patients rem aining on assigned treatment, re -treatment, or until subsequent cancer therapy  
according to the clinical study  protocol .
Any other si tes at whi ch new disease is suspected should also be adequately  imaged at 
follow-up.
If an unscheduled assessment was performed and the pat ient has not progressed, every  attem pt 
shoul d be made to perform  the subsequent assessments at their schedule d visit s.  Thi s 
schedule is to be fo llowed in order to minimize any  unintent ional bias caused by so me pat ients 
being assessed at a different frequency than other patients.
3A positive FDG -PET scan lesion should be reported only when an uptake greater than twice that of the 
surrounding tissue is observed.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
183(199)Target lesions
Documentation of target lesions
A maximum of 5 measurable lesio ns, wi th a maximum o f 2 lesions per organ (including 
lymph nodes collect ively considered as a single organ), representative of all lesio ns involved 
shoul d be i dentified as TL at baseline.  Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their 
size (l ongest di ameter for non -nodal  lesions or short axis for nodal lesio ns), but in addit ion 
shoul d be those that l end themselves to reproducible repeated measurements.  It may  be the 
case that, on occasion, the largest lesio n does not lend itself to reproducible measure ment in 
which circumstance the next largest lesio n, which can be measured reproducibly, should be 
selected.
The site and locat ion of each TL should be documented as well as the longest diameter for 
non-nodal  lesions (or short axis for lymph nodes).  All me asurements shoul d be recorded in 
millimeters.  At baseline the sum o f the diameters for all TL will be calculated and reported as 
the baseline sum of diameters.  At fo llow-up visits the sum of diameters for all TL will be 
calculated and reported as the fol low-up sum  of diam eters.
Special cases:
 For TL measurable in 2 or 3 dimensions, always report the longest diameter.  For 
pathol ogical lymph nodes measurable in 2 or 3 dimensions, always report the short axis.  
 If the CT/MRI slice thickness used is >5 mm, the minimum size of measurable disease at 
baseline should be twice the slice thickness of the baseline scan.
 If a lesio n has co mpletely disappeared, the longest diameter should be recorded as 0 mm.
 If a TL split s into two or more parts, then record the sum of the di ameters of those parts.  
 If two or more TLs merge then the sum o f the diameters of the combined lesio n should 
be recorded for one of the lesio ns and 0 mm recorded for the other lesio n(s).  
 If a TL i s believed to be present and is faint ly seen b ut too sm all to measure, a default 
value of 5 mm should be assigned.  If an accurate measure can be given, this should be 
recorded, even if it is below 5 mm.
 If a TL cannot be measured accurately due to it being too large, provide an est imate of 
the size of the lesi on.  Although a visi t response of PD will be assigned in the vast 
majorit y of these cases, a case should be flagged and reviewed by the Study  Physician in 
a blinded fashio n if use o f the estimated size in the calculat ion of TL would not give an 
overall visit response of PD.
 When a TL has had any intervent ion eg, radi otherapy , embo lization, surgery , during the 
study , the si ze of  the TL shoul d still be provided where possible and the intervent ion 
recorded in the RECIST case report form.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and T remelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
184(199)Evaluation o f target lesions
This sect ion provi des the definit ions of the criteria used to determine object ive tumor visit 
response for TL (see Table 17).
Table 1 7 Evaluation of target lesions
Complete Response (CR) Disappearance of all TLs since baseline.  Any pathological lymph 
nodes selected as TLs must have a reduction in short axis to 
<10mm.
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the diameters of TLs, taking 
as reference the baseline sum of diameters.
Stable Disease (SD) Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient 
increase to qualify for PD.
Progression of disease (PD) At least a 20% increase in the sum of diameters of TLs and an 
absolute increase of at least 5 mm, taking as reference the smallest 
sum on study (this includes the baseline sum if that is the smallest 
on study).
Not Evaluable (NE) Only relevant if any of the TLs were not assessed or not evaluable 
or ha d a lesion intervention at this visit.  Note: if the sum of 
diameters meets the progressive disease criteria, progressive 
disease overrides not evaluable as a TL response.
CR  Complete response; PR  Partial response; PD  Progression of disease; NE  Not evaluable; SD  Stable disease; 
TL  Target lesion.
Non-target lesions
Evaluation of non -target lesions
All other lesio ns (or sites of disease) not recorded as TL should be ident ified as NTL at 
baseline.  Measurements are not required for these lesions, but their status shoul d be f ollowed 
at subsequent visits.  At each visit an overall assessment of the NTL response should be 
recorded by  the Investi gator.  This sect ion provi des the definit ions of the criteria used to 
determine and record overall response for NTL at the invest igational site at each visit (see 
Table 18).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
185(199)Table 18 Evaluation of non -target lesions
Complete response (CR) Disappearance of all NTLs since baseline.  All lymph nodes must 
be non-pathological in size (<10 mm short axis).
Non CR/Non PD Persistence of one or more NTL with no evidence of progression.
Progression (PD) Unequivocal progression of existing NTLs.  Unequivocal 
progr ession may be due to an important progression in one lesion 
only or in several lesions.  In all cases th e progression MUST be 
clinically significant for the physician to consider changing (or 
stopping) therapy.
Not evaluable (NE) Only relevant when one or some of the NTLs were not assessed 
and, in the Investigator’s opinion, they are not able to provide an 
evaluable overall NTL assessment at this visit.
Note: for patients without TLs at baseline, this is relevant if any of 
the NTLs were not assessed at this visit and the progression 
criteria have not been met.
CR  Complete response; PR  Partial response; PD   Progression of disease; NE  Not evaluable; NTL  Non -target 
lesion; TL  Target lesion.
To achieve “unequivocal progression” on the basis of NTLs, there must be an overall level of 
substant ial worsening in non -target disease such that, even in presence of stable disease or 
partial response in TLs, the overall tumor burden has increased sufficient ly to merit 
discontinuat ion of therapy .  A m odest “increase” in the size of 1 or more NTLs is usually  not 
sufficient to qualify for unequivocal progressio n status.
New lesions
Details o f any new lesio ns will also be recorded with the date of assessment.  The presence of 
one or m ore new l esions is assessed as progression.  
A lesio n identified at a follow up assessment in an anatomical locat ion that was not scanned at
baseline is considered a new lesio n and will indicate disease progression.
The finding of a new lesio n shoul d be unequivocal: ie, not attributable to differences in 
scanning technique, change in imaging modalit y, or findings thought to represent something
other than tumor.
If a new lesio n is equivocal, for example because of its small size, the treatment and tumor 
assessments should be cont inued unt il the new lesion has been confirmed.  If repeat scans 
confirm there is a new lesio n, then the progression da te shoul d be declared using the date of 
the init ial scan.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
186(199)Symptomatic deterioration
Symptom atic deteri oration is not a descriptor of an object ive response: it is a reason for 
stopping study  therapy .
Patients wi th “symptom atic deteri oration” requi ring disco ntinuat ion of treatment without 
objective evidence of disease progression at that time should continue to undergo tumor 
assessments where possible unt il objective disease progression is observed.
Evaluation of overall visit response
The overall visit respo nse will be derived using the algorithm shown in Table 19.
Table 19 Overall visit response
Target lesions Non-target lesions New lesions Overall response
CR CR No or NE CR
CR NA No or NE CR
CR Non CR/Non PD No or NE PR
CR NE No or NE PR
PR Non PD or NE or NA No or NE PR
SD Non PD or NE or NA No or NE SD
NE Non PD or NE or NA No or NE NE
PD Any Yes or No PD
Any PD Yes or No PD
Any Any Yes PD
CR  Complete response, PR  Partial response, SD  Stable disease, PD  Progression of disease, NE  Not evaluable, 
NA  Not applicable (only relevant if there were no non-target lesions at baseline).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
187(199)Confirmation of Progression
Disease progressi on in the immuno modulatory  therapy  arms requi res confirmat ion.  The 
confirmatory  scan shoul d occur preferably  at the next scheduled visit and no earlier than 
4weeks after the init ial assessment of progression of disease (PD) in the absence of clinical 
deteri oration.  Di sease progressi on in pat ients in the Standard of Care arm should be 
confirmed by a scan obtained no earlier than 4 weeks after the init ial assessment of PD and 
preferably at the next scheduled imaging visit, if clinically  feasible.
Progression wou ld be considered confirmed if the fo llowing criteria are met:
 ≥20% increase in the sum diameters of TLs co mpared with the nadir at 2 consecutive 
scan timepo ints with an absol ute increase of 5mm* and/or
 significant progression (worsening) of NTLs at the c onfirmatory  scan time -point 
compared wi th the first time point where progression of NTLs was ident ified (Note: new 
lesions i dentified at the previous scan timepo int are consi dered non -target l esions at the 
confirmatory  scan t imepo int), and/or
 Addit ional new unequivocal lesio ns at the confirmatory  scan time -point. 
*The assessment of progression requires a ≥20% increase in the sum diameters of target lesions at the first 
progression timepoint relative to the nadir.  The nadir is the smallest sum of diameter s, and this may be at 
baseline or subsequent follow -up assessments.  The confirmatory scan confirms the persistence of the 
≥20% increase relative to the nadir.  The minimum absolute increase in the sum of diameters of target 
lesions is at least 5 mm at bot h assessments.
In the absence of significant clinical deterioration the Invest igator should cont inue assigned 
treatm ent until progressio n is confirmed.  If progressio n is not confirmed, then the patient 
shoul d cont inue on assigned treatment and on treatmen t assessments.  
If a patient discontinues treatment (and/or receives a subsequent cancer therapy ) prior to 
progression, then the patient should st ill cont inue to be fo llowed unt il confirmed object ive 
disease progressi on.
Central Review
The imaging Contrac t Research Organizat ion (iCRO) appointed by  AstraZeneca to perform  
the collect ion, QC, and storage of images fro m the Invest igator sites for this study  will provide 
guidelines for image acquisit ion, image anonymization, image storage at the invest igative site 
as source data, and image transfer to the iCRO .  The decisi on to perform  a BICR by  the iCRO 
is at the discretion of AstraZeneca.  If a BICR is performed, assessments will be performed by 
the central  radiologists according to RECIST 1.1, and irRECIST 1. 1 (Nishino et al 2013 ).  The 
management of patients will be based so lely upon the l ocal assessments conducted by  the 
Invest igator.
Further details of t he Blinded Independent Central Review will be documented in the 
Independent Review Charter (also referred to as ‘Imaging Charter’).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
188(199)REFERENCES
Eisenhauer et al 2009
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D, Ford R, et al.  New response 
evaluat ion criteria in solid tum ors: revi sed RECIST gui deline (versio n 1.1).  Eur J Cancer 
2009;45(2):228 -47.
Nishino et al 2013
Nishino M Gi obbie -Hurder A, Gargano M, Suda M, Ramaiya NH, Hodi FS. Developing a 
commo n language for tumor response to immunotherapy: Immune -related response criteria 
using unidimensio nal measurements. Clin Cancer Res, 2013;19(14):3936 -43.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
189(199)Appendix F Patient -Reported Outcomes

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
190(199)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
191(199)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
192(199)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI 4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
193(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
194(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
195(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
196(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
197(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
198(199)
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance MEDI4736 and Tremelimumab
Study Code D419LC00001
Version 12.0
Date 29 June 2020
199(199)
CCI
SIGNATURE PAGE
This is a representation of an electronic record that was signed
electronically and this page is the manifestation of the electronic signature
Document Name: d419lc00001-csp-v12
Document Title: D419LC00001 Clinical Study Protocol version 12
Document ID: Doc ID-003967645
Version Label: 4.0 CURRENT LATEST APPROVED
Server Date
(dd-MMM-yyyy HH:mm ‘UTC’Z)Signed by Meaning of Signature
30-Jun-2020 12:27 UTC Content Approval
30-Jun-2020 12:09 UTC Content Approval
30-Jun-2020 03:15 UTC Content Approval
29-Jun-2020 22:56 UTC Author Approval
Notes: (1) Document details as stored in ANGEL, an AstraZeneca document management system.
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD