Improving mobility in peripheral artery disease using an ankle foot orthosis  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
06/01/2020  
1.  Specific  Aims   
Peripheral   artery   diseas e  (PAD)   is   a  comm on  cardiovascular   diseas e  manifesting   from   atherosclerotic   
blockages   in  the  arteries   of  the  legs.   The  most   prevalent   symptom   of  PAD   is  intermittent   claudication,   defined   
as  pain  or  discomfort   in  the  legs  that  is  produ ced  by  physical   activity   and   is  relieved   only  through   rest.   PAD   
results   in  significant   functiona l  limitations   such  as  slower   walki ng  velocity   and  an   overall   sedentary   lifestyle1-­5.  
Our  researc h  has  document ed  significant   deficit s  in  gait  biomechanics ;;  specifically,   an  inability   of  the  ankle  
plantarflexors   to  generate   normal   torque   and  power6-­10.  Furthermore,   we  found   that  insufficient   blood   flow  is  not  
the  only  mechanism   contributing   to  gait  dysfunction   in  patients   with  PAD11,  12,  but  the  affected   muscl e  also  
demonstrates    a  myopathy   that  prevents   normal   leg  functi on  in  thes e  patients13-­17.  Thus,   treatment   must   
consider   muscular   function   and  hemodynamics   to  improve   function   and  increase   activity   levels.   
  
Supervised   treadmill   walking   exercise   is  an  effectiv e  treatment   for  increasi ng  the  distances   patients   with  PAD   
can  walk  18-­21.  However,   there   is  a  critical   treatment   gap  for  individuals   whose   disease   presentations   warrant   a  
non-­operative   treatmen t  plan   but  lack  the  motivation ,  time ,  access   and  monetary   resources   for  supervised   
therapy .  An  ankle -­foot  orthosis   (AFO)   to  offset   ankle  plantarflexor   torque   and  power   deficiency   is  a  nove l  
approac h  to  increase   the  walking   distances   and  physical   activit y  level s  in  those   with  PAD .  Made   of  a  carbon -­
composite   material,   AFOs   are  adjustable,   affordabl e  and   could   be  prescri bed   and  worn  long -­term   to  overcome   
the  reduced   propulsion   and   improv e  walki ng  economy22-­26.  The  spring -­like  properties   of  carbon -­composite   
AFOs   allow   energy   storage   at  weight   acceptance   and   retur n  at  the  poin t  of  toe  off,  when   the  ankle   
plantarflex ors  are  suppos ed  to  propel   into  the  next   step27,  28.  Improvements   in  ankle  kinetics   and   angular   
momentu m  have  been   report ed  by  using  an   AFO   with  stroke ,  and  other   neuromuscular   disorders   affecti ng  the  
legs22-­25.  However,   AFO s  are  typicall y  worn   for  foot  drop,   and  have   never   been   implemen ted  in  patients   with  
PAD   to  improve   forward   propulsion .  Our  pilot  work   has  shown   that  walking   with  an  AFO  instantly   increases   the  
initia l  and  absolute   walking   distances   in  patients   with  PAD   as  much   as  pharmacotherapy   for  six  months29.  An  
AFO   addresses   both   the  myopathy   and   low  blood   flow  problems   associat ed  with  claudication.   Mechanical   
force   from   the  AFO   compensates   for  the  insufficien t  propulsion   force   of  the  myopathic   gastrocnemius   muscles ,  
while   at  the  same   time   decreasing   blood   flow  demand   and  muscular   stress   effec ts  of  ischemia .  Thus   an  AFO   
allows   patients   to  walk   longer   without   pain   or  walk   the  distanc e  need ed  to  complete   daily   activities   with  less  
stress  to  the  affect ed  leg,  and   may   preserve/improv e  the  overall   healt h  of  the  PAD   limb  by  loweri ng  oxygen  
demands   to  PAD   muscle   and  effort   induc ed  ischemi a  and   stress .  
  
Hypothesis:   An  AFO   improves   walking   performance   in  patients   with  PAD   by  reducing   the  energy   cost  of  
walking   and  thes e  improvements   can  be   seen  from   the  first  time  the  patient   uses   the  AFO .  Further,   an  AFO   
intervention   improves   walking   performance   by  improving   the  muscular   function   of  patients’   affect ed  legs.  
  
Specific   Aim   1:   Test   the  hypothesis   that  from   its  first  use  an  AFO   produces   improvements   in  walking   
performanc e  of  patients   with  PAD   by  decreasi ng  the  required   muscle   contribution   and  energy   cost  of  walking .  
  
Specific  Aim  2:   Test  the  hypothesis   that  using  an  AFO   for  three  months   leads   to  progressiv e  improvements   in  
walking   performance,   physical   activity   levels   and  quality   of  life  of  patients   with  PAD   and   that  thes e  
improvements   correlate   with  improvements   in  the  morphometric   measurements ,  oxygenation   levels,   and  
muscle   strength   and  endurance   characteristi cs  of  the  affect ed  legs.  We  will  use  a  crossover   design,   in  which  
half  of  subjects   will  complete   a  three -­month   control   period   before,   and  half  after,   the  AFO   intervention.   
  
Specific   Aim   3:   To  determine   the  feasibility   of  a  three   month   AFO   intervention   by  examini ng  acceptability   
(satisfaction,   intent   to  continue   use),   demand   (actual   use,   perceiv ed  demand),   implementati on  (degr ee  of  use,   
success   or  failure   of  use,   factor s  affecting   use),   and  practicalit y  (effects,   abilit y  of  participant s  to  use  AFO).   
  
If  our  hypothesis   is  correc t,  will  be  the  first  to  demonstrate   that  a  simple,   accessible   AFO   device   can  rapidly   
improve   functiona l  status   and  quality   of  life  in  patients   with  PAD   immediately   by  decreasing   the  required   
muscular   contribution   and   oxygen   demands   to  PAD   muscle.   Additionally ,  Aim  #2  will  evaluat e  the  long -­term   
effects   of  weari ng  an   AFO   on  functional   status   and   quality   of  life.  Aim  #3  will  help   the  investigative   team   ensure   
it  is  feasible   to  implement   the  AFO   in  our  target   population.   Detailed   measures   of  mechanisms   related   with  
walking   performance,   muscle   contribution,   physical   activity,   quality   of  life  and  how  thes e  mechanisms   change  
after   weari ng  the  AFO   for  three  months   will  provi de  the  evidenc e  require d  to  implemen t  an  AFO   therapy   that  
will  improve   functional   status   and  quality  of  life  in  indiv iduals   with  PAD.   
2. Significance 
Current treatments for PAD do not compensate for muscle myopathy  
Lower extremity peripheral artery disease (PAD) is a prevalent atherosclerotic syndrome that produces 
progressive narrowing and occlusion of the arteries supplying the legs5. PAD affects approximately 8 million 
people in the US, producing a considerable public health burden30. Most PAD patients are older adults and in 
populations older than 70 years the prevalence of PAD increases to 20%5. The cardinal manifestation of PAD 
is claudication, a severe functional limitation identif ied as gait dysfunction and painful tightness or cramping in 
the muscles of the leg caused by walking and relieved by  rest. The prevalence of claudication is expected to 
rise due to the anticipated aging of the population and there is a clear and unmet need for effective treatment31. 
The standard therapies for claudication include pharmacother apy, supervised exercise therapy, endovascular 
revascularization (angioplasty/stenting) and open revascularization (bypass operations)9. The two medications 
currently approved for the treatment of claudication in the US are pentoxifylline (a methylxanthine derivative) 
and cilostazol (a phosphodiesterase type 3 inhibitor). Both medications have modest efficacy and a recent 
systematic review concluded that pentoxifylline and cilostazol are associated with improvement in maximal 
treadmill walking distance of only 15% and 25%, respectively32. 
Supervised exercise therapy is more effective but unfortunately is associated with poor compliance. Moreover, Medicare and most medical insurance companies do not pay for exercise therapy, limiting access to it. Finally, endovascular and open 
revascularization offer greater degrees of improvement but are 
associated with considerable morbidity and poor long term patency
40, 41 (Table1) . These treatments all require time to take 
effect (3-6 months for pharmacotherapy and exercise), or require time for recovery (at least 3 months for endovascular and open revascularization procedures). Furthermore, all 
available treatments primarily target t he blood flow limitation of PAD while very little is done for the ischemic 
myopathy in the legs of patient with PAD, which has been  shown to be a key determinant of decreased walking 
performance in patients with PAD42, 43.  
 
Our research has documented significant deficits in gait biomechanics in patients with PAD compared with healthy, aged matched controls. Our studies show that PAD re sults in inability of the posterior calf muscles, the 
ankle plantarflexors, to generate normal tor que and power by the lower extremity joints
6-10. We have also 
shown that in PAD gait dysfunction is not only a result of inadequate 
blood flow11, 12, but also the product of an ischemic myopathy affecting the leg muscles of patients with PAD13-
17, 44. An AFO can immediately provide mechanical compensation for ankle plantarflexor torque and power 
deficiency through energy storage and return (Figure 1). M ade of a carbon-composite material (Figure 2), off 
the shelf AFOs are adjustable, affordable and could be prescribed to overcome reduced propulsion and 
improve walking economy22-26. The spring-like properties of carbon-composite AFOs allow energy storage at 
weight acceptance and returns at the point of toe off, when the ankle plantarflexes and power is required to 
Treatment % Increase In Maximum 
Walking Distance Refs 
Pentoxifylline 15% 32 
Cilostazol 25% 32 
Ramipril 123% 33 
Supervised exercise 120% 
34, 35 
Endovascular revascularization 90% 
36-38 
Open bypass revascularization 172% 
39 
Table 1. Effects of treatment on absolute 
walking distance.  
Figure 1. The ankle plantarflexors 
contribute torque during the propulsion phase at the end of stance. This diagram illustrates 
required plantarflexor force during 
normal walking (top) and while walking with an AFO (bottom). The 
red arrows represent reduced 
plantarflexor force contribution with the AFO. The AFO contributes to 
torque at the end of propulsion is 
shown by bending during weight 
acceptance, which stores energy in 
the carbon composite material that is later released during propulsion. The 
moment generated by the AFO is 
equal to the AFO stiffness (k) times 
the change in the AFO angle ( ). 
propel the body into the next step. AFO devices have stim ulated excitement in regards to their potential for 
improving walking performance in indivi duals with movement disability. In 
individuals with stroke, hemiplegia, and other motor disorders22-25 that have 
inadequate lower extremity torque and power during walking, an AFO has been 
shown to help restore walking performance26, 28, 45. The AFO can similarly be 
used to address this need of a non-operative, efficacious intervention that directly increases the functional status in patients with PAD. The results of such an intervention on muscle performance, physical activity levels, and quality of life present mechanistic research questions that can improve the care of 
patients with PAD.  
 
Objective of our application and significance of proposed work:   
An AFO can directly increase the distance patients with PAD can walk: 
Patients with PAD are limited in the distance they can walk and also 
demonstrate increased energy costs of walking compared with healthy aged-
matched individuals46-49. We will test whether wearing an AFO can instantly 
improve the functional status of patients with PAD. Walking performance will 
be assessed using walking distances, and lower extremity torque and power contribution measured by gait biomechanics. Interventions often target blood 
flow improvements in patients with PAD, but the AFO takes a different 
approach by addressing both the blood flow limitation and the myopathy of PAD legs. The AFO can reduce 
ischemia by decreasing the demand for blood flow during walking and can also compensate for myopathy-related muscle weakness by providing propulsion torque at the end of stance. Previous studies in elderly and 
patients with neuromuscular diseases show that an AFO maintains the overall ankle torque and power profile 
by allowing a reduction in the contribution needed from ankle plantarflexor muscles. We hypothesize that the 
use of an AFO will improve the walking distances of pat ients with PAD by reducing the energetic requirements 
of the myopathic PAD legs and the energy cost of walking.  
 
Patients wearing an AFO device for three months will progressively improve walking performance and increase 
physical activity levels. The work of our group and others demonstrates that a state of repetitive cycles of 
exercise-induced ischemia followed by reperfusion at rest is associated with episodes of claudication and 
contributes to the muscle degeneration and possibly even the excess morbidity and mortality seen in these patients
15, 17, 50, 51. It is possible that treating a claudicating patient with an AFO decreases the severity of these 
ischemia/reperfusion events and results in local protection to the treated leg and its muscles and the body as 
whole. If this hypothesis is correct then we can expec t that treatment with the AFO may improve the muscle 
histological and biochemical characteristics, muscle strength and performance, walking distances and overall 
activity levels21. 
 
Patients with PAD are sedentary compared with their healthy peers, and this sedentary lifestyle is associated with faster declines in functioning and adverse calf muscle changes
52-54. Thus, the goal of the proposed AFO 
intervention is to reverse this negative cycle by increasing the ability of patients with PAD to walk. The distance that older individuals can walk is directly correlated with muscle strength and ankle plantarflexor torque generation. Additionally, the mitochondrial function and oxidative capacity of the plantarflexor muscles of older 
individuals is more affected by physical activity levels than age.
55, 56 Therefore, enabling individuals to walk 
more could promote increases in muscle strength and endurance, muscle morphometric measurements, and 
improvements in muscle oxygenation levels, which tr anslate to overall increased walking performance, 
physical activity levels, and quality of life. The concept that patients with PAD will walk more with the AFO is based on the premise that wearing the AFO will prolong the onset of pain and results in fewer occurrences of 
claudication pain throughout the day.   
 
Little work has been done to enhance adherence to treatment in PAD  
Adherence to treatment is a critical component to the efficacy of any intervention. Without adherence, even an effective intervention has no impact. Thus feasibility measures are warranted when testing the utility of a new 
intervention technique to assess patients’ acceptabili ty (satisfaction, intent to continue use), demand 
(perceived demand), implementation (degree of use, su ccess/failure of use, factors impacting use), and 
practicality (positive/negative effects, ability of participants to use) of the treatment. Research in several fields has examined the efficacy of braces  and other devices to improve health outcomes. For example, Armstrong 
Figure 2. Carbon-composite 
ankle-foot orthosis. The 
spring-like properties of 
carbon composite allows energy to be stored during 
heel strike and returned at 
the point of toe-off. 
and colleagues (2003)57 examined diabetic patients’ adherence to a pressure off-loading device used to treat 
foot ulcerations. They found patients had minimal wear time which partially explained the poor results of the 
study. While the authors speculated on why adherence was low, there was no information on the reasons for 
low adherence from the patients’ perspective. Gathering information from the patients’ point of view is 
necessary to understand whether a new treatment is feasible for patients. Unfortunately little is known about how individuals with PAD adhere to treatment. Assessing the feasibility of a new treatment is crucial to its application in future studies and can determine if additional educational interventions to improve adherence are needed
58. In individuals with PAD, walking exercise is a good example of an effective treatment that has been 
difficult to get patients to adopt unless it is supervised. In previous studies of supervised exercise that 
demonstrated increases in walking distances, non-s upervised control groups did not show improvements. 20, 59, 
60 There are likely many factors that play a role in non-adherence, including leg symptoms, feelings of 
decreased mobility, low motivation, and low self-efficacy, ones’ belief in his or her capacity to execute the 
desired behavior change61. In studies of exercise adherence in elderly individuals, pain is the top reason for 
non-adherence. 62 It could be assumed that symptomatic claudication pain is also the top reason in patients 
with PAD. Research in individuals with PAD has shown that self-efficacy plays a vital role in adherence to exercise.
 63, 64 Thus, decreasing the onset of pain through an AFO is likely to help patients address the number 
one barrier to exercise. The lack of improvement in non-supervised individuals emphasizes the need for 
developing interventions that will be adapted by the patients. Additional work to determine treatment 
adherence barriers in individuals with PAD is limited due to lack of additional conservative therapies in this 
group. Thus, the third specific aim will seek to ensure the AFO device is something that will be adapted by 
patients. Patient interviews will capture information on the feasibility of the AFO intervention by capturing acceptability, demand, implementation, and practicality. We will use this information to inform modifications to 
the device itself or ways to implement it in patients with PAD. 
 
Improvements in gait and ankle kinetics have been reported by using an AFO in individuals with neurological disorders and in the elderly. However, an AFO has never been used to help the gait deficiencies of patients with PAD. In this study, we will determine whether w earing a carbon composite AFO leads to a clinically 
important improvement in walking performance, examine changes in walk ing performance, physical activity, 
and quality of life following a three month intervention, and investigate multiple facets of the intervention to 
improve patient compliance. We propose that these immediate walking performance improvements are the 
result of reduced energy costs for those wearing the dev ice, as previous studies have demonstrated the device 
replaces ankle torque and power.
 22-25 Further we propose the mechanisms of improved morphometric 
parameters, muscle oxygenation, and muscle strength and endurance of the affected legs facilitate 
improvements seen following the intervention. 
 
3. Innovation 
The resources of our research group are focused on interventions to improve leg function in patients with PAD and we have developed a history of effective patient recruitment and collection of gait data before and after 
therapeutic intervention. Consequently, we have a unique c apability to study the effects of interventions on 
walking performance, along with the mechanisms behind those effects. We have actualized this capability by 
coupling our expertise in biomechanics and behavioral inte rvention with extensive clinical expertise. The result 
is a well-rounded team of scientists equipped for evaluating and refining a new intervention that has great potential to impact functional status and quality of life in patients with PAD. Our findings that the ankle 
plantarflexor muscles are the most consistently and greatly affected muscles, combined with our work 
demonstrating muscles of these patients fail at the histological and biochemical levels, have directed us to a novel yet simple intervention that can assist these muscles. We see the AFO as a way to address the problems of insufficient blood flow and muscular myopathy to enable performance of normal daily activities. 
 
Most conservative approaches to treatment have involved some form of supervised exercise. While exercise therapy can be effective in improving the distance patients can walk, it does not have an immediate impact. Implementing the simple yet novel intervention of a ca rbon composite AFO, our study will test the mechanisms 
contributing to both acute and long-term improvements in walking performance, and provide the evidence 
required to successfully implement the AFO as a therapy  in this population. This project will provide the 
evidence needed to introduce an easily accessible intervention that can be utilized in the clinical setting. Furthermore, our findings will be used to develop additional rehabilitation studies aimed to improve muscle health and function in PAD.  
 
4. Approach 
Preliminary work demonstrates forward propulsion is deficient in individuals with PAD. 6-8, 10, 65  
We have conducted several studies evaluating ground reaction forces (Figure 3), joint angle kinematics, and 
joint muscular responses (joint torques) and their contributions (joint powers) during the stance phase of gait in 
patients with PAD.  
In the first study, we compared ground reaction forces of 14 patients with PAD (Age: 58 ± 3.4 years; Body Mass: 81.0 ± 15.64 kg) to five healthy controls (Age: 53 ± 3.4 years; Body Mass: 87.4 ± 
12.75 kg)
65. In this study we analyzed ground 
reaction forces. Additionally, we evaluated stance 
time and time spent in double-limb support. Results demonstrated that in the anterior-posterior force direction, the propulsion forces used for push-off in 
late stance were significantly decreased in patients 
with PAD (Figure 3). Regarding stance time and time spent in double support, patients with PAD had significantly increased values compared with healthy controls. All of these differences were even 
present during a pain free (rested) state in patients 
with PAD.  
In several follow-up studies in patients with PAD, we evaluated joint muscular responses and their contributions by calculating joint torques and powers of the ankle, knee, and the hip during 
walking (Figure 4).  
 
The first such study evaluated lower extremity 
joint torques in 13 patients with PAD who 
exhibited bilateral intermittent claudication (Age: 
64.5 ± 8.57 years; Body Mass: 80.7 ± 12.64 kg) and 11 healthy control subjects (Age: 66.2 ± 
9.22; Body Mass: 77.8 ± 10.75 kg). 
The conditions included walking prior to the onset of claudication pain and walking after the onset of pain
10. 
Compared to controls, patients with PAD had significantly decreased hip extensor torque during early stance in 
both conditions. During the pain condition, patients with PAD had significantly decreased ankle plantarflexor torque during late stance. We conducted a follow-up st udy in 20 patients bilateral PAD (Age: 60.3 ± 7.21 years; 
Body Mass: 82.6 ± 18.05 kg) and 16 healthy controls (Age: 62.8 ± 12.01; Body Mass: 81.8 ± 20.99 kg) that 
evaluated joint torques and also joint powers
7, which was the first study to investigate joint powers in patients 
with PAD. Patients were assessed while walking before and after the onset of claudication pain. Patients with 
Figure 4.  Average decreases in 
joint power contributions during 
each phase of stance in patients with PAD compared with healthy 
controls from previously published 
studies
6-8, 10. There are significant 
average decreases at all three 
joints during various phases of 
stance in individuals with PAD. In another group of individuals with 
decreased ankle torque and power 
at the end of stance, healthy older, 
the hip compensates by increasing 
the hip extensor torque during weight acceptance. As is evident in 
this figure, individuals with PAD do 
not compensate in this way.   Figure 3.  Anterior-posterior (front-to-back) ground reaction 
force curves for patients with PAD prior to the onset of 
claudication (PRE) and following  the onset of claudication 
(POST); and healthy controls (CONTROL). Decreased peak 
propulsion towards the end of the stance phase in the PAD 
group is consistent with inability of the ankle plantarflexor 
muscles to generate force to propel individuals into the next step just before the toe comes o ff the ground. This decrease 
occurs prior to the onset of pain and worsens slightly during the PAD POST condition.  

PAD had significantly decreased hip and knee power dur ing early stance due to decreased torques produced 
by the hip and knee extensors. Knee and hip power was also significantly decreased during midstance, which 
is attributed to decreased torques produced by the knee extensors and the hip flexors. During late stance, 
reduced propulsion was noted by a significant reduction in the ankle plantarflexor torque and power. All of 
these reductions in patients with PAD were present prior to and after the onset of claudication pain.  
 
We have also performed a similar biomechanical evaluati on in 12 unilateral patients with PAD (Age: 61.7 ± 
10.53 years; Body Mass: 84.7 ± 20.24 kg and 10 healthy co ntrols (Age: 66.3 ± 9.22; Body Mass: 77.9 ± 10.65 
kg)8. Results of this study further confirmed the def iciencies of the ankle plantarflexors in propelling the body 
forward, as ankle plantarflexor torque was significantly reduced in the affected limb as compared with controls 
before and after the onset of claudication pain. Additi onally, ankle plantarflexor power was significantly 
decreased on both affected and unaffected limbs of patients with PAD as compared to controls. Although ankle 
torque and power are often reduced in healthy older in dividuals, older compensate by increasing the hip 
extensor torque and power66. Here, the PAD group experiences deficits at the ankle, knee, and the hip rather 
than compensating with a different joint like we see in healthy older individuals. In sum, we estimate that 
average reductions in joint torques during each phase of stance from all of our previous studies are 24% decrease in hip power generation during early stance,  39% decrease in knee power generation during 
midstance, and 26% reduction in ankle plantarflexor power generation during late stance as compared with 
healthy controls (Figure 4)
 6-8, 10.  
 
Collectively, these studies demonstrate patients with PAD have deficits in the muscular contribution of the 
ankle plantarflexors, which decrease propulsion during walk ing. Ankle plantarflexor torque and power in late 
stance is of great importance as it represents the greatest contribution to overall power during ambulation. The 
findings from these preliminary studies motivated the intervention to increase propulsion with an AFO.  
 
Supervised exercise therapy improves peak walking distances but not lower extremity torques and 
powers. Preliminary unpublished data from our laboratory was collected in 23 patients with PAD (Age: 60.3 ± 
7.21 years; Body Mass: 82.6 ± 18.05 kg) who complet ed a supervised walking program for six months. Joint 
torques and powers were calculated from subjects walking prior to the onset of claudication pain at baseline 
and after the exercise program. Of the 23 subjects c ollected, the ankle plantarflexor torques were unchanged 
or worsened (decreased torque) in 14 subjects following the exercise program (Figure 5). To examine whether 
patients with PAD were able to redistribute joint torque following the exercise program, we investigated hip 
extensor torque in early 
stance. Redistribution of torque is a strategy to use one joint to compensate for a deficit 
in another joint, to 
achieve propulsion during walking. However, instead of torque redistribution, we found similar 
decreases in the hip as the ankle, with 13 of the 23 patients having no change, or further decrease, in peak hip 
extensor torque following the exercise intervention (Figure 6). Regarding power, a total of 16 patients had 
unchanged or decreased ankle plantarflexor power ( Figure 7), and 11 patients had unchanged or decreased 
hip extensor power after participating in supervised exerci se for six months (Figure 8). Of note, all 23 subjects 
improved the peak walking distance 685 meters on average. Of subjects whose ankle plantarflexor torque did 
not improve, their peak walking distances were still incr eased an average of 669 meters. While it is a positive 
result that patients are increasing the maximum distance that they can walk after completing a six month exercise program, lack of improvement in gait biom echanics means there is untapped potential for further 
improvements in the walking performance of these individuals. Figure 5.  Changes in 
ankle plantarflexor 
torque after completing a 
supervised exercise program in patients with 
PAD. Fourteen subjects 
had unchanged or 
decreased torque 
values, even though the maximum distance these patients could walk was 
increased, which shows 
that treadmill exercise 
does not improve the 
ability of muscles with myopathy to produce 
torque. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Wearing an ankle foot orthosis immediately impr oves walking performance in patients with PAD. 
Four patients with PAD (Age: 66.0 ± 10.9 years; Body Mass: 84.3 ± 17.1 kg) completed pilot testing of initial 
and maximum claudication distances while walking with and without an AFO. Patients completed a 
progressive-load treadmill test67. During the treadmill test, the patients with PAD walked on a treadmill that 
started at 0% grade and 0.83m/sec. Every two minutes, the grade was increased by 2% up to a maximum of 
15% grade. The first indication of claudication pain was recorded as initial claudication distance, while the total distance the patients could walk on the treadmill before stopping because of pain was the absolute claudication distance
67. Throughout the test, we asked the patient to confirm the presence or absence of pain to ensure the 
Figure 6.  Changes in hip 
extensor torque following six months of a supervised 
exercise program 
demonstrate at least half of 
the patients have no improvement or further decreased values for torque. Unlike healthy older 
individuals, patients with PAD 
still do not redistribute torque from the ankle to the hip, but rather maintain an overall decreased torque profile 
d ith h lth ld
Figure 7.  Changes in ankle 
plantarflexor power of patients with PAD who completed a 
supervised exercise program. 
Sixteen subjects had unchanged or decreased ankle power generation, even though the maximum distance these patients could walk was 
increased, which shows that 
treadmill exercise does not improve the ability of muscles with myopathy to produce power at the end of the 
stance phase of walking. 
Figure 8.  Eleven patients with 
PAD had unchanged or 
decreased hip extensor power 
following the supervised 
exercise program. These results demonstrate that patients with PAD do not improve ankle propulsion, or redistribute power to the hip 
even following supervised 
exercise. 
 
correct initial claudication distance was recorded. We counterbalanced the effect of the AFO by having two 
patients walk first with the AFO, while the other two walked first without the AFO to prevent a fatigue effect. On average, the patients’ initial claudication distance was 140.1 ± 72.5 meters while walking without the AFO and 
183.5 ± 121.2 meters while walking with the AFO (Figure 9). The average maximum claudication distance was 
366.0 ± 118.3 meters without the AFO and 492.3 ± 66.8 meters with the AFO (Figure 10). Thus, the four patients increased the maximum distanced walked by about 50 meters just by wearing the AFO. These increases in initial and maximum walking distances are comparable to those seen after pharmacotherapy for six months
29, 32.  
Wearing an AFO trends 
towards redistribution 
of torque to the hip in 
patients with PAD. Four 
patients with PAD (Age: 
60.3 ± 7.21 years; Body 
Mass: 82.6 ± 18.05 kg) 
were tested while walking overground with and without the AFO. Peak torque was calculated for 
the ankle at the end of 
the stance phase and hip extensor torque was calculated from early stance in each condition. 
The preliminary results 
show that the ankle 
plantarflexor muscles have to contribute less torque to walking while 
wearing the AFO, as the ankle plantarflexor torque in these four subjects decreased while wearing the AFO (Figure 11; 1.280 ± 0.14 Nm/kg without the AFO and 1.22 ± 0.12 Nm/kg with the AFO). 
This decrease in ankle plantarflexor 
torque while wearing the AFO was not expected, but surprisingly, the overall torque profile was also maintained. Thus, 
our results indicate that walking with the 
AFO helps patients with PAD in two ways: 
1) contributing mechanical torque during 
propulsion and 2) reducing the demands 
on the myopathic calf muscles of these 
patients. The hip extensor torque also 
increased with the AFO (Figure 12; 0.602 ± 0.12 Nm/kg without the AFO compared 
with
 0.621 ± 0.12 Nm/kg with the AFO). 
While these increases are small, the fact that all four of the patients actually increased is significant 
considering that at least 50% of subjects decreased in these same variables following supervised exercise in 
our preliminary data presented earlier. This subset of preliminary data provides optimism as to the potential of 
the AFO to improve both walking distances and torque profiles in patients with PAD both acutely, and following a three month AFO intervention.  Opportunity presented by an ankle foot orthosis (AFO) intervention: Recent studies in healthy and neurological 
populations have demonstrated that simple AFOs can increase walking performance through reduced energy 
expenditure26, 28, 68. While powered exoskeletons have been a hot-topic in media and pop-culture, clinicians and  Figure 9. Initial claudication distances 
improve while walking with an ankle foot 
orthosis (AFO) compared to walking 
without an AFO in patients with PAD.  Figure 10. Maximum claudication 
distances are increas ed in patients with 
peripheral arterial disease when walking with an ankle foot orthosis (AFO). 
Figure 11 . The required torque contribution of the ankle 
plantarflexors was decreased in four patients with PAD when 
wearing the AFO. Thus, the AFO contributes mechanical force in place of the ankle plantarflexor s and also decreases the oxygen 
demand by requiring less exertion from those muscles. 

scientists are 
appropriately cautious realizing 
that such 
technology is far from being practical and affordable for all individuals who would benefit. 
However, an off-
the-shelf AFO is the least complex form of 
exoskeleton, that is 
easily adjustable, affordable, and available to immediately be prescribed and worn by patients with PAD wishing to walk further who do not wish or are not 
candidates to undergo an 
operation.  
 
Research Plan 
Study Design: We plan to 
recruit 50 patients with PAD from the claudication clinic at the Nebraska and Western Iowa Veterans Affairs’ Medical Center (VAMC) in Omaha, Nebraska 
(Figure 13). As we just 
completed enrollment of a five-year NIH grant that included 200 patients (R01 AG034995) and have collected over 50 patients 
in 18 months for a COBRE 
research project (P20 GM109090), we expect this recruitment goal to be attainable. The collaborating vascular 
surgeons, Drs. Johanning and 
Pipinos, will evaluate all patients seen at the University of Nebraska Medical Center and Veterans’ Affairs Medical Center claudication clinics. The PI also 
participates in these clinics and 
works side by side with the surgeons. Inclusion criteria:  At entry into 
the study, all subjects must: 
1) be able to give written, 
informed consent 
2) demonstrate positive 
history of chronic claudication 
3) demonstrate exercise-
limiting claudication established 
by history and direct observation 
Figure 12 . Wearing the 
AFO allowed four pilot 
subjects to increase hip 
extensor torque during early stance, which is 
consistent with the 
redistribution of torque from the ankle to the hip 
seen in healthy older 
individuals. Utilizing the hip muscles would further 
decrease the demand on 
the ankle plantarflexors 
while walking with an AFO. 
Figure 13 . Study 
Design 
 

during a screening walking test administered by the evaluating vascular surgeon.  
4) have an ankle/brachial index < 0.90 at rest69  
5) and have a stable blood pressure regimen, stable lipid regimen, stable diabetes regimen and risk factor 
control for 6 weeks. 
Exclusion criteria: Any potential subjects will be excluded if they have: 
1) rest pain or tissue loss due to PAD (Fontaine stage III and IV)69 
2) acute lower extremity ischemic event secondary to thromboembolic disease or acute trauma 
3) walking capacity limited by conditions other than claudication including leg (joint/musculoskeletal,  
neurologic) and systemic (heart, lung disease) pathology 
 
Specific Aim 1: Determine the acute impact of the AFO on walking performance  
Approach:  We propose to study 50 patients with PAD, measuring walking performance with and without 
wearing a carbon composite AFO. Patients will wear the AFO on the affected leg(s), so patients with bilateral 
leg symptoms will wear them on both legs while patients with unilateral disease will wear the AFO on the 
symptomatic leg only. Walking performance will include m easurement of initial and absolute walking distances, 
and lower extremity torque and power. Energy cost and mu scle activity will be tested as potential mechanisms 
contributing to improvement in walking performance. Conditions will be randomized, with half of the subjects performing the tests without the AFO and the other half starting with the AFO walking conditions. All data will be collected in the Biomechanics Research Building (BRB). All subjects will be consented after reporting to the 
BRB and the outcomes detailed below will be assessed. Th e entire process is expected to take 2.5 hours. 
Outcomes 
1) Initial and absolute walking distances:  Walking distances will be determined with a progressive-load 
treadmill test
67 with initial and maximum claudication distances as outcomes. During the treadmill test, 
patients with walk on a treadmill that starts at 0% grade and 2.0 mph. Every two minutes, the grade will be increase by 2% up to a maximum of 15% grade, and the speed held constant throughout the test
67. 
2) Lower extremity torque and power:  Biomechanical data will be collected using eight in-ground AMTI 
force platforms and a 12 camera high speed digital moti on capture system (Cortex 5.1, Motion Analysis 
Corp, Santa Rosa, CA) to collect three dimensional kinematics (60 Hz) and kinetics (ground reaction 
forces, 600 Hz). Reflective markers will be placed at specific anatomical locations on the lower limbs, 
utilizing the marker systems of Vaughan70 and Nigg71. Following the setup, kinematics and ground 
reaction forces  will be recorded while the subjects walk with their self-selected pace through a ten-
meter pathway. Each patient will be tested before the onset of claudication pain (pain free) with a 
mandatory one-minute rest period between the walking trials to insure that all trials are in a pain free condition. A total of five walking trials per leg will be collected. Following the collection of overground data, the patients with PAD will be allowed to rest.  
 
Data are exported and processed in custom laboratory software using MATLAB (Mathworks Inc., MA) and Visual 3D (C-Motion, Inc., MD). This software is used to calculate ground reaction forces for the vertical, anterior-posterior, and medial-lateral direction, and joint angles and joint angular velocity for 
the hip, knee, and ankle during the stance phase of walking. Lower extremity joint muscular responses 
and contributions during walking are determined using joint torques and powers. Joint torques and powers are calculated using inverse dynamics for the hip, knee, and ankle during the stance phase of walking. Inverse dynamics combine the kinematics and the ground reaction forces as described by Winter
72. Additionally, spatial and temporal characteristics will be calculated using custom code in 
MATLAB (Mathworks Inc., MA). From this data our primary lower extremity function outcome measures will be ankle and hip plantarflexor torque and power, al though all kinematic and kinetic measures of the 
lower extremity will be investigated. 
3) Muscle activity: Electromyographic data will collected from the gasctrocnemius and soleus muscles of the affected legs at 1000 Hz using surface electrodes with the DelSys Trigno™ wireless system. Prior 
to the trials maximum voluntary contraction electromyographic signals will be recorded for each muscle 
via isometric contraction for three seconds. For electromyographic data analysis, time-domain and frequency-domain analyses will be performed using custom Matlab programs. Time-domain analysis of electromyographic signal provides a measure of the average muscle activity and work produced by a 
given muscle (activation profiles)
 73. The mean electromyographic signal (EMG mean) will be computed to 
measure the average muscle activity for eac h trial. The electromyographic envelope (EMG env) will also 
be calculated by integrating the time series of root-mean-square electromyogr aphic signal for each trial. 
EMG env provides a measure of the muscle work for a given trial. Frequency-domain analysis of 
electromyographic signal provides a window into muscle fatigue and motor unit recruitment 73. The raw 
electromyographic signal will be converted to the frequency domain using a Fast Fourier Transform to 
determine the power spectrum. Median frequency and frequency bandwidth will be computed from the 
power spectrum. Median frequency will be computed as the frequency at half of the integrated power 
spectrum as given by the following equation (1) 73: 
 
  
where P(f) is the power at frequency f, f med is the median frequency, and f max is the maximum frequency 
of the power spectrum. Frequency bandwidth (f band) is the difference between the highest and lowest 
frequency where the power exceeds half the maximum power of the power spectrum.  
 
4) Energy cost:  A portable metabolic cart (Cosmed K4b2, Cosmed USA Inc., Chicago, IL), will be used to 
measure gas exchange on a breath-by-breath basis, providing a measure of oxygen consumption. 
Steady-state oxygen consumption in ml/kg/min will be calculated during the walking distance test.  
 
Statistical analysis: The sample size was calculated to detect effect sizes observed in pilot data for initial and 
absolute walking distances. The mean (SD) difference in initial walking distance with and without AFO was 43.4 meters (93), corresponding to a standardized effect size of 0.47 standard deviations. A sample size of 50 subjects will provide 84% power to detect differences of 0.47 standard deviations between walking with and without an AFO, using a paired t-test for sample size estimation purposes only, and a significance level of 0.02 to informally adjust for multiple testing. The standardized effect size for absolute walking distance was 1.29 
standard deviations, so the sample size of 50 subjects will also provide sufficient power to detect this 
difference. For statistical analysis, a linear (or generalized linear, as appropriate) mixed modeling approach will be used. This approach will allow us to detect differences between walking with and without an AFO while adjusting for confounding variables. The level of significance will be set at 0.05.  
 
Expected results/possible limitations: Based on work with AFO devices in other pathological populations, we expect the AFO will improve lower extremit y torque and power generation enough to demonstrate a 
clinically important difference. If our hypothesis is  correct, the AFO will be a potential new conservative 
intervention for improving walking performance in pat ients with PAD, along with the mechanisms contributing 
to those improvements. If our hypothesis is not supported, we speculate that the AFO may still be a viable conservative treatment option based on results of Specif ic Aim 2. For example, the AFO may improve walking 
performance over the course of the three-month intervention. This aim will also provide data on muscle contribution that could be used to design and test an improved AFO.  Our preliminary work looks promising for increasing the distance that patients with PAD can walk. Completion of this aim will provide the groundwork for 
exploring and designing even more effective AFO devices. 
 
Specific Aim 2: Determine improvements in walking performance following a three month AFO intervention 
Approach: We propose to study a subset of 30 patients from Specific Aim 1 measuring walking performance, 
physical activity, and quality of life after a three-month AFO intervention. Walking performance will be 
assessed in the same manner as in Specific Aim 1 during the baseline assessment. Physical activity will be assessed using accelerometers while quality of life will be assessed through questionnaires. To investigate mechanisms contributing to improvements in walking perfo rmance, physical activity and quality of life, we will 
measure changes in energy cost, muscle morphometric parameters, muscle oxygenation, and muscle strength 
and endurance at baseline and following each of the three month intervention arms (control and AFO).  
 
AFO and Control Intervention: Patients will be asked to wear an AFO each day for three months. Subjects 
will have an off-the-shelf AFO (Figure 2) chosen initially based on shoe size and adjusted or exchanged for a 
different size during the initial evaluation after entering the study. The patients will be asked to wear the AFO at 
all times except when they are in bed or showering/bathing. The instructions given to the patients about walking will be the same as typically  provided by clinicians, which is to walk 30 minutes per day, most 
days/week. We have chosen this specific AFO device bec ause it is already available for use in a clinical 
environment, is composed of a carbon-composite material  that will capture and return energy during the gait 
cycle, and has successfully contributed to propulsion during walking in other clinical populations
26, 28. Patients 
will be able to contact the nurse coordinator at any time if they need the AFO adjusted or have questions about what should happen during the intervention. Subjects in the control arm will be asked to continue the same lifestyle for three months. The intervention arm order will be randomized (see Statistical Analysis)  max) ( ) (
0f
ff
medmeddf f P df f P  max) ( ) (
0f
ff
medmeddf f P df f P
(1) 
Outcomes: All outcomes will be assessed at baseline and following each arm (control and AFO). 
1) Initial and absolute walking distances, 2)  Lower extremity torque and power , 3) Muscle activity, 
and 4) Energy cost will all be measured as described for Specific Aim 1.  
5) Physical Activity:  Participants will wear the Actigraph (Actigraph GT3X, Actigraph, FL, USA) 
accelerometer on their hip for seven days (the whole day except when sleeping) prior to starting the 
AFO intervention to measure baseline activity level. The accelerometer will be mailed back to researchers in a pre-paid envelope. Two weeks prior to  the post-intervention visit to the laboratory, an 
accelerometer will be mailed to participants to wear the final seven days before the visit. Average steps/day, maximum cadence, and average peak activity index will be calculated.  
6) Quality of Life:  The Walking Impairment Questionnaire
74, Medical Outcomes Short Form 36, and 
Edinburgh Claudication Questionnaire will be used to assess quality of life. The Walking Impairment Questionnaire has been validated in patients with claudication
74 and the Short Form 36 has been 
extensively evaluated and tested with a variety of popul ations and is able to distinguish between groups 
of varying health status75, 76. The Edinburgh Claudication Questionnaire was developed in an iterative, 
systematic fashion and has been implemented as a more holistic approach to identify presence of 
intermittent claudication in many clinical trials.20, 77-82 
7) Morphometric parameters: An ultrasound transducer (LS128 CEXT-1Z, Telemed, LT, Lithuania) will 
be used to assess thickness of the plantarflexor muscles using a standard real time B-mode image. 
Muscle thickness will be measured on the posterior medial and lateral surfaces, 20, 30, and 40% 
between the lateral malleolus of fibula and the lateral condyle of the tibia. The average values of 
muscle thickness at all measured site s will be the primary outcome measure. 
8) Muscle Oxygenation: Continuous-wave near infrared spectroscopy (Moxy Monitor, Fortiori Design 
LLC, MN, USA) will be measured bilaterally on the gastrocnemius calf muscle before, during and after the walking distance test. We will measure resting StO
2, minimum StO 2 during the maximal treadmill 
test, time to minimum StO 2, and the StO 2 recovery time.  
9) Muscle Strength and Endurance: An isokinetic dynamometer  (Biodex 4 Medical Systems, Inc. USA)  
will be used to measure peak isokinetic strength (torque) of the ankle and hip of the more symptomatic leg. Peak torque and total work performed for ankle plantarflexion, ankle dorsiflexion, hip flexion, and hip extension will be measured. Subjects will perform one trial of five repetitions at 60 degrees/second to assess strength, and one trial of 15 repetitions at 120 degrees/second to assess endurance.  
 
Statistical analysis: A portion of patients from Aim 1 will be randomized to one of two intervention arms 
(control then AFO, or AFO then control). We expect differences from a 3-month training to be larger than the immediate differences shown in Aim 1. A sample size of  30 subjects (15 per treatment arm) will provide 80% 
power to detect differences of 0.59 standard deviations between walking with and without an AFO, using a paired t-test for sample size estimation purposes only, and a significance level of 0.025 to adjust for multiple testing. This sample size will also allow us to detect an effect size of 1.2 for differences between the two groups at each time point. Assuming a 10% drop-out rate, we will randomize 17 per group, for a total of 34 subjects. For statistical analysis, a linear mixed m odeling approach (or generalized linear mixed model, as 
appropriate) will be used. This approach will allow us to detect differences within and between groups, and 
adjust for confounding variables. The main comparison of interest will be changes in walking distances due to wearing the AFO. The use of the crossover design will allow us to investigate several questions of interest: 1) If walking distances improve after wearing the AFO for 3-mo nths; 2) If walking distances worsen over the first 3 
months for subjects not wearing the AFO in the first period; and 3) If the improvement in walking distances from wearing the AFO for three months is retained over the second 3 months (no AFO).  To evaluate the 
relationship between improvements in walking perform ance, physical activity, and quality of life, and 
improvements in morphometric parameters, muscle oxygenation, and muscle strength and endurance, multiple 
correlations will be used. The level of significance will be set at p=0.05. 
 
Expected results/possible limitations: We hypothesize that an AFO intervention will increase walking 
performance, physical activity levels, and quality of life through improvements in the function of the muscles of 
the treated legs. If our hypothesis is correct, the AFO intervention is a new effective conservative intervention 
for patients with PAD. Because the premise is that the AFO will maintain overall torque and power while requiring a lower contribution from the leg muscles of patients, the patients will be able to walk further, placing 
less stress on their leg muscles, thereby allowing regeneration of structure and function of the muscles. 
Another possibility is that the patients experience an improvement in their walking performance, physical activity levels and quality of life but do not see improvements in muscular function of the legs. In this case, the 
AFO would still be beneficial for patients to use. Ho wever, if none of the components of our hypothesis are 
correct, and neither the function and quality of life nor the muscle characteristics improve despite conscientious 
use of the AFO, then our study would direct us away  from AFO-type treatments and towards other therapies 
and rehabilitation geared towards muscle health. 
 
Specific Aim 3: Determine the feasibility of a three month AFO intervention  
Approach: We will utilize Bowen and colleagues’ standards for feasibility studies to measure the feasibility of 
using an AFO over three months in a random subset of  20 patients from Specific Aim 2. We will employ 
interviews and surveys throughout the three-month AFO intervention period to assess the following outcomes.  
Outcomes 
1) Acceptability: Interviews and a satisfaction survey  will be implemented to assess satisfaction of using 
an AFO, intent to continue use, and perceived appropriateness measured. The research team will 
conduct interviews at 1.5 months, and three months. Interviews will last no longer than 30 minutes and 
will take place at the UNO Biomechanics Research Bu ilding. Satisfaction surveys for all participants will 
be completed during the final assessment in the Biomechanics Research Building.  
2) Demand:  Actual use and perceived demand will be measured using an accelerometer and interviews. 
An additional accelerometer will be given to the patient at the baseline visit. Battery life on these accelerometers can span over 30 days, especially with a lower sampling frequency of 1 Hz. Each 
month a new accelerometer will be mailed to participants and the package will include a pre-paid mailer 
for subjects to return the previous accelerome ter for downloading data and charging. Additionally, 
patients will be contacted randomly three times duri ng the 3-month study period to further assess the 
actual use. Perceived demand will be assessed via interview at baseline and at three months.  
3) Implementation: Degree of use, success/failure of use, and factors affecting the ease/difficulty of use 
will be measured using interviews to determine implementation. Interviews will take no longer than 30 minutes and will occur at 1.5 months and 3-month time points.  
4) Practicality: Measurements of the  positive/negative effects of the AFO and ability of participants to 
effectively use the AFO will be made to determine the practicality of the intervention. We will assess these factors via interviews at three months. 
 
Analysis for Specific Aim 3, Outcomes 1-4: Data from interviews will be transcribed and analyzed by the 
research team in NVivo 10 (QSR International Pty Lid., Victoria, AU). Researchers will independently code transcripts and meet to reach agreement on major dat a themes. Emerging themes will be identified using a 
constant comparison approach. This approach allows for the development of explanations through patterns but also allows the coder to harness theory and prior knowledge or research to answer research questions. 
 
Statistical analysis: Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize results of survey data. We will use counts 
and percents for categorical data, and means and standar d deviations for quantitative data. Associations 
between walking distance variables and acceptability, use, and practicality variables will be examined using t-tests for dichotomous variables and correlations for continuous variables. 
 
Expected results/possible limitations: We expect that an AFO intervention will be feasible to implement for 
three months in patients with PAD. If our hypothesis is correct, the study will establish the AFO as a new intervention that will likely be easily adopted by patients. It is also possible that the intervention does not prove 
feasible in one or more areas. If that happens, the study  results will provide specific information on which 
aspects of the application of AFO treatment are not feasible. Those area(s) can then be further evaluated and 
potentially improved. Importantly, the re sults will inform the importance of these areas to feasibility of all 
interventions for the PAD patient group, not just the AFO intervention proposed in the current study. 
 
Table 2: Project Timeline 1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year  5th Year 
Subject recruitment XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXX 
Baseline assessment     XXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX  
AFO and Control Intervention Arms     XXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXX 
Post AFO and Control assessments       XX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXX XXX 
Data analysis  XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX 
Abstract/manuscript development         XXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX 
Grant writing    XXXXXX XXXXXX 
 
References  
1. Crowther RG, Spinks WL, Leicht AS, Quigley F, Golledge J. Relationship between temporal -spatial gait 
parameters, gait kinematics, walking performance, exercise  capacity, and physical activity level in peripheral 
arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 2007 Jun;45(6):1172 -8. 
2. McDermott MM, Liu K, Greenland P, Guralnik JM, Criqui MH, Chan C, et al. Functional decline in peripheral 
arterial disease: Associations with the ankle brachial index and leg symptoms. JAMA. 2004 Jul 28;292(4):453 -
61. 
3. Garg PK, Liu K, Tian L, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Criqui MH, et al. Physical activity during daily life and 
functional decline in peripheral arterial disease. Circulation. 2009 Jan 2 0;119(2):251 -60. 
4. Nehler MR, McDermott MM, Treat -Jacobson D, Chetter I, Regensteiner JG. Functional outcomes and 
quality of life in peripheral arterial disease: Current status. Vasc Med. 2003 May;8(2):115 -26. 
5. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, Nehler M R, Harris KA, Fowkes FG, et al. Inter -society consensus for 
the management of peripheral arterial disease (TASC II). J Vasc Surg. 2007 Jan;45 Suppl S:S5 -67. 
6. Wurdeman SR, Koutakis P, Myers SA, Johanning JM, Pipinos II, Stergiou N. Patients with periphera l arterial 
disease exhibit reduced joint powers compared to velocity -matched controls. Gait Posture. 2012 Jul;36(3):506 -
9. 
7. Koutakis P, Johanning JM, Haynatzki GR, Myers SA, Stergiou N, Longo GM, et al. Abnormal joint powers 
before and after the onset of  claudication symptoms. J Vasc Surg. 2010 Aug;52(2):340 -7. 
8. Koutakis P, Pipinos II, Myers SA, Stergiou N, Lynch TG, Johanning JM. Joint torques and powers are 
reduced during ambulation for both limbs in patients with unilateral claudication. J Vasc Surg.  2010 
Jan;51(1):80 -8. 
9. Wurdeman SR, Myers SA, Johanning JM, Pipinos II, Stergiou N. External work is deficient in both limbs of 
patients with unilateral PAD. Med Eng Phys. 2012 Feb 7.  
10. Chen SJ, Pipinos II, Johanning JM, Radovic M, Huisinga JM, Myers S A, et al. Bilateral intermittent 
claudication results in alterations in the gait biomechanics at the hip and ankle joints during gait. Journal of 
Biomechanics. 2008;41(11):2506 -14. 
11. Myers SA, Johanning JM, Pipinos II, Schmid KK, Stergiou N. Vascular occ lusion affects gait variability 
patterns of healthy younger and older individuals. Ann Biomed Eng. 2012 Oct 9.  
12. Myers S, Johanning J, Stergiou N, and Pipinos I. Gait variability of peripheral arterial disease patients is 
similar before and after the ons et of claudication pain. Clinical Biomechanics. 2010;submitted.  
13. Weiss DJ, Casale GP, Koutakis P, Nella AA, Swanson SA, Zhu Z, et al. Oxidative damage and myofiber 
degeneration in the gastrocnemius of patients with peripheral arterial disease. J Transl Med. 2013 Sep 
25;11:230,5876 -11-230. 
14. Cluff K, Miserlis D, Naganathan GK, Pipinos II, Koutakis P, Samal A, et al. Morphometric analysis of 
gastrocnemius muscle biopsies from patients with peripheral arterial disease: Objective grading of muscle 
degenera tion. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013 Aug 1;305(3):R291 -9. 
15. Pipinos II, Judge AR, Selsby JT, Zhu Z, Swanson SA, Nella AA, et al. The myopathy of peripheral arterial 
occlusive disease: Part 1. functional and histomorphological changes and ev idence for mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2007 Dec -2008 Jan;41(6):481 -9. 
16. Makris KI, Nella AA, Zhu Z, Swanson SA, Casale GP, Gutti TL, et al. Mitochondriopathy of peripheral 
arterial disease. Vascular. 2007 Nov -Dec;15(6):336 -43. 
17. Pipinos II, Judge AR, Selsby JT, Zhu Z, Swanson SA, Nella AA, et al. The myopathy of peripheral arterial 
occlusive disease: Part 2. oxidative stress, neuropathy, and shift in muscle fiber type. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 
2008 Apr -May;42(2):101 -12. 
18. Norgren  L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, Hirsch AT, Jaff MR, Diehm C, et al. The next 10 years in the 
management of peripheral artery disease: Perspectives from the 'PAD 2009' conference. Eur J Vasc Endovasc 
Surg. 2010 Sep;40(3):375 -80. 
19. Regensteiner JG, Steiner JF, Hiatt WR. Exercise training improves functional status in patients with 
peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 1996 Jan;23(1):104 -15. 
20. Crowther RG, Spinks WL, Leicht AS, Sangla K, Quigley F, Golledge J. Effects of a long -term exercise 
program on lowe r limb mobility, physiological responses, walking performance, and physical activity levels in 
patients with peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 2008 Feb;47(2):303 -9. 
21. McDermott MM. Functional impairment in peripheral artery disease and how to imp rove it in 2013. Curr 
Cardiol Rep. 2013 Apr;15(4):347,013 -0347 -5. 
22. Danielsson A, Sunnerhagen KS. Energy expenditure in stroke subjects walking with a carbon composite 
ankle foot orthosis. J Rehabil Med. 2004 Jul;36(4):165 -8. 
23. Desloovere K, Molenaers G, Van Gestel L, Huenaerts C, Van Campenhout A, Callewaert B, et al. How can 
push -off be preserved during use of an ankle foot orthosis in children with hemiplegia? A prospective controlled 
study. Gait Posture. 2006 Oct;24(2):142 -51. 
24. Wolf SI, Alimusaj M, Rettig O, Doderlein L. Dynamic assist by carbon fiber spring AFOs for patients with 
myelomeningocele. Gait Posture. 2008 Jul;28(1):175 -7. 
25. Bartonek A, Eriksson M, Gutierrez -Farewik EM. Effects of carbon fibre spring orthoses on gait in 
ambulatory chi ldren with motor disorders and plantarflexor weakness. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007 
Aug;49(8):615 -20. 
26. Bregman DJ, Harlaar J, Meskers CG, de Groot V. Spring -like ankle foot orthoses reduce the energy cost of 
walking by taking over ankle work. Gait Posture . 2012 Jan;35(1):148 -53. 
27. Hansen AH, Childress DS, Miff SC, Gard SA, Mesplay KP. The human ankle during walking: Implications 
for design of biomimetic ankle prostheses. J Biomech. 2004 Oct;37(10):1467 -74. 
28. Arch ES, Stanhope SJ. Passive -dynamic ankle -foot orthoses substitute for ankle strength while causing 
adaptive gait strategies: A feasibility study. Ann Biomed Eng. 2015 Feb;43(2):442 -50. 
29. Thompson PD, Zimet R, Forbes WP, Zhang P. Meta -analysis of results from eight randomized, placebo -
controlled  trials on the effect of cilostazol on patients with intermittent claudication. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Dec 
15;90(12):1314 -9. 
30. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd -Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, et al. Executive summary: Heart 
disease and stroke statistics --2012 update: A report from the american heart association. Circulation. 2012 Jan 
3;125(1):188 -97. 
31. Vincent G, Velkoff V. The next four decades: The older population in the united states, 2010 to 2050. US 
Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics A dministration, US Census Bureau; 2010.  
32. Stevens JW, Simpson E, Harnan S, Squires H, Meng Y, Thomas S, et al. Systematic review of the efficacy 
of cilostazol, naftidrofuryl oxalate and pentoxifylline for the treatment of intermittent claudication. Br J S urg. 
2012 Dec;99(12):1630 -8. 
33. Ahimastos AA, Walker PJ, Askew C, Leicht A, Pappas E, Blombery P, et al. Effect of ramipril on walking 
times and quality of life among patients with peripheral artery disease and intermittent claudication: A 
randomized cont rolled trial. JAMA. 2013 Feb 6;309(5):453 -60. 
34. Gardner AW, Poehlman ET. Exercise rehabilitation programs for the treatment of claudication pain. A 
meta -analysis. JAMA. 1995 Sep 27;274(12):975 -80. 
35. Leng GC, Fowler B, Ernst E. Exercise for intermittent  claudication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2000;(2)(2):CD000990.  
36. Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, Regensteiner JG, Mohler ER, Cohen DJ, Reynolds MR, et al. Supervised exercise 
versus primary stenting for claudication resulting from aortoiliac peripheral artery di sease: Six -month outcomes 
from the claudication: Exercise versus endoluminal revascularization (CLEVER) study. Circulation. 2012 Jan 
3;125(1):130 -9. 
37. Whyman MR, Fowkes FG, Kerracher EM, Gillespie IN, Lee AJ, Housley E, et al. Is intermittent claudicatio n 
improved by percutaneous transluminal angioplasty? A randomized controlled trial. J Vasc Surg. 1997 
Oct;26(4):551 -7. 
38. Perkins JM, Collin J, Creasy TS, Fletcher EW, Morris PJ. Exercise training versus angioplasty for stable 
claudication. long and mediu m term results of a prospective, randomised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
1996 May;11(4):409 -13. 
39. Lundgren F, Dahllof AG, Lundholm K, Schersten T, Volkmann R. Intermittent claudication --surgical 
reconstruction or physical training? A prospective rand omized trial of treatment efficiency. Ann Surg. 1989 
Mar;209(3):346 -55. 
40. Ziegler KR, Muto A, Eghbalieh SD, Dardik A. Basic data related to surgical infrainguinal revascularization 
procedures: A twenty year update. Ann Vasc Surg. 2011 Apr;25(3):413 -22. 
41. Nowygrod R, Egorova N, Greco G, Anderson P, Gelijns A, Moskowitz A, et al. Trends, complications, and 
mortality in peripheral vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2006 Feb;43(2):205 -16. 
42. Koutakis P, Myers SA, Cluff K, Ha DM, Haynatzki G, McComb RD, et al. Abnormal myofiber morphology 
and limb dysfunction in claudication. J Surg Res. 2015 Jun 1;196(1):172 -9. 
43. Koutakis P, Miserlis D, Myers SA, Kim JK, Zhu Z, Papoutsi E, et al. Abnormal accumulation of desmin in 
gastrocnemius myofibers of patients with peri pheral artery disease: Associations with altered myofiber 
morphology and density, mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired limb function. J Histochem Cytochem. 2015 
Apr;63(4):256 -69. 
44. Brass EP, Hiatt WR. Acquired skeletal muscle metabolic myopathy in athe rosclerotic peripheral arterial 
disease. Vasc Med. 2000;5(1):55 -9. 
45. Bregman DJ, De Groot V, Van Diggele P, Meulman H, Houdijk H, Harlaar J. Polypropylene ankle foot 
orthoses to overcome drop -foot gait in central neurological patients: A mechanical and f unctional evaluation. 
Prosthet Orthot Int. 2010 Sep;34(3):293 -304. 
46. McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, Guralnik JM, Criqui MH, Dolan NC, et al. Leg symptoms in peripheral 
arterial disease: Associated clinical characteristics and functional impairment. JA MA. 2001 Oct 
3;286(13):1599 -606. 
47. McDermott MM, Ohlmiller SM, Liu K, Guralnik JM, Martin GJ, Pearce WH, et al. Gait alterations associated 
with walking impairment in people with peripheral arterial disease with and without intermittent claudication. J 
Am Geriatr Soc. 2001 Jun;49(6):747 -54. 
48. McDermott MM, Liu K, Guralnik JM, Mehta S, Criqui MH, Martin GJ, et al. The ankle brachial index 
independently predicts walking velocity and walking endurance in peripheral arterial disease. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
1998  Nov;46(11):1355 -62. 
49. Gardner AW, Ritti -Dias RM, Stoner JA, Montgomery PS, Scott KJ, Blevins SM. Walking economy before 
and after the onset of claudication pain in patients with peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010 
Mar;51(3):628 -33. 
50. Hiatt WR, Armstrong EJ, Larson CJ, Brass EP. Pathogenesis of the limb manifestations and exercise 
limitations in peripheral artery disease. Circ Res. 2015 Apr 24;116(9):1527 -39. 
51. McDermott MM. Lower extremity manifestations of peripheral artery disease: The p athophysiologic and 
functional implications of leg ischemia. Circ Res. 2015 Apr 24;116(9):1540 -50. 
52. McDermott MM, Liu K, Ferrucci L, Tian L, Guralnik JM, Liao Y, et al. Greater sedentary hours and slower 
walking speed outside the home predict faster dec lines in functioning and adverse calf muscle changes in 
peripheral arterial disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 Jun 7;57(23):2356 -64. 
53. McDermott MM, Mehta S, Liu K, Guralnik JM, Martin GJ, Criqui MH, et al. Leg symptoms, the ankle -
brachial index, and walki ng ability in patients with peripheral arterial disease. J Gen Intern Med. 1999 
Mar;14(3):173 -81. 
54. McDermott MM, Greenland P, Ferrucci L, Criqui MH, Liu K, Sharma L, et al. Lower extremity performance 
is associated with daily life physical activity in i ndividuals with and without peripheral arterial disease. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2002 Feb;50(2):247 -55. 
55. C P, PT R, N B, LS S, BB R. Resistance exercise training alters mitochondrial function in human skeletal 
muscle. Pubmed: Resistance Exercise ... Available  from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=resistance%20exerc ise%20training
%20alters%20mitochondrial%20function . 
56. Hart CR, Layec G, Trinity JD, Liu X, Kim SE, Groot HJ, et al. Evidence of preserved oxidative capacity and 
oxygen delivery in the plantar flexor muscles with age. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2015 S ep;70(9):1067 -76. 
57. Armstrong D, Lavery L, Kimbriel H, Nixon B, Boulton A. Activity patterns of patients with diabetic foot 
ulceration - patients with active ulceration may not adhere to a standard pressure off -loading regimen. 
Diabetes Care. 2003 SEP;26 (9):2595 -7. 
58. Bus SA, Waaijman R, Nolet F. New monitoring technology to objectively assess adherence to prescribed 
footwear and assistive devices during ambulatory activity. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012 NOV;93(11):2075 -9. 
59. Nicolai SP, Hendriks EJ, Prin s MH, Teijink JA, EXITPAD study group. Optimizing supervised exercise 
therapy for patients with intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg. 2010 Nov;52(5):1226 -33. 
60. Nicolai SP, Teijink JA, Prins MH, Exercise Therapy in Peripheral Arterial Disease Study Grou p. Multicenter 
randomized clinical trial of supervised exercise therapy with or without feedback versus walking advice for 
intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg. 2010 Aug;52(2):348 -55. 
61. Collins TC, Kroll TL, Krueger PN, Willson P, Ashton CM, Sharf BF. A qualitative approach to developing a 
patient -derived intervention to increase exercise in peripheral arterial disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil. 2006 
Mar-Apr;26(2):92 -100. 
62. Schutzer KA, Graves BS. Barriers and motivations to exercise in older adults. Prev  Med. 2004 
Nov;39(5):1056 -61. 
63. Collins TC, Lunos S, Ahluwalia JS. Self -efficacy is associated with walking ability in persons with diabetes 
mellitus and peripheral arterial disease. Vasc Med. 2010 Jun;15(3):189 -95. 
64. Barnes S, Curran C, Lunos S, Ahluw alia JS, Collins TC. Mediators and readiness to exercise in patients at 
risk of symptomatic peripheral arterial disease. Angiology. 2010 May;61(4):377 -81. 
65. Scott -Pandorf MM, Stergiou N, Johanning JM, Robinson L, Lynch TG, Pipinos II. Peripheral arterial  
disease affects ground reaction forces during walking. J Vasc Surg. 2007 Sep;46(3):491 -9. 
66. DeVita P, Hortobagyi T. Age causes a redistribution of joint torques and powers during gait. J Appl Physiol. 
2000 May;88(5):1804 -11. 
67. Labs KH, Dormandy JA, Ja eger KA, Stuerzebecher CS, Hiatt WR. Transatlantic conference on clinical trial 
guidelines in peripheral arterial disease: Clinical trial methodology. basel PAD clinical trial methodology group. 
Circulation. 1999 Oct 26;100(17):e75 -81. 
68. Collins SH, Wigg in MB, Sawicki GS. Reducing the energy cost of human walking using an unpowered 
exoskeleton. Nature. 2015 Jun 11;522(7555):212 -5. 
69. Hiatt WR, Marshall JA, Baxter J, Sandoval R, Hildebrandt W, Kahn LR, et al. Diagnostic methods for 
peripheral arterial dis ease in the san luis valley diabetes study. J Clin Epidemiol. 1990;43(6):597 -606. 
70. Vaughan C, Davis B, O’Connor J. Dynamics of human gait . Cape Town, South Africa: Kiboho Publishers; 
1999.  
71. Nigg BM, Cole GK, Nachbauer W. Effects of arch height of the  foot on angular motion of the lower 
extremities in running. J Biomech. 1993 Aug;26(8):909 -16. 
72. Winter DA. Biomechanics and motor control of human movement. 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 
2005.  
73. Basmajian J, DeLuca C. Muscles alive: Their funct ions revealed by electromyography. 5th ed. Baltimore, 
MD: Williams and Wilkins; 1985.  
74. Coyne KS, Margolis MK, Gilchrist KA, Grandy SP, Hiatt WR, Ratchford A, et al. Evaluating effects of 
method of administration on walking impairment questionnaire. J Va sc Surg. 2003 Aug;38(2):296 -304. 
75. Ware JE,Jr. SF -36 health survey update. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2000 Dec 15;25(24):3130 -9. 
76. Garratt AM, Ruta DA, Abdalla MI, Buckingham JK, Russell IT. The SF36 health survey questionnaire: An 
outcome measure suitable  for routine use within the NHS? BMJ. 1993 May 29;306(6890):1440 -4. 
77. D S, A D, B T, M H, A P, C L, et al. Reproductive factors and its association with peripheral arterial disease 
in women aged 52 -81 years: The KORA F4 study. Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicat i... Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire . 
78. L L, DF M, JP P. Secondhand smoke exposure and intermittent claudication: A scotland -wide study of 
4231 non -smokers. Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicati... Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire . 
79. TJ NG, de Albuquerque I M, P dMC, DM C, G dMC, JL dCV. Association between the ankle -brachial index, 
intermittent claudication, and physical activity level: What is the influence on the functional capacity of patients 
with or at high risk of cardiovascular disease? Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicati... Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire . 
80. Z H, KJ M, GJ H, L F, PE N. Perip heral arterial disease increases the risk of subsequent hip fracture in 
older men: The health in men study. Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicati... Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire . 
81. GC L, FG F. The edinburgh claudication questionnaire: An improved version of the WHO/rose 
questionnaire for  use in epidemiological surveys. Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicati... Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/site s/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire%201992 . 
82. FG F, PL A, C T, FB S, PT D. Validity of duplex scanning in the detection of peripheral arterial disease in 
the general population. Pubmed: Edinburgh Claudicati... Avai lable from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Search&db=PubMed&term=Edinburgh%20claudication%20que
stionnaire%201992 . 
 