1  
 
Protocol 823005: Financial incentives for maintenance of weight loss II  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
01/30/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Financial incentives for maintenance of weight loss II  
 
 
Study  Instruments  
The proposed study will evaluate the effectiveness of financial incentives in improving maintenance of weight loss. We propos e a 2 -phase, 2 -
arm randomized controlled trial (RCT) in which [ADDRESS_100711] 5 kilograms ( 11 pounds) in a weight loss program will be 
randomized to receive one of the following: 1) daily weigh -ins and weekly feedback (control arm) or 2) daily weigh -ins, weekly feedback, and 
a weekly escalating lottery -based financial incentive (Phase I, months 1-6). Those assigned to the escalating lottery condition will be eligible to 
win lotteries worth an expected value of $3.98 in week 1 that will increase by $0.43 per week for each week that they achieve  the goal of 
weighing 6/[ADDRESS_100712] 4-6 months , and member opted in for communications from Weight 
Watchers about research studies . Weight  Watchers  will facilitate  communication  to these  members  using  existing  communication  channels  
(email).  Potentially  eligible  individuals  will be invited  to visit the Way to Health  portal,  an NIH-funded  web-based  infrastructure  based  at 
the University  of Pennsyl vania that is used to run behavioral  economic  intervention  studies.  Participants  meeting  the inclusion  criteria  will 
be randomized  to one of the [ADDRESS_100713] to Health  platform.  We will use permuted block  randomization  with variable  
block  sizes.  P a rt i c i p a n t s a re  randomize d in a 1:1 ratio to t h e intervention  or control  arm and randomization will be stratif ied 
by: (1) sex and (2) amount of weight lost within first 4 -6 months of Weight Watchers membership  (<30 lbs. versus 
30+ lbs) , as baseline  w e i g h t  l o s s  may moderate  treatment  effects.  Prior  to a participant  signing  the informed  consent,  both the 
participant  and the study  coordinator  will be blinded  to what  their potential  group  assignment  of the participant  would be if enrolled.  
Once  consented  and enrolled,  neither  the participants  nor the study  coordinator  will be blinded  to condition  assignment  due to the nature  of 
the interventions.  However, the consent form will not elucidate the design of the t wo intervention arms so that participants are not aware of 
the comparisons being made. For scientific  purposes  to establish  valid measures  of the effects  of the various  kinds  of incent ive plans,  
blinding  participants  to the overall study  design  is necessar y, presents  no increment  of risk, and doesn’t  violate  subject  rights.  Once  a 
subject  has been  assigned  to a study  arm, she will receive an automatically -generated  email  notification  about  group  assignment  and 
next steps.  At the close  of the study, all participants  will receive a debriefing  letter  disclosing  all study  arms  and informing  participants  
of the final results  of the study  (using  de-identified  data)  that will be submitted  for publication  to an academic  journal  at the completion  of 
the analysis.  
 
Administration  of Surveys and/or  Process  
Basic  demographic  data (BMI,  gende r, race,  education,  income,  household  size),  physical  activity data (IPAQ long),  and eating  behavior 
questions  (TFEQ)  and [ADDRESS_100714]  
Obesity is the second leading cause of preventable death in the [LOCATION_002], (1) associated with high blood pressure (BP), type 2 diabetes, 
coronary heart disease, and osteoarthritis. Identifying effective strategies for treating obesity is both a clinic al challenge and a public health 
priority. Over 70% of the U.S. population is overweight or obese, and obesity in middle age translates into higher rates of h ospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
Medicare expenditures, disability, and mortality risk in subsequent years. While a  variety of approaches are successful in achieving initial 
weight loss, techniques for maintenance of initial weight loss have largely been unsuccessful.  
 
Our previous work examining the impact of different degrees of cost sharing on employee participation, engagement, and ongoin g weight loss 
showed that among Weight Watchers members who had initial success in losing at least 5% of their initial body weight,  the majority regained 
weight over the subsequent 6 months; Weight Watchers members in general were at high risk of droppi[INVESTIGATOR_91168] (John et al 2015). Research has sh own that the frequency of self-weighing  is 
important for both prevention of weight gain and weight loss (Wing et al NEJM 2006; 355:1563 -1571; Linde JA et al Ann Behav Med 2005; 
30: 210 -216).  This study will build on our successful efforts using incentives  for weight loss to test scalable ways of increasing the frequency 
of self-weighing  among Weight Watchers members who had initial success in losing weight. This 2- arm randomized controlled trial will 
compare the relative effectiveness and cost -effectivene ss of (1) weekly feedback without incentives  to (2) weekly escalating lottery -based 
incentives  among patients who successfully lost at least 5 kg over 4-6 months during participation in Weight Watchers (Pre Phase). Incentives 
will be provided to some study  participants  (Arm 2 ) for the first 6 months (Phase I), and then participants will be followed for 6 more months 
to examine effects following cessation of incentives (Phase II). A total of 259 participants will be randomized into the 2 arms.  
 3  
Specific Aims  
Aim 1:  Among participants who lose 5 kg or more of baseline weight prior to randomization, assess the effectiveness of escal ating lottery 
rewards, relative to the control group, on maintenance of weight loss over the ensuing 6 months (Phase  I). 
 
Aim 2: Assess the degree to which weight loss is maintained in the intervention group relative to usual care during the 6 months f ollowing the 
cessation of the interventions (Phase II).  
 
 
Objectives  
Overall objectives  
1. Among participants who lose 5  kg or more of baseline weight prior to randomization, assess the effectiveness of escalating  lottery rewards, 
relative to the control group, on maintenance of weight loss.  
2: Assess the degree to which weight loss is maintained in the intervention groups relative to usual care during the 6 months following the 
cessation of the interventions (Phase II).  
 
Primary  outcome  variable  
Pounds of weight lost at the end of [ADDRESS_100715] at the end of 12 months  
2. Percent of individuals who maintained their weight (defined as gaining no more than 1.36 kg or 3 lbs) at 6 and 12 months  
3. Average weekly weigh -in frequency during Phase I  
4. Average weekly weigh -in frequency during Phase II  
5. Linear trend for weigh -in frequency during Phase I  
6. Linear trend for weigh -in frequency during Phase II  
7. Self -reported physical activity at 6 months, as measured by [CONTACT_91171] -minutes/week, total minutes in Moderate to Vigorous Activity 
(MVPA), and minutes/week walking  
8. Self -reported physical activity at 12 months, as measured by [CONTACT_91171] -minutes/week, total minutes in Moderate to Vigorous Activity 
(MVPA), and minutes/week walking  
9. Eating behavior at 6 months (cognitive restraint, uncontrolled eating, emotional eating)  
10. Eating behavior at 12 months (cognitive restraint, uncontrolled eating, emotional eating)  
11. Proportion of the time people fall off the lottery escalation ladder  
12. Number of resets to beginning  for the lottery winnings  
 
Exploratory o utcome  variable  
Frequency of weight self -reported to Weight Watchers online  
 
 
Backg round  
Obesity  is the second  leading  cause  of preventable  death  in the United  States,  associated  with high blood  pressure  (BP),  type [ADDRESS_100716] 5-10 kg can impr ove risk factors  (e.g.,  BP, glycemia,  and serum  lipid levels) 
and reduce  the incidence  of diabetes.  In older  adults,  weight  loss interventions  have shown clear  impr ovements  in BP, arthritis,  and 
functional  status.  However, maintenance  of weight  loss is needed  to achieve long term health  benefits,  and successful  strategies for long-
term maintenance  are lacking.  Weight  regain after a period  of intentional  weight  loss is widely  obser ved with all interventions  due to 
loss of motivation,  lack of sustained  rewards for weight  loss behavior, difficulty  adhering  to diet, and need  for ego-depleting  exertion  
of willp ower. For maximum  generalizabilit y, we will enroll  study  participants  from  Weight  Watchers  [WW]),  the largest commercial  
weight  loss program  nationall y. Since  this program,  like other  successful  weight  loss interventions,  has difficulty  with weight  loss 
maintenance,  an external  motivational  source  such as financial  incent ives may help people  keep weight  off better  than standard  
approaches.  Individuals  put disproportionate  value on the present  relative to future  costs  and benefits,  known as present -biased  preferences.  
While  this bias typi[INVESTIGATOR_91169], the same  factors  can be used to promote  compliance  by [CONTACT_91172].  The literature  most  relevant to obesity  interventions  relates  to the impact  of incent ives on 
addiction -related  behaviors,  which,  like diet, are difficult  to change  and involve a conflict  between  an individual’s  long-term well-being  and 
short -term cravings.  As reported  in the Contingen cy Management  literature,  financial  incent ives have been  highly  effective for such 
patients,  leading  to higher  rates  of program  retention  and abstinence.  However, the most  effective approaches  are those  that require  
monitoring  several times  a week,  suggesting  the importance  of frequent  feedback.  A review of [ADDRESS_100717] found  various  incent ives (including  lotteries)  effective in changing  behavior. 
However, few studies  have examined  cost-effectiveness  or longe r-term effects  of incent ives on health  behaviors  after cessation  of 
 [ADDRESS_100718]  
with return  of their valuables  contingent  on progress  towards pre-specified  goals,  and that incent ives for weight  loss are more  effective than 
incent ives for attending  weight  loss training  sessions.  Finkelstein  et al. found  that over a 3-month  period,  participants  offered  
$[ADDRESS_100719] 4.7 pounds  whereas  participants  offered  $[ADDRESS_100720] 2.0 
pounds.  Incent ives for maintenance  of weight  loss ($10 for participants  who gained  weight)  demonstrated  higher  rates  of maintaining  
weight  loss that were  not statistically  significant.  These  studies  illustrate  that incent ives, even if small  and infrequent,  can be effective; 
higher  rewards and more  frequent  feedback  could  substantially  enhance  these  effects.  Recent  studies  concluded  that annual  US 
expenditures  attributable  to overweight  and obesity  are between  $90 and $[ADDRESS_100721] of obesity  per person  is about  $1308.  Higher  BMIs  in young  adulthood  and middle  age are associated  with 
substantially  higher  Medicare  expenditures  in old age. Higher  BMI  also translates  into significantly  higher  health  care charges within  
[ADDRESS_100722] per QALY ratios  ranging  between  $32,000  and $52,000,  depending  
upon  whether  direct  medical  costs  alone  or direct  and indirect  costs  were  counted.  A comparison  of low carbo hydrate  and low fat diets  by 
[CONTACT_91173]. Finkelstein  et al. reported  that the 1-year incremental  cost per 1% 
reduction  in 10-year CHD  risk associated  with an enhanced  behavioral  intervention  was $637.  The substantial  health  and economic  
consequences  of obesity  highlight  the importance  of testing  new approaches  to maintenance  of weight  loss and the potential  cost 
effectiveness  of successful  interventions.  
 
Study  Design  
 
Design  
Study  participants  will be obese  (at time of enrollment in Weight Watchers)  volunteers  recruited  from  a major  community -based  weight  loss 
program  (Weight  Watchers  (WW)),  who have lost at least [ADDRESS_100723]  4-6 months  in the program . Eligible  participants  will be 
randomized  to a control  group  (weekly  feedback  via text and email  messaging  and regular  measurement  of weight  for 6 months),   or an 
escalating lottery -based financial  incent ive. Participants  will be asked to weigh in on a digital scale 6/7 days each week. Participants  in the 
incentive  arm will be eligible  for weekly  winnings  based  on w e i g h i n g  6/ 7  d a y s  e a c h  w e e k  a n d  w i l l  receive weekl y 
feedback  on their winnings  to keep w e i gh in g goals  salient.  Participants in both arms will receive weekly tips on how to make 
weighing in frequently easier to do. There will be some diet & exercise -related tips mixed in with weighing in frequently 
tips. Between  months  7-12 (Phase  II) participants  will receive no further  incent ives tied to weigh ing, nor will they receive a weekly tip . 
The study  is powered  to test the effectiveness  of the intervention  arm relative to control .  
 
Study  duration  
We estimate  it will take [ADDRESS_100724] for 6 months.  We will remove the intervention  and 
obser ve changes  in weight  over the subsequent  6 months  for a total length  of participation  of 12 months.  
 
 
 
Characteristics of the Stu dy Population  
 
Target population  
Eligible  participants  will be men and women  ages 30 to 80 years  who had a BMI of 30 to 45 kg/m2 prior  to starting  Weight  Watchers,  
have a documented  weight  loss of at least [ADDRESS_100725] an online Weight Watchers 
membership . 
 
 
Accrual  
Weight  Watchers  has over 1 million  members.  Weight  Watchers  will send invitations  to their online  members  that meet  our inclusion  
criteria  and opted in for communications from Weight Watchers about research studies . Given the large pool of potential  participants,  we 
should  be able to recruit  259  participants  in 9 months.   
 
Key inclusion  criteria  
(1) Individuals  ages 30 to 80 years  (2) BMI  of 30 to 45 kg/m2  prior  to starting  Weight  Watchers  (3) Have a documented  weight  loss of 
at least [ADDRESS_100726] 4-6 months  of joining Weight Watchers ; (4) In stable  health ; (5) Have an online Weight Watchers membership . The 
age range  represents  those  ages most  affected  by [CONTACT_91174],  and of associated  disease,  disabilit y, and healthcare  costs.  
 [ADDRESS_100727] of incent ives. 
 
Key exclusion  criteria  
substance  abuse; bulimia  nervosa or related  behaviors;  pregnan cy or breast  feeding;  medical  contraindications  to counseling  about  diet, 
physical  activity, or weight  reduction;  unstable  mental  illness;  screen  posit ive for pathologic  gambling  on the basis  of the 2 item Lie-Bet 
criteria  (excluded  if meets  1 or both criteria).  Individuals  unable  to read consent  forms  or fill out surveys in English  will be excluded.  
 
 
Subject  recruitment  
Potential  participants  will be identified  by [CONTACT_91175].  Weight  Watchers  will facilitate  communication  to 
these  members  using  existing  communication  channels  (email).  Potentially  eligible  individuals  will be invited  to visit the Way to Health  
portal,  an NIH-funded  web-based  infrastructure  based  at the University  of Pennsyl vania that is used to run behavioral  economic  intervention  
studies.  Interested  participants  will be directed  to the Way to Health  platform  where  they will provide informed  consent.  These  
individuals  will also be asked to enter  data related  to eligibility  and their demographic  and clinical  characteristics  through  the Way to Health  
internet  portal.  
 
 
To enhance  retention,  we will provide a total of $100 to participants  in all arms.  Participant  compensation  will be independent  of 
degree of weight  loss and randomization  group  as follows: $50 for completing  an online survey at the end of month  6 and a t  t h e  e n d  o f  
m o n t h  12. All participants  will also receive a free scale  (value $179).  All payments  will be approved electronically  from  the Way to 
Health  platform.  Payment  information  will be sent to Wells Fargo to process  and sent to participants  via check.  Participants  will 
receive an automated  message  from  the Way to health  platform  notifying  them  of compensation  after completing  each required  survey . 
Participants in the financial incentive arm of the study will receive additional payments based on their adherence to daily weighing at home as 
outlined below in Study Procedures.   
 
 
Statistical Methods  
 
Sample size justification  
 
We have designed the study with adequate power to detect differences in maintenance of initial weight loss. Our intervention should achieve 
its maximal impact in maintaining initial weight loss at the end of Phase I, when the incentive payments cease. The primary analysis will be an 
intent -to-treat analysis that compares the weight loss at [ADDRESS_100728] at the 0.05 level for 
significance. Assuming 20% missingness, a 5 kg (11 lb) SD for weight change at [ADDRESS_100729] 90% power to detect the improvement in our primary outcome.  
 
Analytic approach  
 
Primary and key secondary outcomes  
 
The primary analysis will be an unadjusted between -arm comparison of the change in weight from baseline (randomization) to [ADDRESS_100730] performed at the 0.05 significance level.  The primary analysis will be done as an intent -to-treat (ITT) an alysis, including each 
participant in the group to which she was randomized, regardless of adherence to the assigned intervention.  The [ADDRESS_100731] weight that is inside the 6 -month visit window.  A multiple imputation strateg y based on baseline covariates (including study arm) 
will be used to fill in the missing data for the primary outcome. For more details see multiple imputation strategy below. A complete case 
analysis will be done as a sensitivity analysis. A second sensit ivity, assuming weight returned to baseline (weight at time of randomization) 
may also be considered. We will also estimate the difference between arms at 6 -month in an adjusted analysis where the change from baseline 
is regressed in a linear model on stud y arm, baseline weight, and other covariates including age, sex, race, BMI, education, income, and 
physical activity (total MET -minutes/week).  
 
Analyses of the key secondary outcome, weight change between baseline and 12 months (Phase 2) will be conducted in a similar manner as the 
primary outcome.  The [ADDRESS_100732] weight inside the 12 -month visit window. The multiple 
imputation algorithm for the 12 -month outcome will additionally consider the 6 -month weight outcome as an additional predictor, using a 
chained imputation type approach.   
 
Multiple Imputation Strategy  
 6 Missing primary outcome data, wei ght at 6 months, will be imputed using baseline covariates only (Imputation A); variables include age, sex, 
race, weight, BMI qualifying weight loss, education, income, IPAQ activity level, MET -minutes walking, the three domains of eating 
behaviors (cognit ive restraint, uncontrolled eating, emotional eating, and two scores related to delayed gratification behavior. A supportive 
analysis will also be done also using post -randomization variables (Imputation B); these variables include the most recent logged w eight and 
time since last weight , The imputation strategy for the weight at 12 months and other secondary outcomes will proceed in a similar manner. 
Weight at 12 months will additionally use the 6 -month weight outcome, using chained imputation approach (1) .  
 
Analysis of other outcomes  
 
The trend over time for the frequency of at -home weight measurements will be compared between arms using a generalized estimating 
equation (GEE) with an autoregressive (AR -1) working correlation model; specifically the mean number of days out of 7 is modeled and 
compared among study arms adjusting for study week and a week -by-arm interaction. Separate models will be fit for Phases 1 and 2. A linear 
mixed effects model with random intercept and slope for week will also be cons idered. An overall average weekly frequency of weighing in 
will be compared between arms for Phase I and Phase II using a similar GEE approach.  
 
Additional secondary analyses include a between -arm comparison of the percent of individuals who maintained the ir weight (defined as 
gaining no more than 1.36 kg or 3 lbs) at 6 and 12 months. We will consider whether the amount of weight gain is correlated w ith the average 
number of times per week participants weighed themselves in a cross -sectional analysis at 6 a nd 12 months. Comparisons will also be made of 
the changes in self -reported physical activity and the three domains of eating behaviors (cognitive restraint, uncontrolled eating, emotional 
eating) at 6 months and 12 months after initial weight loss.  Descr iptive analyses will be done to examine the proportion of the time people fall 
off the lottery escalation ladder and the number of resets to beginning for the lottery incentive arm. All secondary analyses will follow in a 
manner similar to the primary anal ysis, considering both an unadjusted and adjusted approach. Imputation models for the secondary outcomes 
will include as predictors the baseline value for that outcome and the other baseline covariates considered for the imputatio n strategy A model, 
as des cribed above. For secondary outcomes with < 10% data missing data, only a single imputation strategy (imputation A) may be 
considered.  
 
Exploratory Analyses  
We will summarize the frequency of the self -reported weights in Phase I and Phase II and examine wh ether there will be a difference by [INVESTIGATOR_216]. 
We will further explore intervention effects and examine whether there may be a potential interaction between the baseline de layed 
gratification score and treatment arm.   
 
 
Study Procedures  
 
Procedu res 
Potentially  eligible  patients  will be sent emails  directing  them  to the Way to Health  website.  Participants  will be required  to sign up online  
and complete  the screening  questionnaire  where  they will be asked  to document  their  previous  weight  loss.  The screening  questionnaire  
has been  attached . 
Participants  will be asked to electronically  sign the consent  and complete  the demographic  survey on the platform.  Participants  will then 
be randomized  to o n e  of t w o  study  arms.  Immediately  following  randomization,  each participant  will receive a description  of her 
assigned  treatment  condition  by [CONTACT_91176]  (See Control  and Escalating Lottery  dashboard  instructions  
attached).  Participants  will self-monitor  their weights  daily. Every day, at a time convenient for the participant , 
p a r t i c i p a n t s  will weigh  themsel ves using  the internet -enabled  scale.  The scale  will wirelessly  transmit  their weight  data where  it will 
be stored  on the Way to Health  portal.  Each  week , subjects  will be text paged  with feedback  on their progress  relative to their weekly 
goal. Participants in the escalating lottery arm will be eligible for a weekly lottery with an expect ed value of $3.98  in we ek 1 that will increase 
by $0.43  per week if, prior to resolution of the lottery, they weighed in 6 out of 7 days the prior week.  If participants in the escalating 
rewards arm miss the target in a given week, they will go back to the beginning of the escalating rewards schedule, with one  
exception: participants will be given the opportunity to return to their previous place in the schedule if they meet goals th e 
following week.  
The lottery  provides  both infrequent  large payo ffs (a 1 in 100 chance  at a $[ADDRESS_100733] in week 1)  and frequent  small  payo ffs (an 18 in 100 
chance  at a $[ADDRESS_100734] in the week 1 ) since  subjects  are motivated by [CONTACT_91177]  (fixation  on large potential  winnings)  and the past 
(how often  did I win?).  Participants in the lottery arm  will be asked to pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696] a 2-digit number  upon  entry  into the study, e.g. 27. A two  
digit random number  will be generated  for each week . If the random  number  includes  one digit,  either  a 2 or 7 in the same  position  as the 
participant's  number  (an 18 in 100 chance),  and the subject  weighed  in at least 6 days that week , s/ he wins  a small reward . If the random  
number  matches  27 exactly  (a 1 in 100 chance)  the subject  wins  t h e  l a r g e  r e w a r d . When  a subject  does not m e e t  t h e i r  
g o a l  o f  w e i g h i n g  i n  6/ [ADDRESS_100735]  if s/he would 
have won the lottery  that week  if s/he had weighed in at least [ADDRESS_100736] won, had one been  adherent,  will motivate participants  to a greater  degree than only on 
 7 the value of the rewards.  Other than the total number of lottery weeks (24), there is no limit to the number of times a person could 
win the daily lottery if their number comes up; however, for participants who make all of their weekly goals for the entire 6 
months (24 weeks) of the intervention, the expected value of the lottery is approximately $2 14.  
All participants  will be required  to complete  online surveys at months 6 and 12 . Participants  will receive automated  emails/t ext messages  
from  the Way to Health  platform  notifying  them  of their compensation  payment  for completing  each of the required  surveys at months 6 an 
12. Participants  will receive $[ADDRESS_100737] to Health  
platform.  Payment  information  will be sent to Wells Fargo to process  and send to participants  via check  every week . Between  months  7-12 
(Phase  II), participants  will not receive incent ives tied to weighing in  to evaluate  sustainability  of effects  achieved in Phase  I. 
 
 
Subject  Privacy 
Potential participants  will be  identified by  [CONTACT_91178]. Weight  Watchers  will facilitate  
communication  to these  members  using  existing  communication  channels  (email).  Interested  participants  will be directed  to the Way to 
Health  portal  where  they will be asked to enter  data related  to eligibility  and their demographic  characteristics.  Enrollment  will include  a 
description  of the voluntary  nature  of participation,  the study  procedures,  risks  and potential  benefits  in detail.  The enrollment  procedure  
will provide the opportunity  for potential  participants  to ask questions  and review the consent  form  information  with family  and friends  
prior  to making  a decision  to participate.  Participants  will be told that they do not have to answer  any questions  if they do not wish  and can 
drop out of the study  at any time,  without  affecting  their medical  care or the cost of their care.  They will be told that they may not benefit  
directly  from  the study  and that all information  will be kept strictly  confidential,  except  as required  by [CONTACT_2371]. Subjects  will be given a copy of 
the consent  document.  All efforts will be made  by [CONTACT_91179]. 
 
 
 
 
Consent  
 
Consent  Process  
 
Overview  
Potential  participants  will be identified  by [CONTACT_91180]. Weight  Watchers  will 
facilitate  communication  to these  members  using  existing  communication  channels  (email).  Potentially  eligible  individuals  will be invited  to 
visit the WTH  portal.  Potentially  eligible  individuals  will enroll  directly  through  the WTH  platform,  which  steps  them  through  screening  and 
consent  process  electronicall y. 
 
 
Risk / Benefit  
 
Potential  Study  Risks  
The incent ive programs  could  be detrimental  to individuals  with certain  psychiatric  issues  such as bulimia  nervosa or gambling  
disorde r. We will screen  for and exclude  people  with these  disorders  during  recruitment.  Because  of the low prevalence  of these  
disorders  in our target population,  we anticipate  this to be an infrequent  occurrence.  The main  risk is loss of confidentialit y, which  will 
be protected  as described  below. Database  Security/Protection  against  Risk.  To assure  that patient,  physician  and other  informant  
confidentiality  is preser ved, individual  identifiers  (such  as name  [CONTACT_91183]/p hysician  billing  identifier)  are stored  in a 
single  password protected  system  that is accessible  only to study  research,  analysis  and IT staff. This system  is hosted  on site at The 
University  of Pennsyl vania (UPenn)  and is protected  by a secure  firewall. Once  a participant  is in this system,  they will be given a unique  
study  identification  number  (ID).  Any datasets  and computer  files that leave the firewall will be stripped  of all identifiers  and individuals  
will be referred  to by [CONTACT_91181]. The study  ID will also be used on all analytical  files.  Additionall y, any information  that leaves this 
system  to communicate  with third  party  data sources  (biometrics  devices,  survey software, etc.) will be stripped  of any identifiers  and 
transmitted  in encrypted  format.  The same  unique  study  ID will be used to link these  outside  data to the participants.  Social  security  
numbers,  bank  account  and routing  numbers  for all participants  to whom  payments  are sent will also be transmitted  in encrypted  format  to 
UPenn 's Financial  Systems/Comptrollers  Department  where  data will be stored  for compliance  with W-[ADDRESS_100738] to Health  (WTH)  Research  Data  
Center  staff is responsible  for preventing  unauthorized  access  to the trial participant  tracking  system  database.  It is important  to note that 
the Way to Health  database  server and individual  study  databases  have never been  compromised  as a result  of the extremely  rigorous  and 
secure  network firewall technologies.  The secure  servers are located  in a specially  designed,  highly  secured  facility  at UPenn  with 
dedicated  uninterrupted  power supply  and strictly  limited  access.  The study  will utilize  a client -server deployed Data  Management  
 8 System  (DMS)  rather  than a 'Store  and Forward' database  configuration,  obviating  research  site database  security  concerns.  Confidential  
participant  information  will be entered  into the database.  Thereafte r, confidential  information  will be made  available  to authorized  users  
only as specifically  needed.  No one can gain access  to an individual  MySQL  database  table  unless  explicitly  granted  a user ID, password, 
and specific  access.  Even those  with user names  and passwords cannot  gain access  to the tables  that contain  the identifying  participant  
information.  No results  will be reported  in a personally  identifiable  manne r. All tracking  system  data will be password-protected  with 
several levels of protection.  The first will allow access  to the operating  system  of the compute r. The second  will allow access  to the basic  
menus  of the integrated  system;  within  certain  menu  options,  such as database  browsing,  a third  password will be required.  Our prior  
research  empl oying similar  precautions  has demonstrated  that these  techniques  are very successful  in assuring  the protection  of subjects.  
The same  procedure  used for the analysis  of automated  data sources  to ensure  protection  of patient  information  will be used for the 
survey data,  in that patient  identifiers  will be used only for linkage  purposes  or to contact  [CONTACT_1962].  The study  identification  numbe r, and no 
other  identifying  information,  will be used on all data collection  instruments.  All study  staff will be reminded  to appreciate  the confidential  
nature  of the data collected  and contained  in these  databases.  In order  to monitor  for excess ive weight  loss, the CRC  will be sent an alert if 
a participant  loses  more  than 10pounds  in one week  and/or  [ADDRESS_100739]  
generalizability  in treating  the obesity  epi[INVESTIGATOR_91170] y, as these  types  of financial  incent ives could  be set up by [CONTACT_91182].  As stated  previousl y, findings  from  this important  research  will provide further  information  concerning  the management  of 
obesity  and maintenance  of weight  loss. 
 