 
 
 
 
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  
Clinical Trial Protocol  
Oral Ibrexafungerp for the Treatment of Complicated Vulvovaginal 
Candidiasis (VVC) in Subjects who have failed Fluconazole  Therapy  
Protocol Number SCY-078-307b 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  
[ADDRESS_26389] Plaza, 13th Floor 
 Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE] 
Original Protocol Issue Date: 03 September  2021 (Version 1.0) 
Amendment 1: 12 October 2021 (Version 2.0) 
Amendment 2: 17 January 2022 (Version 3.0)  
STATEMENT OF CONFIDENTIALITY  
The information in this document contains trade secrets and commercial information that are 
privileged or confidential and may not be disclosed unless such disclosure is required by 
[CONTACT_11262] . In any event, persons to whom the information is disclosed 
must be informed that the information is privileged or confidential and may not be further 
disclosed by [CONTACT_476]. These restrictions on disclosure will apply equally to all future 
information supplied to you which is indicated as privileg ed or confidential . 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26390] Plaza, 13th Floor  
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE]  
 
  
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 3 2. PROTOCOL APPROVALS  
PROTOCOL ID: SCY- 078-307b  
Oral Ibrexafungerp for the Treatment of Complicated  Vulvovaginal Candidiasis (VVC) in 
Subjects who have failed Fluconazole Therapy  
SCYNEXIS, Inc. Approval:  
   
  Date  
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 4 3. INVESTIGATOR AGREEMENT STATEMENT  
PROTOCOL  ID: SCY-078-307b 
Oral Ibrexafungerp for the Treatment of Complicated Vulvovaginal Candidiasis (VVC) in 
Subjects who have failed Fluconazole Therapy   
I understand that all documentation provided to me by [CONTACT_27367], Inc. or its designated 
representative(s) concerning this study that has not been published previously will be kept in the 
strictest confidence. This documentation includes the study protocol, Investigator’s Brochure, 
electronic case report forms, and other scientific data. This study will not commence without the prior written approval of a properly constituted Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee. 
No changes will be made to the study protocol without the prior written approval of SCYNEXIS, 
Inc. and the Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee (IRB/EC), except where necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to the subject. All subjects will provide a written informed consent prior to participation.  
I have read the protocol, including all appendices, and I agree that it contains all necessary details for me and my staff to conduct this study as described. I have read, understood, and agree to abide 
by [CONTACT_27368], and in compliance with 
International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) guidelines, Good Clinical Practices (GCP), Safety Reporting obligations and any applicable local requirements. 
Principal Investigator’s Signature  [CONTACT_27439]’ s Name     
[CONTACT_27367], Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26391] OF FIGURES  .........................................................................................................................9  
4. ABBREVIATIONS  ....................................................................................................10  
5. PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS ............................................................................................12  
6. SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN  .........................................................................19  
7. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC  RATIONALE  ...................20  
7.1. Background Information  .............................................................................................20  
7.1.1.  Vulvovaginal Candidiasis  ...........................................................................................20  
7.1.2.  The glucan synthesis inhibitor ibrexafungerp (formerly known as SCY -078) ...........[ADDRESS_26392] Using the VSS  Scale ...................36  
14.9.  Vulvovaginal Samples for Identification of Other Pathogens and Vaginal  pH ..........36  
14.10.  Vulvovaginal Samples for KOH and Fungal  Culture  .................................................37  
14.11.  Rating of Vulvovaginal Signs by [CONTACT_27369] ....................37  
14.12.  Quality of Life (QOL) Questionnaire  .........................................................................[ADDRESS_26393]  ...........................................................................................44  
16.4.  Overdose  .....................................................................................................................44  
16.5.  Pregnancy  ...................................................................................................................44  
16.6.  Unexpected Adverse  Event  .........................................................................................44  
16.7.  Grading of Adverse  Events  .........................................................................................45  
16.7.1.  Clarification of the difference in meaning between “severe” and “serious”  ..............45  
16.8.  Causality  Assessment  .................................................................................................45  
16.9.  Adverse Event Collection  Timeframe  ........................................................................45  
16.10.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  ........................................................46  
16.11.  Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event  Follow -up ...............................................46  
16.12.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting – Procedures for  Investigators  ..............................[ADDRESS_26394]/Ethics Committee  Review  ..............................................[ADDRESS_26395] OF TABLES  
Table 1:  Schedule of Visits and Procedures (Study SCY -078-307b)  .......................................[ADDRESS_26396] OF FIGURES  
Figure  1: Schematic of Study Design .........................................................................................[ADDRESS_26397]  Aspartate aminotransferase  
BID Twice daily  
CI Confidence interval(s)  
CPK  Creatinine  phosphokinase  
DDI Drug -drug interaction  
ECI Event of clinical interest 
EOT  End of treatment  
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
GCP  Good clinical practices  
GGT  Gamma -glutamyl transferase  
GI Gastrointestinal  
GSI Glucan synthesis inhibitors  
Hct Hematocrit  
HgB  Hemoglobin  
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus  
IB Investigator’s brochure  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International conference on harmonization  
IRB/EC  Institutional review board/Ethics committee  
ITT Intent -to-Treat  
IV Intravenous  
KOH  Potassium hydroxide  
MedDRA  Medical dictionary for regulatory activities  
MITT  Modified Intent -to-Treat  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 11 ABBREVIATION  DEFINITION  
mg Milligram  
mL Milliliter  
OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 Transporters that are expressed on the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes; they 
accept a number of therapeutic reagents as their substrates. In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that some drugs inhibit these transporters and cause clinically 
relevant dr ug-drug interactions (DDIs).  
QOL  Quality of Life  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_27333]-Protocol  
RBC  Red blood cell  
RVVC  Recurrent Vulvovaginal Candidiasis  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
TEAE  Treatment emergent adverse event  
WBC  White blood cell  
VSS Vulvovaginal Signs and Symptoms  
VVC  Vulvovaginal candidiasis  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 12 5. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
TITLE:  Oral Ibrexafungerp for the Treatment of Complicated Vulvovaginal Candidiasis (VVC) in 
Subjects who have failed Fluconazole Therapy   
STUDY OBJECTIVES:  
Primary Objective:  
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC who failed 
fluconazole therapy, based on clinical c ure. 
Secondary Objectives : 
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC who failed 
fluconazole therapy, based on mycological and clinical outcomes.  
• To evaluate the safety and tolerability of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC who 
failed  fluconazole therapy.  
Exploratory Objective  
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC who failed  
fluconazole  therapy , based on Quality of Life (QOL) outcomes.  
STUDY ENDPOINTS:  
Primary Endpoint:  
• Efficacy as measured by [CONTACT_27370] (total composite score of 0 on 
the Vulvovaginal Signs and Symptoms [ VSS] Scale with no additional antifungal therapy required 
based on investigator’s judgment) at the Test -of-Cure (TOC) visit  
Secondary Endpoints:  
Efficacy as measured by:  
• The percentage of subjects with clinical improvement  
− Total composite score of 2 on the VSS Scale at the TOC and Follow -up (FU)  visits . 
− Total composite score of 1 on the VSS  Scale at the TOC and FU  visits . 
• The percentage of subjects with clinical success (at least 50% reduction from baseline in the total 
composite VSS score) at the TOC and FU visit s. 
• The percentage of subjects with mycological response (defined as a negative culture for growth of 
Candida spp. or subject is asymptomatic therefore culture not done) at the TOC and FU  visit s. 
• The percentage of subjects with both clinical cure and mycological response at the TOC and FU  
visits . 
• The percentage of subjects with clinical cure at the FU visits.  
• The absolute change in total composite VSS score from baseline to the TOC and FU visits.  
 
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 13 Exploratory Endpoints:  
• Absolute improvement in QOL outcomes at TOC and FU visits compared to baseline as measured 
by [CONTACT_27371] . 
• Subjects whose signs and symptoms ha ve resolved enough that additional antifungal treatment was 
not required based on clinical judgement. 
• Time to resolution of symptoms. 
Safety and tolerability as measured by: 
[CONTACT_27372] (AEs), vital signs, treatment discontinuation, and safety laboratory tests.  
 
STUDY PHASE :  3b 
STUDY DESIGN:  
This study is a Phase 3b, open- label, multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral 
ibrexafungerp in the treatment of subjects with complicated VVC  epi[INVESTIGATOR_27334] : 
• not responsive to, or   
• have isolates anticipated not to respond to, or  
• who are refractory  to or intolerant of fluconazole.  
The susceptibility of historical isolates will be collected if available.  
Approximately 150 eligible subjects will be enrolled. Subjects will be randomized to receive oral 
ibrexafungerp 300 mg administered twice a day (BID) for either one, three , or seven  consecutive days, 
stratified by [CONTACT_27373].        
STUDY VISITS : 
The study will consist of a Screening visit on Day - 2 (±1) , Baseline visit on Day 1  (if applicable, the 
Screening and Baseline visits can both be done on Day 1) , Phone contacts on Days 3, 5 and 7 (±1), a 
TOC visit 14 (±3) days after Baseline, FU visits at: 14 days (±3) days after End Of Treatment  (EOT) , 30 
(±4) after Baseline, 30 (±4) days after  EOT and 60 ( ±4) days after EOT . 
Screening (Day -2 (±1) ):  At Screening, subjects who are experiencing vulvovaginal symptoms will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_093], who will obtain a vaginal sample for potassium hydroxide (KOH) testing 
and vaginal pH determination by [CONTACT_12082]. The vaginal samples will a lso be evaluated locally 
for findings indicative of bacterial vaginosis and Trichomonas vaginalis (WET Mount and/or DNA 
Probe). A vaginal sample for fungal culture and for species identification and susceptibility testing will 
be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. If the investigator suspects Herpes virus, 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, or Chlamydia trachomatis infection, a vaginal sample will be collected and sent 
to the local laboratory. The investigators and the subjects will rate the signs and symptoms of infection, 
respectively, on the VSS Scale  (see Appendix 2 ). Safety procedures, including an abbreviated physical 
exam, vaginal exam, vital signs, laboratory tests, and a pregnancy test will also be performed.  
The Screening and Baseline (Day 1) visits may occur on the same day.  
Baseline visit (Day 1) :  Subjects who meet all criteria for this study will complete a QOL questionnaire .  
They will receive the first dose of study drug, oral ibrexafungerp 300 mg, at the study site and will self-
administer subsequent doses  as applicable , at home . For some subjects, 300mg  BID dosing will be 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 14 repeated daily for a total of 3  consecutive days (Days 1 -3) or for 7 consecutive days (Days 1 -7) based on 
Candida species  and presence or absence of underlying medical conditions . 
Phone Contact (Day s 3, 5 and 7  [±1]):  During this phone contact, AEs, resolution of symptoms, and 
concomitant medications (including antifungals) will be assessed . 
TOC visit ( 14 days  [±3] after Baseline ): At this visit, treatment compliance  will be reviewed and  any 
AEs and/or concomitant medications evaluated. The investigators and the subjects will again rate the 
signs and symptoms of infection on the VSS Scale  and the subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire  
Vulvovaginal samples for fungal culture, species identification, and antifungal susceptibility testing will 
be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. Additional vaginal samples will be obtained for 
a KOH testing and vaginal pH by [CONTACT_27374].  
FU visit (14 days [±3] after EOT):  At this visit, treatment compliance will be reviewed and any A Es 
and/or concomitant medications evaluated. The investigators and the subjects will again rate the signs 
and symptoms of infection on the VSS Scale and the subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire  
Vulvovaginal samples for fungal culture, species identification, and antifungal susceptibility testing will 
be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. Additional vaginal samples will be obtained for 
a KOH test and vaginal pH measurement by [CONTACT_27375].  
FU visits 30 (±4) days after Baseline, 30 (±4) days after EOT and 60 (±4) days after EOT: At the 
FU visits , subjects will rate their symptoms of infection on the VSS Scale  and will complete a QOL 
questionnaire . Only if VSS symptoms are present will the investigator perform a vulvovaginal 
examination to rate the subject’s signs of infection, and collect samples for pH determination, KOH 
testing, and fungal culture.  
A second treatment cycle  (Cycle 2) will be allowed for subjects who did not achieve sufficient clinical 
improvement (e.g. VSS remains ≥3) on the randomized treatment (Cycle 1) as evaluated at the TOC visit 
or at the FU EOT+14 visits .  The same visit schedule will be followed, starting with the Baseline visit.  
TARGET POPULATION:  The study population will include female subjects who are ≥[ADDRESS_26398] failed fluconazole therapy . 
KEY INCLUSION CRITERIA:  
Subjects must fulfill all the following KEY criteria at Screening (Day - 2 (±1)) to be eligible for study 
admission:  
1) Subject is a post menarchal female ≥18 years of age at the time of signing the informed consent 
form (ICF) .  
2) Subject has a diagnosis of symptomatic VVC that meets the following criteria at the Screening 
visit:  
a) Minimum composite vulvovaginal signs and symptoms score of ≥ [ADDRESS_26399] 2 signs or 
symptoms having a score of 2 (moderate) or greater on the V VS scale at baseline.  
b) Positive microscopic examination with 10% KOH in a vaginal sample collected at Screening 
revealing yeast forms (hyphae/pseudohyphae) or budding yeasts . 
c) Normal vaginal pH (≤ 4.5).  
d) Has no other vaginal co- infections based on WET Mount  microscopic examination  and/or 
DNA probe.  
3) Subject should also have:  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 15 a) A VVC epi[INVESTIGATOR_27335] (last dose of 
fluconazole must have been administered at least 7 days prior, but no longer than 28 days prior 
to screening ). 
OR 
b) A recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis ( RVVC ) epi[INVESTIGATOR_27336].  
OR 
c) A VVC epi[INVESTIGATOR_27337]  a non- albicans candida species  known to have  either  intrinsic 
resistance to fluconazole e.g.  C.krusei or suspected resistance to fluconazole, e.g.  C.glabrata, 
C auris  but likely without MIC data in hand.  
OR  
d) A VVC epi[INVESTIGATOR_27337] a candida species with documented resistance to fluconazole based 
on MIC determination. 
OR 
e) A known history of azole allergy or intolerance.  
4) Subject is able to take oral tablets.  
KEY EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  
A subject will be excluded from participation in the study if she meets any of the following KEY 
exclusion criteria:  
1) Subject has any vaginal condition other than VVC that may interfere with the diagnosis or 
evaluation of response to therapy, such as concurrent causes of vulvovaginitis and/or cervicitis 
including bacterial vaginosis, Trichomonas , Herpes virus, Neisseria  gonorrhoeae , Chlamydia, 
symptomatic human papi[INVESTIGATOR_27338], or other mixed infections.  
2) Subject received systemic and/or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27339], including prescription or over- the-counter products, within 7 days prior to the Screening visit. Note: The screening visit 
may be rescheduled if required.  
3) Subject is receiving or anticipates requir ing treatment with the prohibited medications  within the 
specified timeframes per Appendix I.  
4) Subject has active menstruation at the Screening visit. Note: The Screening visit may be 
rescheduled if required.  
5) Subject has a history of or an active cervical/vaginal cancer . 
STUDY DRUGS:  
The study drug will be provided by [CONTACT_27376]. as o ral ibrexafungerp 150 -mg tablets.   
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 16 Treatment Cycle 1:  ALL randomized subjects:  
All subjects will receive open -label, oral ibrexafungerp 300mg BID (total daily dose of 600mg) , for 
either one, three  or seven  consecutive days per the table below .  
 Ibrexafungerp Treatment Groups: 
Treatment 
Group  Criteria  *Ibrexafungerp Dose (300mg AM 
and 300mg PM) 
Randomization and Stratification  
Group A  Subjects without underlying medical 
conditions AND known to have isolates 
other than C glabrata, C krusei, C auris   1 Day dosing 
N=50 
Group B  Subjects with underlying medical conditions: 
DM, immunocompromised conditions (e.g. 
HIV), debilitation, immunosuppressive 
therapy (e.g. corticosteroids), recurrent VVC 
(≥3 epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]/year)  AND/ OR known to have 
C glabrata, C krusei  or C auris  isolates  3 Day OR 7 D ays dosing  
Randomized 1:1  
N=50:50 
    *Days of treatment is per CDC Guidelines (https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-
guidelines/candidiasis.htm) 
Enrollment will continue until the target number in each cohort is reached.    
Treatment Cycle 2:  A second treatment cycle will be allowed for subjects who did not achieve sufficient 
clinical improvement (e.g. VSS remains ≥3) on the randomized treatment (Cycle 1) as evaluated at the TOC  visit or at the FU EOT+14  visits   A second treatment cycle will also be allowed for subjects with 
clinical cure/improvement/success who experience a recurrence before the last FU visit.  During Cycle 2, subjects 
may receive additional treatment with ibrexafungerp for a period up to 14 days as 
recommended by [CONTACT_27377].  
It is recommended that study drug be administered with or immediately after a meal or snack.  
STUDY BLINDING, RANDOMIZATION, AND STRATIFICATION:   This is an open- label study. 
Subjects will be randomized to treatment, stratified by [CONTACT_27378].  
STUDY EVALUATIONS  
Efficacy Evaluations 
Clinical Evaluation:  The signs (edema, erythema, and excoriation or fissures) and symptoms (itching, 
burning, and irritation) of infection will be assessed by [CONTACT_27379], respectively, on 
the VSS Scale. The VSS Scale is a standardized, predefined scale where each sign and symptom will be given a numerical rating based on severity (absent = 0 ; mild = 1; moderate  = 2; or severe = 3) to calculate 
a total composite score.  
Mycological Evaluations : Mycological tests will include direct WET M ount microscopic examination 
(performed locally) to visualize clue cells indicative of bacterial vaginosis or trichomonas, direct 
microscopic examination with 10% KOH (performed locally) to identify yeast, and fungal cultures 
(performed at the central lab) for species identification and antifungal susceptibility testing. 
Safety and Tolerability Assessments  
Safety Evaluations:  Safety will be evaluated throughout the study, from consent through the  TOC  visit, 
including the following parameters: AEs, concomitant medications, vital signs, safety laboratory tests , 
and study treatment discontinuations. 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 17 STATISTICAL ANALYSES:  
All statistical tests will be two -sided and interpreted at a 5% significance level. The study is not powered 
for formal statistical comparisons. Descriptive statistics (i.e., mean, standard deviation, median, 
minimum, maximum, etc.) will be provided for al l continuous variables; frequencies and percentages 
will be tabulated for incidence and categorical variables.  For parameters measured over time, observed 
values and changes from baseline will be described for each time point. All analyses will be presented 
by [CONTACT_1570].  Unless otherwise stated, data will be analyzed as is with no imputation.  No 
adjustment for multiplicity will be employed.   
The primary efficacy endpoint, the percentage of subjects with clinical cure at TOC will be assessed on 
the MITT population and will present the clinical cure rate and the 95% confidence interval calculated 
using the method of Clopper and Pearson. In addit ion, the clinical cure rate and 95% CI will be calculated 
where subjects with missing values will be removed from the analysis.  
Sample Size Determination  
This is an exploratory study and no formal sample size calculation was performed.  Approximately 150 subjects will be enrolled in allocation 50:50:[ADDRESS_26400] of 1, 3 and 7 days of treatment.  Subjects will 
be randomized to treatment, stratified by [CONTACT_27380]. The sample size of 15 0 is 
estimated to be adequate to perform an initial 
assessment of efficacy.   
Analysis Populations 
The study populations to be used in the analyses are defined as follows: Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population : All ibrexafungerp- treated subjects.  
Modified Intent -to-Treat ( MITT) Population:  All treated subjects who have a positive culture for 
Candida species  at Screening . 
Per-Protocol (PP) Population: All MITT subjects who have completed the study drug treatment, who 
did not have major protocol deviations likely to affect study efficacy  AND who have available data at 
the TOC evaluation.  
Safety Population:  All enrolled subjects who received at least one dose of study drug. 
Efficacy Analysis  
Efficacy assessments will be based on clinical evaluations, QOL outcomes, mycological testing, and 
additional antifungal use at the TOC visit.   Analysis by [CONTACT_27381].  
The following treatment outcome definitions will be used for the assessment of efficacy relative to 
Baseline:  
Clinical Outcomes:  
Clinical Cure : complete resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite score  of 0 on the VSS 
Scale and with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgment . 
Clinical Improvement: p artial resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite score of 1 or 2 on 
the VSS Scale and with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgement. 
Clinical Success : at least 50% reduction from Baseline in the total composite VSS score with no 
additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgment. 
Clinical Failure: P ersistence and/or worsening of signs and symptoms or need for additional antifungal 
therapy. 
Mycological Outcomes  
Mycological Eradication:  negative culture for growth of Candida species  
Presumed Eradication:  Subject is asymptomatic, therefore cultures not done 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 18 Mycological Persistence:  positive culture for growth of Candida  species  
Safety Analysis 
Safety will be evaluated throughout the study, including the following parameters: AEs, treatment 
discontinuations, physical examination, vital signs, safety laboratory tests, and prior and concomitant 
medications.  
No formal statistical analysis is planned for the safety data. Safety analysis will be conducted using the 
Safety Population. 
AEs will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) Version  19.1 or 
higher. The incidence and severity of treatment -emergent AEs and SAEs and their relationship to 
treatment will be summarized by [CONTACT_27382]. The percentage of subjects who 
discontinued study treatment and the reasons for discontinuation will be summarized. 
Safety laboratory evaluations and vital signs will be summarized as observed values and as changes from 
Baseline. In addition, shifts (with respect to the reference range) from Baseline will be presented for 
laboratory tests.  
 
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 19  
6. SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN  
Schematic of Study  Design  
Figure 1: Schematic of Study Design
 
 
 
Days 1 -3 
Ibrexafungerp 
300mg BID  
 
TOC Visit (14 (+3) days after Baseline ) – VSS assessment, 
cultures  
 
Baseline Day 1*  
Collect baseline cultures  
 
 
Screening (Day -2 +1)*  
 
FU Visit (30 (+4) days after Baseline ) – VSS assessment, cultures  if 
applicable, QOL  Days 3, 5, and 7 (+1) Phone Contact – Resolution of 
symptoms 
*Screening visit  can be done on the same day as Baseline visit if needed.  
 
 Day 1  
 Ibrexafungerp 
300mg BID  Days 1 -7 
Ibrexafungerp 
300mg BID 
FU Visit ( 30 (+4) days after EOT)  – VSS assessment , QOL  
FU Visit ( 60 (+4) days after EOT)  – VSS assessment , QOL  FU Visit (14 (+3) days after EOT)  – VSS assessment, cultures  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26401] menarcheal women with VVC.  
7.1.1. Vulvovaginal Candidiasis  
Vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) is a common fungal infection caused by [CONTACT_27383]. and is a 
significant morbid condition in women from all social classes.  
Information  on the incidence  of VVC  is incomplete,  since  the disease  is not a reportable entity  and 
data collection is hampered by [CONTACT_27384]- representative study 
populations.1 VVC affects 70% –75% of women at least once during their lives, most frequently 
young women of childbearing age. Approximately 40% –50% of women will experience a 
recurrence2 and 5% to 8% of adult women have a recurrent vulvovaginal  candidiasis.3 
Current  treatments  for VVC  include  topi[INVESTIGATOR_27340].  In two vaginal  candidiasis  studies  conducted  with fluconazole, 
the therapeutic cure rate, defined as the resolution of signs and symptoms of vaginal candidiasis 
along with negative  KOH examination  and negative  culture  for Candida, was achieved  by 55% of 
subjects receiving single doses of fluconazole 150 mg. The therapeutic cure rate is reduced to 40% 
in subjects with a history of recurrent vaginitis4,5. Although a single dose of fluconazole is able  to 
provide  an acceptable therapeutic outcome  for more  than half of the treated  individuals, the 
emergence of fluconazole resistance among C. albicans  isolates  and the frequency of cases  caused 
by C. glabrata, a strain naturally less susceptible to fluconazole, signals the need for new 
therapeutic approaches.  
Additionally, recurrence of VVC after fluconazole therapy is not uncommon and these 
exacerbations often involve the same microorganism identified in the initial epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], suggesting that a small number of C. albicans remain as a reservoir in the vagina after completion of azole 
therapy, becoming the source of subsequent exacerbations
6. This may be explained by [CONTACT_27385], which means that they slow the growth of, but do not kill, the fungus and 
azoles are not active against certain species of Candida that cause VVC.  
New curative approaches are needed, particularly involving agents with fungicidal activity (i.e., 
that can kill the fungus) and activity against fluconazole -resistant strains, so that the causative 
yeasts can be eradicated. A new therapeutic approach with these characteristics would be expected  
to result  in improved short -term and potentially  long- term outcomes  for this condition. 
This study aims to provide evidence of the efficacy and evaluate the safety of oral ibrexafungerp  
as a new class of antifungal agent with fungicidal activity against Candida spp. in the treatment of 
complicated VVC  in subjects  who have failed fluconazole therapy.  
7.1.2. The glucan synthesis inhibitor ibrexafungerp (formerly known as SCY -078) 
Ibrexafungerp is a member of a new class of antifungal agents  and is an orally active, semi -
synthetic, triterpenoid derivative of the natural product enfumafungin. Ibrexafungerp is a 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26402] class of glucan synthesis inhibitor (GSI) that inhibits  the synthesis  of the 
fungal  cell wall polymer  β-(1,3) -D-glucan.  Time -kill studies  have  demonstrated that 
ibrexafungerp has in vitro fungicidal activity against Candida spp. isolates similar to that observed 
with the echinocandins.  
Ibrexafungerp  is being developed as the first oral and intravenous (IV) GSI for the treatment and  
prevention of fungal  infections  caused by  [CONTACT_27386].  
7.1.3. Antifungal activity  
The spectrum  and potency of activity  of ibrexafungerp has been  evaluated  by [CONTACT_27387] (M27 -A3 guidelines)[ADDRESS_26403]  laid the foundation in support  of the use of ibrexafungerp  
for the treatment of invasive fungal  infections8,9,10. 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Activity against Candida spp.  
Ibrexafungerp has been evaluated against >[ADDRESS_26404] 
shown that ibrexafungerp retains activity (i.e., no significant change  in minimum inhibitory 
concentration  [MIC]  compared  to wild type)  against  >90%  of azole-  resistant strains and >70% of 
Candida strains with FKS mutations commonly associated with echinocandin resistance. 
Interestingly, although ibrexafungerp and the echinocandins share  a similar  mechanism  of action  
(β-[1,3] -D-glucan synthesis  inhibition), their clearly  different molecular structure provides them 
with some differentiating characteristics in terms of microbiological activity.  
Ibrexafungerp was evaluated  in vitro  against  approximately [ADDRESS_26405] approximately 70% of the isolates containing the most commonly 
reported FKS mutation associated with echinocandin resistance in C. glabrata (S663P in FKS2 
and S645P in FKS1 ). Selection of ibrexafungerp resistance in vitro occurs  at a low frequency. A  
deletion  at position F659 in FKS2  of C. glabrata was the predominant mutation observed in these  
studies;  notably, ibrexafungerp did not select  for mutations at positions S663 or S645. These results 
suggest that ibrexafungerp inhibits glucan synthase in a manner different to echinocandins.  
The in vitro studies also included several multidrug -resistant isolates. Consistent with the data 
described above, ibrexafungerp was active against >70% of these isolates. Ibrexafungerp  has also 
demonstrated a potent activity against life -threatening and multi -drug- resistant C. auris strains in 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26406] s. C. auris  has been  recently  highlighted as a clinical alert by [CONTACT_27388] (CDC) because of the global emergence of this fungal infection with limited 
therapeutic options and high mortality.  
7.1.4. Clinical experience  
To date , more than  [ADDRESS_26407] been exposed to ibrexafungerp in 
completed and ongoing clinical trials . 
Ibrexafungerp was generally well tolerated following single oral doses of up to 1600 mg and 
multiple oral doses of up to 800 mg/day for 28 consecutive days in Phase 1 studies. Reported 
adverse events (AEs) after oral administration have been generally tran sient and  primarily mild to 
moderate in intensity. The most frequently reported AEs have been mild gastrointestinal  (GI) 
events (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain). 
A Phase  3, Multicenter,  Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Study to Evaluate the 
Efficacy and Safety of Oral Ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) vs. Placebo  in Subjects  with Acute 
Vulvovaginal  Candidiasis  
The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in female  
subjects 12 years and older with VVC by [CONTACT_27389]. The primary  end point  of the study  was efficacy  as measured  by [CONTACT_27390] (complete  resolution of  signs  and symptoms)  at the test-of-cure (TOC) visit.  
Approximately 366 eligible  subjects  were enrolled and randomly assigned  in a 2:1 ratio to receive  
ibrexafungerp (300 -mg dose  twice  daily  [BID]) or  matching  placebo  administered  BID  for 1 day.  
Overall,  the percentage of subjects  with clinical  cure at the TOC  visit was statistically  significantly  
higher  for the  ibrexafungerp group than the  placebo  group (50.5%  versus  28.6%;  P=0.001). 
Ibrexafungerp was generally well -tolerated by [CONTACT_27391] a 300-  
mg oral dose (two 150mg tablets) BID for 1 day. Overall, a total of 150 subjects (60.7%) of the  
247 subjects who  received  ibrexafungerp and 63 subjects  (50.8%)  of the [ADDRESS_26408] frequently 
reported  GI disorders  in the ibrexafungerp groups  included diarrhea  and nausea (in more  than 10% 
of subjects).  
Three (3) subjects  reported  SAEs  during the study:  [ADDRESS_26409]  (0.4%)  who 
received ibrexafungerp  (pneumonia and bronchial  hyperreactivity), and 2 SAEs  were reported  by 
2 subjects  (1.6%)  who received  placebo  (diabetes  mellitus  and hypokalemia);  none  were  
considered  to be  related  to the study drug. 
A total of 5 subjects  in the ibrexafungerp  group experienced  TEAEs  that resulted  in 
discontinuation. Of these, 2 subjects experienced TEAEs leading to withdrawal  of the study drug 
and discontinuation from the study (vomiting and dizziness). In addition, 3 subjects  experienced  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 23 TEAEs  leading  to discontinuation after completing study treatment  (bacterial  vaginosis and 
vulvovaginal itching; not related to study drug). There were no deaths reported during the study. 
Mean clinical laboratory results and vital sign measurements observed at the TOC visit were  
generally similar to those observed at baseline, with no notable differences between treatment  
groups. 
SCY -078-306, A Phase 3, Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Study to  
Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Oral Ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) vs. Placebo in Subjects with  
Acute Vulvovaginal Candidiasis  
A total of [ADDRESS_26410] 1 dose of randomized  
study drug, 298 subjects received ibrexafungerp and 151 subjects received placebo.  
The primary  objective  was to evaluate the efficacy  of oral ibrexafungerp versus  placebo  in female  
subjects 12 years and older with VVC by [CONTACT_27389].  Efficacy  was defined  as the percentage of subjects  with clinical  cure (complete  resolution 
of signs  and symptoms)  at the TOC  visit.  The primary  analysis  was conducted using the Modified 
Intent -to-Treat  (mITT)  set, which  included 272 randomized  subjects  (188 subjects  in the 
ibrexafungerp group and 84 subjects in the placebo group) who had a diagnosis of symptomatic  
AVVC and a positive culture for Candida species at baseline. The study achieved the primary  
endpoint  reaching  statistical significance.  Overall,  the percentage of subjects  with clinical  cure at 
the TOC visit in the mITT set was statistically significantly higher for the ibrexafungerp group  
than the placebo group (63.3% versus  44.0%; P=0.007). 
Ibrexafungerp was generally well -tolerated by [CONTACT_27391] a 300-  
mg oral tablet BID  for 1  day. 
Overall, a total of 99 subjects (33.2%) of the 298 subjects who received ibrexafungerp and 44 
subjects  (29.1%)  of the [ADDRESS_26411] frequently reported adverse events w ere GI disorders. The percentage of subjects who  
experienced treatment -related TEAEs was higher for the ibrexafungerp group than the placebo 
group (14.8% versus 4.0%, respectively), however the majority of these were GI disorders and  
were considered mild in  severity.  
A total of 2 subjects reported SAEs during the study: [ADDRESS_26412] from the placebo group reported  
diabetic  ketoacidosis.  
Three subjects experienced a TEAE leading to study discontinuation, all in the ibrexafungerp  
group (diabetes  mellitus [[ADDRESS_26413]] and  bacterial vaginosis  [2 subjects]).  
Mean clinical laboratory results and vital sign measurements observed at the TOC visit were  
generally similar to those observed at baseline, with no notable differences between treatment  
groups. 
For additional information on ibrexafungerp, please refer to the Investigator´s Brochure (IB).  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26414] been well tolerated in Phase 1, Phase 2, and ongoing Phase 3 studies . 
7.2.3. Rationale for Study Endpoints  
Study endpoints were selected in line with prior efficacy and safety studies in patients with VVC 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  
7.2.4. Rationale for Study Design  
This trial is being conducted as a phase 3b, open -label, ibrexafungerp only treatment for VVC. The 
duration of treatment and the subsequent evaluations and endpoints are consistent with prior 
clinical trials in patients with VVC  
8. STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
8.1. Primary  Objectives  
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC who failed  
fluconazole  therapy , based on clinical c ure. 
8.2. Secondary  Objectives  
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC  who failed  
fluconazole  therapy , based on mycological and clinical outcomes.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 25 • To evaluate the safety and tolerability of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC 
who failed  fluconazole therapy . 
8.3. Exploratory  Objective 
• To evaluate the efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp in subjects with complicated VVC  who failed 
fluconazole therapy , based on QOL outcomes. 
9. STUDY  ENDPOINTS  
9.1. Primary  Endpoints  
• Efficacy as measured by [CONTACT_27370] (total composite score of 0 on 
the VSS Scale with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgment) at the 
TOC visit . 
9.2. Secondary  Endpoints  
Efficacy as measured by:  
• The percentage of subjects with clinical improvement: 
- Total composite score of 2 on the VSS scale at the TOC and FU  visits  
- Total composite score of 1 on the VSS scale at the TOC and FU  visits  
• The percentage of subjects with clinical success (at least 50% reduction from baseline in the total 
composite VSS score) with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgment) at the TOC and FU  visit s.
 
• The percentage of subjects with mycological response (defined as a negative culture for growth of 
Candida spp. or subject is asymptomatic, therefore culture not done ) at the TOC and FU visits. 
• The percentage of subjects with both clinical cure and mycological response at the TOC and FU visit s. 
• The percentage of subjects with clinical cure at the FU visits.  
• The absolute change in total composite VSS score from baseline to the TOC and FU visits. 
Exploratory Endpoints:  
• Absolute improvement in QOL outcomes at TOC and FU visits compared to baseline as measured by [CONTACT_27371] . 
• Subjects whose signs and symptoms ha ve resolved enough that additional antifungal treatment was 
not required based on clinical judgement. 
• Time to resolution of symptoms. 
Safety and tolerability as measured by: 
[CONTACT_27372] (AEs), vital signs, treatment discontinuation, and safety laboratory  tests. 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 26 10. STUDY DESIGN  
10.1. Overall Description of the  Study  
This study is Phase 3b, open- label, multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral 
ibrexafungerp in the treatment of subjects with VVC  epi[INVESTIGATOR_27334] : 
• not responsive to, or  
• have isolates anticipated not to respond to, or   
• who are refractory  to or intolerant of fluconazole .  
The susceptibility of historical isolates will be collected where available.  
Approximately [ADDRESS_26415] of a Screening visit on Day -2 (±1), Baseline visit on Day 1 (if applicable, 
the Screening and Baseline visits can both be done on Day 1), Phone contacts on Days 3, 5 and 7 
(±1), a TOC visit 1 4 (±3) days after Baseline, FU visits at:  14 (±3) days after EOT , 30 (±4) after 
Baseline, 30 (±4) after EOT and 60 (±4) days after EOT . 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Screening (Day -2) 
 At Screening, subjects who are experiencing vulvovaginal symptoms will be evaluated by [CONTACT_093], who will obtain a vaginal sample for potassium hydroxide (KOH) testing and vaginal pH determination by [CONTACT_27392]. The vaginal samples will also be evaluated locally for findings indicative of bacterial vaginosis and Trichomonas vaginalis  (WET Mount and/or DNA probe) . If the investigator suspects Herpes  
virus, Neisseria  gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis infection, a vaginal sample will be 
collected and sent to a qualified local laboratory. A vaginal sample for fungal culture and for 
species identification and susceptibility testing will be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. The investigators and the subjects will rate the signs and symptoms of infection, respectively, on the VSS Scale  (see Appendix 2) . Safety procedures, including an abbreviated 
physical exam, vaginal exam, vital signs, laboratory tests and a pregnancy test will also be performed.   To be eligible for inclusion, subjects must have a minimum composite score of vulvovaginal signs and symptoms ≥  [ADDRESS_26416] 2 signs or symptoms having a score of 2 (moderate) or greater in 
the VSS Scale at Baseline, a positive KOH test , a normal vaginal pH (≤4.5)  and confirmed absence 
of other vaginal co-infections. 
The Screening and Baseline (Day 1) visits may occur on the same day.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 27 [IP_ADDRESS]. Baseline (Day 1)  
Subjects who meet all criteria for this study will complete a QOL questionnaire.  They will receive 
the first dose  of study drug, oral ibrexafungerp 3 00 mg, at the study site and will self -administer 
subsequent doses as applicable  at home . For some subjects,  300mg BID dosing will be repeated 
daily  for a total of 3 or 7  consecutive dosing days based on Candida species  and presence or 
absence of underlying medical conditions .  Doses will be self -administered at 12-hourly ( ±3 hours)  
intervals.   
[IP_ADDRESS]. Phone Contact (Days 3, 5 and 7[ ±1]) 
During this phone contact, AEs, resolution of symptoms  (applicable section of the VSS scale) , and 
concomitant medications (including antifungals) will be assessed.  
[IP_ADDRESS]. TOC  visit  (14 ±3  days after Baseline ) 
At this visit, study drug container(s)  will be returned, reviewed, and treatment compliance 
evaluated. The investigators and the subjects will again rate the signs and symptoms of infection 
on the VSS Scale and the subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire . 
Vulvovaginal samples for fungal culture, species identification, and antifungal susceptibility 
testing will be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. Additional vaginal samples 
will be obtained for a KOH test and pH measurements by [CONTACT_27393]. AEs and/or concomitant medications will be evaluated.    
[IP_ADDRESS]. FU visit  (14 ±3 days after EOT ) 
At this visit, study drug container(s)  will be returned, reviewed, and treatment compliance 
evaluated. The investigators and the subjects will again rate the signs and symptoms of infection 
on the VSS Scale and the subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire . 
Vulvovaginal samples for fungal culture, species identification, and antifungal susceptibility 
testing will be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. Additional vaginal  samples 
will be obtained for a KOH  and vaginal pH testing by [CONTACT_27394].  AEs and/or concomitant medications will be evaluated.   
[IP_ADDRESS]. FU visits  30 (±4) days after Baseline, 30 (±4) days after EOT and 60 (±4) days after 
EOT : 
At the FU visits , subjects will rate their symptoms of infection on the VSS Scale  and will complete 
a QOL questionnaire . Only i f VSS symptoms are present  will the investigator perform a 
vulvovaginal examination to rate the subject’s signs of infection and collect samples for pH 
determination, KOH testing , and fungal culture . 
[IP_ADDRESS]. All Visits  
AEs and prior/concomitant medications will be assessed and documented at all visits.  
10.1.2. Study  Assessments 
The study will include efficacy, safety , and tolerability assessments.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 28 [IP_ADDRESS]. Efficacy Assessments  
Efficacy assessments will be based on VSS scores, clinical evaluations, QOL outcomes, 
mycological testing  and additional antifungal use assessed at the TOC and FU visits . 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Safety Assessments 
Safety will be evaluated throughout the study, including the following parameters: AEs, treatment 
discontinuations, physical examination, vital signs, safety laboratory tests, and prior and 
concomitant medications . 
10.2.  Blinding, Randomization , and Stratification  
This is an open label study. Subjects will be randomized to treatment, stratified by [CONTACT_27395].   
10.3.  Study  Duration  
Each subject is expected to complete the study in approximately [ADDRESS_26417] enrollment and treatment.  
11. STUDY  POPULATION  
The study population will include female subjects who are ≥[ADDRESS_26418] fulfill all of the following criteria to be eligible for study admission:  
1) Subject is a post menarchal female ≥18 years  of age at the time of signing the ICF.   
2) Subject has a diagnosis of symptomatic VVC that meets the following criteria at the Screening 
visit:  
a) Minimum composite vulvovaginal signs and symptoms score of  ≥[ADDRESS_26419] 2 signs or 
symptoms having a score of 2 (moderate) or greater on the V SS scale at baseline.  
b) Positive microscopic examination with 10% KOH in a vaginal sample collected at Screening revealing yeast forms (hyphae/pseudohyphae) or budding yeasts  
c) Normal vaginal pH (≤ 4.5). 
d) Has no other vaginal co- infections based on WET Mount microscopic examination (and/or 
DNA probe).  
3) Subject should also have :  
a) A VVC with persistent symptoms despi[INVESTIGATOR_27341]  (last dose of fluconazole 
must have been administered at least 7 days prior , but no longer than 2 8 days prior to 
screening.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 29 OR 
b) A recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis (RVVC) epi[INVESTIGATOR_27342].   
OR 
c) A VVC  epi[INVESTIGATOR_27337]  a non- albicans candida species  known to have either intrinsic 
resistance to fluconazole e.g.  C.krusei  or suspected resistance to fluconazole, e.g. 
C.glabrata, C auris  but likely without MIC data in hand. 
OR  
d) A VVC epi[INVESTIGATOR_27343]. 
OR 
e) A known history of azole allergy or intolerance.   
4) Subject is able to take oral tablets.  
5) Subject is not pregnant or lactating and plans not to become pregnant . Women of childbearing 
potential < [ADDRESS_26420] agree to and comply with using one barrier method 
(male condom, female condom, and diaphragm) plus one other highly effective method of birth 
control, or sexual abstinence , from the time of consent through [ADDRESS_26421] on the signs and symptoms of VVC. 
Note : Women of childbearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test prior to 
enrollment (performed by [CONTACT_779]’s local laboratory). 
6) Subject is able to understand and sign a written ICF, which must be  obtained prior to treatment  
and any study- related  procedures.  
7) Subject is able to understand and sign a consent or authorization form,  which  shall  permit the 
use, disclosure and transfer  of the subject’s personal health information (e.g., in the US Health 
Information Portability and Accountability Act Authorization  form).  
8) Subject is able to understand and follow all study- related procedures including study drug 
administration .  
11.2. Exclusion  Criteria  
A subject will be excluded from participation in the study if she meets any of the following 
exclusion criteria:  
1) Subject has any vaginal condition other than VVC that may interfere with the diagnosis or 
evaluation of response to therapy, such as concurrent causes of vulvovaginitis and/or cervicitis 
including bacterial vaginosis, Trichomonas , Herpes  virus, Neisseria  gonorrhoeae , 
Chlamydia, symptomatic human papi[INVESTIGATOR_27338], or other mixed infections. 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 30 2) Subject received systemic and/or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27339], including prescription 
or over -the-counter products, within 7 days prior to the Screening visit .  Note: The screening 
visit may be rescheduled if required.  
3) Subject is receiving or anticipates requir ing treatment with the prohibited medications within 
the specified timeframes per Appendix I .  
4) Subject has active menstruation at the Screening  visit.  Note: The Screening visit may be 
rescheduled if required . 
5) Subject has a history of or an active cervical/vaginal cancer.  
6) Subject has a known hypersensitivity to any of the components of the  formulation. 
7) Subject  has participated  in any other  investigational  study within  at least 30 days (or 5.[ADDRESS_26422]) before signing the  ICF. 
8) Subject has received prior treatment with ibrexafungerp.  
9) Subject has any other condition or laboratory abnormality (such as severe hepatic impairment) 
that, in the judgment of the investigator, would put the subject at unacceptable risk for 
participation in the study or may interfere with the assessments included in the  study. 
10) Subject is unlikely to comply with protocol  requirements.  
11.3.    Discontinuation  Criteria  
A subject may be discontinued from the study or study drug for any of the following reasons:  
• Withdrawal of consent by [CONTACT_423]  
• Investigator or sponsor decision that withdrawal is in the subject’s best  interest  
• Occurrence of an AE that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], warrants discontinuation of 
the subject from the study drug  
• Lost to follow up (every attempt should be made to contact [CONTACT_423])  
The reason  for a subject’s  discontinuation of treatment or withdrawal  from  the study will be clearly 
documented in the source documents and on the electronic case report form (eCRF). All TOC procedures  should be performed  for subjects  who discontinue  from  the study before  the TOC  visit.  
11.4.   Early  Termination  
If the subject experiences persistence or worsening or recurrence of symptoms that per the 
investigator’s assessment (e.g., symptoms ≥ 4) warrant the use of additional antifungal therapy, and 
the investigator does not consider continuing treatment with ibrexafungerp for a Second Treatment 
Cycle, a vaginal examination with investigator’s rating of signs should be completed. Additionally, 
vulvovaginal samples should be obtained for KOH testing and pH measurements by [CONTACT_27396], fungal culture by [CONTACT_27397].  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26423] is negative, the investigator should consider other causes for the persistence or 
worsening of the symptoms as additional antifungal medication may not be indicated.  
If the investigator’s rating of the vulvovaginal signs and vaginal sample collection is not possible 
prior to the initiation of the additional therapy, it should still be completed as soon as possible after 
additional therapy is initiated.  
In addition to the vaginal examination, the symptoms that led to the use of additional antifungal 
therapy should be documented in the eCRF and the following procedures should also be 
completed:  
• If additional antifungal therapy is administered prior to or at the TOC visit, all TOC visit 
procedures should be completed,  and no additional  visits  will be needed.  The subject  will be 
considered as early termination due to lack of efficacy prior to or at  TOC.  
• If additional antifungal therapy is administered after the TOC visit but prior to or at the FU 
visit, all FU visit procedures should be completed , and no additional visits will be needed. 
The subject will be considered as early termination due to lack of efficacy after TOC but prior to or at FU.  
11.5.   Replacement of  Dropouts  
Subjects who discontinue from the study may be replaced at the discretion of the investigator and 
Sponsor . 
12. STUDY  TREATMENTS  
12.1. Study Treatment  Groups  
Treatment Cycle 1 – ALL randomized subjects:  
Subjects who meet all the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria will be randomized to 
treatment  and stratified by [CONTACT_27398]. Subjects will receive open -label oral ibrexafungerp 300 mg BID for one, 
three or seven consecutive days per the table below : 
 Ibrexafungerp Treatment Groups:  
Treatme
nt Group  Criteria  *Ibrexafungerp Dose (300mg AM 
and 300mg PM)  
Randomization and Stratification  
Group A  Subjects without underlying medical conditions AND 
known to have isolates other than C glabrata, C krusei, 
C auris   1 Day dosing  
N=50 
Group B  Subjects with underlying medical conditions: DM, 
immunocompromised conditions (e.g. HIV), 
debilitation, immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. 
corticosteroids), recurrent VVC (≥3 epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]/year) 
AND/OR known to have  C glabrata, C krusei  or C 
auris  isolates  3 Days OR 7 Days dosing  
Randomized 1:1  
N=50:50 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 32 *Days of treatment is per CDC Guidelines (https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment -
guidelines/candidiasis.htm)  
Enrollment will continue until the target number in each cohort is reached.    
Treatment Cycle 2 : A second treatment cycle will be allowed for subjects  who did not achieve 
sufficient clinical improvement (e.g. VSS remains ≥3) on the randomized treatment (Cycle 1) as 
evaluated at the TOC and FU visits.  A second treatment cycle will also be allowed for subjects  
with clinical cure/improvement/success who experience a recurrence before the last FU visit.  
During Cycle 2, subjects  may receive additional treatment with ibrexafungerp for a period up to 
14 days as recommended by [CONTACT_27377]. 
12.2. Dietary Requirements  
There are no dietary requirements or restrictions for the administration of the study drug. It is 
recommended that study drug be administered preferably with or immediately after a meal or snack  
and with approximately 8 oz./[ADDRESS_26424] of  oral ibrexafungerp ( 150 mg tablets) . 
12.4. Ibrexafungerp Description  
Study Drug Identifier:  i brexafungerp  
12.4.1. Formulation, Packaging and  Labelling  
Ibrexafungerp citrate drug product for oral administration will be supplied as a tablet containing 
150 mg of ibrexafungerp active ingredient  on a free-base basis.  In addition to the active ingredient, 
the tablet formulation also contains silicified microcrystalline cellulose, crospovidone, mannitol, colloidal silicon dioxide, magnesium stearate (non -bovine) and butylated  hydroxyanisole.  
Oral tablets will be supplied in blister packs of four 150 mg tablets per blister.  Each blister constitutes  one day’s  dosing of 300 mg BID.  Labels on the blisters  will contain  study medication 
information and any other information required by [CONTACT_27399]:  
• Product N ame 
• Sponsor  Name 
• Study Protocol  Number  
• Place to write the subject  number  
• Number of tablets per  blister pack  
• Dosing instructions  
• Storage conditions (e.g. room temperature 15°C – 25°C  
• Caution Statement: e.g. "Caution: New Drug – Limited by [CONTACT_4496] ([LOCATION_002]) Law to Investigational Use  Only”  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26425] be kept 
in a secure area (e.g., locked cabinet) and stored at room temperature. 
12.5. Drug  Accountability  
The investigator or designee will inventory and acknowledge receipt of all shipments of the  study 
drug. Drug accountability logs will be used to maintain accurate records of receipt, dispensing, administration to each subject and return of drug. A study monitor will periodically check  the 
supplies of investigational products held by [CONTACT_27400]. At 
the conclusion of  the study after  final drug accountability  has been  completed by [CONTACT_2037], all 
unused study drug and all empty/partially used blisters  will be returned  to the Sponsor or destroyed 
on site if the site has procedures in place for study drug destruction. 
Drug supplies will be maintained in a secure, limited -access storage area under the recommended 
storage conditions (see Section  12.4.2).  
The study drug supplied for this study is only for use in subjects properly consented and enrolled 
under this protocol. A study site designee (e.g. pharmacist, study nurse/coordinator) will: 
• Record the treatment in the appropriate drug accountability log 
• Report and document any study medication issues such as crushed or broken tablets  
− All product quality complaints should be reported to the Sponsor 
• Collect  blister packs (containers) and count the number of tablets remaining at the TOC 
visit.  
• Record  any unused or remaining  drug in the drug accountability log and eCRF and note 
any discrepancies and reason for discrepancies  
12.6. Subject Compliance with Study Drug  Dosing 
Subjects will be instructed to bring the assigned blister packs  of study medication (including empty 
blister packs ) with them  to the TOC  visit to assess treatment compliance.  Compliance will be 
assessed  based  on remaining  tablets  as compared  to what  should have been  taken. Details  of 
treatment  including any missing  dose will be recorded  on the eCRF.  Sites  are encouraged to  contact  
[CONTACT_27401], especially 
for subjects who miss doses due to problems with tolerability.  
13. NON -STUDY  TREATMENTS  
13.1. Prior and Concomitant  Medications  
All medications (including prescription and over -the- counter medications, supplements, and 
herbal products) taken from 30 days before the Screening Visit (Day -2 [+ 1] ) through the TOC 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 34 visit will be recorded  in the eCRF.  Only  the use of antifungal  medications, medications used to treat 
vaginal infections, vaginal (topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) medications, antibiotics for any reason or any other 
medications to treat a  study- drug related AE will be recorded after the TOC visit through the last 
study visit (FU). Start and stop dates of concomitant  medications  will be recorded  in the eCRF.  
Prior and concomitant  medications  will be reviewed and recorded at all scheduled and unscheduled 
study visits.  
13.2. Prohibited  Medications 
Medications specifically not permitted in the exclusion criteria (Section  11.2) include the 
following:  
• Non-study systemic or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27344]  
• Topi[INVESTIGATOR_27345]  
• Topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855] (vaginal)  contraceptives  
• Other investigational  drug(s)  
• Select strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors, CYP3A4/[ADDRESS_26426] P -gp substrates.  
See Section  21 (Appendix 1) for the full list of prohibited medications.  
13.2.1. Medications to be Administered with Caution and Monitored as Appropriate  
The following medications must be administered with caution and must be monitored as 
appropriate:  
• CYP3A4 substrates, including but not limited to sirolimus, tacrolimus warfarin, cyclosporine and amiodarone  
• Organic anion -transporting polypeptide 1B3 (OATP1B3)  substrates  
See Section  21 (Appendix 1) for the full list of medications to be administered with caution.  
13.3. Study  Restrictions  
There are no study restrictions other than those described in Section  11.2 (Exclusion Criteria), 
Section  12.2 (Dietary Requirements) and Section  13.2 (Prohibited Medications). 
14. STUDY  PROCEDURES  
The following sections provide a description of the individual study procedures to be performed during the conduct of the study. Detailed schedules of study assessments are provided in the Schedule of Visits and Procedures in Table 1.  
14.1. Informed  Consent  
Every study subject must provide written informed consent at Screening, prior to participating in any Screening evaluations or any other study activities (see Section  19.3).  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26427]  identification  (ID) 
number, which will consist of a site number followed by a 2- digit sequentially assigned subject 
number starting at 01, at each site. The subject numbers assigned to eligible subjects will be 
recorded in the eCRF. This number will be unique to each subject and will be used to identify the subject throughout the study.  
Subjects  who are screen  failures  or who  are not eligible  for enrollment will be recorded  as such in 
the eCRF. For subjects who sign an ICF (i.e., are assigned a subject number) but are NOT enrolled 
because they do not meet all of the inclusion/exclusion criteria,  the applicable screening visit pages  
of the eCRF  will be completed.  The criteria  that were not met for enrollment will be documented 
in the eCRF.  
14.3. Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria  
All inclusion and exclusion  criteria will be reviewed  at Screening  (-2 +1) and at Baseline (Day  1) to 
ensure that the subject qualifies for the  trial.  Screening and Baseline can be on the same day, if 
applicable.  
14.4. Medical History and  Demographics  
During the  Screening  visit,  a complete  medical history  for the prior year  will be recorded  for each 
subject. The medical history will include previous and current medical diagnoses and major 
surgical procedures. Subject demographics such as age, sex, race , and ethnicity will also be 
collected.  
14.5. Abbreviated Physical Examination  
An abbreviated  physical examination, including general  appearance and an overall  examination  of 
body systems, will be conducted at Screening, TOC visit, and at any unscheduled visit, if needed.  
14.6. Urine Pregnancy  Test 
A urine pregnancy test based on the measurement of human chorionic gonadotropin with a 
sensitivity of at least [ADDRESS_26428] results will be reviewed at Baseline (Day 1) before administration of  study drug. 
14.7. Safety Laboratory  Tests  
Safety laboratory tests will be performed by a qualified local  laboratory. Samples for safety 
laboratory tests will be collected  at the Screening , TOC , and  at any unscheduled visit, if  needed.  If 
indicated,  these may be done more  frequently  as follow  up to a laboratory abnormality.  
The following laboratory parameters will be determined: 
14.7.1. Hematology 
• White blood cell  (WBC)  count  • Hemoglobin  (HgB)  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 36 • Red blood cell  (RBC)  count  • Hematocrit  (Hct)  
• Platelet  count   
• Differential WBC count will include percentages for lymphocytes, monocytes, 
eosinophils  and basophils,  
• and absolute counts for neutrophils, lymphocytes, atypi[INVESTIGATOR_27346], 
monocytes, eosinophils and basophils.  
14.7.2. Blood Chemistry  
• Glucose  • Total creatine phosphokinase  (CPK)  
• Albumin  • Aspartate aminotransferase  (AST/SGOT)  
• Sodium  • Alanine aminotransferase  (ALT/SGPT)  
• Potassium  • Gamma glutamyl transferase  (GGT)  
• Alkaline  Phosphatase  • Bilirubin (total, direct and  indirect)  
• Creatinine  • Total  protein  
14.8. Rating of Vulvovaginal Symptoms by [CONTACT_27402], Baseline  (Day 1 ), during 
telephone  interviews on Days 3, [ADDRESS_26429] experiences persistence or worsening or recurrence of symptoms that per the 
investigator’s assessment (e.g. symptoms ≥ 4) warrant the use of rescue antifungal therapy, the 
rating of the symptoms that led to the use of rescue antifungal therapy must be documented in the  
eCRF and a vaginal examination with rating of signs by [CONTACT_27403]. If the investigator’s rating of the vulvovaginal signs and vaginal samples collection are not possible prior  to the initiation  of the  rescue therapy, they  should still be completed  as soon as possible  after 
rescue therapy is  initiated.  
Subjects will rate their symptoms of infection using the VSS Scale, where each vulvovaginal symptom will be given a numerical rating based on severity, as follows:  
• Itching: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe =  3 
• Burning: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe =  3 
• Irritation: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe =  [ADDRESS_26430] microscopic examination with 
10% KOH. Subjects must have a positive KOH test at s creening to be enrolled. The s creening 
KOH will be assessed at the site by [CONTACT_27404]. A vaginal sample will also be obtained at s creening , at the TOC and at the first FU  visit at [ADDRESS_26431] 
ibrexafungerp and additional  antifungal agents (per CLSI M27- A3 guidelines). If there is 
persistence or recurrence of vulvovaginal symptoms, additional vulvovaginal specimens will be 
collected for KOH testing at the TOC and at the FU visits, and for fungal culture at the FU visit s. 
Samples will also be obtained at any unscheduled visit, if needed.  
If the subject experiences persistence or worsening or recurrence of symptoms that per the investigator’s assessment (e.g. symptoms ≥ 4) warrant the use of rescue antifungal therapy, the 
subject  may be enrolled into Treatment Cycle [ADDRESS_26432]  enters Treatment Cycle 2, or be prescribed rescue therapy, a  vaginal 
examination with collection of samples for KOH (assess at the site) and culture should be 
completed  prior  to initiation  of Treatment Cycle [ADDRESS_26433] is negative,  
the investigator  should consider other causes for the persistence or worsening of the symptoms and 
antifungal rescue medication  may not be indicated.  If the collection  of the vaginal  culture  is not 
possible  prior  to the initiatio n of the rescue therapy, it should still be collected as soon as possible 
after rescue therapy is  given. 
14.11.  Rating of Vulvovaginal Signs by [CONTACT_27405] (or qualified designee) will perform vulvovaginal examinations to rate the subject´s signs of infection at the Screening, TOC and first FU visits  at [ADDRESS_26434] experiences persistence or worsening or recurrence of symptoms that per the investigator’s assessment (e.g. symptoms ≥ 4) warrant the use of rescue antifungal therapy, the 
subject may be enrolled into Treatment Cycle [ADDRESS_26435] enters Treatment Cycle 2, or be prescribed rescue therapy, a  vaginal  
examination  with rating  of signs  by [CONTACT_27406]. If the investigator’s rating of the vulvovaginal signs is not possible prior to the initiation  
of the rescue therapy,  it should still be completed  as soon as possible  after rescue therapy is  initiated.  
Investigators will assess the signs of infection using the VSS Scale provided in Section  21 
[Appendix 2]), a standardized, predefined scale where each sign of the vagina and/or vulva will be 
given a numerical rating based on severity, as follows:  
• Edema: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe = 3 
• Erythema: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe =  3 
• Excoriation or fissures: absent = 0; mild = 1; moderate = 2; severe = [ADDRESS_26436] relevant medical term in the abbreviated physical 
examination page of the eCRF.  
14.12.  Quality of Life (QOL) Questionnaire  
Subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire at Baseline, TOC and at the follow -up visits.  
14.13.  Randomization  
This is an open label study.  Subjects will be randomized to treatment and stratified by [CONTACT_27407]. 
14.14.  Study Drug  
At Baseline (Day 1), eligible subjects will have their Day 1 dose administered in the clinical 
research unit and will be dispensed enough study medication for either single day BID dose, or for 
BID dosing for 3 or 7 consecutive days as explained in Section 12.1.  
14.15.  Study Drug  Dosing  
Treatment Cycle 1 applicable to all subjects: The first study drug dose (Day 1) will be ad ministered 
at the clinical research center and the subsequent dose (s) will be self -administered by [CONTACT_27408] 12 ±  3-hour intervals  at home.  
NOTE:  If administering the first dose at the study center  would complicate  the administration  of 
the second  dose 12 hours  later (e.g. first dose at 3 p.m. will require second dose at 3 a.m.), the 
subject can self -administer both Day 1 doses at home to allow for a more convenient dosing 
schedule (e.g., 8 p.m. and 8 a.m.). Details of study treatment groups and dietary requirements for treatment administration are provided in Section  12.1 and Section  12.2, respectively.  
Treatment Cycle 2: A second treatment cycle will be allowed for subjects  who did not achieve  
sufficient  clinical improvement ( e.g. VSS remains ≥3) on the randomized treatment  (Cycle 1) as 
evaluated at the TOC and FU1 visits .  A second treatment cycle will also be allowed for subjects  
with clinical cure/improvement/success who experience a recurrence before the last FU visit.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 39 During Cycle 2, subjects  may receive additional treatment with ibrexafungerp for a period up to 
14 days as recommended by [CONTACT_941] i nvestigator  and f ollowing discussion with the sponsor. 
14.16.  Study Drug Collection and Treatment Compliance  Evaluation  
Treatment compliance will be reviewed by [CONTACT_27409]. Subjects 
will be instructed to bring all blister packs (including empty blister packs ) of study medication 
with them to the visit to assess treatment compliance. Further details are available in Section  12.5. 
14.17.  Vital Signs  
Vital signs, including blood pressure (systolic and diastolic), heart rate and body temperature will 
be measured at s creening and at the TOC visit as well as at unscheduled study visits, if needed. 
14.18.  Prior and Concomitant Medication  Review  
All medications (including prescription and over -the-counter medications, supplements, and 
herbal products) taken from 30 days before Screening visit through the TOC visit will be recorded 
in the eCRF. Only the use of other antifungal medications, medications used to treat vaginal 
infections, vaginal (topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) medications  and antibiotics for any reason or any other medications 
to treat a  study- drug related AE will be recorded after the TOC visit through the last study visit. 
Start and stop dates of concomit ant medications  will be recorded  in the eCRF.  Prior and 
concomitant  medications  will be reviewed and recorded at all scheduled and unscheduled study  
visits.  
See Section  13.2 for prohibited medications, medications to be administered with caution and 
further details for non- study treatments.  
14.19.  Adverse Event  Monitoring  
AEs will be recorded and reviewed at all scheduled and unscheduled study visits from the time the ICF is signed through TOC visit.  New AEs starting after TOC will be recorded only if they led to 
the use of other antifungal medications or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27347], if they are a vaginal bacterial 
or parasitic infection, or if they are deemed related to the previously administered study drug. See 
Section  16 for further reference.  
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 40 15. STUDY  SCHEDULE  
Detailed schedules of all study visits and procedures are presented in Schedule of Visits and Procedures ( Table 1).  
The actual visits will be dependent on the Dosing Group i.e there may be overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_27348]. 
Subjects entering Treatment Cycle 2, will follow the same Schedule of Visits and Procedures, starting with Baseline visit and may 
have visits that are Not Applicable during Treatment Cycle 1. 
Table 1: Schedule of Visits and Procedures (Study  SCY-078-307b) 
Visit  V1 
Screeninga V2 
Baselinea At 
Home  V3 
TOC   
V4 FU  
V5 FU  
  
V6 FU   
V7 FU 
Unscheduled 
Visitsb 
Day (allowable window)  Day -2(+1) Day 1  Days 
2-7 14 ±[ADDRESS_26437] 
Baseline  14 ±[ADDRESS_26438] 
EOT  30±[ADDRESS_26439] 
Baseline  30 ±[ADDRESS_26440] EOT  60 ±[ADDRESS_26441] ID number  X     
   
 
Inclusion/exclusion criteriac X X        
Medical history and demographics  X     
   
 
Abbreviated physical exam  X   X     If needed  
Vital Signsk X X  X     If needed  
Urine pregnancy testc
 X   X     If needed  
Safety laboratory blood testsd 
 
 X   X     If needed  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 41 Visit  V1 
Screeninga V2 
Baselinea At 
Home  V3 
TOC   
V4 FU  
V5 FU  
  
V6 FU   
V7 FU 
Unscheduled 
Visitsb 
Day (allowable window)  Day -2(+1) Day 1  Days 
2-7 14 ±[ADDRESS_26442] 
Baseline  14 ±[ADDRESS_26443] 
EOT  30±[ADDRESS_26444] 
Baseline  30 ±[ADDRESS_26445] EOT  60 ±[ADDRESS_26446] 
EOT  
Rating of vulvovaginal 
symptoms by [CONTACT_27410]
 X X X X  
X X X  
X If needed  
Vaginal Examination and 
rating of vulvovaginal signs by 
[CONTACT_27411] X   X  
 
X If 
symptoms  If 
symptoms   
If 
symptoms  If needed  
Vulvovaginal sample for other 
pathogense X   If needed   
If needed  if needed   
If needed   
If needed  If needed  
Vulvovaginal sample for KOH 
and pH e X   If symptoms  If 
symptoms  If 
symptoms  If 
symptoms  If 
symptoms  If needed  
Vulvovaginal sample for fungal 
culturee X   X  
X If 
symptoms   If 
symptoms  If 
Symptoms  If needed  
Quality of Life Questionnaire   X  X  
X 
 X  
X  
X  
Study drug dosing   X X       
Study drug container(s) 
collection and subject data 
reviewed     X  
   
 
Phone Contacth   X   
   
 
Prior and concomitant 
medication reviewi X X X X  
X X X  
X X 
AE monitoringj X----------------------------------------------------X X X X X X 
Abbreviations: AE  = adverse event; D  = day; TOC  = test of cure; V  = visit; FU = follow up  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 42 a) Screening and Baseline may occur on the same  day. 
b) Unscheduled visits can occur if the investigator determines there is a need for one outside of the scheduled per protocol visits.  
c) Results should be reviewed prior to enrollment at Baseline (Day 1). 
d) Hematology and blood chemistry. Safety laboratory tests will be performed by a qualified laboratory.  
e) A vaginal examination with rating of signs by [CONTACT_27412]. If the subject experiences  persistence or worsening 
or recurrence of symptoms, after the baseline visit (e.g. symptoms ≥ 4), that warrant the use of rescue antifungal therapy, the symptoms that led to the 
use of rescue antifungal therapy must be documented in the eCRF. Additionally,  vulvovaginal  samples should be obtained for KOH testing and pH 
measurement (both at the clinical research unit), fungal culture (central laboratory) and investigation of other pathogens such as bacterial vaginosis and 
Trichomonas vaginalis (at the local lab). If the investigator’s rating of the vulvovaginal signs and vaginal samples collection are not possible pr ior to 
the initiation of the rescue therapy, they should still be completed as soon as possible after rescue therapy is initiated.  
f) Vulvovaginal examinations will be repeated at the FU visits  only if the subject presents symptoms. Otherwise, no additional vulvovaginal examination 
will be conducted or signs rated.  
g) The first study drug dose (Day 1) will be administered at the clinical research center and the subsequent dose(s) will be sel f-administered by [CONTACT_27413] 12 ± 3 hour intervals at home.  
h) The Day  3, 5, and [ADDRESS_26447] s will be used to evaluate symptom resolution, AEs, and concomitant medications.  
i) Only the use of antifungal medications, vaginal (topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) medications, antibiotics for any reason or any other medications to treat an AE will be 
recorded after the TOC visit through the last study visit (FU).   
j) New AEs starting after TOC will be recorded only if they led to the use of other antifungal medications or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27349], if they are a 
vaginal bacterial or parasitic infection, or if they are deemed related to the previously administered study drug 
k) Blood pressure (systolic and diastolic), heart rate and body temperature  
 
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26448] medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether 
or not considered drug related. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or disease temporal ly associated with the 
use of a study drug/study intervention, whether or not related to the study drug/study intervention. 
Any laboratory  abnormality  that is deemed  to be clinically  significant  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_27350], whether or not it is 
related to the study drug.  
Stable chronic conditions that are present prior to clinical trial enrollment and do not worsen are 
not considered AEs and will be accounted for in the subject’s medical history. 
The following can be considered AEs:  
• An exacerbation of a pre -existing  illness  
• An increase in frequency or intensity of a pre -existing epi[INVESTIGATOR_27351]  
• A condition detected or diagnosed after the initiation of treatment with study 
medication, even though it may have been present prior to the start of the  study 
• Continuous persistent disease or symptoms present at baseline that worsen after signing 
the informed consent or following the initiation of treatment with study medication  
The following are not considered AEs:  
• Medical or surgical procedures (e.g., surgery, endoscopy, tooth extraction or transfusion); the condition that leads to the procedure is an AE 
• Pre-existing disease or conditions present or detected at the start of the study that do 
not worsen  
• Situations where an untoward medical occurrence has not occurred (e.g., hospi[INVESTIGATOR_27352]/convenience admissions)
 
• The disease being studied, or signs or symptoms associated with the disease, unless 
more  severe than expected  for the subject’s  condition or a worsening  of the disease 
being studied 
16.2. Definition of a Serious Adverse  Event 
A SAE is defined as an AE meeting one of the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• Life-threatening event  
• Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_27353], Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 44 • Persistent or significant disability/incapacity or substantial disruption of the  ability to 
conduct normal life  functions  
• Congenital anomaly or birth defect  
Any other important medical event that may not result in one of the above outcomes may be 
considered a SAE when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, the event may jeopardize the 
participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed 
above.  
A life -threatening AE is any AE that places the subject, in the view of the investigator, at 
immediate risk of death from the AE as it occurred. It does not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
16.3. Events of Clinical Interest  
Not Applicable  
16.4. Overdose  
This refers to the administration of a quantity of a medicinal product given per administration or 
cumulatively, which is above the maximum recommended dose according to the authorized product information.  
An overdose can occur if a subject has taken, accidentally or intentionally, a drug administered in a dose exceeding the protocol -specified dose.  An overdose must be reported within [ADDRESS_26449]’s medical record as well as in the d osing section of the eCRF .   
16.5. Pregnancy  
Female  subjects  who become  pregnant  should be immediately  discontinued from  the study and 
followed up to determine the outcome of the pregnancy. The pregnancy must be reported to the 
Sponsor within 24 hours of the site becoming aware of the pregnancy. If the pregnancy  ends for 
any reason  before  the anticipated  date,  the investigator  should notify the Sponsor. At the completion 
of the pregnancy, the investigator will document the outcome  of the pregnancy. If the outcome  of 
the pregnancy meets  the criteria  for immediate classification as an SAE (i.e., postpartum 
complication, spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, neonatal death or congenital anomaly), the 
investigator should follow the procedures for reporting an SAE.  
16.6. Unexpected Adverse  Event  
An AE is considered “unexpected” if it is not listed in the IB or is of greater specificity or severity  
than those  that have  been  observed with the particular  study drug being tested.  For example, under 
this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected (by [CONTACT_14213]) if the IB 
referred only to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by [CONTACT_14214]) if the IB listed only 
cerebral vascular accidents. "Unexpected," as  used in this definition, also refers to AEs that are 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 45 mentioned in the IB as occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological 
properties of the drug but are not specifically mentioned as occurring with the particular drug under  
investigation.  
16.7. Grading of Adverse  Events  
The severity (or intensity) of an AE refers to the extent to which it affects the subject’s daily 
activities and will be classified by [CONTACT_27414], moderate or severe using the following criteria:  
• Mild: Awareness of sign or symptom, but easily tolerated. Not likely to require medical  
attention.  
• Moderate: Discomfort enough to cause some interference with daily activity. May require medical  intervention. 
• Severe: Intense enough to disrupt daily activities. Likely requires medical intervention. 
16.7.1. Clarification of the difference in meaning between “severe” and “serious”  
The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific event (as in mild, 
moderate or severe myocardial infarction); the event itself, however, may be of relatively minor 
medical significance (such as severe headache). This is n ot the same as “serious”, which is based 
on the outcome or action criteria usually associated with events that pose a threat to life or 
functioning. Seriousness (not severity) serves as a guide for defining regulatory reporting 
obligations.  
16.8. Causality Assessment  
The investigator  will assess causality  (i.e., whether  there  is a reasonable possibility  that the study 
drug caused the event) for all AEs and SAEs. The relationship will be characterized using the following classification: 
• Related: The temporal relationship of the AE with the study drug makes causality 
possible and as likely or more likely than due to another cause such as other drugs, a 
surgical intervention, or an underlying disease.  
• Not related: The temporal relationship of the AE with the study drug makes causality  
improbable  and can be due to another  cause such as other  drugs, a surgical intervention,  
or an underlying disease.  
16.9. Adverse Event Collection  Timeframe  
AEs will be recorded and reviewed at all scheduled and unscheduled study visits from the time the ICF is signed through TOC visit.  New AEs starting after TOC will be recorded only if they led to 
the use of other antifungal medications or topi[INVESTIGATOR_27347], if they are a vaginal bacterial or parasitic infection, or if they are deemed related to the previous ly administered study drug.
 
All AEs reported by [CONTACT_27415] (PI) or qualified designee. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_27354], if possible, to establish a 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26450] be reported within 24 hours of the site becoming aware of the SAE  (Appendix 3) . 
Any event that is serious, study drug- related,  and unexpected  as assessed  by [CONTACT_27416]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_27355]/Ethics Committee (IRB/EC) in accordance with its regulations and guidelines. 
16.11.  Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event  Follow-up  
All AEs and SAEs will be followed up to resolution (the subject’s health has returned to her  
baseline status  or all variables  have returned  to normal) or until an outcome is reached, stabilization 
occurs (the investigator does not expect any further improvement or worsening of the event) or the 
event is otherwise explained, regardless of whether the subject is still participating in the study. All appropriate therapeutic measures should be undertaken and recorded. Where appropriate, medical tests and examinations will be performed to document resolution of the event(s).  
16.12.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting – Procedures for  Investigators  
Initial Reports and Follow -Up SAE  Reports: To report  an SAE,  the SAE  eCRF  form  within the 
Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system must be completed. All SAEs, whether or not deemed drug-
related  or expected,  must be reported  by [CONTACT_27417] [ADDRESS_26451] becoming aware of the event  (Appendix 3). The investigator/qualified designee will enter  the 
required  information  regarding the SAE  into the appropriate form,  which  will automatically result 
in distribution of the information to the appropriate sponsor  contact . If the EDC system is 
temporarily unavailable (>24 hours), the event, including the investigator- determined causality to 
study drug, should be reported via a paper back- up SAE form to the Safety Surveillance team via 
(contact [CONTACT_3031], i.e., e- mail or fa x will be available on the SAE form).  
Upon return of the availability of EDC system, the SAE information must be entered into the EDC 
system as soon as possible. The SAE form within the EDC system must be updated within 24 
hours of knowledge/receipt of SAE follow-up information. 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26452] 
MANAGEMENT  
17.1. Data Collection and  Reporting  
Data for this study will be collected  using eCRFs.  The investigator  and study site staff will receive 
training regarding the completion of the eCRF. Visit -specific data should be entered  into the eCRF  
and be ready  for review  as soon as possible, but no later than 5 days after each visit/time  point.  
All protocol -required information collected during the study must be entered by [CONTACT_27418].  All data entry, modification or 
deletion will be recorded indicating the individual subject, original value, the new value, the reason 
for change, who made the change, and when the change was made. All data changes will be clearly 
indicated with a means to locate p rior values. The investigator will maintain a list of individuals 
who are authorized to enter or correct data on the  eCRFs.  
The investigator or designated sub- investigator, following review of the data in the eCRF, will 
confirm the validity of each subject’s data by [CONTACT_17094].  
17.2. Study  Monitoring  
Study progress will be monitored by [CONTACT_27419], protocol compliance, and study conduct in 
accordance with accepted regulatory requirements. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_27356]. Arrangements for monitoring visits will be made in advance, except in emergency cases.  
17.3. Investigator Study  Files  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_27357]- related documents in the study files. The Sponsor 
will notify the PI [INVESTIGATOR_27358]. The following documents will be kept in the study files or be readily accessible:  
• original protocol and all  amendments  
• signed agreement or  protocol  
• signed and dated study staff roles and responsibilities  log 
• copy of the current curriculum vitae of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_27359]-investigators  
• IRB/EC membership list and all IRB/EC approvals for the protocol and amendments, informed consent documentation and all updates, advertisements, and written information provided to subjects; all IRB/EC correspondence; documentation that the 
IB and subsequent revisions have been submitted to the IRB/EC; documentation that 
all SAEs and any periodic safety reports have been submitted to the IRB/EC; and annual IRB/EC renewals (as  required)  
• updated laboratory certification  and the laboratory’s  normal  values  (covering  the entire 
time interval of the study for all laboratory tests conducted during the  study)  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 48 • all confirmations of investigational drug receipt, drug accountability logs and drug 
return records  
• all correspondence to or from the Sponsor or its designees  
• blank informed consent  form  
• Investigator’s  Brochure  
• subject screening  log 
• subject list (contains subject initials and/or protocol- specific subject  number)  
• all subjects’ original signed informed consents  
• monitoring visit  log 
17.4. Retention of  Records  
Essential documents should be retained until at least [ADDRESS_26453]. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by [CONTACT_27420].
 
The Sponsor will inform the PI/institution in writing of the need for record retention and will  notify  
the PI/institution  in writing  when  the trial- related  records  are no longer  needed.  
An investigator who withdraws from the responsibility of maintaining study records or wishes  to 
move  them  to a new location  has the obligation to place  them  in safekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_27360].  
18. ANALYTICAL  PLAN  
All statistical processing will be performed using SAS® version 9.3 or later, unless otherwise  
stated.  All statistical tests will be two-sided  and interpreted  at a 5% significance level.  
The study is not powered for formal statistical comparisons.  Descriptive statistics (i.e., mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, maximum, etc.) will be provided for all continuous  
variables;  frequencies  and percentages  will be tabulated for incidence and categorical variables. For 
parameters measured over time, observed values and changes from baseline will be described for each time point. 
The clinical cure and mycological eradication rates will be described by [CONTACT_27421], 
when the number of isolates per species allows.  
All analyses will be presented by [CONTACT_1570]. Unless otherwise stated, data will be analyzed as is with no imputation. No adjustment for multiplicity will be employed.  
A Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) describing all statistical analyses in detail will be provided  as a 
separate document. The SAP will be finalized  prior  to database lock . 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 49 18.1. Sample Size  Determination  
The primary efficacy endpoint of the study is the percentage of subjects with clinical cure 
(complete resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite score of 0 on the VSS Scale with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s j udgment) at the TOC visit. This 
is an exploratory study, and no formal sample size calculation was performed.  Approximately 150 subjects will be enrolled in allocation 50:50:[ADDRESS_26454] of 1, 3 or 7 days of treatment.  Subjects will be randomized to tre atment, stratified by [CONTACT_27422]. A sample size of 150 subjects is estimated to be adequate to perform an initial assessment of efficacy.   
18.2. Analysis Populations  
The study populations to be used in the analyses are defined as follows:  
Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population: Al l ibrexafungerp- treated subjects.  
Modified Intent -to-Treat ( MITT) Population: All treated subjects who have a positive culture 
for Candida species  at Screening . 
Per-Protocol (PP) Population: All MITT subjects who have completed the study drug treatment , 
who did not have major protocol deviations likely to affect study efficacy AND who have a TOC 
evaluation.  
Safety Population:  All enrolled subjects who received at least one dose of study drug. 
18.3. Subject Disposition, Discontinuation, and Baseline  Data  
Subject disposition in terms of the number and percentage of subjects enrolled by [CONTACT_27423]. The number of subjects enrolled , number completing the study, and reasons  for 
discontinuation will be summarized  by [CONTACT_1570]. Subject  demographics and baseline 
characteristics such as age, race, ethnicity, sex, weight, height, body mass index, region (if 
applicable) and other relevant parameters will be tabulated by [CONTACT_1570]. 
Baseline is defined as the last non -missing assessment prior to the date (and time if appropriate) 
of the first dose of study drug. Change from baseline is defined as: post - baseline value – baseline 
value.  
18.4. Handling of Missing Data, Dose Adjustments, and Early 
Withdrawals  
For the efficacy  analyses,  subjects  who do not have  a TOC  assessment  will be assigned as treatment 
failures. For subjects who withdraw from the study early, every effort will be made to collect TOC 
visit information at the point of  withdrawal.  
18.5. Prior and Concomitant  Medications  
Prior and concomitant medications will be coded using the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary terminology. The number and percentage of subjects taking each medication before and after the first dose of study drug will be tabulated by [CONTACT_1570]. Medications taken and 
stopped prior to the first dose of study drug will be considered prior medications. Medications 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26455] dose of 
study drug will be considered concomitant medications. 
18.6. Efficacy 
18.6.1. Efficacy  Assessments 
Efficacy assessments will be based on VSS scores, clinical evaluations, QOL outcomes, 
mycological testing, and additional antifungal use by [CONTACT_27424]. 
[IP_ADDRESS]. The following treatment outcome definitions will be used for the assessment of 
efficacy relative to baseline:  Clinical Outcome  
• Clinical Cure: Complete resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite score 
of 0 on the VSS Scale  and with no additional antifungal therapy required based on 
investigator’s judgment 
• C linical Improvement:  partial  resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite 
score of 1 or 2 on the VSS Scale and with no additional antifungal therapy required 
based on investigator’s judge ment . 
• C linical Success:  at least 50% reduction from Baseline in the total composite VSS score 
with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgment  
• C linical Failure:  Persistence and/or worsening of signs and symptoms or need for 
additional antifungal therapy 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Mycological Outcome 
• Mycological Eradication: negative culture for growth of Candida species  
• Presumed Eradication: Subject is asymptomatic, therefore cultures not done 
• Mycological Persistence:  positive culture for growth of Candida species  
18.6.2. Efficacy  Analyses 
The efficacy  analyses  will be conducted using the M ITT (primary  analysis  population), ITT and PP 
populations to evaluate ibrexafungerp. 
The primary efficacy endpoint, the percentage of subjects with Clinical Cure  at TOC will be 
assessed on the M ITT population and will present the Clinical Success rate and the 95% confidence 
interval calculated using the method of Clopper and Pearson. All other efficacy data will be 
summarized, but not subject to formal statistical analysis.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 51 18.7. Safety  
18.7.1. Safety  Assessments  
Safety will be evaluated throughout the study, including the following parameters: AEs, treatment 
discontinuations, physical examination, vital signs, safety laboratory tests, and prior and concomitant medications.  
AEs will be recorded and reviewed at all scheduled and unscheduled study visits from the time  the 
Informed  Consent  Form  is signed. An abbreviated  physical  examination,  including general 
appearance and an overall examination of body systems, will be conducted at Screening, at the 
TOC visit and at the first FU (14 Days after EOT) visit. Vital signs, including blood pressure 
(systolic and diastolic), heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_27361] s and at unscheduled visits, if needed. Safety laboratory test  (hematology 
and blood chemistry) will be measured at Screening, at the TOC visit s and at unscheduled visits,  
if needed.  All prior  and concomitant  medications  taken  before  Screening  through the TOC visit will 
be recorded. Only the use of antifungal medications, vaginal (topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) medications, antibiotics for 
any reason or any other medications to treat an AE will be recorded after the TOC  visit through 
the last study visit.  
Study procedures are described in Section 14.0 and safety assessments and monitoring are 
described in Section 16.0 . 
18.7.2. Safety Analyses  
Safety analyses will be conducted using the safety population. 
AEs will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) 
Version  19.1 or higher. The incidence and severity of treatment -emergent AEs and SAEs and their 
relationship  to treatment  will be summarized  by [CONTACT_27425]. The 
percentage of subjects who discontinued study treatment and the reasons for discontinuation will be summarized by [CONTACT_2948]. 
Safety laboratory evaluations and vital signs will be summarized as observed values and as 
changes from Baseline. In addition, shifts (with respect to the reference range) from Baseline will 
be presented by [CONTACT_27426]. 
19. ETHICS AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN PATIENTS  
19.1. Ethical Conduct of the  Study  
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, the ethical principles established by 
[CONTACT_27427]  (as amended  in Fortaleza,  Brazil,  October  2013), the International 
Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Guidelines, the US Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) sections that address clinical research studies, applicable European Union regulations and/or other national and local ethical and legal requirements, as  applicable.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26456]/Ethics Committee  Review  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_27362]/ CRO must provide the IRB/EC with all appropriate materials, including a copy 
of the subject ICF. The study will not be initiated until the PI [INVESTIGATOR_27363]/EC, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_27364]. Appropriate reports on the progress of this study will be made by [CONTACT_978] 
[INVESTIGATOR_27365]/EC, medical monitor, and Sponsor in accordance  with applicable government 
regulations and in agreement with poli cy established by [CONTACT_1034]. 
19.3. Informed  Consent  
The ICH issued guidelines to provide protection for human subjects in clinical investigations. The ICH Tripartite Guideline for Good Clinical Practice establishes the general requirements for 
informed consent. Each subject will be provided with oral and wr itten information in a language 
they can understand that describes the nature and duration of the study. Before undergoing 
screening, each subject must consent in writing to study participation.  The patient  will sign and 
personally date the subject  ICF.  The person rendering consent will also sign and personally date 
the subject ICF as the person who obtained the consent  of the subject.  The original signed subject 
ICF will be retained with  the study center’s  records.  Each  subject  will receive a copy of her signed  
subject  ICF. In  addition, the PI, or his or her designee,  must  document  in the case history that 
informed consent was obtained before study participation.  
19.4. Future Use of  Samples 
Biological samples collected during the study, including Candida spp. isolates (see Section  14.9 
and Section  14.10),  may be maintained  in repositories  for potential  future  use. Future research of 
Candida isolates may include in vitro susceptibility testing of new or existing antifungals  or 
analysis  of mechanisms  of resistance.  All samples  will be identified only by a coded number to 
maintain subject confidentiality.  
19.5. Subject Privacy and Subject  Confidentiality  
All laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, reports, and other records that leave the site will be identified only by a coded number to maintain subject privacy and confidentiality. All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet. All computer entry and networking programs will be performed 
with coded numbers only. Clinical information will not be released without written permission of 
the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by [CONTACT_7195], IRB/EC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), t he Sponsor or where required by [CONTACT_2371]. All local privacy laws must 
be followed.
 
19.6. Study  Termination  
The PI, the sponsor, the FDA,  and the IRB/EC each reserve the right  to terminate  the study in the 
interest of subjects’ safety and welfare. The sponsor reserves the right to terminate the study at any 
time for administrative  reasons . The  sponsor also reserve s the right to discontinue study enrolment 
if a particular cohort is proving difficult to enroll . 
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26457] be collected 
prior to study initiation and 1 year following the completion of the clinical trial.  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 54 20. REFERENCES 
1) Sobel JD. Vaginal candidosis. Lancet  2007;369:1961–71. 
2) Hurley R, De Louvois J. Candida vaginitis. Postgrad Med J  1979;55:645–47. 
3) Foxman B, Marsh JV, Gillespie B, Sobel JD. Frequency and response to vaginal symptoms 
among white and African American women: results of a random digit dialing survey. J Womens Health  1998;7:1167–74. 
4) Diflucan prescribing information. [COMPANY_007]. Revised November  2014.  
5) Sobel JD, Management of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: unresolved issues. Curr Infect 
Dis Rep. 2006 Nov;8(6):481- 6. 
6) Fidel PL, Sobel JD. Immunopathogenesis of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 1996 July;9(3):335- 348. 
7) CLSI. 2008a. Reference method for broth dilution antifungal susceptibility testing of yeasts; 
approved standard – third edition. CLSI document M27- A3. Clinical and Laboratory 
Standards Institute, Wayne, PA. 
8) Scorneaux B, Angulo D, Borroto- Esoda K, Ghannoum M, Peel M, Wring S. SCY -[ADDRESS_26458] Candida species in Time -Kill studies. Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 2017 March;61(3):e01961- 16. 
9) Arendrup MC, Jorgensen KM, Hare RK, Chowdhary A. In vitro  activity of ibrexafungerp 
(SCY -078) against Candida auris isolates as determined by [CONTACT_27428] C. albicans and C glabrata and with the activities of six comparator agents. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2020 March;64(3):202136- 19. 
10) Sobel JD, Borroto- Esoda K, Azie N, Angulo D. In vitro pH activity of ibrexafungerp against 
fluconazole -susceptible and -resistant Candida isolates from women with vulvovaginal 
candidiasis.  Antimicrobial Agents Chemotherapy 2021 May doi:10.1128/AAC.[ZIP_CODE]- 21. 
 
 
       
 
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,[ADDRESS_26459]  has been documented as not 
responding to study  drug.  No investigational  drugs  other  than the study drug are allowed within 30 
days before Screening and for the entire duration of the study. In addition, the medications listed below are also  prohibited. 
Strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors and CYP3A4/5 inducers  
 
CYP  Strong Inhibitorsa Inducersa 
3A4/[ADDRESS_26460]. John’s  wort 
long- lasting 
barbiturates  
efavirenz  
etravirine  
a. The CYP3A4/5 inhibitors and CYP3A4/5 inducers listed in this table are not permitted  during the 7 days prior 
to enrollment and during study treatment until  TOC.  
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 56 Medications to be administered with Caution and Monitored as Appropriate  
CYP3A4 substrates  
 
CYP  Substrates  
3A4 In vitro , ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) was an inhibitor of CYP3A mediated metabolism of 
midazolam, but was only a weak inhibitor of metabolism of testosterone. The clinical 
significance of this inhibition is unknown; caution should be exercised when 
administering ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) with drugs known to be CYP3A sensitive 
substrates with narrow therapeutic index, such as midazolam and cyclosporine. 
Subjects receiving sirolimus, tacrolimus, warfarin, cyclosporine or amiodarone are 
permitted for enrollment in the study and these medications may be administered 
concomitantly with ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) with close monitoring. Dosing 
adjustments and subsequent monitoring of sirolimus and warfarin should be undertaken 
in accordance with product prescribing information for the respective agents. 
 
OATP1B3 substrates  
OATP  Substrate  
1B3 In vitro , ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) is an inhibitor of the OATP1B3 liver uptake 
transporter. The clinical significance of this inhibition is unknown; however, there is a 
potential risk for increased exposure of the concomitant medications (arising from 
lowered hepatic clearance) when administering ibrexafunger p (SCY- 078) with drugs 
known to be OATP1B3 selective substrates. Therefore, caution should be exercised 
when administering ibrexafungerp (SCY -078) with drugs known to be OATP1B3 
selective substrates such as telmisartan, including monitoring the subject for  signs of 
overexposure associated with the concomitant medications as described in the product 
prescribing information.  
 
 
Sources:  
• FDA Draft Guidance for Industry. Drug Interaction Studies – Study Design, Data 
Analysis, and Implications for Dosing and Labeling. 2012. 
• Drug interactions in infectious disease by [CONTACT_27429] C. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_27366], Keith Rodvold (2007)  
• UCSF -FDA  Transportal  
P-gp Drug Substrates  
digoxin, colchicine, dabigatran 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 57 APPENDIX  2. VULVOVAGINAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS SCALE  
SIGNS:  
To be rated by [CONTACT_27430]  
 0 Mild  
1 Moderate  
2 Severe  
3 
Edema      
Erythema      
Excoriation or fissures      
• Definitions: Absent: none  Mild: slight 
• Moderate: definitely noticeable   Severe: marked, intense 
SYMPTOMS:  
To be rated by [CONTACT_27431]  
0 Mild  
1 Moderate  
2 Severe  
3 
Burning      
Itching      
Irritation      
Definitions:  
• Absent: I have no discomfort (i.e., burning, itching, irritation) 
• Mild: I have some discomfort (i.e., burning, itching, irritation), but it does not bother 
me much  
• M oderate: I have discomfort (i.e., burning, itching, irritation), which is annoying, but 
not enough to affect what I am doing 
• Severe: I have discomfort (i.e., burning, itching, irritation), which is annoying enough 
to affect what I am doing 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 58 APPENDIX  3. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
SAEs, as defined in Section16 Safety Assessments and Monitoring will be reported in accordance 
with ICH E2A Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited 
Reporting. 
Site Responsibilities  
All SAEs that occur during the course of  the study must be reported to SCYNEXIS within [ADDRESS_26461] be provided. An assessment by [CONTACT_27432], if possible.  Investigator will report 
all SAEs to:  
SCYNEXIS Inc.  
[ADDRESS_26462] Plaza, 13th Floor 
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE] 
[EMAIL_435]  
and 
[EMAIL_436]  Telephone: +1. [PHONE_407] Fax: +1 .[PHONE_408] 
The investigator will report SAE and any follow up information to the Research Ethics Board (REB) per REB procedures and requirements. 
The investigator will provide SAE follow -up information as soon as information is available to 
SCYNEXIS.  
SCYNEXIS Responsibilities  
If the SAE is considered a Suspected, Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (S[LOCATION_003]R) 
SCYNEXIS or designee will create a CIOMS or a Medwatch  3500A Report for submission to the 
relevant regulatory authority within 15- days after SCYNEXIS has learned of the SAE. If the 
S[LOCATION_003]R is a fatal or life -threatening event, the reports will be sent within 7 days after SCYNEXIS 
has learned of the event.  
Follow- up reports will be provided to regulatory agencies as soon as information is available 
according to the same reporting periods. 
 
  
 
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 59 APPENDIX 4. PROTOCOL REVISION HISTORY  
Revisions to Protocol dated 12 October 2021  (Protocol Version 2.0) 
Current Version and Date: Protocol Amendment 2 (Protocol Version 3.0) dated 1 7 January 2022 
 
Amended to delete the strikethrough text and include the bolded  text 
 
Protocol Section  Change and Rationale  
 
  
 
 Synopsis: Study Endpoints  
 Synopsis: Statistical 
Analysis  
 
Section 9.1: Primary 
Endpoint  
 Section 9.2: Secondary 
Endpoints  
 Section 18.6.1. : 
Efficacy Assessments  
 - Definition of “Clinical Cure” changed from a total composite score on the VSS 
Scale  of “≤ 2” to “0”.  In response to FDA comments  
- Addition of “Clinical Improvement” as another Clinical Outcome and 
Secondary Endpoint .  Follow -on to above change  
 Clinical Outcomes:  
Clinical Cure: partial or  Complete resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite 
score of  ≤ 2 0 on the VSS Scale and with no additional antifungal therapy required based 
on investigator’s judgment.  
Clinical Improvement:  partial resolution of signs and symptoms with total 
composite score of 1 or 2 on the VSS Scale and with no additional antifungal therapy required based on investigator’s judgement.  
 Efficacy as measured by:  
[CONTACT_27433]  
− Total composite score of 2 on the VSS Scale at the TOC and Follow -up (FU) visits.  
− Total composite score of 1 on the VSS Scale at the TOC and FU visits.  
 
 
     Synopsis: Study Visits  
 Section 6: Schematic of Study Design  
 Section 10.1.1: Study 
Visits  
 Section 14: Study Procedures  
 Section 15: Study Schedule  
 Changes to Study Visits:   In response to FDA comments  
- TOC visit was changed from 14 days after EOT  to 14 days after Baseline  
- FU Visit 14 (±3) days after EOT was added  
- FU visit 30 (±3) days after Baseline was added  
 
STUDY VISITS:  
The study will consist of a Screening visit on Day - 2 (±1), Baseline visit on Day 1 (if 
applicable, the Screening and Baseline visits can both be done on Day 1), Phone contacts 
on Days 3, 5 and 7 (±1), a TOC visit 14 (±3) days after EOT Baseline  and FU visits at: 
14 days (±3) days after End Of Treatment (EOT), 30 (±4) after Baseline,  30 (±4) 
days after EOT and 60 (±4) days after EOT.  
 
TOC visit (14 days [±3] after EOT Baseline ): At this visit….   
FU visit (14 days [±3] after EOT): At this visit, treatment compliance will be 
reviewed and any AEs and/or concomitant medications evaluated. The 
investigators and the subjects will again rate the signs and symptoms of infection on the VSS Scale and the subjects will complete a QOL questionnaire. Vulvovaginal 
samples for fungal culture, species identification, and antifungal susceptibility 
testing will be obtained and sent to a designated central laboratory. Additional 
vaginal samples will be obtained for a KOH test and vaginal pH measurement by 
[CONTACT_27375].  
FU visits : 30 (±4) days after  Baseline , 30 (±4) days after EOT and 60 (±4) days after 
EOT:  At the FU visits ….  
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 60  
Synopsis  
Section 10.1. Overall Description of the 
Study 
Section 1 0.2 Blinding, 
Randomization and 
Stratification  
Section 14.13 
Randomization  
 Study design changed from non -randomized  without  stratification, to randomized 
with stratification .  In response to FDA comments  
 
STUDY BLINDING, RANDOMIZATION, AND STRATIFICATION:  This is an open- label study. There will be no blinding, randomization, or stratification.   Subjects 
will be randomized to treatment, stratified by [CONTACT_27434].  
 
Approximately 100 150 eligible subjects will be enrolled. Subjects will be 
randomized to  receive oral ibrexafungerp 300 mg administered twice a day (BID) for 
either one, three, or seven consecutive days, stratified by [CONTACT_27435].  
 
 
Synopsis  
 Section 18.1: Sample size Determination  Sample size increased from [ADDRESS_26463] of response 
to FDA comments  
Sample Size Determination: 
The primary efficacy endpoint of the study is the percentage of subjects with clinical cure ( partial or  complete resolution of signs and symptoms with total composite score 
≤2 of 0 on the VSS Scale with no additional antifungal therapy required based on 
investigator’s judgment) at the TOC visit. As this is a single arm, a statement 
regardingCI) will be produced. It is estimated that 100 eligible subjects will be 
enrolled.    
This is an exploratory study, and no formal sample size calculation was performed.  Approximately 150 subjects will be enrolled in allocation 50:50:[ADDRESS_26464] of 1, 3 or 7 days of treatment.  Subjects will be randomized to treatment, 
stratified by [CONTACT_27436]. A sample size of 150 subjects is estimated to be adequate to perform an initial assessment of efficacy.   
 
 
Synopsis  
 Section 10.3: Study Duration  
 Section 12.1: Study 
Treatment Groups  
 
Section 12.4. : 
Ibrexafungerp Description  
 
Section 12.5.: Drug 
accountability  
 Section 14: Study Procedures   
 - Treatment Groups changed from 3 groups to 2 groups (Treatment Cycle 1) .  To 
simplify  
- A dded potential for additional Treatment Cycle 2 treatment .  To provide 
additional treatment option to patients with inadequate response  
- S tudy duration increased to potentially 130 days .   As a result of the addition of 
Treatment Cycle 2  
- I P will be provided in blister packs. Changed from bottles .  Company logistics  
 
Ibrexafungerp Treatment Groups:  
Treatment 
Group  Criteria  *Ibrexafungerp Dose (300mg AM 
and 300mg PM)  
Randomization and Stratification  
Group A  Subjects who do not fit criteria for Groups B 
and C  
Subjects without underlying medical 
conditions AND known to have isolates 
other than C glabrata, C krusei, C auris   1 Day dosing  
N=50  
Group B  Subjects with underlying medical conditions: 
DM, immunocompromised conditions (e.g. 
HIV), debilitation, immunosuppressive 
therapy (e.g. corticosteroids), recurrent VVC 
(≥3 epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]/year) AND/ OR known to have 
C glabrata, C krusei or C auris isolates  3 Day OR 7 Days dosing  
Randomized 1:1  
N=50:[ADDRESS_26465] C glabrata, C krusei 
or C auris isolates  7 Day dosing  
 
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 61 *Days of treatment is per CDC Guidelines (https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment -
guidelines/candidiasis.htm)  
Enrollment will continue until the target number in each cohort is reached.    
Treatment Cycle 2: A second treatment cycle will be allowed for subjects who did 
not achieve sufficient clinical improvement (e.g. VSS remains ≥3) on the 
randomized treatment (Cycle 1) as evaluated at the TOC visit or at the FU EOT+14 visits. A second trea
tment cycle will also be allowed for subjects with clinical 
cure/improvement/success who experience a recurrence before the last FU visit.  
During Cycle 2, subjects may receive additional treatment with ibrexafungerp for 
a period up to 14 days as recommend ed by [CONTACT_27437].  
Study Duration: Each subject is expected to complete the study in approximately 65 
days and up to approximately 130 days for subjects who require additional 
treatment and enter Treatment Cycle 2.  
Oral tablets will be supplied in blister packs of four 150 mg tablets per blister.  
Each blister constitutes one day’s dosing of 300 mg BID.   
 
 
 Section 16.3: Events of Clinical Interest  Events of Clinical Interest – Removed .  No longer required since  Ibrexafungerp 
safety profile is well established  
 16.3. Events of Clinical Interest - Not Applicable  
The following are considered events of clinical interest (ECIs) if they occur after 
dosing, and must be reported by [CONTACT_27438]:  
• ALT or AST > 8 x the upper limit of normal (ULN), confirmed by [CONTACT_15013]  
• ALT or AST > [ADDRESS_26466] for more than 2 weeks if new compared to Baseline, 
confirmed by [CONTACT_15013]  
• ALT or AST > [ADDRESS_26467] and total bilirubin >[ADDRESS_26468] if new compared to Baseline, 
confirmed by [CONTACT_15013]  
• ALT or AST > [ADDRESS_26469], with the appearance of fatigue, 
nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or 
eosinophilia (> 5%)  
 
  
SCYNEXIS, Inc.  US IND Number 107,521  
Clinical Protocol Number SCY -078-307b   Version 3.0 
 
 
17 January 2022  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 62  
Revisions to Protocol dated 03 September 2021 (Protocol Version 1.0)  
Current Version and Date: Protocol Amendment 1 (Protocol Version 2.0) dated 12 October 2021.  
Protocol Section  Change and Rationale  
Section 4. Revision History  This section is added to track revisions to the protocol.  Numbering of 
sections changed throughout.  
Section 6 Protocol Synopsis  
Section 7 Schematic of Study Design Section 9 Study Objectives  
Section 10 Study Endpoints  
Section 11.1 Study Visits  
Section 11.2 Study Assessments  
Section 15.12 Quality of Life Questionnaire  
Section 19.6.1 Efficacy Analysis  
  
Add text that the Quality of Life  Questionnaire will be completed at 
Baseline, TOC and Follow -up visits to sections where it was previously 
omitted.  
 
Section 12.2 Inclusion Criteria  Add text to clarify the pregnancy prevention requirements as part of 
Inclusion Criteria  
“Subject is not pregnant or lactating and plans not to become pregnant. Women of childbearing potential < [ADDRESS_26470] agree 
to and comply with using one barrier method (male condom, female condom, and diaphragm) plus one other highly effect ive method of birth 
control, or sexual abstinence, from the time of consent through 10 days 
after the completion of study therapy.”  
 