 
 
Surface Stimulation for Female Sexual Dysfunction  
NCT0269241 [ADDRESS_486125] 
sexual function and quality of life surveys will be completed at key time  points to evaluate the effects 
of the experimental stimulation as compared to before study initiation  and to look for any long-term 
residual effec t. Participants will also be given a demographics questionnaire once during the study, so 
that we can evaluate possible stratification among participants and stimulation responders.  
 
Description of methods and analysis  
Patients will be randomly assigned to  one of two study groups: receiving DGNS  or PTNS.  In this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], as has been standard for prior pi[INVESTIGATOR_387790]  [1-5], we will not have 
a control stimulation paradigm that does not activate the nerves of interest. While this control 
stimulation is desired for an ultimate demonstration of this approach, its design will be outside the 
scope of what is feasible with these pi[INVESTIGATOR_387791]. To date there has only been a single controlled 
evaluation of PTNS which also included a control  stimulation paradigm  [6]. We plan to emulate that 
approach after demonstrating feasibility here. See Figure [ADDRESS_486126] stimulation sessio n, the pudenda -anal threshold 
(PA T) for driving reflex closure of the anal sphincter will be determined  by [CONTACT_108355] a [ADDRESS_486127] amplitude is within 30 – 60 mA  [7-9]. After 
placement of electrodes and drapi[INVESTIGATOR_387792], stimulation wil l be applied for [ADDRESS_486128] above the medial 
malleolus (cath ode) and the ipsilateral calcaneus (anode). At the first stimulation session, the test 
electrode stimulation level will be determined with [ADDRESS_486129] below that at which the motor or discomfort responses occurred [2]. 
After placement of electrodes and drapi[INVESTIGATOR_387792], the appropriate stimulation will be applied for 
[ADDRESS_486130] groups 
(DGNS/PTNS). Sexual Function and Quality of Life surveys will be taken at study initiation 
and at 6 -week intervals afterwards. The final 6 -week period of no stimulation will look for  
long-term carry over.  
DGNS: DGNS Active DGNS Active No Stim
PTNS: PTNS Active PTNS Active No Stim
-SurveyGroup 6 weeks 6 weeks 6 weeks N
10
10
neuromodulation studies  [1], [6], [10 -12]. The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) is a standardized 
survey with 19 questions on sexual health that provides a maximum score of 36  [13] (See Appendi x 1 
for survey) . The short form 36 -question (SF -36) quality of life survey was designed for general use in 
clinical practice  [14] and will be used here to assess overall impact  (See Appendix 2 for survey) . The 
Measure of Symptoms - American Urological Asso ciation Symptom Index is a standardized 8 -
question survey assessing urologic concerns. The Patients’ Global Impression of Change (PGIC) 
Scale is a 1 -question survey designed to assess patients’ feelings of improvement after intervention. 
Subjects will take  the four surveys before study initiation (baseline), after each of concurrent 6-week 
stimulation sessions in the clinic  (6weeks; 12weeks) , and six weeks after study completion (long -
term).  
Due to the relatively small sample sizes planned for this study, we will use non -parametric 
statistical testing. We will use a two -sided Wilcoxon ra nk sum test to make comparisons of the survey 
scores among the different subject groups  [1], [6], [8], [15 ], with a significance level of 0.05. FSFI and 
SF-36 scores will be compared for each of the potential comparisons among the baseline, 6 -week 
and 12 -week study time points and at long -term time point , for DGNS and PTNS groups separately.  
We plan for a total study size of 30 subjects. 15 
subjects will be assigned to each stimulation group – 
DGNS and PTNS. As this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_387793], we do not have an effect size 
from which to calculate a target sample size. This study 
size of 15 subjects for each stimulatio n approach was 
selected for two reasons. Our primary factor was that prior 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_387794] 9 -10 subjects  
[3-4], [8 -9]. Our secondary factor was that given the one -
year ti me frame of our planned study, larger sample sizes 
may not be feasible. If one or both stimulation approaches 
are successful, larger sample sizes  will be performed  in 
subsequent studies.  
 
Potential difficulties  
We anticipate several potential difficulties with these 
planned studies. Patient compliance may be an issue, as 
the need to visit the clinic for [ADDRESS_486131] the study budget (or draw 
from [CONTACT_387806]’ startup funds) to allocate funds  to pay for 
daily parking (~$7) and to give a lump 
sum upon completion of the study ($ 50) to 
each subject. As other PTNS studies use 
weekly study durations, sometimes with 
much larger sample sizes, we expect that 
a similar willingness will occur here.  
It is possible that patients find the 
planned  stimulation amplitudes (e.g. PA T 
or 2 x PA T) to be uncomfortable. As it is 
not our goal to explore optimal stimulation 
parameters here, we will keep current 
levels as low as necessary to maintain 
subject comfort.  
It is possible that transient genital 
arousal or pain may occur in the clinic 
directly as a result of the applied electrical  
Figure 3. Electrode setup for PTNS. For experimental 
PTNS, the TENS unit will be connected to electrodes, 
on either side of the ankle . Figure modified from  [6]. 
 
Figure 2. DGNS electrode locations. 
For experimental DGNS, the TENS 
unit will be connected to electrodes 
placed on either side of the clitoris.  

stimulation. To protect subject privacy and modesty, we will ensure that subjects are located in 
private rooms and left alone for the duration of applied stimulation. Subje cts will be given a method to 
report uncomfortable side effects if they should occur. At the conclusion of each session, we will 
survey subjects as to any transient pain or arousal to compare effects over time.  
It is possible that patients attending [CONTACT_387807] rger’s clinic do not have intercourse frequently enough 
to be eligible for the study (  1 time per month). If we observe that occurrence through the first month 
of recruitment (3 clinics) then we will relax the criteria to be a desire to have intercourse several times 
per month. Conversely, it is possible that subjects who have intercourse [ADDRESS_486132] a doctor placing leads on their genitals every week. They will also be reminded that 
their continued participation is voluntary. If psychological trauma is raised, patients will be referred to 
our sexual he alth therapi[INVESTIGATOR_387795].  Casey O'Gara is a registered nurse and sexual health 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_387796].  
 
Collection, analysis and interpretation of results  
Each study subject will be assigned an identification nu mber. Only this number will be used to 
identify subjects in any individual tabulation. It is expected that only group data will be published. If 
individual subject data is to be published, no identifying information will be included. The study files 
will b e maintained in a secure location. Access to computerized data will be restricted to IRB -
approved study personnel. Password authorization will be enforced.  
The study coordinator or other research team staff will provide both the FSFI and the SF -[ADDRESS_486133] the identification number as the only ident ifying pi[INVESTIGATOR_387797]. This same 
sequence will be performed at the other data collection points – after 6 weeks of testing (in the clinic 
before the 7th stimulation session) and after the 12th session. For the [ADDRESS_486134] to complete the survey and mail back in if they will not be visiting the clinic during that time.  
As described in the appendices, each survey has a scori ng method that yields a total quality of life 
score and a total sexual satisfaction score. These scores will be compared across the different time 
points as discussed above. The study team will meet with a statistical consultant (UM Center for 
Statistical Consulting and Research) to confirm correct approaches and conclusions. The study team 
will also compare the results found to other reported studies in the literature that used similar 
methods and analysis approaches for consistency.  As described in the ap pendices, each survey has 
sub-sections that we may compare individually, if the data suggests any sub -section trends.  
Data collection will be limited to the investigators and the research staff. All study personnel who 
have access to the data will be educated regarding the need to protect confidentiality and the 
procedure to be followed to ensure such protection. All staff will also be required to sign a standard 
medical record confidentiality agreement.  
 
Description of any new methods and why an impro vement  
Currently there are no neuromodulation therapi[INVESTIGATOR_387798]. Our 
approach of translating an approach validated for other pelvic organs represents a new direction in 
this field. Furthermore, these periodic clinic stimulation sessions , if efficacious,  may lead to novel non -
regular sessions that reduce the load on patients or potentially to small minimalist implants that 
provide more user control. Either of these approaches would represent a novel approach in the field . 
Recruitm ent & Retention Plan  
Population characteristics   
The proposal involves a 30-subject prospective study of surface electrode stimulation (dorsal 
genital nerve or posterior tibial nerve) weekly sessions for improving sexual arousal. As described 
below, adult women over the age of [ADDRESS_486135]. Berger’s pelvic pain clinic as described below. The 
characteristics of the patients include dyspareunia (pain with intercourse), and/or pelvic or bladder 
pain. The bulk of [CONTACT_387808]’s pain in this clinic (~5 new patients each session, plus similar numbers 
of return visits) have pain with interco urse and pelvic pain as major components of their complaints. 
There is a sexual health therapi[INVESTIGATOR_387799], so we will 
have a psychosocial evaluation for many of them.  
Patients will also be recruited from the O B/GYN clinic, other sex therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]’ clinics, and UHS.  
 
Sampling plan   
We will seek patients who meet the study inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Due to the relative short 
timeframe of this study length, we will not perform any random sampling of potentially eligible patients 
and will approach each candidate on a first come first serve system.  There are no ethnic distributions 
of targeted/planned e nrollment.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 Adult women   18 years of age  
 Sexually active   1 time  per month  ( 2 times per month preferred)  
 Having sexual dysfunction as identified by a  score of 19 or less on the FSFI -6 [16]. 
For each question: Over the past four weeks…  
How would you rate your level 
(degree) of sexual desire?  Very 
high (5)  High 
(4) Mod-
erate 
(3) Low (2)  Very 
low or 
none at 
all (1)  
How would you rate 
your level of sexual 
arousal (“turn on”) 
during sexual activity or 
intercourse?  No 
sexual 
activity  
(0) Very 
high (5)  High 
(4) Mod-
erate 
(3) Low (2)  Very 
low or 
none at 
all (1)  
How often did you 
become lubricated 
(“wet”) during sexual 
activity or intercourse?  No 
sexual 
activity 
(0) Almost 
always 
or 
always 
(5) Most 
times 
(4) Some -
times 
(3) A few 
times 
(2) Almost 
never or 
never 
(1) 
When you had sexual 
stimulation or 
intercourse, how often 
did you reach orgasm?  No 
sexual 
activity 
(0) Almost 
always 
or 
always 
(5) Most 
times 
(4) Some -
times 
(3) A few 
times 
(2) Almost 
never or 
never 
(1) 
How satisfied have you been with 
your overall sexual life?  Very 
satisfie
d (5) Mod-
eratel
y 
satis-
fied 
(4) About 
equally 
satisfie
d and 
dissatis
-fied (3)  Mod-
erately 
dissatis
-fied (2)  Very 
dissatis -
fied (1)  
How often did you 
experience discomfort 
or pain during vaginal 
penetration?  Did not 
attempt 
inter-
course 
(0) Almost 
never 
or 
never 
(5) A few 
times 
(4) Some -
times 
(3) Most 
times 
(2) Almost 
always 
or 
always 
(1) 
 Neurologically stable  
 Ambulatory  
 Capable of giving informed consent  
 English speaking  
 Capable and willing to follow study procedures  
 
Exclusion criteria  
 Pregnant or planning  to get pregnant during the study period  
 Clinically diagnosed neurological bladder dysfunction  
 Prior experience with PTNS or DGNS  
 Use of TENS on pelvis, back or legs  
 Implanted pacemaker, defibrillator, spi[INVESTIGATOR_55441], or sacral root stimulator  
 Vaginal infection  
 Coagulation disorders  
 Taking any investigational drug  
 
Recruitment and retention  
Potential subjects will be recruited from an investigator’s clinic  or related clinics . Only 
inclusion/exclusion criteria that are provided by [CONTACT_387803] -in procedures or 
prior visits will be used to make a decision to approach a potential study subject. If a patient 
expresses interest in the study, then eligibility based on the full inclusion/exclusion criteria list will be 
verified.  
The study coordinator/nurse will follow up with the patient to schedule the stimulation sessions  
and will administer the baseline survey s (American Urological Association Symptom Index - AUA,  
Female Sexual Function Index – FSFI, Short Form Health Survey – SF-36) via mail or email . 
Informed consent will be obtained in person at the first stimulation session, prior to any intervention. 
After each session, the coordinator will remind subjects of subsequent meetings.  
Patient personal information will be protected per HIPAA guidelines.  
 
Plan for recruitment, informed consent process  
Eligible subjects will be identified through the treating physicians, and will be recruited in clinic by 
a study coord inator or team member. [CONTACT_387808] has a pain clinic on the 1st, 3rd, and 5th Tuesday 
afternoon of each month at the Von Voigtlander clinic that is called the Female Pelvic and Urinary 
Pain clinic. [CONTACT_387808] runs this clinic with [CONTACT_387809] from Uro logy. In addition, [CONTACT_387808] and 
his partners have general urogynecology clinics at which subjects could be recruited.  
Prior to the initiation of the study, an IRB approval for the study of human subjects will be 
obtained. The consent form will include al l of the elements required by [CONTACT_387804], local, and 
institutional regulations. Comprehensive written consent will be obtained from subjects prior to 
participation. A study coordinator or investigator will approach subjects to obtain informed consen t. 
Open, witnessed and non -coercive discussion will be undertaken prior to signing of the consent 
document.  
References  
1. V. Vandoninck, M. R. van Balken, E. Finazzi Agro, F. Petta, F. Micali, J. P. F. A. Heesakkers, 
F. M. J. Debruyne, L. A. L. M. Kiemeney, a nd B. L. H. Bemelmans, “Percutaneous tibial nerve 
stimulation in the treatment of overactive bladder: urodynamic data,” Neurourol. Urodyn. , vol. 
22, no. 3, pp. 227 –232, 2003.  
2. G. Amarenco, S. S. Ismael, A. Even -Schneider, P. Raibaut, S. Demaille -Wlodyka, B.  Parratte, 
and J. Kerdraon, “Urodynamic effect of acute transcutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation 
in overactive bladder,” J. Urol. , vol. 169, no. 6, pp. 2210 –5, Jun. 2003.  
3. D. B. Vodusek, J. K. Light, and J. M. Libby, “Detrusor inhibition induced by  [CONTACT_387805],” Neurourol. Urodyn. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 381 –389, 1986.  
4. J. Previnaire, J. Soler, M. Perrigot, G. Boileau, P. Schumacker, J. Vanvelcenaher, and J. 
Vanhee, “Short -term effect of pudendal nerve electrical stimulation on detrusor hyperreflexia in 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_387800]: importance of current strength,” Paraple gia, vol. 34, pp. 95 –99, 
1996.  
5. H. B. Goldman, C. L. Amundsen, J. Mangel, J. H. Grill, M. Bennett, K. J. Gustafson, and W. M. 
Grill, “Dorsal genital nerve stimulation for the treatment of overactive bladder symptoms,” 
Neurourol. Urodyn. , vol. 27, no. 6, pp.  499–503, 2008.  
6. K. M. Peters, D. J. Carrico, R. A. Perez -Marrero, A. U. Khan, L. S. Wooldridge, G. L. Davis, 
and S. A. Macdiarmid, “Randomized trial of percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation versus sham 
efficacy in the treatment of overactive bladder syndro me: results from the SUmiT trial.,” J. 
Urol. , vol. 183, no. 4, pp. 1438 –43, May 2010.  
7. E. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_387801], A. Borau, and N. Rijkhoff, “Subject -controlled stimulation of dorsal genital nerve to 
treat neurogenic detrusor overactivity at home,” Neurourol. Urodyn. , vol.  32, pp. 1004 –1009, 
2013.  
8. J. Worsøe, L. Fynne, S. Laurberg, K. Krogh, and N. J. M. Rijkhoff, “Acute effect of electrical 
stimulation of the dorsal genital nerve on rectal capacity in patients with spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828],” 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_35406] , vol. 50, no. November 201 1, pp. 462 –466, 2012.  
9. J. Worsøe, L. Fynne, S. Laurberg, K. Krogh, and N. J. M. Rijkhoff, “Electrical stimulation of the 
dorsal clitoral nerve reduces incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_387802]: A 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],” Color. Dis. , vol. 14, pp.  349–355, 2012.  
10. D. Signorello, C. C. Seitz, L. Berner, E. Trenti, T. Martini, A. Galantini, L. Lusuardi, M. Lodde, 
and A. Pycha, “Impact of sacral neuromodulation on female sexual function and his correlation 
with clinical outcome and quality of life index es: a monocentric experience.,” J. Sex. Med. , vol. 
8, no. 4, pp. 1147 –55, Apr. 2011.  
11. G. Lombardi, N. Mondaini, A. Macchiarella, A. Cilotti, and G. Del Popolo, “Clinical female 
sexual outcome after sacral neuromodulation implant for lower urinary tract symp tom (LUTS).,” 
J. Sex. Med. , vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1411 –7, Jun. 2008.  
12. M. S. Ingber and H. B. Goldman, “Neuromodulation and Sexual Function in Women,” Curr. 
Bladder Dysfunct. Rep. , vol. 5, no. February, pp. 27 –31, 2010.  
13. R. Rosen, C. Brown, J. Heiman, S. Leiblum , C. Meston, R. Shabsigh, D. Ferguson, and R. 
D’Agostino, “The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI): a multidimensional self -report 
instrument for the assessment of female sexual function.,” J. Sex Marital Ther. , vol. 26, no. 
March 2015, pp. 191 –208, 2011.  
14. J. E. Ware and C. D. Sherbourne, “The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection.,” Med. Care , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 473 –483, 1992.  
15. S. Gokyildiz, N. Kizilkaya Beji, O. Yalcin, and A. Istek, “Effects of percutaneo us tibial nerve 
stimulation therapy on chronic pelvic pain,” Gynecol. Obstet. Invest. , vol. 73, pp. 99 –105, 2012.  
16. A.M. Isidori, et al.  “Development and validation of a 6 -item version of the female sexual 
function index (FSFI) as a diagnostic tool for femal e sexual dysfunction.” J. Sex. Med.  7, 1139 –
1146 (2010).  