 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan   
 
Unique Protocol ID:  IRB00060752  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Feasibility of Exercise and Cognitive Retraining to Improve  
Memory, Attention and Concentration in Heart Failure.  
 
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_626276], PhD 
 
08/03/2015  
  
 
Title: Feasibility of Exercise and Cognitive Retraining to Improve Cognitive Impairment in Heart Failure . 
Abstract .  Cognitive impairment (CI) is a prevalent  problem in persons with HF heart failure  (HF) and is 
associated with adverse clinical outcomes, higher mortality and poorer quality of life. Studies designed to 
attenuate or alleviate CI in persons with HF are limited , and evidenced based guidelines for screening and 
provision of care are practi cally nonexistent. Improvement in cognition has been reported following some 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_626277], 
suggesting that CI may be amenable to intervention in this population . Exercis e is documented to increase 
cerebral perfusion and oxygenation by [CONTACT_626297] , and, in turn, cognitive 
functioning.  Brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a key mechanism underlying the effect of exercise, 
but most stud ies of BDNF have not included individuals with CI or chronic illness populations, and its 
relationship to cognitive outcomes in HF is unknown. Cognitive retraining techniques, originally developed to 
treat traumatic brain injury, have also shown efficacy i n broader neurologically -affected conditions and may 
provide added benefit to that of exercise.  A nimal studies suggest exercise and plasticity -based cognitive 
training could act synergistically through different neural mechanisms to have a more pronounced and positive 
impact on cognitive outcomes than either approach alone ; but this has not been previously tested a s an 
intervention to improve CI . The proposed feasibility  study is designed to test the acceptability and limited 
efficacy of  a combined exercise (Ex) and cognitive training (C T) program  to improve CI  in stable NYHA class II 
and III HF patients compared to  either exercise alone or a no -intervention, attention -control group.  Findings will 
be used to support the development of a future, large scale study to test the efficacy of this intervention to 
improve cognitive functioning, quality of life, and physiolog ical markers of improved brain function in HF.  
 
Specific Aims.   Persons with heart failure (HF) have a four -fold greater likelihood of developi[INVESTIGATOR_626278]  (CI) than their age matched healthy counterparts, placing them at high risk for adverse c linical 
outcomes, poorer quality of life (QOL) and higher mortality.1-6 CI is a subtle but measurable deficit in one or 
multiple cognitive domains ; it is a deficit  greater than cognitive losses  associated  with normal aging.[ADDRESS_834554] 
been documented , indicating a critical need for furth er research  in this area .5-6 
    The etiology of CI in HF is not fully understood, but several underlying mechanisms are consistently 
reported : reduced cerebral perfusion and oxygenation, brain structural changes (i.e., hippocampal damage, 
atrophy, loss of  gray matter), and micro emboli .5,7,11,14,[ADDRESS_834555] therapi[INVESTIGATOR_626279], oxygenation , 
fluid overload, and systemic and cerebral  perfusion ; these findings are inconsistent and anecdotal .5,8,13-14,25-[ADDRESS_834556] emerged;17,52 -55 recent advances in neuroim aging 
support  that participation in regular exercise leads to specific changes in brain structure and function. 56-57 
Exercise is also thought to enhance brain plasticity . BDNF  appears to play a crucial role in this process : 52-53,58-
[ADDRESS_834557]  evidence to date for 
using cognitive training (CT) to promote better cognitive functioning and provide a  rationale for why a combined 
exercise and CT approach may be superior to monotherapy.50,[ADDRESS_834558] the acceptability, implementation  and limited efficacy  of  a combined 
exercise (Ex) and cognitive training (CT)  intervention in stable NYHA class II and III heart failure patients with 
cognitive impairment.  A total of 60 participants will be randomized to one of three study arms: Ex/CT (N=20), 
Ex-alone (N=20), and attention control (N=20).   The study aims are:  
 
Aim 1: To evaluate the feasibil ity of a 3 -arm intervention (ExCT, Ex, AC) in heart failure patients with CI. 
   Aim 1a . To test the acceptability and implementation of each study arm.  
Aim 2: To ascertain limited efficacy of the 3 -arm intervention on changes in cognitive abilities  
Aim 3: To ascertain limited efficacy of the 3 -arm intervention to improve cerebral oxygenation, physiological 
status, physical function and QOL.  
A. Significance .  Approximately 670,000 individuals are diagnosed with HF annually  in the [LOCATION_002] ,67-70 
and over one million hospi[INVESTIGATOR_626280], especially among adults 65 years of age and 
older.71-73 As many as  60% of persons  with HF experience cognitive impairment , (CI); this number increases 
proportionately as HF  worsen s.5-6,10,74 -76 Increased age and depression are independent predictors of more 
severe CI in persons with HF.5-6,77-82 CI often interferes with the ability to engage in effective self -management 
of HF; this  leads to more frequent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_626281] .6,74-75,83 To reduce these burdens, we propose a nurse -led exercise and cognitive 
training intervention that targets underlying mechanisms that contribut e to CI in persons with HF.   
Exercise.  Over 130 smaller studies, as well as the recent large, multi -site Heart Failure: A Controlled Trial 
Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training (HF-Action ) trial,[ADDRESS_834559] of exercise on cognitive functioning 
and cerebral perfusion in HF revealed significant improvements in 2 cognitive domains (attention and psycho -
motor speed)  but no change s in cerebral perfusion ; the low dose exercise regimen and lack of a true 
comparison group also interpretation.15 Evidence from other populations, including those with disabilities and 
chron ic illness, (e.g. renal failure, Parkinson’s Disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, Alzheimer’s Disease) 
suggests that exercise improves cognition via several biological processes: its impact on increased cerebral 
blood flow and oxygen delivery; its influenc e on BDN F (thought to  enhance neurogenesis ); and its effect on 
certain neurotransmitters.52-53,[ADDRESS_834560] of 
exercise is much greater on selected cognitive processes, especially executive function ; this suggests  that 
executive function may be  amenable to intervention .52-[ADDRESS_834561] considerable limitations; few randomized trials are available.64-66,[ADDRESS_834562] learning , delayed recall memory, psychom otor speed, and performance of IADLs ; 
participant adherence and satisfaction were high .[ADDRESS_834563] ; and similar 
changes  on cogn ition are noted with plasticity -based CT; the effects of these two approaches are different yet 
synergistic, and suggest the effect on cognitive functioning may be more pronounced when the two are used in 
combination versus alone ; this  provides a strong rationale for the propo sed intervention . 52-66 This feasibility 
study will evaluate the acceptability of the intervention(s), adherence to the intervention protocol s, the scope of 
recruitment efforts to identify acceptable cases, potential dose responses gleaned from differing a mounts of 
intervention compliance, and estimates of effect sizes to optimize a subsequent, large -scale efficacy trial.   
 PRELIMINARY STUDIES . We have tested strategies to maximiz e physical function, reduc e psychological 
distress, and maintain optimal physi ological status  in persons with HF .94-[ADDRESS_834564] expertise in the design of 
home -based exercise studies using self -monitoring strategies to increase adherence to exercise (e.g. exercise 
testing and  prescription, HR monitors, pedometers, logs).  In our prior work, we collected, stored and analyzed 
a variety of biomarkers (hsCRP, tumor necrosis alpha and BNP) and findings showed a trend for significance, 
similar to previous research. This preliminary study will expand our previous work by [CONTACT_626298] (BDNF, cerebral oxygenation) not previously examined in HF.  
Conceptual framework .  The conceptual model for this study , portrayed in Figure 1 , is based on the 
substantial literature of the underlying physiological mechanisms that contribute to CI in HF .75,93 Heart failure 
by [CONTACT_343087] a state of hypo -perfusion  that contributes to poor cerebral perfusion, poor oxygenation and, in 
turn, CI .93 The proposed intervention (exercise and CT) is designed to positively alter these underlying 
physiological processes that contribute to CI in persons with HF .  This model aligns well with that of the Center.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework  
B. Innovation : Available  evidence  to guide  care for persons with HF who are cognitively impaired  is 
nonexistent . Our preliminary work using exercise and cognitive behavioral strategies 94-100 has shown improve d 
physical, psy chological and QOL outcomes in persons with HF. The proposed study will expand this work and 
provide important insight on a n innovative  intervention strategy (exercise and CT) and novel biomarkers (BDNF, 
cerebral oxygenation) in a diverse population of HF with CI.  No study has documented whether exercise 
improves cerebral oxygenation in persons with HF; the one study measuring cerebral oxygenation in persons 
with HF found a significantly reduced cerebral oxygenation level using near infrared spectography ( NIRS ), 
despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a normal peripheral oxygen saturation.[ADDRESS_834565] 
(N=25), Ex-alone (N=2 5), or 
attention control (N= 25) 
intervention conditions for [ADDRESS_834566] at baseline, 
intervention completion (3 -
months) and [ADDRESS_834567] include cognitive functioning, peak oxygen consumption (peak V0 2), BDNF, 
and Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ; H F specific quality of life instrument) . After a 4 -5 month 
start-up for hiring and training, enrollment will begin. Recruitment/enrollment will take place over 18 months; the 
final follow -up appointment in month 30. This will leave 6 months for data analysis and dissemination.                                                                                                                                                                  
 
Setting  and Sample :  Patients will be recruited from the Centers of Heart Failure Therapy of Emory University 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (EUH) and clinics, Emory University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_79452] (EUHM), and Grady Health Systems (GHS). A 
full description of t he ethical recruitment of participants is described in the Human Subjects section of this 
proposal. T he Atlanta Cardiomyopathy Consortium (TACC) and HF Network database s at EUH will enable us to 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_626282]. In 2009, over 4,000 inpatient admissions to 
EUH or EUHM were due to HF, and excluding those for transplant, 5377 local patients with HF were seen in the 
Antecedents  
Age 
Depression  
Co-morbidities   
SES 
Medications  
 Heart failure  
    Severity (NYHA, LVEF)  
    Duration  
 
    Hypoperfusion, oxygenation  Intervention  
Ex/CT  
Ex Only  
AC control  Outcomes  
Cognitive function  
Cerebral oxygenation  
Physiological status  
Physical function  
QOL  
 
Center for HF Therapy; 42% are women and 31% African American.  The patients at GHS reflect a mo re 
ethnically homogeneous group: 51% are women, 94% African -American, and most are low socioeconomic 
status.  Because the regional population is estimated to be 35% to 40% African American, this range will be 
used as the recruitment goal.  See Human Subject s for sample characteristics and rationale .   
STUDY CONDITIONS. All 3 groups will receive Usual Care  (UC) + group assignment (attention control 
stretching, EX/CT or EX only) after undergoing baseline measures conducted at the Clinical Integration Network 
(CIN) clinic of the Atlanta Clinical Translational Science Institute (ACTSI). UC includes pharmacologic therapy 
according to ACC guidelines  102-103 and patient education and self -management (i.e., low sodium diet, 
medication in structions, symptom and weight monitoring ).  All study patients will be given standard printed 
educational materials (Heart Failure Society of America [HFSA] Modules 1 and 3) regarding HF.103  Group 
assignments, 
schedules and 
procedures are 
outlined in Table 1.   
Education, flexibility 
and stretching  will 
provide control for 
the possible 
confounding variable of receiving  attention from a healthcare professional.  Instruction on stretching and 
flexibility movements is also expected  to reduce attrition and patient dissatisfaction and to better ensure 
concealment of group allocation. The se time-equivalent, flexibility/stretching movements have been previously 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_626283] “placebo exercise condition .” In pi[INVESTIGATOR_626284], but w ere 
not strong enough to influence outcomes. The AC education placebo component will be delivered as soon as 
feasible after baseline (T1) . The first [ADDRESS_834568] T2 measures ; this will 
occur at weeks [ADDRESS_834569] 
been shown to influence exercise adherence and exercise self -efficacy and may confound study outcomes.104-105   
 
Groups 2 and 3 Exercise Prescription . Groups 2 & 3 will receive the same exercise prescription using a 
progressive moderate intensity aerobic protocol. To ensure that participants achieve adequate training stimulus, 
dose -specific exercise will be 
based on maximum heart rate 
(HR) obtained during symptom 
limited, modified Balke treadmill 
tests106-[ADDRESS_834570] in th e 
CIN. Target heart rate (THR)  using the 60% to 70% of maximum HR achieved on the cardiopulmonary exercise 
test (CPET) will be used to monitor the intensity and training response for aerobic exercise.  Each participant will 
be provided with an individualiz ed THR zone based on CPET results.107 Under the supervision of a research 
nurse, participants will begin the walking sessions at 60% of THR and increase to 70% by [CONTACT_5875] 5 as shown in 
Table 2.  In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_626285], a progressive moderate intensity level exercise program yielded positive 
outcomes with no adverse events, was appealing to participants and adherence rates were 80% or higher.  
Group 2: EX/CT  (UC + aerobic exercise + cognitive training)  The first [ADDRESS_834571] program, Brain Fitness  (Posit, San Francisco, CA  detailed below) .  The research nurse will supervise 
one walking session during the first 2 we eks to ensure the safety of the participant  and that he/she understands 
how to use the Polar HR monitor and pedometer and how to complete the walking logs. During the first [ADDRESS_834572]  that participants 
will require additional time (at least 30 minutes each time) in the first 2 weeks to learn  how to use and access 
the Brain Fitness program.  The weekly schedules are provided in table 1.  

Brain Fitness Computer Training: is based on the principles of positive brain plasticity and designed for use by 
[CONTACT_67022] . The training program (“Brain Fitness”) is focused on speech reception to strengthen an individual’s 
memory for speech. It has 6 modules names Hi -Lo, Tell Us Apart, Match It, Listen and Do, Sound Replay and 
Story Teller. Research to date has found: 1) par ticipants with limited or no computer experience were capable of 
learning to perform the training exercises, 2) the training was safe and well tolerated by [CONTACT_4317], and 3) 
healthy participants who trained on Brain Fitness showed on average a 1/[ADDRESS_834573] deviation of improvement 
in memory , concentration and cogniti on, and 4) it has been tolerated well in patients in HF in a prior study .16 
Group 3: Ex only group  (UC + aerobic exercise).  The same exercise protocol will be used as above without the 
comput er training.   
Exercise adherence . To be 100% adherent for exercise sessions, participants in both groups [ADDRESS_834574] 
document walking weekly at the prescribed intensity/duration on the exercise log.  Participants will record on  a 
calendar provided: maximum HR  achieved;  rate of perceived exertion (RPE) during walk ; and number of steps 
walked during the walking sessions.  Polar HR monitors and pedometers (described in instruments) will be used 
to objective ly document exercise intens ity (i.e., maximum HR and RPE achieved) , duration, walking adherence 
and progression. The Polar HR monitor  and pedometer data will be downloaded during each home visit during 
the first [ADDRESS_834575] adherence .  The total number of minutes for the full Brain Fitness  program is approximately 2400 minutes 
over 8 weeks.  Patients will be considered adherent if they meet or exceed 80% of the required minutes for the 
intervention.  Total number of minutes can be accessed from th e program to monitor adherence.   
 
VARIABLES, DEFINITIONS AND MEASURES. Variables, operational definitions and methods are described 
below and in Table 3.  Questionnaires will be administered at the time of the visit by a trained research assistant 
blinded  to group allocation.  Core services and Center activities will greatly enhance the success of this study. 
Through training and monitoring in administration and scoring of the core test battery, regular consultation with 
the BMC to monitor implementation i ssues, systematic data management and analysis, and support in using 
these findings to prepare an RO1 application, this study will achieve its aims and further the goals of this Center.  
Sociodemographic and clinical variables  will be obtained from  self-report and medical records . The Charlson 
Comorbidity Index (CMI)108 will quantif y the cumulative risk of death.  Mini Mental Status Examination102 will 
be used to screen for study inclusion for mild to moderate cognitive impairment  (score of 20 for 8 -9 yrs of 
schooling; 22 for 10 -12 yrs of schooling; 23 for >12 yrs) 102 and has excellent specificity at this cut -off point.5  
The Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II)[ADDRESS_834576] modifier  and explored as a potential outcome variable.  Cognitive Function . We will use  the 
Center’s core neuropsychological testing battery of well -established and validated instruments that are  
described in the Biobehavior and Methods Core (BMC) portion of this a pplication . The BMC  will provide training 
on test administration  and scoring and will aid in data management and interpretation.   Cerebral  tissue 
oxygenation  will be assessed in the CIN by  a cerebral oximeter  sensor  (Casmed, Blanton, CT) using near 
infrared  spectography (NIRS) . NIRS is widely used and validated in a variety of fields to assess cerebral tissue 
oxygenation .86,101 
 
  Table 3.   Variables, measures, instruments and time of evaluation  
Variable  Measure/Instrument  # of items /time  Time of 
Evaluation  
Antecedents  
Participant  Demographics 
& Clinical information : Co-
morbidity, Cardiac Fx, Meds  
Mild-moderate cognitive 
impairment  
Depressi ve symptoms  Age, gender, education, marital status,  
Charlson comorbidity Index (CMI)  LVEF, NYHA 
class, length of time with HF & etiology, 
Medications  
MMSE  
 
BDI-II Chart review & 
questionnaire  
Questionnaire  
 
30 item /10 minutes  
 
21 item /15 minutes  Baseline 
(BL) 
 
 
BL only  
 
BL only  
Cognitive function     Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of        
   Neuropsychological Status (RBANS)  
Controlled Oral Word Association Test  
Color Trails 1 & 2   
WAIS -III Digit Span /Letter Number Sequenc e  
Stroop Test  
Ruff 2 & [ADDRESS_834577]  
 30 minutes  
 
5 minutes  
10 minutes  
10 minutes  
5 minutes  
5 minutes  
10 minutes  BL, 3 and 
6 months  
Physical function  Peak oxygen consumption (Modified Balke)  20 minutes  BL & 3 
mos 
Physiological status  BDNF  NA BL & 3 
mos 
Cerebral oxygenation  Near infrared spectography ,  30 minutes  BL & 3 
mos 
Quality  of Life  KCCQ  23 items / [ADDRESS_834578] adherence  Polar HR (intensity, duration and frequency), 
walk calendars, pedometer, nurse telephonic 
log 
Brain Fitness program, nurse telephonic log  [ADDRESS_834579]  106-107 to determine peak 
oxygen consumption (peak Vo2), maximum HR for exercise prescription and to screen for cardiac  
contraindications to exercise according to the (AHA/ACC) guidelines.[ADDRESS_834580], the assays will be stored at -
80 degrees until processed by [CONTACT_626299]’s ELISA guidelines.   
QOL.  The Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnnaire (KCCQ)110 is a reliable and well validated 23 -item, 
disease specific questionnaire that quantifies physical function, symptoms, social f unction, and HRQOL in 
HF.111-112 
Adherence.  Step counts will be indirectly assessed using the  Omron HJ -7201ITC pedometer to count daily  
steps.113-117  The 15 point (6 -20) Borg Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE) Scale118 will be used to measure 
participants’ subjective perception of effort. T arget heart range (THR)  107 using the HR reserve method will be 
used to monitor the intensity and training response to walking.  Polar Beat  Watch ( FT4)119 will be used to 
monitor intensity and duration of walking .120-121 Actual adherence to intervention protocols and study attrition 
rates will be included in an intent -to-treat analysis (CT & Ex).  
Acceptability . During post -baseline visits and phone contacts, participant’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_592422], e.g. 
perceived us efulness, ease of use, barriers to adherence, perceived improvements in health, cognition, mood, 
quality of life will be collected. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_626286].  
Procedures   Recruitment, Screening and Enrollment  of participants will occur through physician and other 
health care provider referrals and patient self -referral.  These methods have proved successful in our prior work.   
The recruitment nurse will arrange a time for laboratory, and treadmill test s at the CIN. Baseline (T1) measures 
will be taken in the CIN by a trained data collector blinded to group assignment.   All participants will be given the 
same measures, in the same sequence at each time point.  Questionnaire completion should take [ADDRESS_834581]; emergency 
equipment, doctors and nurses are ava ilable.  After BL, p articipants will be randomized to study groups by 
[CONTACT_626300]. At 3 and 6 months we will follow the same procedures 
used at Evaluation 1.  After Evaluation 3, participants will be discharged from the study, and all participants 
provided with study results. A $50 honorarium will be provided at each measurement time point, to total 
$150/patient for completing the study.  Intervention process measures (evaluatio n, attendance) will be tracked 
and evaluated to maintain internal validity.  Protocol adherence will be calculated for both groups.  
Data Management and Analysis .  The Biobehavioral and Methods Core (BMC) will coordinate the collection, 
integration, and analysis of biological and psychosocial data for this study. Data will be analyzed using both 
descriptive and inferential test statistics. We will build multivariable statistical models to examine the relationship 
between  an Ex/CT intervention to exercise alone and attention control (AC) on cognitive functioning  (P-30 
Neuropsychological Battery) , cerebral oxygenation  (NIRS, 3 months only ), physiological status  (BDNF) , physical 
function (peak V02) and QOL (KCCQ) in HF  at BL, 3 and 6 months controlling for but not limited to age, gender, 
SES, depressi on, social support, NYHA class, medications and comorbidities . 
     Since the intent of this study is explorat ory; hypothesis testing will not be the primary focus of the s tatistical 
analysis. Rather, we will analyze data with the specific intent of establishing population parameters (e.g., effects 
sizes) for the variables being investigated. Confidence intervals will be calculated for all effect sizes associated 
with the pr edictor variables, other significant outcome effects, and for changes over time. These effect size 
estimates will be used to design the future R01 study.  Given the relatively small sample size of n=60 at 80% 
power, and α=.05, we will have the ability to de tect a moderate (d=.5) to large effect size (d=.8). We will use 
general linear and/or mixed models as the main modeling framework for analyses of the outcome measures in 
the projects. We will build full factorial models to test for interactions and review estimated marginal means. We 
will use Using G*Power 3, to estimate actual power for the GLM analysis both a priori and post hoc.  
 
E.    HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH  
Inclusion criteria: (a) 75 outpatient  men and women  between the ages of 40 and 75; (b) English speaking; (c) 
live independently within a 60 mile radius of Atlanta; (d) meet education corrected cut -offs on the MMSE 
indicating cognitive impairment (score of 20 for 8 -9 yrs of schooling; 22 for 10 -12 yrs of sc hooling; 23 for >12 
yrs) 102; (e) have a computer with internet connection;(f) d ocumented medical diagnosis of NYHA class II or III 
systolic. ( g) Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≥ 10% that is documented within the last year by 
[CONTACT_6751], car diac catheterization ventriculography or radionuclide ventriculography; ( h) Receiving 
medication therapy for HF according to American College of Cardiology (ACC) American Heart 
recommendation guidelines103for at least 8 weeks prior to study enrollment.  Exclusion criteria : a) NYHA class I 
or IV; (b) change in HF therapy within 8 weeks; (c) worsening HF symptoms within last 5 days; ( d) unstable 
angina; ( e) renal insufficiency (serum creatinine > 3.o mg/dL); ( f) fixed rate pacemaker; (g) uncontrolled 
hypertension; (h) not involved in any structured exercise program or exercising 3 or more times per week for a 
minimum of 30 minutes and; ( i) not hospi[INVESTIGATOR_626287] 30-days; ( j) not diagnosed with any neurological 
disorder that  may interfere with cognitive function ; (k) Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI -II) score greater than 
25; and ( l) any disorder interfering with exercise participation.   
It is anticipated that approximately 50% of patients approached regarding the s tudy will be eligible and will 
agree to participate. Based on the PI’s earlier studies, a retention rate of 85% is expected. The actual 
acceptance and retention rates will be included as part of the information gleaned from this feasibility study to 
inform  the design and methods for a subsequent, large scale efficacy trial.  
Rationale for sample  characteristics . The age range was selected to avoid confounding effects of age and 
sarcopenia with outcomes such as aerobic capacity, BDNF and  HRQOL; participants  below the age of [ADDRESS_834582] HF for other reasons than the majority of the general HF population. Older age (>75) is 
associated with reduced exercise capacity and age related cognitive decline which may confound  physical 
function cognitive  outcome  measurement . In addition, persons over the age of [ADDRESS_834583] participants to be 
receiving optimal medication therapy, treatment decisions  regarding individual care will be based on patient's 
clinician; evidence -based care will be encouraged.  If any participants are not being treated with what is 
considered optimal medication therapy according to ACC guidelines, the reason (eg, intolerance)  will be 
recorded and tracked by [CONTACT_626301] a covariate.  We recognize that both resting and 
exercise heart rates are influenced by [CONTACT_57134] -blockers, which is considered optimal therapy for HF patients. For 
both exercise testing and training we will use the heart rate reserve method which takes into account the 
patient’s resting heart rate, thereby [CONTACT_626302] -blockade. We will attempt to schedule patients 
for their exercise testing and training a minimum of 3 hours af ter taking beta blockers.28-29  For patients who are 
unable to schedule exercise during this time frame or exercise up to the prescribed heart rate, Borg’s 6 -20 rate 
of perceived exertion scale (RPE) between [ADDRESS_834584] preliminary study, approximately 90% 
had an ICD; th ere were no firings during exercise or any increase in adverse events.  Although unlikely to 
occur, participants  with a fixed rate pacemaker would not be able to participate because heart rate may be set 
at a lower rate than required to achieve prescribed target heart rate.  Participants who have recurrent angina, 
more severe symptoms have uncontrolled hypertension will be excluded due to the higher risk for adverse 
cardiovascular events during exercise testing and the walking intervention.  Because moderat e to severe 
depressive symptoms are a major predictor of exercise attrition  and more severe CI , participants  will be 
excluded who have a BDI -II score of [ADDRESS_834585] 8 weeks, currently 
exercising at regular intervals (more than twice  per week  for 30 minutes ) will not be eligible for the study.  
     Based on the practice patterns at enrolling institutions, we expect the recruitment pool to be approximately 
35% Afric an American, with very small numbers of Hispanic/Latino, Asian/Pacific Islander or American Indian 
racial/ethnicity groups. We anticipate our recruitment to represent this population (Tables 3 and 4).  Subjects 
will not be excluded due to race or ethnicity .  Based on our prior experience with this population, we anticipate 
most participants will have computer access .  
 Sources of research material will include responses to questionnaires obtained at baseline,  3 and 6 
months ; data will also be obtained at these time points in the f orm of laboratory serum samples, treadmill and 
neuropsychological  tests.  Polar HR monitors and pedometers will be downloaded weekly during the first 2 
weeks  to obtain data on adherence to prescribed exercise intensity and duratio n and at 3 and 6 months .  
Calendar walking logs will be used to obtain data on exercise adherence for the  exercise sessions.  The 
participant’s medical history, medication history and sociodemographic information will be obtained from the 
medical record.  It is expected to take approximately [ADDRESS_834586] from 3 -12 weeks  
and bi-monthly telephone contacts from 15 -24 weeks.  Participants randomized to the exercise/CT and 
exercise only group w ill have one supervised walking sessions to establish safety , explain use of pedometers , 
HR monitors  and calendars . Participants randomize d to the exercise/CT group will have [ADDRESS_834587] 2 weeks to explain and review how to use the Brain Fitness program (in combination with one 
supervised walk session).  The AC group will also have [ADDRESS_834588] 2 weeks to demo nstrate 
stretching and flexibility exercises and to review HF educational materials.  At the end of 12 weeks, the 
participants will undergo T2 measures at the ACTSI at weeks 13 and 14  (3 months evaluation) .  At the end of 
the [ADDRESS_834589] group is 
anticipated to be approximately 80 hours including testing  time. 
  After a 4 -5 month start -up for hiring and training, enrollment will begin. Recruitment/enrollment will take 
place over 18 months; the final follow -up appointment in month 30. This will leave [ADDRESS_834590]  within 48 hours .  Recruitment flyers, posters, 
and print/media advertisements will be placed in strategic places for patient access, with a phone number to 
call if they are interested in participating. The Atlanta Cardiomyopathy Consortium (TACC) database and NIH 
funded HF network at EUH will also be used to identify potential participants. Those who are identified as 
eligible using the TACC or HF network database will be mailed letters with research tea m contact [CONTACT_626303]. Recruitment 
fairs may also be held in areas where HF patients are likely to be present, such as HF patient education 
conferences and  congregate housing facilities.  Community -sponsored events such as health fairs and cardiac 
support groups are also potential venues to elicit study participants. Once eligibility has been established  via 
phone or in person , the study will be fully explai ned and written informed consent will be obtained from each 
participant by a member of the research team. Prior to beginning the study, recruitment materials will be 
reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_4707] (IRB) of Emory University, which s erves as the 
oversight committee for each of the enrolling institutions.  IRB approval for the overall study will be obtained 
prior to participant recruitment or enrollment.   
 Potential Risks  are expected to be minimal since participants will be referred from an academic health 
sciences center under the care of a cardiologist and receiving optimal medication and device therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  In 
addition, excluding patients who are over the age of [ADDRESS_834591] a LVEF < [ADDRESS_834592] a brief history and physical examination before aerobic 
capacity  tests (modified Balke) are conducted at the  ACTSI.  If a participant becomes fatigued and does not 
wish to continue, they will be rescheduled for an additional appointment to complete the remainder of the tests . 
     The risks associated with administering the modified Balke treadmill tests are ant icipated to be minimal but 
may include: atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, sudden death, angina, ICD firings, adverse blood pressure 
changes (high or low), dyspnea, fatigue, falling orthopedic/musculoskeletal complaints, dizziness, and 
electrocardiographi c evidence of ischemia. We will administer the modified Balke, a symptom limited treadmill 
test, in the ACTSI by [CONTACT_626304]/AHA guidelines.[ADDRESS_834593] will be performed with commercially available equipment 
(VMAX Spectra 29 CPET Instrument, Yorba Linda, CA) according to the recommendations of the ACC/AHA 
guidelines.123 Before the exercise testing, each participant will undergo spi[INVESTIGATOR_626288] 2 min 
to obtain resting oxygen consumption (VO 2); and will walk for [ADDRESS_834594] ([CONTACT_275143]) wi ll be notified.  Data from the 
HF-ACTION study provides evidence of the safety of symptom limited exercise tests.  Of the 4,411 symptom -
limited exercise tests during 5 years, no deaths and only 2 nonfatal, major CV events occurred (0.45 
events/1,000 tests) . There were also no test -related ICD discharges requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  It was concluded 
that i n NYHA class II -IV patients with severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction, that symptom -limited exercise 
testing is safe based on no deaths and a rate o f nonfatal major CV events that is <0.5 per 1,000 tests123  
     The potential risks  associated with the walking intervention are anticipated to be minimal.  Any potential 
cardiovascular (CV) events that poses risk to the participant is anticipated to be detected during the modified 
Balke maximal treadmill test.  In addition, the duration  of walking will be limited to [ADDRESS_834595] 2 
weeks and at an intensity level (60%) that is not likely to result in any adverse CV events; if necessary 
participants can rest as needed until the 30 minute duration of walking is completed. Par ticipants will wear a 
Polar HR monitor so that HR and intensity level can be closely monitored. Participants will undergo 2 
supervised walking sessions prior to walking at home unsupervised; the risk associated with the unsupervised 
session therefore, is a nticipated to be minimal.  Participants in the study will be provided with detailed 
instructions on self -monitoring HR, BP and symptoms associated before, during and after walking.  Each 
participant will be provided with a target heart rate range to stay w ithin during the study period.  Participants 
will be instructed to wear the Polar HR monitor during each exercise session .  The participants will take their  
HR, and BP (if machine available)  and weight prior to and after each walking  session and record  it in their 
walking  calendar. Participants will be instructed to call the research nurse  if their BP or HR is outside their 
normal range.  If participants are symptomatic, experience increased shortness of breath or have a greater 
than [ADDRESS_834596] an ICD, to keep their HR 15 beats below the firing range at all 
times (usually set at higher than 170 beats per minute, so it is unlikely to interfere with training stimulus).  In 
addition, they will be in structed to monitor their RPE using the Borg [ADDRESS_834597] 
ischemic heart disease and prescribed nitroglycerin (NTG) will be instructed to carry their NTG  with them 
during each  walking sessions. If chest pain occurs during exercise, the participants will be told to stop 
exercising and to take a NTG  as di rected by [CONTACT_280322]. The participant will also be instructed if the chest 
pain continues to sit down and to call a relative or friend and to take another NTG  if the chest pain does not 
subside.  If the chest pain continues and is not relieved by [CONTACT_626305] [ADDRESS_834598] stopped 
walking for several minutes they will be instructed to call a relative or friend; if not dissipated they will be 
instructed to go the nearest emergency room.  If a participant becomes dizzy while walking they will be asked 
to sit down and to get up slowly once the dizziness passes. If an ICD fires, the participant will be instructed to 
call 911 if symptoms are present; to notify their cardiologist if no symptoms for possible evaluation.  In our 
preliminary work, 90% of participants had an I CD and there were no ICD shocks using a very similar protocol.   
If symptoms are present at current intensity level or duration of walking the participant will not be progressed 
until exercising at current level with RPE at [ADDRESS_834599] program  in persons with HF , Brain 
Fitness  (Posit, San Francisco, CA) , there wer e no adverse events, and satisfaction and adherence were 
reported to be high.16 
     The potential risk to participants in the AC control stretching/flexibility  movement group is anticipated to be 
minimal.  Participants will be taught how to use stretching  and flexibility movements by a research nurse who is 
not involved with the intervention groups. In our preliminary work, participants enjoyed this placebo exercise, 
but it was not strong enough to influence outcomes.  Although some participants did experi ence a better QOL 
from contact [CONTACT_626306], and it was of shorter 
duration.   
       Potential risks related to questionnaire completion include the possibility of distress after the instrument 
admi nistration or teaching session.  Based on the preliminary work and patient responses to these types of 
questionnaires and interventions, we anticipate this risk to be minimal.  The intervention should not increase 
distress over usual care.  We also observed no increase in patient depressive symptom scores over time in 
other studies suggesting that the intervention did not introduce greater distress. However, if pa rticipants do 
indicate significant symptoms of depression by [CONTACT_626307] -II, mental health referral information 
will be provided and they will be asked if they would like a research team member to assist them in setting up a 
referral.  If at  any time a participant indicates serious depressive symptoms or an intent to hurt him or herself, a 
family member will be informed (as agreed in the Informed Consent form) and/or their primary care provider (or 
cardiologist) alerted (again as agreed to in  the Informed Consent).  Other risks that occur are increased burden 
of participating in the intervention or attention control follow up calls and clinic visits.  The blood sample will be 
collected by a research nurse or laboratory assistant in the ACTSI a t each time point.  The needles and 
syringes will be disposed in appropriate biohazard containers.  The BDNF  sample will be labeled by [CONTACT_626308], time point and stored in the ACTSI at -[ADDRESS_834600] available  to HF patients.  The total BDI -II will be reviewed as part of 
screening and those with moderate to severe depressive symptoms will be excluded.  If BDI -II scores reveal 
that moderate depression (BDI -II>25) is present, the participant will be informed and asked for permission to 
share this information with their primary physician because of the established increased CV risk as a 
consequence of depression in this patient population. This will be a part of the study explanation prior to 
informed consent.  It is important to note that the BDI -II does not confer a diagnosis of clinical depression but is 
a useful screening tool for those needing further assessment by a clinical psychologist or psychiatrist.  
     All patient records will be kept in a locked file cabinet in the research office and will be accessible only to 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_44200].  All data will be coded by [CONTACT_200523], and no identifying 
information will be recorded on the data collection forms.  The master list that will c onnect the codes to 
identifying information will be secured in the research project office.  All data maintained in the computerized 
database will be accessible only with a login and protected, encrypted password.  After the study is completed, 
all data wi ll be kept according to regulations in a locked file.   
 The potential risks to subjects are anticipated to be minimal, and the anticipated benefits  to patients 
enrolled in the study are potentially high.  The majority of those who participate in combined exercise and 
exercise only  are expected to show an improvement in cognitive  function, physiological status, aerobic 
capacity and Q OL.  Because CI and physical inactivity contributes to physical function decline and poor clinical 
outcomes in p ersons  with HF , improvement of physical function has the potential to significantly reduce the 
burden associated with this disorder and has potentially cost savings benefits. Based on our previous 
experience, we anticipate that the AC stretching/flexibility group may ha ve an improvement in psychological 
functioning and QOL as a result of the contact [CONTACT_626309] , but it will likely be of shorter 
duration than the intervention groups, and have no benefit on any of the other outcome variables.  In additio n, 
potentially AC education only participants may improve in HF self -care behaviors based on the additional 
knowledge and education provided in the education sessions.  The potential knowledge to be gained  from this 
study includes a better understanding of  the underlying mechanisms that contribute to CI and the influence of a 
combined exercise and CT program on  cognition, aerobic capacity and novel biomarkers .  We will provide 
funds to cover transportation and parking costs associated with laboratory and ph ysical function testing.  In 
addition, costs for travel, parking and membership at the ACTSI  will be provided. A  payment  of $50 will be 
used at each measurement time point to total $ 150/patient for completing the study.   
 
Inclusion of Women  
Based on the p ractice patterns of the enrolling institutions, we expect 60% of the HF patients to be male. 
Enrollment targets are set for 40 -50% of the HF patient sample to represent women.  This is congruent with the 
population at the enrolling sites and will result in  data generalizable to the overall population of HF patients. We 
will over sample women at all sites to assure attainment of the gender distribution.  We will monitor the gender 
of enrolled HF patient subjects and alter recruitment strategies to increase t he representation of women if 
needed.  In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_626289] 47% women.   
 
Inclusion of Minorities  
The greater Atlanta area census data reflects that approximately 35% of the population is African American. 
Based on the practice patt erns at the enrolling institutions, we expect the minority recruitment pool of HF 
patients to be approximately 35% to 40% African American, with very small numbers representing 
Hispanic/Latino, Asian/Pacific Islander or American Indian racial/ethnicity gro ups.  Enrollment targets are set 
for at least 30% of the enrolled HF patients sample to represent minorities, primarily African Americans, which 
will be congruent with the populations of the enrolling sites and the greater Atlanta area.  We will monitor 
minority enrollment for HF patient subjects and alter recruitment strategies to increase the representation of 
minorities if needed. In our previous studies 39% -52% were African American HF participants.  We have been 
diligent in selecting the sites for this  study for their access to potential minority participants.   
 
Inclusion of Children   
Children are excluded from this study. This is due to the low prevalence of HF under the age of [ADDRESS_834601] (DSMB).  This board will be composed of [CONTACT_626311], Chairperson, [CONTACT_626312], cardiologist and Director of the Heart Fa ilure Therapy Center, 
Emory University School of Medicine, [CONTACT_626313], Professor at Emory University School of Nursing; this 
board will be supported by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Amita Manatunga , PhD, biostatistician in the School of Public Health.  Each of 
the DSMB members have extensive experience serving on a DSMB and are well qualified to serve in this 
capacity.  
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_626290].  
This study is considered to present minimal risks to part icipants.  Adverse events, that is, unfavorable or 
unintended symptoms temporarily associated with the intervention or evaluation, are expected to be minimal.  
Possible mild adverse events could include shortness of breath, fatigue, chest pain, dizziness, or rapid beating 
heart beat during the symptom limited modified Balke treadmill test and muscle strength testing.  Subjects will 
be informed of these and will be asked to notify the research staff if any of the symptoms occur; they will also 
have telemetry  in place during the tests to detect any heart rhythm changes, blood pressure will be monitored 
as well before and after these tests.  The risks for the adverse events during the home based walking and 
resistance intervention are also anticipated to be min imal.  If symptoms occur during the home -based 
intervention, participants will be counseled on ameliorating strategies and asked to contact [CONTACT_30155]. 
Before the modified Balke, all participants will receive a brief history and physical by a cardiolog y fellow or 
advanced practice nurse, and will be asked if they feel well enough to perform the test.  If they experience any 
untoward symptoms, the treadmill test or muscle strength testing will be stopped and the participant seated 
and evaluation of sympt oms performed by [CONTACT_626310], nursing research team member or study cardiologist.  If 
symptoms persist, the person will be taken to the Emergency Department for further evaluation and treatment.  
All adverse events will be reported to the IRB, ACTSI and DSMB  for review.   
 The research team will meet periodically to review screening, enrollment and randomization data and to 
identify any human subject issues that arise.  All staff will be trained in the protection of human subjects 
according to university and NIH regulations, and will be required to be certified in human subject’s research in 
accordance with the Emory University IRB procedures.  We will conduct random and periodic audits of 
research records to ascertain that informed consents are signed, witnes sed and complete for each subject, 
and that confidentiality procedures are being maintained.   
 The DSMB will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_626291], after [ADDRESS_834602] the power to recommend termination of the trial.  In addition, study recruitment, and retention procedures 
will be examined for timeliness, practicality, safety, and protection of all human subjects.   
 At subsequent regular annual meetings, the DSMB will review adherence to the goals for recruitment and 
retention; adherence to study protocols; cumulative data for evidence of study related adverse events; quality, 
completeness, and timeliness of the data collected; factors that could affect the outcome or compromise 
participant/data confidentiality; and other factors outside the study (e.g., therapeutic developments, agency 
related policies) that could impact the safety of participants or the ethical condu ct of the study.  General 
recommendations the DSMB may include these: continuation of the study without change; modifications to the 
study protocol; suspension or early termination; alternative approaches to consider. Formal minutes and 
reports of the DSMB  will be maintained and made available to NIH as required.  All materials, discussions and 
reports of the DSMB are considered confidential and will be treated as such in the maintenance of records.   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Literature Cited  
1. Alosco, M. L., Spit znagel, M. B., Cohen, R., Sweet, L. H., Colbert, L. H., Josephson, R (2012). 
Cognitive impairment is independently associated with reduced instrumental activities of daily living in 
persons with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs 27(1), 44 -50. 
2. Feola, M., Ross o, G. L., Peano, M., Agostini, M., Aspromonte, N., Carena, G.. (2007). Correlation 
between cognitive impairment and prognostic parameters in patients with congestive heart failure. Arch 
Med Res, 38 (2), 234 -239. 
3. Cohen, M. B., & Mather, P. J. (2007). A revie w of the association between congestive heart failure and 
cognitive impairment. Am J Geriatr Cardiol, 16 (3), 171 -174. 
4. Zuccala, G., Onder, G., Pedone, C., Cocchi, A., Carosella, L., Cattel, C (2001). Cognitive dysfunction 
as a major determinant of disability in patients with heart failure: results from a multicentre survey. On 
behalf of the GIFA (SIGG -ONLUS) Investigators.  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 70 (1), 109 -112. 
5. Vogels, R. L., Scheltens, P., Schroeder -Tanka, J. M., & Weinstein, H. C. (2007). Cognitive impairment 
in heart failure: a systematic review of the literature. Eur J Heart Fail, 9 (5), 440 -449. 
6. Pressler, S. J.,  Subramanian, U., Kareken, D., Perkins, S. M., Gradus -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_175826], I., Sauve, M. J. (2010). 
Cognitive deficits in chronic heart failure. Nurs Res, 59 (2), [ADDRESS_834603] Onge, J., Turpie, I. D., & McKelvie, R. S. (2007).  
Heart failure and cognitive impairment: challenges and opportunities. Clin Interv Aging, 2 (2), 209 -218. 
8. Miller, L. A., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_188559], M. B., Alosco, M. L., Cohen, R. A., Raz, N., Sweet, L. H., Colbert L, Josephson 
R, Hughes J, Rosneck J, Gunstad J. (2012)  Cognitive profiles in heart failure: A cluster analytic 
approach. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol . 34(5):[ADDRESS_834604], M. M., Lazar, R. M., Klapholz, M., et al. (2008). 
Factors contributing to global cognitive impairment in heart failure: results from a population -based 
cohort. J Card Fail, 14 (4), 290 -295. 
10. Trojano, L., Antonelli Incalzi, R., Acanfora, D., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_626292], C., Mecocci, P., & Rengo, F. (2003). Cognitive 
impairment: a key feature of congestive heart failure in the elderly. J Neurol, 250 (12), 1456 -1463.  
11. Choi, B. R., Kim, J. S., Yang, Y. J., Park, K. M., Lee, C. W ., Kim, Y. H., et al. (2006). Factors associated 
with decreased cerebral blood flow in congestive heart failure secondary to idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol, 97 (9), 1365 -1369.  
12. Garcia, S., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_188559], M. B., Cohen, R., Raz, N., Sweet, L., Co lbert, L., et al. Depression is associated 
with cognitive dysfunction in older adults with heart failure. Cardiovasc Psychiatry Neurol, 2011 , 
368324.  
13. Kindermann, I., Fischer, D., Karbach, J., Link, A., Walenta, K., Barth, C., et al. Cognitive function in 
patients with decompensated heart failure: the Cognitive Impairment in Heart Failure (CogImpair -HF) 
study. Eur J Heart Fail, 14 (4), 404 -413. 
14. Pressler, S. J. (2008). Cognitive functioning and chronic heart failure: a review of the literature (2002 -
July 2007) . J Cardiovasc Nurs, 23 (3), 239 -249. 
15. Tanne, D., Freimark, D., Poreh, A., Merzeliak, O., Bruck, B., Schwammenthal, Y., et al. (2005). 
Cognitive functions in severe congestive heart failure before and after an exercise training program. Int 
J Cardiol, 103 (2), 145 -149. 
16. Pressler, S. J., Therrien, B., Riley, P. L., Chou, C. C., Ronis, D. L., Koelling, T. M., et al. (2011). Nurse -
Enhanced Memory Intervention in Heart Failure: the MEMOIR study. J Card Fail, 17 (10), 832 -843. 
17. Alves, T. C., Rays, J., Fraguas, R., Jr. , Wajngarten, M., Meneghetti, J. C., Prando, S., et al. (2005). 
Localized cerebral blood flow reductions in patients with heart failure: a study using 99mTc -HMPAO 
SPECT. J Neuroimaging, 15 (2), 150 -156. 
18. Almeida, O. P., Garrido, G. J., Beer, C., Lautenschlag er, N. T., Arnolda, L., & Flicker, L. (2012). 
Cognitive and brain changes associated with ischaemic heart disease and heart failure. Eur Heart J . 
Epub ahead of print  
19. Gottesman, R. F., Grega, M. A., Bailey, M. M., Zeger, S. L., Baumgartner, W. A., McKhann, G. M., et al. 
(2010). Association between hypotension, low ejection fraction and cognitive performance in cardiac 
patients. Behav Neurol, 22 (1-2), 63 -71. 
20. Hoth, K. F., Poppas, A., Moser, D. J., Paul, R. H., & Cohen, R. A. (2008). Cardiac dysfunction and 
cognition in older adults with heart failure. Cogn Behav Neurol, 21 (2), 65 -72. 
21. Zuccala, G., Onder, G., Pedone, C., Carosella, L., Pahor, M., Bernabei, R., et al. (2001). Hypotension 
and cognitive impairment: Selective association in patients with heart failur e. Neurology, 57 (11), 1986 -
1992.  
22. Georgiadis, D., Sievert, M., Cencetti, S., Uhlmann, F., Krivokuca, M., Zierz, S., et al. (2000). 
Cerebrovascular reactivity is impaired in patients with cardiac failure. Eur Heart J, 21 (5), 407 -413. 
23. Bornstein, R. A., Starling, R. C., Myerowitz, P. D., & Haas, G. J. (1995). Neuropsychological function in 
patients with end -stage heart failure before and after cardiac transplantation. Acta Neurol Scand, 91 (4), 
260-265. 
24. Gruhn, N., Larsen, F. S., Boesgaard , S., Knudsen, G. M., Mortensen, S. A., Thomsen, G., et al. (2001). 
Cerebral blood flow in patients with chronic heart failure before and after heart transplantation. Stroke, 
32(11), 2530 -2533.  
25. Dixit, N. K., Vazquez, L. D., Cross, N. J., Kuhl, E. A., Serbe r, E. R., Kovacs, A., et al. (2010). Cardiac 
resynchronization therapy: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_626293]. Clin Cardiol, 33 (2), 84 -88. 
26. Zuccala, G., Marzetti, E., Cesari, M., Lo Monaco, M. R., Antonica, L., Cocc hi, A., et al. (2005). 
Correlates of cognitive impairment among patients with heart failure: results of a multicenter survey. Am 
J Med, 118 (5), 496 -502. 
27. Koide, H., Kobayashi, S., Kitani, M., Tsunematsu, T., &  Nakazawa, Y. (1994). Improvement of cerebral 
blood flow and cognitive function following pacemaker implantation in patients with bradycardia. 
Gerontology, 40 (5), 279 -285. 
28. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, Keteyian SJ, Cooper LS, Ellis SJ, Leifer ES, Kraus WE, Kitzman 
DW, Blumenthal JA, Rendall DS, Miller NH, Fleg JL, Schulman KA, McKelvie RS, Zannad F, Piña IL; 
HF-ACTION Investigators. Efficacy and safety of exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: 
HF-ACTION randomized controlled trial.  JAMA . 2009;301(14):1439 -50. 
29. Sullivan MJ, Higginbotham MB, and Cobb FR. Exercise training in patients with severe l eft ventricular 
dysfunction: Hemodynamic and metabolic effects. Circulation. 1988; 78:506 -515. 
30. Itoh K, Osada N, Inoue K, Samejima H, Seki A, Omiya K, Miyake F. Relationship between exercise 
intolerance and levels of neurohormonal factors and proinflammator y cytokines in patients with stable 
chronic heart failure. Int Heart J. 2005; 46(6):1049 -1059.  
31. Adamopoulos S, Coats AJS, Brunotte F, Arnolda L, Meyer T, Thompson CH, Dunn JF, Stratton J, Kemp 
GJ, Radda GK, and Rajagopalan, B. Physical training improves ske letal muscle metabolism in patients 
with chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993; 21(5):1101 -1106.  
32. Hornig B, Maier V, and Drexler H. Physical training improves endothelial functions in patients with 
chronic heart failure. Circulation. 1996; 93(2):21 0-214. 
33. Hambrecht R, Gielen S, Linke A, Fiehn E, Yu J, Walther C, Schoene N, and Schuler G. Effects of 
exercise training on left ventricular function and peripheral resistance in patients with chronic heart 
failure: A randomized trial. JAMA. 2000; 283(23):3 095-3101.  
34. Niebauer J, Clark AL, Webb -Peploe KM, Coats AJ. Exercise training in chronic heart failure: effects o n 
pro-inflammatory markers.  Eur J Heart Fail . 2005;7(2):189 -93. 
35. Gielen S, Adams V, Möbius -Winkler S, Linke A, Erbs S, Yu J, Kempf W, Schubert A,     
    Schuler  G, Hambrecht R. Anti-inflammatory effects of exercise training in the skeletal                      
    muscle of patients with chr onic heart failure.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42(5):861 -8. 
36. Smart, N. A., &  Steele, M. Systematic review of the effect of aerobic and resistance exercise training on 
systemic brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N -terminal BNP expression in heart failure patients. Int J 
Cardiol, 140 (3), 260 -265. 
37. Smart, N. A., & Steele, M. (2011). The effect of physical training on systemic proinflammatory cytokine 
expression in heart failure patients: a systematic review. Congest Heart Fail, 17 (3), 110 -114. 
38. Coats AJ. (2009). Heart failure: Support for exercise training in CHF.  Nat Rev Cardiol .,6(7):447 -8. 
39. Angevaren, M., Aufdemkampe, G., Verhaar, H. J., Aleman, A., & Vanhees, L. (2008). Physical activity 
and enhanced fitness to improve cognitive function in older people without known cognitive impairment. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2), CD005381.  
40. Ivey, F. M., Ryan, A. S., Hafer -Macko, C. E., & Macko, R. F. Improved cerebral vasomotor reactivity 
after exercise t raining in hemiparetic stroke survivors. Stroke, 42 (7), [ADDRESS_834605], N. R., & Petersen, R. C. (2011). Physical exercise as a 
preventive or disease -modifying treatment of dementia and brain aging. Mayo Clin Proc, 86 (9), 876 -
884. 
42. Cacciatore, F., Abete, P., Ferrara, N., Calabrese, C., Napoli, C., Maggi, S., et al. (1998). Congestive 
heart failure and cognitive impairment in an older population. Osservatorio Geriatrico Campano Study 
Group. J Am Geriatr Soc, 46 (11), 1343 -1348.  
43. Chang, Y. K., Labban, J. D., Gapin, J. I., & Etnier, J. L. (2012). The effects of acute exercise on 
cognitive performance: A meta -analysis. Brain Res . 1453:87 -101. 
44. Baldasseroni, S., Mossello, E., Romboli, B., Orso, F., Colombi, C., Fumagalli, S., et  al. (2012). 
Relationship between cognitive function and [ADDRESS_834606] in older outpatients with chronic 
heart failure. Aging Clin Exp Res, 22 (4), 308 -313. 
45. Barber, S. E., Clegg, A. P., &  Young, J. B. Is there a role for physical activity in preventing cognitive 
decline in people with mild cognitive impairment? Age Ageing, 41 (1), 5 -8. 
46. Carles, S., Jr., Curnier, D., Pathak, A., Roncalli, J., Bousquet, M., Garcia, J. L., et al. (2007). Effect s of 
short -term exercise and exercise training on cognitive function among patients with cardiac disease. J 
Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev, 27 (6), 395 -399. 
47. Cumming, T. B., Tyedin, K., Churilov, L., Morris, M. E., & Bernhardt, J. The effect of physical activity on  
cognitive function after stroke: a systematic review. Int Psychogeriatr , 1-11. 
48. Emery, C. F., Hsiao, E. T., Hill, S. M., & Frid, D. J. (2003). Short -term effects of exercise and music on 
cognitive performance among participants in a cardiac rehabilitation program. Heart Lung, 32 (6), 368 -
373. 
49. Ferreira, A. F., Real, C. C., Rodrigues, A. C., Alves, A. S., & Britto, L. R. (2011). Short -term, moderate 
exercise is capable of inducing structural, BDNF -independent hippocampal plasticity. Brain Res, 1425 , 
111-122. 
50. Langdon, K. D., & Corbett, D. (2011). Improved Working Memory Following Novel Combinations of 
Physical and Cognitive Activity. Neurorehabil Neural Repair . Epub ahead of print  
51. Vaynman, S. & Gomez -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_21102], F. Revenge of the "sit": how lifestyle impacts neuron al and cognitive 
health though molecular systems that interface energy metabolism with neuronal plasticity . J. Neurosci. 
Res. 84, 699 –715 ( 2006 ). 
52. Hillman, C. H., Erickson, K. I., &  Kramer, A. F. (2008). Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects 
on brain and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci, 9 (1), 58 -65. 
53. Knaepen, K., Goekint, M., Heyman, E. M., &  Meeusen, R. Neuroplasticity - exercise -induced response 
of peripheral brain -derived neurotrophic factor: a systematic review of experimental studies in human 
subjects. Sports Med, 40 (9), 765 -801. 
54. Kramer, A. F., & Erickson, K. I. (2007). Capi[INVESTIGATOR_626294]: influence of physical activity on 
cognition and brain function. Trends Cogn Sci, 11 (8), 342 -348. 
55. Mahncke, H. W., Bronstone, A., & Merzenich, M. M. (2006). Brain plasticity and functional losses in the 
aged: scientific bases for a novel i ntervention. Prog Brain Res, 157 , 81-109. 
56. Colcombe, S. J. et al. (2004). Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
[LOCATION_003] 101,3316 –3321.  
57. Thomas, C., & Baker, C. I. (2012).Teaching an adult brain new tricks: A critical revie w of evidence for 
training -dependent structural plasticity in humans. Neuroimage . Epub ahead of print.  
58. Griffin, E. W., Mullally, S., Foley, C., Warmington, S. A., O'Mara, S. M., & Kelly, A. M. Aerobic exercise 
improves hippocampal function and increases BD NF in the serum of young adult males. Physiol Behav, 
104(5), 934 -941. 
59. Griffin, E. W., Bechara, R. G., Birch, A. M., & Kelly, A. M. (2009). Exercise enhances hippocampal -
dependent learning in the rat: evidence for a BDNF -related mechanism. Hippocampus, 19 (10), 973 -
980. 
60. Marlatt, M. W., Potter, M. C., L ucassen, P. J., & van Praag, H. (2012). Running throughout middle -age 
improves memory function, hippocampal neurogenesis and BDNF levels in female C57Bl/6J mice. Dev 
Neurobiol . 
61. Cotman CW, Berchtold NC. (2002) . Exercise: a behavioral intervention to enhance brain health and 
plasticity. Trends Neurosci ., 25:295 -301. 
62. Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Gage FH. More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched 
environment. Nature . 1997;386:493 -495. 
63. Kronenberg G, Reut er K, Steiner B, et al. (2003). Subpopulations of proliferating cells of the adult 
hippocampus respond Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair differently to physiologic neurogenic 
stimuli. J Comp Neurol ., 467:455 -463. 
64. Hahn, E. A., & Andel, R. (2011). Nonpha rmacological therapi[INVESTIGATOR_626295]. J Aging Health, 23 (8), 1223 -1245.  
65. Teixeira, C. V., Gobbi, L. T., Corazza, D. I., Stella, F., Costa, J. L., & Gobbi, S. Non -pharmacological 
interventions on cognitive  functions in older people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Arch Gerontol 
Geriatr, 54 (1), 175 -180. 
66. Jean, L., Bergeron, M. E., Thivierge, S., & Simard, M. (2010). Cognitive intervention programs for 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment: systemati c review of the literature. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, 
18(4), 281 -296. 
67. Najafi F, Jamrozik K, Dobson AJ. Understanding the 'epi[INVESTIGATOR_626296]': a systematic review of 
trends in determinants of heart failure.  Eur J Heart Fail . 2009;11(5):472 -9 
68. Foot D, Lewis R, Pearson T, and Beller G. Demographics and cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;35:66B -80B. 
69. Thomas S, Rich MW. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], pathophysiology, and prognosis of heart failure in the elderly.  Clin 
Geriatr Med. 2007; 23(1):1 -10 
70. Curtis LH, Whellan DJ, Hammill BG, Hernandez AF, Anstrom KJ, Shea AM, Schulman KA. Incidence 
and prevalence of heart failure in elderly persons, 1994 –2003. Arch Intern Med . 2008;168:418 –424. 
71. Lloyd -Jones D, Adams R, Carne thon M, De Simone G, Ferguson TB, Flegal K, Ford E, Furie K, Go A, 
Greenlund K, Haase N, Hailpern S, Ho M, Howard V, Kissela B, Kittner S, Lackland D, Lisabeth L, 
Marelli A, McDermott M, Meigs J, Mozaffarian D, Nichol G, O'Donnell C, Roger V, Rosamond W, S acco 
R, Sorlie P, Stafford R, Steinberger J, Thom T, Wasserthiel -Smoller S, Wong N, Wylie -Rosett J, Hong 
Y; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease 
and stroke statistics: 2009 update: a report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee 
and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation . 2009;119:e21 –e181  
72. Liao L, Jollis JG, Anstrom KJ, Whellan DJ, Kitzman DW, Aurigemma GP, Mark DB, Schulman KA, 
Gottdiener JS. Costs for heart failure with no rmal vs reduced ejection fraction. Arch Intern Med.  2006; 
166(1):112 -118. 
73. Jugdutt BI. Aging and heart failure: changing demographics and implications for therapy in the elderly.  
Heart Fail Rev . 2010;15(5):401 -5 
74. Bennett, S. J., & Sauve, M. J. (2003). Cognitive deficits in patients with heart failure: a review of the 
literature. J Cardiovasc Nurs, 18 (3), 219 -242. 
75. Cameron, J., Worrall -Carter, L., Page, K., Riegel, B., Lo, S. K., & Stewart, S. (2010). Does cognitive 
impairment predict poor self -care in patients with heart failure? Eur J Heart Fail, 12 (5), 508 -515. 
76. Sauve, M. J., Lewis, W. R., Blankenbiller, M., Rickabaugh, B., & Pressler, S. J. (2009). Cognitive 
impairments in chronic heart failure: a ca se controlled study. J Card Fail, 15 (1), 1 -10. 
77. Bennett, S. J., Sauve, M. J., & Shaw, R. M. (2005). A conceptual model of cognitive deficits in chronic 
heart failure. J Nurs Scholarsh, 37 (3), 222 -228. 
78. Barnes, D. E., Alexopoulos, G. S., Lopez, O. L., William son, J. D., & Yaffe, K. (2006). Depressive 
symptoms, vascular disease, and mild cognitive impairment: findings from the Cardiovascular Health 
Study. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 63 (3), [ADDRESS_834607], et al. 
(2008). Pathways linking late -life depression to persistent cognitive impairment and dementia. 
Dialogues Clin Neurosci, 10 (3), 345 -357. 
80. By[CONTACT_3727], A. L., & Yaffe, K. (2011). Depression and risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_6124]. Nat Rev  Neurol, 7 (6), 
323-331. 
81. Ravaglia, G., Forti, P., Lucicesare, A., Rietti, E., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_253501], N., Mariani, E., et al. (2008). Prevalent 
depressive symptoms as a risk factor for conversion to mild cognitive impairment in an elderly Italian 
cohort. Am J Geriatr Psy chiatry, 16 (10), 834 -843. 
82. Pressler, S. J., Kim, J., Riley, P., Ronis, D. L., & Gradus -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_175826], I. (2010). Memory dysfunction, 
psychomotor slowing, and decreased executive function predict mortality in patients with heart failure 
and low ejection fraction. J Card Fail, 16 (9), 750 -760. 
83. Bennett, S. J., Sauve, M. J., & Shaw, R. M. (2005). A conceptual model of cognitive deficits in chronic 
heart failure. J Nurs Scholarsh, 37 (3), 222 -228. 
84. Stanek, K. M., Gunstad, J., Paul, R. H., Poppas, A., Jefferson, A. L., Sweet, L. H., et al. (2009). 
Longitudinal cognitive performance in older adults with cardiovascular disease: evidence for 
improvement in heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs, 24 (3), 192 -197. 
85. Kakos, L. S., Szabo, A. J., Gunstad, J., Stanek, K. M., Waechter, D., Hughes, J., et al. (2010)  Reduced 
executive functioning is associated with poorer outcome in cardiac rehabilitation. Prev Cardiol, 13 (3), 
100-103. 
86. Rooks, C. R., Thom, N. J., McCully, K.  K., & Dishman, R. K. Effects of incremental exercise on cerebral 
oxygenation measured by [CONTACT_27227] -infrared spectroscopy: a systematic review. Prog Neurobiol, 92 (2), 134 -
150. 
87. Snowden, M., Steinman, L.,  Mochan, K., Grodstein, F., Prohaska, T. R., Thurman, D. J. , (2011).  Effect 
of exercise on cognitive performance in community -dwelling older adults: review of intervention trials 
and recommendations for public health practice and research. J Am Geriatr Soc, 59 (4), 704 -716. 
88. Cotelli, M., Manenti, R., Zanetti, O., &  Miniussi, C. (2012). Non -pharmacological intervention for 
memory decline. Front Hum Neurosci, 6 , 46. 
89. Mahncke, H. W., Bronstone, A., & Merzenich, M. M. (2006). Brain plasticity and functional losses in the 
aged: scientific bases for a novel intervention. Prog Brain Res, 157 , 81-109. 
90. Zelinski, E. M., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_28947], L. M., Yaffe, K., Ruff, R., Kennison, R. F., Mahncke, H. W. (2011).  Improvement 
in memory with plasticity -based adaptive cognitive training: results of the 3 -month follow -up. J Am 
Geriatr Soc, 59 (2), 258 -265. 
91. Belleville, S. (2008). Cognitive training for persons with mild cognitive impairment. Int Psychogeriatr, 
20(1), 57 -66. 
92. Smith, G. E., Housen, P., Yaffe, K., Ruff, R., Kennison, R. F., Mahncke, H. W., et al. (2009). A cognitive 
training program based on  principles of brain plasticity: results from the Improvement in Memory with 
Plasticity -based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT) study. J Am Geriatr Soc, 57 (4), 594 -603. 
93. Braunwald, E. (2008). Biomarkers in heart failure. N Engl J Med, 358 (20), 2148 -2159.  
94. Gary RA , Cress ME, Smith AL, Higgins MK, Dunbar SB. A Combined Aerobic and Resistance Exercise 
Program Improves Physical Performance in Patients with Heart Failure, Journal of Cardiovascular 
Nursing, ahead of pub, Jan 2012 .  
95. Gary RA , Cress ME, Smith AL, Higgins MK, Dunbar SB. Combined Aerobic and Resistance Exercise 
Program Improves Task Performance in patients with heart failure, Archives of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, (CME article), 2011 Sep;92(9):1371 -81.    
96. Gary RA , Dunbar SB, Higgins MK, Musselman DL, Smith AL.  Combined Exercise and 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Improves Outcomes in Patients with Heart Failure, 2009; 
Journal of     Psychosomatic Research, 2010; 69(2):119 -131. 
97. Gary R . and Lee SY. Physical Function and Quality of Life in Olde r Women With Diastolic Heart 
Failure: Effects of a Progressive Walking Program on Sleep Patterns. Progress in Cardiovascular 
Nursing,  2007;22(2):72 -80. 
98. Gary R . Exercise self -efficacy in older women with diastolic heart failure.  Journal of Gerontological   
          Nursing , Continuing Education Article, 2006;37:31 -41.  
    99. Gary R .  Self -care in women with diastolic heart failure.  Heart Lung,  2006; 35(1): 9 -19. 
100. Gary R , Sueta C, Dougherty M, Rosenberg B, Cheek D, Preisser J, Neelon V, McMurray R.  Home -   
           based exercise improves functional performance and quality of life in women with diastolic heart  
           failure. Heart Lung, 2004;33:210 -218. 
     101. Rifai, L., Winters, J., Friedman, E., & Silver, M. A. Initial description of cer ebral oximetry  
            measurement in heart failure patients. Congest Heart Fail, 18 (2), 85 -90. 
       102. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. ""Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading the     
                   cognitive state of patients for the clinician". Journal of Psychiatric Research  1975; 12 (3):189–98. 
     103. Hunt S, Baker D, Chin M, Cinquegrani M, Feldman A, Francis G, Ganiats T, Goldstein S, Gregoratos      
             G,Jessup M, Noble R, Packer M, Silver M, and Stevenson LW. ACC/AHA guidelines for the evaluation  
             and management of chronic heart failure in the adult: executive summary: a report of the American  
             College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on P ractice Guidelines (Committee to  
             Revise the 1995 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol       
             2001;38(7): 2101 -2113.  
      104. Barbour KA , Miller NH . Adherence to exercise training in heart failure: a review.  Heart Fail Rev.   
              2008;13(1):[ADDRESS_834608] Rev . 2010;7:CD007131.  
           106. Balke B & Ware RW. An experimental study of fitnes s of Air Force personnel. U.S. Armed Forces Med.  
                   J. 1959;10 , 675 -688. 
         107. Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Bricker JT, Chaitman BR, Fletcher GF, Froelicher VF, Mark DB,             
                 McCallister BD, Mooss AN, O'Reilly MG,  Winters WL, Gibbons RJ, Antman EM, Alpert                   
                 JS, Faxon DP, Fuster V, Gregoratos G, Hiratzka LF, Jacobs AK, Russell RO, Smith SC;  
                 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Prac tice  
                 Guidelines. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for exercise testing: summary article. A  
                 report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force  
                 on Practice Guidelines (Committ ee to Update the 1997 Exercise Testing Guidelines). J  
                 Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40 (8):1531 -1540.  
         108. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, and MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying  
                 Prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chronic  
                 Dis. 1987; 40(5):373 -383. 
           109. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. BDI-II, Beck Depression Inventory:Manual. San  
                   Antonio, Tex: Psychological Corp; 1996.  
           110. Green CP , Porter CB , Bresnahan DR , Spertus JA . Development and evaluation of the  
                   Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart  
                   failure. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2000;35(5):[ADDRESS_834609] MW , Heidenreich PA , Krumholz HM , Jones P ,  
                   McCullough PA , Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] I , Tooley J , Weintraub WS , Rumsfeld JS ; Cardiovascular                 
                   Outcomes Research Consortium . Monitoring clinical changes in patients with heart  
                   failure: a comparison of methods. Am Heart J.  2005;150(4):707 -15. 
           112. Eurich DT , Johnson JA , Reid KJ , Spertus JA . Assessing responsiveness of generic and  
       specific health related quality of life measures in heart failure. Health Qual Life      
       Outcomes.  2006;24;4:89.  
113. Elley CR. Review: use of pedometers increases physical activity in adults. Evid Based   
        Med, 2008;13 (3), 72.  
114. Bravata DM, Smith -Spangler C, Sundaram V, Gienger AL, Lin N, Lewis R. Using  
         pedometers to increase physical activity an d improve health: a systematic review. JAMA.  
         2007;298 (19), 2296 -2304.  
115. Merom D , Rissel C , Phongsavan P , Smith BJ , Van Kemenade C , Brown WJ , Bauma n AE .                                                             
        Promoting walking with pedometers in the community: the step -by-step trial.  Am J Prev     
        Med.  2007;32(4):290 -7. 
116. Tudor -Locke C, Lutes L. Why do pedometers work?: a  reflection upon the factors related                   
         to successfully increasing physical activity.  Sports Med . 2009;39(12):[ADDRESS_834610]  
         Fail. 2005;11 (5), 366 -371. 
            118. Borg G. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Ex. 1982; 14:377 - 
                    381. 
         119. Polar [LOCATION_003]. Polar Heart Rate Monitors. https://www.polarusa.com . 
         120. Godsen R, Carroll T and Stone S. . How well does the Polar Vantage XL heart rate  
                  monitor estimate actual heart rate? Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 1991;23(4):  
                  Suppl - S14. 
         121. Leger L, and Thivierge M.. Heart rate monitors: Validity, stability and functionality.          
                  Phys Sp orts Med. 1988;16(5): 143 -151. 
  122. Singer  JD., & Willett, J. B.. Applied longitudinal data analysis: Modeling change  
          and event occurrence. 2003;[LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press.  
          123. Keteyian SJ, Isaac D, Thadani U, Roy BA, Bensimh on DR, McKelvie R, Russell SD,  
                    Hellkamp AS, Kraus WE; HF -ACTION Investigators. Safety of sympt om-limited       
                    cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with chronic heart failure due to severe left            
                    ventricular systolic dysfunction.  Am Heart J . 2009;158([ADDRESS_834611]):S72 -7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 