1 
 TARGETING AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS WITH 
ALTERNATING CURRENT STIMULATION  
IRB # 14-3285  
 
Funding Mechanism:  National Institute of Mental Health  
Grant Number : 1R21MH105574-01 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Flavio Frohlich, PhD   
Co-Investigators: [CONTACT_226273], MD, [CONTACT_226274], MD  
Version Number: 4.0 
29 April 2015  
 
 
  
2 
  
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
The study will be carried out in accordance with  Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as required by [CONTACT_14504]  
● [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies 
(45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and 21 CFR Part 312)  
● ICH E6; 62 Federal Register [ZIP_CODE] (May 9, 1997)  
All key personnel (all individuals responsible for the design and conduct of this study) have 
completed Human Participants Protection and HIPAA Training.  
3 
  
SIGNATURE [CONTACT_19841], and provides 
the necessary assurances that this trial will be conducted according to all stipulations of the 
protocol, including all statements regarding confi dentiality, and according to local legal and 
regulatory requirements and applicable US fe deral regulations and ICH guidelines.  
 
Signed:   
Date:   
 
 
   
[ADDRESS_272014] of Abbreviations 7  
Protocol Summary 9  
1 Key Roles 12  
2 Introduction: Background Information and Scientific Rationale 14  
2.1 Background Information 14  
2.2 Rationale 14  
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits 15  
2.3.1 Potential Risks 15  
2.3.2 Known Potential Benefits 16  
3 Objectives 17  
3.1 Study Objectives 17  
3.2 Study Outcome Measures 17  
3.2.1 Primary Outcome Measures 17  
3.2.2 Secondary Outcome Measures 17  
4 Study Design 18  
5 Study Enrollment and Withdrawal 20  
5.1 Participant Inclusion Criteria 20  
5.2 Participant Exclusion Criteria 20  
5.3 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention 21  
5.4 Treatment Assignment Procedures 22  
5.4.1 Randomization Procedures 22  
5.4.2 Reasons for Withdrawal 22  
5.4.3 Handling of Withdrawals 22  
5.4.4 Termination of Study 23  
6 Study Intervention/Investigational Product [ADDRESS_272015] 28  
5 
 7 Study Schedule 29  
7.1 Screening 29  
7.2 Enrollment/Baseline 30  
7.3 Stimulation Sessions 32  
7.4 Follow-up 33  
7.5 Final Study Visit 33  
8 Study Procedures/Evaluations 34  
8.1 Clinical Evaluations 34  
8.2 Laboratory Evaluations 35  
8.2.1 Clinical Laboratory Evaluations 35  
8.2.2 Special Assays or Procedures 36  
9 Assessment of Safety 37  
9.1 Specification of Safety Parameters 37  
9.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety 
Parameters 37  
9.2.1 Adverse Events 37  
9.2.2 Expected Adverse Reactions 39  
9.2.3 Serious Adverse Events 39  
9.2.4 Unanticipated Problems 40  
9.3 Reporting Procedures 40  
9.3.1 Reporting of Pregnancy 41  
9.4 Type and Duration of Follow-up of Participants after Adverse Events 41  
9.5 Halting Rules 41  
9.6 Safety Oversight 42  
10 Clinical Monitoring 43  
10.1 Frohlich Lab Monitoring Plan 43  
11 Statistical Considerations 44  
11.1 Study Hypotheses 44  
11.1.1 Primary Objective               44  
11.1.2 Secondary Objective               44  
11.2 Sample Size Considerations 45  
11.3 Final Analysis Plan 45  
12 Source Documents and Access to Source Data/Documents 46  
13 Ethics/Protection of Human Participants [ADDRESS_272016] 48  
13.3 Informed Consent Process 49  
13.4 Exclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children (Special Populations) [ADDRESS_272017] Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] 51  
14.1 Data Management Responsibilities 51  
14.2 Data Capture Methods 51  
14.3 Types of Data 51  
14.4 Timing/Reports 52  
14.5 Study Records Retention 52  
14.6 Protocol Deviations 53  
15 Publication Policy 54  
16 Literature References 55  
Supplements/Appendices 60  
Appendix A : Schedule of Events         60 
Appendix B: AE Report Form   61 
Appendix C : AE Log   63  
Appendix D: SAE Report Form   64  
Appendix E: UE/SAE Log .  68  
Appendix F: Consent Amendment Tracking Log   69  
Appendix G: Informed Consent Process Documentation  70 
Appendix H: Informed Consent Process Quiz.  72 
Appendix I:  IRB Amendment Tracking Log   73  
Appendix J: Delegation of Authority   74  
Appendix K: Enrollment Log   75  
Appendix L: Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Checklist  76 
Appendix M: Note to File   77 
Appendix N: Protocol Deviation  78 
Appendix O: Study Startup Checklist  79 
Appendix P: Participant Off Study Form  80 
Appendix Q: Telephone Log   82 
Appendix R: Training Log  83 
Appendix S: Telephone Recruitment Script   84 
Appendix T:EEG Questionnaire   [ADDRESS_272018] Assertive Community Treatment  
AE Adverse Event  
AHRS  Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale  
AIMS  Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale  
ANOVA  Analysis of Variance  
BACS  Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia  
BDNF  Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor  
CAPA  Corrective and Preventative Action  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
CGI-S  Clinical Global Impression Severity Scale  
Co-I Co-Investigator  
CRF Case Report Form  
CRMS  Clinical Research Management System  
dl-PFC  Dorso-lateral Prefrontal Cortex  
DMV  Department of Motor Vehicles  
DSM-IV  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Version IV)  
DSMB  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
eCRF  Electronic Case Report Form  
EEG Electroencephalogram  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
Hz Hertz  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
JAMA  Journal of the American Medical Association  
LAR Legally Authorized Representative  
mA Milli-amps  
NCPRC  North Carolina Psychiatric Research Center  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
NRB Neurosciences Research Building  
OHRE  Office of Human Research Ethics  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
PANSS  Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_100867]/Serious Adverse Experience  
SAS Simpson Angus Scale  
[ADDRESS_272019] Current Stimulation  
TMS Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation  
TPJ Temporo-parietal Junction  
UDS Urine Drug Screen  
UE Unexpected Event  
UNC  University of North Carolina  
UNC-CH  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
US [LOCATION_002]  
9 
  
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title:  Targeting Auditory  Hallucinations with Alternating Current 
Stimulation  
Précis:   
The purpose to determine the efficacy of transcranial alternating 
current stimulation, tACS, versus  sham stimulation (with tDCS 
versus sham as a positive control for assay sensitivity) for the treatment of medication
-refractory auditory hallucinations in 
patients with schizophrenia. We will recruit [ADDRESS_272020] 5, twice -daily (one 
week Monday through Friday), [ADDRESS_272021] 3 hours apart. Participants will be randomly assigned to one of three groups; sham stimulation, 10 
Hz (alpha) tACS or 2 mA tDCS. Participation will in
volve 1 to 8 
visits. At the in itial session, informed consent will be obtained 
and subjects will be screened for eligibility. Eligible participants 
will then be scheduled for their, twice- daily stimulation sessions 
which will include  daily assessment of stimulation side- effects. 
Clinical assessments will be performed at baseline, 1, 2 and 4 weeks using the Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale (Attachment 3) . Neurophysiological (EEG) and cognitive assays 
will be performed before and after stimulation. 
Please see 
Appendix A for a detailed  schematic describing all visits and 
assessments.  
 
Objectives:  
 Our primary objective is to demonstrate the value of 
synchronization and information fl ow measures derived from 
EEG data as novel biomarkers in the treatment of medication refractory auditory
 hallucinations in schizophrenia with 
transcranial current stimulation. To reach this objective, we will 
test the working hypothesis that (1) baseline impairment in EEG synchronization and information flow  predicts treatment success 
and (2) changes in these markers correlate with improvement of 
clinical symptom presentation as determined by [CONTACT_226233], 
PANSS, and BACS
 (Attachment 12) . We will test our working 
hypothesis by [CONTACT_226234] -head EEG data from all patients 
in our feasibility study (48 patients from Aim 1) before and 
10 
 immediately after the five day course of stimulation and at both 
follow -up visits.  
 
 
Population:  We will recruit [ADDRESS_272022] 12 weeks,  with no change in their  
level of care  during that period .  Participants will be recruited 
from the Chapel Hill, Durham and Raleigh areas.  
Phase:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_226204]:  This is a single site study performed at University of North 
Carolina- Chapel Hill.  
Study Duration:  This study will take 2 years to complete  
Participant Participation 
Duration:  Eligible participants who complete this clinical trial will have a 
total of 8 visits; an initial session, 5 days of twice -daily 
stimulation, a one week and a one month follow up visit  (Follow 
up sessions are measured from last day of stimulation).  The initi
al screening session will take approximately [ADDRESS_272023] about 9 hours. The one week fol low up will 
take approximately 2 .5 hours and the one month follo w up will 
take approximately 5  hours.  We estimate that total partic ipation 
to be approximately 40 hours.  
Description of Agent or 
Interventio n: We will be using an active sham, [ADDRESS_272024] a 10 second ramp in and ramp out with 20 minutes of stimulation for a total of 1
180 seconds. Stimulation 
waveforms are sine -waves with a peak-to- peak amplitude of 2 
mA.   
Estimated Time to 
Complete Enrollment:  We estimate that it will take 2 years to complete enrollment of 
participants.  
11 
 
 
*Schematic of Study Design:  
Table 1. The 48 participants will be randomized into one of three of the following arms  
ARM 1  16 participants  Sham  
ARM 2  16 participants  10 Hz tACS  
ARM 3  16 participants  tDCS  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
*
 Weeks are based on time from last stimulation session  
  
 
12 
 1 KEY ROLES  
Individuals:  Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_61560], Ph.D.  
 Co-Investigator: Fred Jarskog M.D., John Gilmore, M.D  
Medical Monitor : Asa Cordle, M.D.  
  
Flavio Frohlich Ph.D. – Principal Investigator     
[CONTACT_11604] - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
Email:  [EMAIL_1219]  
Office:  4109 Neuroscience Research Building  
Phone:  ([PHONE_4786]  
 
Fred Jarskog M.D - Co-Investigator  
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
Email:  [EMAIL_4462]  
Office:  Medical School Wing D, Rm 254  
Phone:  ([PHONE_4787]  
 
John Gilmore M.D - Co-Investigator  
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
Email:  [EMAIL_4462]  
Office:  304 MacNider Hall  
Phone:  ([PHONE_4788]  
 
Robert M. Hamer Ph.D. -Data Management 
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
Email: [EMAIL_4463]  
Office:  336 Medical School Wing B 
Phone:  ([PHONE_4789]  
 
Juliann Mellin B.A . – Project Manager/Study Coordinator  
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
E-mail:  [EMAIL_1671]      
Office: Medical School Wing C -233 
Phone: (919)  966-9929 
 
Courtney Lugo MPH . – Study Coordinator  
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry  
E-mail: [EMAIL_4464]  
13 
 Office: Medical School Wing C-233 
Phone: ([PHONE_4790] 
 
Michael Boyle B.S. – Graduate Research Assistant   
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Biomedical Engineering  
Email: [EMAIL_4465]      
Office:  4129 Neuroscience Research Building  
Phone: (919) -966- 2682   
  
Asa Cordle M.D. – Medical Monitor     
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychiatry   
Email: [EMAIL_4466]     
Office: UN C Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226205]# 7160    
Phone: (919) 966 -5217  
 
Institutions:  University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill  
 
Other:  IRB 
University of North Carolina -Chapel Hill 
Medical School Building [ADDRESS_272025]  
CB #7097  
Chapel Hill, NC [ZIP_CODE] -7097 
(919) 966 -311 
Natio nal Institute of Mental Health 
Sponsored Programs Office, SOM  
1140 -C Bioinformatics Bldg., CB9525 
Chapel Hill, NC [ZIP_CODE] -9525 
 
  
 
 
14 
 2      INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND 
SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE  
2.1 Background Information  
 
About, 30% of patients with schizophrenia have auditory hallucinations that are refractory to 
antipsychotic medication and cause a significant de crease in quality of life (Shergill, Murray et 
al. 1998). All effective antipsychotics introduced over the past [ADDRESS_272026] been limited to the use of tDCS (Brunelin, Mondino et al. 2012). However, tDCS does not specifically target the known deficits in neuronal synchronization (alpha 
frequency band coherence) between the cortical areas that may play a causal role in auditory 
hallucinations (Winterer, Coppola et al. 2003).  
 
Patients with schizophrenia exhibit disorganized neuronal network dynamics such as 
hypoactivity in the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (dl-PFC) and hyperactivity in the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) (Silbersweig, Stern et al. 1995; Lawrie, Buechel et al. 2002). A recent 
provocative study has suggested that these abnormalities can be targeted by [CONTACT_226235] (tDCS) (Brunelin, Mondino et al. 2012) resulting in a significant decrease in auditory hallucinations that outlasts stimulation for at least three months. However, the relative 
importance of the choices of stimulation pa rameters (stimulation waveform, number of 
treatments, treatment schedule) remains unknown. In particular, tDCS does not target the known 
deficits in the temporal structure of cortical n etwork activity in patients with schizophrenia.  
 
 
2.2 Rationale  
 
Here, we propose a new innovative approach driven by [CONTACT_226236]-
invasive brain stimulation to directly target the circuit-level pathology of auditory hallucinations. Specifically, we will evaluate simultaneous tACS (10 Hz) to enhance synchronization between 
frontal and temporo-parietal areas of the left he misphere. Such use of tACS to enhance 
synchronization has recently been introduced as a successful modulator of long-range synchrony 
mediating working memory (Polania, Nitsche et al. 2012). Additionally, we will use EEG data to 
develop a novel biomarker to show that decreases in  auditory hallucinations are predicted by [CONTACT_226237]. Ultimately, our goal is to 
treat patients based on demonstrable changes in brain activity, rather than on symptoms 
15 
 themselves. The proposed research is innovative  because it employs a new form of non-invasive 
brain stimulation, tACS, which targets underlying functional neuropathology to treat medication 
refractory auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia. Additionally, we are developi[INVESTIGATOR_226206].  
 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits 
 
2.3.1 Potential Risks 
 
Risk of Confidentiality Breach : In the unlikely event of a breach of confidentiality, people 
might discover that an individual was involved in this research study. This is especially 
sensitive because the clinical population recruited for this study may be subjected to negative consequences caused by [CONTACT_226238]. Furthermore, some 
might not agree with the principle of participat ing in research or of changing natural brain 
activity. To avoid breaches in confidentiality, study documents that contain personal 
information, including the informed consent document, and the document that links study 
ID numbers to personal identifying information are kept in locked filing cabinets in 
locked rooms, separate from any source documents containing participant dummy 
identifiers. All data is stored in locked cabinets inside locked offices; electronic data will 
be stored only on password-protected computer s, and data encryption methods will be 
used during communication between investigators. Only study personnel will have access 
to these data. All study staff participate in annual human participant training that includes 
education about responsibilities to the minimize risk of confidentiality breach.  
Risk of Embarrassment : Self-reports and some assessments contain questions regarding 
sensitive personal information. This risk is necessary in order to assess experiences such as auditory hallucinations and disease state. Pa rticipants will be assured upon intake that 
only study personnel will see any clinical ratings, and study raters are trained to inquire 
about potentially distressing symptoms us ing a sensitive and respectful approach. 
Participants will be given the option not to  answer questions that are too distressing.  
Risk of Injury and Discomfort : Transcranial current stimulation has been used without 
any reports of serious side-effects for more than a decade. This stimulation mode has 
NOTHING to do with electroconvulsive therapy that applies many orders of magnitude higher stimulation current. Rather, transcranial current stimulation is so weak that it does 
not cause super-threshold activation of neurons (Frohlich and McCormick, 2010). In 
particular, tACS has been used without reports of any serious side-effects. Some 
participants report a transient mild tingling, burning, or itching underneath the electrodes and headache, but no other side effects have  been noted. Importantly, it remains unclear 
16 
 if these mild side-effects were caused by [CONTACT_226239]. In order to 
monitor these side-effects, we will be ad ministering an advers e effects stimulation 
questionnaire (Attachments 1 &2) after each stimulation session to determine whether 
these effects were experienced. Research pe rsonnel present during these sessions will 
also check in with the participant periodicall y during the stimulation to see whether they 
are comfortable. If any side-effect occurs (rated by [CONTACT_226240] “moderate”) or the participant is experiencing  severe discomfort, the stimulation will be 
immediately stopped.  
While not previously reported with tDCS or tACS in humans, there is a theoretical 
possibility that stimulation of neuronal circuits could lead to epi[INVESTIGATOR_219601]. To 
minimize this occurrence, we screen and exclude patients with personal and family 
history of neurological conditions from the study. If abnormalities or a seizure is witnessed during the course of the study, the subject will be referred to a neurology clinic 
for further evaluation and treatment.  
We have no evidence that our treatment paradigms will increase auditory hallucinations if 
not treated (receive the sham treatment), as par ticipants, will be by [CONTACT_108], stable. If an 
enrolled patient shows signs of increase symptoms that were not apparent during 
enrollment, a referral to UNC Psychiatry will be made. [CONTACT_104654], Co-I, will facilitate this process.  
2.3.2 Known Potential Benefits 
Our novel protocol targets the evidence for abnormal neuronal activity displayed in 
schizophrenia, with the intent to decrease  auditory hallucinations. tACS has the 
promise to become the next generation stimulation paradigm for non-invasive 
treatment of pathological cortical network dy namics in patients with schizophrenia. A 
significant benefit to society would be the ability to treat medication resistant 
symptoms of schizophrenia. 
 
This study has not been designed to benefit the individual participants. The study has 
been designed to gain knowledge about the potential efficacy of tACS in treating 
auditory hallucinations in people with schizophrenia. In the event that tACS is effective, participants in this study who are randomized to the tACS arm could experience improvement in auditory halluc inations.  There are no known serious 
risks to the participant from the interventions used in this study. The chance to 
understand and develop a new tr eatment for persistent hallucinations in schizophrenia 
is an important step in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_226207].  
17 
 3 OBJECTIVES  
3.1 Study Objectives 
 
Our primary objective is to develop an effectiv e non-invasive brain stimulation paradigm that 
will treat medication refractory auditory hall ucinations in patients with schizophrenia.  
 
3.2 Study Outcome Measures 
 
3.2.1 Primary Outcome Measures 
 
The Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (Attachment 3) will be the primary outcome 
measure for this study.  This rating will be  administered at baseline, two weeks later at 
the screening visit, the first day of stimulation, last day of stimulation, at the one week and the one month follow up visits.  We will compare the AHRS scores immediately 
before the first stimulation session and immedia tely after the last stimulation session as 
our primary outcome measure. 
 
3.2.[ADDRESS_272027] EEG data at the one week and one month follow up visits. We will use these data to analyze alpha frequency 
activity as a pi[INVESTIGATOR_226208].  
 
The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) (Attachment 5) and Brief 
Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS)  (Attachment 12) will also be 
secondary outcome measures for this study.  These measurements will be taken at 
baseline, first day of stimulation, and last day of stimulation and at the one month follow up visit.  We will compare the PANSS a nd BACS scores immediately before first 
stimulation session and immediate ly after last stimulation session as secondary outcome 
measures. 
[ADDRESS_272028] during the initial session in order to determine eligibility for the study. 
These individuals will be outpatients; most will  be referred through psychiatrists in the UNC 
Department of Psychiatry and affiliated ACT clin ics, or by [CONTACT_226241].  
 
This is a single site, clinical trial with 3 arms.  We estimate 2 years to complete study enrollment. 
  
Participants will be randomly assigned to one  of three arms; active sham stimulation, 10 Hz 
(alpha) tACS or [ADDRESS_272029] itude of 2 mA. In each 
arm, participants will stay in a relaxed and ye t controlled state by [CONTACT_84022] a nature movie such 
as “Reefscape” during stimulation.  
 
Eligible participants who complete this clinical tria l will have a total of 9 to 11 visits; an initial 
screening session, a 2
nd screening session, (if needed) [ADDRESS_272030] stimulation session in patients with schizophrenia of schizoaffective 
disorder. As a secondary objective we will assess  the differential clinical  effects of sham, 10 Hz 
and 2 mA tDCS on EEG measures of alpha oscillations. 
 
In order to ensure symptom stability for each poten tial participant, there will be up to a 6 week 
period for the participant to achieve a stable AHRS score. The AHRS will be performed at 2 
week intervals during screening. A stable score is defined as having less than or equal to 20% 
change. If the change between the first and second AHRS scores is less than or equal to 20%, 
then the participant will move on to the week of stimulation. If a stable score is not achieved at 
the second screening session, the participant w ill have two more opportunities at 2 week 
intervals during follow-up screening sessions to ac hieve a stable score. The participant will be 
paid for each session. If the participant does not achieve a stable score (if there remains a greater 
than 20% change in scores between consecutiv e AHRS administrations) by [CONTACT_2671] [ADDRESS_272031] meet all of the following 
criteria: 
 
● DSM-IV diagnosis of schizophrenia, any subtype, or schizoaffective disorder, with 
refractory auditory hallucinations. Duration of illness >1 year  
● 18-70 years old  
● Clinically stable for at least 12 weeks, i.e. not requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_26109] a change in 
level of care  
● On current antipsychotic doses for at least 4 weeks  
● Experience at least 3 auditory hallucinations per week.  
● Stable auditory hallucinations as demonstr ated by [CONTACT_226242] 20% 
change in AHRS scores across a 2 week interval during the screening period.  
● Capacity to understand all relevant risks and potential benefits of the study and to provide 
written informed consent, OR has a legal guardian who can provide informed consent on the patient ’s behalf with the patient providing  written assent to participate. 
 
5.2 Participant Exclusion Criteria 
 
A potential participant who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded from 
participation in this study:  
 
● DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol of substance abuse (other than nicotine) within the last 
month or a DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol or substance dependence (other than nicotine) within the last 6 months  
● Medical or neurological illness (unstable ca rdiac disease, AIDS, malignancy, liver or 
renal impairment) or treatment for a medical disorder that could interfere with study participation  
● History of traumatic brain injury that required subsequent cognitive rehabilitation, or 
caused cognitive sequelae  
● A difference of greater than 20% in AHRS scores between Consent Visit and Screening 
Visit.  
● Prior brain surgery  
● Any brain devices/implants, including cochlear implants and aneurysm clips  
21 
 ● Co-morbid neurological condition (e.g. seizure disorder, brain tumor)  
● Non English speakers  
● Female participants who are pregnant, nursing,  or unwilling to use an adequate method of 
contraception during study participation for those of childbearing potential.  
● Anything that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], would place the participant at increased 
risk or preclude the participant’s  likelihood of completing all components of the study  
 
5.[ADDRESS_272032] at forming 
a professional relationship with the participants so they feel comfortable and willing to discuss 
22 
 what may be sensitive information. Retention will be quantified by [CONTACT_226243] (the data from each session will be scored and documented the day of the 
session. Participants will no longer be eligible to  continue the study if they miss more than two 
non-consecutive sessions. Participants who miss two c onsecutive sessions will not be eligible to 
continue their participation.  
5.4 Treatment Assignment Procedures 
 
Participants will be randomized into one of thr ee arms.  This is a double blind study, so neither 
the participant nor the researcher will know which treatment arm the participant has been 
assigned to.   
 
5.4.1 Randomization Procedures 
 
A Frohlich Lab member will randomize 48 codes which will be used by [CONTACT_226244].  These c odes are directly linked to which treatment 
participants receive (sham, 10Hz tACS or 2 mA tDCS).  This lab member will have no other responsibility in the study other than providing these randomized codes.   
 
5.4.2 Reasons for Withdrawal 
 
A study participant will be discontinued from further participation if:  
 
● The participant has missed more than 2 stimulation sessions.  
●    Any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality, intercurrent illness or other 
medical condition, or situation occurs such that continued participation in the study 
would not be in the best interest of the participant.  
● The participant meets any exclusion criteria (either newly developed or not 
previously recognized).  
● A participant wishes to withdraw from further participation for any reason. 
 
5.4.[ADDRESS_272033] safety data on any participant discontinued because of an AE or SAE.  In 
any case, every effort will be made to undertake protocol-specified safety follow-up 
procedures.  If voluntary withdrawal occurs, th e participant will be asked to continue 
scheduled evaluations and complete an end-of-study evaluation.  If an AE has been reported, researchers will help the participant seek the medical care they need and a follow up will be performed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_12749]-I.  In the case of an early withdrawal, the 
23 
 researcher will complete a Participant Off Study form to document the withdrawal reason 
(Appendix Q). 
 
5.4.4 Termination of Study  
 
This study may be prematurely terminated if, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], there is 
sufficient reasonable cause.  Circumstances th at may warrant termination include, but are 
not limited to: 
 
● Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participants.  
● Insufficient adherence to protocol requirements.  
● Data those are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable.  
● Plans to modify suspend or discontinue the development of the study device.  
 The IRB will be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or 
suspension by [CONTACT_171372]/institution, as specified by [CONTACT_40006](s).  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
[ADDRESS_272034] always been classified as “non -significant risk” by [CONTACT_226245]. 
 
In addition, some participants will be stimula ted with the commercial, CE-certified Neuroconn 
Plus stimulator (for purely logistic reasons of device availability). The use of this device in this study has previously received a NSR designation on initial review by [CONTACT_61598]. Both devices are electrically equivalent and provide the same stimulation. The NeuroConn device description is as follows:  
The DC-STIMULATOR is a CE-certified medical device for conducting non-invasive 
transcranial direct-current stimulation (tDCS) in  humans. DC stimulation is used in clinical 
practice and in the research of stroke, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], migraine, tinnitus, depression, multiple sclerosis, dementia and chronic headache. The DC-STIMU LATOR is a micro-processor-controlled 
constant current source. It meets the highest safety standards thanks to (hardware- and software-based) multistage monitoring of the current path. By [CONTACT_226246], maximising patient safety. The device's alphanumeric display and the 4 touch keys allow various stimulation modes to be selected and stimulation parameters such as curren t strength, duration, fade-in and fade-out to be 
set. 
 
 DC-STIMULATOR features: • 1 channel (anodal and cathodal stimulation possible) 
• Adjustable current up to 5,000 μA * 
• Adjustable application time up to 30 minutes * 
• [ADDRESS_272035] modes - single (continuous stim ulation) and - pulse (cyclical stimulation 
activation/deactivation) with fade in and fade out 
• Customer-specific programs possible (optional) 
• "Study mode" for blind processing of genuine and 'pseudo' stimulation (optional) 
• External trigger input (optional) 
 
 
 
25 
 6.1.1  Device Description  
 
The device consists of the following main components/subsystems:  
 
1. Tablet with user interface application (App)  
2. Microprocessor  
3. Function generator chip  
4. Voltage controlled current source  
5. Safety circuitry  
 
First, the stimulation parameters are specified by [CONTACT_226247].  The 
parameters are:  
 
1. tDCS/tACS  
2. Number of channels  
3. Amplitude  
4. Test duration  
5. Frequency (for tACS)  
6. Password.  
 
Next, the parameters are sent via Bluetooth to the microprocessor.  The microprocessor 
interprets these parameters, and programs the function generator chip accordingly.  The function generator then creates the programmed waveform, which is ultimately a voltage signal.  The voltage signal is applied to  a voltage controlled current source, which 
generates the specified amount of current through an arbitrary load resistance.  
 
 
 
6.1.[ADDRESS_272036] 
the stimulant from high currents.  The stages are as follows:  
 
1. Automatic software current cutoff.  The output of the current sensor described above is 
read by a microprocessor, which compares the reading to a value of +/-3mA peak.  If the 
current exceeds these limits, stimulation is stopped,  a relay in series with the electrode is 
opened, and the power supply used for stimulation is turned off.  The user is then given the option to investigate the issue, and cancel or resume the test.  Since high-side current sensing is used (described above), any short circuit of the electrode terminals to ground 
will be detected.  
 
2. Automatic hardware current cutoff.  The output of the current sensor is fed into a pair 
of comparators which detect if the current exceeds +/-4.5mA.  If so, the fault is latched 
such that the relay in series with the electrodes is opened.  Additionally, the 
microprocessor is notified of this instance t hrough an interrupt.  Upon this interrupt, the 
27 
 microprocessor immediately stops stimulation and the power supply used for stimulation 
is turned off.  
  
Figure 1: Example of successful hardware cutoff function  
 
 
 
 
3. Permanent hardware current cutoff.  A 5mA fast-acting fuse is in series with the 
electrode connector.  If the above two over-c urrent detection methods fail, the fuse will 
blow, and the stimulant will no longer be electrically connected to the device.  
 
4. Power supply fuse.  Finally, if for any other reason the entire device draws too much 
current, the main power supply fuse is blown.  This fuse is sized with a cutoff of 200% of steady-state operating current.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_272037] a 10 second ramp in  and ramp out with 20 minutes of stimulation 
for a total of 1220 seconds. Stimulation wavefor ms are sine-waves with a peak-to-peak 
amplitude of 2 mA.  The sham stimulation will include 10 seconds of ramp in to 1 minute of 10 
Hz tACS with a ramp out of 10 seconds for a to tal of 100 seconds of stimulation. We will be 
using 5x5cm electrodes covered in 10/20 conductive  paste and placed between Fp1 and F3 and 
between T3 and P3 with a 5x7cm electrode placed over CZ as a return electrode.  
 
Stimulation devices will be preprogrammed and c odes will be randomized to one of the three 
experimental arms. Researchers will enter the part icipant-specific code into the App that controls 
the stimulation and monitor participants during the 20 minutes of the stimulation.  
 
The study coordinator and/or the research assistant will be thoroughly trained and have trainings 
documented on the transcranial stimulation device and will be present during all stimulation 
sessions. Please see Appendix S for an example of the training documentation log. To monitor 
side effects of stimulation a daily questionnaire will be administered after each stimulation 
session.  Please see Attachment [ADDRESS_272038] ±[ADDRESS_272039] 5 participants, after which the approved clinicians will be present for only the initial session, the 5
th day of stimulation and the one month follow up. The approved clinician will be present to 
administer the SAS (Attachment 9) , the AIMS (Attachment 7)  for each participant and the CGI-S 
(Attachment 8)  for the first 5 participants until research personnel are comfortable and certified 
to do so (will be determined by [CONTACT_226248]). In order to increase data quality, the 
assessments for an individual participant at the initial session, the 1st day of stimulation, the 5th 
day of stimulation, the one week one month fo llow ups will be administered by [CONTACT_226249]. Protocol for this study will not requi re the same researcher to be present during days 
[ADDRESS_272040] log for each telephone 
conversation with a participant throughout the study. There will be a log for each participant and 
will be filed in the participant binder ( Appendix R ).  
 
During the telephone screening, researchers will provide a brief background about Schizophrenia 
and tACS.  Any initial questions will be answered at this point. The timeline of visits will then be 
explained; there will be [ADDRESS_272041] be en answered, the participant will be asked if 
he/she is still interesting in participating in the study.  If yes, the researcher will begin the initial phone screening which will determine eligibility for the initial session. The screening questions 
are shown below. If the required answers are give n for each question, the initial session will be 
scheduled and a reminder call will be given at least 24 hours before initial session. We will use the telephone script provided in Appendix T  for all telephone screenings.  
 
o Are you 18 years or older? (Yes)  
o Have you ever, or are you currently being treated for a neurological condition (i.e. 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002])? (No)  
[ADDRESS_272042] you ever had brain surgery? (No)  
o Do you have any brain devices or implants, including a cochlear implant or 
aneurysm clip? (No)  
o Have you ever been diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury? (No)  
o For females only, is there a chance you may be pregnant? (No) 
 
7.2 Enrollment/Baseline 
 
Initial Screening Visit (Visit 1, Day 0)  
At the consent visit, participants will sign both a HIPAA authorization form and the consent 
form. Each form will be read to the participant by [CONTACT_3021], and the participant will be given the time to ask any questions about the i nformation discussed. The researcher will verify 
that the participant meets inclusion criteria. If th e participant is female, she will be asked to 
provide urine for a pregnancy test. All participants  (male and female) will be asked to complete a 
urine drug screening to determine eligibility for the study. Next, the SCID ( Attachment 6 ) will be 
administered in order to confirm diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and to 
verify that the participant does not have active alcohol or illicit drug abuse or dependency. Once 
the diagnosis has been confirmed, demographic information will be collected, which will include 
a history of medication, alcohol, and drug use and information about symptom onset and baseline 
vitals will be taken. A short handedness qu estionnaire and a Belief about Treatments 
questionnaire will also be admini stered. Each participant will be asked a series of questions 
(Appendix H ) to ensure that the consent form is fully understood. After consent has been 
obtained, a baseline Auditory Hallucinations Rati ng Scale (AHRS) will be administered to 
document hallucinatory severity and frequency. The 2
nd screening visit will be scheduled for 
approximately 2 weeks later, and th e participant will be paid. 
 
2nd Screening Visit (Visit 2)  
At the beginning of the 2nd screening visit, vitals will be taken and an EEG will then be 
administered. The EEG recording will include rest ing state data along with two auditory tasks. 
After each EEG, an EEG questionnaire ( Appendix U)  will be administered to document the 
participant’s auditory experiences during the EEG tasks. The following questionnaires will then 
be administered to further check eligibility; Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (AHRS) in order to document any change in auditory  hallucination severity/frequency ( Attachment 3 ). The 
AHRS scores from the initial screening visit and th e current visit will be compared. If a change 
in score greater than 20% exists, then a 3
rd screening visit will be scheduled for approximately 2 
weeks later. If a change in AHRS score is le ss than or equal to 20% then the Simpson Angus 
Scale (SAS) ( Attachment 9 ) and the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) 
(Attachment 7 ) will be administered as a baseline  assessment of extrapyramidal syndromes or 
tardive dyskinesia due to antipsychotic medication use. In order to ensure proper assessment, 
[ADDRESS_272043] sufficient experience. At the end of the initial session, and 
once eligibility has been confirmed, a saliva sample will be collected (for testing of BDNF 
allele), the week of stimulation will be sche duled, and the participant will be paid.  
 
3rd Screening Visit (Possible Visit 3) 
At the beginning of the 3rd screening visit, vitals will be taken and an EEG will then be 
administered. The EEG recording will include rest ing state data along with two auditory tasks. 
After each EEG, an EEG questionnaire ( Appendix U)  will be administered to document the 
participant’s auditory experiences during the EEG tasks. The following questionnaires will then 
be administered to further check eligibility; Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (AHRS) in 
order to document any change in auditory  hallucination severity/frequency ( Attachment 3 ). The 
AHRS scores from the 2nd screening visit and the current visit will be compared. If a change in 
score greater than 20% exists, then a 4th screening visit will be scheduled for approximately 2 
weeks later. If a change in AHRS score is le ss than or equal to 20% then the Simpson Angus 
Scale (SAS) ( Attachment 9 ) and the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) 
(Attachment 7 ) will be administered as a baseline assessment of extrapyramidal syndromes or 
tardive dyskinesia due to antipsychotic medication use. In order to ensure proper assessment, 
each AIMS administration will initially be record ed to be reviewed and scored by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jarskog 
until the researcher is deemed to have sufficien t experience. At the end of the initial session, and 
once eligibility has been confirmed, a saliva sample will be collected (for testing of BDNF allele), the week of stimulation will be sche duled, and the participant will be paid.  
 
4
th Screening Visit (Possible Visit 4) 
At the beginning of the 4th screening visit, vitals will be taken and an EEG will then be 
administered. The EEG recording will include rest ing state data along with two auditory tasks. 
After each EEG, an EEG questionnaire ( Appendix U)  will be administered to document the 
participant’s auditory experiences during the EEG tasks. The following questionnaires will then 
be administered to further check eligibility; Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (AHRS) in 
order to document any change in auditory hallucination severity/frequency ( Attachment 3 ). The 
AHRS scores from the 2nd screening visit and the current visit will be compared. If a change in 
score greater than 20% exists, then the participant is considered not eligible to participate and 
will be paid for completing the session. If a ch ange in AHRS score is less than or equal to 20% 
then the Simpson Angus Scale (SAS) ( Attachment 9 ) and the Abnormal Involuntary Movement 
Scale (AIMS) ( Attachment 7 ) will be administered as a base line assessment of extrapyramidal 
syndromes or tardive dyskinesia due to antipsychot ic medication use. In order to ensure proper 
assessment, each AIMS administra tion will initially be recorded to be reviewed and scored by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jarskog until the researcher is deemed to ha ve sufficient experience. At the end of the initial 
32 
 session, and once eligibility has been confirmed, a sali va sample will be collected (for testing of 
BDNF allele), the week of stimulation will be scheduled, and the participant will be paid.  
 
 
7.3 Stimulation Sessions 
 
Day 1 of Stimulation (Visit 5)  
At the first day of stimulation, vitals will be recorded and several questionnaires will be 
administered. First, the AHRS ( Attachment 3 ) will be administered followed by [CONTACT_226250] 
(Attachment 5 ) and the Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS) (Attachment 
12). The BACS will be used as a baseline a ssessment of participant cognition, and will be 
administered again during later sessions to assess for any changes in cognitive function 
associated with treatment. After this, the CGI-S ( Attachment 8 ) will be administered in order to 
document any difference in auditory hallucination or symptom severity from the screening visit.  
 
Once the questionnaires are complete, the particip ant will be administered either sham, 10 Hz 
tACS or 2 mA tDCS treatment for 20 minutes. Particip ants will be asked to sit still and not talk 
during these 20 minutes, and will be asked to ke ep their eyes open and facing straight ahead. 
After the 20 minutes of treatment, the participan t will be asked to return 3 hours later on the 
same day for another 20 minutes of either sham, 10  Hz tACS or 2 mA tDCS treatment, where the 
participant will again be asked to sit still, not talk, and with their eyes open. 
 
After each stimulation treatment, to assess an y side effects of stimulation, the stimulation 
adverse effects questionnaire will be administered. This questionnair e will be administered at the 
end of each stimulation session as a safety assess ment to monitor any potential side effects of the 
stimulation ( Attachment 1 ). Participants will be paid at the conclusion of this session.  
 
Days 2 – 4 of Stimulation (Visit 6 – 8) 
Upon participant arrival, vital signs will be ta ken and documented at the beginning of the first 
stimulation session of each day. The participant will then receive 20 minutes of sham, 10 Hz tACS or 2mA tDCS (as per the initial randomization) while sitting quietly with their eyes open.  After 3 hours, the participant wi ll return for another 20 minutes of sham, 10 Hz tACS or 2mA 
tDCS. Each stimulation session will be followed by  [CONTACT_226251]. 
Participants will be paid at the conclusion of each session.   
 
Day 5 of Stimulation (Visit 9) 
Upon participant arrival, vital signs will be ta ken and documented at the beginning of the first 
stimulation session of the day.  An EEG will then be administered. The EEG recording will 
include resting state data along with two audito ry tasks, and the EEG Questionnaire will be 
33 
 administered. The participant will receive 20 min utes of sham, 10 Hz tACS or 2mA tDCS (as per 
the initial randomization) while sitting quietly with their eyes open.  After 3 hours, the participant will return for another 20 minutes of sham, 10 Hz tACS or 2mA tDCS. Each 
stimulation session will be followed by [CONTACT_226252].. The AHRS 
(Attachment 3 ) will be administered. After this the PANSS ( Attachment 5 ), BACS (Attachment 
12), CGI-S ( Attachment 8 ), and SAS ( Attachment 9 ) and AIMS ( Attachment 7 ) data collection 
assessments will be administered at the end of  this session. After the assessments are completed, 
the participant will then be paid at the completion of the session.  
 
7.4 Follow-up  
 
One week Follow-up Visit (Visit 10, on e week after last day of stimulation) 
Upon participant arrival, vital signs will be  taken and documented. An EEG will then be 
administered. The EEG recording will include rest ing state data along with two auditory tasks, 
and the EEG Questionnaire will be administered. The AHRS will th en be administered to assess 
severity of auditory hallucinations. Each particip ant will be asked whether they believe their 
symptoms have improved ( Attachment 11 ). Participants will be paid at the conclusion of this 
study visit.  
 
7.5 Final Study Visit 
 
One month Follow-up Visit (Visit 11, one month after last day of stimulation) 
Upon participant arrival, vital signs will be  taken and documented. An EEG will then be 
administered. The EEG recording will include rest ing state data along with two auditory tasks, 
and the EEG Questionnaire will be administered. Th e AHRS will then be administered to assess 
severity of auditory hallucinations, followed by [CONTACT_3433] e adverse events questionnaire and a review of 
current medications. The PANSS ( Attachment 5 ), CGI-S ( Attachment 8 ), and SAS ( Attachment 
9), AIMS ( Attachment 7 ), and BACS (Attachment 12)  data collection assessments will be 
administered at the end of this session for endpoi nt assessment. Each participant will be asked 
whether they believe their symptoms have changed (better, worse, no change) over the course of the study. After the assessments are completed, the participant will then be paid for the 
completion of the final study visit.   
 
 
34 
 8 STUDY PROCEDURES/EVALUATIONS  
8.[ADDRESS_272044]. 
 
Several clinical evaluations will be used throughout this study. These assessments are listed 
below and can be found in the attached documents.  
 
i. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I) is a semi-
structured interview used to diagnosis major Axis I disorders. For this study, the SCID-I (First et al. 2004) will be administered at baseline in order to confirm a diagnosis of Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder.  
 
ii. The Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (AHR S) is a structured interview, designed to 
assess differe nt aspects of patient’s auditory hallucinations. This assessment has 11 
items and is rated on a scale of 0 – [ADDRESS_272045] 
day of stimulation, and at the one week and one month follow up visits.  
 
iii. The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (P ANSS) is a structured interview used to 
assess the symptom severity of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia. The PANSS (Kay et al. 1987) focuses on the positive and negative syndromes and their general 
severity. This scale will be administered the initial session, first day of stimulation, 
the last day of stimulation and at the one month follow up visit.  
  
iv. The Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS) will be administered at 
baseline, day 5 of stimulation and at the we ek 5 follow-up session in order to monitor 
changes in participant cognition. This va lidated assessment (Keefe et al. 2004, Keefe 
et al. 2006) contains 6 tests that focus on verbal memory and learning, working 
memory, motor functioning, attention/processi ng speed, verbal fluency and reasoning 
and problem solving.  
 
35 
 v. The Simpson Angus Scale (SAS) (Janno et al. 2005) is a [ADDRESS_272046] day of stimulation to obtain a baseline assessment, and again at day 5 of 
stimulation and the week 5 follow-up session to monitor symptom severity or 
development for each participant.  
 
vi. The Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) will be administered at the initial 
session to obtain a baseline assessment, a nd again at day [ADDRESS_272047] the occurrence of 
tardive dyskinesia.  
 
vii. The Clinical Global Impression Severity Sca le (CGI-S) measures the symptom severity 
for patients diagnosed with mental disorders based on the clinician’s total experience 
with that specific population. The CGI-S (Berk et al. 2008) will be administered by a clinician or trained research assistant at the initial session, the first day of stimulation, the last day of stimulation, and the week [ADDRESS_272048] 
data on participant experience. A similar questionnaire was used in IRB 13-2995 to 
determine ability to successfully blind using transcranial current stimulation.  (Attachment 1 and Attachment 2) 
 
8.[ADDRESS_272049] will also be performed for any female participant who is unable to confirm pregnancy status. This information will be recorded on the inclusion/exclusion criteria 
checklist (Appendix M) to be completed by [CONTACT_3021]. Participants will also be asked 
to complete a drug urine test during the initial session to verify drug use status.  
 
36 
 8.2.2 Special Assays or Procedures 
 
The Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS) (Attachment 12)  will be 
administered during the 1st day of stimulation, the 5th day of stimulation and at the one 
month follow-up. This assay was specifically designed to assess cognition in patients diagnosed with schizophrenia and will be used to obtain a baseline assessment of cognition in each participant. We will also be using this assay as a safety monitor and 
data collection tool throughout the study to assess any changes in cognition that may be seen as a result of the treatment.  
There will be two procedures used throughout this study. Each participant will attend 5 
consecutive weekdays of stimulation for this study. Each participant will be randomly assigned to one of three treatment arms for this study (sham, 10HZ tACS or 2mA tDCS). Electrodes with a measurement of 5x5cm wi ll be placed between Fp1 and F3 and 
between T3 and P3, and a return electrode, 5x7cm, will be placed over Cz. In order to 
detect any change(s) at the neurophysiological level, an EEG will be performed during 
the [ADDRESS_272050] an influence on efficacy of brain stimulation.  Within the 
central nervous system, BDNF regulates survival, proliferation, and synaptic growth as 
well as directly influences synaptic plasticity in the adult human brain (Antal et al. 
2010).  Egan et al. (2003) demonstrated that Val66Met, a single nucleotide 
polymorphism in the BDNF gene, has functional consequences in healthy humans 
including decreased epi[INVESTIGATOR_83996] a reduction in recall 
capacity. This polymorphism is common in over one third of the Caucasian population 
(65% Val66Val to 35% Val66MET) (Pezawas et al. 2004; Hariri and Weinberger 2003).  
Kleim et al. (2006) found that individuals with the Val/Val polymorphism respond to 
tDCS and transcranial magnetic stimulation treatments (TMS) with expected changes 
whereas individuals expressing the Val/MET allele do not.  These authors indicate the 
difference to be caused by [CONTACT_226253]/MET 
allele. These findings suggest that individua l of treatments using brain stimulation may 
be partially genetically predetermined and s hould be taken into account when preforming 
such procedures. Accordingly, we will conduct genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_226209].  We will perform exploratory analyses in which we group 
participants by [CONTACT_84033].  
 
[ADDRESS_272051] any changes in 
these symptoms; additionally we did not find any changes in a related clinical trial (IRB# 13-
2995).  Should there be a significant change in PANSS rating scores, (>25% increase) we will 
direct the participant to [CONTACT_226275] or [CONTACT_226276] kog for further follow up and file a AE report. 
 
After each stimulation session, a stimul ation adverse effects questionnaire ( Attachment 1and 
Attachment 2)  will be administered.  This tool is us ed to document any side effects experienced 
during stimulation. The researcher will also ch eck with the participant throughout the 20 minute 
stimulation sessions to make certain no discomfor t is felt.  The stimulation session will be 
terminated if the participant reports having  unmanageable discomfort or pain (more than 
“moderate”).  Additionally, this information will be reported on an AE report  form (Appendix B) 
and an AE log (Appendix C). 
 
9.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety 
Parameters 
 
9.2.1 Adverse Events 
 
Adverse Event:   An AE, as defined by [CONTACT_18121], is any unfavorable changes in health, 
including /abnormal laboratory findings that occur in trial participants during the clinical trial or within a specified period following the trial.  
 
All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for “serious 
adverse events” will be captured on the appropriate CRF.  In addition, the AE Report 
Form will be completed by [CONTACT_9137] ( Appendix B).  The AE report form 
includes the follow; what is known about the therapy and previous reported side effects, 
if the AE occurred in temporal relation to the therapy, whether or not the AE improves or 
disappears when treatment is stopped, whether the AE is a worsening of baseline 
38 
 symptoms or related to a concurrent medical condition or medication use. Once complete, 
this form will be given to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_79761]-I who will review, comment and sign this form.  Completed forms will be p laced in the participant’s folder.  
 
The study coordinator will document any AE occurrence on the AE log ( Appendix C)  
which includes information such as the date of  the AE, severity, relationship to the 
treatment (assessed by [CONTACT_978]), actions taken, and outcome(s). The log will be reviewed 
and initialed by [CONTACT_978] 72 hours after being completed. All AEs occurring during the 
clinical trial will be documented appropria tely regardless of relationship to tACS. All 
AEs will be followed to adequate resoluti on and will be graded for severity and 
relationship to the study treatment.  Any medical condition noted at the initial session 
will be considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. 
 
  All AEs will be graded for severity using the following guidelines. 
 
● Asymptomatic:  the participant is exhibiting no symptoms due to the event; no 
treatment needed.  
● Mild  Adverse Event – Event results in mild or transient discomfort, not requiring 
intervention or treatment; does not limit or interfere with daily activities (e.g., 
insomnia, mild headache).  
● Moderate  Adverse Event – Event is sufficiently discomforting so as to limit or 
interfere with daily activities; may requi re interventional treatment (e.g., fever 
requiring antipyretic medication).  In the case of a moderate adverse event the medical advisor may recommend an over the counter medication.  
● Severe and undesirable  Adverse Event – Event results in significant symptoms that 
prevents normal daily activities; may requi re hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84006] 
(e.g., anemia resulting in blood transfusion).  
 
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented with the Note to File document 
(Appendix N)  and will be filed in the participant’s folder .  
 
Relationship to Study Products:   The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706]-I will together determine whether an 
AE is associated with the study treatment. Th e event will be labeled associated if the 
event is temporally related to the administration of the therapy and no other factors can explain the event. The event will be labeled as not associated if the event is temporally independent of the study treatment and can be explained by [CONTACT_226254]. 
 
[ADDRESS_272052] s were caused by [CONTACT_226255]. During the stimulation, the resear cher will ask the participant about their 
comfort.  Stimulation will immediately be stopped if any discomfort (more than 
“moderate”) is reported . In theory, there is a possibility that application of weak 
stimulation current could induce a seizure.  
 
These adverse reactions will be monitore d with the stimulation adverse effects 
questionnaire ( Attachment 1 and Attachment 2) . The following scale reflects the scoring 
of severity for any possible side effects.  
 
1 = Absence of the indicated symptom  
2 = Mild (awareness of a symptom but the symptom is easily tolerated)  
3 = Moderate (discomfort enough to cause the researcher to be informed)  
4 = Severe (incapacitating; the stimulati on is terminated due to extreme discomfort)  
 
All expected adverse reactions questionnaires  are a daily source document that will be 
placed in each individual’s folder.  Should the DSMB ask to see a complete report of this information a report can be regenerated for their viewing.   
 
9.2.3 Serious Adverse Events 
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE):  An SAE, as defined by [CONTACT_18121], consists of adverse 
events that result in death, require either  inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226210], are life-threatening, result in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity or result in congenital  anomaly/birth defect. Other important medical 
events, based upon appropriate medical judgmen t, may also be considered Serious 
Adver se Events if a trial participant’s health is at risk and intervention is required to 
prevent an outcome mentioned.  
 
All SAEs will be recorded on the Serious Adverse Events Form ( Appendix D) , 
documented in the UE/SAE log and reported to the IRB. The SAE Form will be 
completed by [CONTACT_9137], and in cludes information relating to the onset and 
nature of the SAE, relationship to the study treatment, seriousness of the SAE, treatment required as a response to the SAE, and outcome. This form will be filed in the 
40 
 participant’s binder at the resolution of the ev ent. The study coordinator will complete the 
UE/SAE log ( Appendix E ) which includes information such as the date of the event, time 
at which the study team was informed of the event, details, when the IRB has been 
notified, and the date that the SAE Form was completed.  
 
9.2.4 Unanticipated Problems . 
 
Unexpected Events (UE) will be recorded on the UE/SAE log ( Appendix E)  and will 
include information such as the date of the event, when the study team was informed of 
this event, details of the event, when the IRB was notified, and whether the SAE Form 
was completed. The IRB will be notified of each UE that may occur during the study.  
 
The Office for Human Research Protections  considers unanticipated problems involving 
risks to participants or others to include, in  general, any incident, experience, or outcome 
that meets all  of the following criteria: 
 
● Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research procedures 
that are described in the protocol-related doc uments, such as the IRB-approved research 
protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics of the participant 
population being studied;  
● Related or possibly related to participation in the research  
● Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm 
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously 
known or recognized. 
 
If an UE occurs the IRB will be notified a nd the study will be adjusted as needed to 
protect the health and safety of the participants. Depending on the nature of the UE, the 
research protocol, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and informed consent will be changed to 
reflect the possibility of this event reoccurring. Please see Appendix F for an example of 
the Consent Amendment Tracking log.  During this time, no new participants will be 
recruited and the research proce dures for currently enrolled pa rticipants will be stopped. 
Each UE will be recorded and reported throughout the study.  
 
9.3 Reporting Procedures 
 
We will be adopting the follow table for reporting procedures:  
 
41 
 What Event is Reported  When is Event Reported  By [CONTACT_226256]-threatening 
unexpected, suspected 
serious adverse reactions  Within 24 hours  of initial 
receipt of information  Investigator  ● Local/internal 
IRBs, DSMB  
      
Non-fatal, non-life-
threatening unexpected, suspected serious adverse reactions
 Within 48 hours of initial 
receipt of information  Study Coordinator  ● Local/internal 
IRBs/Institutional 
Officials, DSMB  
Unanticipated adverse 
device effects  Within [ADDRESS_272053]  Investigator  ● Local/internal 
IRBs 
 
Unanticipated Problem 
that is not an SAE  Within  [ADDRESS_272054] igator becoming 
aware of the problem  Investigator  ● Local/internal 
IRBs/Institutional 
Officials,  
 
All Unanticipated 
Problems  Within 30 days  of the 
IRB’s receipt of the report of the UP from the 
investigator.
 IRB ● OHRP  
Investigator3 ● External IRBs  
 
9.3.[ADDRESS_272055]. If two seizures are witnessed during the study visits, the 
entire study will be stopped prematurely. These in dividuals would be referred for further medical 
attention. It is very unlikely that a seizure will occur, given that previous studies using tDCS in 
42 
 patients with depression and schizophrenia ha ve had no seizures occur (Berlin et al., 2013, 
Brunelin et al., 2012). The study will also be stopped if other studies provide evidence that transcranial current stimulation has been asso ciated with other, previously unrecognized, 
potentially harmful effects, either short-term or long-term.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_272056], a biostatistician and one or more  clinical researchers. The DSMB will review 
AEs every 6 months whereas the medical monit or will review AEs in real time and make 
decisions as to each participant’s continuation in the trial. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226211]-I on a case-by-case basis. The medical 
monitor will also be present at weekly meetings in order to discuss/explain any event(s) that may occur. 
 
Every [ADDRESS_272057]  of participants’ identification numbers from 
a Frohlich Lab member, not otherwise associated with this clinical trial.  Participant 
identification number will be displayed in a tab le according to the three arms of the study; 
however the specific treatment of that arm will not  be disclosed.  This will allow the DSMB to 
compare the three treatment groups. 
 
Reasons for stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_226212]; decrease in cognitive 
abilities based on baseline and e nd of study data (>25% decrease in  scores in 2/[ADDRESS_272058] 
participants or 20% of participants overall.).  In addition, as mentioned above, if a seizure occurs 
during a study visit, the clinical trial will be temporarily be placed on hold for further 
investigation.   
 
   
 
43 
 10 CLINICAL MONITORING  
The Purpose of the monitoring plan is to present the Frohlich Lab’s approach to monitoring 
clinical trials.  The plan facilitates compliance with good clinical practice. 
 
(a) The rights and well-being of human subjects are protected.  
(b) The reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable from source documents.  
(c) The conduct of the trial is in compliance w ith the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), 
with GCP, and with applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
 
This section identifies key monitoring activities and specifies the data to be reviewed over the 
course of a clinical trial.  This is a single site, investigator initiated, clinical trial so there will be 
no site monitoring plan in place. 
 
10.[ADDRESS_272059] version of the approved IRB application for this clinical trial will be followed at all 
times. This responsibility falls in the hands of the study coordinator and research assistants.  If at 
any time there is a deviation from protocol, the deviation from protocol log ( Appendix O ) will be 
filled out.  All team members will be trained on how and when to use this log.  The most up to 
date IRB application will be on file at the Clinical Trials desk in Rm 4109 of the NRB. 
Deviations will be sent to IRB every 4-6 weeks (if necessary). 
 
At the end of the month clinical trials meeting with the PI, 3 randomly selected informed consent 
forms will be chosen. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226213] (1) these forms have been filled out appropriately, 
and (2) the consent form process described in the SOP was followed and properly documented.  
Should any consent form be in violation, the research team will perform and document a 
complete review of all consent forms. 
 
AE and SAE are clearly defined in the Master  Protocol.  Documents of AE and SAE can be 
found in the study binder on file at the Clinical Trials desk in Rm [ADDRESS_272060] with reporting of such events ( Attachment 10 ).  
At all weekly clinical trial team meetings, the study coordinator will chose one CRF and Source 
Document to asses for completion and maintenance. At weekly clinical trials meeting, with the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_84001] (dat a site). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226214]-only access.  This 
allows the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226215], but does not allow them to add, change or input any data.
44 
 11 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
11.1 Study Hypotheses 
 
11.1.1 Primary Objective 
 
Null hypothesis: There is no difference in AHRS score immediately before first 
stimulation session and immediately after la st stimulation session between treatment 
groups. 
Alternative hypothesis: There is a difference in AHRS score immediately before first 
stimulation session and immediately after la st stimulation session between treatment 
groups.  
 
11.1.2 Secondary Objectives  
 
1. Null hypothesis: There is no difference in changes of alpha frequency power 
between baseline EEG and EEG at comp letion of stimulation between treatment 
groups. 
Alternative hypothesis: There is a difference in changes of alpha frequency power 
between baseline EEG and EEG at comp letion of stimulation between treatment 
groups. 
 
2. Null hypothesis: There is no difference in PANSS score immediately before first 
stimulation session and immediately afte r last stimulation session between 
treatment groups. 
Alternative hypothesis: There is a difference in PANSS score immediately before 
first stimulation session and immediately af ter last stimulation session between 
treatment groups.  
 
3. Null hypothesis: There is no difference in BACS score immediately before first 
stimulation session and immediately af ter last stimulation session between 
treatment groups. 
Alternative hypothesis: There is a difference in BACS score immediately before 
first stimulation session and immediately af ter last stimulation session between 
treatment groups.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_272061] size of 
twice daily tACS or tDCS on auditory halluc inations and/or the underlying biomarkers.   
 
11.[ADDRESS_272062] or session (immediately before first stimulation 
session and immediately after last stimulation session) and between subject factor treatment 
(sham, 10Hz tACS or 2 mA tDCS). Spectral analysis will be performed with multi-tapered 
estimation of the frequency spectrum followed by [CONTACT_187941] 
(8-12 Hz).  We will apply the same statistical  analysis procedure for our primary outcome of 
AHRS, PANSS and BACS scores.  
 
We will also use post- hoc paired or unpaired Student’s t -test to identify the group or groups that 
differed. We will further control for multip le comparisons by [CONTACT_226257].  
 
46 
 12 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE 
DATA/DOCUMENTS  
Human Research Committee (IRB):  
● All IRB Correspondences are on file.  
● The study staff is IRB approved prior to performing any study procedures.  
● Adverse events and deviations are reported to IRB per current guidelines.  
● All versions of the IRB protocols and informed consent forms are on file.  
 
Informed Consent:  
● Ensure that participant identification is on all pages of the ICF  
● There is documentation that the participant is given a copy of the consent form (Appendix G)  
● The participant and study representative signed and dated the consent form for him/herself.  
● The participant initialed and dated all ap propriate pages on the informed consent form.  
● Note to file (Appendix N) made for any informed consent deviations.   
● Ensure a valid (current version date) copy of the consent form was used. 
 
Protocol:  
● Confirm that the study staff is conducting the study in compliance with the protocol 
approved by [CONTACT_1744]  
● The protocol deviations (exceptions and viol ations) are documented in the participant 
chart and reported to IRB as required.  
  
Source Documents:  
● Each participant binder will contain a checklis t to ensure that each binder has each source 
document. The checklist will be dated by [CONTACT_3433] e researcher for each time an assessment is 
administered. (Appendix J)  
● Review participant charts to ensure the a ccuracy, completeness and legibility of the data  
● Any correction made to the source documents is dated, initialed, and explained. The original 
entry should not be obscured.  
● The protocol specific source documents are on file.  
● Source documents are completed in ink.  
● Note to files (Appendix N) are made for missing or incomplete data and to explain any 
discrepancies or additional comments.  
 
Electronic Case Report Forms (eCRF)  
● Ensure the data reported on the eCRF is consistent with the source documents.  
● Discrepancies between the source documents and eCRF are explained in a note to file 
(Appendix J) or captured in a comment in the eCRF.  
47 
   
DNA  
● Participant names will not be on any of the samples collected at the initial session. DNA 
testing is performed within the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the samples 
are not shared with or processed by [CONTACT_226258].  
 
The research coordinator, research assistants, and PI [INVESTIGATOR_226216].  Co-I and medical monitor will have access to files upon request as they will need 
access to the locked rooms and filing cabinets in which these documents are located.  The key 
linking dummy identifiers with subject information will be securely destroyed after completion 
of data acquisition.  
 
 
 
48 
 13 ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN PARTICIPANTS  
13.[ADDRESS_272063] 
 
The investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with the principles set 
forth in The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles  and Guidelines for the Protection of Human 
Subjects of Research, as drafted by [CONTACT_226259]  (April 18, 1979) and codified in 45 CFR Part 
46 and/or the ICH E6; 62 Federal Regulations [ZIP_CODE] (1997). 
 
13.[ADDRESS_272064] work together to ensure institutional compliance with ethical principles and 
regulatory requirements. The following is a mi ssion statement for the coordinated Human 
Research Protection Program:  
 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is committed to expanding and disseminating 
knowledge for the benefit of the people of North Carolina and the world. An important part of 
that commitment to knowledge is research of the highest quality on all aspects of the health and 
behavior of people, and such research is only possible through the participation of humans as 
research participants. Human participants are part ners in research and a precious resource to the 
university. At UNC-Chapel Hill, human participan t research is a privilege, but not a right. 
Consistent with that philosophy, it is the mission of the UNC-Chapel Hill Human Research Protection Program to ensure that 
 
1. The rights and welfare of human participants are paramount in the research process; 
2. The highest standards of ethical conduct are employed in all research involving human 
participants; 
3. Research investigators are properly traine d in the ethical and regulatory aspects of 
research with human participants; 
49 
 4. Research investigators deal honestly and fairly with human participants, informing them 
fully of procedures to be followed, and the ri sks and benefits of participating in research; 
and 
5. Research using human participants at UNC-Chapel Hill conforms to all applicable local, 
state, and federal laws and regulations and the policies of the university.  
13.3 Informed Consent Process 
 
Informed consent is a process th at is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to participate in 
the study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation.  Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of tACS will be provided to the participants and their families. 
Consent forms describing, in detail, the study intervention, device, procedures, and risks are 
given to the participant and written documentation  of informed consent is required prior to the 
administration of any treatment or assessments used in this study.  Please see Appendix G for an 
example of the Documentation of Informed Consent Process form. All consent forms will be 
IRB-approved and updated with any new information as modifications are made throughout the 
study ( Appendix F) . 
 
Together, the researcher and potential participants w ill review the clinical trial in its entirety. At 
several intervals during the consent review, the researcher will ask the participant questions that 
will assess the comprehension of the information in the consent. If the participant is unsure or does not know, the researcher will return to that section and more carefully explain the information. Participants must sign the informed consent document prior to any procedures 
taking place.  If needed, the participants will have the opportunity to discuss the study with their 
surrogates or think about it prior to agreeing to  participate.  Participants may withdraw consent at 
any time throughout the course of the trial.  A copy of the signed informed consent document 
will be given to the participants for their records.  The rights and welfare of the participants will 
be protected by [CONTACT_40749]. 
 
13.4 Exclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children (Special Populations) 
 
Non-English speaking individuals are excluded be cause the ability to accurately and completely 
communicate study information, answer questions about the study, and obtain consent is necessary. Female participants will be asked if there is any reason to believe they might be 
pregnant. Pregnant participants will be excluded despi[INVESTIGATOR_226217], since no safety data for  pregnancy is known to exist for transcranial 
[ADDRESS_272065] participant’s willingness to cont inue will be communicated within [ADDRESS_272066] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_226218], completeness, 
legibility, and timeliness of the data reported. During weekly meetings, the data will be reviewed 
by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_226219].  Any changes made to the data will involve crossing out the original data, documenting the new data with the initials and date of the researcher making the change.  
 
14.1 Data Management Responsibilities 
 
The responsibilities designated to each member of the research team are documented on the 
Delegation of Authority SOP ( Appendix K).  The study coordinator and research assistants will 
be responsible for the informed consent process, review for eligibility, questionnaire administration, data entry, devi ce administration, EEG administ ration, and CRF entries. The 
study coordinator will be responsible for AE/SAE documentation and reporting, while the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226220], review of the AE documentation forms and overview of 
the research staff. [CONTACT_226277] will be th e medical monitor for the study.        
 
14.2 Data Capture Methods 
 
Clinical data (including AEs, concomitant medicat ions, and expected adverse reactions data) and 
clinical laboratory data will be entered into a data capture system provided by [CONTACT_61604].  The data system includes password protection and inte rnal quality checks, such as automatic range 
checks, to identify data that appear inconsistent, incomplete, or inaccurate.  Clinical data will be 
entered directly from the source documents. 
 
14.[ADDRESS_272067] day of stimulation, the 5th 
day of stimulation and end point (one month follow-up). The BACS will be used to assess 
cognition in each participant and will be used as a safety monitor and data collection tool to 
[ADDRESS_272068] day of stimulation, the 5th day of stimulation, and 
at the one week and one month follow-up. The data collected from the EEG recording will 
enable assessment of neurophysiological changes induced by [CONTACT_187930].  
 
14.4 Timing/Reports . 
 
The stimulation adverse effects que stionnaire will be administered  at the end of each stimulation 
session and at each follow-up session. Any AE will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_874] 72 hours and to 
the medical monitor within 24 hours.  Reports will be run at the end of each week and any 
unusual activity that could be a cause of concern will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226221].  
 
14.5 Study Records Retention 
 
According to th e University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill’s Archives and Record 
Management Services schedule f or General Records Retention and Disposition Schedule 6.10, 
records will be kept for 5 years after the comple tion of the study or grant end date, whichever is 
later.  
 
53 
 14.6 Protocol Deviations 
 
All deviations from the protocol will be addressed in study participant source documents. The 
researcher will complete a Protocol Deviation Log (Appendix O) using the participant code as the 
identifier. This form will collect information such as the date the deviation occurred, details of what the deviation consisted of, any corrective and preventative actions that were taken as a 
result of the deviation, and the date that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84010]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226222].  A completed co py of the Protocol Deviation Form will be 
maintained in the regulatory file, as well as in  the participant’s source document.  Protocol 
deviations will be sent to the IRB per their guidelines.  The site PI/study staff will be responsible for knowing and adhering to their IRB requirements.  
 
 
54 
 15 PUBLICATION POLICY  
This study will be registered on clinicaltrials. gov once IRB approved. There are no restrictions 
on publications since this is an investigator-initi ated study funded by a grant agency (NIMH) that 
has no influence on the publications resulting from this study. The aim is to publish the results of 
this study in a peer-reviewed, highly-ranked psychiatry journal.  
 
55 
 16 LITERATURE REFERENCES  
 
Ali, M. M., K. K. Sellers, et al. (2013). "T ranscranial alternating current stimulation modulates 
large-scale cortical network activity by [CONTACT_226260]." The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 33(27): [ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE].  
 
Antal, A., Chaieb, L., Moliadze, V., Monte-Silva,  K., Poreisz, C., Thirugnanasambandam, N., & 
Paulus, W. (2010). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene polymorphisms shape 
cortical plasticity in humans. Brain Stimulation , 3(4), 230-237. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2009.12.003  
 
Arns, M., C. K. Conners, et al. (2013). "A decad e of EEG Theta/Beta Ratio Research in ADHD: 
a meta-analysis." J Atten Disord 17(5): 374-383.  
 
Berk, M., Ng, F., Dodd, S., Callaly, T., Campbell, S., Bernardo, M., & Trauer, T. (2008). The 
validity of the CGI severity and improvement scales as measures of clinical efficacy suitable for 
routine clinical use. Journal Of Evaluation In Clinical Practice, 14(6), 979-983. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2753.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x  
 
Berlim, M.T., Van den Eynde, F., and Daskalakis, Z.J. (2013). Clinical utility of transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS) for treating  major depression: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized, double-blind and sham-cont rolled trials. Journal of psychiatric research 
47, 1-7.  
 
Brunelin, J., M. Mondino, et al. (2012). "Examini ng transcranial direct-current stimulation 
(tDCS) as a treatment for hallucinations in schizophrenia." Am J Psychiatry 169(7): 719-724.  
 
Brunoni, A. R., J. Amadera, et al. (2011). "A systematic review on reporting and assessment of 
adverse effects associated with transcranial di rect current stimulation." The international journal 
of neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific journal of the Collegium Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum 14(8): 1133-1145.  
 
Brunoni, A. R., M. A. Nitsche, et al. (2012). "Clinical research with transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future directions." Brain stimulation 5(3): 175-195.  
 
56 
 Cohen, M. X., N. Axmacher, et al. (2009). "Good vibrations: cross-frequency coupling in the 
human nucleus accumbens during reward processing." Journal of cognitive neuroscience 21(5): 
875-889.  
 
Delorme, A. and S. Makeig (2004). "EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-
trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis." Journal of neuroscience 
methods 134(1): 9-21.  
 
Egan M.F., Kojima M., Callicott J.H., Goldberg T.E., Kolachana B.S., Bertolino A., et al. 
(2003). The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects ac tivity-dependent secretion of BDNF and 
human memory and hippocampal function. Cell, 112(2), pp. 257 –269.  doi:10.1016/S0092-
8674(03)[ZIP_CODE]-[ADDRESS_272069], M. B., & Gibbon, M. (2004). The Structu red Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I 
Disorders (SCID-I) and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Disorders (SCID-
II). In M. J. Hilsenroth, D. L. Segal (Eds.) , Comprehensive handbook of psychological 
assessment, Vol. 2: Personality assessment (pp. 134-143). Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons 
Inc. 
 
Fritsch, B., J. Reis, et al. (2010). "Direct curren t stimulation promotes BDNF-dependent synaptic 
plasticity: potential implications for motor learning." Neuron 66(2): 198-204.  
 
Fröhlich F, McCormick DA.. Endogenous electric fi elds may guide neocortical network activity. 
Neuron(2010) 67:129 –43.10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.005  
 
Frohlich, F. and S. L. Schmidt (2013). "Rational design of transcranial current stimulation (TCS) 
through mechanistic insights into cortical network dynamics." Frontiers in human neuroscience 
7: 804.  
 
Green, M. F., R. S. Kern, et al. (2000). "Neu rocognitive deficits and functional outcome in 
schizophrenia: are we measuring the "right stuff"?" Schizophrenia bulletin 26(1): 119-136.  
 
Hariri, A. R., Goldberg, T. E., Mattay, V. S., Kolachana, B. S., Callicott, J. H., Egan, M. F., & 
Weinberger, D. R. (2003). Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor val ΂΂ met Polymorphism 
Affects Human Memory-Related Hippocampal Activity and Predicts Memory Performance. The 
Journal Of Neuroscience, 23(17), 6690-6694 . 
 
57 
 Janno S, Holi M. M., Tuisku K., Wahlbeck K. (2005). Validity of Simpson-Angus Scale (SAS) 
in a naturalistic schizophrenia population. BMC Neurol  5(1): 5.  doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-5-5  
 
Jarskog, L. F., R. M. Hamer, et al. (2013). "Metformin for weight loss and metabolic control in 
overweight outpatients with schizophrenia and sc hizoaffective disorder." The American journal 
of psychiatry 170(9): 1032-1040.  
 
Kanai, R., L. Chaieb, et al. (2008). "Frequenc y-dependent electrical stimulation of the visual 
cortex." Curr Biol 18(23): 1839-1843.  
 
Kay, S. R., Flszbein, A., & Opfer, L. A. (1987). The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale 
(PANSS) for Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13(2), 261-276.  
 
Keefe, R. S., Goldberg, T. E., Harvey, P. D., Gold, J. M., Poe, M. P., & Coughenour, L. (2004). 
The Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia: reliability, sensitivity, and comparison 
with a standard neurocognitive batter y. Schizophrenia Research, 68(2-3), 283-297. 
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2003.09.011  
 
Keefe, R. E., Poe, M., Walker, T. M., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). The Relationship of the Brief 
Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS)  to Functional Capacity and Real-world 
Functional Outcome. Journal Of Clinical And Experimental Neuropsychology, 28(2), 260-269. 
doi:10.1080/13803390500360539  
 
Keefe, R. S., C. E. Eesley, et al. (2005). "Defining a cognitive function decrement in 
schizophrenia." Biological psychiatry 57(6): 688-691  
 
Keefe, R. S., R. W. Buchanan, et al. (2013 ). "Clinical trials of potential cognitive-enhancing 
drugs in schizophrenia: what have we learned so far?" Schizophrenia bulletin 39(2): 417-435.  
 
Kirkpatrick, B., W. S. Fenton, et al. (2006). "The NIMH-MATRICS consensus statement on 
negative symptoms." Schi zophrenia bulletin 32(2): 214-219.  
 
Kleim, J. A., Chan, S., Pringle, E., Schallert, K., Procaccio, V., Jimenez, R., & Cramer, S. C. 
(2006). BDNF val66met polymorphism is associat ed with modified experience-dependent 
plasticity in human motor cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 9(6), 735-737. doi:10.1038/nn1699  
 
58 
 Kutchko, K. M. and F. Frohlich (2013). "Emerg ence of metastable state dynamics in 
interconnected cortical networks with propagati on delays." PLoS computational biology 9(10): 
e1003304.  
 
Lawrie, S. M., C. Buechel, et al. (2002). "Reduc ed frontotemporal functional connectivity in 
schizophrenia associated with auditory halluc inations." Biol Psychiatry 51(12): 1008-1011.  
 
Miniussi, C., D. Brignani, et al. (2012). "Combi ning transcranial electrical stimulation with 
electroencephalography: a multimodal a pproach." Clin EEG Neurosci 43(3): 184-191.  
 
Neuling, T., S. Rach, et al. (2013). "Orchestrating neuronal networks: sustained after-effects of 
transcranial alternating current stimulation de pend upon brain states." Frontiers in human 
neuroscience 7: 161.  
 
Nitsche, M. A., W. Jaussi, et al. (2004). "Consolidation of human motor cortical neuroplasticity 
by D-cycloserine." Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29(8): 1573-1578.  
 
Nitsche, M. A. and W. Paulus (2000). "Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex 
by [CONTACT_226261]." The Journal of physiology 527 Pt 3: 633-639.  
 
Pezawas L.,Verchinski B.A., Mattay V.S., Call icott J.H., Kolachana B.S., Straub R.E., Egan 
M.F., Meyer- Lindenberg A, Weinberger D.R. (2004). “The Br ain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor 
val66met Polymorphism and Variation in Human Cortical Morphology.” The Journal of 
Neuroscience 24 (45): [ZIP_CODE] –102. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2680-04.2004.  
 
Polania, R., M. A. Nitsche, et al. (2012). "The importance of timing in segregated theta phase-
coupling for cognitive performance." Curr Biol 22(14): 1314-1318.  
 
Seth, A. K. (2010). "A MATLAB toolbox for Granger causal connectivity analysis." Journal of 
neuroscience methods 186(2): 262-273.  
Shergill, S. S., R. M. Murray, et al. (1998). "Auditory hallucinations: a review of psychological 
treatments." Schizophrenia research 32(3): 137-150.  
 
Silbersweig, D. A., E. Stern, et al. (1995). "A  functional neuroanatomy of hallucinations in 
schizophrenia." Nature 378(6553): 176-179.  
 
59 
 Stagg, C. J. and M. A. Nitsche (2011). "Physiological basis of transcranial direct current 
stimulation." Neuroscientist 17(1): 37-53.  
 
Uhlhaas, P. J. and W. Singer (2012). "Neuronal dynamics and neuropsychiatric disorders: toward 
a translational paradigm for dysfunctional large-scale networks." Neuron 75(6): 963-980.  
 
Vicente, R., M. Wibral, et al. (2011). "Transfer entropy--a model-free measure of effective 
connectivity for the neurosciences." Journal of computational neuroscience 30(1): 45-67.  
 
Winterer, G., R. Coppola, et al. (2003). "Functional and effective frontotemporal connectivity 
and genetic risk for schizophrenia." Biological psychiatry 54(11): 1181-1192.  
 
Zaehle, T., S. Rach, et al. (2010). "Transcran ial alternating current stimulation enhances 
individual alpha activity in human EEG." PloS one 5(11): e13766.  
 
Zaghi, S., M. Acar, et al. (2010). "Noninvasive brain stimulation with low-intensity electrical 
currents: putative mechanisms of action for direct and alternating current stimulation." The 
Neuroscientist : a review journal bringing neurobi ology, neurology and psychiatry 16(3): 285-
307. 
 
 
 
60 
 SUPPLEMENTS/APPENDICES 
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF EVENTS 
A detailed schematic describing all visits and assessments. 
 
 STILL 2 Study Outline 
Procedures Consent Visit Screening Visit  Day 1 of 
Stimulation Days 2 –4 of 
Stimulation Day 5 of 
Stimulation 1 Week  
Follow-up 1 Month  
Follow-up 
Signed Consent Form X       
Vital Signs  X X X X X X 
SCID, Med Hx, Phys. Exam  X      
Incl/Excl Criteria  X      
Medications       X 
AHRS X X X  X X X 
PANSS, CGI-S   X  X  X 
SAS, AIMS  X   X  X 
BACS   X  X  X 
UDS, beta-HCG  X      
Randomization   X     
Stimulation   X X X   
EEG  X   X X X 
EEG Questionnaire  X   X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X   
 
 
 
  
 
61 
  
APPENDIX B: AE REPORT FORM 
 
Adverse Effects Report:  
Reasons for Report (adverse event, time, date and place of occurrence if available) :  
1. What do we already know about the therapy? 
a.  
2. What is the temporal relationship of the AE to the study therapy? 
a.  
3. Does the AE improve or disappear when the therapy is stopped? 
a.  
4. Is the AE a worsening of baseline symptom(s)? 
a.  
5. Is the AE a result of an underlying concurrent medical condition(s) or concurrent 
medication(s)? 
a.   
6. Additional Information provided by [CONTACT_84048]  
a.  
Research team member signature ______________________________________ 
Date____________ 
Co-Investigator :  
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________ 
 
Steps to be taken (if applicable) ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
CI signature 
_______________________________________________________Date___________ 
 PI [CONTACT_72411]:  
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
 
62 
 ______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________  
Steps to be taken (if applicable) 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_59844] 
_______________________________________________________Date___________ 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 APPENDIX C: AE LOG 
 
Participant ID  
 if AE meets 
definition of 
serious*   
GRADE / 
INTENSITY 
1. Asymptomatic 
2. Mild  
3. Moderate  
4. Severe  
  
DATE OF 
INCIDENT   
Relationship to 
study device 
 
1. Related  
2. Possibly  
3. Not Likely  
4. Not Related  
  
Was Action 
Taken?  
 
 
 
  
Action(s) Taken: 
 
  
Outcome: 
 
1. Recovered  
2. Not Recovered  
3. Recovered w/Sequel 
4. Fatal  
5. Unknown   
PI [CONTACT_74938] / Date 
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
     Yes  /  No    
 
64 
 APPENDIX D: SAE REPORT FORM 
Participant ID: _______________ 
 
1. Location of SAE (e.g., clinic, home): __________________________________________ 
 
2.   Age: ______  
 
3.  Gender: Male Female 
 
4. SAE term (provide diagnosis): _____________________________________________________ 
 
4a. If diagnosis is not known, symptoms: __ __________________________________________ 
 
5. Date of onset: ________________________ (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
6. What is the severity grade of the serious adverse event?   
Grade: 1: Mild  Grade 2: Moderate  
Grade 3: Severe  
Grade 4: Life-threatening  Grade 5: Death 
 
7. Did the participant receive the investigational product or study intervention prior to this SAE? 
   Yes   No   N/A 
 7a. If yes, identify the investigational product or  study intervention received prior to the SAE: 
Investigational Product/Study Intervention 
 
Dose_______ 
Units_______ 
Frequency________  Start Date _____/_____/______
(dd/mm/yyyy) 
Stop Date _____/_____/______ ( (dd/mm/yyyy) 
Check if Ongoing 
      8. Action taken with investigational product/study intervention: 
 
Continued 
Lowered 
Interrupted Discontinued Increased N/A  
9. Outcome of SAE: 
 
Ongoing at this time 
Resolved without sequelae Resolved with sequelae Death 
Present at death, not contributing to death 
  
 
65 
 10. Date of resolution: ________________________ (dd/mm/yyyy) or  
 Ongoing at end of study 
 11. Seriousness criteria? (Check all that apply) 
 
Life-threatening Required hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226223]/incapacitating 
Important medical event 
Fatal 
If fatal: 11a. Date of death: ________________________ (dd/mm/yyyy) 
11b. Primary cause of death: ________ _______________________________________ 
11c. Was an autopsy performed?   
Yes  
No  
12. Relationship to investigational product/study intervention:  
Related (Associated with the use of the st udy intervention. There is a reasonable 
possibility that the experience may have been caused by [CONTACT_34144].) 
Unrelated 
 
13. If SAE is unrelated to investigational product/s afety intervention, select all possible etiologies: 
Concurrent illness, disease, or other external factors, specify: 
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________  
Concurrent medication, specify: _____________________________________________________________________________ 
 Secondary study procedure, specify: 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Accident, trauma, or other external factors, specify: 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Other, specify: _____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
14. Did the participant receive any relevant conc omitant medications in response to the SAE?  
Yes 
 No 
  14a. If yes, please specify: Name, Start and Stop date or On going  
 _____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 15. Did the participant receive any treatments/procedures in response to the SAE?  
 
Yes  No   
 
66 
 15a. If yes, please specify 
 _____________________________________________________________________________  
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
16. Did the participant receive relevant laboratory or diagnostic tests in response to the SAE?  
 
Yes  No   
16a. If yes, provide the name [CONTACT_226268]/or supplemental 
  exams below:  
 ____________________________________________________________________________  ________________________________________ ____________________________________ 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
17. Narrative/Comments (provide a description of the serious adverse event including chronological 
clinical presentation and evolution of the seriou s adverse event and associated signs/symptoms):  
 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  ____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________  ____________________________________________________________________________________  ____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 ____________________________________________________________________________________  ____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________  ____________________________________________________________________________________  
____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
18. Completion of form: printed names,  signatures and date of signature  
 
[CONTACT_226269] 
(print name)             Person Completing Form  
                   (signature)  Date  
   
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
67 
  
Investigator (print name)  Investigator (signature)  Date  
 
______________________________________________________________________________  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
68 
 APPENDIX E: UE/SAE LOG 
 
Participant ID  
  
  
Date Event 
Occurred  
Date Study 
Team Notified 
of Event  
  
Event 
  
Date Reported 
to IRB 
  
Study SAE Form Completed  
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
     Yes     No      
N/A      
 
 
69 
 APPENDIX F: CONSENT AMENDMENT TRACKING LOG 
 
 
 
Change Initiated 
by:               [CONTACT_226262]? 
(Y/N) Stipulation 
Submission 
Date  IRB 
Approval 
Date  
Initials  Reference 
ID 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
 
   
 
70 
 APPENDIX G: INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS DOCUMENTATION 
Abbreviated Study Title:       
 
Participant Name:        [CONTACT_226270]:     
 Medical Record #: __________________________  
Please INITIAL next to “Yes” or “No”  by [CONTACT_226263] (if “No,” an explanation MUST be 
provided in the notes section below). 
 
 Yes  No Participant and/or the participant’s legally authorized representative (LAR) 
was given a copy of the consent document to read. 
 Yes  No Ample time was provided fo r reading the consent document, and the 
participant (or participant’s LAR) was encouraged to ask questions. 
 Yes  No All questions and concerns we re addressed to the satisfaction of the 
participant (or participant’s LAR) prior to signing the consent document. 
 Yes  No The PI [INVESTIGATOR_54720]-I was available fo r questions prior to the subject signing the 
consent.  
 Yes  No The subject (or subject’s LAR) agreed to participate in the study and 
signed/dated the consent document. 
 Yes  No A copy of the signed consent do cument was provided to the participant (or 
participant’s LAR). 
     Verbal consent was obtained (per IRB approved consent process).  
Documentation of the process and the in dividual(s) witnessing the process is 
described below. 
 Yes  No No procedures specifically related  to the study were performed prior to the 
participant signing the consent document. 
 
The details of this research study we re discussed with the participant (or participant’s LAR), including an 
explanation of all of the elements  of the consent document.  The IRB-approved consent document was 
signed and dated by [CONTACT_2299] (or participant’ s LAR) and a copy of the signed consent document 
was placed in the participant’s medical record (unless otherwise noted).  No activities specifically related 
to the research were initiated until after the ex ecution of the consent document.  The principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_226224]’s cons ent to be enrolled in the study and agrees with 
enrollment of subject. 
 
The participant (or participant’s LAR) signed consent document version      
on     (date)  at   (time) . 
 
 
71 
 Notes: 
             
             
             
             
             
             
              
               
Signature [CONTACT_226271] 
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
72 
 APPENDIX H: INFORMED CONSENT QUIZ 
 
Name [CONTACT_61617]:  
 
 
You have been asked to be in a research  study. This sheet will help you think 
of questions to ask but you may have other questions.  This is not a test.  We 
want to be sure you understand what it means to be in this research study.  
You should understand the research before you decide whether or not to 
participate. 
 
 
1. What is the purpose  of the research? 
 
 
2. What are the possible benefits  of the research? 
 
 
3. What are the possible risks of the research? 
 
 4. Will everyone receive the same treatment? 
 
 
5.   How is this research different than the care or treatment I would get if I wasn ’t in 
the research study?  
 
 
6.  Does in the research cost me anything extra? 
 
 
7. Can you stop being in the re search once you’ ve started? 
 
 
8.  Who will view your medical  records? 
 
 
9.   Who do you call if I have questions about being a research subject? 
 
 
10.  Any questions?   
 
73 
 APPENDIX I: IRB AMENDMENT TRACKING LOG  
 
 
 
Change Initiated 
by: [CONTACT_61613]: Type and Brief 
Summary  Date 
Submitted 
to IRB Date of 
IRB 
Answer Requires 
Stipulations? 
(Y/N) Requires 
Updated 
Consent 
Form? 
(Y/N) Stipulation 
Submission 
Date  IRB 
Approval 
Date  
Initials  Reference 
ID 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
74 
 APPENDIX J: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
 
 
 Designee (full 
name)  Courtney Lugo Juliann Mellin [CONTACT_226278]. John Gilmore  [CONTACT_226279] & Position Study Coordinator  Study Coordinator Co-Investigator  Co-Investigator  Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_226225] 
(see codes)      
Designee 
Signature & Dates      
Designee Initials 
(signed)      
 Activity Codes: 
01:  Informed Consent                                 04:  CRF Entries                           07:  Data Entry  
02:  Initial Session Review for Eligibility   05:  Device Administration           08: Adverse Event Assessment 
03:  Questionnaire Administration              06:  EEG Administration              09: Adverse Event 
Documentation/Reporting  
10: Medical Monitor   
 Investigator’s Authorizati on: I hereby [CONTACT_226264]-related duties to the following persons 
and understand that the overall responsibility for conduct of the research remains with me.  
 
1Investigator’s Signature:  [CONTACT_1782]:  
 
75 
 APPENDIX K: ENROLLMENT LOG 
 
Subject ID Date 
Consent 
Signed Gender Race Ethnicity Treatment 
Arm / 
Group Explanation if subject did not 
complete study / Comment  
1   M  F      
2   M  F      
3   M  F      
4   M  F      
5   M  F      
6   M  F      
7   M  F      
8   M  F      
9   M  F      
10   M  F      
11   M  F      
12   M  F      
13   M  F      
14   M  F      
15   M  F      
 
76 
 APPENDIX L: INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA CHECKLIST 
Inclusion Criteria 
DSM-IV diagnosis of schizophrenia, any subtype, or schizoaffective disorder,  
with refractory auditory hallucinations. Duration of illness >[ADDRESS_272070] 12 weeks, i.e. not requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226226] a change in level of care         Yes   No 
On current antipsychotic doses for approx. 4 weeks or more     Yes   No 
Capacity to understand all relevant risks and potential benefits of  
the study (informed consent) OR has a legal guardian who can     Yes   No  
complete consent forms on the patients behalf       
      
If the responses to all the inclusion criteria ar e YES and all the exclusion criteria are NO, the 
participant is able to participate in the trial.  
Is the participant eligible to part icipate in the trial?    YES  NO 
If NO, discontinue subject. 
If YES, I have reviewed the inclusion and ex clusion criteria and have determined that the 
participant is eligible for participation in the trial. 
 Investigator Signature: ____________________________   Date: _____________ 
 Exclusion Criteria 
Subjects with a DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol or substance abuse  
(other than nicotine) within the last month or a DSM -IV diagnosis      Yes   No 
of alcohol or substance dependence (other than nicotine) within the last 6 months    
History of significant head injury/trauma, as defined by [CONTACT_226265] 1 hour, or recurring seizures, or requiring 
    Yes   No 
later cognitive rehabilitation or  causing cognitive sequellae 
P r i o r  b r a i n  s u r g e r y            Y e s    N o  
Any brain devices/implants, including cochlear implants and aneurysm clips   Yes   No 
Co-morbid neurological condition (i.e. seizure disorder, brain tumor)    Yes   No 
Medical or neurological illness (unstable cardiac disease AIDS, malignancy,  liver or renal
 impairment) or treatment for a medical disorder that could     Yes   No 
interfere with study participation  
Non English speakers           Yes   No 
Pregnancy, nursing, or if female and fertile, unwilling to use      Yes   No appropriate birth control measures during study participation 
 
77 
 APPENDIX M: NOTE TO FILE 
 
IRB#: 14-3285        PI: [INVESTIGATOR_226227]: ____________________________________________________________________ 
Date of Occurrence: ________________ 
Research Name: ____________________________________ Participant ID: _________________ 
Reason for Note: 
______________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________ Note: ______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________ Corrective action (if applicable);____________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________  
 
 Signature: ______________________________      Date: _______________ 
 
78 
 APPENDIX N: PROTOCOL DEVIATION LOG 
Participant 
ID Date 
Occurred Description CAPA* Date PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_226228]/Date 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
 
79 
 APPENDIX O: STUDY START UP CHECKLIST 
Study Start Up Checklist  
Study Title: ______________________________________________________     Funding Source: 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
 Date Completed  
CRMS Recorded Created ______________________  
IRB Application Submitted  ______________________ Approved Date : ____________ 
CVs/Certifications/Medical 
License ______________________  
IRB Roster ______________________  
IRB Statement of Compliance ______________________  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_226229] ______________________  
                                                                Date Completed 
Study Binders Created ______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ ______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
 
 
 
 
______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
______________________ 
 Regulatory Documents Filed 
Protocol Deviation Tracking Log 
Filed 
Completion of Site Training, 
Filed 
Delegation Log Completed 
Develop Recruitment Plan 
Begin Pre-Screening 
Source Documents Created  
Participant Folders Created 
 
 
 
Schedule Study Start Up 
Meeting 
Lab Kits Received 
Participant Supplies Received 
Investigational Device Received 
 
 
 
 
80 
 APPENDIX P: PARTICIPANT OFF STUDY FORM 
Participant Initials                            ID              Date:             /               / 
                         Month         Day            Year 
 
 
Participant Off Study 
 
Date participant went Off Study:             /               / 
                                       Month         Day            Year 
 
INDICATE OFF STUDY REASON:  
  Study Activities Completed  
  Side effects of study intervention (com plete applicable SAE form  or AE Tracking Log) 
  Death  
  Participant lost to follow-up* (provide comments below) 
   Participant refused follow-up* (provide comments below) 
   Other* (provide comments below) 
  Participant withdrew (complete Early Withdrawal section below) 
 
Was treatment unblinded? [ADDRESS_272071] Visit Completed:        Early Withdrawal form not completed  
 
  Screening Visit  
  Visit 1  
  Visit 3 
  Visit 4                                          
   Visit 6   
  Visit 2                                           Visit 5                                            Visit 7   
    
Indicate the primary  reason the participant has withdrawn from the study (select only one): 
  Participant deemed eligible but declined participation  
  Participant deemed inappropriate for study participation by [CONTACT_978]  
  [INVESTIGATOR_226230] r enrollment* (provide comments    below) 
  Identification of disease/condition after enrollment that warrants withdrawal* 
   Unable to continue due to personal constraints* 
   Side effects of study intervention * (complete UWI-02-007 Adverse Event Tracking   
 Log)  
  Other * 
 
 
 
 
81 
 *Additional explan ation required:  
              
              
 
 
F O R M  C O M P L E T E D  B Y :            
 
  
 
 
82 
 APPENDIX Q: TELEPHONE LOG 
 
Date/Time 
  
Incoming/Outgoing  
Message/Conversation  
Reason for calling  
Comments/Researcher Initials 
 
 
  
Incoming 
Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
  
Incoming 
Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
  
Incoming 
Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
  
Incoming 
Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
  
Incoming 
Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
  
Incoming Outgoing 
  
Message 
Conversation   
 
 
83 
  
APPENDIX R: TRAINING LOG 
Title of Training:_________________________ _____  DATE:__________________________ 
(e.g., Protocol; Amendment; IRB [include version #/date]) 
 
By [CONTACT_31300], each staff member verifies they have  been trained on the information and understand the 
obligations/responsibilities associated with this training. 
 
Trainer Name (if relevant):_____________________________ 
(Please print) 
 
Trainer Signature (if relevant):__ _________________________________Training Date 
(if different than 
above) Trainee Name 
(please print) Trainee Signature [CONTACT_226272] 
(ie Presentation; Self-Study)  
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
84 
 APPENDIX S: TELEPHONE RECRUITMENT SCRIPT 
 
Hello, my name [CONTACT_832] _________. Are you contacti ng me in regards to the non-invasive brain 
stimulation study?   If ‘No’, redirect them as necessary) (If ‘Yes’, proceed) Do you have time now to hear about the study,  answer a few screenin g questions, and schedule 
your first visit?  
 
(If ‘No’, ask for a good time to call back) (If ‘Yes’, proceed)  Great! This study is looking at how abnormal rh ythms of brain activity in schizophrenia respond 
to very weak applied currents. Findings from this  study will help the development of treatments 
for the symptoms of sc hizophrenia, like auditory hallucinati ons. In the study, a very weak 
current will be applied to your scalp. Some pe ople report a mild tingling because of this 
stimulation, but no other side effects have been  found. It is not a shock and should cause no 
pain.  
 
Participation in this study includes one to ei ght sessions, with one session being an initial 
information session, then five, twice daily stim ulation sessions, followed by a one week then 
one month follow up session. The stimulation sess ions need to be on consecutive days with the 
second session occurring [ADDRESS_272072] session. The maximum compensation for this study is $340 for completing  all of the sessions. Are you still interested in 
participating?  (If ‘No’, thank them for their time) (If ‘Yes’, proceed) 
 
Great! In order to make sure you’re eligible fo r the study, I need to ask you a few questions. 
Please answer yes or no. You do not need to provide any further details.  
(If the answer given is not the same as the answer shown, thank the individual for his or her interest and say unfortunately, they do not qualify for the current study) 
 
x Are you 18 years old or older?  (Yes) 
x Have you ever, or are you currently being treated for a neurological condition (i.e. 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002])? (No) 
x Are you currently taking any benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050] s or anticonvulsant medications? (No) 
x Have you ever had brain surgery? (No) 
x Do you have any brain devices or implants , including a cochlear implant or aneurysm 
clip? (No) 
x Have you ever been diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury? (No) 
 
85 
 x (For females only), Is there a chance you may be pregnant? (No) 
 
Follow-up questions:  
x Do you wear glasses/contact [CONTACT_13276]? 
o Could you bring your contact [CONTACT_226266] e study visits instead of wearing your 
glasses? 
 
(If answered according to all indicated responses, continue) 
 
Excellent! Due to the study schedule, some session s will be longer than others. Is it possible for 
you to be available from 8 – 5 on weekdays to be  at the UNC Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226231]? If not, can you specify the days/times that do not work for you? 
 Would you be willing to participate in an 8 hour session for this study? (This includes a 3 hour 
break).   You are eligible for participation in the first session of the study. At the first session we will determine your eligibility for the remainder of the sessions.  I’d like to schedule your first 
session now. It will last approximately 3 hours.  All testing will be conducted at either UNC 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_226232].  (specific location).  
 
(Schedule a time for first session)  I will give you a call to confirm your appoin tment [ADDRESS_272073] any 
questions before then, please don’t hesita te to contact [CONTACT_226267]. 
 Thank you for your time. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
86 
 APPENDIX T: EEG QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
EEG Questionnaire 
Date:____________     Participant ID:___________ 
 
After Resting State EEG:  
During this EEG task, can you tell me what you heard (if anything)?  
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
After Oddball task: 
During this EEG task, can you tell me what you heard (if anything)?  
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
After click train task: 
During this EEG task, can you tell me what you heard (if anything)?  
______________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 