Version 0.03, Updated on 1 -1-19 TITLE :  Tamsulosin vs Placebo to Prevent Postoperative Urinary Retention in Female Pelvic 
Reconstructive Surgery  
NCT0352433 9 
1/1/19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 0.03, Updated on 1 -1-19 BACKGROUND:  
Postoperative urinary retention (POUR) is a well -known risk of surgery, and is particularly common in 
urogynecologic surgery.  While acute POUR has a high rate of eventual resolution after discharge home 
with a catheter for [ADDRESS_679689] potential aspects of surgery.  Reported rates of POUR in urogynecologic surgery are 
variable, ranging from to 21 -50% (1, 2, 3).  In our practice the rate is estimated to be around 30%.  Risk 
factors for developi[INVESTIGATOR_523875], most notably high grade cystocele, 
higher intra -operative blood loss, urinary retention prior to surgery, and early removal of foley catheter 
in elderly patients (1, 2).  The etiology for POUR is not completely understood, but multipl e factors are 
suspected to play a role including postoperative pain resulting in impaired relaxation of pelvic floor 
muscles, decreased bladder detrusor muscle contraction, and involuntary contraction of the external 
urethral sphincter secondary to pain, t rauma, or inflammation (4).  
Research has not provided a means to prevent POUR in this patient population.  One therapy that has 
been studied in other fields is use of an alpha receptor antagonist (most commonly tamsulosin), with 
the goal of relaxing muscul ature in the bladder neck and urethra.  The bladder neck and female urethra 
are known to express alpha receptors.  Inhibition of these receptions causes relaxation of muscle in the 
bladder neck and urethral sphincter, decreasing urethral pressure.  Studies  of alpha blockade have 
shown decreased mean and maximal urethral pressure [ADDRESS_679690] symptoms (5), and increased mean urinary flow rate and lower 
urinary tract symptoms after daily ta msulosin for one month (6).  Metaanalysis and systematic review of 
over [ADDRESS_679691] symptoms in patients 
with dysfunctional voiding (7)  
Tamsulosin has been studied in other surgical fields to de crease POUR.   Medani et al studied men 
undergoing urologic surgery including varicocelectomy, inguinal herniorrhaphy, and scrotal surgery, and 
randomized patients to placebo versus tamsulosin 0.4mg at 14 and 2 hours before surgery, and 10 hours 
after surg ery.  They observed a decrease in POUR from 21.1% to 5.9% (8).  A similar study of patients 
undergoing urologic surgery under spi[INVESTIGATOR_523876], and saw an improvement in the rates of POUR with both  alpha antagonists compared to 
placebo, but no difference between the two alpha -blockers (9).  A retrospective review of patients 
undergoing colorectal surgery revealed that patients who received perioperative tamsulosin for 3 days 
prior to surgery and aft er surgery were significantly less likely to experience urinary retention (6.7% vs 
25%) (10).  In a small, retrospective study of our own patients, tamsulosin use was associated with a 
significantly lower rate of POUR (OR 0.11, p=0.03) . 
Development of POUR  is of significant consequ ence to patient health and well -being, as well as to 
healthcare costs.  The risk of POUR in patients undergoing female pelvic reconstructive surgery is high.  
Risk factors for POUR in this field have been identified, but there are  no available prevention strategies.  
Tamsulosin has been studied in other surgical fields and has been shown to be beneficial to preventing 
POUR.  Determining if tamsulosin is beneficial in preventing POUR in female pelvic reconstructive 
surgery is a sign ificant step in improving healthcare in this field.  
 
Version 0.03, Updated on 1 -1-19 PURPOSE/HYPOTHESIS  
The purpose of this study is to determine if perioperative use of tamsulosin decreases the risk of 
postoperative urinary retention after urogynecologic surgery.  
Study aim 1:  Compare t he rates of passage of initial postoperative voiding trial.  
Study aim 2:  Compare the rates of any required bladder catheterization in the postoperative 
period  
Study aim 3:  Compare rates of UTI in the postoperative period  
Hypothesis:  Participants who have received perioperative Tamsulosin will have lower rates of 
postoperative urinary retention following urogynecologic surgery compared to patients who have 
received placebo.  
 
DESIGN: Randomized Control led Trial.  
 
SETTINGS: Two large  academic Institutio ns.  
 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND METHODS:  
This will be a  multi -institutional  randomized controlled trial .  Written consents explicitly explaining the 
risks  and benefits of the study will be obtained from the patients.  
 
The inclusion criteria are the following:  
-Patients must be [ADDRESS_679692] include admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523877], and planned removal of foley catheter and active voiding trial on 
postoperative d ay 1.  
 
The exclusion criteria are the following:  
-Patient unable or unwilling to provide informed consent  
-Severe allergy to sulfa drugs  
-Known allergy to tamsulosin or another alpha antagonist medication  
-History of urinary retention  
Version 0.03, Updated on [ADDRESS_679693] void 2/3 of instilled volume .  
-The patient  will complete the Voiding Symptom Survey  at time of enrollment and again  on 
postoperative day 4.  They will be provided with a copy of this form prior to their discharge from the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  They will be contact[CONTACT_523878] r results.  
-Data collected will include:  Study number, MRN, age, race, BMI, current tobacco use, parity, ASA class, 
preoperative history of urinary retention, preoperative prescription for medication for overactive 
bladder or urge incontinence, urodynamic  testing results (presence of stress urinary incontinence and 
detrusor activity, increased EMG recruitment, post -void residual, peak flow rate, detrusor pressure at 
peak flow rate), preoperative diagnosis particularly of stress urinary incontinence or pelv ic organ 
prolapse, surgery performed, surgical complications, estimated blood loss , voiding trial results, presence  
of POUR, time until resolution of POUR, presence of postoperative urinary tract infection, results of 
postoperative Voiding Symptom Survey . 
 
Data security  
Version 0.03, Updated on 1 -1-19 -Study data will be collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools . REDCap 
(Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture 
for research studies, providing: 1) an intuitive interface for validated data entry; 2) audit trails for 
tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless data 
downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) proced ures for importing data from external sources. 
Identifiable information will be stored in password protected directory accessible only by [CONTACT_25617]. Finally, no identifiable information with be shared outside of our institution  and all non -
identifiable informatio n will be pooled and released as a group for the final study after statistical 
analysis is complete. After the completion of the statistical analysis phase and a sufficient length of time, 
the file containing the patients' MRNs and study specific unique nu merical identifiers will be deleted.  
Patient MRN and unique study specific identifier will be kept until c ompletion of data analysis or >[ADDRESS_679694] for perioperative care.  Investigators will 
again address any questions or concerns during the scheduled postoperative telephone follow up to 
discuss the questionnaire. The primary investigators will meet monthly to review patient enrollment and 
potential adverse events. Any unexpected or significant adverse event may prompt a preliminary 
statistical analysis and/or immediate halt in enrollment or cancellation of the study.  
-Safety monitoring/event reporting :  study investigators will actively monitor for unanticipated 
problems, adverse events, or protocol deviations, with specific emphasis on any events involving risk to 
subject or others.  Reco rd of these events will be kept in the Safety Monitoring Log.  Monitoring will take 
place during preoperative communication with patient, during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408], at the follow -up phone call, 
and in the postoperative period.  In addition to monitoring and rec ord keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], events will be reported 
as appropriate.  Unanticipated problems and any adverse events that may change the risk/benefit ratio  
will be reported to the IRB within 3 days of discovery per institutional guidelines.  Serious adverse events 
will be  immediately reported to the IRB and the patient’s primary provider as soon as investigator is 
aware of the incident.  Any adverse events that are felt to alter the risk/benefit ratio of the study may 
prompt a review and revision of study protocol and/or c onsent form.  Non -serious adverse events will 
be kept in the Safety Monitoring Log.  
  
Version 0.03, Updated on [ADDRESS_679695] deviations, and 
ranges.  Comparisons between the experi mental and control group will be evaluated with univariate and 
multivariate logistic regression as appropriate.  A conservative power analysis was performed and 
determined that a total of 118 (59 in each arm) would be required to achieve a power of 80% wit h an 
alpha error of 0.[ADDRESS_679696] a decrease in the rate of failed void trial from 30% to 10%.   To 
account for a 15% dropout rate we will recruit 136 participants.  
 
OUTCOMES:  
PRIMARY OUTCOME :  pass/fail of voiding trial on the morning after surg ery 
SECONDARY OUTCOMES:  development of POUR at any time after surgery, diagnosis of urinary tract 
infection after surgery, Voiding Symptom Survey  score  
 
REFERENCES:  
1. Hakvoort RA, Dijkgraaf MG, Burger MP, Emanuel MH, Roovers JP. Predicting short -term uri nary 
retention after vaginal prolapse surgery. Neurourol Urodyn 2009;28:225 -8 
2. Chong C, Kim HS, Suh DH, Jee BC. Risk factors for urinary retention after vaginal hysterectomy for 
pelvic organ prolapse.  Obstetrics & Gynecology Science. 16 Mar 2016, 59(2): 137-143 
3. Espaillat -Rijo L, Siff L, Alas AN, Chadi SA, Zimberg S, Vaish S, Davila GW, Barber M, Hurtado EA.  
Intraoperative Cystoscopic Evaluation of Ureteral Patency: A Randomized Controlled Trial.  Obstet 
Gynecol. 2016 Dec;128(6):1378 -1383.  
4. FitzGeral d MP, Brubaker L. The etiology of urinary retention after surgery for genuine stress 
incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2001;20(1):[ADDRESS_679697] of tamsulosin on the 
resting tone and the contractile behaviour of the female urethra: a functional urodynamic study in 
healthy women.  Eur Urol. 2004 Aug;46(2):[ADDRESS_679698] 
symptoms (LUTS) in women.  Asia n J Surg. 2007 Apr;30(2):[ADDRESS_679699] 
symptoms in women: a s ystematic review and meta -analysis.  Int J Impot Res. 2017 Jul;29(4):[ADDRESS_679700] -operative urinary retention: a randomized double -
blind placebo -controlled study.  Int Braz J  Urol. 2014 Jan -Feb;40(1):30 -6. 
Version 0.03, Updated on 1 -1-19 9. Akkoc A, Aydin C, Topaktas R, Kartalmis M, Altin S, Isen K, Metin A.  Prophylactic effects of alpha -
blockers, Tamsulosin and Alfuzosin, on postoperative urina ry retention in male patients undergoing 
urologic surgery under spi[INVESTIGATOR_56188].  Int Braz J U rol. 2016 May -Jun;42(3):578 -84. 
10. Poylin V, Curran T, Cataldo T, Nagle D.  Perioperative use of tamsulosin significantly decreases rates 
of urinary retention  in men undergoing pelvic surgery.  Int J Colorectal Dis. 2015 Sep;30(9):1223 -8 
 