1 
 
Randomized, double -masked, placebo -controlled evaluation of netarsudil for 
prevent ion of corticosteroid -induced  intraocular pressure elevati on 
 
 
 
Name [CONTACT_257518]:  Netarsudil  ophthalmic solution 0.02%  
Investigational phase:    Physician -spon sored IND  
Principal Investigator:    [CONTACT_247842] W. Price, Jr. MD  
Telephone number:    [PHONE_5365]  (24 hours)  
Email address:     [EMAIL_4963]  
 
Study number:     [ADDRESS_765108] number     03248037  
Date:     8/23/2017  
Version:     2 
 
 
 
 
Sponsor : 
Francis W. Price, Jr. MD  
Cornea Research Foundation of America  
[ADDRESS_765109]., Suite 212  
Indianapolis, IN  [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: 317 -814-2990, FAX: 317 -814-2806  
 
2 
 
 
1. Purpose of the Study and Background  
 
1.1  Purpose of the Study:  
The study objective is to determine whether use of netarsudil significantly reduces the rate of steroid -
associated intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation when used by [CONTACT_581869][INVESTIGATOR_581862] -term as an 
adjunct to prednisolone acetate (P A) 1% ophthalmic solution (used to prevent transplant rejection).  
 
1.2  Background  
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_581863]. They are also 
the mainstay for preven ting and treating corneal transplant rejection and for treating ocular conditions 
involving immune hyper -reactivity.1 The principal drawbacks include steroid -induced ocular hypertension 
and steroid -induced glaucoma. The incidence varies with the type of glucocorticoid and its formulation, 
the dosing freque ncy, and the treatment duration.  
 
Prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic solution is the most commonly used topi[INVESTIGATOR_581864] 
U.S.2 Treatment duration ranges from a few weeks, for controlling postoperative inflammation, to years, 
for preventing co rnea transplant rejection.2 Up to 35% of patients without a prior glaucoma diagnosis and 
up to 80% with pre -existing glaucoma experience clinically significant post -keratoplasty IOP elevation 
with long -term topi[INVESTIGATOR_121464].[ADDRESS_765110] eroids, without the confounding factors present 
with immune hyper -reactivity disorders.  
 
1.3 Study Design  
 Prospective, randomized, double -masked, placebo -controlled clinical trial   
 Main Outcome Measure  
o Rate of intraocular pressure elevation  
 
2.0  Characteris tics of the Research Population  
 
2.1  Number of Subjects:  up to 186 cornea  transplant (endothelial keratoplasty) patients will 
be enrolled.  
 
2.2  Gender of Subjects:  both men and women will be enrolled  
3 
 
2.3  Age of Subjects:  18-90 years of age. The rationale for not in cluding minors is that 
endothelial keratoplasty is performed to  treat endothelial dysfunction , a condition  usually seen in  
adults over 40 years of age.  
 
2.4  Racial and Ethnic Origin:  Subjects may be of any racial or ethnic origin.  
 
2.5  Inclusion criteria:  the fo llowing are requirem ents for study inclusion:  
o At least 18 years of age  
o Male or female patient undergoing Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty  
o Patient is able and willing to administer eye drops.  
o Patient is able to comprehend and has signed the Inform ed Consent form.  
o Patient is likely to complete the nine -month  course of the study.  
 
2.6: Exclusion criteria:  
o A patient exhibiting pre-operative intraocular inflammation.   
o A patient with a known sensitivity to any of the ingredients in the study 
medication s  
o A patient who has a condition (i.e., UNCONTROLLED  systemic disease) or is in a 
situation which in the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_581865], may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with the 
patient’s parti cipation in the study  
o A patient with abnormal eyelid function . 
o A patient that is exhibiting active corneal ulceration, keratitis, or conjunctivitis, or 
who has a history of herpetic keratitis .  
o A patient who has been diagnosed with uncontrolled  glaucoma , prior aqueous 
shunt or trabeculectomy,  or with preoperative IOP > 2 2 mm Hg  in the potential 
study eye . 
o Presence of any ocular disease that would interfere with the evaluation of the 
study treatment.  However, p atients with a history of cystoid macular edema , age -
related macular degeneration,  corneal neovascularization, and other  non-
interfering  comorbidities may be enrolled.  
o A patient with a history of non -compliance with using prescribed medication . 
o A patient who is concurrently involved in or participated in another randomized 
clinical trial within 30 days prior to enrollment in this study.  
o Patients who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant within the duration of 
the study  
 
2.7 Vulnerable Subjects:  No potentially vulnerable subjects will be enrolled b ecause there may 
be no direct benefit to the patient; rather, important knowledge which may benefit future subjects 
is being sought. As such, the direct benefit would not outweigh risks for vulnerable  populations.  
 
Minors will not be enrolled into this st udy because the conditions being studied under this 
protocol are not typi[INVESTIGATOR_416371] . Endothelial keratoplasty is performed to  treat 
endothelial dysfunction, a condition usually seen only in older (>40 years of age) adults. ) 
 
4 
 
Pregnant women wil l not be enrolled into this study as potential risks and harm to the fetus is 
unknown.  
 
This study plans to exclude any person who does not speak English as non - English speaking 
patients are not normally seen at the study site  so a translator would not b e available to translate 
the consent form into the patient’s native language.  
 
3.0  Methods & Procedures  
 
3.1 Study procedures and assessments.  
 Screening  and Enrollment :  Prospective subjects  will be considered for entry into the study. 
Subjects meeting the in clusion and exclusion criteria will be informed of the opportunity to participate in 
the study. Subjects will be entered into the study after providing written informed consent.  Each subject 
will be instructed that if they decide not to participate, they may withdraw at any time.  
 Randomization:   Netarsudil ophthalmic solution 0.02% and placebo eye drops will be dispensed 
to study subjects in 2.[ADDRESS_765111]  will be randomly 
assigned to receive netarsudil or AR-[ZIP_CODE] placebo (netarsudil vehicle) . Both t he subject and the 
investigator will remain masked as to the assigned treatment.  If a study participant elects to have both 
eyes enrolled in the study, the dosing coordinator will automatically assign the second eye  to the opposite 
treatment group from th at of the first eye.  
 Study Treatment Regimen:  Subjects will be instructed to instill the assigned eye drop into the 
study eye once nightly for the [ADDRESS_765112] of care to prevent cornea transplant 
rejection, subjects will use prednis olone acetate 1% eye drops [ADDRESS_765113] 3 months, then 3 
times daily during month 4, twice daily during month 5, and once daily during months 6 to 9.  
 Study Drug Accountability:   Subjects will be asked to bring back to the clinic all study b ottles, 
both used and un -used. All study drug bottles will be reconciled and recorded.  
 Rescue Medication:   if a study subject develops IOP elevation (a measurement ≥ 24 mm Hg or an 
increase over the screening pre -operative reading of ≥ 10 mm Hg), the dosing coordinator will be notified.  
If the affected eye was assigned to the placebo group, the subject will be offered the opportunity to 
crossover to the netarsudil group to determine whether that adequately reduces  IOP. Depending upon the 
severity of the IOP increase, the investigator may decide whether it is in the patient’s best interest  to 
reduce corticoste roid strength and/or dosing frequency and/or initiate use of approved glaucoma 
medications.      
 Examinations:   
5 
 
o Schedule:  Each subject will be examined at screening, 1, 3, [ADDRESS_765114] of care for endothelial keratoplasty patients.  
o Procedures:  At [ADDRESS_765115] refraction, corneal thickness (pachymetry) and intraocular pressure will 
be made. Corneal endothelial cell density will be measured by [CONTACT_581870]. . A slit lamp examination will be performed to 
assess the health of the transplant and document any conjunctival or lid 
hyperemia, stromal inflammation, superficial punctate keratitis, other surface 
toxicity of the cornea, neovascularization of the cornea, cells or f lare in the 
anterior chamber, or evidence of transplant rejection.  
o Records release:  Subjects may be asked to sign a records release form in case the 
subject  sees another eye specialist while enrolled in the study. This will allow the 
investigator to determ ine if there is a rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_581866]. The primary outcome 
(intraocular pressure) is a routine ophthalmic exam procedure, so the subject may 
have some exams performed by a local eye doctor if returning  to the study site  for 
all exams  is too burdensome.  
o Unscheduled examinations:  Subjects will be instructed to return for extra 
examinations if they note any problems with the eye or any early signs of a 
possible rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], such as  a change in vision, redness to the eye, 
increased light sensitivity, burning sensation, or foreign body sensation.  
o Study completion:  Subjects will be considered to have completed the study after 
they complete the [ADDRESS_765116] withdrawal or  discontinuation:   Each subject may voluntarily discontinue  
the study at any time they choose. Subjects who cannot complete the study for 
administrative reasons (e.g., non -compliance, failure to meet visit schedule, etc.) 
will be discontinued from the stud y. Discontinued subjects may be replaced. For 
6 
 
subjects withdrawn from the study, the same measurements and assessments 
should be performed as done at the 9 -month exit exam . Adverse events should be 
followed up until resolution or stabilization of the adver se event.   
7 
 
Table 1  
 Screening  Randomization  
(1 or 2 days after 
DMEK)  5 day 
after 
DMEK  4 (± 2 ) 
weeks  
after 
DMEK  3 (± 1) 
months 
after 
DMEK  6 (± 1) 
months 
after 
DMEK  9 (± 1) 
months 
after 
DMEK  
Informed Consent  X       
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria  X       
Medical and ophthalmic 
history  X X X X X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X X X X 
Uncorrected visual acuity 
(Snellen)  X X X X X X X 
Assignment to netarsudil 
or placebo   X      
Corrected distance visual 
acuity (Snellen)  X   X X X X 
Manifest refraction  X   X X X X 
Endothelial cell density 
(if possible)  X   X X X X 
Intraocular pressure  X   X X X X 
Ultrasonic pachymetry  X   X X X X 
 
3.2 Data Analysis and Data Monitoring: The primary outcome measure is  the incidence of clinically 
significant  IOP elevation (defin ed as IOP ≥  24 mm Hg or a relative increase over the baseli ne reading of 
≥ 10 mm Hg). Previous study results conservatively  suggest that the rate of IOP elevation will be 20% or 
greater in the placebo -control arm.4,5 Based on the mechanism of action and cl inical trial results,  we 
estimate that the relative odds ratio will be 0.25 in the  netarsudil study arm. A sample size of 84 per study 
arm (total = 168) woul d provide 80% power to detect a statistically significant difference between groups 
at a 5% signifi cance l evel (two -sided test). Assuming up to 10% drop out , the re quired recruitment is 186 
study eyes . 
8 
 
Statistical analysis will be conducted on an intent -to-treat basis (i.e. all randomized subjects will be 
included in the analysis). Data will be analyzed  with Statistical An alysis Software (SAS Version 9.4 , SAS 
Institute, Cary, NC) using Kaplan Meier survival analysis and proportional hazards analysis.    
3.3 Data Storage and Confidentiality:  Research data will be stored in a locked cabinet or locked room 
and on a password protected server to prevent unauthorized access to data. The investigators and research 
staff will have access to the data.  Subject identifiers will be removed and data will be aggregated for 
publication or presentation of study results.    
4.0  Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 
4.1 Risks and Anticipated Adverse Events:  
Risks:  This study is considered moderate risk. Netarsudil is an investigational drug - a New Drug 
Application (NDA) was recently submitted to the U. S. Food and Drug Administration.  
  
A number of complaints and complications are anticipated in patients who have received a 
cornea transplant, regardless of whether they participate in this study.  Therefore, the presence or 
absence of the following anticipated complaints and complications in the study eye will be 
recorded on the electronic case report f orm (eCRF) for each exam rather than on separate  
adverse event forms.  
 Complaints of ocular discomfort: (e xamples include: eye pain, irritation, burning, itching, 
scratchy feeling, foreign body sensation, tired/fatigued feeling, achy/tender/sore feeling, pressure 
sensation, tightness, twinge/twitchy feeling, dry eyes, tearing/watering, eye redness ) 
 Complaints of visual symptoms or disturbances:  (examples include: glare or fluctuating vision, 
haloes around lights, diplopia, blurry, hazy, cloudy, filmy or out of focus vision, ghosting or 
shadowing, difficulty reading, difficulty with night driving, floaters, spots in vision, light 
sensitivity, decreased vision, light reflections from intraocular len s or peripheral iridotomy ).   
 Increased ptosis (within the first 6 months of surgery)  
 Puffy ey elids (within the first 3 months of surgery)  
 Delayed resol ution of corneal haze or edema (within the first 6 months of surgery)  
 Subconjuntival hemorrhage (within the first 3 months of surgery)  
 Epi[INVESTIGATOR_17754] (within the first month of surgery)  
 Folds in the transplant  
9 
 
 Partial graft detachment  without further intervention  
 Development of capsular haze  
 Superficial punctat e keratitis  
 Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_32465]  (within the first  3 months of surgery)  
Adverse events:  The type, severity, duration and frequency of the following anticipated adverse 
experiences and any other unanticipated ocular adverse events will be tabulated. If a patient 
experiences an adverse reaction, appropriate  medical treatment will be provided.  Examples may 
include:  
 Graft detachmen t which requires intervention  
 Immuno logic graft rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]  
 Graft failure and/or regraft  
 Intraocular pressure elevatio n which requires intervention  
 Development of capsular ha ze which requires intervention  
 Iris synechia  
 Cystoid macular edema  
 Iritis  
Anticipated rare adverse events  include retinal detachment, iris synechiae/atrophy, epi[INVESTIGATOR_43691], 
infectious keratitis or conjunctivitis, branch retinal vein occlusion, or end ophthalmitis.   
Serious Adverse Event:  A serious adverse event is one that results in any of the following 
outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4967], a persistent or significant disability/ incapacity, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect. In the event of a serious adverse event, the investigator will maintain 
complete documentation and promptly inform the governing Institutional Review Board (IRB) of 
the serious adverse event wit hin their required reporting period.  
 
Fellow eye:  Patients in this population tend to be affected with the eye condition bilaterally, so 
many of the study subjects may undergo surgery on the fellow eye during study participation.   
[ADDRESS_765117] Risks:  Every effort will be made to minimize any risks or 
discomforts to study subjects. The investigator  will ensure appropriate training of study 
personnel and monitoring of subjects and will provide appropriate treatment for eye -related 
adverse events or referral for treatment of non -eye-related adverse events. The subject and or 
their health insurance pla n will be responsible for payment for treatment, counseling or follow 
up. 
 
A Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)  will be chaired by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Gerald Clarke, an 
independent ophthalmologist practicing in Menasha, Wisconsin. The DSMC will review any 
serious adv erse events as they occur. The DSMC will also review the interim data (including 
adverse events and subject compliance) every [ADDRESS_765118], 
Aerie Pharmaceuticals.  
 
4.3 Potential Benefits to the Subjects:  Study subjects may not realize any direct benefit 
from participation in the research; rathe r, important knowledge which may benefit future 
subjects is being sought.   
 
4.4 Study termination:  The study may be prematurely terminated if, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_124496], there is sufficient reasonable cause. Written notification, 
docume nting the reason for study termination, will be provided to the investigator or Sponsor by 
[CONTACT_51272]. Circumstances that may warrant termination include, but are not limited 
to: 
 Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to subjects.  
 Insufficient adherence to protocol requirements.  
 Data that is not sufficiently complete or evaluable.  
11 
 
 Plans to modify, suspend or discontinue marketing of the Study Product.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_765119] Capacity:  All subjects will be evaluated for capacity to consent through the use of the 
Cornea  Research Foundation of America Evaluation to Sign a Consent Form. Any subjects who do not 
answer the Evaluation questions satisfactorily will be considered cognitively impaired and will not be 
enrolled into the study as they would not meet the study's inc lusion/exclusion criteria.  
5.[ADDRESS_765120]/Representative Comprehension:  Subjects will be given time to ask any questions , and 
study information will be explained until it is clear that all information presented is understood.    
5.4 Debriefing Procedures:  Not applicable; this is not a psychological study and no information will be 
purposely withheld from the subject.  
6.0 Consent Forms  
6.1 Documentation of Consent Patient's medical records and informed consent documents will be 
maintained and stored with access limite d to the authorized personnel.  All research records will be kept 
separate and locked with limited access by [CONTACT_257516].  
6.[ADDRESS_765121]:  The subject and or their health insurance plan will be responsible for payment 
for treatmen t, counseling or follow up.  
12 
 
6.3 Payment for Participation:  Subjects will be provided with the assigned study drug (netarsudil or 
placebo eye drops) and with the prednisolone acetate 1% eye drops used to prevent transplant rejection 
for the duration study p articipation. Subjects will not receive any payment for study participation.  
7.0 References  
1. Fini ME, Schwartz SG, Gao X, Jeong S, Patel N, Itakura T, Price MO,  Price FW  Jr, Varma R, 
Stamer WD. Steroid-induced ocular hypertension/glaucoma: Focus on pharmacogenomics and 
implications for precision medicine.  Prog Retin Eye Res 2016 [Epub ahead of print].  
2. Price FW, Price DA, Ngakeng V, Price MO. Survey of steroid usage patterns during and after 
low-risk penetrating keratoplasty. Cornea 2009;28:[ADDRESS_765122] DP. Vision and intraocular 
pressure after Descemet -strippi[INVESTIGATOR_581867] -
existing glaucoma. Ophth almology 2009;116:1644 -50. 
4. Price MO, Feng MT, Scanameo A, Price FW Jr. Loteprednol etabonate 0.5% gel vs. prednisolone 
acetate 1% solution after Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty: p rospective randomized 
trial. Cornea 2015;34:853 -8. 
5. Price MO, Price FW Jr, Kruse FE, Bachmann BO, Tourtas T. Randomized comparison of topi[INVESTIGATOR_581868] 1% versus fluorometholone 0.1% in t he first year after Descemet membrane 
endothelial keratoplasty.  Cornea 2014;33:880 -6. 