Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 1 of 47 
   ZIPLINE  APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  
 
 
 
The Human Subjects Division (HSD) strives to ensure that people with disabilities have access to all services and content.  If you 
experience  any accessibility -related issues with this form or any aspect of the application process, email 
[EMAIL_1004]  for assistance.  
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that will be reviewed by [CONTACT_52879] . Before completing this form, check HSD’s website  to 
confirm that this should not be reviewed by [CONTACT_52880] (non -UW) IRB.  
• If you are requesting a determination  about whether your activity is human subjects research or qualifies for exempt status, 
you may skip all questions except those marked with a          . For example 1.[ADDRESS_1126404] be answered.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to your research  or if you believe you have already answered a question 
elsewhere in the application , state “ NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the information) . If you 
do not answer a question, the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or whether it is  not applicable. This 
may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, place an “X” in the box.  To fill in a text box, make sure your cursor is within the gray text box bar before 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_52855].  
• The word “you” refers to the researcher and all members of the research team, unless otherwise specified.  
• For collaborative research, describe only the information that is relevant to you unless you are requesting that the UW IRB 
provide the review and oversight for your collaborators as well.  
• You may reference other documents (such as a grant application) if they provide the requested information in non -technical 
language. Be sure to provide the document name, page(s), and specific sections, and upload it to Zipline . Also, describe any 
changes that may have occurred since the document was written (for example, changes that you’ve made during or after the 
grant review process). In some cases, you may need to provide additional details in the answer space as well as referencing a  
document .  
 
INDEX  
1 Overview  6 Children (Minors) and Parental Permission  10 Risk / Benefit Assessment  
2 Participants  7 Assent of Children (Minors)  11 Economic Burden to Participants  
3 Non -UW R esearch Setting  8 Consent of Adults  12 Resources  
4 Recruiting and Screening Participants  9 Privacy and Confidentiality  13 Other Approvals, Permissions, and 
Regulatory Issues  
5 Procedures    
 
1 OVERVIEW  
Study Title:  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_813432] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126405] the research . Provide any he lpful explanatory information.  
In general, the home institution is the institution (1) that provides the researcher’s paycheck  and that considers him/her to be 
a paid employee, or (2) at which the researcher is a matriculated student. Scholars, faculty, fellows, and students who are 
visiting the UW and who are the lead researcher: identify your home institution  and describe the purpose and duration of your 
UW visit, as well as  the UW department/center with which you are affiliated while at the UW.  
 
Note that many UW clinical faculty members are paid employees of non -UW institutions . 
 
The UW IRB provides IRB review and oversight for only those researchers who meet the criteria  described in the SOP: Use of 
the UW IRB . 
 University of Washington  
1.[ADDRESS_1126406] you consulted with anyone at HSD about this study?  
It is not necessary to obtain advance consultation. If you have: answering this question will help ensure that the IRB is awa re 
of and considers the advice and guidance you were provided.    
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the consultation: approximate date, with whom, and method (e.g., by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone call, in -person meeting).     
       
1.3 Similar and/or related studies . Are there any related IRB applications that provide context for the proposed 
activities?  
Examples of studies for which there is likely to be a related IRB application: Using samples or data collected by [CONTACT_61921]; 
recruiting subjects from a registry established by a colleague’s research activity; conducting Phase [ADDRESS_1126407], or 
conducting a continuation of another study; serving as the data coordinating center for a multi -site study that includes a UW 
site. 
 
Providing this information (if relevant) may significantly improve the efficiency and consistency of the IRB’s review.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the other studies or applications and how they relate to the proposed 
activities. If the other applications were reviewed by [CONTACT_52879], please also provide: the UW IRB 
number, the study title, and the lead researcher’s name.    
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126408] 
your proposed activity?  
HSD recognizes that everyone would like their IRB applications to be reviewed as quickly as possible. To ensure fairness, it is 
HSD policy to review applications in the order in which they are received. However, HSD will assign a higher priority to 
research with externally -imposed urgency that is beyond the control of the researcher. Researchers are encouraged to 
communicate as soon as possible with their HSD staff contact [CONTACT_52883] (in other words, before  
submitting the IRB application). Examples: a researcher plans to test an experimental vaccine that has just been developed fo r 
a newly emerging epid emic; a researcher has an unexpected opportunity to collect data from students when the end of the 
school year is only four weeks away.  
 
HSD may ask for documentation of the externally -imposed urgency. A higher priority should not be requested to compensate 
for a researcher’s failure to prepare an IRB application in a timely manner. Note that IRB review requires a certain minimum 
amount of time; without sufficient time, the IRB may not be able to review and approve an application by a deadline.  
  No  
 x Yes → If yes, briefly describe the urgency or deadline as well as the reason for it.  
   We have received a Just In Time request from NIH for this research. We would like to submit this 
documentation to NIH as soon as possible.  
1.[ADDRESS_1126409] . If hypotheses are being tested, describe them.  You will be asked to describe the specific procedures in a 
later section.  
 
If your application involves the use of a HUD “humanitarian” device: describe whether the use is for “on -label” 
clinical patient care, “off -label” clinical patient care, and/or research (collecting safety and/or effectiveness data).  
 This study aims to develop an interactive, brief, web -based intervention for young adults who report 
drinking to cope and report negative alcohol -related consequences during th e transition to young 
adulthood. To do this, we will  develop measurement tools to assess weekly copi[INVESTIGATOR_813433], 
knowledge, and use, and incorporat e these tools in the development  of an interactive web -based 
intervention  with text -message reminders  for young adults who drink to cope. Phase 1  includes 
formative research on the development  of the drinking to cope intervention  (through focus groups and 
rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_119696])  and developi[INVESTIGATOR_813434]. Phase [ADDRESS_1126410]  IRB approval for phase 1 activities (focus groups, rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813435] ) and phase [ADDRESS_1126411] the programmed intervention, feasibility of study design, and 
to complete a phone interview to assess overall impression and feedback of the intervention .  
We are now submitting documentation for approval of a phase 2 activity of the small pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
The specific aims of this research are as follows:  
Phase 1. Develop  an interactive web -based intervention with text -message reminders for young adults 
with alcohol -related consequences who report a pattern of drinking to cope. Conduct a series of focus 
groups and rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813436].  
Phase [ADDRESS_1126412] to determine feasibility, acceptability, utilization of copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], and 
preliminary alcohol outcomes. A total of 120 young adults will be randomized to the 4 -week, web-based  
drinking to cope intervention (n=60) or an assessment only control (n=60)  where they will complete 4 
weekly assessments on knowledge, acquisi tion, and use of copi[INVESTIGATOR_604936] a 1 - and 3 -month follow -up 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 4 of 47 
 1.6 Study design . Provide a one -sentence description of the general study design and/or type of methodology.   
Your answer will help HSD in assigning applications to reviewers and in managing workload. Examples: a longitudinal 
observational study; a double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized study; ethnographic interviews; web scrapi[INVESTIGATOR_52857] a 
convenience sample of blogs; medical record review; coordinating center for a multi -site study.  
 Phase [ADDRESS_1126413] an “X” in at least one box.  
This question is essential for ensuring that your application is correctly reviewed. Please read each option carefully.  
 Descriptor  
  1. Class project or other activity whose purpose is to provide an educational experience for the researcher 
(for example, to learn about the process or methods of doing research).    
  
  
2. Part of an institution, organization, or program’s own internal operational monitoring.    
  
  
3. Improve the quality of service provided by a specific institution, organization, or program.    
  
  4. Designed to expand the knowledge base of a scientific discipline or other scholarly field of study, and 
produce results that:  
• Are expected to be applicable to a larger population beyond the site of data collection or the specific 
subjects studied, or  
• Are intended to be used to develop, test, or support theories, principles, and statements of 
relationships, or to inform policy beyond the study.   x 
  
  5. Focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information or biospecimens are collected 
through oral history, journalism, biography, or historical scholarship activities, to provide an accurate and 
evidence -based portrayal of the individuals.    
  
  6. A quality improvement or program improvement activity conducted to improve the implementation 
(delivery or quality) of an accepted practice, or to collect data about the implementation of the practice 
for clinical, practical, or administrative purposes. This does not include the evaluation of the efficacy of 
different accepted practices, or a comparison of their efficacy.    
  
  7. Public health surveillance activities conducted, requested, or authorized by a public health authority for 
the sole purpose of identifying or investigating potential public health signals or timely awareness and 
priority setting during a situation that threatens public health.    
  
  
8. Preliminary, exploratory, or research development activities (such as pi[INVESTIGATOR_52858], or 
reliability/validation testing of a questionnaire)    
  
  
9. Expanded access use of a drug or device not yet approved for this purpose    
  
  
10. Use of a Humanitarian Use Device    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 5 of 47 
   
  
11. Other. Explain:    
  
         
1.8 Background, experience, and preliminary work . Answer this question only  if your proposed activity has one or 
more of the following characteristics. The purpose of this question is to provide the IRB with information that is 
relevant to its risk/benefit analysis.  
• Involves more than minimal risk (physical or non -physical)  
• Is a clinical trial, or 
• Involves having the subjects use a drug, biological, botanical, nutritional supplement, or medical 
device.  
“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater 
than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or 
tests.  
 a. Background . Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for your  proposed activity, based 
on existing literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that your proje ct is 
intended to address.  
 This should be a plain language description. Do not provide scholarly citations. Limit your answer to less than one page, or 
refer to an attached document with background information that is no more than three pages long.  
       
 b. Experience and p reliminary work . Briefly describe experience or preliminary work or data (if any) that you or 
your team have that supports the feasibility and/or safety of this study.   
 It is not necessary to summarize all discussion that has led to the development of the study protocol. The IRB is interested 
only in short summaries about experiences or preliminary work that suggest the study is feasible and that risks are 
reasonable relative to the benefits. Examples: You have already conducted a Phase 1 study of an experimental drug which 
supports the Phase 2 study you are now proposing to do; you have already done a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_406499] -school program with classroom aides; you have 
experience with the type of surgery that is required to implant the study device; you have a study coordinator who is 
experienced in working with subjects who have significant cognitive impairment.  
        
1.9 Supplements . Check all boxes that apply, to identify Supplements you should complete and upload to the 
Supporting Documents  SmartForm  in Zipline . 
This section is here instead of at the end of the form to reduce the risk of duplicating information in this IRB Protocol for m that 
you will need to provide in these Supplements.  
 Check all 
That A pply  Type of R esearch  Supplement N ame  
    
Department of Defense  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Department of Defense      
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 6 of 47 
     The research involves Department of Defense funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  
    
Department of Energy  
The research involves Department of Energy funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Department of Energy      
    
    Drug, biologic, botanical, supplement  
Procedures involve the use of any drug, biologic, botanical or 
supplement, even if the item is not the focus of your research  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Drugs      
    
    Emergency exception to informed consent  
Research that requires this special consent waiver for research involving 
more than minimal risk  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Exception from Informed 
Consent for Emergency 
Research (EFIC)      
    
    
Genomic data sharing  
Genomic data are being collected and will be deposited in an external 
database (such as the NIH dbGaP database) for sharing with other 
researchers, and you are asking the UW to provide the required 
certification or to ensure that the consent forms can be certified  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Genomic Data Sharing      
    
    Medical device  
Procedures involve the use of any medical device, even if the device is 
not the focus of your research, except when the device is FDA -approved 
and is being used through a clinical facility in the manner for which it is 
approved  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Devices      
    
    Multi -site study  
You are asking the UW IRB to review one or more sites in a multi -site 
study.  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Participating Site in Multi -
Site Research      
    
    
None of the above     x  
    
 
 
[ADDRESS_1126414] populations or groups , including age range, 
gender, health status, and any other relevant characteristics.  
 Participants will be young adults  between the ages of 18 -25 years old at study entry.  
2.2 Inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
a. Inclusion criteria.  Describe the specific criteria you will use to decide who will be included in your study from 
among interested or potential subjects. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Inclusion criteria include: 1)18-25 years old; 2) Reside  in the state of Washington , 3) Have a valid email 
address and phone number, 4) report at least [ADDRESS_1126415] month , 5) report using 
alcohol to cope with distress via negative reinforcement (i.e., to provide relief or reduction of stress or 
depre ssed mood) in the past month . 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 7 of 47 
 b. Exclusion criteria. Describe the specific criteria you will use to decide who will be excluded from your study 
from subjects who meet the inclusion criteria listed above. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Doesn't meet inclusion criteria, unwillingness to participate, failure to provide consent.  
2.3 Prisoners . IRB approval is required in order to include prisoners in research, even when prisoners are not an 
intended target population.  
a. Will you recruit or obtain data from individuals that you know to be prisoners?  
For records reviews: if the records do not indicate prisoner status and prisoners are not a target population, select “No”. See 
the WORKSHEET: Prisoners  for the definition of “prisoner”.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions (i – iv). 
 i. Describe the type of prisoners, and which prisons/jails:  
       
 ii. One concern about prisoner research is whether the effect of participation on prisoners’ 
general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and opportunity for 
earnings in prison will be so great that it will make it difficult for prisoners to adequately 
consider the research risks. What will you do to reduce the chances of this?  
       
 iii. Describe what you will do to make sure that (a) your recruitment and subject selection 
procedures will be fair to all eligible prisoners and (b) prison authorities or other prisoners will 
not be able to arbitrarily prevent or require particular prisoners from participating.  
       
 iv. If your research will involve prisoners in federal facilities or in state/local facilities outside of 
Washington State: check the box below to provide your assurance that you will (a) not 
encourage or facilitate the use of a prisoner’s participation in the research to influence parole 
decisions, and (b) clearly inform each prisoner in advance (for example, in a consent form) 
that participation in the research will have no effect on his or her parole.  
  Confirmed   
 b. Is your research likely to have subjects who become prisoners while participating in your study?   
For example, a longitudinal study of youth with drug problems is likely to have subjects who will be prisoners at some 
point during the study.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, if a subject becomes a prisoner while participating in your study, will you continue the 
study procedures and/or data collection while the subject is a prisoner?    
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the procedures and/or data collection you will continue with 
prisoner subjects    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126416] populations listed here. Check the boxes 
for any of these populations that you will purposefully include in your research. (In other words, being a part of 
the population is an inclusion criterion for your study.)  
The WORKSHEETS describe the criteria for approval  but do not need to be completed and should not be submitted . 
 Population  Worksheet  
  
Fetuses in utero  WORKSHEET: Pregnant Women    
  
  
Neonates of uncertain viability  WORKSHEET: Neonates    
  
  
Non -viable neonates  WORKSHEET: Neonates    
  
  
Pregnant women  WORKSHEET: Pregnant Women    
  
a. If you check any of the boxes above, use this space to provide any information you think may be relevant for 
the IRB to consider.   
 n/a 
2.5 Native Americans or non U.S. indigenous populations.  Will you actively recruit from Native American or non-U.S. 
indigenous populations through a tribe, tribe -focused organization, or similar community -based organization?  
Indigenous people are defined in international or national legislation as having a set of specific rights based on their hist orical 
ties to a particular territory and their cultural or historical distinctiveness from other populations that are often politically 
dominant.  
 
Exam ples: a reservation school or health clinic; recruiting during a tribal community gathering  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes,  name [CONTACT_52935], tribal -focused organization, or similar community based organization. T he 
UW IRB expects that you will obtain tribal/indigenous approval before beginning your research .    
       
2.[ADDRESS_1126417] private identifiable  information about other individuals  from your subjects? 
Common examples include:  collecting medical history information or contact [CONTACT_61925], 
friends, co -workers.  
“Identifiable” means any direct or indirect identifier that, alone or in combination, would allow you or another member of yo ur 
research team to readily identify  the person. For example, suppose that you are studying immigration history. If you ask your 
subjects several questions about their grandparents but you do not obtain names or other information that would allow you to 
readily identify the grandparents, then you are not collecting private identifiable information about the grandparents.  
 x No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 9 of 47 
   Yes → If yes, these individuals are considered human subjects in your study. Describe them and what 
data you will collect about them.     
       
2.[ADDRESS_1126418] or describe the maximum number of subjects (or subject units) you need to 
complete your study, for each subject group?  
Subject units  mean units within a group. For most research studies, a group will consist of individuals. However, the unit of 
interest in some research is not the individual. Examples:   
• Dyads such as caregiver -and-Alzheimer’s patient, or parent and child  
• Families  
• Other units, such as student -parent -teacher  
Subject group  means categories of subjects that are meaningful for your research. Some research has only one subject group – 
for example, all UW students taking Introductory Psychology. Some common ways in which subjects are grouped include:  
• By [CONTACT_52886] – for example, an intervention group and a control group.  
• By [CONTACT_52887] – for example, urban versus rural families  
• By [CONTACT_654] – for example, children who are 6, 10, or 14 years old.  
 
The IRB reviews the number of subjects you plan to study in the context of risks and benefits. Unless otherwise specified, if the 
IRB determines that your research involves no more than minimal risk: there are no restrictions on the total number of subjec ts 
you may enroll in the study. If your research involves more than minimal risk: you may only enroll the number of subjects 
described here in your application. Submit a Modification if you wish to increase the number of subjects. Exceeding the IRB -
approved number ( over -enrollment ) will be considered non -compliance.   
  No → If no, provide your rationale in the box below. Also, provide any information you can about the 
scope/size of the research. You do not need to complete the table.    
  Example: you may not be able to predict the number of subjects who will complete an online survey 
advertised through Craigslist, but you can state that you will post your survey for two weeks and the number 
who respond is the number who will be in your study.  
        
 x Yes → If yes, for each subject group, use the table below to provide your estimate of the maximum 
desired number of individuals (or other subject unit, such as families) who will complete the 
research.    
 Group name/description  Maximum desired number of individuals (or other 
subject unit, such as families) who will complete 
the research  
*For clinical trials: provide numbers for your site and for 
the study -wide total number  
 Focus Groups  60 
 Rapid Prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813437]  10 
 Usability Study  15 
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  120 
             
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126419] outside of UW and Harborview  
3.1 Reason for sites . Describe the reason(s) why you selected the sites where you will conduct the research.  
 N/A 
3.[ADDRESS_1126420] your 
research, how it is conducted, or how you obtain or document consent.  
Examples: It would be culturally inappropriate in some international settings for a woman to be directly contact[CONTACT_426] a male 
researcher; instead, the researcher may need to ask a male family member for permission before the woman can be 
approached. It may be appropriate to obtain permission from community leaders prior to obtaining consent from individual 
members of a group.  In some distinct cultural groups, signing forms may not be the norm.  
 
This federal site maintains an international list of human research standards and requirements:  
 http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/international/index.html   
 N/A 
3.[ADDRESS_1126421] your research (especially the research design and 
consent procedures). The most common examples are laws about:  
• Specimens  – for example, some countries will not allow biospecimens to be taken out of the country.  
• Age of consent  – laws about when an individual is considered old enough to be able to provide consent vary 
across states, and across countries.   
• Legally authorized representative  – laws about who can serve as a legally authorized representative (and who 
has priority when more than one person is available) vary across states and countries.  
• Use of healthcare records  – many states (including Washington State) have laws that are similar to the 
federal HIPAA law but that have additional requirements.  
 N/A 
3.[ADDRESS_1126422] your research.  
Example: A school district may require you to obtain permission from the head district office as well as school principals before 
approaching teachers or students; a factory in China may allow you to interview factory workers  but not allow you to pay 
them.  
 N/A 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 11 of 47 
 3.5 Students: Does your research involve traveling outside of the US?   
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, confirm by [CONTACT_52890] (1) you will register with the UW Office of Global Affairs  
before traveling; (2) you will notify your advisor when the registration is complete; and (3) you will 
request a UW Travel Waiver if your research involves travel to the list of countries  requiring a UW 
Travel Waiver.  
 Confirmed  
 
 
4 RECRUITING and SCREENING PARTICIPANTS  
4.1 Recruiting and Screening . Describe how you will identify, recruit, and screen subjects. Include information about: 
how, when, where, and in what setting. Identify who (by [CONTACT_52891], not name) will approach and recruit 
subjects, and who wil l screen them for eligibility.  
 Ads will be placed in online social networking sites (e.g., Instagram) and other media outlets (newspapers, 
community ads) that attract a broad spectrum of young adult drinkers. An online study profile will be developed 
for Facebook and Instagram, as in our previous studies.  Other methods of recruitment will include placing ads on 
Craigslist, in local university, community college, and trade school newspapers, and advertising in local 
newspapers and placing flyers in local coffee shops and other places where young adults frequent. In these ads, 
individuals are asked to call or view the study website to complete t he screening. Additionally, we will use in -
person techniques such as tabling at colleges or local community events.  
 
Both Instagram and Facebook recruitment ads will provide a hyper -linked website address (URL) for more 
information and eligibility screening. Potential participants will first be presented with an information statement 
briefly describing the screening and consent process. If interested, individuals may complete the screening 
online.  
 
All contacts with participants will:  
• Inform/remind participants of the voluntary nature of their participation  
• Review the length and content of the  focus groups/rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_119696]  
• Provide incentive information  
• Provide study contact [CONTACT_3031]  
• Provide information for contact[CONTACT_813443]/retention contacts with participants.  
 
The information statement will contain all elements of consent and what they will be asked to do if they choose 
to participate.  
 
At the end of the screening survey, participants who do not meet eligibility criteria will be informed that they 
have completed th eir participation in the study.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 12 of 47 
 4.2 Recruitment materials .  
 
a. What materials (if any ) will you use to recruit and screen subjects?  
Examples: talking points for phone or in -person conversations; video or audio presentations; websites; social media 
messages; written materials such as letters, flyers for posting, brochures, or printed advertisements; questionnaires filled 
out by [CONTACT_52893].  
 Ads will be placed in online social networking sites (e.g., Instagram) and other media outlets (newspapers, 
community ads) that attract a broad spectrum of young adult drinkers. An online study profile will be 
devel oped for Facebook and Instagram . Other methods of recruitment will include placing ads on Craigslist, in 
local university, community college, and trade school newspapers, and advertising in local newspapers and 
placing flyers in local coffee shops and other places where young adults frequent. In these ads, individuals are 
asked to call or view the study website to complete the scre ening. Additionally, we will use in -person 
techniques such as tabling at colleges or local community events.  Participants who meet eligibility criteria will 
immediately be invited to participate in the study . Study staff will make  phone call reminder s and participants 
will be given the opportunity to ask any questions they have about the study or their participation.  
b. Upload descriptions of each type of material (or the materials themselves) to the Consent Forms and 
Recruitment Materials  SmartForm  of Zipline . If you will send letters  or emails  to the subjects, the se should 
include a statement about how you obtained the subject’s name  [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_3031] . However, no 
sensitive information about the person (such as a diagnosis of a medical condition) should be included in the 
letter.  
HSD encourages researchers to consider uploading descriptions of most recruitment and screening materials instead of the 
materials themselves. The goal is to provide the researchers with the flexibility to change some information on the materials  
without submitting a Modification for IRB approval of the changes. Examples:  
• You could provide a list of talking points that will be used for phone or in -person conversations instead of a script.   
• For the description of a flyer, you might include the information that it will provide the study phone number and the 
name [CONTACT_4007] a study contact [CONTACT_9702] (without providing the actual phone number or name). In doing so,  you would not 
need to submit a Modification if/when the study phone number or contact [CONTACT_52895]. Also, instead of listing the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, you might state that the flyer will list one or a few of the major inclusion/exclusion 
criteria.  
• For the description of a video or a website, you might include a description of the possible visual elements and a list of 
the content (e.g., study phone number; study contact [CONTACT_9702]; top three inclusion/exclusion criteria; payment of $50; 
study name; UW research er).  
4.[ADDRESS_1126423] an existing relationship with 
the study population(s)?  
Examples: a study team member may have a dual role with the study population (for example, being their clinical care 
provider, teacher, laboratory directory or tribal leader in addition to recruiting them for his/her research).  
 s No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the nature of the relationship.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 13 of 47 
 4.4 Payment to participants . Describe any payment you will provide, including:  
• The total amount/value  
• Whether payment will be “pro -rated” so that participants who are unable to complete the research may still 
receive some part of the payment  
The IRB expect s the consent process or study information provided to the subjects to include information about the number 
and amount of payments, and especially the time when subjects can expect to receive payment. One of the most frequent 
complaints received by [CONTACT_217303] a check on the day that they completed a study 
and who were angry or disappointed when payment took [ADDRESS_1126424] provided a table summarizing participant payments for this study below. All payments will be in the 
form of Amazon.com electronic gift cards.  
  
Payments  
 
Survey  Compensation  
Focus Group  $20 
Rapid Prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_741140]  $20 
Usability Study  $50 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  $65 
 
4.5 Non -monetary compensation . Describe any non -monetary compensation you will provide. Example: extra credit 
for students; a toy for a child. If you will be offering class credit to students, you must provide (and describe) an 
alternate way for the students to earn the extra credit without participating in your research.  
 n/a 
4.6 Will you access or obtain data or specimens for recruiting and screening procedures prior to enrollment?   
Examples: names and contact [CONTACT_3031]; the information gathered from records that were screened; results of screening 
questionnaires or screening blood tests; Protected Health Information (PHI) from screening medical records to identify possib le 
subjects.  
 x No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
  Yes → If yes, describe any data and/or specimens (including PHI) you will acces s or obtain for recruiting 
and screening and whether you will retain it as part of the study data.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 14 of 47 
 4.7 Consent for recruiting and screening . Will you obtain consent for any of the recruiting and screening procedures? 
(Section 8: Consent of Adults  asks about consent for the main study procedures).  
“Consent” includes: consent from individuals for their own participation; parental permission; assent from children; consent 
from a legally authorized representative for adult individuals who are unable to provide consent.  
 
Examples:   
• For a study in which names and contact [CONTACT_52898] a registry: the registry should have consent 
from the registry participants to release their names and contact [CONTACT_52899].  
• For a study in which possible subjects are identified by [CONTACT_52900]: there will be no consent process.  
• For a study in which individuals respond to an announcement and call into a study phone line: the study team person 
talking to the individual may obtain non -written consent to ask eligibility questions over the phone.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
 x Yes → If yes, describe the consent process.  
   Consent via online information statement described in 4.[ADDRESS_1126425] on a consent form to document consent for all of the recruiting and screening 
procedures ? 
  No → If no, describe the information you will provide during the consent process and 
for which procedures.  
          
  Yes → If yes, upload the consent form to the Consent Forms and Recruitment Materials  
page of Zipline .    
 
 
5 PROCEDURES  
5.1 Study procedures . Using lay language, p rovide a complete description of the study procedures , including the 
sequence,  intervention or manipulation (if any),  drug dosing information (if any) , use of records,  time required, 
and setting/location. If it is available and you think it would be helpful to the IRB: Upload a study flow sheet or 
table  to the Supporting Documents  SmartForm in Zipline .  
For studies comparing standards of care : It is important to accurately identify the research procedures. See  UW IRB POLICY : 
Risks of Harm from Standard Care  and the draft guidance from the federal Office of Human Research Protections, “Guidance 
on Disclosing Reasonably Foreseeable Risks in Research Evaluating Standards of Care”;  October 20, 2014.  
 Ads will be placed in online social networking sites (e.g., Instagram) and other media outlets (newspapers, 
community ads) that attract a broad spectrum of young adult s. Online and print ads will highlight our study and 
provide a hyper -linked website address (URL) for information and to complete the brief screening survey. An 
information statement will describe all elements of informed consent, including a description of the study 
procedures, incentive structure, and potential risks to participants. Individuals will then complete a brief on -line 
screening survey to assess for study eligibility.  Those that meet the eligibility criteria will  be invited to participate 
in a focus group or rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813438].  
A research assistant will then call individuals who meet eligibility criteria .  In this call , participants  will be asked to  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 15 of 47 
 verbally confirm several pi[INVESTIGATOR_813439] (including name [CONTACT_18131]), and 
once this is confirmed they will schedule a time to participate  in the focus group or rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_143523].   
 
Due to the novel coronavirus (COVID -19) outbreak, all focus group and rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813440] (video conferencing).  Participants will be emailed the  Zoom password for the meeting and the 
‘wait room’ feature will be utilized.   
 
The purpose of the focus group is to receive feedback on the protot ype of the intervention modules. Focus 
groups will  last up to 90 minutes, and be digitally recorded. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_1126426] up to 60 -minutes, and be 
digitally recorded. Participants  will be compensated $20 for their time.  A total of 10 participants will complete 
rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
 
For the usability study  and for Phase 2 (small pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]) , a research assistant will call and email individuals who 
meet eligibility criteria  and invite them to participate in a training session and to verify eligibility. The training 
session will be completed via Zoom (video conferencing).  Participants will be emailed the Zoom password for the 
meeting and the ‘wait room’ feature will be utilized.  During the training,  participants  will be asked to  verbally 
confirm several pi[INVESTIGATOR_813439] (includin g name [CONTACT_18131]) , and then will be 
provided with more information about the study design, timeline, and payment. This training should take no longer 
than 15 minutes.  
 
After the training is complete, participants will be emailed a link to complete the baseline survey.  
A total of 15 participants will participate in this usability study where they will receive 2 modules a week for a 
total of 4 weeks (8 modules total) and complete a phone interview at the end of the study to assess overall 
impressions with the modules and provide feedback.  
 
For the small pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], a total of 120 young adults will be randomized to receive the 8 health -related modules or 
assessment only control group.  
 
The 8 web -based modules include skills to improve mood and adaptive strategies instead of  drinking alcohol to 
cope with negative emotions  (e.g., drinking alcohol when feel sad) . Each module will take between 5 -10 minutes 
to view. The modules are focused on: 1) education on drinking to cope with negative emotions, 2) identifying 
triggers for drinking and engaging in more helpful behaviors, 3) goal setting, 4) emotion regulation, 5) mood 
booster activities, 6) more helpful thinking, 7) social support, and 8) pro blem solving.  
 
All participants will complete online follow -up assessments at 1 and 3 months.  
 
 
5.2 Recordings . Does your research involve creating audio or video recordings?  
  No → If no, go to question 5.3. 
 x Yes → If yes, describe what you will record (if not already described in 5.1) and answer question  a. 
 a. Before recording, will you obtain the consent of subjects and any other individuals who may be 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 16 of 47 
 recorded?  
  No → If no, email [EMAIL_1004]  before submitting your application in Zipline. In 
your email, include a brief description of your research and a note that you 
intend to record individuals without their consent.     
 x Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_1126427] a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan as part of the study procedures?  
This means scans that are performed solely for research purposes or clinical scans that are modified for research purposes (f or 
example, using a gadolinium -based contrast agent when it is not required for clinical reasons ).  
 x No → If no, go to question  5.4. 
  Yes → If yes, answer questions a through c. 
a. Describe the MRI scan(s).  Specifically:  
• What is the purpose of the scan(s)? Examples: obtain research data;  safety assessment 
associated with a research procedure.  
• Which subjects will receive a MRI scan?  
• Describe the minimum and maximum number of scans per subject, and over what time period 
the scans will occur. For example: all subjects will undergo two MRI scans, six months apart.  
       
b. Use of gadolinium . Will any of the MRI scans involve the use of a gadolinium -based contrast agent 
(GBCA?)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, which agents will be used? Check all that apply.  
 Brand Name  [CONTACT_52936] / Primovist  Gadoxetate disodium  Linear  
  Gadavist  Gadobutro  Macrocyclic  
  Magnevist  Gadpe ntetate dimeglumine  Linear  
  MultiHance  Gadobenate dimeglumine  Linear  
  Omniscan  Gadodiamide  Linear  
  OptiMARK  Gadoversetamide  Linear  
  ProHance  Gadoteridol  Macrocyclic  
  Other, provide name:        
[CONTACT_217349] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 17 of 47 
  1.) The FDA has concluded that gadolinium is retained in the body and brain for 
a significantly longer time than previously recognized, especially for linear 
GBCAs. The health -related risks of this longer retention are not yet clearly 
established. However, the UW IRB expects researchers to provide a 
compelling justification for using a linear GBCA instead of a macrocyclic 
GBCA, to manage the risks associated with GBCAs.  
 Describe why it is important to use a GBCA with your MRI scan(s). Describe 
the dose you will use and (if it is more than the standard clinical dose 
recommended by [CONTACT_3455]) why it is necessary to use a higher 
dose . If you plan to use a linear GBCA, explain why you cannot use a 
macrocyclic GBCA.  
        
 2.) Information for subjects. Confirm by [CONTACT_245826] -approve d Patient Medication Guide for this 
GBCA you are using or that the same information will be inserted into the 
consent form.  
  Confirmed  
c. MRI facility . At which facility(ies) will the MRI scans occur? Check all that apply.  
  UWMC Radiology/Imaging Services (the UWMC clinical facility)  
  DISC Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (UWMC research facility)  
  BMIC Biomolecular Imaging Center (South Lake Union research facility)  
  Harborview Radiology/Imaging Services (the Harborview clinical facility)  
  SCCA Imaging Services  
  Northwest Diagnostic Imaging  
  Other: identify in the text box below:  
        
Personnel. For MRI scans that will be conducted at the DISC or BMIC resear ch facilities: The role, qualifications, and 
training of individuals who will operate the scanner, administer the GBCA (if applicable), and/or insert and 
remove the IV catheter should be listed on the Study Team addendum.  
5.4 Data variables.  Describe the specific data you will obtain (including a description of the most sensitive items). If 
you would prefer, you may upload a list of the data variables to the Supporting Documents SmartForm instead of 
describing the variables below.  
 We are requesting permission to make additions and minor edits to the questionnaires without re -submitting 
documents to the IRB . For changes that go outside the range and scope of what is approved we will submit a 
modification. The types of measures we will include are: alcohol use & consequences  and  drinking to cope 
behaviors.  
A phone interview will consist  of qualitative data from the participants.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126428] for this research: Identify whether you are 
obtaining the data from the subjects (or subjects’ specimens) or whether you are obtaining the data from some 
other source (and identify the source).  
If you have already provided this information in Question 5.1, you do not need to repeat the information here.  
 We will be obtaining data from the subjects  
5.[ADDRESS_1126429] you in identifying relevant compliance 
requirements.  Review the following definitions before answering the questions:  
Access means to view or perceive data, but not to possess or record it. See, in contrast, the definition of “obtain”.  
Identifiable  means that the identity  of an individual is or may be readily (1) ascertained by [CONTACT_61938] a combination of data variables, or (2) associated with the 
information.  
Direct identifiers  are direct links between a subject and data/specimens. Examples include (but are not limited to): name, date 
of birth, medical record number, email or IP address, pathology or surgery accession number, student number, or a collection 
of your data that is (when taken together) identifiable.  
Indirect identifiers  are information that links between direct identifiers and data/specimens. Examples: a subject code or 
pseudonym.   
Key refers to a single place where direct identifiers and indirect identifiers are linked together so that, for example, coded da ta 
can be identified as relating to a specific person. Example: a master list that contains the data code and the identifiers li nked 
to the codes.  
Obtain  means to possess or record in any fashion (writing, electronic document, video, email, voice recording, etc.) for 
research purposes and to retain for any length of time. This is different from accessing , which means to view or perceive data.  
a. Will you or any members of your team have access  to any direct or indirect identifiers?  
 x Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   Name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_3031] (phone numbers, address, email addresses) will be 
entered, downloaded, and stored separately from research data. All data will be 
identified only by a PIN, which will be randomly generated for study purposes. A master 
list of names and PI[INVESTIGATOR_813441] a locked research staff office in a password -
protected database and on password -protected computers with restricted access, and 
will be available only to  research staff on this project.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not have access to 
direct or indirect identifiers.     
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before you have access.    
  
  
You have (or will have) entered into an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or 
key) that prohibits the release of the identifiers (or key) to you under any circumstances.    
  
  You should be able to produce this agreement for IRB upon request. Examples: a Data Use 
Agreement, Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 19 of 47 
   management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.  
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key to 
you. Describe them below.    
  
        
b. Will you obtain  any direct or indirect identifiers?  
 x Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   
 Yes, name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_3031] (phone numbers, address, email addresses) will be 
collected and stored separately from research data and identified only by a PIN, which 
will be randomly generated for study purposes.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not obtain direct or 
indirect identifiers.     
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before you have access.    
  
  
You have (or will have) entered into an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or 
key) that prohibits the release of the identifiers (or key) to you under any circumstances.     
  
  You should be able to produce this agreement for IRB upon request. Examples: a Data Use 
Agreement, Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key to 
you. Describe them below.     
  
        
c. If you obtain any identifiers, indicate how the identifiers will be stored (and for which data).  NOTE: Do not 
describe your data security plan here – we will ask for that information in section 9.6.  
  
You will store the identifiers with the data . Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
  
You will store identifiers and study data separately but you will maintain a link between 
the identifiers and the study data (for example, through the use of a code) . Describe the 
data to which this applies:   x 
  
  Name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_813444], downloaded, and stored separately from 
research data. All data will be identified only by a PIN, which will be randomly generated 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126430] . 
  
You will store identifiers separately from the study data, with no link between the 
identifiers and the study data. Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
d. Research collaboration . Will individuals who provide you with coded information or specimens  for your 
research also collaborate on other  activities for this research? If yes, identify the activities and provide the 
name [CONTACT_61971]’s institution/organization.  
Examples include but are not limited to: (1) study, interpretation, or analysis of the data that results from the coded 
information or specimens; and (2) authorship on presentations or manuscripts related to this work.  
 No one outside the UW research team will have access to identifiers.  
5.7 Protected Health Information (PHI).  Will you access, obtain, use, or disclose a participant’s identifiable PHI for any 
reason (for example, to identify or screen potential subjects, to obtain study data or specimens, for study follow -
up) that does not involve the creation or obtaining of a Limited Data Set?  
PHI is individually -identifiable healthcare record information or clinical specimens from an organization considered a “covered 
entity” by [CONTACT_52906], in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. If you will use UW Medical 
Records, you must answer yes to this question.  
 x No → If no, skip the rest of this question; go to question  5.8 
  Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
  a. Describe the PHI you will access or obtain, and the reason for obtaining it. Be specific.  
       
b. Is any of the PHI located in Washington State?  
  No  
  Yes  
c. Describe how you will access or obtain the PHI. Be specific.  For example, you might: directly view 
records; search through your department’s clinical database; submit a request to Leaf.  
       
d. For which PHI will you obtain HIPAA authorization from the subjects by [CONTACT_61941] a HIPAA 
Authorization form, before obtaining and using the PHI?  
       
 Confirm by [CONTACT_61942], obtain, use, or disclose UW Medicine PHI.  
  Confirmed    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 21 of 47 
 e. For which PHI will you NOT obtain HIPAA authorization from the subjects?  
       
 Provide the following assurances by [CONTACT_52909].  
 
 
You will access, obtain and/or use only the minimum necessary amount of PHI to accomplish 
the purposes described in this application.   
 
 
 
 
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by 
[CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted.   
 
 
 
 
 
You will fulfill the HIPAA “accounting for disclosures” requirement. See UW Medicine 
Compliance  Policy # 104. THIS IS ONLY FOR UW RECORDS.   
 
 
 
   
 
There will be reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any 
patient in any report of the research.     
 
   
 
5.8 Genomic data sharing . Will you obtain or generate genomic data  (as defined at  
http://osp.od.nih.gov/scientific -sharing/genomic -data -sharing -faqs/  )? 
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the question below.  
 a. Do you plan to send genomic data from this research to a national database (for example, NIH’s 
dbGaP database)?  
   No  
   Yes → If yes, complete the ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT Genomic Data Sharing  and upload 
it to the Supporting Documents  SmartForm of Zipline .   
5.9 Whole genome sequencing. For re search involving biospecimens: W ill the research include whole genome 
sequencing?  
Whole genome sequencing is sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or 
exome sequence of that specimen.  
 x No  
  Yes  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126431] for any of the following:  
• Future research not described in this application (in other words, secondary research)  
• Submission to a repository, registry, or database managed by [CONTACT_10825], colleagues, or others for research 
purposes  
• Sharing with others for their own research  
You are strongly encouraged to consider the broadest possible future plans you might have, and whether you 
will obtain consent now from the subjects for future sharing or research  uses  (which you may or may not be 
able to describe at this time).  Answer  YES even if you will only share information without identifiers . Answer  NO 
if you are unlikely to do any sharing, or if your only sharing will be through the NIH Genomic Data Sha ring 
described in question 5. 8. 
Many federal grants and contracts now require data or specimen sharing as a condition of funding, and many journals require 
data sharing as a condition of publication. “Sharing” may include  (for example) : informal arrangements to share your banked 
data/specimens with other investigators; establishing a repository from which you formally share with others through written 
agreements; or sending your data/specimens to a third party repository/archive/entity such as the Social Science Open Access 
Repository (SSOAR), or the  UCLA Ethnomusicology Arch ive. 
  No  
 x Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
 a. Describe what you will store for future use,  including whether any direct or indirect (e.g., subject 
codes) identifiers will be stored.  
 Indirect identifiers (PI[INVESTIGATOR_227822]) will be stored with the data set.  
 b. Describe what will be shared  with other researchers or with a repository/database/registry , 
including whether direct identifiers will be shared and (for specimens) what data will be 
released with the specimens.  
 It is possible that only the de -identified data set will be shared with  study collaborators . 
However, no direct identifiers are stored with the data and all identifying information will 
remain safeguarded and maintained confidentially with restricted access to only the research 
team.  
 c. Who will oversee and/or manage the sharing?  
 The Project Coordinator  and Research Investigator.  
 d. Describe the possible future uses , including limitations or restrictions (if any) on future uses or 
users.  As stated above, consider the broadest possible uses . 
 Examples: data will be used only for cardiovascular research; data will not be used for research on 
population origins.  
 De-identified d ata will be shared with members of our Center or the broader research 
community upon request for legitimate scholarly research purposes.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 23 of 47 
  e. Consent . Will you obtain consent now from subjects for the secondary use, banking and/or 
future sharing?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, be sure to include the information about this consent process in the 
consent form (if there is one) and in your answers to the consent questions in 
Section 8.  
 f. Withdrawal . Will subjects be able to withdraw their data/specimens from secondary use, 
banking or sharing?  
  No  
 x Yes → If yes, describe how, and whether there are any limitations on withdrawal.  
 Example: data can be withdrawn from the repository but cannot be retrieved after they 
are released.  
 Participants can choose to withdraw their data or stop participating at any 
time.  
 g. Agreements for sharing or release . Confirm by [CONTACT_61944] 
(and, if applicable, UW Medicine) policies that require a formal agreement between you and 
the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_52864].  
 Data Use Agreements or Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52865]; Material Transfer Agreements are used for 
specimens (or specimens plus data ). Do not attach your template agreement forms; the IRB neither 
reviews nor approves them  
 x  Confirmed  
5.11 Communication with subjects during the study . Describe the types of communication (if any) you will have with 
already -enrolled subjects during the study. Provide a description instead of the actual materials themselves.   
Examples: email, texts, phone, or letter reminders about appointments or about returning study materials such as a 
questionnaire; requests to confirm contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 We will have contact [CONTACT_813445], text messages, and phone calls through -out the study. 
Participants will be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_813446].  
5.[ADDRESS_1126432] information  you obtain  for your subjects  so that 
they can be contact[CONTACT_52911] ? 
  No  
 x Yes → If yes, describe the purpose of the future contact, and whether use of the contact [CONTACT_245269]; if not, describe who else could be provided with the contact [CONTACT_3031].  
Describe your criteria for approving requests for the information.    
 Examples: inform subjects about other studies; ask subjects for additional 
information or medical record access that is not currently part of the study 
proposed in this application; obtain another sample.  
 It is possible that participants who indicate willingness to be contact[CONTACT_813447] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 24 of 47 
 5.13 Alternatives to participation . Are there any alternative procedures or treatments that might be advantageous  to 
the subjects ? 
If there are no alternative procedures or treatments, select “No”. Examples of advantageous alternatives: earning extra class  
credit in some time -equivalent way other than research participation; obtaining supportive care or a standard clinical 
treatment from a health care provider instead of participating in research with an experimental drug.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the alternatives.  
         
5.14 Upload to the Supporting Documents  SmartForm  of Zipline  all data collection forms  (if any) that will be directly 
used by [CONTACT_52914], and any  scripts/talking points you will use to collect the data . Do not include data 
collection forms that will be used to abstract data from other sources (such as medical or academic records, or 
video recordings.  
• Examples : survey, questionnaires, subject logs or diaries, focus group questions.  
• NOTE: Some times the IRB can approve the general content of surveys and other data collection instruments rather than 
the specific form itself. This prevents the need to submit a modification request for future minor changes that do not add 
new topi[INVESTIGATOR_52866]. To request this general approval, use the text box below to identify  
the questionnaires/surveys/ etc. for which you are seeking this more general approval. Then briefly describe the scope of 
the topi[INVESTIGATOR_61916]. The HSD staff person who screens this application 
will let you know whether this is sufficient or whether you will need to provide more information.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
• For data that will be gathered in an evolving way : This refers to data collection/questions that are not pre -determined 
but rather are shaped during interactions with participants in response to observations and responses made during those 
interactions. If this applies to your research, provide a description of the process by [CONTACT_61949]/questions as you interact with subjects, how you will document your data collection/questions, the topi[INVESTIGATOR_61917], the most sensitive type of information you will plan to gather, and the limitations (if any) on topi[INVESTIGATOR_61918].  
Use this text box (if desired) to provide:  
• Short written descriptions of materials that cannot be uploaded, such as URLs  
• A description of the process you will use for data that will be gathered in an evolving way.  
• The general content of questionnaires, surveys and similar instruments for which you are seeking general 
approval. (See the NOTE  bullet point in the instructions above.)  
 We have provided the following items with our Zipline application:  
o Screening Invitation Email and general communication with participants  
o Pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]: Screening measures  
o Pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]: Baseline measures  
o Pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]: Follow up measures  
o Usability study: Phone interview measures  
 
We would also like to request general approval to make minor changes to measures, scripts, text 
messages, and intervention content without submitting a formal modification so long as those changes 
do not alter the range and scope of what is currently approved. For changes that go outside the range 
and scope of what is currently approved we will submit a modification.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 25 of 47 
  
 
6 CHILDREN (MINORS) and PARENTAL PERMISSION  
6.1 Involvement of minors . Does your research include minors (children )? 
Minor or child  means someone who has not yet attained the legal age for consent for the research procedures, as 
described in the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted. This may or may not 
be the same as the definition used by [CONTACT_217314].  
• In Washington State the generic age of consent is 18, meaning that anyone under the age of 18 is 
considered a child.  
• There are some procedures for which the age of consent is much lower in Washington State . 
• The generic age of consent may be different in other states, and in other countries.  
 x No → If no, go to Section 8 . 
  Yes → If yes, provide the age range of the minor subjects for this study and the legal age for consent in 
your population(s). If there is more than one answer, explain.      
        
  
Don’t know  →This means is it not possible to know the age of your subjects. For example, this may be 
true for some research involving social media, the Internet, or a dataset that you obtain 
from another researcher or from a government agency. Go to Section 8 .  
 
6.2 Parental permission . Parental permission  means actively obtaining the permission of the parents. This is not the 
same as “passive” or “opt out” permission where it is assumed that parents are allowing their children to 
participate because they have been provided with information about the res earch and have not objected or 
returned a form indicating they don’t want their children to participate.  
a. Will you obtain parental permission for:  
  
All of your research procedures  → Go to question 6.2b.   
  
  
None  of your research procedures  → Use the table belo w to provide your justification , and skip 
question 6.2b.    
  
  
Some of your research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which you will 
not obtain written parental permission.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) for 
which there will be NO parental 
permission2 Reason why you will not 
obtain parental 
permission  Will you inform 
them about the 
research ?3 
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 26 of 47 
       
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If your answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, you can collapse your answer across the groups  and/or 
procedures . 
2. If you plan to obtain identifiable information or biospecimens without parent permission, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_61950]’ refusal to provide broad consent (for example, through the Northwest Biotrust).  
3. Will you inform them about the research beforehand even though you are not obtaining active permission?  
b. Indicate by [CONTACT_61951](es) your plan for obtaining parental permission  
  Both parents, unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available; or when 
only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child    
  
  
One parent, even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.    
  
  This is all that is required for minimal risk research.  
 If you checked both boxes, explain:  
       
6.3 Children who are wards. Will any of the children be wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, an advocate may need to be  appointed for each child who is a ward. The advocate must be in 
addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. The 
same individual can serve as advocate for all children who are wards.    
 Describe who will be the advocate(s). Your answer must address the following points:  
• Background and experience  
• Willingness to act in the best interests of the child for the duration of the research  
• Independence of the research, research team, and any guardian organization  
       
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 27 of 47 
 7 ASSENT OF CHILDREN (MINORS)  
Go to Section 8  if your research does not involve children (minors).  
7.1 Assent of children (minors) . Though children do not have the legal capacity to “consent” to participate in 
research, they should be involved in the process if they are able to “assent” by [CONTACT_7661] a study explained to them 
and/or by [CONTACT_5978] a simple form about the study, and then giving their verbal choice about whether they want to 
participate. They may also provide a written assent if they are older. See WORKSHEET: Children  for circumstances 
in which a child’s assent may be unnecessary or inappropriate.   
a. Will you obtain assent for:  
  
All of your research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.2.   
  
  
None  of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide your 
justification , then skip to question 7.6   
  
  
Some of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to identify the 
procedures for which you will not obtain 
assent.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if 
any) for which assent will NOT 
be obtained  Reason why you will not  obtain  assent  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Table footnotes  
1. If your answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, you can collapse your answer across the groups  and/or 
procedures . 
7.2 Assent process. Describe how you will obtain assent, for each child group. If your research involves children of 
different ages, answer separately for each group. If the children are non -English speakers, include a description of 
how you will ensure that they comprehend the information you provide.  
       
7.3 Dissent or resistance. Describe how you will identify a child’s objection or resistance to participation (including 
non-verbal indications) during the research, and what you will do in response.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 28 of 47 
 7.4 E -consent. Will you use any electronic processes (email, websites, electronic signatures, etc.) to present assent 
information to subjects/and or to obtain documentation (signatures) of assent? If yes, describe how you will do 
this. 
       
7.5 Documentation of assent.  Which of the following statements describes whether you will obtain documentation of 
assent?  
  
None of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide your 
justif ication, then go to question  7.5.b    
  
  
All of your research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.5.a, do not complete the 
table    
  
  
Some of your research procedures and/or child groups  → Complete the table below and then to go 
question 7.5.a   
  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which assent 
will NOT be documented  
            
            
            
            
            
Table footnotes  
1. If your answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, you can collapse your answer across the groups  and/or 
procedures . 
 a. Describe how you will document assent . If the children are functionally illiterate or are not fluent in English, 
include a description of what you will do.  
        
 b. Upload all assent materials  (talking points, videos, forms, etc.) to the Consent Form and Recruitment 
Materials  SmartForm  of Zipline . Assent materials are not required to provide all of the standard elements of 
adult consent; the information should be appropriate to the age, population, and research procedures. The 
documents should be in Word, if possible.  
7.6 Children who reach the legal age of consent during participation in longitudinal research .  
Children who were enrolled at a young age and continue for many years : It is best practice to re -obtain assent (or 
to obtain it for the first time, if you did not at the beginning of their participation).  
Children who reach the legal age of consent : You must  obtain informed consent from the now -adult subject for (1) 
any ongoing interactions or interventions with the subjects, or (2) the continued analysis of specimens or data for 
which the subject’s identify is readily identifiable to the researcher, unless the IRB waives this requirement.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 29 of 47 
  a. Describe your plans (if any) to re -obtain assent from children.   
       
 b. Describe your plans (if any) to obtain consent for children who reach the legal age of consent.  
• If you plan to obtain consent, describe what you will do about now -adult subjects w hom you are unable 
to contact.  
• If you do not plan to obtain consent or think that you will be unable to do so, explain why.  
       
7.7 Other regulatory requirements . (This is for  your  information only; no answer or response is required.)  
Researchers are responsible for determining whether their research conducted in schools, with student records, 
or over the Internet comply with permission, consent, and inspection requirements of the following federal 
regulations:  
• PPRA – Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment  
• FERPA – Family Education Rights and Privacy Act  
• COPPA – Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act  
 
 
[ADDRESS_1126433]’s decision to participate in the research is documented. 
This is typi[INVESTIGATOR_52870] a consent form.  
CONSENT FORM  is a document signed by [CONTACT_1766], by [CONTACT_52921].  
ELEMENTS OF CONSENT  are specific information that is required to be provided to subjects.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF CONSENT  are the qualities of the consent pro cess  as a whole. These are:  
• Consent must be legally effective.  
• The process minimizes the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Subjects or their representatives must be given sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider participation.  
• The information provided must:  
o Begin with presentation of key information (for consent materials 
over 2,000 words)  
o Be what a reasonable person would want to have  
o Be organized and presented so as to facilitate understanding  
o Be provided in sufficient detail  
o Not ask or appear to ask  subjects to waive their rights  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 30 of 47 
 PARENTAL PERMISSION  is the parent’s active permission for the child t o participate in the research. 
Parental permission is subject to the same requirements as consent, including 
written documentation of permission and required elements.  
SHORT FORM CONSENT  is an alternative way of obtaining written documentation of consent that is most 
commonly used with individuals who are illiterate or whose language is one for 
which translated consent forms are not available.  
WAIVER OF CONSENT  means there is IRB approval for not obtaining consent or for not including some of 
the elements of consent in the consent process.  
 
NOTE : If you plan to obtain identifiable information or identifiable biospecimens 
without consent, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52922] a subject’s 
refusal to provide broad consent (for example, the Northwest Biotrust).  
WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION 
OF CONSENT  means that there is IRB approval for not obtaining written documentation of 
consent.  
8.1 Groups  Identify  the groups to which your  answers in this section apply.  
 x Adult subjects  
  Parents who are providing permission for their children to participate in research  
 → If you selected PARENTS , the word “consent” below should also be interpreted as applying to parental 
permission and “subjects” should also be interpreted as applying to the parents.  
8.2 The consent process  and characteristics . This series of questions is about whether you will obtain consent  for all 
procedures except recruiting and screening  and, if yes, how.  
The issue of consent for recruiting and screening activities is addressed in question 4. 7. You do not need to repeat your answer 
to question 4.6.  
 a. Are there any procedures for which you will not obtain consent?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, use the table below to identify the procedures for which you will not obtain consent. “All” is 
an acceptable answer for some studies.    
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including future contact, and sharing/banking of data and specimens fo r 
future work.  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) 
for which there will be NO consent 
process  Reason why you will not obtain 
consent  Will you 
provide 
subjects  with 
info about the 
research after 
they finish?  
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 31 of 47 
       
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If your answer is the same for all groups you can collaps e your answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Describe the consent process , if you will obtain consent for any or all procedures, for any or all groups. Address 
groups and procedures separately if the consent processes are different.  
Be sure to include:  
• The location/setting where consent will be obtained  
• Who will obtain consent (refer to positions , roles, or titles, not names)  
• How you will provide sufficient opportunity for the subjects to discuss the study with the research team and consider 
participation  
 Participants will be directed to a Screening  Information Statement detailing all procedures, obligations, and 
timeline associated with the study . It is made clear that participants can rescind consent and decline further 
participation at any time. Participants are provided with information for contact[CONTACT_813448].  
Eligible participants will then be directed to an electronic Informed Consent page  for the usability study  and 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] . 
Audio recordings will begin with an announcement that the conversation is now being recorded .  
c. Comprehension . Describe how you will ensure or test the subjects ’ understanding of the information  during the 
consent process . 
 Participants are encouraged to ask any questions they have about the study prior to consenting to participate. 
Participants are provided with information for contact[CONTACT_813449].  
d. Influence . Does your research involve any subject groups that might find it difficult to say “no” to your research  
because of the setting or their relationship with you, even if you don’t pressure them to participate ?   
Examples: Student participants being recruited into their teacher’s research; patients being recruited into their healthcare 
provider’s research, study team members who are participants; outpatients recruited from an outpatient surgery waiting 
room just prior to their surgery.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what you will do, for each of these subject groups, to reduce any effect of the 
setting or relationship on their decision.    
  Examples: a study coordinator will obtain consent instead of the subjects’ physician; the researcher will not 
know which subjects agreed to participate; subjects will have two days to decide after hearing about the 
study.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126434] ascertained that the 
information you will provide to subjects (via written or oral methods ) is what a reasonable member of the 
subject population(s)  would want to know. If you have consent materials that contain a key information section, 
also describe how you have identified that the informatio n presented in that section is t hat which is most likely  
to assist the selected subject population with making a decision. See GUIDA NCE: Key I nformation for Consent 
Materials . 
 
For example, you may have consulted with publications about research subjects’  preferences, disease -focused nonprofit 
groups, patient interest groups, or other researchers/study staff with experience with the specific population. It may also 
involve directly consulting selected members of the study population.  
       
f. Ongoing process . For research that involves multiple or continued interaction with subjects over time, describe 
the opportunities (if any) you will give subjects to ask questions or to change their minds about participating.  
       
8.3 Electronic presentation of consent information. Will any part of the consent -related information be provided 
electronically for some or all of the subjects?  
This refers to the use of electronic systems and processes instead of (or in addition to) a paper consent form. For example, an 
emailed consent form, a passive or an interactive website, graphics, audio, video podcasts. See GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed 
Consent  for information . 
  No → If no, skip to question 8.4  
 x Yes → If yes, answer questions a through e 
a. Describe your methodology and the information that will be provided . 
All informational materials must be made available to the IRB. Website content should be provided as a 
Word document. It is considered best practice to give subjects  information about multi -page/multi -screen 
information that will help them assess how long it will take them to complete the process. For example, 
telling them that it will take about [ADDRESS_1126435] the study team with questions and/or concerns.  
Focus group and rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_119696] , and usability study  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] , will also include 
electronic consent.  
b. Describe how the information can be navigated (if relevant). For example, will the subject  be able to 
proceed forward or backward within the system, or to stop and continue at a later time?  
 The screening  consent form can be accessed via email and closed and accessed at a later time. 
All of the information is on one page, so they do not need to navigate forward or backward.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126436] the opportunity to go 
through the consent form with study staff and/or to ask study staff about any question they may 
have after reading the consent form. Describe  what, if anything, you will do to facilitate the 
subject’s comprehension and opportunity to ask questions when consent information is 
presented electronically. Include a description of any provisions to help ensure privacy and 
confidentiality during this process.  
Examples: hyperlinks, help text, telephone calls, text messages or other type of electronic messaging, video 
conference, live chat with remotely located study team members.  
 Potential subjects are presented with an information statement detailing the purpose of the 
study, study procedures, payment information, information on risk, stress, or discomfort, 
alternatives to participation,  benefits of the study, description of the source of funding, 
information on confidentiality, and the ability to consent or decline participation. The contact 
[CONTACT_813450], and participants are encouraged to 
ask questions at any point in their consent process or participation to ask questions. We also 
encourage participants to contact [CONTACT_813451] a research subject. We also encourage them to keep a copy of the consent form, 
and offer to provide a copy, to be able to reference the information and the contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  
Young adults completing the online screening survey and meeting eligibi lity criteria will be 
presented with an electronic consent form for  the usability study  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] .  
d. What will you do if you encounter individuals who wish to participate but who do not have access 
to the methodology you are using or who do not wish to use it? Are there alternative ways in 
which they can obtain the information, or will there be some assistance available? If this is a 
clinical trial, you cannot exclude these individuals from your study unless you have a compelling 
rationale.  
 
For example, consider individuals who lack familiarity with electronic systems, have poor eyesight or 
impaired motor skills, or who do not have easy email or internet access.  
 It is not possible to participate in the study without completing the online screening . 
e. How will you provide additional information, including any significant new findings (such as new 
risk information) to subjects during the research?  If this is not an issue, explain why.  
 We do not anticipate additional relevant findings will come up during the research that requires 
dissemination to participants. However, we would contact [CONTACT_813452].   
8.4 Written documentation of consent. Which of the statements below describe whether you will obtain 
documentation of consent? NOTE: This question does not apply to screening and recruiting procedures which have 
already been addressed in question 4. 7. 
Documentation of consent that is obtained electronically is not considered written consent unless it is obtained by a method 
that allows verification of the individual’s signature. In other words, saying “yes” by [CONTACT_61965]  
a. Are you obtaining written documentation of consent for:  
  None of your research procedures  → Use the table below to provide your justification then g o to 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 34 of 47 
  x question 8.5. 
  
  
All of your research procedures  → Do not complete the table; go to question 8.4.b.   
  
  
Some of your research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which you will 
not obtain written documentation of consent from your adult 
subjects.    
  
Adult 
subject 
group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which 
there will be NO documentation of consent  Will you 
provide them 
with a written 
statement 
describing the 
research 
(optional)?  
  YES NO 
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
                 
 
     
      
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If your answer is the same for all adult  groups or all procedures, you can collaps e your answer across the groups and/or 
procedures.  
b. Electronic consent signature. For studies in which documentation of consent will be obtained: will subjects use 
an electronic method to provide their consent signature?  
• FDA-regulated studies must use a system that complies with the FDA’s “Part 11” requirements about electronic 
systems and records.  Note that the UW -IT supported DocuSign e -signature [CONTACT_52939] . 
• Having subjects check a box at the beginning of an emailed or web -based questionnaire is not considered legally 
effective documentation of consent.  
  No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 35 of 47 
   Yes → If yes,  describe the methodology you will use.  
See the GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed Consent  for information about options (including the DocuSign 
system available through UW-IT) and requirements.  
       
b.1 Is this method legally valid in the jurisdiction where the research will occur?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes,  what did you use as your source of information  about legal validity ? 
       
b.[ADDRESS_1126437]’s identity if the signature [CONTACT_52940] a member of the study team? Note that this is required for FDA -regulated 
studies.  
See the GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed Consent  for information and examples  
  No →If no, provide your rationale for why this is appropriate. Also, what would  
be the risks to the actual subject if somebody other than the intended  
signer provides the consent signature?  
       
  Yes →If yes,  how ? 
       
b.3 How will you meet the requirement to provide a copy of the consent information (consent 
form) to individuals who provide an e -signature?  
The copy can be paper or electronic and may be provided on an electronic storage device or via 
email. If the electronic consent information uses hyperlinks or other websites or podcasts to convey 
information specifically related to the research, the information in these hyperlinks should be 
included in the cop y provided to the subjects and the website must be maintained for the duration 
of the entire study.  
       
8.5 Non -English -speaking or -reading adult subjects . Will you enroll adult subjects who do not speak English or who 
lack fluency or literacy in English?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the process you will use to ensure that the oral and written information provided to 
them during the consent process and throughout the study will be in a language readily 
understandable to them and (for written materials such as consent forms or questionnaires) at an 
appropriate reading/comprehension level.    
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 36 of 47 
  a. Interpretation . Describe how you will provide interpretation and when. Also, describe the 
qualifications of the interpreter(s) – for example, background, experience, language proficiency 
in English and in the other language, certification, other credentials, familiarity with the research -
related vocabulary in English and the target language.  
       
 b. Translation s. Describe how you will obtain translations of all study materials (not just consent 
forms) and how you will ensure that the translations meet the UW IRB’s requirement that 
translated documents will be linguistically accurate, at an appropriate reading level for the 
participant population, and culturally sensitive for the locale in which they will be used.  
       
8.6 Barriers to written documentation of consent . There are many possible barriers to obtaining written 
documentation of consent. Consider, for example, individuals who are functionally illiterate; do not read English 
well; or have sensory or motor impairments that may impede the ability to read and sign a consent form.  
a. Describe your plans (if any) for obtaining written documentation of consent from potential subjects who may 
have difficulty with the standard documentation process (that is, reading and signing a consent form). Skip this 
question if you are not obtaining written documentation of consent for any part of your research.  
Examples of solutions : Translated consent forms; use of the Short Form consent process; reading the form to the person  
before they sign it ; excluding individuals who cannot read an d understand the consent form.  
  
8.7 Deception . Will you deliberately withhold information or provide false information to any of the subjects? Note: 
“Blinding” subjects to their study group/condition/arm is not considered to be deception , but not telling them ahead of time 
that they will be subject to an intervention or about the purpose of the procedure(s) is deception . 
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what information and why.  
  Example: you may wish to deceive subjects about the purpose of the study.  
       
 a. Will you inform subjects beforehand that they will be unaware of or misled regarding the nature 
or purposes of the research ? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes  
 b. Will you debrief the subjects later? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how you will debrief the subjects. Upload any debriefing materials, 
including talking points or a script, to the Consent Form and Recruitment 
Materials SmartForm of Zipline .   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 37 of 47 
        
8.8 Cognitively impaired adults, and other adults unable to consent . Do you plan to include such individuals in your 
research?  
Examples: individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) or dementia; individuals who are unconscious, or who are significantly 
intoxicated.  
 x No → If no, go to question  8.9. 
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions.  
 a. Rationale . Provide your rationale for including this population in your research.  
       
 b. Capacity for consent / decision making capacity . Describe the process you will use to 
determine whether a cognitively impaired  individual is capable of consent  decision making 
with respect to your research protocol and setting.  
        
 b.1. If you will have repeated interactions with the impaired subjects over a time period 
when cognitive capacity could increase or diminish, also describe how (if at all) you will 
reassess decision -making capacity and obtain consent during that time.  
       
 c. Permission (surrogate consent) . If you will include adults who cannot consent for themselves, 
describe your process for obtaining permission (“surrogate consent”) from a legally authorized 
representative (LAR).   
 For research conducted in Washington State, see the SOP: Legally Authorized Representative  to learn 
which individuals meet the  state  definition of “legally authorized representative”.  
        
 d. Assent . Describe whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If some, 
indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not (and why not). Describe 
any process you will use to obtain and document assent from the subjects.  
        
 e. Dissent or resistance . Describe how you will identify the subject’s objection or resistance to 
participation (including non -verbal) during the research, and what you will do in response . 
        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 38 of 47 
 8.9 Consent -related materials . Upload to the Consent Forms and Recruitment Materials  SmartForm of Zipline  all 
consent scripts/talking points, consent forms, debriefing statements, Information Statements, Short Form consent 
forms, parental permission forms, and any other consent -related materials you will use.  
• Translations must be included . However, you are strongly encouraged to wait to provide them until you know that the IRB 
will approve the English versions.  
• Combination forms : It may be appropriate to combine parental permission with consent, if parents are subjects as well as 
providing permission for the participation of their children. Similarly, a consent form may be appropriately considered an 
assent form for older children.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_1126438] to  
recruiting, consenting, sensitivity of the data being collected, and the method of data collection.  
Examples:  
• Many subjects will feel a violation of privacy if they receive a letter asking them to participate in a study because they 
have ____ medical condition, when their name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and medical condition were drawn from medical 
records without their consent.  Example: the IRB expects that “cold call” recruitment letters will inform the subject 
about how their information was obtained.  
• Recruiting subjects immediately prior to a sensitive or invasive procedures (e.g., in an outpatient surgery waiting 
room) will feel like an invasion of privacy to some individuals . 
• Asking subjects about sensitive topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (e.g. details about sexual behavior) may feel like an invasion of privacy to some 
individuals.  
 Procedures for minimizing risks : We have taken steps to protect participants against potential risks 
posed by [CONTACT_346182]. In the consent form, participants will be fully informed of the 
range of items and the most sensitive and personal items, and will also be informed that they are free 
not to answer any question they wish not to answer and can refuse to participate or withdraw from 
participation at any time without penalty. Participants are encouraged to contact [CONTACT_813453].  
All data and other information in this study will be maintained confidentially, but will not be 
anonymous due to the longitudinal nature of participation. In order to protect against risks posed by a 
potential loss of confidentiality, we will take the following steps. First, participants will be assured that 
they are free to refrain from answering any question they do not wish to answer. Second, all data will be 
identified only by a unique personal identification number (PIN), which will be randomly generated for 
study purposes. Identifiable information entered online (such as contact [CONTACT_3031]) wil l be downloaded 
and stored separately from participants’ responses, but will be identified by [CONTACT_813454]. A master list of 
names and PI[INVESTIGATOR_813441] a password -protected database, on a password -protected computer 
with restricted access, and will only be available to senior research staff under the supervision of the 
Principal Investigator . Data will be retained on computers with restricted and password protected 
access, without links to the master code list. Third, all members of the research team have received or 
will receive training that includes emphasis upon the importance of confidentiality of information, and all 
personnel on the project will complete the required NIH training in protection of human research 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 39 of 47 
 participants. All staff will sign confidentiality statements. Fourth, to maintain confidentiality of data 
submitted over the internet, participants will be required to log into a secure server (site certificate 
provided by [CONTACT_813455]) using a unique PIN created for study purposes. Data transfer will be protected 
using a Secure Socket Layer with 128 -bit encryption. The SSL certificate will ensure that data moving 
from the participant to the server (i.e., participant responses) will be encrypted using a [ADDRESS_1126439].  
 
9.2 Identification of individuals in publications and presentations . Do you plan to use potentially identifiable 
information about subjects in publications and presentations, or is it possible that individual identities could be 
inferred from what you plan to publish or present?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, will you obtain subject consent for this use?  
  Yes  
  No → If no, describe the steps you will take to protect subjects (or small groups of 
subjects) from being identifiable.     
       
9.3 State mandatory reporting. Each state has reporting laws that require some types of individuals to report some 
kinds of abuse, and medical conditions that are under public health surveillance. These include:  
• Child abuse  
• Abuse, abandonment, neglect, or financial exploitation of a vulnerable adult  
• Sexual assault  
• Serious physical assault  
• Medical conditions subject to mandatory reporting (notification) for public health surveillance  
 
Are you or a member of your research team  likely to learn of any of the above events or circumstances while 
conduc ting your research AND  feel obligated to report it to state authorities?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes,  the UW IRB expects you to inform subjects of this possibility in the consent form or during the 
consent process, unless you provide a rationale for not doing so:    
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 40 of 47 
 9.4 Retention of identifiers  and data . Check the box below to indicate your assurance that you will not destroy any 
identifiers (or links between identifiers and data/specimens)  and data  that are part of your research records until 
after the end of the applicable records retention requirements (e.g. Washington State; funding agency or sponsor; 
Food and Drug Administration) for your research.  If you think it is important for your specific study to say 
something about destruction of identifiers (or links to identifiers) in your consent form, state something like “the 
link between your identifier and the research data will be destroyed after the records retention period required by 
[CONTACT_52925]/ or federal law.”  
This question can be left blank for conversion applications (existing paper applications that are being “converted” into a Zi pline 
application.)  
 
See the “Research Data” sections of the following website for UW Records management for the Washington State research 
rectords retention schedules that apply in general to the UW  (not involving UW Medicine data) : 
http://f2.washington.edu/fm/recmgt/gs/research?title=R  
 
See the “Research Records and Data ” information in Section 8 of this document for the retention schedules for UW Medicine 
Records : https://www.uwmedicine.org/recordsmanagementuwm -records -retention -schedule.pdf  
 x Confirm  
9.5 Certificates of Confidentiality . Are you planning to obtain a federal Certificate of Confidentiality for your research 
data? NOTE: Answer “No”  if your study is funded by [CONTACT_52926] , because all NIH -funded  and CDC -funded  
studies automatically have a Certificate.  
 x No  
  Yes  
9.6 Data and specimen security protections . Identify your data classifications and the security protections you will 
provide, referring to the ZIPLINE  GUIDANCE: Data and Security Protections  for the minimum requirements for 
each data classification level . You cannot answer this question without reading this document. Data security 
protections should not conflict with records retention requirements.  
 a. Which level  of protections will you apply to your data and specimens? If you will use more than one level , 
describe which level  will apply to which data and which specimens.  
  We will apply Level [ADDRESS_1126440] those here.  
  We will follow all required Level 3 data security protections.  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 41 of 47 
 10 RISK / BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
10.[ADDRESS_1126441]:  
• Describe the magnitude, probability, duration, and/or reversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard, AND  
• Describe how you will manage or reduce the risks.  Do not describe data security protections here, these are 
already described in Question 9.6.  
• Consider possible physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic harms , including  possible negative effects on  
financial standing, employability, insurability, educational advancement or reputation.  For example, a breach of 
confidentiality might have these effects.  
• Examples of “others”: embryo, fetus, or nursing child; family members; a specific group.  
• Do not include the risks of non -research procedures that are already being performed.  
• If the study design specifies that subjects will be assigned to a specific condition or intervention, then the condition or 
intervention is a research procedure - even if it is a standard of care.  
• Examples of mitigation strategies: inclusion/exclusion criteria; applying appropriate data security measures to prevent 
unauthorized access to individually identifiable data; coding data; taking blood samples to monitor something that 
indicates drug toxicity.  
• As with all questions on this application, you may refer to uploaded documents.  
 There are no  known physical risks of participating in  this research. It is possible participants  may feel 
uncomfortable participating  in the focus groups or rapid prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_813442]. They  may feel self -conscious about sharing your feedback and thoughts in 
front of others.  
It is possible participants may not want to answer questions in the usability study or may feel self -conscious 
sharing their feedback about the intervention materials. Participants will be told they are free to not answer 
items.  
 
10.2 Reproductive  risks . Are there any ris ks of the study procedures to me n and women (who are subjects, or partner 
of subjects) related to pregnancy, fertility, lactation or effects on a fetus or neonate?  
Example s: direct teratogenic effects; possible germline effects; effects on fertility; effects on a woman’s ability to continue a 
pregnancy; effects on future pregnancies.  
 x No → If no go to question 10.3  
  Yes → If yes,  answer the following questions:  
 a. Risks . Describe the magnitude, probability, duration and/or reversibility of the risks.  
         
 b. Steps to minimize risk . Describe the specific steps you will take to minimize the magnitude, 
probability, or duration of these risks.  
Example s: inform the subjects about the risks and how to minimize them;  require a pregnancy test before 
and during the study; require subjects to use contraception; advise subjects about banking of sperm and 
ova.  
 
If you will require the use of contraception: describe the allowable methods and the time period when 
contraception must be used.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126442] (or a subject’s partner) becomes pregnant  
For example; will you require the subject to immediately notify you, so that you can discontinue or modify 
the study procedures, discuss the risks, and/or provide referrals or counseling?  
         
10.3 MRI risk management. Answer this question only if your subjects will receive MRI scans . A rare but serious 
adverse reaction called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been observed in individuals with kidney disease 
who received gadolinium -based contrast agents (GBCAs) for the scans. Also, a few healthy individuals have a 
severe allergic reaction to GBCAs.  
a. Describe how you will assess the renal function of your subjects prior to MRI scans and how you will use that 
information to exclude subjects at risk for NSF.  
       
b. Describe your protocol for handling a sever allergic reaction to the GBCA or any other medical 
event/memergency during the MRI scan, including who will be responsible for which actions.   
       
10.[ADDRESS_1126443] risks that are currently unforeseeable?  
Example: using a drug that hasn’t been used before in this subject population.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes,  identify the procedures.  
         
10.5  Subjects who will be under regional or general anesthesiology . Will any research procedures occur while 
subjects -patients are under general or regional anesthesia, or during the 3 hours preceding general or regional 
anesthesia (supplied for non -research reasons)?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, check all the boxes that apply.  
    
Administration of any drug for research purposes      
    
  
Inserting an intra -venous (central or peripheral) or intra -arterial line for research purposes    
  
  Obtaining samples of blood, urine, bone marrow or cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_52872] a research sample from tissue or organs that would not otherwise be removed 
during surgery    
  
  
Administration of a radio -isotope for research purposes**    
  
  
Implantation of an experimental device    
  
  
Other manipulations or procedures performed solely for research purposes (e.g., 
experimental liver dialysis, experimental brain stimulation)    
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 43 of 47 
   If you checked any of the boxes : 
You must provide the name [CONTACT_52941] a physician anesthesiologist who is 
a member of your research team or who will serve as a safety consultant about the 
interactions between your research procedures and the general or regional anesthesia of 
the subject -patients. If your procedures will be performed at a UW Medicine facility or 
affiliate, the anesthesiologist must be a UW faculty member, and you must consult with the 
Vice Chair of Clinical Research in the UW Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine 
for feasibility, safety and billing.  
        
  ** If you checked the box about radio -isotopes: you are responsible for informing in advance all 
appropriate clinical personnel (e.g., nurses, technicians, anesthesiologists, surgeons) about the 
administration and use of the radio -isotope, to ensure that any personal safety issues (e.g., 
pregnancy) can be appropriately addressed. This is a condition of IRB approval.  
10.6  Data and Safety Monitoring . A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is required for clinical trials (as defined 
by [CONTACT_4289]). If required for your research , or if you have one regardless , upload your DSMP to the Supporting 
Document s SmartForm in Zipline . If it is embedded in another document you are uploading (for example, a 
Study Protocol ) use the text box below to name [CONTACT_52942].  Alternatively, you can provide 
a description of your DSMP in the text box below .  
 DSMP is now uploaded to supporting documents.  
10.7  Un-blinding . If this is a double -blind ed or single -blinded  study in which the participant and/or you do not k now 
the group to whic h the participant is assigned: describe the circumstances under which un -blinding would be 
necessary, and to whom the un -blinded information would be provided.  
 n/a 
10.[ADDRESS_1126444] research -related benefits that some or all 
individual participants are likely to experience f rom taking part in the research, describe them below:  
Do not include benefits to society or others, and do not include subject payment (if any). Examples: medical benefits such as 
laboratory tests (if subjects receive the results); psychological resources made available to participants; training or educa tion 
that is provided.   
 There may be no direct benefit from  participation . The knowledge gained from this study may benefit future 
young adults .  Benefits to society include the opportunity to contribute to research  that helps to develop 
substance use intervention programs . 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 44 of 47 
 10.10 Return of individual research results.  
In this section you are asked to provide your plans for the return of individual results. An “individual research result” is any 
information collected, generated or discovered in the course of a research study that is linked to the identity of a research  
participant. These may be results from screening procedures, results that are actively sought for purposes of the study, resu lts 
that are discovered unintentionally, or after analysis of the collected data and/or results has been completed.  
 
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about results that should and should not be returned, validity 
of results, the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA), consent requirements and communicating results.  
 a. Do you anticipate that the research will produce any individual research results that are clinically 
actionable?  
 “Clinically actionable” means that there are established therapeutic or preventive interventions or other available 
actions that have the potential to change the clinical course of the disease/condition, or lead to an improved health 
outcome.  
 
In general, e very effort should be made to offer results that are clinically actionable, valid and pose life -threatening or 
severe health consequences if not treated or addressed quickly. Other clinically actionable results should be offered if 
this can be accomplished without compromising the research.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions (a.1 -a.3).  
 a.1. Describe the clinically actionable results that are anticipated and explain which results, 
if any, could be urgent (i.e. because they pose life -threatening or severe health 
consequences if not treated or addressed quickly).  
 Examples  of urgent results include  very high calciu m levels, highly elevated liver function test results, 
positive results for reportable STDs . 
       
 a.2. Explain which of these results will be offered to subjects.  
       
 a.3. Explain which results will not be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for not 
offering these results.  
 Reasons not to offer the results might include:  
• There are serious questions regarding validity or reliability  
• Returning the results has the potential to cause bias  
• There are insufficient resources to communicate the results effectively and appropriately  
• Knowledge of the result could cause psychosocial harm to subjects  
       
 b. Do you plan to offer subjects any results that are not clinically actionable?  
 Examples: non -actionable genetic results, clinical tests in the normal range, experimental and/or uncertain results.  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, explain which results will be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for 
offering these results.   
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#[ADDRESS_1126445] to the offer of results, who will 
communicate the result (if different), the circumstances, timing, and communication methods that will be 
used.  
       
 e. Describe any plans to share results with family members (e.g. in the event a subject becomes 
incapacitated or deceased).  
       
 f. Check the box to indicate that you have described your plans for return of individual research results in the 
consent document. If there are no plans to provide results to participants, this should be stated in the 
consent form.  
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about consent requirements.  
  Confirmed   
10.[ADDRESS_1126446] or patent could result from this 
study?  
 x No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe whether subjects might receive any remuneration/compensation and, if yes, 
how the amount will be determined.   
         
 
 
11 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANTS  
11.1 Financial responsibility for research -related injuries.  Answer this question only if the lead research er is not a 
UW student, staff member, or faculty member whose primary  paid appointment is at the UW.  
 
Describe who will be financially responsible for research -related injuries experienced by [CONTACT_1766], and any 
limitations. Describe the process (if any) by [CONTACT_61956]/compensation.  
 N/a 
11.2 Costs to subjects . Describe any research -related costs for which subjects and/or their health insurance may be 
responsible ( examples might include:  CT scan required for research eligibility screening; co -pays; surgical costs 
when a subject is randomized to a specific procedure; cost of a device ; travel and parking expenses that will not 
be reimbursed ). 
 N/a 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 46 of 47 
 11.3 Reimbursement for costs . Describe any costs to subjects  that will be reimbursed  (such as travel expenses) . 
 N/a 
 
 
12 RESOURCES  
12.1 Faculty Advisor . (For researchers who are students, fellows, or post -docs.) Provide the following information 
about your faculty advisor.  
• Advisor’s name  
• Your relationship with your advisor (for example: graduate advisor; course instructor)  
• Your plans for communication/consultation with your advisor about progress, problems, and changes.  
 N/a 
12.2 Study team communication . Describe how you will ensure that each study team member is adequately trained 
and informed about the research procedures and requirements (including any changes) as well as their research -
related duties and functions.  
  There is no study team.  
   
 We will have  weekly research team meetings to ensure each study team member is adequately trained and 
informed about the project and its related functions.  
 
 
13 OTHER APPROVALS, PERMISSIONS, and REGULATORY ISSUES  
13.1 Other regulatory approvals . Identify any other regulatory approvals that a re required for this research, by 
[CONTACT_422137].  
 Approval  Research for which this is required  
  
Radiation Safety  Procedures involving the use of radioactive materials or an ionizing 
radiation producing machine radiation, if they are conducted for research 
rather than clinical purposes.  Approvals need to be attached to the 
Supporting Documents page in Zipline .   
  
  
Institutional Biosafety  Procedures involving the transfer/administration of recombinant DNA, 
DNA/RNA derived from recombinant DNA, or synthetic DNA.    
  
  
RDRC  Procedures involving a radioactive drug or biological product that is not 
approved by [CONTACT_245280], for basic science research (not to determine safety and 
effectiveness, or for immediate therapeutic or diagnostic purposes).    
  
  
ESCRO  Procedures involving the use of some types of human embryonic stem 
cells.    
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
07/28/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  12/5/2019  
revised 11.18.2021  
revised 3.22.22  
Version 2.1 Version x.x  
#2003   Page 47 of 47 
 13.2 Approvals and permissions.  Identify any other approvals or perm issions that will be obtained. For example: from 
a school, external site/organization, funding agency, employee uni on, UW Medicine clinical unit.  
Do not attach the approvals and permissions unless requested by [CONTACT_1201].  
 n/a 
13.[ADDRESS_1126447] (SFI) with this research as defined by [CONTACT_52932] 10 ? 
 x No  
  Yes → If yes, has the Office of Research made a determination regarding this SFI as it pertains to your 
proposed research?    
  No → If no, contact [CONTACT_52933] ([PHONE_950], [EMAIL_1005] ) for  
guidance on how to obtain the determination   
  Yes → If yes, upload the Conflict Management Plan for every team member who has a 
FCOI with respect to the research, to the Supporting Documents  page of Zipline . If 
it is not yet available, use the text box to describe whether the Significant 
Financial Interest has been disclosed already to the UW Office of Research and 
include the FIDS Disclosure ID if available.   
       
 
 