AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
1 IRB# 19-005341  
 
TITLE  
Clinical Pi[INVESTIGATOR_717037] 
(AHI/Depression Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268])  
 INVESTIGATORS /KEY STUDY PERSONNEL  
William V. Bobo,  M.D. , M.P.H.,
[ADDRESS_977461] Weinshilboum , 
M.D.,2 Mark A. Frye, M.D.,2 Katherine M. Moore , M.D.,2 Hannah K. Betcher, M.D.2 
 
1 Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL ([LOCATION_003])  
2 Mayo Clinic, [COMPANY_002]ster, MN ([LOCATION_003])  
3 University of Illinois, Urbana -Cham paign, IL ([LOCATION_003]) 
 
ABSTRACT   
This study will pi[INVESTIGATOR_717038] a validated Augmented Human 
Intelligence (AHI) -driven algorithm and clinical decision support tool  to predict the 8-
week response to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSR I) and serotonin-
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_26331] (SNRI) treatment of adults with a clinical diagnosis of  
Major Depressive Disorder.  This study will enroll 120 patients over two  years.   
 
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a chronic and severe psychiatri c illness that affects 
over 15 million people in the U.S. and is the leading cause of disability worldwide. Treatment choices are often made on a “trial and error” basis and an individual patient can receive several months of ineffective treatments before a clear “non -response” profile 
can be established.  Investigators  at Mayo Clinic [LOCATION_012] , Mayo  Clinic [COMPANY_002]ster, and the 
University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign (UIUC) have developed an augmented 
human intelligence (AHI) algorithm for response prediction during short -term treatment 
with SSRIs and SNRIs, validated in three large , 8-week SSRI clinical trial datasets, and 
an additional pooled dataset of 4 SNRI clinical trials  of 8-12 weeks duration. The 
algorithm takes as inputs clinical and demographic char acteristics at baseline, depression 
severity at baseline and at interim treatment time points (including a smaller sub -set of 
highly -prognostic individual depression symptoms) measured using validated rating 
scales, and genomic information (when available) . The output is a probability of eventual 
non-response and remission of depressive symptoms at an interim treatment time point 
when that information can be used to inform clinical judgment as to whether the current course of treatment should continue or be  changed. A web -based tool was developed for 
clinical decision support  in naturalistic treatment settings, based on the AHI algorithm. 
Mayo Clinic is now poised to implement and test the effectiveness of the clinical decision 
support tool  with a n 8-week  prospective, naturalistic pi[INVESTIGATOR_717039].  The 
main hypothesis to be tested is that the eventual antidepressant treatment outcome (non-
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
2 response, remission) predicted by [CONTACT_717058] 2-  and [ADDRESS_977462] 
high concordance wit h the observed outcome at 8 weeks.  
 
  
INTRODUCTION  
MDD is a chronic and severe psychiatric illness that affects ove r 15 million people in the 
U.S. (Kessler et al., 2005)  and is the leading cause of disability worldwide  (WHO 2017) . 
MDD can generally be managed with antidepressants  (Belmaker & Agam 2008) . 
However, the most common antidepressants for treating MDD are ineffective for many 
patients  (Frochtmann et al., 2005; Gartlehner et al., 2012; Rush et al., 2004, 2006) , and 
multiple therapeutic trials of a ntidepressants (each lasting several weeks) are typi[INVESTIGATOR_717040]  (Trivedi et al., 2006) . This means that an individual 
patient can receive several months of ineffective treatments before a clear “non -response” 
profile can be established  (Rush et al., 2003) . Hence, at an early point during treatment, 
there is a compelling clinical need in primary care and specialty care settings, where systematic recording of depressive symptoms may be accomplished through interactive devices (e.g., computers, tablets, smart -phones) , to know, “given a patient’s depression 
severity change after X weeks, are there specific thresholds of change in Y depression symptoms, such that there is a  Z% chance of patient not responding favorably to additional weeks of treatment with the current antidepressant medication.”  The 
translational impact of generating quantitative prognoses that forecast poor response based on early response to antidepressant medication rests in the availability of objective measures  to prompt an early change in treatment. Avoiding extended weeks of 
medication that is unlikely to benefit the patient could potentially reduce disease burden and suffering.  
 In a preliminary study, w e developed a novel machine learning workflow that ident ified 
core symptoms from the full rating scales (QIDS -C and HDRS) using data from 3 large 
8-week clinical trials of citalopram/escitalopram treatment in over 1,400 MDD patients. 
Supervised learning methods predicted sex -specific non- response and remission at 8 
weeks with AUC 0.62–0.95 using the baseline severity of core symptoms and their associated changes at 4 weeks. The prognostic capabilities of the core symptoms identified using our approach replicated across all 3 clinical trials  (manuscript in 
prepar ation) . The algorithm was then applied to an additional pooled dataset of 4 
randomized, placebo -controlled SNRI clinical trials , which resulted in a replication of 
core symptom identification  and prognostic outcomes  in the active treatment groups 
(manuscri pt in preparation). In both studies, specific thresholds of early improvement in 
core symptoms were identified that were highly -prognostic and predictive of non-
response and remission after 8- [ADDRESS_977463] 
its effectiveness with an 8 -week prospective, naturalistic pi[INVESTIGATOR_717039].  
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
3 Figure 1. Study overview.  
 
 STUDY OVERVIEW  (Fig 1)  
Adults (aged 18- 64 years) who meet 
DSM -5 diagnostic criteria for non-
psychot ic unipolar major depressive 
disorder (MDD) and meet study 
eligibility criteria will receive [ADDRESS_977464] - and 
clinician -rated versions of the 16-
items QIDS scale (QIDS -SR and 
QIDS -CR) and the 17- item HAMD 
at baseline, week 2 (via telephone), week 4, and week 8; with an additional phone contact [CONTACT_717059] 24. The QIDS scale scores at 2 - and 4- weeks will be entered into the AHI -based clinical 
decision support  tool, and the outcome predicted by [CONTACT_330583]  (e.g., the predicted eventual 
treatment outcome at 8 weeks)  will be recorded.  Clinicians and patients will be blinded to 
the clinical decision support tool prediction of outcome provided at the 2-  and 4 w eeks. 
The overarching hypothesis to be tested in this study  is that the antidepressant treatment 
outcome (non- response, remission) predicted by [CONTACT_717058] 2-  and [ADDRESS_977465] high concordance with the observed outcome at 8 weeks.  
 
Note:  As part of this protocol, blood will also be collected for genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_717041]. When available, a SNP panel will be performed to examine whether information on SNP profiles in four specific genes improve the accuracy of the predicti ons achieved using the AHI -based clinical decision support tool. 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
1. Evaluate the degree of statistical concordance between observed clinical outcomes 
(non- response/remission) after 8 weeks of treatment and the outcomes predicted by 
[CONTACT_285571] -based clinical decision support tool after 2 weeks of follow up (i.e., 
concordance between 2 -week predicted outcome and 8- week observed outcome) , 
as assessed using the QIDS -SR and QIDS -CR,  in adults with DSM -5-defined 
MDD who receive prospective treatment w ith an SSRI or SNRI antidepressant .   
2. Evaluate the degree of statistical concordance between observed clinical outcomes 
(non- response/remission) after 8 weeks of treatment and the outcomes predicted by 
[CONTACT_285571] -based clinical decision support tool after 4  weeks of follow up (i.e., 
concordance between 4- week predicted outcome and 8- week observed outcome) , 
as assessed using the QIDS -SR and QIDS -CR, in adults with DSM -5-defined 
MDD who receive prospective treatment with an SSRI or SNRI antidepressant .     
3.    
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977466] a poor response to a given antidepressant medi cation in depressed patients, based 
on early response s to antidepressant medication . These objective measures  can be used to 
augment clinician judgment in order  to prompt an early change in treatment  if the 
prognosis for non- response is high. Today, there is no evidence -based guidance on how 
much change in the overall depression score (or the scores for specific symptoms) is required to make those decisions.    The main challenge for developi[INVESTIGATOR_717042] (inter -individual variability) in 
response to antidepressant medication (Arnow 
et al., 2015; Fried 2017; Kessler et al., 2017; Musliner et al., 2016; Senn 2016) . In 
measurement -based care of patients with 
MDD, standardized rating scales such as the  
Hamilto n Depression Rating Scale (HDRS)  
(Hamilton 1960) and the  Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Sympt oms – clinician rated 
version (QIDS -CR) (Rush et al., 2003) are 
used to assess the total depression severity by [CONTACT_717060], appetite, mood, fatigability, etc. The 
ability to know whether an early change (e.g., at 2 or 4 weeks) in total depressive severity is 
prognostic of eventual outcomes (e.g., at 8 weeks) is challenged by [CONTACT_717061]. In mathematical terms, if there are n levels of depression 
severity scores across k time-points of treatment, then there are n
k transitions – resulting 
in multiple  hundreds  of trajectories , as shown in Fig. 2. It is not tractable for even an 
experienced clinician to be able to memorize all possible trajectories of change in MDD severity to derive treatment prognoses at an individual patient level.  
 
Others have attempted to utilize machine learning (ML) and artificial inte lligence (AI) 
approaches to analyzing large datasets from clinical trials of antidepressants for 
depressed adults, with the goal of deriving more homogeneous patient subgroups or trajectories of clinical response (Chekroud et al., 2016, 2017; Iniesta et al ., 2016). These 
approaches have relied on the use of baseline depressive symptoms and 
sociodemographic predictor variables. The clinical utility of these approaches is severely 
limited by [CONTACT_717062], either in dividually 
or in aggregate , for predicting outcomes of antidepressant treatment  (Chekroud et al., 
2016, 2017; Initesta et al., 2016) . Furthermore, these ML/AI -based methods are unable to 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
5 consider changes in depressive symptoms or other clinical assessments  at intermediate 
time-points, before a therapeutic antidepressant trial is fully completed —a central 
concept in depression management  (Crismon et al., 1999; Friedman et al., 2000; Kennedy 
et al., 2016) . 
 
To address the problem of antidepressant response he terogeneity  while simultaneously 
considering changes in depressive symptoms at intermediate time points , we set out to 
derive more compact and data- driven representations of antidepressant response patterns 
in MDD patients and use this information to achie ve interpretable (clinically useful) 
prognoses of antidepressant treatment outcome at an early stage of treatment. Briefly, we used probabilistic graphs to algorithmically explore the most- likely longitudinal 
variations (referred to as symptom dynamic paths ) of total depression severity to achieve 
an eventual categorical treatment outcome  using data from three large SSRI trials 
(n=1,846) and two rating scales —the HDRS and QIDS -CR (see PRELIMINARY 
RESULTS below) . This approach provided the mathematical found ation needed to model 
conditional dependencies that follow a clinician’s treatment logic, i.e., accounting for improvement in total depression severity, conditioned upon baseline depression severity and changes in depressive symptoms at intermediate time -points, in a purely data -driven 
manner, without a priori specification of trajectories  (Athreya et al., 2017; Koller 2009) . 
Second, using unsupervised machine learning, we identified a subset of individual depressive symptoms (referred to as core depressive symptoms ) with homogeneous 
responses to symptom severity assessments, and found that their early (4- week) changes 
were prognostic and predictive of categorical treatment outcomes at 8 weeks (remission, response, non -response). Crucially, the symptom dynam ic paths, core symptoms, and 
their predictive capabilities replicated across all three datasets and both rating scales.  
Specific thresholds of change in core symptoms were identified at 4 weeks that were highly prognostic of eventual outcome at 8 weeks. Subsequent application of this ML workflow to a large pooled dataset of duloxetine -treated adult patients with MDD  
(totaling 2,510 subjects)  resulted in a replication of the same findings with SSRI 
antidepressants (manuscript in preparation). Additional methodological details of this preliminary work are provided below under the section entitled, PRELIMINARY 
STUDIES.  
 To increase the translational impact of our preliminary work, we built an interactive system that allows clinicians to input select demographic  measures and depression 
severity scores, and obtain from the probabilistic graphical model output that conveys the predicted outcome and evidence supporting that prediction (see PRELIMINARY 
STUDIES below) . While the methods developed in our preliminary  work rely on 
retrospective analyses of clinical trial datasets, the aforementioned clinical impact is possible only when prognostic models reflect variability observed in naturalistic clinical settings  and are shown to be valid prospectively in routine use s ettings . And this provides 
the motivation for the current study protocol.  
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977467] been conducted by [CONTACT_717063]. In the initial phase , we used data from 3 open trials o f citalopram or escitalopram, 
two closely related SSRI antidepressants, to: (a) Cluster patients based on depressive symptoms severity, separately by [CONTACT_4321], as a basis for modeling the change in depressive symptoms over time  (symptom dynamic paths) ; (b) Iden tify a subset of core depressive 
symptoms with homogeneous longitudinal responses to study drugs;  (c) Use core 
depressive symptom changes at [ADDRESS_977468] non- response, response (without 
remission), and remission at 8 weeks ; and (d) Create a web -based  decision support tool 
using the collected data. In the second phase , we replicated the findings from the first 
phase (with citalopram/escitalopram) using data from 9 randomized trials of duloxetine , 
and SNRI antidepressant,  for treating adults with MDD, e ach with a follow -up duration 
of 8 –12 weeks ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], NCT0073411, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]9, and [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) . 
Presented here are methods and results from the first phase (methods from the first phase  
were  duplicated  and the results were replicated  in the second phase ) and the third phase 
of our work. This workflow is summarized in Fig 3, where steps (a) and (b) are 
summarized under Fig 3 Aim 1 , step (c) is summarized under Fig 3 Aim 2, and step (d) 
is summarized under Fig [ADDRESS_977469] phase was the 
Pharmacogenomics Research Network Antidepressant Medical Pharmacogenomics Study 
(PGRN -AMPS, NCT 00613470) . PGRN- AMPS was a single -arm, open trial designed to 
assess antidepressant effects of citalopram/escitalopram over 8 weeks in adults (aged 
18−84 years) with MDD, and to examine metabolomic and genomic predictors of those 
outcome  (Ji et al., 2013). Data from complete cases (baseline, 4 -, and 8- week data) of 
step 1 of the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depressio n (STAR*D) trial 
(NCT 00021528) and International SSRI Pharmacogenomics Consortium (ISPC) were used to test the reproducibility of patterns of depressive symptom response i nferred in the 
PGRN- AMPS study (Biernacka et al., 2015; Trivedi et al., 2006). The c omplete pooled 
dataset consisted of 1,846 adults, aged 18- 75 years, with MDD. 
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
7 Fig 3 Aim 1 – Patient clustering and sex stratification  
Unsupervised learning (Gaussian mixture models) were  used to generate patient 
stratification (clusters) at baseline an d at 4 and 8 weeks based on total QIDS -CR and 
HDRS 17 scores  (see Fig 4 ). The Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152]-
Wilk test was  used to test whether the 
distribution of symptom severity scores is 
normal (Gaussian).  Because total 
depression severity scores were not 
normally distributed  (Fig. 4), we modeled  
the distribution of symptom severity scores as being  composed of a mixture of 
Gaussians (k components of the distribution), where each Gaussian distribution represented a cluster of 
patients with similar symptom severity. We used an expectation -maximization 
(EM) algorithm that initially assumed  only 
two (k=2, line 1 in Fig 4 ) components in the mixture (a single bell- shaped curve 
distribution) and gradually increased the number of components (multiple normal 
distributions) unti l an adeq uate fit of the data was  achieved. For each value of k, we 
generated 10,000 samples (line 7 in Fig 4 ) using the parameters (mean and variance of a 
Gaussian component) estimated by [CONTACT_717064] p- values using 
Kolmogorov- Smirnov (line 8 in Fi g 4) test.  The process of increasing the components 
stopped at the first instance of p>0.05 ( line [ADDRESS_977470] the 
null hypothesis that the estimated distribution and actual distribution of total depression 
severity scor es are similar); otherwise, k was  incremented by 1 (line 12 of Fig 4 ), and the 
process reverted back to line 5 of Fig 4. Under the assumption that the distribution was  a 
mixture of k components (line 10 in Fig 4 ), patients 
were assigned to a cluster 
based on the components 
to which their scores belonged. Our solution 
yielded k=3 clusters, as shown in Fig 5, at baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks .  The 3 clusters of 
patients were labeled A1, 
A2, and A3; the clusters at 4 weeks were labeled B1, B2, and B3;  and the clusters at [ADDRESS_977471] severe symptom cluster, and 2 represented an intermediate symptom cluster.  Crucially, 
the clusters at 8 week s (C1, C2, and C3) were shown to be ecologically (clinically) valid-
- all patients in C1 achieved remission, all patients in C3 failed to achieve remission or 
response, and 87% of patients in C2 achieved response without remission. 
Fig. 4:  Patient stratification algorithm  
Fig. 5: (a) shows the inference of mixtures comprising the distribution 
of symptom severity scores. (b) shows distributions of symptom 
severity within clusters inferred using the sufficient statistics of 
components inferred in (a).  
 

AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
8 Fig. 6: Symptom dynamics, total depression severity.  
 
Fig 3 Aim 1 – Modeling symptom dynamics pathways  
Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGM s) with the forward algorithm were  used to model 
how total QIDS -CR and HDRS 17 scores changed during citalopram/escitalopram 
treatment by [CONTACT_717065] a given baseline cluster 
to a cluster at [ADDRESS_977472] of the path likelihood of arriving at the precursor node, the transition probability from the precursor node to the current node (i.e., proportion of patients who moved between the two nodes), and the fraction of patients who achieved response status at the present node relative to their baseline severity. The paths for the pairs of baseline and 4- or 8-week clusters that had  the highest likelihood scores were  identified as the 
“most likely” paths, which we then refer red to as symptom dynamics paths.  The 
symptom dynamic p aths (shown in Fig. 6 for women in PGRN -AMPS and ISPC) and 
distributions of total depressi on scores on the paths replicated in the PGRN -AMPS and 
STAR*D datasets (for QIDS -CR), and in the PGRN -AMPS and ISPC datasets (for 
HDRS 17), including the most likely response status on these paths at [ADDRESS_977473] repres entation of antidepressant response  was achieved 
by [CONTACT_508413]  a set of 9 sign ifican t trajectories of treatment res ponse – as opposed to over 
1,300 trajectories in Fig. 1.  
Fig 3 Aim 1 – Extracting core depressive symptoms  
To extract homogeneous patterns of  citalopram/escitalopram response on the symptom 
dynamic paths, core depressive symptoms were defined using three criteria: ( 1) similar 
response patterns at all time -points, (2) low inter -individual variability, and ( 3) 
statistically distinct patterns of r esponse at 4 weeks between symptom dynamic paths 
originating from a baseline cluster. Hierarchical clustering with complete linkage was  
used to identify individual depression scale items with similar rating patterns (clustered 
together with a common parent  in the tree, other than the common parent of the entire 
hierarchy) within patient clusters at baseline, 4, and 8 weeks. Then, symptom clusters 
were identified wherein clinician ratings for each of the scale items at baseline had a 
nonzero median and low i nter-individual variability (the chi -square test for the 
distribution of clinician ratings is significant after multiple comparisons, with the null 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
9 hypothesis being that the distributions of ratings for that item are equal). Finally, the 
Kolmogorov- Smirnov test were used to determine if there were significant differences in 
the distributions of core symptom scores at 4 weeks between the symptom dynamic paths leading to non- response (<50% reduction in QIDS -CR or HDRS 17 scores), response 
(>50% reduction in QI DS-CR or HDRS scores), and remission (QIDS -CR score ≤ 5, 
HDRS 17 score ≤ 7) at 8 weeks, from a given baseline cluster. In the individual and 
combined datasets, 5 items in the QIDS -CR (sad mood, concentration/decision- making, 
self-outlook, involvement, and energy/fatigability) and 4 items in the HDRS 17 (sad 
mood, psychic anxiety, guilt feelings/delusions, and work/activities) met the core depressive symptom criteria.  
 
Fig 3 Aim 2 – Predicting non -response/remission after [ADDRESS_977474] clinical outcomes at 8 weeks 
given a specific baseline cluster, using the baseline severity of core depressive symptoms 
and their changes at 4 weeks. AUC, PPV, NPV, sensitivity, and specificity  were 
calculated as measures of algorithm performance, using the  null information rate as a 
proxy for chance. To minimize the effects of overfit and information leak, nested cross -
validation (nested- CV) with 5 repeats was  used to train the classifiers and maximize the 
area under the curve.  In our preliminary study of c italopram/escitalopram -treated adults, 
the predictive accuracies for non -response ranged from 71 to 84% (p<0.01, AUC 0.85–
0.91) in women and from 89 to 92% (p<0.02, AUC 0.88−0.90) in men. For remission, predictive accuracies were 75 –85% (p<0.04, AUC 0.84−0.89) in women and 63−95% 
(p<0.04, AUC 0.62–0.94) in men. 
 
Fig 3 Aim 3 – Electronic decision support tool development  
We have recently used data from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_717043] (and the SNRI, duloxetine) 
to build an interactive system  (web -based decision support tool)  that allows clin icians to 
input select demographic measures and depression severity scores, and obtain from the 
probabilistic graphical model output that conveys the predicted outcome and evidence supporting that prediction. The interactive system consists  of a platform -independent 
front -end (i.e., it will work on desktops, laptops, smart phones and other hand- held 
devices) through which clinicians can input data and a back- end (e.g., a server hosting the 
ML framework and code) where results are computed. The front -end interacts  with the 
trained prediction model in the server via a RESTful API [INVESTIGATOR_717044] -based websites, allowing clinicians to use a wide range 
of devices, including phones, tablets and workstations. T he server  is hosted at UIUC, 
which has vendor support from IBM Systems, Intel, and NVIDIA. Crucially, the analyses that provide the basis for the decision support tool’s functionality are retrospective in nature; thus, prospective validation is needed—which serves as the motivation for the current study.  
 
Additional Work – Integration of biological measures  
Moreover, the ML framework described here allows for the integration of biological 
measures in future studies —which serves as the motivation for the blood colle ction as 
part of this protocol. We tested the capability of a basic version of our ML algorithm 
(using total depression scale scores) to include functionally validated pharmacogenomics 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977475], again, consisted 
of the PGRN -AMPS (n = 398), STAR*D (n = 467), and ISPC (n = 165) trials. GWAS for 
PGRN- AMPS plasma metabolites associated with SSRI response (serotonin)  and 
baseline MDD severity (kynurenine) identified SNPs in  DEFB1 ( rs5743467, rs2741130, 
rs2702877), ERICH3 ( rs696692), AHR ( rs17137566), and TSPAN5 ( rs10516436), which 
were tested as predictors.  Supervised machine learning methods trained using SNPs and 
total baseline depression scores predicted remission and response at 8 weeks with AUC > 
0.7 (p<0.04) in PGRN -AMPS patients, with comparable prediction accuracies >69% 
(p<0.05) in STAR*D and ISPC. None of the clinical or demographic predictor variables that w ere also tested in our ML algorithm were associated with depression severity at 
baseline or at 8 weeks. There was also a lack of a significant association between CYP2C19 metabolizer phenotypes with depression severity clusters at baseline and 8 weeks. These results demonstrate that machine learning can achieve accurate and, 
importantly, replicable prediction of SSRI therapy response using total baseline depression severity combined with pharmacogenomic biomarkers  (Athreya et al., in 
press ). 
 
PARTICIPANTS  
 Entry Criteria  
We will enroll 120 participants, both male and female.  They will meet the following 
criteria : 
 
(1) Outpatients  with nonpsychotic MDD. Outpatient status assumes that the subject is not 
psychiatrically hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717045].  
(2) A total score of > 10 on the QIDS -CR and on the QIDS -SR (equivalent to a HAMD 17 
score of 13 [ids -qids.org, accessed on April 12, 2019] ) given that when medication 
exceeds the effect of  placebo in primary care,  participa nts have a 17- item HAMD score  
>12.  We added 2 HAMD points to take into account the possibility of measurement 
error.  This is a very similar approach taken to the successful recruitment of subjects into 
the PGRN -AMPS trial.  
(3)  A ntidepressant treatment is  deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_1003].   
(4)  Adults who are between 18 -64 years of age.   
 (5)  Ability to provide informed consent  
(6)  Ability to understand English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
The following will be exclusionary for participation in this study:  
(1)  A medical contraindication that preclude s SSRI or SNRI  treatment . 
(2) Presence of a general medical condition that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_717046], is 
the cause of their depressive symptoms, will be exclusionary.  
(3)  People with treatment- resistant depression will be excluded from participating. For 
this study, treatment resistance will be defined as failure to respond to  two or more 
adequate therapeutic trials of SSRIs and  at least on SNRI therapeutic trial (sufficient 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
11 antidepressant dose, for 6 wee ks or longer) during the current depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] .  
Failure to tolerate a therapeutic trial of a given medication (resulting in 
discontinuation due to adverse effects) will not be counted as exclusionary. Persons who have failed to respond to two or more  adequately designed and executed 
therapeutic trials of SSRIs but have no history of least on e failure to respond to SNRI 
treatment during the current depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_717047].  
(4) Diagnosis of  schizophreni a, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar I or II disorder , or 
bipolar disorder NOS (including other specified or other unspecified bipolar disorders ) or a primary psychiatric condition that requires a different initial treatment 
than an  antidepressant .   
(5) Currently taking an  antidepressant medication with subtherapeutic results in terms of 
antidepressive efficacy  and unwilling to undergo a medication taper and 
discontinuation prior to initiation of a study drug from this protocol .  The subject will 
be closely monitored by [CONTACT_717066]. The design of the medication taper will be at the discretion of the study clinician.  S ubjects who cannot be safely tapered from their medication or 
who exper ience adverse effects during the taper that make further tapering infeasible 
will be excluded from the study.   
(6) Use of  antidepressant medication primarily for management of nicotine dependence, 
chronic pain, migraine prophylaxis or other diagnoses.   
(7) Active subst ance use disorder. Persons in sustained full remission (> 12 months) and 
a negative urine drug of abuse screen at the screening visit will be considered eligible. Note : An additional urine drug screen will not be necessary for individuals with a 
negative u rine drug screen documented in the medical record where the date of 
testing occurred within 12 weeks (84 days) of the screening/baseline study visit. However, study clinicians can still obtain a urine drug screen based on their clinical judgement even in participants with a negative drug screen within the 12 weeks preceding the screening/baseline study visit.  
(8) Trazadone, melatonin, low -dose quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (<100 mg QHS), z -drugs (zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], 
zopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], etc.), ramelteon, and diphenhydramine may be used as rescue 
medications for insomnia. Benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_717048], and atomoxetine may be used for the treatment of attention deficit disorder.  Study subjects currently on antipsychotic medications (e.g., typi[INVESTIGATOR_717049] , other than low -dose quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_123201] ) and mood 
stabilizing agents (e.g., lithium, carbamazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050], valproate, lamotrigine)  are not 
eligible for the study  
(9) Pregnant subjects  and those who are currently breastfeeding and who plan to continue 
breastfeeding  will be excluded.  
(10) Persons c urrently undergoing ECT, TMS or DBS as acute series or for 
maintenance.  
(11) Patients currently psychiatrically hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717050].   
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
12 As an additional stipulation, individuals whose total QIDS -CR and total QIDS -SR scores 
are 10 or higher  at the screening visit but decrease (improve) to total scores less than 10 
on either the QIDS -CR or QIDS -SR at the baseline visit will be exclud ed. 
 
METHODS  
 
1.  Patient Identification and R ecruitment   
Patient recruitment will be focused on the Mayo Clinic [COMPANY_002]ster  and Mayo Clinic 
[LOCATION_012]  outpatient practices  of the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology  as well as 
Mayo Departments of Family Me dicine, Preventive and Occupational Health and 
Community Internal Medicine and other medical providers also treat a large number of 
patients with MDD, so coordination will also occur with these departments.  Study coordinators ( SC) will coordinate recruitment efforts through daily contact [CONTACT_717067].   
 
2. Screening Visit  
At the screening visit, potential study subjects  will: 
(1) Complete a brief form ascertaining basic demographic information and clinical 
information  including prior course of the illness, prior suicide attempts, family 
history of MDD or bipolar disorder, current general medical illnesses, history of bone marrow or liver transplant or blood transfusion within the previous 6 weeks, and prior history of treatment during the current major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865];  and 
(2) Complete a QIDS -SR. 
 
At the screening visit, the study coordinator  will:  
(1) Obtain informed consent . Patients will have the opportunity to have the Mayo 
IRB patient advocate or a significant other present during the consent procedure if desired ; 
(2) Review the clinical and demographic information  provided by [CONTACT_102] (see [1] 
above) , including  responses to items about  prior course of the illness , prior  
suicide attempts, family history of MDD or bipolar disorder, current general medical illnesses,  history of bone  marrow  or liver transplant or blood transfusion 
within the previous [ADDRESS_977476] to ensure that adequate information is available for 
follow -up after completion of the study;  
(3) Measure the patient’s height and weight ; 
(4) Ask participa nts for their permission to be contact[CONTACT_717068] ;  
(5) Complete the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID) [First et al, 1995]  
to confirm a diagnosis of MDD;  
(6) Administer  the QIDS -C16; and  
(7) Review the study inclusio n/exclusion criteria.  
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
13 Role of the study clinician : The study clinician will review the information provided by 
[CONTACT_717069] a basic clinical interview 
to confirm eligibility for study participation. Safety  issues, including suicidal ideation and 
risk for harming others, will be assessed.  
 When appropriate after a negative pregnancy test  and/or urine drug of abuse screen, the 
study coordinator will invite subjects  to participate in the study if entry criter ia are met.  
If the subject agrees, he/she will receive treatment as described below.  If the subject declines to participate, he/she will receive clinical care as usual from their primary 
physician or psychiatrist.    
3. Research E valuation Treatment S chedule   
Participants selected for inclusion in the study will be seen at weeks 0 (baseline), 4, and 
8, and telephone interview s will be scheduled at [ADDRESS_977477] them by [CONTACT_717070] -CR and Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Ratings  
(FIBSER)/Antidepressant Side -Effect Checklist (ASEC)  (Uher et al. 2009; Wisniewski et 
al., 2006) . A summary of assessments and rating scales by [CONTACT_6492] -up time point is 
presented below in Table 1.  
Table 1. Assessments and scales by [CONTACT_6492] -up time point.  
Assessment  Baseline  Week 2  
(telephone)  Week 4  Week 8  Week 24  
(telephone)  
QIDS -CR • • • • • 
QIDS -SR •  • •  
HAMD -17 • • • • • 
CGI-S •  • •  
CGI-I   • •  
C-SSRS*  •  • •  
PETS    • •  
FIBSER/ASEC   • • • • 
Side effects†   • • • • 
Vital signs  •  • •  
ACE/ MOSSS  •     
HCG/UDS ‡ •     
* Refers to the C -SSRS screen version.  
† Refers to spontaneous ascertainment of adverse effects by [CONTACT_71488].  
‡ A urine  pregnancy test  (HCG) and/or urine drug screen  will be ordered at baseline. The 
HCG will be ordered only  for women under age 45 years.  
  
Prior to Baseline Visit.    
Some enrollees who are already taking antidepressants will undergo a medication taper 
and discontinuation prior to initiation of a study drug from this protocol.  The rate of tapering will be determined by [CONTACT_1003], with the goal of taper completion within 2 -8 weeks, depending on the current dose and antidepressant selected. Once the 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977478] cases.  
 Baseline Visit.   
Note : If medication allows, the screening and baseline visits can occur on the same day. 
In other words, for patients will are identified by [CONTACT_717071], this will be the first study visit for those participants.  
 
(1) Clinical ratings : Before each visit  with study clinicians, subjects will complete a 
QIDS -SR, ACE, and MOSSS;  and the study coordinator will complete a QIDS -CR, 
17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD17) (Hamilton 1967),  and 
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) screening version ( Posner et al., 
2011) . QIDS -SR and –CR scale scores will be made available to study clinicians, as 
the latter will serve as a guide for clinical decisions about changing the dose of study drugs. At the end of the face to face visit, study clinicians will provide a CGI -S score 
(Guy 1976) . 
(2) Initial data entry into clinical decision support tool:  Study clinicians will enter 
information about subject age, sex, QIDS -CR, and HAMD17 scores. This information 
will be used  in conjunction with changes in depressive symptom scores  at the week 4 
face to face study visit to generate an output that specifies the prognoses of achieving eventual remission, response, and non- response at week 8.  
(3) Sample collecti on: At the baseline visit, we will obtain blood for DNA using two 
EDTA tubes, DNA isolation- 50ng/ml that will be sent to the BAP Lab for storage. All 
venipunctures will be performed using standard techniques.    
(4) Vital signs :  At the baseline visit, subjects will have their blood pressure, heart rate, 
height, and body weight measured.  
(5) Study drug initiation : Study drugs will include all SSRI and SNRI antidepressants 
available for clinical use in the U.S. All study drugs will be initiated at sta ndard 
doses, as  shown in Table 2. For drugs with multiple indications, the doses chosen for 
this study are based on those recommended by [CONTACT_3455].  
(6) Scheduling next study visit(s) : The study coordinator will schedule the week [ADDRESS_977479] starting doses and titration guidelines  
Study drug name  [CONTACT_717078] 
(mg/day)  Titration guideline (optional)  
Citalopram (Celexa)  20  Increase to 40 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Escitalopram  (Lexapro)  10 Increase to 20 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Fluoxetine  20 Increase to 40 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Fluvoxamine  50 Increase to 100mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Paroxetine  20 Increase to 40 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Sertraline  50 Increase to 100  mg if non -responder at wk 4  
   
Desvenlafaxine  50 Increase to 100  mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Duloxetine  60* Increase to 90 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
Levomilnacipran  40† Increase to 80 mg if non -responder at wk 4  
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
15 Venlafaxine  75 Increase to 150  mg if non -responder at wk 4  
* The total duloxetine dose can be given once daily, usually in the morning, or on a BID schedule (e.g., 30 
mg BID). The study clinician may start the medication at a dose of 30 mg once daily and increase after 7 
days as toler ated to an initial dose of 60 mg daily (or 30 mg BID).  
† Levomilnacipran is initiated at a dose of [ADDRESS_977480] the support tool output (probability of a non- response/remission at 8 
weeks) on a standard form, and confirm scheduling of the next study visit at week 4.  
 
Although study clinicians will not be needed under routine circumstances for the telephone visit at week 2, they will be available for s upport when it is requested by [CONTACT_404914], or for special circumstances. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) The research coordinator will alert a study clinician if a patient expresses a wish to  
die (suicidal ideatio n), or if there are responses of 1 or higher on item 12 of the QIDS -
CR or on item 3 of the HAMD17;  
(2) The research coordinator will alert a study clinician if a patient complains of  
distressing medication side -effects, or if there is a FIBSER item 3 score of 4 (marked 
impairment) or higher.  
  During these circumstances, a study clinician will assess the clinical situation via the telephone with the patient and initiate appropriate next -step management. This may 
include, but not necessarily be limited to, stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_14930], changing the dose 
of study medication, providing urgent or more frequent face to face clinical visits, or sending the patient to the emergency room/activating emergency response. Such decisions will be at the discretion of the study c linician.  Additional details are provided 
below under the section entitled, SUICIDE RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN.  
Face to Face Visit at Week 4.  
(1) Clinical ratings : At the week 4 visit, subjects will complete a QIDS -SR, FIBSER, 
ASEC , and the Patient Experience with Treatment and Self -management scale  
(PETS) ; and the study coordinator will complete a QIDS -CR, HAMD17, and C-
SSRS. All of these  scale scores will be made available to study clinicians. At the end 
of the face to face visit, study clinicians will provide CGI -S and CGI -I scores . 
(2) Determination of response status : For this study, a positive antidepressive response 
will be defined as a reduction (improvement) in QIDS -CR total score of 50% or 
more, relative to their baseline total QIDS -CR score .  Subject s who achi eve this 
threshold of improvement will be considered positive responders. Those who do not 
will be considered non- responders. This will serve as a clinical guide to dosing, as 
described in item ( 5) below. Some responders will be further classified as havin g 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
16 achieved symptomatic remission, which will be defined in this study as a QIDS -CR 
total score of 5 or lower ( Rush et al., 2006). 
(3) Quantification of the probability of non- response/remission at 8 weeks :  In order to 
ensure the blinding of the clinical decis ion support tool prediction, t he study 
coordinator will enter the week [ADDRESS_977481] likely at 8 weeks (non -response, response without remission, remission). 
(4) Vital signs :  At the week [ADDRESS_977482] their blood pressure, heart rate, 
and body weight measured. 
(5) Dosing of study drugs : Study clinicians will be allowed to adjust the dose of study 
drug at the week 4 visit (but changing medications or adding adjunctive medication, will not be allowed). The decision to adjust the dose of study drug will be made at the discretion of the study clini cian based on their judgment, in collaboration with the 
patient in a shared decision making framework, Table 2 provides  guidance for the 
adjustment of the dose of study drugs ). 
(6) Scheduling next study visit : The research coordinator will schedule the week [ADDRESS_977483] that the next visit (week 8) will be the last face to face visit as part of this research . 
 
Face to Face Visit at Week 8.  
(1) Clinical ratings : At the week 8 visit, subjects will complete a QIDS -SR, FIBSER,  
ASEC , and PETS ; and the study coordinator will complete a QIDS -CR, HAMD17, 
and C-SSRS. All of these scale scores will be made available to study clinicians. At 
the end of the face to face visit, study clinicians will provide CGI -S and CGI -I 
scores.  
(2) Determ ination of response status : At week 8, subjects will be classified as having 
non-response  (those who have not achieved a > 50% reduction from baseline in 
QIDS -CR total score ), response  without remission ( > 50% reduction in QIDS -CR 
total score from baseline , but total score still adds up to > 5) , or remission (QIDS -CR 
total score <  5). This will again serve as a clinical guide to dosing, as described in 
item (4) below.  
(3) Vital signs :  At the week [ADDRESS_977484] th eir blood pressure, heart rate, 
and body weight measured. 
(4) Dosing of study drugs : Subjects will be reminded that the week [ADDRESS_977485]’s regular 
health care provider(s). For the participants who are classified as having  symptomatic 
remission at week 8, no dose adjustment will typi[INVESTIGATOR_717051]. For persons who 
have not achieved remission at week 8  (including non-responders ) an increase in the 
dose of the antidepressant , augmentation/combination therapy , or therapeutic switch 
should be  considered. Depending on the specific situation, study clinicians may elect 
to initiate this process themselves in close coordination with the subject’s regular health care provider, with subsequent face to face follow up provided by [CONTACT_423]’s 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
17 regular health care provider(s). Otherwise, study clinicians may provide  specific 
next-step treatment recommendations to the subject so that they can discuss them 
with their  regular health care provider.  
(5) Subsequent follow -up: The  research coordinator will schedule the week [ADDRESS_977486] about their participation in the study. During this telephone follow -up visit, the study 
coordinator will administer the QIDS -CR, HAMD17, FIBSER, and ASEC, and will 
ascertain spontaneous reports of adverse effects of current treatments.  
 As was the case for the telephone visit at week 2, study clinicians will not be needed under routine circumstances; however, they will be available for support when it is requested by [CONTACT_95002], or for special circumstances. Again, such circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:  
(1) The research coordinator will alert a study clinician if a patient expresses a wish to die (suicidal ideation), or if there are responses of 1 or higher on item 12 of the QIDS -CR or 
on item 3 of the HAMD17;  
(2) The research coordinator will alert a study clinician if a patient complains o f 
distressing medication side -effects, or if there is a FIBSER item 3 score of 4 (marked 
impairment) or higher.  
  During these circumstances, a study clinician will assess the clinical situation via the telephone with the patient and initiate appropriate next -step management. This may 
include, but not necessarily be limited to, stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_14930], changing the dose of study medication, providing urgent or more frequent face to face clinical visits, or 
sending the patient to the emergency room/activat ing emergency response. Such 
decisions will be at the discretion of the study clinician. Additional details are provided below under the section entitled, SUICIDE RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN.  
CLINICAL DECISION SUPPORT TOOL  
 Overview.  
We have  built an interactive web-based system that allows clinicians to input select 
demographic measures and depression severity scores, and obtain from the probabilistic 
graphical model output  (see PRELIMINARY STUDIES)  that conveys the predicted 
outcome and evidence supporting that  prediction. The interactive system will consist of a 
platform -independent front -end (i.e., it will work on desktops, laptops, smart phones and 
other hand- held devices) through which clinicians can input data and a back- end (e.g., a 
server hosting the arti ficial intelligence/machine learning  framework and code —again, 
see PRELIMINARY STUDIES ) where results are computed. The front -end will interact 
with the trained prediction model in the server via a RESTful API [INVESTIGATOR_717052] 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977487], and only study clinicians and research 
coordinators will be provided such access codes (passwords) . The only inputs into the 
tool made by [CONTACT_717072] (unique to each participant), subject sex, and scores for the QIDS -CR and 
HAMD- 17. No protected health information will be entered into the tool , such as subject 
names, addresses, telephone numbers, social security numbers, Mayo Clinic patient numbers, or any ot her data that could serve as identifiers . 
 
PREMATURE DISCONTINUATION FROM THE STUDY  
Subjects who are prematurely discontinued from the study will then receive standard 
treatment from a primary physician or psychiatrist with different medications and/or therapeutic modalities of treatment (e.g. psychotherapy , etc. ), if necessary .  Patients do 
have the option to switch to another antidepressant at the end of the [ADDRESS_977488] will be withdrawn from the study for any of the following reasons:  
• Loss to follow -up, defined as the failure to keep scheduled face to face or telephone 
study visits despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a minimum of 3 attempts (e.g., missed the week 4 study visit as 
originally scheduled but reachable by [CONTACT_648], then failed to show for a rescheduled visit, and then failed once more to show after rescheduling the visit a second time) or failure to contact a subject who misses a study visit despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a minimum of 3 attempts 
(e.g., failed to show for the week 4 study visit as originally scheduled, then 3 messages left to reschedule the visit with all calls unreturned).  
• Withdrawal of consent  
• Death  
• Positive response between the screening visit and baseline visit without benefit of study drug (described earlier)  
• Violation of protocol procedures, as per investigators’ judgment  
• Any rating of CGI -I or 5 (much worse) or 6 (very much worse)  
• Emergence of w orsening psychotic or perceptual changes or mania, as determined by 
[CONTACT_1003]  
• The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject to discontinue the study (e.g., for safety or tolerability reasons such as an adverse event)  
• The subject becomes pregnant  
 If a subject withdraws from the study for reasons other than withdrawal of consent, an early termination visit will be conducted at the time of discontinuation.   Reason(s) for 
withdrawal will be documented in the subjects’ study documents as a brief clinical note.  
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
19 Collected samples (blood draw obtained at baseline) will be retained and used in 
accordance with the subjects’ original separate informed consent for research samples.   
The subject may withdraw consent for research samples, in which case the sample will be destroyed and no further testing will take place.   
 
SUICIDE RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN  
Suicide risk will be assessed in multiple domains both with brief surveys filled out by 
[CONTACT_717073] t according to the procedures noted 
above. Suicide specific items included in outcomes measures include suicide ratings in the HAMD17  and the QIDS. For more extensive assessment and analysis, the C -SSRS 
screening version  will be used. Finally, patients will be asked in an open- ended manner if 
they have concerns related to their safety.  There are other safety features that pertain to 
suicide risk in this protocol. Participants will be contact[CONTACT_717074] m edication compliance and patient safety. The 
research assistants  will be trained to notify a study clinician  at the time of the clinical 
visits or the phone interviews if the subject endorses any suicidal ideation or plans. After week [ADDRESS_977489] will receive ongoing care from their regular health care 
provider(s)  and will be off of the medication protocol, although we anticipate that the 
majority will continue to be treated with the study drugs . 
 If there are concerns raised that are related to suicide risk assessed by [CONTACT_1697]/research assistants t he patient will then be assessed by a study clinician  for 
acute suicidal risk and suitability for continuation in the study.   Specifically, this 
consultant will assess the patient and make det ermination of whether the patient needs 
more in -depth assessment, additional appointments to ensure or more closely monitor 
their safety , or emergent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. This will also apply if patients are having 
worsening of depressive symptoms without an i ncrease in thoughts of suicide. 
 As an added precaution, subjects will be given listings of numbers to call if there are concerns in between assessments by [CONTACT_28932]. These numbers will include study coordinator s at each respective study site, Emergency Department 
Information/Triage Desk number (904- 953-2000 in Jacksonville; 507- 255-5385 in 
[COMPANY_002]ster) , and the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1- 800-273-TALK.   
 
STATISTICAL PLAN  
Sample Size Determination and Power Estimate . 
We hypothesize t he remission rate in the study cohort will be 45% , based on the 
remission rate (45.8%) reported for t he Eligible for Analysis subset (n=463) in PGRN-
AMPS trial (Mrazek et al., 2014) . We anticipate the clinical decision support’s prediction 
will have an ove rall accuracy of 80% and a sensitivity to predict remission of 95%.  
Under those assumptions, the study is investigating an off diagonal difference of 16% 
between the prediction of treatment response and the true (observed) remission rate at 8 weeks. The s tudy has 97% power to detect that difference using a McNemar’s test with 
120 total subjects included in the study at the alpha=0.05 level of significance. Thus if the clinical decision support tool is under/over calling the 8 week response rate (i.e., 
gene rating discordant observations with the true clinical remission rate), there will be 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977490] to follow -up after the baseline visit. The target sample size of 120 subj ects takes 
into account the estimated dropout rate..  
  
Descriptive Analys es. 
Cohort clinical and demographic characteristics will be summarized using means and 
frequency (%), as required, for all consented participants and by [CONTACT_53816] (defined below). Data will also be visually inspected for measures of dispersion to assess potential outliers that warrant data clarification prior to the formal analyses.   
 
Primary Outcome Analysis.  
The main statistical objective is the quantification of agreement between  the predicted 
outcome  at 4 weeks using the clinical decision tool and the observed outcome at 8 weeks 
based on QIDS -CR total scores at 8 weeks. Remission is defined as an 8 -week QIDS -CR 
total score <  5.  In addition to the remission endpoint, a secondary  ordinal endpoint 
consisting of remission, response (a50% reduction from baseline in QIDS -CR total score 
at 8 weeks but not meeting the remission definition) vs. non- response will be established.    
The week 4 predictions of each of these clinical outcomes  will be provided by [CONTACT_717075] “most likely” outcome. The observed outcomes at 8 weeks will also be unitary (remission OR response without remission OR non- response).  
 Agreement between the week 4 prediction of the outcome and the 8 week clinical outcome will be compared using McNemar’s test (or Bowker’s generalized test of symmetry for the ordinal secondary outcome). This will establish if there’s a significant difference between the predicted outcome, and the actual observed outcome at [ADDRESS_977491] (e.g., examination of false positive and false negatives) . 
 We will conduct a descriptive analysis of the subjects in disagreement between predicted outcomes and actual outcomes. W e will also assessing clinician prediction accuracy  in 
this study,  as well as the accuracy of the clinical decision support tool , although the 
objectives of this study and the reasons for developi[INVESTIGATOR_717053].  
 
Analysis Sets  
The primary analysis will be condu cted under the intention to treat principle. Missing [ADDRESS_977492] case 
imputation (assumed discordance of the algorithm with clinical data), chained equations and random forest imputation str ategies if necessary.  The results from these three 
methods will be compared qualitatively and reported separately in instances where the 
interpretation of the data varies between imputation strategies. In addition, a full analysis 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977493] the clinical decision support tool prediction available at 4 weeks (i.e., participated in 
the first half of the protocol sufficiently to have a predicted 8 week data available). This full analysis set may also require imputation of the 8 week outcome in the event of 
missing data. If needed, the same trio of imputation strategies will be applied to this analysis set.  A completers analysis will also be conducted.  
  
RATING SCALES AND INSTRUMENTS  
(1) HDRS -17:  A 17 -item clinician rating of depressive symptoms, scored on a 4 -point 
scale (0 to 4) (range 0 –54). Anchors are provided for each of the numbered scale 
points. Higher scores represent higher levels of depression. Its psychometric 
propertie s have been studied extensively in adults (Cusin et al., 2010) .  The HDRS -17 
in adults has high interrater reliability0.80 -0.98) and high test -retest reliability (up to 
0.81) (Williams 1998) . Validity of the HDRS ranges from 0.65 to 0.90 with global 
depres sion measures and other well validated clinician -rated measures such as the 
IDS-C and MADRS (Hamilton 2000) . Scores of 7 of less after treatment is a 
generally accepted definition of depressive symptom remission (Frank, et al., 1991) . The following severit y ranges for the HDRS -[ADDRESS_977494] been advocated:   no 
depression, or remission (0–7); mild depression(8 –16); moderate depression (17–23); 
and severedepression (≥24) (Zimmerman et al., 2013) . 
(2) QIDS -SR-16:  The QIDS -SR - 16 has highly acceptable psychometric properties, 
which supports the usefulness of this brief rating of depressive symptom severity in both clinical and research settings (Rush et al., 2003) . Assessed prior to infusion with 
MADRS and on post -infusion day assessment. This will be used for secondary 
outcome measure of self -report remission of symptoms.  
(3) CGI:  Overall clinical judgment symptom severity (I) and change for a preceding 
phase (II). Dropout criteria will be any 1 rating of CGI II – 5 (much worse) or 6 (very much worse) (Guy 1979) . 
(4) C-SSRS :  The screening version of the full -scale C -SSRS is a shorter version of the 
overall scale designed to assess suicidal ideation and behav ior over recent months 
with triage categories.  
(5) FIBSER : The FIBSER is a standard self -reported side-effect measure that was 
designed to be easily adopted into clinical practice for patients receiving treatment for depression. Using data from STAR*D, the FI BSER as shown to be reliable, with high 
correlations between observations taken a short time apart, and correlations decreasing as time between observations increased  (Wisniewski et al., 2006) . There 
were also consistent relationships between items over ti me. The FIBSER has both 
face and construct validity.  
(6) ASEC :  The ASEC is a simple self -report measure that is used to describe adverse 
reactions to antidepressants. In a recent validation study, the ASEC and the 
psychiatrist -rated [LOCATION_006]U Side Effect Rating sc ale were repeatedly administered to 811 
depressed adult s who received open- label treatment with escitalopram or nortriptyline  
(Uher et al., 2009) . There was good agreement between self -report and psychiatrists' 
ratings.  
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
22 (7) MOSSS:  We will use the eight- item mo dified MOSSS, which assesses the quality of 
social support in medical patients and has been shown to good psychometric 
properties that are similar to the full 19 -item version of the scale (Moser et al., 2012).  
(8) ACE : The ACE questionnaire is a 10- item self -rated survey that assessed exposures 
to adverse childhood experiences that occurred prior to 18 years of age  (Felitti et al., 
1998) . The questionnaire consists of 10 main- stem yes/no questions, some of which 
have additional questions.  
(9) PETS : We will use the  PETS scale as a patient -reported measure of treatment burden. 
The PETS consists of 78 items, divided into 15 domains that include  learning about 
health conditions/care, medications , difficulty with medication taking, medical 
appointments , health monitorin g, exercise/physical therapy, diet , use of medical 
equipment, interpersonal challenges , medical/healthcare expenses , confusion/conce rn 
about medical information, healthcare providers , difficu lty with healthcare services, 
role functioning/social activity limitations , and physical /mental exhaustion . 
Individual scale i tems are rated on a 4- or 5-point Likert  scale (e.g., very easy to very 
difficult, not at all to very much, strongly agree to strongly disagree, never to always). Recent validation work documente d good internal consistency (alpha 0.79 –  0.95), 
with h igher PETS scores  associated with greater treatment burden, and significant 
correlation  with more distress, less satisfaction with medications, lower self -efficacy, 
worse physical and mental health, an d low er convenience of healthcare (p <0.001 for 
all correlations ) (Eton et al., 2017) . 
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Common Adverse Effects.  
The most commonly observed side effects of SSRIs and SNRIs are lightheadedness, 
fainting, dizziness, confusion, hallucinations, rhinitis, dry mouth, tre mor, na usea, 
decreased libido, ejaculation disorder (primarily ejaculatory delay), erectile dysfunction, 
impotence, fatigue, nausea, diarrhea  (or constipation) , sleep di sorders (somnolence), 
agitation, restlessness, anxiety, and sweat ing (Goldstein & Goodnick  1998) . Some 
SNRIs , venalfaxine in particular,  are associated with modest bust statistically significant 
increases in  supi[INVESTIGATOR_119232], though typi[INVESTIGATOR_717054] 300 mg/day 
(Thase 1998). According to data provi ded by [CONTACT_3455], 1.4% of patients treated 
with extended -release venlafaxine experienced a ≥[ADDRESS_977495] the control of blood pressure for patients with pre -existing high blood pressure or elevated 
baseline values (Thase 1998).   
Suicide Risk.  
Although SSRIs have been associated with an idiosyncratic increase  in suicidality in a 
FDA meta -analysis, the increase in risk is restricted to individuals under the age of [ADDRESS_977496] 
across the lifespan ( Barbui et al., 2009; Brent 2016; Gibbons et al., 2012; Sharma et al., 
2016; Stone et al., 2009 ). This protocol features extensive assessment of suicide risk, 
including telephone contact [CONTACT_717076] -up after starting study drugs 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
23 (week 2 telephone follow -up). These procedures , we believe, will mitigate the possible 
heightened risk of suicidality translating to suicide risk or behavior. Specific procedures 
for addressing suicide risk are described in detail above in the section entitled, SUICIDE 
RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN.  
 
Other Risks.  
Risks are also associated with a single venipuncture performed for DNA extraction at 
basleline, as well as the measurement of drug response by [CONTACT_717077].  While  every effort will be made to schedule venipuncture at the times of 
clinically -indicated venipuncture , this cannot always be guaranteed .   
 
Capacity for Consent.  
Another common concern with psychiatric patients is the ability to provide informed 
consent. However, people with at least moderately severe recurrent major depression who are treated as outpatients show few impairments in their decision -makin g capacities 
related to res earch (Appelbaum et al., 1999), and depressive symptom severity and 
capacity do not appear to be significa ntly correlated in medical patients (Casarett et al., 
2003). In our study, individuals with psychotic features and those whose depression is so 
severe that psychaitric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717055]. Individuals in acute suicidal crisis will also be excluded. All screening visits with study clinicians will include 
a judgment as the the capacity of subjects to pr ovide valid consent .  If there is any 
question about whether or not  the patient can provide valid informed consent for this 
research, the patient will not be enrolled in this study.   
 
Reproductive and Lactational Safety. 
Regarding childbearing potential , the safety of SSRIs  to the fetus has been extensively 
investigated and, with the possible exception of paroxetine  and fluoxetine , SSRIs are not 
thought t o be associated with clinically significant teratogenic potential  (Myles et al., 
2013; Wang et al, 2015 ). Far less is known about the reproductive safety of SNRIs 
(Richardson et al., 2019). In order to participate in this research, w omen of childbearing 
age must have a negative pregnancy test.  Pregnant women will be excluded. Evidence 
and/or expert consens us suggests some potential for  harmful infant effects  of study drugs  
when used during breastfeeding , although most antidepressants are expected to produce 
low levels in breast milk with no clinical significance  (Kronenfeld et al., 2017).  
Nevertheless, w omen who are currently breastfeeding and who plan to continue 
breastfeeding will be excluded.  
 
BUDGET  
Budget is attached .  
 
CONSENT FORMS  
Draft is attached.  
 
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
24 REFERENCES  
Altman DG, Bland JM. Measurement in Medicine: the Analysis of Method Comparison 
Studies . The Statistician. 1983;32:307–17. 
 Appelbaum PS, Grisso T, Frank E, et al. Competence of depressed patients to consent to research. Am J Psychiatry 1999;156:1380- 4. 
 Arnow BA, Blasey C, Williams LM, et al. Depression Subtypes in Predicting Antidepressant  Response: A Report From the iSPOT -D Trial. Am  J Psychiatry. 
2015;172:743- 50. 
 Athreya AP, Banerjee SS, Neavin D, et al. Data- Driven Longitudinal Modeling and 
Prediction of Symptom Dynamics in Major Depressive Disorder: Integrating Factor Graphs and Learni ng Methods. Paper presented at: IEEE International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology  2017. 
 Athreya AP, Neavin D, Carrillo- Roa T, et al. Pharmacogenomics -Driven Prediction of 
Antidepressant Treatment Outco mes: A Machine Learning Approach with Multi -Trial 
Replication.  Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019; in press.  
 Barbui C, Esposito E, Cipriani A. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and risk of suicide: a systematic review of observational studies.  CMAJ 2009;180: 291-7. 
 Belmaker RH, Agam G. Major depressive disorder. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:55- 68. 
 
Biernacka JM, Sangkuhl K, Jenkins G, et al. The International SSRI Pharmacogenomics Consortium (ISPC): a genome -wide association study of antidepressant treatment 
response. Transl Psychiatry. 2015;5:e553.  Brent DA. Antidepressants and suicidality. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2016;39:503- 12. 
 Casarett DJ, Karlawish JH, Hirschman KB. Identifying ambulatory cancer patients at risk of impaired capacity to consent to research. J ournal of Pain and Symptom Management. 
2003;26:615–624.  Chekroud AM, Gueorguieva R, Krumholz HM, et al. Reevaluating the efficacy and predictability of antidepressant treatments: a symptom clustering approach. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74:370- 8. 
 Chekroud AM, Zotti RJ, Shehzad Z, et al. Cross -trial prediction of treatment outcome in 
depression: a machine learning approach. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3:243- 50. 
 Crismon ML, Trivedi M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_123245], et al. The [LOCATION_007] Medication Algorithm Project: report of the [LOCATION_007] Consensus Conference Panel on Medication Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 1999;60:142- 56. 
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
25 Cusin C, Yang H, Young A, Fava M.  Rating scales for depression.  In:  L Baer, MA 
Blais (eds.).   Handbook of Clinical Rating Scales and Assess ment in Psychiatry and 
Mental Health.   Munich, [LOCATION_013]:   Springer, 2010. 
 
Eton DT, Yost KJ, Lai JS, et al. Development and validation of the Patient Experience with Treatment and Self -management (PETS): a patient -reported measure of treatment 
burden. Qual Life Res. 20 17;26:489- 503. 
Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults: the Adverse  
Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med. 1998;14:245-  
258.  First Michael B., Williams Janet B.W., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_717056] L., and  Gibbon, Miriam: Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV-TR Axis I  Disorders, Clinical Trials Version  
(SCID -CT). [LOCATION_001]: Biometrics  Research, [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute, 2007  
 Fochtmann LJ., Gelenberg AJ. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; Guideline Watch: Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Major Depressive Disorder. 2005  
 Frank E, Prien RF, Jarrett RB, et al.   Conceptualization and rati onale for consensus 
definitions of terms in major depressive disorder.  Remission, recovery, relapse, and 
recurrence.   Arc h Gen Psychiatry 1991;48:851- 5. 
 Freidman SJ, Fava M, Kienke AS, White CN, Nierenberg AA, Rosenbaum JF. Partial 
response, nonresponse, and relapse with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in major depression: a survey of current "next -step" practices. J Clin Psychiatry. 2000;61:403- 8. 
 Fried EI. Moving forward: how depression heterogeneity hinders progress in treatment and research. Expert  Rev Neurother. 2017;17:423- 25. 
 Fruhling A ,  Lee  S, 2005. Assessing the Reliability, Validity and Adaptability of PSSUQ. 
In Proceedings of the 9th Americas Conference on Information Systems, Omaha, Nebraska, [LOCATION_003], August 2005, http://aisel.aisnet.org /amcis2005/378. 
 Gartlehner G, Thaler K, Hill S, Hansen RA. How should primary care doctors select which antidepressants to administer? Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2012;14:360- 9. 
 Gibbons RD, Brown CH, Hur K, et al. Suicidal thoughts and behavior with antidepress ant treatment: reanalysis of the randomized placebo -controlled studies of 
fluoxetine and venlafaxine. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012;69:580- 7. 
 Goldstein BJ, Goodnick PJ. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in the treatment of 
affective disorders —III. Tolera bility, safety and pharmacoeconomics . J 
Psychopharmacol. 1998; 12([ADDRESS_977497] B):S55- 87. 
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
26 Grigoriadis S, VondePorten EH, Mamisashvili L, et al. Antidepressant exposure during 
pregnancy and congenital malformations: is there an association? A systematic review and meta -analysis of the best evidence.  J Clin Psychiatry 2013;74:e293- 308. 
 
Guy W. ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology —Revised . Rockville, 
MD: U.S. Department of Health, Educa tion, and Welfare; Public Health Service, 
Alcohol; Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration; National Institute of Mental 
Health; Psychopharmacology Research Branch; Division of Extramural Research 
Programs. pp. 218–222. OCLC  2344751 . DHEW Publ No ADM 76 –338. 
 Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1960;23:56-62.  Hamilton M. Development of a rating scal e for primary depressive illness. Br J Soc Clin 
Psychol 1967; 6:278–96.  Hamilton M.   Hamilton rating scale for Depression (Ham- D).  In:  Handbook of 
Psychiatric Measures.   Washington, DC:   American Psychiatric Association, 2000. 
 Iniesta R, Malki K, Maier  W, et al. Combining clinical variables to optimize prediction of 
antidepressant treatment outcomes. J Psychiatr Res. 2016;78:94- 102. 
 Ji Y, Biernacka JM, Hebbring S, et al. Pharmacogenomics of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment for major dep ressive disorder: genome -wide associations and 
functional genomics . Pharmacogenomics J. 2013;13:456- 463. 
 Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Adult s with 
Major Depressive Disorder: Section 3. Pharmacological Treatments. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61:540- 60. 
 Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Demler O, et al. Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM -IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replicat ion. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 2005;62:617- 27. 
 Kessler RC, van Loo HM, Wardenaar KJ, et al. Using patient self -reports to study 
heterogeneity of treatment effects in major depressive disorder. Epi [INVESTIGATOR_57396]. 
2017;26:22- 36. 
 Koller DF, N. Probabilistic  Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques MIT Press; 
2009.  Kronenfeld N, Berlin M, Shaniv D, Berkovitch M. Use of psychotropic medications in breastfeeding women. Birth Defects Res. 2017;109:957- 97. 
 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977498] -Study System Usability Questionnaire: 
the PSSUQ. Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 36th Annual Meeting; Boca 
Raton, FL. 1992; pp. 1259- 62. 
 
McHugh ML. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochem Med. 2012;22:276- 82. 
 
Moser A, Stuck AE, Silliman R A et al. The eight -item modified Medical Outcomes 
Study Social Support Survey: psychometric evaluation showed excellent performance . J 
Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2012;65:1107- 16. 
 
Mrazek DA, B iernacka JM, McAlpi[INVESTIGATOR_717057], et al.  Treatment outcomes of depression:  
The pharmacogenomic research network antidepressant medication pharmacologenomic 
study. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2014;43:313- 7. 
 Musliner KL, Munk -Olsen T, Eaton WW, Zandi PP. Heterogeneity in long -term 
trajectories of depressive symptoms: Patterns, predictors an d outcomes. J Affect Disord. 
2016;192:199- 211. 
 
Myles N, Newall H, Ward H, Large M. Systematic meta -analysis of individual selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor medications and congenital malformations. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2013;47:1002 -12. 
 Posner K, Br own GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia –Suicide Severity Rating Scale: 
initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. A m J Psychiatry. 2011;168:1266–77. 
 
Richardson JL, Martin F, Dunstan H, et al . Pregnancy outcomes following maternal 
venlafaxine use: A prospective observational comparative cohort study. Reprod Toxicol. 
2019;84:108- 113. 
 Rush AJ, Bernstein IH, Trivedi, MH, et al. An Evaluation of the Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology and the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression: A Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression Trial Report . Biol Psychiatry 
2006;59:493- 501. 
 Rush AJ, Thase ME, Dubé S. Research issues in the study of difficult -to-treat depres sion. 
Biol Psychiatry 2 003;53:743- 53. 
 
Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Ibrahim HM, et al. The 16 -Item Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology (QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS -C), and self -report (QIDS -SR): a 
psychometric evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol Psychia try 
2003;54:573- 83. 
 Rush AJ, Trivedi M, Carmody TJ, Biggs MM, Shores -Wilson K, Ibrahim H, Crismon 
ML. One -year clinical outcomes of depressed public sector outpatients: a benchmark for 
subsequent studies. Biol Psychiatry. 2004;56:46- 53. 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-005341    
28  
Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, et al. Acute and longer -term outcomes in 
depressed outpatients requiring one or several treatment steps: A STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1905- 17. 
 Senn S. Mastering variation: variance components and personalised medi cine. Stat Med. 
2016;35:966- 77. 
 Sharma T, Guski LS, Freund N, Gotzsche PC. Suicidality and aggression during antidepressant treatment: systematic review and meta -analyses based on clinical study 
reports.  BMJ 2016;352:i65. Doi: 10.1136/bmj.i65. 
 Stone M, Laughren T , Jones ML, et al. Risk of suicidality in clinical trials of 
antidepressants in adults: analysis of proprietary data submitted to US Food and Drug Administration.  BMJ 2009;339:b2880. Doi: 10.1136/bmj.b2880.  
 Thase ME. Effects of venlafaxine on blood pressure: a meta -analysis of original data 
from 3744 depressed patients. J Clin Psychiatry 1998;59:502- 8. 
 Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, et al. Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using measurement -based care in STAR*D: implications for c linical practice. 
Am J Psychiatry 2006; 163:28- 40. 
 Uher R, Harmer A, Henigsberg N, et al. Adverse reactions to antidepressants. Br J Psychiatry 2009;195:202 -10. 
 Wang S, Yang L, Wang L, et al. Selective Serotonin Reup take Inhibitors (SSRIs) and the 
Risk of Congenital Heart Defects: A Meta -Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2015;4:pii:e001681. Doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001681.  
 Williams JB.   A structured interview guide for the Hamilton depression rat ing scale.   
Arch Gen Psychiatry 1988;45:742- 7. 
  Wisniewski SR, Rush AJ, Balasubramani GK, et al. Self -rated global measure of the 
frequency, intensity, and burden of side effects. J Psychiatr Prac. 2006;12:71- 9. 
 World Health Organization. Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global 
Health Estimates. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017. Licence: CC BY -NC-SA 
3.0 IGO. Available online at: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/[ZIP_CODE]/254610/WHO -MSD -MER -2017.2-
eng.pdf;jsessionid=5AA5A7106D619AF4891002ADAF41326E?sequence=[ADDRESS_977499] for Agreement of Medical Instruments Measuring Continuous Variables in Method Comparison Studies: A Systematic Review . PLoS ONE 2012;v.7(5). PMC3360667. 
AHI in MDD   Version 1: 7/7/2019  
IRB # 19-[ADDRESS_977500] 2013;150:384- 8. 
        