 
 
Study Protocol  
 
Restoration of the Fecal Microbiome after Antimic robial Exposure with Autologous Fecal Flora 
Restoration Therapy  
 
Date: December 11, 2014  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: 201312022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restoration of the Fecal Microbiome after Antimicrob ial Exposure with Autologous Fecal Flora Restoration Therapy  
 
2 
 Methods  
Hypothesis: Autologous fecal microbiota therapy (auto FMT) will be able to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375], and safely, restore a 
patient’s fecal microbiome after antimicrobial exposure.  
 
Specific Aims:  
1. Determine the effects five days of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid  on the fecal and urinary microbiome s of 
healthy volunteers.  
2. Determine whether an infusion of fecal filtrate collected prior to the antimicrobial exposure is capable of 
rapid restoration of a  healthy fecal microbiome  when infused after a course of antimicrobials . 
 
Patient Population:  Ten healthy volunteers will be recruited to participate through the Washington University 
Research Participant Registry  (see Resources) . Inclusion criteria will be healthy adults  21 to 70 years of age . 
Exclusion criteri a will include a history of allergic reaction to beta-lactam antimicrobials ; any non -topi[INVESTIGATOR_129338] a primary source of nutrition in  the past six months;  pregnant or risk of 
becoming pregnant during the study period ; gastro enteritis in the last 3 months; any non -elective 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_129339] 12 months incontinent  of stool; prior resection or alteration of the stomach; small 
bowel, or colon; unwillingness to receive an enema/FMT; known colonization with an MDRO; anticipated 
change in diet or medications , or elective surgery,  during the study period; positive HIV test; evidence of 
chronic medical conditions seen during physical exam;  or a history of an intestinal disorder.   
 
Study Procedure  After written informed consent is obtained , a full physical exam including vital signs, βHCG 
pregnancy test in women  of childbearing age, and an HIV 1/[ADDRESS_145949]  will be instructed to bring  back stool  and urine  
specimen s at their convenience within the next week, preferably within two hours after the bowel 
movement /urination . If the bowel movement has been at room temperature for greater than [ADDRESS_145950] a pre -
identified courier to pi[INVESTIGATOR_129340] s. Please see below on how stool and urine will b e 
processed  for microbiome interrogation (stool and urine specimens) and FMT (autologous FMT) . After the first 
stool specimen is collected, the subject  will be provided with a five day supply of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid . 
Explicit directions  on how to ta ke amoxicillin/clavulanic acid  will be provided, as well as instructions to bring the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_129341] . A return visit will be scheduled one or two days after 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid  is to be completed.  The subject  will be instructed to provide stool  specimen s after Figure  Study procedure  overview . [ADDRESS_145951] bowel 
movement after FMT/saline, and days 7, 30, and [ADDRESS_145952] will be 
interrogated with DNA -based microbiome methods and semi -quantitative culture  
 
 

Restoration of the Fecal Microbiome after Antimicrob ial Exposure with Autologous Fecal Flora Restoration Therapy  
 
3 
 amoxicillin/clavulanic acid  has been completed but before FMT/saline. The subject will be able to bring the 
specimen s with them to the FMT/saline visit if they are  less than two hours old, or drop  off/courier specimen s 
prior to the appointment.  The FMT/saline will be administered by [CONTACT_129344]. The subject will be instructed to collect the first bowel movement after FMT/saline  
(immediate release of enema material will be excluded) , as well as urine at that time,  and also bowel 
movements  at day 7 ± 2, day 30 ± 2, and day 90 ± 2.  The subject  will be supplied with all necessary materials 
for stool collection and drop-off at each stool collection time point.  
 
Data Management:  Demographic data, including age, gender, race/ethnicity, height, weight, comorbidities, 
and tobacco and alcohol history, will be obtained on enrollment. All m edications t he subject  received in the [ADDRESS_145953] stool /urine  collec tion will be recorded.  The subject will be provided a questionnaire on 
bowel movement consistency (per Bristol stool chart) and frequency , diet in past week , and medications taken  
to be completed at time of enrollment, FMT/saline, and all subsequent stool /urine  collection time points . 
 
Stool specimen s: Stool specimens will be c ollected as cited above . Fresh stool specimens will be cultured on 
to Brucella blood, Laked blood kanamycin vancomycin (LKV), PEA, Bacteroides Bile Esculin (BBE), 
MacConkey, Hectoen  Enteric, Campylo bacter blood, blood, Colistin -Naladixic, and cycloserine cefoxitin 
fructose (CCFA) agars semiquantitatively  to asse ss viability of aerobic and anaerobic gram positive and gram 
negative organisms . DNA will be extracted prior to freezing, or  processing of the pre -antimicrobial specimen, of 
residual stool  using the MOBIO PowerSoil kit, as performed for the NIH Human Microbiome Project at 
Washington University (60;62) . Parallel sequence datasets will be  generated for each of the samples at the  
Genome Institute at Washington University as previously described for the HMP (58-60). This will involve 1) 
PCR amplification of bacterial rRNA genes using degenerate primers to capture rRNA genes from a broad 
diversity of bacteria, followed by [CONTACT_129345] 16S rRNA gene encod ing either 
the V1 through  V3 (V1 –V3) or V3  through V5 (V3 –V5) hypervariable regions  on the [ADDRESS_145954]. All sequences will be  processed as in the HMP to 
remove artifactual  chimeric sequences and regions of low sequence quality, and then only sequences greater 
than a certain length (usually 200 bases) will be used for further analysis . Analyses will be performed by [CONTACT_129346] e (58;60;61)  and will include quantitative statistical 
techniques to compare microbial community composition (taxa that are present) and structure (abundance of 
taxa). Where differences are found, it is usually possible to specify which species are most at variance 
between samples, and thus pi[INVESTIGATOR_129342] -
establishment of fecal microbiomes. We also no te that this methodology will allow us to initially classify the 
subjects as to which enterotype (63;64)  their microbiome belongs to, in case this is a variable that would 
require stratification in application of the method.  
 
We will also perform shotgun sequencing on a subset of the samples (the pre -antimicrobial sample, the 
enfusate, and the final 90 day sample). Shotgun sequencing allows for detection of non -bacterial entities such 
as viruses  (50) and eukaryotic microbes , as well as detection of bacterial virulence factors, antibiotic resistance 
genes, and other relevant elements. Analyses will be as performed in the references ci ted above for the HMP 
in order to determine if these factors pose problems for the process.  
 
 
Autologous FMT: The pre -antimicrobial stool specimen will be processed for FMT within two hours of 
collection. Approximately 150 gm of stool will be homogenized with 250ml of non -bacteriostatic saline. The 
slurry will be passed through stainless steel strainers to remove particulate matter.  Sterile pharmaceutical 
grade glycerol will be added to a final concentration of 10%, and th e specimen will be frozen at -80˚C  (43). 
After the antimicrobials have been discontinued and the patient has provided a post -antimicrobial b owel 
movement, the enema material will be thawed over 2 to 4 hours in an ice bath  for the patient undergoing 
autologous fecal flora restoration therapy . A 10 ml aliquot of the material will be saved for viability count 
Restoration of the Fecal Microbiome after Antimicrob ial Exposure with Autologous Fecal Flora Restoration Therapy  
 
4 
 culture s and microbiome interrogation  per above . The remaining material will be administered to the patient by 
[CONTACT_129347], and the patient will be instru cted to retain the material for as long as possible. A 10 ml aliquot of the 
non-bacteriostatic saline enema given to patients undergoing the sham procedure will also be collected for 
viability count cultures and microbiome interrogation  as well . 
 
Analysis:  As mentioned above, a nalyses will be performed by [CONTACT_129348] (58;60)  and will include quantitative statistical techniques to compare microbial community 
composition (taxa that are present) and structure (abundance of taxa). Most meth ods are performed using 
functions in the R package, and include calculation of proximity measures such as Bray -Curtis index, 
comparison of communities using hierarchical clustering, multidimensional scaling, and/or Principal 
Component/Coordinate Analysis. The Genome Institute has recently developed additional metrics for 
community comparison  using a tree -based approach  (65). It is usually possible to specify which species are 
most at variance between samples, and thus pi[INVESTIGATOR_129343] -establishment of fecal microbiomes. Enterotype (63;64)  analysis will also be performed on 
the initial subjects to determine if there is any correlation between this parameter and outcome .  
 
 
 