MEDICAL  RECORD  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  STUDY  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
INSTITUTE:  National Cancer Institute  
STUDY N UMBER:  12-C-0116 PRINCI PAL INVESTIGATOR:  Steven A. Rosenberg, M.D., Ph.D  
STUDY TITLE:  A Phase II Study of Lymphodepletion followed by [CONTACT_107766]-
Infiltrating Lymphocytes and High -Dose Aldesleukin for Human Papi[INVESTIGATOR_28597]-
Associated Cancers  
Continuing Review Approved by [CONTACT_33861] 01/11/16  
Amendment Approved by [CONTACT_33861]  07/22/15  (J)                   Date posted to web:   02/05/[ADDRESS_119796]  
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  STUDY  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent (1)  
 INTRODUCTION 
 We invite you to take part in a research study at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
 First, we want you to know that:  Taking part in NIH research is entirely voluntary.   
You may choose not to take part, or you may withdraw from the s tudy at any time.  In 
either case, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  However, to receive care at the NIH, you must be taking part in a study or be under evaluation for study participation.  
  
You may receive no benefit from taking part.  The research may give us knowledge that may help people in the future. 
 Second, some people have personal, religious or ethical beliefs that may limit the kinds of medical or research treatments they would want to receive (such as blood transfusions).  If you have such beliefs, please discuss them with your NIH doctors or research team before you agree 
to the study. 
 Now we will describe this research study.  Before you decide to take part, please take as much time as you need to ask any questions and discuss this study with anyone at NIH, or with family, friends or your personal physician or other health professional.  Why is this study being done?  
We have developed an experimental therapy that involves taking cells called lymphocytes from patients' tumors, growing them in the laboratory in large numbers, and then giving the cells back to the patient.  These cells are called Young Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes, or Young TIL and 
the therapy is called cell therapy.  Before receiving the cells, the patients receive [ADDRESS_119797]  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 2 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 cells will be able to survive in the body. After the cells are given, the patients receive aldesleukin 
(IL-2) to help the t umor fighting cells stay alive longer.    
 
The purpose of this study is to see if these tumor fighting cells (young TIL) can cause tumors 
that are associated with the human papi[INVESTIGATOR_27509] (HPV) to shrink and to evaluate the toxicity of this treatment.  
 
Why are you being asked to take part in this study?  
You are being asked to participate in this study because you have been diagnosed with an HPV -
associated cancer such as cervical, vulvar, vaginal, penile, anal, or oropharyngeal cancer.  
 
How many people wi ll take part in this Study?  
Up to 73 patients will be enrolled in this study.  
 
Description of Research Study  
The Cell protocol has several stages:  
Stage  Timeframe  Location  Comments & Instructions  
Work up  1-2 weeks  Inpatient and 
out patient   Scans, x -rays, labs leukapheresis other tests 
as needed  
Chemotherapy  
(day -7 to -1) 1 week  Inpatient  Receive IV chemotherapy to prepare your 
immune system for the cells  
Cells and 
aldesleukin  
(Day 0 -4) 1-5 days  Inpatient and 
possibly ICU  Receive the TIL cells IV and then high dose 
aldesleukin about every 8 hours for up to 15 
doses  
Recovery  1-2 weeks  Inpatient unit  Recover from the effects of treatment  
Follow -up Ongoing until 
disease 
progression  Outpatient  Return to clinic for physical exam, review 
of side effects, labs, scans every 1 -6 
months.  
What will happen if you take part in this research study?  
 Before you begin the study  
  
Cell harvest and growth 
We will be obtaining your cells for treatment from a biopsy of your tumor or during surgery, so we can grow Youn g TIL from your tumor cells in the laboratory.  In 1 out of 5 patients, we are 
not able to successfully grow the cells for this procedure.  If your cells do not grow or show HPV reactivity  to certain cancer targets, you will not be able to receive the cell  infusion.  If that 
happens, we will look at alternative treatments for you (best available care) or return you to the care of your referring physician.  We usually know after about [ADDRESS_119798]  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 3 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 Work up 
Prior to receiving the experimental treatment you will undergo many tests. These include 
imaging proc edures, heart and lung function tests, and laboratory tests.  If you are a woman, you 
will undergo a pregnancy test.  You will also have a large catheter inserted into a vein and leukapheresis will be performed (see below).  You may be admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_107759]. However, you will be allowed to leave on pass on the days that you are not having tests performed.  
 
Catheter insertion  
Prior to beginning the experimental treatment, you will have an intravenous (IV) catheter placed in your upper chest. The area will be numbed with an anesthetic before the catheter is put in.  
Although rare, putting these catheters in can sometimes cause collapse of a lung or cause 
bleeding.  Lung collapse is treated by [CONTACT_82045] a tube into your chest for a few days to allow your 
lung to expand.  Pressure is placed on any area that might bleed.  Other IVs may be needed in one or both of your arms if we need to give you extra fluids, medicines, or nutrition.  
Leukapheresis 
Leukapheresis is a procedure that allows us to remove certain types of blood cells from you and return the rest of your blood.  It is a very common procedure that is done routinely here at the NIH with very few risks.  During leukapheresis,  blood is removed from you through a needle in your arm, circulated through a machine that divides whole blood into red cells, plasma (the 
serum part), and lymphocytes (or white cells), and then the plasma and red cells are returned to 
you through a second needle in your other arm.  The white blood cells may be used to help grow 
the cells. In addition to the leukapheresis you will undergo as part of your work up, we will also ask you to undergo one additional pheresis procedure between [ADDRESS_119799] you 
are still active.  
 
Chemotherapy Regimen (Day -7 through Day - 1) 
After we have grown the Young TIL cells to large numbers in the laboratory, you will be admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_107760].  You will be given two 
chemotherapy medicines, cyclophosphamide and fludarabine, to make space in your immune 
system so the Young TIL can work without any interference from the cells in your immune system. These medicines may cause your tumor to shrink some, but this shrinkage is anticipated 
to be only partial and of small duration.  The main purpose of the chemotherapy is to see if we can make the cells more effective in fighting cancer tumors.  Animal experiments have indicated that chemotherapy can make th e cells more effective in fighting cancer tumors, but it is not 
known whether this is true in humans.  The cyclophosphamide will be given into your catheter over 1 hour for two days (Day -7 and Day -6) and the fludarabine will be given into your catheter for 30 minutes every day for the next five days (Day -5 through Day -1).  The side effects of 
these medicines are described on the following pages.  
 
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 4 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 Cell Infusion and Aldesleukin Regimen (Day 0 through Day 5) 
All patients will be given the cells through the ir IV over 20- [ADDRESS_119800] dose of chemotherapy.  Within 24 hours after your cell infusion you will be given high dose 
aldesleukin through one of the IVs.  It will be given as a 15- minute infusion about every 8 hours 
for up to five days after the cell infusion.  Aldesleukin is a cell growth factor and it is thought 
that it will help the cells live longer in your body.  
 The day after your cells are infused, we will give you G -CSF (filgrastim) as a shot or injection 
under the skin every day to stimulate your blood cells until they increase to a sufficient number.  We will watch you closely during this entire time for any side effects of this experimental regimen.  We will discuss the side effects below and we will include in your  care all the 
medicines and treatments to prevent as many of these side effects as we can and to make you as comfortable as we can.   
 
Recovery  
You will recover in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_107761].  This usually takes 7-[ADDRESS_119801] dose of aldesleukin; however, you may need to stay in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_107762]. We will continue to give you support medications, do laboratory tests, and watch you closely for any side effects 
until we feel your condition is stable.   
In addition to the laboratory tests to monitor your condition, we will remove between [ADDRESS_119802]  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 5 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 resolved.  You will receive the same medications and cell infusion on the same schedule as with 
the first treatment.  
 
Birth Control  
 If you are a woman who is breast feeding or pregnant, you may not participate in the study 
because we don’t know how this medicine would affect your unborn child or your baby.  If you are a woman who can become pregnant, or are the partner of a woman who can become 
pregnant, you will need to practice an effective form of birth control before starting study treatment, during study treatment, and for four months after you finish study treatment.  If you think that you or your partner is pregnant, you should tell your study doctor or nurse at once. 
 
Effective forms of birth control include: • abstinence • intrauterine device (IUD)  
• hormonal [birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], injections, or implants] • tubal ligation  
• vasectomy  
 Alternative Approaches or Treatments  
 
What othe r choices do I have if I do not take part in this study?  
 
If there are effective salvage regimens (regimens used when standard regimens have failed), you will be directed to undergo these regimens before participating in this protocol.  Other options for treatment of your cancer include:  
• Standard chemotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], including targeted therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]; 
• experimental vaccines;  
• experimental chemotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]; or biotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014];  
• other combination therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]; or 
• getting no treatment; or getting comfort care which is also called palliative care. This 
type of care helps reduce pain, tiredness, appetite problems, and other problems caused 
by [CONTACT_67380]. It does not treat the cancer directly, but instead tries to improve how you feel. Comfort care tries to keep you as active and comfortable as possible.  
 Please talk to your doctor about these and other options.     
 
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 6 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 Risks or Discomforts of Participation 
 
What side effects or risks can I expect  from being in this study?  
The risks and discomforts of this research study can be significant .  This experimental treatment 
can lead to long- term decrease in your immune function.  If you have received radiation therapy, 
you will need to recover completely (usually at least 4 weeks) from the side effects of the radiation before beginning treatment  on this protocol.  It is also possible that you may lose your 
fertility following this  experimental  treatment. It is possible, although unlikely, that this 
experimental treatment may cause your death.  
 We will discuss the side effects of this experimental treatment with you. You will be given 
medicines, transfusions, and treatments to prevent or treat the side effects including drugs to prevent and/or treat different types of infections.  We will try to make you as comfortable as 
possible.  Leukapheresis  
 During the leukapheresis procedure, you may have some tingling in your face and lips due to the medicine used to keep your blood from clotting during the procedure.  The nurses may give you a calcium -containing antacid to chew that takes away this tingling .  Rarely, people may 
experience lightheadedness or dizziness.  We ask that you eat prior to the procedure to prevent 
this.  Rare complications of this procedure are lowered blood pressure, bleeding or bruising 
where the needles are put in your arms.  
 Youn g TIL Cell Infusion  
All Young TIL cells will be given through your catheter while we keep you in the patient care unit so we can watch you closely.  
 Potential risks include:  
• Fever, chills and shortness of breath, which are common and may last for a few hours 
• Lung congestion causing shortness of breath 
• Immune-type reaction, such as pharyngitis and vaginitis. Note:  In similar clinical 
trials with cells targeting a melanoma protein, we have observed the following immune -mediated toxicities: loss of skin pi[INVESTIGATOR_2517] (known as vitiligo), and 
inflammation of the eye (uveitis).  The skin and the eye are all sites where that targeted melanoma protein is known to exist.   
• As this is a new experimental therapy, side effects that we do not anticipate that may 
cause your condition to deteriorate may be encountered.  Any new information that 
becomes available during the course of this study will be shared with you. 
 
  
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 7 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 Medications  
 
The side effects of cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, high dose aldesleukin and some of the other  
medications you will receive are listed below:  
  
Cyclophosphamide and Fludarabine side effects  
Common  Less Common  Rare  
 Changes in blood 
counts including: low red cell count (causing fatigue and shortness of breath), low platelet count (increasing the risk 
of bleeding and 
bruising), decrease 
in white blood cells (increasing the risk of infection and the need for treatment with antibiotics or other treatment)  
 Loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting,  
 Diarrhea, stomach 
pain 
 Mouth sores 
 Hair loss  
 Fatigue  
 Muscl e or joint 
aches   Bleeding  
 Infection  
 Bladder irritation with 
bloody urine 
 Severe allergic reaction (difficulty breathing/swelling)  
 Headache or dizziness  
 Sweating  
 Swelling of arms or legs  
 Skin changes, rash, blisters  
 Weakness  
 Hearing loss   Heart damage  
 Lung  damage  
 Kidney damage 
 Inflammation of the eye resulting in blindness 
 Inflammation of nervous system resulting in death  
 Epstein Barr Virus Lymphoma.  
This can be fatal (Two patients 
on other studies in the Surgery Branch developed EBV lymphoma, and one died as a 
result of this disease.) 
 Loss of fertility  
 Two out of the first 81 patients enrolled on the initial young TIL study died from complications resulting from suppression of the 
immune function which resulted 
in a severe infection (one of these patients also received radiation as part of their treatment regimen).   
  
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 8 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
  
IL-2 (aldesleukin) side effects  
Common  Less common  Rare  
 Fever, chills, and 
fatigue   
 Lowered platelet and 
red blood cell levels that may require 
transfusions  
 Significant fluid 
retentio n causing 
weight gain (as much as 20 pounds).  
 Low blood pressure 
 Increased heart rate  
 Low urine output 
 Swelling in your extremities,  
 Fluid in your lungs that can require oxygen  
 Dry mouth, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea; 
 Rash, itching; and changes in skin  or hair 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_371], called vitiligo;   
 Changes in mental status, including 
confusion, difficulty 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_107763]; this can be severe and require sedation and monitoring in the ICU 
  Decrease in thyroid function 
that may require daily thyroid hormone replacement;  
 Abnormal kidney and liver 
function that can be severe;   
 Abnormal heartbeats or low 
blood pressure that may require treatment in the ICU.  
 Breathing problems which may need monitoring in ICU and insertion of a breathing tube.   
  Bowel per foration (a hole) 
requiring longer hospi[INVESTIGATOR_64329]. 
 Autoimmune disease, where your immune system attacks 
cells in organs of your body.  
Should this occur, you will be treated with steroids to stop the immune response. 
 Damage to the heart muscle or heart attack  
 Loss of blood flow to the extremities due to medicines used to treat very low blood pressure and shock. In one 
instance a patient had to 
have her lower arm amputated after treatment with these medicines.  
 IL-[ADDRESS_119803]  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 9 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
  
Support Medications – side effects  
Common  Less common  Rare  
Filgrastim (To increase production of white blood cells)  
 Bone Pain   Severe h eadache   Severe breathing problems  
 Rupture of your spleen  
Bactrim (To prevent a specific type of pneumonia)  
  Fever  
 Nausea, vomiting,  
 Skin rash with itching 
 reduced number of 
white blood cells  
 Allergic reaction   
Fluconazole:  (To prevent fungal infectio ns)  
 Headache  
 Nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, abdominal pain 
 Itching    A skin disorder called Stevens 
Johnson Syndrome, which can be fatal 
 Liver damage which may be 
permanent  
Acyclovir and Valacyclovir  
  Temporary decrease in 
kidney function which may not ca use any 
symptoms  
 Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation  
 Pain and irritation at 
place of injection   Skin rash, hives, itching  
 Tremors, dizziness, Confusion, seizures  
 Fatigue  
 Blood in the urine 
 
Potential Benefits of Participation 
 
Are there benefits to  taking part in this study?  
The aim of this study is to see if this new experimental treatment will cause your tumors to shrink. We do not know if you will receive personal, medical benefit from taking part in this 
study.  These potential benefits could include shrinking of your tumor or lessening of your 
symptoms, such as pain, that are caused by [CONTACT_62565].  Because there is not much information about the Young TIL therapy effect on your type of cancer, we do not know if you will benefit from taking part in this study, although the knowledge gained from this study may benefit others 
in the future who have cancer.    
 
 
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 10 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 Research Subject’s Rights  
 
What are the costs of taking part in this study?  
If you choose to take part in the study, the following will apply, in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_107764]: 
• You will receive study treatment at no charge to you. This may include 
surgery, medicines, laboratory testing, x -rays or scans done at the 
Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health (NIH), or arranged for you 
by [CONTACT_107767], NIH if the 
study related treatment is not available at the NIH.  
• There are limited funds available to cover the cost of some tests and 
procedures performed outside the Clinical Center, NIH.  You may hav e 
to pay for these costs even if they are not covered by [CONTACT_107768].  
• Medicines that are not part of the study treatment will not be provided or 
paid for by [CONTACT_107769], NIH. 
• Once you have completed taking part in the study, medical care  will no 
longer be provided by [CONTACT_107769], NIH. 
 
Will your medical information be kept private?  
 We will do our best to make sure that the personal information in your medical record will be kept private.  However, we cannot guarantee total privacy.  Organizations that may look at and/or copy your medical records for research, quality assurance, and data analysis include: 
• The National Cancer Institute (NCI) and other government agencies, like the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), which are involved in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_60771].  
• NCI Institutional Review Board  
• The study Sponsor (Steven A. Rosenberg, M.D., Ph.D.) 
• Prometheus Laboratories, Inc.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.Clinicaltrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law.  This Web site will not include information that can identify you.  At most the Web site will include a summary of the results.  You can search this Web site at any time.  
 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_107765]:  
• if he/she believes that it is in your best interest  
• if your disease comes back during treatment  
• if you experience side effects from the treatment that are considered too severe  
• if new information becomes available that shows that another treatment would be better for 
you 
 
MEDICAL  RECORD  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Re search Study 
NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 11 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
NIH-2 514-2 (10- 84) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 In this case, you will be informed of the reason for that decision. 
 
You can stop participating at any time. However, if you decide to stop participating in the study, we encourage you to talk to the study doctor and your regular doctor first. If you refuse to 
participate or withdraw from the protocol or at the completion of the protocol, we will attempt to offer you participation in other NIH protocols if these are available, or will refer you to your home physician for further management.  
 If you decide at any time to withdraw your consent to participate in the trial, we will not collect any additional medical information about you. However, according to FDA guidelines, information collected on you up to that point may still be provided to the Sponsor. If you 
withdraw your consent and leave the trial, any samples of yours that have been obtained for the 
study and stored at the NCI can be destroyed upon request. However, any samples and data generated from the  samples that have already been distributed to other researchers or placed in 
the research databases cannot be recalled and destroyed.  
 You should understand that this study involves research and that your participation is voluntary. Unexpected or unforeseeable side effects may also occur. Your participation in this protocol may be terminated without your consent if your physician feels that it would not be safe for you to continue.  Any significant new findings that relate to this protocol will be discussed with you.  
Conflict of Interest  
 
The National Institutes of Health reviews NIH staff researchers at least yearly for conflicts of interest. This process is detailed in a Protocol review Guide.   You may ask your research team 
for additional information or a copy of the Protocol Review Guide or for more information.  Members of the research team who do not work for NIH are expected to follow these guidelines but they do not need to report their personal finances to the NIH.  Members of the research team wo rking on this study may have up to $15,[ADDRESS_119804].  
   
It is possible that the information obtained from your participation on this study may become valuable for commercial research and development purposes (including patentable inventions), which may be of significant benefit to society, the sponsor of this study, individual researchers or other third parties.  You will not recei ve direct financial benefit from such research and 
development.  The NIH and [ADDRESS_119805]  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  STUDY  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 12 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  
STUDY (Continuation  Sheet)  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 
 OTHER PERTINENT INFORMATION  
1. Confidentiality.  When results of an NIH research study ar e reported in medical journals 
or at scientific meetings, the people who take part are not named and identified.  In most cases, 
the NIH will not release any information about your research involvement without your written permission.  However, if you sign a release of information form, for example, for an insurance 
company, the NIH will give the insurance company information from your medical record.  This information might affect (either favorably or unfavorably) the willingness of the insurance company t o sell you insurance. 
The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of your NIH medical records.  However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical record without your permission, for example, if it is requir ed by [CONTACT_2165] (FDA), 
members of Congress, law enforcement officials, or authorized hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33802]. 
2. Policy Regarding Research -Related Injuries.  The Clinical Center will provide short -
term medical care for any injury resulting from your participation in research here.  In general, 
no long -term medical care or financial compensation for research -related injuries will be 
provided by [CONTACT_7681], the Clinical Center, or the Federal Governme nt.  
However, you have the right to pursue legal remedy if you believe that your injury justifies such action.  
3. Payments.  The amount of payment to research volunteers is guided by [CONTACT_107770].  In general, patients are not paid for taking part in research studies at the National Institutes of Health.  Reimbursement of travel and subsistence will be offered 
consistent with NIH guidelines.  
4. Problems or Questions.  If you have any problems or questions about this study, or 
about your rights as a research participant, or about any research -related injury, cont act the 
Principal Investigator, Steven A. Rosenberg, M.D., Ph.D., Building 10 CRC, Room 3-3940, 
Telephone:  [PHONE_2466]. You may also call the Clinical Center Patient Re presentative at [ADDRESS_119806]  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  STUDY  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
STUDY NUMBER:  12-C- 0116 CONTINUATION: page 13 of 13 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT  TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  RESEARCH  
STUDY (Continuation  Sheet)  
• Adult Patient or  • Parent, for Minor Patient  
NIH- 2514- 1 (07- 09) 
P.A.:  09 -25-0099  
File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 
  
 
COMPLETE APPROPRIATE ITEM(S) BELOW:  
A. Adult Patient’s Consent  B. Parent’s Permission for Minor Patient.  
I have read the explan ation about this study 
and have been given the opportunity to discuss 
it and to ask questions.  I hereby [CONTACT_107771].  I have read the explanation about this study 
and have been given the opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions .  I hereby [CONTACT_107772].   
(Attach NIH 2514-2, Minor’s Assent, if 
applicable.)  
        
Signature [CONTACT_33885]/  
Legal Representative  Date  Signature [CONTACT_2387](s)/  Guardian  Date  
  
Print Name    
[INVESTIGATOR_31324]  
C. Child’s Verbal Assent (If Applicable)  
The information in the above consent was described to my child and my child agrees to 
participate in the study.  
       
Signature [CONTACT_2387](s)/Guardian  Date  Print Name  
[CONTACT_107773] 11, 2016 THROUGH JULY 10, 2016  
 
   
   
   
  
Signature [CONTACT_107774]  
 