Page [ADDRESS_783702] Injury: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 02/27/2024  
     
 
      
 
      
 
   
Page 2 of 9  ingly  popul  
s the  poten  
 
Protocol Template Version Jan 2018  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  
 
 
Protocol  Title:  Feasibility of Mindfulness Meditation Training and Home Practice  in 
Persons with Spi[INVESTIGATOR_17751]: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_593992]:  Radha Korupolu, MD, MS; Chelsea Gilts Ratcliff,  Ph.D  
 
Co-Investigators:  Susan Robinson -Whelen, Ph.D., Heather B. Taylor,  Ph.D.  
 
Study  Coordinator:  Shrasti Lohiya  
 
Name [CONTACT_594035]: National Institute of Health: National Center for Complimentary and 
Integrative Health  
 
Population: People with spi[INVESTIGATOR_593993]:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration: Three years  
 
Subject  Duration: [ADDRESS_783703] injury (SCI) ranges from 65 -85%. Chronic pain after 
SCI contributes to anxiety, depression and diminishes the health -related quality of life (QOL). Pharmacological agents 
such  as opi[INVESTIGATOR_593994], but are ineffective in relieving  pain 
and associated with significant side effects. Mindfulness meditation training (MM) has been shown to improve mental 
and physical symptoms, including pain -related interference, in many studies of people without SCI who have chronic 
pain. However, these  interventions are typi[INVESTIGATOR_593995], expensive, and require in -person visits with a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], making 
them inaccessible to many people with SCI. Mounting evidence suggests that mobile apps may provide an effective and 
low-cost way to provide MM. Indeed, one recent study found that internet -based MM training led to reduced pain 
interference and improved mental health in people with SCI and chronic pain, suggesting app -based MM interventions 
may have promise in this population. However, this study used an in tervention created by [CONTACT_594008],  limiting  large -scale  dissemination.  Additionally,  the feasibility  found in that study 
may not necessarily translate to that of an existing, publicly available ap p-based MM intervention among persons with 
SCI. Similarly, the feasibility of other app -based MM interventions for non -SCI populations may not translate to persons 
with  SCI due to the specific  physiological limitations  experienced  by a person  with  SCI. 
 
Our multidisciplinary,  interinstitutional team  of investigators  proposes  to randomize  60 SCI patients  experiencing chronic 
pain  to practice  audio -guided  MM for ≥ 10 minutes  daily  for 6 weeks  using the free app “Mindfulness  Coach”  
developed  by [CONTACT_594009],  or to view  health  and wellness -related  TED talks  for ≥ 10 minutes  daily 
for 6 weeks on the free TED app (active control). Primary outcomes are the feasibility and acceptability of proposed 
interventions in people with SCI and  chronic pain. Secondary outcomes include the feasibility of collecting patient - 
reported  outcomes  of pain,  anxiety,  depression,  mindfulness,  quality  of life, stress, fatigue  and sleep  disturbance.  
 
Given the great need for remotely delivered, low-cost chr onic pain management and unique physiological limitations 
among persons with SCI, it is essential to determine the feasibility and acceptability of a free, publicly available app - 
based  MM  intervention  prior  to conducting a larger efficacy  study.  With  the emerging  use of telemedicine  in this COVID - 
19 era, t herapy-focused a pps, and rem ote data collection are becom ing increas arIRmBaNkiUngMtBhEisRli:nHeSoCf-iMnqSu-2ir2y-0035 
Page 3 of 9  both  timely  and innovative . Furthermore,  the app-guided MM  intervention  ha IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  
tial to facilitate self- 
Page 4 of 9  management of pain by [CONTACT_408589], as the MM exercises can be practiced at the individual’s preferred time and 
place. The long- term goal of this study is to improve pain management and QOL of people with SCI living with chronic 
pain  by [CONTACT_594010]-guided  interventions  which  can be used  as an adjuvant  tool after  SCI in 
conjunction with other  treatments.  
 
Background Information 
Debilitating,  persistent  pain  occurs  in 65-85%  of persons  who  sustain  spi[INVESTIGATOR_593996]  (SCI)  and one-third  of them 
categorize their pain as severe.1-[ADDRESS_783704] daily life beyond the functional 
consequences of SCI.1 4 5Additionally, chronic pain after SCI is associated with increased risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_593997],  
depression,  and decreased  quality  of life (QOL).6-[ADDRESS_783705]  participation  in life activities  and decrease  QOL12-16, 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_593998] -epi[INVESTIGATOR_593999].17 This often 
leaves people to cope on their own outs ide the healthcare system. There is a clear need for effective non - 
pharmacological interventions to help people with SCI manage their pain.  
Mindfulness  meditation  (MM)  interventions  have  been  identified  as an effective  pain  management  strategy.18-[ADDRESS_783706] of empi[INVESTIGATOR_227832].30 Given the unique physiological limitations of an SCI population, determining the feasibility 
and acceptability of an existing, free, publicly available MM mobile -app to remotely manage chronic pain is e ssential 
among people with SCI31 We propose a randomized clinical pi[INVESTIGATOR_594000] a 
mobile  app-guided  MM  intervention  compared  to active  control,  i.e., health  education (HE) condition  in people  with  SCI 
who have chronic  pain.  
The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_209911] (RCT) will determine the feasibility of a subsequent larger efficacy 
trial among people with SCI. Our long -term goal is to improve pain management and QOL of people with SCI living 
with  chronic pain by [CONTACT_594011] -guided interventions that are affordable and accessible and can be 
used as an adjuvant tool in conjunction with other treatments.  
 
Objectives  
Aim 1.  To evaluate the feasibility of a 6 -week app- guided MM inter vention (daily sessions of ≥ 10 minutes 6 
days/week) and HE condition (viewing daily TED Talks of ≥10 minutes 6 days/week) in people with SCI who have 
chronic pain. To achieve this aim, we will obtain the following data: a) Recruitment rate: the proportion  of eligible 
people who provide consent, b) Adherence rate: the proportion of participants in MM and HE who complete the minimum recommended minutes (i.e., 60 minutes/week) of the MM or HE intervention; c) Retention rate: the proportion of participants in MM and HE who meet our criteria for adherence and complete the immediate post - 
intervention and [ADDRESS_783707]  chronic  pain.  To achieve  this aim,  we will measure  participant -reported  satisfaction  with  the initial training  to 
orient  them  to their  randomly  assigned  condition  and their  satisfaction  with  the assigned home  practice  sessions at the 
end of 6 weeks (post -intervention).  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_783708] -intervention, and 6 - 
week follow -up to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of collecting these  data.  
 
Study Design  IRB NUMBER: HSC- MS-22-0035  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/[ADDRESS_783709] design  will be used  to evaluate  the feasibility  and acceptability  of a 6-week  app-based  mindfulness  meditation 
(MM)  intervention  (Table  1) and health  education  (HE; active  control)  condition  in people  with  SCI who  have  chronic 
pain.  
Study Population 
Participants: We will screen potential participants using the following inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Inclusion  Criteria : 1) At least  18 years  of age, 2) Traumatic  SCI of at least  6 months  duration,  3) Chronic  pain  [defined  as 
pain lasting at least 3 months with a pain intensity rating of 4 or higher on a 10 -point visual analog scale], and 4) 
Understand spoken and w ritten English sufficiently to provide informed consent, participate in the intervention and 
complete study  surveys  
Exclusion Criteria : 1) Lack of daily access to the internet using a smartphone or smart tablet, 2) Cognitive impairment 
(determined by [CONTACT_594012] 4 out of 5 
questions pertaining to the study), 3) Significant visual/hearing impairment that does not allow the use of the MM 
and/or HE apps’ audiovisual presentations, 4) U se of any kind of meditation more than once a week in the last 3 
months, 5) Inabilityto provide or obtain an email address for communication with study staff, and 6) Inability to operate the app download or study related survey using a smartphone.  
 
Study  Procedures  
Recruitment,  Screening,  and Consent : Participants  will be recruited  using a range  of recruitment  mechanisms  designed  to 
cast a broad  net and reach  a diverse  sample  of people  with  SCI. We will recruit  locally  through  TIRR  Memorial  Hermann’s 
(TIRR -MH) outpatient clinic, located in the heart of the [LOCATION_007] Medical Center, and outpatient rehabilitation facilities 
located  throughout  the Houston  metropolitan  area.  We will post  recruitment  flyers  at these  locations  and ask healthcare 
provid ers to inform patients by [CONTACT_6063], a Website with study information and a QR Code to access the website. 
We will include  study  announcements  in our institutions/organizations’  websites,  social  media  outlets,  and newsletters. 
We will also distribute our recruitment flyer through SCI support groups, the Veterans Association, the Unites Spi[INVESTIGATOR_594001],  centers  for independent  living,  and recreation  and advocacy  programs  that serve  people  with  SCI. In 
addit ion, we will recruit utilizing the TIRR -MH’s Spi[INVESTIGATOR_594002] (SCIDR) Registry, a national database of 
over  500 individuals  with  SCI who  previously  consented to be informed  of future  research  opportunities.  Included in this 
registry are men and women with traumatic SCI who participated in a recent national survey study on chronic pain, depression, and resilience. This study oversampled women with SCI; thus, we have ample access to women with SCI to 
ensure they are repres ented in the proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. The team of investigators has an established network of 
organizations with whom we have successfully recruited in the past, and we are confident in our ability to recruit the 
proposed  sample.  
In all of these recruitment activities, we will share our study announcement and/or recruitment flyer and invite those  
interested to contact [CONTACT_594013] (RC) by [CONTACT_594014]/or to 
schedule a screening i nterview. Additionally, the recruitment flyer will contain a QR code, which will open a survey 
that will ask the participant to enter their phone number and email address so that the research coordinator may contact [CONTACT_476]. The RC will follow up with interes ted individuals by [CONTACT_594015] 
(i.e., whether they meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria). For eligible individuals, the RC will email them a link to an online informed consent form (via REDCap), review informed c onsent with the study candidate over the phone, 
and answer any questions. The RC will then ask individuals to provide written online consent, using a mouse or stylus, in the signature [CONTACT_594036]. The RC will email a copy of the consent form to individuals who 
provide consent for their personal records. All screening, enrollment, and consent materials and procedures will be 
reviewed with our community advisors prior to implementation to ensure they are easy to understand and are optimally  accessible. For eligible individuals who do not consent to the study, the RC will inquire about and document 
the reason for refusal and thank them for their time.  
Baseline assessment: After consent is obtained, the RC will text and email a RedCap link to complete a 30 -minute 
baseline assessment survey. All measures listed in the Measure section of the proposal will be collected via RedCap 
except the International SCI pain basic data subset96 (ISPBD version 2) questionnaire . This measure is not validated fo r 
data collection by [CONTACT_594016] a trained professional. Hence, this measure will be  
administered by [CONTACT_44518] v ia phone interview or video confe rence  trIaRiBneNdUtMo aBdEmRi:nHisStCer-MthSe-22-0035 
ISPBD by [CONTACT_978] ( Korupol u). Pa rticipants wh o do not com plete the survey imme re IRceBivAePaPnRaOuVtoAmLaDteAdTeEm: 0a2il/,27/2024  
Page 6 of 9  followed a phone call (if needed) to assess if the participant experiencing any barriers to completing the survey. In 
addition to collecting outcome measures (see measures section), we will also collect information on demographic and 
disability characteristics including age, sex, gender, education level, employment status, marital status, etiology of injury, year of injury, level of injury, and completeness of injury.  
Randomization: After completing the baseline assessment, eligible participants will be ran domized in a 1:1 ratio to the 
mindfulness meditation (MM) or health education (HE) (active control) condition using the permuted blocks 
randomization with varying block sizes. We will stratify based on sex; thus, a random assignment will be conducted separ ately for men and women to ensure that women and men have comparable representation in the two conditions. 
Given literature suggesting sex- dependent differences, in pain and recovery from SCI, this randomization strategy 
reduces the risk that unequal sex d istribution will potentially confound feasibility and acceptability ratings. It will also 
help us evaluate potential sex -related differences in adherence or satisfaction ratings in the two conditions.  
Intervention: After randomization, the RC will schedule  a 30 -minute training session with the participant using Zoom. 
This one-on-one videoconference  will describe  their  assigned condition  (MM  or HE), provide  guidance  on how  to engage 
in the respective condition (i.e., how to download and use respective apps), and instruct participants on the frequency of engagement expected during the [ADDRESS_783710] of training components to 
ensure consis tency in the delivery of the training by [CONTACT_122440]. 
 
MM Training and Intervention: Participants randomized to the MM condition will be provided with a unique invitation 
code that will allow them to download and use the free research version  of the Mindfulness  Coach app (available for iOS 
and Android platforms) developed by [CONTACT_594017]74. If the app becomes unavailable on 
one of these platforms, the participants with that operating system will be provided with a loaner device (iPad) compatible with the Mindfulness Coach Explorer app. The study team/ RA will ship the loaner device to the participants. At the end of the six-week  intervention,  the RA will provide  the return  shippi[INVESTIGATOR_594003]. Participants will be informed of their responsibility to handle the loaner device carefully and adhere to the study guidelines for device usage and  return.  
The Loaner Device will be secured by [CONTACT_38188] - 
1. Access  Restriction:  The loaner  device  provided  for this study  will be strictly  limited  to study  use only.  Access  to the 
device will be restricted to authorized study personnel and participants  involved in the  research.  
2. Apple Care+ Services: Apple Care+ services will be utilized to protect the loaner device from loss, damage, or failure  to return.  Apple  Care+  covers  up to two incidents  annually,  safeguarding  the device  against  various  risks.  
The utilization of access restriction measures and Apple Care+ services aim to minimize potential risks and enhance the overall security of the loaner device throughout the study duration."  
 
 
Meditation  Coach  is an iOS- and Android -based  app designe d to deliver  mindfulness  training.  The app is tailored  to users 
who may be skeptical about meditation practices by [CONTACT_594018]. The app offers written information about mindfulness (e.g., sections on “What is Mindfulness?” and “Benefits of Mindfulness”) as well as 12 audio -guided meditations, with titles such as “Awareness of Breath,” “Awareness of the 
Body,” or “Mindfulness of Emotional Discomfort,” each lasting 8 -13 minutes, with an average length of 10 min utes 
(Table 1 below). Users can engage in a “training plan” option in the app, which consists of 14 sessions each of which includes short readings about mindfulness and one guided meditation (sessions 1, 7, and 14 also include a self - 
assessment of the min dfulness experience). Users have the option of by[CONTACT_594019] [ADDRESS_783711] use, including but  not limited to a Veteran population. The app transmits HIPAA compliant de - 
identified usage data to a secure server using methods approved under the VA’s Technical Reference Model.
[ADDRESS_783712]  the “Awareness  of the Breath”  audio -guided  meditation  (approximately  8 
minutes)  to practice  during the videoconference.  The RC will encourage  participants  to listen  to at least  one,  and ideally 
two, audio -guided meditation exercises each day for the next six weeks.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC- MS-22-0035 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  

Page 5 of 9   ng the  RedC  
followed  by  
   
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
[INVESTIGATOR_168617],  the RC will orient  participants  to the “Track  Progress” section  of the app.  The RC will ask participants  to complete 
weekly  logs of their  MM  practice  (based  on the record  of their  use they  can view  within  the app)  via a RedCap  survery  
sent via email.[ADDRESS_783713] access to app usage data for each participant from the app developers at VA’s National Center for PTSD. Thus, 
compliance with the MM intervention will be assessed in two ways: via self- report in the weekly RedCap assessments and 
directly from app usage, which the research team can access in real- time on the VA App Connect dashboard. The research 
team will download this usage data to our own  secure servers monthly and will examine the agreement between the two 
methods of usage data. We will also ask the participants to export the data from the app at the end of the post - 
intervention, which creates an email from the participant’s email addres s to the study email with an Excel file attached 
that documents the participant’s app usage. The research coordinator (RC) will provide the participants with an instruction guide to assist them in exporting the app usage data.  
 
Active Control Training and Intervention : Active control in this study will be referred as a health education (HE) 
condition. Participants randomized to HE will be asked to download and use the free TED Talk app (available for iOS and Android platforms). Prior to the training, the RC will create a TED Talk account for each participant with a unique 
study ID (e.g., “SCIPainStudy01”) and study -related password (e.g., “SCIPainStudy01”). Participants’ TED Talk accounts 
used for the study will in no way be connected to any identifying info rmation. Each participant’s account will include a list 
of over [ADDRESS_783714] categories of sleep, nutrition, mood, 
relationships, chronic pain, and health behaviors. These talks or presentations range from 4 to 18 minutes and were 
reviewed/selected by [CONTACT_92142]. The RC will instruct them to watch or listen to these videos for ≥ 10 
minutes daily for 6 days per week. The RC will ask participants to complete weekly logs of their TED Talk ap p use 
(based on the record or their use they can view within the app) via a RedCap survey sent via email. As it is not possible for the research team to directly assess usage from the TED Talk app, compliance with the HE intervention 
will be assessed from this self-reported data.  
Weekly  assessments:  Following  standard  procedures  used  in previous  intervention  research  projects  to minimize  attrition, 
the RC will send  all participants  an email andtext  message  at the end of each  week  of the intervention  period  to encourage 
them to maintain their participation and will include a link to a brief (<10 minute) RedCap survey to assess pain intensity 
and interference (0 -10 visual analogue scale), depression (patient Health Questionnaire -2; PHQ -2)99, and anxiety 
(Generalized Anxiety Disorder -2; GAD- 2)[ADDRESS_783715] -Treatment and 6- Week Follow Up Assessment : At the end of the [ADDRESS_783716] - 
intervention  period  (i.e.,  [ADDRESS_783717] -baseline),  the RC will send  participants  a text message  and an email with  a link to a 
30-minute RedCap survey (see measures section for full list). The International SCI pain basic data subset96 (version 2) 
questionnaire  which  requires  data  collection  by [CONTACT_594020],  will be collected  separately.  If the participant  does  not 
com plete the post-  tre atmen t or fo llow-up as sessments within 5 days of receivi aIpRBlinNk,UifMpBaErtRic:ipHaSnCt-dMoSe-s22n-o0t035 
complete  the assessment  within  a few days,  the RC will initiate  email  reminders  IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  
a phone call to remind them  
Figure 1. Mindfulness Coach App Interface  
 Figure  2. Active  Control  (TED)  App Interface  
Page [ADDRESS_783718] -Study Adherence Barrier Survey: After completion of the study (post 12 weeks, the participants who did not use the 
app at all or used  less than  the recommended  minutes(<45  minutes),  the RC will send  the participant  a text message and an 
email with a link to a <less than 5 -minute survey to get better understanding and information about the barriers and 
challenges  the participant  faced  to use the app less than  recommended  minutes  or not at all. 
 
Participant Compensation : Participants will be reimbursed for completing baseline assessment ($25), immediate post - 
intervention  assessment  ($25),  and 6-week  follow  up assessment ($25).  Additionally,  participants  will be reimbursed  for 
completing the brief weekly surveys at the end of each week during the intervention period ($10 for each weekly 
assessment completed).  
 
Community Advisory Board Involvement:  To ensure this program of research is in line with the needs and priorities of  
individuals  living  with  SCI-related  chronic  pain,  we have  assembled  a panel  of individuals  with  SCI and chronic  pain  to serve 
on a Community Advisory Board (CAB) through the duration of the study. The CAB will regularly meet with the study investigators, individually and in group settings, to provide input on each step of the research process (see Timeline). As 
part of the proposed study’s innovation is examining the feasibility/acceptability of a publicly available MM app, the CAB will not be providing fe edback on the app itself. However, the CAB will provide feedback on all other elements of the 
study,  including beta -testing  and providing feedback  on the relevance,  accessibility,  and practicality  of materials  and 
methods.  Proposed  PI (Korupolu)  will moderate twice -yearly  CAB teleconferences  in year  1-2 and one meeting  in year 3. In 
Year 1 meetings we will gather feedback on the assessments (i.e., the online survey accessibility, wording, etc.), 
recruitment materials (i.e., recruitment flyers and emails), video -conference orientation to conditions, and the initial 
feedback from the 8 participants run as part of the internally funded pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. The study team will revise the study materials as necessary based on CAB feedback. Year 2 meetings (two meetings) will focus on providing the CAB with updates on recruitment and study progress, and discussion of any challenges. Year 3 meeting will focus on a discussion of study findings related to feasibility (i.e., recruitment, adherence, and retention rates) an d acceptability (i.e., responses to 
the program  evaluation  questionnaire  including responses  to open -ended questions  asking  for suggested  revisions),  how  to 
revise  study  procedures  for a subsequent  efficacy  study  and where  to share/present  findings  to ensure  dissemination  that 
is of direct benefit to the SCI  community.  
 
Measures: The primary outcomes are feasibility (Aim 1) and acceptability (Aim 2) of the MM intervention and HE 
condition. This study will use the National Center for Complimentary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) definition of 
feasibility and acceptability, including whether participants can/will adhere to the protocol (recruitment, attend all visits, 
be able to perform or tolerate the intervention, complete study measures).101 
 
Aim 1. To a ssess the feasibility of participating in a 6 -week app -guided MM intervention (daily sessions of ≥ 10 minutes 6 
days/week) and HE condition (viewing daily health education -related TED Talks of ≥10 minutes 6 days/week) in people 
with SCI who have chronic pa in, we will collect the: a) recruitment rate : the proportion of eligible people who provide 
consent, b) adherence rate : the proportion of participants in each group who complete the minimum recommended 
minutes (i.e., 60 minutes/per week) of using the MM or  HE app during the 6 weeks intervention, and c) retention rate : 
the proportion of participants in MM and HE conditions who meet our criteria for adherence and complete the baseline, immediate post -intervention and 6 -week follow -up assessments.  
 
Aim 2 . To e xamine the acceptability of participating in a 6 -week app -guided MM intervention (daily sessions of ≥ 10 
minutes 6 days/week) and HE condition (active control), we will collect quantitative and qualitative patient -reported 
satisfaction with their video -conference training, their assigned app, and their assigned practice sessions. Quantitative 
satisfaction will be assessed using a program evaluation questionnaire that will assess their satisfaction with the app. This measure also allows participants to provide open -ended comments and suggestions. Additionally, the post - 
treatment assessment will contain open- ended questions to assess barriers to adherence, to inform strategies and to 
enhance compliance with the sessions in future studies.  
Aim [ADDRESS_783719] patient -reported  
measures of pain , depression, an xiety, mindfulne ss, and QOL  and calculate the r e I:RtBheNpUrMopBoErtRio: nHSoCf -MS-22-0035  
participants in MM and HE c onditions who complete the ba seline , the immediat vIeRnBtioAnP,PaRnOdVthAeL6D-wAeTeEk: 02/27/[ADDRESS_783720] 70% of participants complete ≥ 70% of the assessment items.  
 
The following patient reported outcomes will be collected at baselin e and the immediate post -treatment and [ADDRESS_783721] -treatment follow  up. These  measures  are included  in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_594004].  If this pi[INVESTIGATOR_594005],  these  measures  will serve  as primary  outcome  measures  in a subsequent  effectiveness  trial.  
 
Pain will be assessed using the International SCI pain basic data subset96 (version 2). This pain measure is one of the 
CDEs recommended by [CONTACT_198912] (NINDS) for measurement of pain in 
people with spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828]. This measure collects information on the interference of pain with daily acti vities, mood 
and sleep. It also evaluates location, type of pain, the intensity of pain, duration of pain and treatment of pain for 3 wors t 
pain problems reported by a person with SCI.  
 
Pain- related distress will be assessed using the Chronic Pain Acceptance Questionnaire (CPAQ -R8), which consists of 8 
items assessing acceptance of pain rated on a 0 (never true) to 6 (always true) scale to generate scores on two subscales: activity engagement and pain willingness. The CPAQ has been validated in patients with chronic pain.
107 
 
Brief Pain Catastrophizing Scale (Brief PCS ) measures three aspects of catastrophic cognitions about pain -rumination, 
magnification, and helplessness. Each question has five response options ranging from 0 (not at all) to 4 (all the time) scale.  
 
Depression  will be measured  by [CONTACT_594021] -item  Patient  Health Questionnaire (PHQ -8),108 109which  assesses each  of the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder -V depression criteria, with the item assessing for suicidality 
removed. The PHQ -8 has strong psychometric characteristics.109 This is a CDE proposed by [CONTACT_594022]. 
Anxiety will be measured by [CONTACT_20817] -7 (GAD -7),109 110 which assesses anxiety symptoms on a four - 
point scale and has strong psychometric characteristics. This is a CDE proposed by [CONTACT_594023].  
 
Mindfulness  will be assessed using the Five Facet  Mindfulness  Questionnaire- Short  Form  (FFMQ -15).111The FFMQ -15 is 
a 15 -item measure that consists of five facets of mindfulness: observing, describing, acting with awareness, non -judging 
of inner  experience,  and non-reactivity  to inner  experience.  The FFMQ -15 has shown  strong psychometric  properties  in a 
variety of sa mples.112 113 
 
Quality of Life will be measured using the SCI-quality of life (QOL): Positive Affect and Well Being- Short Form (PAWB - 
SF),[ADDRESS_783722] of SCI on four domains of life, namely physical- medical, 
physi cal functioning, emotional, and social health. All PAWB- SF items were taken from the Neuro -QOL PAWB measure.116 
Items were calibrated based on data collected from the SCI sample, and the scores were transformed to the Neuro -QOL 
metric. This measure is a CD E proposed by [CONTACT_594024].  
 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS -4) is a self-reported questionnaire that was designed to measure the degree to which 
situations in one’s life are appraised as stressful. A four- item sca le was developed for measuring psychological stress. The 
PSS- 4 determines how unpredictable, uncontrollable, and overloaded respondents find their lives. The scale also includes 
queries about current levels of experienced stress.  
 
PROMIS Fatigue- Short Form 4a assesses a range of self-reported symptoms, from mild subjective feelings of tiredness to 
an overwhelming,  debilitating,  and sustained sense of exhaustion  that likely  decreases  one’s  ability  to execute daily  activities 
and fun ction normally in family or social roles. The fatigue short forms are universal rather than disease -specific. All assess 
fatigue over the past seven days. Each question has five response options ranging in value from one (not at all) to five (ver y 
much).  
PROMIS  Sleep  Disturbance- Short  Form  4a assesses self-reported  perceptions  of sleep  quality,  sleep  depth,  and restoration 
associated  with  sleep.  This includes  perceived  difficulties  and concerns  with  getting  to sleep  or staying  asleep,  as well as 
perc eptions of the adequa cy of and satisfaction  with  sleep. The Sleep Disturban m IiRs uBnNivUeMrsaBlErRat:hHeSrCth-ManS-d2i2se-0a0s3e5- 
specific. It assesses sleep disturbance over the past seven days. Each question  IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  
Page 8 of 9  ensure par from five (very poor) to one (very good).  
 
Acceptance and Action Questionnaire (AAQ- 2) measure of psychological inflexibility/experiential avoidance. Acceptance 
and Action  Questionnaire (AAQ -2) contains  7 items  and answers  are given  on a 7- point  scale  ranging  from  1 (never  true)  to 
7 (always true). High scores on the AAQ -[ADDRESS_783723] greater acceptance and  action.  
 
Statistics:  
Sample size: We plan to enroll a total of n=60 participants and randomize the m 1:1 to the MM intervention group or the 
control group. Following the NCCIH guidance on pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], we base this sample size on practical/budgetary 
considerations as well as the estimation precision for the feasibility and acceptability outcomes. For t he proportions 
considered, the margin of error (MOE) would not exceed 17.9% when n=30 per arm. For example, when the true proportion is 75%, we could estimate it with an MOE of 15.5%. The planned sample size is also adequate for identifying potential unfor eseen issues in the trial flow to facilitate improved planning for the subsequent larger trial.
117 
 
Analysis  Plan:  Most  of the planned  analyses  are descriptive  due to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_594006].  Continuous 
variables  will be summarized  by [CONTACT_594025],  and categorical variables  will be 
summarized via frequency and percentages. Variables will be summarized both overall and separately for each randomization arm, following the intention -to-treat principle.  We will also conduct subgroup analysis by [CONTACT_594026].  
 
Aim 1: The number  of individuals  screened,  consented,  and randomized  per month  will be presented,  and we will use the 
CONSORT diagram to summarize the numbers and reasons related to recruitment, follow -up, and dropout. The main 
feasibility outcomes include recruitment rate, adherence rate and retention rate. a) Recruitment rate : the proportion of 
eligible people who provide consent (b) Adherence rate the proportion of participants in MM and HE condition who 
complete a minimum of 60 minutes/week assigned home practice sessions; (c) Retention rate : the proportion of 
participants in MM and HE condition who meet our criteria for adherence and complete the outcome assessments at 
baseline,  immediate  post -intervention  and 6-week  follow -up. We will summarize  these  outcomes  by [CONTACT_594027], 
percentage, and 95% confidence intervals . We will inspect these percentages relative to our feasibility targets. Next, we 
will obtain  summary  statistics  by [CONTACT_594028],  the number  of days  that 
the participants complete at least 1 session, and total duration of participation (i.e., time spent reviewing the mediation 
sessions or the TED talk sessions). These data are available in two data sources (i.e., email surveys and app usage data) for the MM Training arm, leading to two sets of variables. We will analyze both sets as well as their differences. For the 
active control arm (HE), we will summarize adherence data collected via weekly email surveys.  
Aim 2: We will first derive item -specific summary statistics for the multiple -choice items in the program  evaluation 
questionnaire by [INVESTIGATOR_216]. Next, we will use mean, SD, and quartiles to summarize the total score . Qualitative data from the 
open -ended items on the program evaluation questionnaire will be analyzed using thematic analysis to identify themes of 
satisfaction and areas for future improvement.  
 
Aim 3: We will calculate  the response  rate for each  measure  at baseline,  immediate  post -intervention,  and 6-week  follow 
up to evaluate feasibility and acceptability of collecting these data. For outcomes that are repeatedly measured, we will 
estimate the mean trajectory by [CONTACT_164114] a (generalized) linear mixed  model.  
 
Additionally,  descriptive  analyses  will be condu cted  for all variables  collected. We will derive  summary  statistics  for the 
patient outcomes by [CONTACT_594029] (baseline, immediately after intervention, and six weeks after the intervention). Following the guidelines for feasibility studies, no  statistical comparison or hypothesis testing will be 
conducted regarding the between -group differences in these  measures. 
 
Ethics: Please see the attachment protection of Human subjects document  
 
Data handling and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_594007]:  Participants'  confidentiality  must  be considered  to  
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC- MS-22-0035 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  ticipant safety. Regarding  

Page 9 of 9  participants' data, the methods of responding to the self -report measures will be online (RedCap) and via phone 
interviews. Data collected by [CONTACT_594030]. As such, participants will be reminded 
to take the battery of measures in a private location to ensure their confidentiality. No identifying data will be attached t o 
the outcome measures. All participants will be assigned a participant ID number to enter on all online surveys to eliminate the need for personal information and allow the research team to match participants' baseline data with their follow -up 
data. The informed consent forms that include participant contact [CONTACT_594031]. The participant ID numbers linked with minimal identifying information will be stored on a secure server at the primary institution in a password -protected document that only 
authorized research team members may access. Once all data collection and data cleaning has been completed, with all 
participants’ measures from each time -point combined, the data file with all identifying information will be destroyed.  
Finally, should any conflicts of interest be raised regarding participant safety or bias, the research team and community advisory board will meet to review this conflict and determine the appropriate response. Consultation may be used if necessary. 
 
Database protection : Participant usage of the Meditation Coach app will be accessed through the app's dashboard, VA 
App Connect,  which  only  investigators  of the study  will be able  to access. This will allow  us to generate  invitation  codes 
so that participants  assigned  to the MM  condition  will be able  to use the research  version  of the Mindfulness  Coach  app 
and will allow  us to download  data  for users  (real- time  access) in JSON  files. We will use SAS code  to extract the data.  
This data  will be stored  on our institutions' secured  drive.  The statistician  from  UTHealth  will be provided  access  to these 
files per the institutional  access  policy.  The password -protected  deidentified  files will be shared  among  investigators.  
Data will be stored on secure UTHealth desktops that can only be accessed using an institutional ID and password. A separate linking log with identifiable information will be stored on the institution’s secured server. The RedCap survey results  and reports  are stored  on UTHealth  RedCap  secure  servers.  A UTHealth  email account  is needed  to log in. Excel 
spreadsheets  used  to tabulate  and analyze  data  will be password  protected  and stored  on protected  UTHealth  desktop 
computers located in locked project offices. As all data will be collected online (RedCap) or via phone interview and entered  directly  into RedCap  by [CONTACT_100576].  Thus,  we do not anticipate  any usage  or storage  of any paper 
documents i n this proposed  study.  
 
Quality control and assurance Data quality and management: The investigators and study staff will review all data collection forms on an ongoing basis 
for data completeness and accuracy as well as protocol compliance. All data excep t the pain measure will be completed 
via RedCap by [CONTACT_3038]. The pain measure will be collected via phone interview with a research assistant (RA), as 
this measure is not validated for collection via self- report. The RA will enter this data directl y into RedCap during the 
phone interview. Additionally, w hile creating RedCap surveys to collect outcome data, we will restrict the entry of specific 
variables to prevent data entry errors. For example, the minimum age entry will be restricted to [ADDRESS_783724] udy inclusion 
criteria (participants’ age will have already been verified as over 18 by [CONTACT_594032]). The 
survey was carefully designed and tested multiple times to identify any potential issues with data collection with the  input 
from Community Advisory Board. Additionally, we will audit the data for the first two months bi- weekly and then 
quarterly during the study period to prevent systematic errors.  
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC- MS-22-0035 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/27/2024  

 Publication Plan  
We acknowledge the importance of the timely release of scientific information and resources to the broader 
community.  We are also aware  of the policies  and guidelines  established  by [CONTACT_594033].  Therefore,  we plan  to present  the results  generated  by [CONTACT_594034] -reviewed journals in a timely  fashion.  
 
ATTACHMENTS 
1. Updated Assessments (RedCap  survey)  
2. Updated Co nsent  Document  
3. Updated screening telephone  script  
4. Updated MM orientation tutorial slides  
5. Updated TED talk orientation tutorial slides  
6. Updated  flyer 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-22-0035  
    IRB APPROVAL DATE:  02/27/2024  
10 
