Protocol #IRB201703386 1 
Version date: 3/15/2019  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
University of [LOCATION_012] IRB -03 
Protocol  
 
Title:  Culturally Sensitive, Primary Care Clinic -Based Interventions by [CONTACT_482211]:   
Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_482202] M. Tucker, PhD, Department of Psychology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of [LOCATION_012]  
Co-Principal Investigators: Nipa Shah, MD, Department of Community Health and Family Medicine, College of Medicine –Jacksonville  
Stephen Anton, PhD, Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, College of Medicine, University of [LOCATION_012]  
Co-Investigators:  Lori Bilello, PhD, College of Medicine –Jacksonville  
 Fern Webb. PhD, College of Medicine –Jacksonville  
 Shiva Gautam, PhD, College of Medicine -Jacksonville   
 Anne Mathews, P hD, IFAS, Food Science and Nutrition  
Community Co- investigator : Delori s Rentz, MS, Department of Psychology, College of Liberal 
Arts and Sciences, University of [LOCATION_012]  
Study Staff:  Amy Leg ros, Department of Psychology, College of Liberal Arts 
and Sciences, University of [LOCATION_012]  
 Frederic Desmond, PhD, Department of Psychology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of [LOCATION_012]  
Maria Bautista, MD, MPH, College of Medicine –Jacksonville  
Erica Guerrido,  MPH  College of Medicine –Jacksonville  
 
1. Abstract:  
Black women have the highest prevalence of obesity in the U.S. with more than half 
(56.6%) of Black women experiencing obesity. This dis ease increases the likelihood of 
having diabetes and other chronic diseases, and decreases quality of life and life expectancy. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that all adults who have obesity participate in an evidence- based, intensive, multicomponent behavioral treatment for this 
disease. Such treatment has been shown to produce clinically significant weight -loss among 
patients; however, this weight -loss is typi[INVESTIGATOR_482203]. Health care 
professionals nationally agree that treatment of obesity should be occurring and evaluated in primary care settings.  
We will test the effectiveness of a culturally sensitive, evidence -based, multi -component, 
behavioral program for treating obesity called Health- Smart.
TM This program will  be 
implemented for 6 months in 20 UF Health Jacksonville primary care clinics by [CONTACT_482212] (CHWs ) with Black women patients who have obesity, and followed by 
[CONTACT_482213] -implemented behavioral counseling weight loss maintenance 
programs that are applied  quarterly over 12 months to prevent weight gain. Specifically, we 
will compare the effects on weight -loss and weight -loss maintenance of (1) Health -Smart 
Protocol #IRB201703386 2 
Version date: 3/15/2019  plus the Patient -Centered, Culturally Sensitive Weight Loss Maintenance Program  (PCS -
WLM) , and (2) Health- Smart plus the Standard Behavioral Weight Loss Maintenance 
Program  (SB-WLM) . We expect that (a) the PCS -WLM will result in significantly greater 
weight -loss and weight -loss maintenance compared to SB -WLM , and ( b) that the model used 
to integrate CHWs into the health care team at each clinic will result in high ratings of this 
integration by [CONTACT_482214].  
 
2. Background:  
Obesity has been called a modern epi[INVESTIGATOR_901] .[ADDRESS_619522] quality of life.
2-5 Thus, reducing and 
eventually eliminating obesity contin ues to be a national health priority.6  
Approximately 75% of non- Hispanic Blacks are overweight or obese. This percentage is 
higher than other US racial and ethnic groups. The 2011- 12 US National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey revealed that (a) th e prevalence of obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) 
had increased to 34.9% and (b) this obesity increase was even higher among Blacks (47.8%) and Hispanics (42.5%).
7 Black and Hispanic women are affected by [CONTACT_482215]. Notably, Black wo men (BW) have the highest obesity prevalence in the 
US. More than half (56.6%) of BW are obese, compared to 44.4% of Hispanic women and 32.8% of non- Hispanic White women.
[ADDRESS_619523] found that lifestyle interventions are effective in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_482204].9 Generally, lifestyle interventions that are delivered in weekly group 
sessions over 4 to 6 months can help individuals achieve weight losses of approximately 5 to 10% of their body weight.
10 Unfortunately, many individuals who successfully lose 5% or 
more  of their body weight gradually regain most, if not all, of the weight they lost .[ADDRESS_619524] called for a focus on preventing weight 
regain, particularly in primary care settings.7  The Obesity Reduction Black Intervention Trial 
(ORBIT) provides important insights into weight loss and maintenance for BW .10 The 6 -
month weight -loss inter vention in this trial was implemented by [CONTACT_482216] -weekly group discussions focusing on eating a healthy diet, restricting 
calories, and increasing physical activity and related goals, plus monthly 30- minute 
motivational interviewing (MI) sessions by [CONTACT_262416] .[ADDRESS_619525] 3.0 kg, and the control group had gained 0.2 kg. Both groups gained weight between months 6 and 18 (1 kg in the intervention group and 0.1 kg in the 
control group). At month 18, only 24% of the intervention group and 12% of the control 
group had lost at least 5% of their initial body weight. The authors of the article  reporting 
these findings concluded that the low weight -loss and unsuccessful weight -loss maintenance 
indicates t hat more research is needed to identify what contributes to meaningful weight loss 
and weight -regain prevention in BW.  
  
Protocol #IRB201703386 3 
Version date: 3/15/2019   
3. Specific Aims:  
The project has three primary aims. The first primary aim is to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the Community Health Worker  (CHW )-implemented, clinic -located, 
evidence -based, 6 -month Health -Smart weight- loss program as indicated by (1) participa ting 
patients ’ mean weight loss and (2) percentage of participating patients  who show clinically 
significant weight loss (i.e., at least 5% of baseline body weight).  
The second primary aim  is to compare the outcomes of two 12- month, clinic -based 
weight -loss maintenance programs implemented by [CONTACT_1962]’ respective physicians after the 
6-month weight -loss intervention. The fi rst program is the Patient- Centered, Culturally 
Sensitive, Weight -Loss Maintenance (PCCS -WLM) program, which is a weight -maintenance 
program implemented by [CONTACT_482217] -centered, cultural sensitivity 
training  to enhance their ability to talk with patients about weight -loss issues in ways that 
enable patients to feel comfortable with, respected by, and trusting of their physicians. The 
second program is a standard behavioral weight -loss maintenance (SB -WLM) program that 
is recommended by [CONTACT_482218]. The specific patient reported outcome measures  related to this aim are continued weight loss or maintaining weight loss 
and changes in patients’ perceived levels of (a) satisfaction with physician care, (b) provider cultural sensitivity, and (c) physician engagement in discussions of their weight and health-
smart behaviors (e.g., eating and physical activity). 
The third primary aim  is to implement and evaluate a Medical Assistant (MA) -led 
program designed to integrate tra ined CHWs into the health care team in [ADDRESS_619526] obesity at these clinics. MAs at each participating 
clinic will train and men tor the CHWs assigned to the clinic to becom e integrated into the 
heath care team  at th at clinic . This training will be informed by [CONTACT_482219]- recognized 
TeamSTEPPS Program
__an evidence -based set of teamwork strategies and tools developed 
by [CONTACT_229334] (AHRQ) aimed at optimizing patient outcomes by [CONTACT_482220].
 CHW integration e ffectiveness will be assessed using (a) ratings by [CONTACT_29441], 
MAs, and physicians in the proposed study on the relevant subscales of a TeamSTEPPS team integration assessment tool , the AHRQ Office Survey for Patient Safety.  
The secondary study aims  are to deter mine if, at the end of the 12- month weight -loss 
maintenance programs, there are differences in the following participant health indicators in association with type of physician- implemented weight- loss maintenance program 
implemented by [CONTACT_482221] ’ physicians: (a) blood pressure, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], HbA1c, and 
blood glucose; (b) hea lthy eating and physical activity engagement; (c) participant -perceived 
barriers to health -smart behaviors; and (d) health -related quality of life.  
The primary  hypotheses  that will be tested  are the following : (1) at the end of the 6-
month Health -Smart weight -loss intervention, participa ting patients  will show weight 
reduction of at least 5% of their baseline weight , and (2) at the end of 18 months, a 
significantly larger perce ntage of participants at clinics assigned to the 12- month PCCS -
WLM program will maintain initial weight loss or show continued weight loss compared to participants at clinics assigned to the 12 -month SB -WLM program.  
  
Protocol #IRB201703386 4 
Version date: 3/15/2019   
4. Research Plan:  
Target Population : The target population for this study is B lack women patients with 
obesity and are current patients in the UF Jacksonville P rimary Care Network. This 
populat ion w as selected because t hey have a high incidence of mo rtality due to obes ity, and 
have  the most potential direct benefit f rom participating in th is study.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: The  partici pant inclusion cri teria are:  (1) African 
American/B lack,  (2) female, (3) age 21 year s or older, (4) BMI of 30kg/ m2 or higher ; (5) 
active patient  of a par ticipati ng cli nic (i.e., at least  [ADDRESS_619527] 24 months), and 
(6) willing and ready to change one’s  diet and phy sical act ivity level, and (7) willin g to be 
random ized to either of  the two physician- implemented weight-loss m aintenance 
intervention groups. Ex clusion criteria  are (1)  any serious medical conditi on that likely 
affects weight, such as end stage renal  diseas e or can cer, (2) pr ior ba riatric surgery within 
the last 5 years  or plans for this surgery in the next 2 years , (3) use  of prescri ption or over -
the-counter weight-loss medication within the last 6 mo nths, (4) currently pregnant or  plan 
to get pregnant within the ne xt 2 year s, (5) plan to relocate from  the a reas served by 
[CONTACT_482222] w ithin the ne xt 2 year s (6) having had unintentional  weight loss (≥ 5% 
of body w eight) within  6 months  of enrol lment, and (7) taking a daily dose of an oral 
corticosteroid  or anti-psychotic ( clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050],   olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], or risperidone ) for less than six 
months. 
Participant Recruitment : Participa nts will be  recruited  from  the UF Jacksonville pr imary 
care net work. At least 20 of these  primary care cli nics will be targeted for recruitment of 
eligible participants , and a  multi-faceted ap proach will be  used  for recruitment . At the 
participating clinics, rec ruitment w ill involve distribution of marketing  materials (e. g., posters 
and flyers ) in the wa iting r oom and  exam rooms. These marketing materials will include a 
telephone number to call if interested in the study. The  participati ng provider  in each cli nic 
may also d iscuss the trial with any p otentially eligible patien ts if they already have an 
appointment during the recruitment period. If a patie nt is initially interested in partici pating 
and appears t o be eligible, the medical staff w ill ask the pat ient to complete a short form 
indicating  that she would like to be contact[CONTACT_426] a study t eam m ember to learn  more about 
the trial. A dditional ly, to s ystematical ly ide ntify and recruit potentiall y eligible partici pants, 
the research team will conduct  an IR B-approved qu ery of the UF Health-Jax electronic 
medical record system (Epic) , and organize targeted m ailings of a study participation 
invitation letter t o potentially eligible patients  (based on their age, race, sex and BMI) . The 
letter will provide an overview of the study and the phone number to call if they are 
interested in participating in the study.  
Screen ing. A trained research coordinator or CHW will receive the phone calls  from patients  
who are interested in participating in the trial and  will perform a screening interview after 
having received verbal consent from the possible patient participant (interested caller) .  See 
copy of the screening script and interview tool. If the caller meets the screening criteria and 
is interested in participating in the study, a visit with their physician  or phy sician extender 
(ARNP or Physician Assistant ) will be scheduled to  ensure there are no medical 
contraindications to their participation in the study. This screening visit will include a 
review of the patient’s m edication i nventory, medical and  hosp ital admission history for any 
exclusion criteria noted above as well as  a phys ical exam that includes measuring blo od 
pressu re, radial p ulse, and w eight, administering a mini -cognitive assessment , and reviewing 
Protocol #IRB201703386 5 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619528]             
 the patient’s health history. At  the end of the screening visit,  patients  will b e informed 
whet her or not they qualify for the study. It is estimated that a pproximately 1,600 individuals 
will need to  be screened in order to enroll 758 participants Participants will be enrolled in 3 
waves : Wave1 will include [ADDRESS_619529] obesity, and followed by [CONTACT_482223]- implemented behavioral counseling programs that are applied quarterly over 12 
months to prevent weight re gain.  CHWs will be hired by [CONTACT_482224].  The 
CHWs will also receive extensive training on the Health -Smart program by [CONTACT_978] ([CONTACT_482243]) 
and her team prior to program implementation.  A brief description of each i ntervention 
component used in this study is as follows:  
Measurement Session 1.   The p atient ’s baseline biometric data ( weight, height , blood 
pressure ) will be measured  by a n MA  at their physician’s clinic . Additionally, blood will be 
drawn to as sess total c holesterol, LDL- chole sterol, H DL-cholesterol, trigl ycerides, glucose, 
and H bA1c  if this has not been done in the last 30 days or during the physician screening 
visit. These data will be entered into the Health Data Log . Every attempt will be made to 
obtain the blood sample while the patient has been fasting. However, when that is not feasible, it will be noted in the form that the patient has not been fasting. Next, a trained CHW at the patient’s primary care clinic will provide a battery of questionnaires to be filled 
out on site  (see Questionnaire/Instruments section  for descriptions ).  The research 
coordinators assigned to the clinics  for this project  will input the  patients’ biometric and lab 
data from the Health Data Log form and store it in the dedicated IRB research drive to 
prepare the data for analys es. Patient name , the date the measurement was taken,  and the 
name [CONTACT_482242].  
      Participation in the 6- month Health -Smart  weight loss program . Within two months  
after completing Measurement Session 1, pa tients  will begin the Health -Smart weight loss 
program.  T he 6-month clinic-adapt ed Health-Smart intervention is part of both 
compara tors and includes the f ollowing  component s/strategies: (a)  assessment of each 
Protocol #IRB201703386 6 
Version date: 3/15/2019  participant’s motivators of and barriers t o heal th-smart behaviors using the Motivat ors of  and 
Barriers t o Health -Smart Behav iors Invent ory14—which  has been  published  by [CONTACT_9154]; 
(b) coaching by a trai ned CHW that  involves using the in ventory-identif ied motivators and  
barriers to faci litate the patient pa rticipa nt’s goal-setting and identification of strategies to 
achieve their goals , teaching participants to monitor selected h ealth-smart goals  and related 
goal at tainment strategi es, reviewing the standard goals for all patients that include 5% 
weight loss and increasing or maintaining steps walked to meet the 10,000 steps per day 
walking goal, a nd facilitating a pat ient-family member/friend discussion during which t he 
patient  asks the family member/friend to engage in behav iors that will su pport the patient  in 
implementing her heal th-smart goal achi evement strategies; (c) three months of weekly group 
sessi ons and then 3 months of bi-weekly gr oup s essions; (d) [ADDRESS_619530] ivities such as g roup walks  
and individual walking to achieve 10,000 steps per day , and/or other self -selected moderate 
physical activities , and documentation of  the physical activities in addition to documenting 
steps walked . Furthermore, the walking steps should begin with any number of steps that can 
be walked without any physical discomfort (e.g., pain, difficulty breathing) and then gradually increased by a number of steps that can be walked without any physical discomfort. Additionally, for participants who cannot walk at all, the physical activity goal is to engage in any physical activity up to [ADDRESS_619531] one of the sessions  in the Health -Smart intervention , 
patient  participants  will be given  the opportunity to anonymo usly or directly ask healt h-
related q uestions  to a pane l of health experts  (e.g., di etitians)  and B lack women  communi ty 
members who have lost weight and m aintained this weight loss. 
The first week of Health -Smart will involve having a trained CHW, employed by [CONTACT_27470] , to help participa ting patient s set health -smart behavior goals and weight -loss goals and 
identify strategies for achieving these goals  using the Motivat ors of  and Bar riers t o Health -
Smart Behav iors Invent ory (MB-HSBI) . The CHW will review the standard goals for all 
patients that include 5% weight loss and increasing or maintaining steps walked to meet the 10,[ADDRESS_619532] session of Health- Smart only. This support person will be 
asked to make a commitment to help achieve the pa tient’s health -smart goals .  
Patients  will attend the CHW -led Health -Smart weekly 1 ½ - to 2- hour group sessions for 
3 months and then bi -weekly group sessions for another 3 months.  During these sessions, 
patients  will be weighed. P atients  will view and discuss segments of a Health -Smart DVD 
that show culturally diverse families and communi ty members, licensed physicians and other 
health care providers discussing health- smart behaviors and “real world” strategies for 
promoting these behaviors. P atients will be given a Health -Smart Resource Guide that is a 
supplement to the Health -Smart DVD—a  guide that contains more detailed information 
about the discussed health- smart be haviors and “real world” strategies for promoting these 
behaviors. Patients  will be encouraged to review sections of the Health- Smart Resource 
Guide that are relevant to each  week’s group discussion. Patients will also be encouraged to 
follow a reduced -calorie eating plan to promote a 5% loss of their current body weight during 
the 6 -month weight -loss intervention. Sample reduced- calorie meal plans that provide 
approximately 1200 kcals from a well -balanced diet from a variety of foods emphasized in 
the 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans will be provided to patients . They  will also 
participate in 150 minutes of physical activity each week -  either on their  own or arranged by 
[CONTACT_1738] #IRB201703386 7 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619533] their  steps walked using a 
pedometer that will be provided to them  as well as document other physical activity  
performed during each week . They  will also be recording food and beverages consumed 
daily.  
Measurement Session 2 . After the complet ion of  the 6 -month Health -Smart  weight loss 
program , patients ’ weight, height , blood pressure will be measured by a Medical Assistant at 
their physician’s clinic. Additionally, patients’ blood will be drawn to as sess their total 
cholesterol, LDL- chole sterol, H DL-cholesterol, tri glycerides, glucose, and H bA1c  and they 
will complete the questionnaires previously completed as part of Measurement Session 1. 
The research coordinators assigned to clinics will input  the pa tients’ biometric and lab data 
from the Health Data Log form  and store it in the dedicated IRB research drive . 
Weight Loss Maintenance Support from Primary Care Physician . During the [ADDRESS_619534] quarterly visits with their physician (at no charge to the patients ) so that the 
phys ician can provide counseling and support to the patients that is designed to help the 
patients  continue to lose weight or maintain the weight loss that resulted from 
participating in the Health -Smart weight loss program. In this phase, two different 12-
month weight maintenance programs implemented by [CONTACT_482225] (PCCS -WLM program and SB -WLM program). Both the patient and the CHW will be 
blinded on which program the patient will be participating in. The clinics will be randomly assigned to one of these  two program s. The PCCS -WLM program (Comparator 
1) will be implemented by [CONTACT_482226] 10 clinics in this 
study, and the SB -WLM (Comparator 2) will be implemented by [CONTACT_482227] a  separate set of [ADDRESS_619535]  of patient-physician  clinical  encounte rs every three months over a 12-month 
period, duri ng which physicians in each program  will r eview each of their participating 
patien t’s cli nic-track ed weight/BMI and implement e vidence-based p rovider behavioral 
counseli ng strategies for weight-regain prevention with each of these patients. A  
summary form that includes the pat ient’s weight loss goals and health -smart goals will be 
provided to the physician prior to their first maintenance visit.  
Focus Groups. Focus groups with Black women  with weight concerns will be performed 
to identify specif ic ways providers can demonstr ate cultural sensit ivity that will be  among the 
foci of the p hysician  training for the PCCS -WLM  program  (Comparator 1) . A minimum of 
two but no more than four focus groups will be conducted before the end of 2018. Each group will include 6 to 10 participants per focus group.  Each participant will receive a $[ADDRESS_619536] receipt form that includes their name, social security number , address , and phone number. Focus group 
participants will be recruited from the general population through disseminating flyers about these groups at local clinical settings (e.g., the participating clinics and at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482205]-in health care sites), community  settings (e.g., local Black churches), and meetings that are 
attended by [CONTACT_482228]. The snowball technique will also be used to recruit Black women to participate in the focus groups. This  technique involves having 
individuals who to agree to be research (focus group) participants help recruit other focus group participants. Focus groups will be held at UF Health, or at an identified site closest to the participating women.  
Protocol #IRB201703386 8 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619537] had experience in conducting focus groups and will be trained in conducting the focus groups for this study. Each focus group discussion will be audio-recorded with notes taken on key issues by [CONTACT_482229]. The audio -recordings  will be transcribed and analyzed as 
described in the focus group guide. Information from the focus groups will help inform the 
physician training curriculum  for the physicians in the PCCS -WLM program (Comparator 1). 
The audio- recordings of the focus groups will be destroyed 5 years after the se recordings are 
made and will be store d in a locked file cabinet in the Psychology Building at the University 
of [LOCATION_012] ’s Gainesville campus until th ey are destroyed. The PI , Co- PIs, Co -Is and other 
study staff as we ll as a hired transcription company will have access to the audio recordings 
for transcription purposes only. After the transcriptions a re made, t he PI, Co-PIs, Co -Is and 
other staff will have access to the au dio-recordings until they are destroyed. The audio-
recordings will be destroyed by [CONTACT_370554]- it—a UF authorized Destruction and Disposal 
Services Company.  
Physician Training for Implementing the Weight Loss Maintenance Programs . Prior 
to beginning e ither of the physician- implemented weight-loss maintenance programs, the 
physicia ns who deliver each program will r eceive training on how to implement the 
program that will be provided in their r espec tive clinic.  The physician training time for 
implementing the PCCS -WLM program (Comparator 1) will be the same as the physician 
training time for implementing the SB -WLM program (Comparator 2). All of the 
physicia ns, regardless of which program they implement at their clinic, will experience 
the following in this order: (a)  completion of the Tucker Culturally Sensitive Health Care 
Inventory – Provider Version, (b) 4- hour training that will include a 3 -hour in- person 
training and a  1-hour on -line training, ( c ) 3 boos ter training s essions (in person and 
online ), schedu led to occur at  quarter ly intervals (i.e., just pr ior to each quarterly 
physician- patient weight loss maintenance program visit) , and (d) completion of the Tucker 
Culturally Sensitive Health Care Inventory – Provider Version at the end of the study. We will also implement a satisfaction survey for the physicians reg arding the weight loss 
maintenance phase (i.e., at month 18). [CONTACT_482243] will lead the training for the physicians 
who will implement the PCCS -WLM program (Comparator 1), and [CONTACT_133822] will lead 
the training for the physicians who will implement the SB -WLM  (Comparator 2). In all of 
these trainings, the physician trainees will be i nstruc ted to remind their pa tient 
partici pants of the importance of  reaching an d/or maintaining the healt h-smart goal of 
reducing their body w eight at least 5% from when the y beg an the earlier 6 -month H ealth-
Smart program.   
Description of the PCCS -WLM program (Comparator 1). This program is designed 
to enable physicians to: (a) talk with their Black women patients about their weight, weight loss goals and goal barriers, and strategies for overcoming their goal barriers, and deliver this talk in patient- centered, culturally sen sitive ways (i.e., in ways that enable 
Black women patients to feel comfortable with, trusting of, and respected by [CONTACT_482230]), (b) assist their patients with engaging in self -identified 
strategies for achieving and sustaining their self -selected health -smart goals for weight 
loss and overall health, (c) be knowledgeable about health- smart behaviors (healthy eating 
Protocol #IRB201703386 9 
Version date: 3/15/2019  and drinking, physical activity, and managing stress/anxiety, and depression), (d) use 
behaviors and display attitudes in physician- patient interactions with Black women 
patients that are provider cultural sensitivity indicators in published literature 15,16,17 , but 
customized for use when counseling Black women  patients with obesity—customized  
based on operationalization of these i ndicators by [CONTACT_482231] e indicators when talking with Black 
women with obesity about their weight and weight loss , and (e) say and display behaviors 
and attitudes that Black women in the aforementioned focus groups identified as important when discussing obesity and losing weight with Black women patients who 
have obesity.  
Description of the SB -WLM program (Comparator 2) . This program is des igned to 
enable physicians to: (a) implement motivational interviewing approaches when talking 
with their patients about their weight loss goals and behavioral strategies to achieve these 
goals, (b) become knowledgeable about empi[INVESTIGATOR_482206], (c) 
communicate how to use these empi[INVESTIGATOR_482207] -selected health -smart goals related to weight loss 
and/or weight loss maintenance, and (d) use  motivational interviewing approaches to 
communicate empathy and understanding with patients who are struggling to maintain their weight loss and/or accomplish a behavioral goal .  
  External Control Monitoring to Verify that the Physicians and CHWs are 
Following Provided Training.  This external control monitoring will occur during the 
CHW integration period, the CHW implementation of Health -Smart , and the physician 
weight loss maintenance year. Th e CHW monitoring will be conducted by [CONTACT_482232] a research lab course taught by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_482208]—all of whom will be trained to conduct this monitoring.  This external control 
monitoring wi ll involve observing health -smart group sessions , either in person or through 
teleconferencing, that are run by [CONTACT_482233] s and using a moni toring form to rate whether or not 
the activities  of the sessions were implemented by [CONTACT_482234] . The study staff, either in 
person or through the telemedicine system, will observe the physicians  to monitor fidelity 
to the weight maintenance program that they were trained to implement.  
Measurement Session [ADDRESS_619538] their  weight, height , blood pressure, blood glucose, Hemoglobin A1c, and lipi[INVESTIGATOR_482209] s 1 and 2. The research coordinators assigned to clinics will input  the pa tients’ 
biometric and lab data from Health Data Log form  and store it in the D edicated R esearch 
Drive. 
Participant Questionnaires/Instruments . The following tools will be administered 
during the measurement sessions .  Most of these questionnaires will be completed  at each 
measurement period except the following that will only be administered at the [ADDRESS_619539] 
measurement period:  Health -Smart Participant Satisf action Questionnaire , Patient Survey of 
Provider Weight Manag ement Practices, Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire – 18, and Tucker 
Culturally Sensitive Health Care Inventory – Patient Version.   The questionnaires  will be 
filled out electronically on a computer o r tablet using Qualtrics and stored in a secure UF 
server.  The survey data will include a patient identification number for tracking purposes.  
No PHI or medical records including lab results will be stored in Qualtrics , only patient 
Protocol #IRB201703386 10 
Version date: 3/15/2019  satisfaction and perceptions information. A CHW will be present when each pati ent is 
completing the  questionnaires and will provide each patient with whatever assistance is 
needed when completing the questionnaires.  A paper version will be available for those who 
cannot complete it online. 
 
 Motivators of and Barriers to Health- Smart Behaviors Inventory (MB -HSBI)–Adult Version 
(Tucker, Rice, Hou, Kaye, Nolan, Grandoit, Gonzales, Smith, & Desmond, 2011) . The MB -
HSBI —Adult Version is a 129- item inventory that assesses motivators of and barriers to 
engaging in specific healt h-smart (he alth promoting) behaviors within each of the following 
four domains: (1)  Eating a Healthy Breakfast, (2)  Eating Healthy Foods and Snacks, 
(3) Drinking Water and Other Healthy Drinks, and (4)  Engaging in Physical Activity. For 
each of these four domains, the MB -HSBI includes a “Motivators” section that assesses 
what motivates respondents to engage in the identified health promoting behaviors and a “Barriers” section that assesses barriers to engaging in the identified health  promoting 
behaviors.  
International Physical Activity Questionnai re (IPAQ). IPAQ is a 27-item self-report 
questionnaire that a ssesses phys ical acti vity in fi ve activity domains (job-related, 
transport ation, h ousework/house  maintenance/caring for family, r ecreation/sport/leisure 
time, and time spent sittin g).21  
Dietary Short Questionnai re (DSQ, NCI/N HIS CCS 201 0 vers ion). The DSQ is a 27-
item survey that asks  about the frequency of c onsumption of  selected foods and drinks in 
the past month.22 
Weight Control Strategies Scale (WCS S). The WCSS  is a self-report measure to assess the 
use of sp ecific strategies for losing w eight or maintaining weight loss. The 30-item WCSS  
contains four su bscal es: Dietary Choices , Self -Monitoring Stra tegies,  Physical A ctivity, and 
Psycho logical C opi[INVESTIGATOR_007].23 
USDA Adult F ood S ecurity Survey  Module (AFSSM). The  AFSSM addresses conditi ons 
and behaviors related to one’s  experience of,  and anxiety due  to, limited instances  and 
conseq uences of reduced food inta ke. 24 
World Health Organization (WHO) Quality of Life –Brief Form (WHOQOL -BREF) . This 
26-item survey assesses self -reported quality of life, defined by [CONTACT_7543] “an 
individual’s perception of their position in life in the context of the culture and value system s in which they live, and in relation to their goals, expectations, standards and 
concerns.” The questionnaire consists of an overall quality of life question, an overall health question, and questions that assess four quality of life domains (physical hea lth, 
psychological  health , social relationships, and environment); however, only the physical 
health (7 items) and psychological  health  (6 items) domain items will be used in this 
study.
25 
Demographic and Health Information Questionnaire . This researcher -constructed questionnaire 
is designed to obtain pa tients ’ basic demographic and health information (e.g., age, gender, 
race/ethnicity, annual household income, highest level of education completed, marital status, employment status, and weight - and obesity- related information and diseases).  
Health -Smart P rogram  Evaluation Questionnaire  - Participant  (6 month and 18 month)  – This 
researcher constructed questionnaire is designed to measure the participants’ satisfaction with the Health -Smar t Program.  These will be administered at Measurement 2 and 3 time periods . 
Protocol #IRB201703386 11 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619540] ion Q uestionnai re-(PSQ -18). This 
subscale as sesses patien ts’ level of agreement that they view their  medical car e broadly as 
perfect and level of ag reement that t hey are dissatisf ied with s ome aspects of their medical 
care. Items from this questionnaire that will be included in the present study are items 1, 2, 
4, 6, 13, and 14.18 
Tucker -Culturally Sensitive Health Care Provider Inventory- Patient Form (T -CSHCPI -PF). 
The T -CSHCPI -PF is a 27 -item inventory that will be used to assess patient 
participants’  perceived level of provider patient -centered cultural sensitivity. This inventory 
is comprised of three sub -scales: (1) Competence/Confidence, (2) Sensitivity/Interpersonal 
Skill, and (3) Respect/Communication.19  
Patient Survey  of Provider Weight Management Practices. This is an 18- item survey 
developed by [CONTACT_482235] -based Research Network and the Oregon Health & 
Science University in collaboration with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
Two items from the 18 -item Patient Survey of Provider Weight Management Practices (items 
8 and 13) will be used to measure participants’ perceived leve ls of their physician’s 
engagement in discussions of their weight and health behaviors.20 
 
Table 2 lists the measures that will be completed at each Measurement Session.  
Table 2. Schedule of Patient Participant Assessments  
 Intervention -Phase Month  
Category   
 0 6 18 
Informed Consent and Eligibility criteria  X    
Body weight (Primary outcome)  X X X X 
Patient Goals setting   X   
Physiological Measures   X X X 
Lifestyle Change Behaviors   X X X 
Psychological Measures   X X X 
Measures of patient participants’ 
satisfaction with Health -Smart    X X 
 
CHW Integration . To address  the third primary aim,  we will implement and evaluate 
the medical assistant led ( MA-led) program designed to integrate the CHWs into the health 
care team so that these CHWs can implement the 6 -month Health -Smart weight- loss program 
at these clinics. The Office Manager and MAs at each participating clinic will train and 
mentor the CHWs  assigne d to that clinic  to becom e integrated into the heath care team  at that 
clinic . This training will be informed by [CONTACT_482236]26__an evidence- based set of teamwork strategies and tools developed by [CONTACT_482237].
 CHW integration 
effectiveness will be assessed using ratings by [CONTACT_29441], MAs, and physicians on the 
TeamSTEPPS  Medical O ffice Su rvey of Patient  Safety. In particular, two subscales from 
this survey  (the Working in Y our Medical Offi ce subscale,  and the Communic ation and  
Follow -up su bscale)  will be administered electronically using Qualtrics at the beginning of 
the project prior to TeamSTEPPS training and after the 6- month Health -Smart weight- loss 
program.  The survey will be anonymous  and no personal health information is collect ed. 
Protocol #IRB201703386 12 
Version date: 3/15/2019  Compensation .  Participating patients  can receive up to $150 in gift cards by [CONTACT_482238]. Specifically, they will receive a $[ADDRESS_619541] Measurement Session  (Baseline) , a $[ADDRESS_619542] six months later 
after participating in Health -Smart and the second Measurement Session  (Month- 6), and a 
$[ADDRESS_619543] Measurement Session  (Month- 18).  
Participant Safety .  The data taken during the measurement sessions will also be used for 
safety measures. If a BP measurement is taken that is an alert value, as listed in the Table [ADDRESS_619544] two measurements will be used to determine the appropriate plan of action. The machine that measures blood pressure often also provides a pulse rate reading. The patient’s pulse rate is not an outcome meas ure in the study, but will be addressed if it is outside of the nor mal 
range . Total cholesterol, LDL - cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, triglycerides, and HbA1c will 
be assessed through point of care (POC) testing, as specified in the Study Intervention sectio n above.  Based on the readings of these measurements, an appropriate plan of action 
will be taken. Table 3 below lists both Urgent (notify PCP within 24 hours) and Alert values (notify PCP immediately while patient is still in the office). If the patient has a result in the alert value range, the physician or non- physician provider will determine if 911 needs to be 
called.  
Table 3. Safety Assessments and Action Needed During Health -Smart Intervention 
Sessions.  
 Normal  Not Clinically 
Significant 
(Document as per 
study protocol ) Urgent (Notify 
PCP in <24 h)  Alert (Not ify PCP 
Immediately)  
Systolic BP  (mm 
Hg) 90-130 130-160 Low: 80 -90 w/o 
Sx* Low: <90 w/ Sx or 
<80 
High: >190  High: 160 -180 
Diastolic BP  
(mm Hg)  70-90 60-94 Low: 50-60 w/o 
Sx 
High: 95 -110 Low: <60 w/ Sx or 
<50 
High:  >110  
LDL -c (mg/dl)  <100  100-190 >190  NA 
Triglycerides  
(mg/dl)  <150  150-400 400-800 >800  
Glucose  
(mg/dl)  80-125 70-140 Low: 60 -70 
High:141- 300 Low: <60  
High: >300 
Pulse  60-100 60-100 Low: < 59 w/o Sx  
High: >100 w/o 
Sx Low: < 59 with Sx  
High: >100 with Sx 
*Sx = symptoms of low blood pressure or pulse such as light headedness, dizziness, syncope (fainting) near syncope, palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814], headache, vision changes, chest pain, shortness of breath. 
If the patient experiences a serious  adverse event  at any of the Health- Smart intervention 
sessions that occur outside the  clinic  or after clinic hours , the CHW will call 911 and 
Protocol #IRB201703386 13 
Version date: 3/15/2019  complete a Serious Adverse Event Form that will be sent to the patient’s health care provider 
and to the PI.  
Participant Privacy and Confidentiality. The following steps will be taken to protect 
participants’ privacy and confidentiality:  
• Prior to recruiting patients for this study, CHWs will  complete the required HIPAA and 
CITI or NIH GCP trainings as required by [CONTACT_482239].  
• All signed consent forms will be kept in a locked file cabinet in a locked office at the study team’s office in Jacksonville (Tower II, Suite 6015).  
• All electronic documents and data  will be stored in secure, password- protected servers 
on the UF campus.  
• All paper based study documents including patient surveys and data collection forms 
will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked room in the Center for Health Equity 
and Qual ity Research office on UF Health Jax campus.  
 
5. Statistical Analysis  
The primary outcome is change in body w eight (weight loss and  maintenance of  weight loss) 
in BW patient  partici pants at the 20 participati ng pr imary care clinics. The unit of 
randomization w ill be the primary care clinic. Each clinic will be randomized into  one of the 
two weight loss maintenance conditions (PCCS -WLM  and SB -WLM).  
Sample Size/Power. To  detect a weight-loss dif ference o f 5 pounds ( between two groups)  
with a s tandard deviation of 12.5 pounds w ith 80% pow er and a 5% significance level, we 
will include 20 cli nics and  25 s tudy partic ipants per cli nic. B ased on our p ilot data, an i ntra-
class c orrel ation of 0.05 among pat ients within  a clinic is used in  these calcul ations. Ba sed on 
the power calculat ion above, a total of 500 participants ( 20 clinics x 25 patient participants  
per clinic ) will be  needed for final analyses . Assuming a 25%  dropout rate of pat ients per 
clinic, we will need 34 patie nts per clinic; thus, [ADDRESS_619545] 1 (which involves 7 clinics) patient participa nt drop -out rate, the 
number of participants per clinic will need to be increased for Wave [ADDRESS_619546] deviations, and medians. Categorical variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_22977]. Visual summary may include graphs, charts and tables. The main outcome variable (weight change) will be analyzed using a 2- level hierarchical model within the framework of a linear mixed 
model. The [ADDRESS_619547] within the model. Similarly, weight loss from baseline  to 6 months also will be estimated (but not 
compared) by [CONTACT_331860] a contrast . It is assumed that those participants with BMIs greater 
than 50 will lose weight at the same rate of those with BMIs between 30 and 50.  However, we plan to analyze the weight l oss rates in two ways: one with all of the participants in the 
analysis  and another  with BMIs greater than 50  excluded. Based on these two analyses, we 
Protocol #IRB201703386 14 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619548] size.  These 
data sets  will be compared using a mixed model for categorical data (e.g., GLIMMIX 
procedure in SAS). Descriptive analysis will be used to evaluate the effect of age, BMI, 
poverty rate (according to zip code), i nsurance type, and HbA1c at baseline.  
 
6. Data Safety and  Monitoring Plan  
The Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_7706]- Principal Investigators  with the advice and assistance 
of the Advisory Board will monitor all aspects of the safety of the study intervention and assessment procedures. In addition to this ongoing monitori ng by [CONTACT_3476], a  Data and 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSM B) will be established to e nsure the safety of all participants 
involved in the study and the validity and integrity of the data. The DSMB and its chair will be named and approved by [CONTACT_482240] . It is planned that the 
DSMB meets by [CONTACT_482241] a bi -annual basis.   
The DSMB has access to all study data, documents and progress. The DSMB has the 
following charges:  
• Review the study protocol. 
• Review data (including masked data) over the course of the trial.  
• Identify problems relating to safety over the course of the study.  
• Identify needs for additional data relevant to safety issues and request these data from 
the study investigators. 
• Propose appropriate a nalyses and periodically review developi[INVESTIGATOR_482210]. 
• Make recommendations regarding recruitment, treatment effects, retention, 
compliance, safety issues and continuation of the study. 
• At any time, the DSMB may recommend discontinuation of any component/treatment group of the study. However, t he IRB will decide whether or not to accept any 
recommendation from the DSMB to discontinue a component or components  of the 
study.   
Any serious adverse event that might be due to the study interven tion will be  reported to 
the patie nt’s health care provider, the PI , the DSMB  and the  IRB.  
 
7. Possible Discomforts and Risks  
 There may be possible discomfort s or risk s in obtaining a blood sample for the diagnostic 
lab tests. The se possible discomforts or risks  include  discomfort at the site of puncture; 
possible bruising and swelling around the puncture site; an infection; and faintness from the procedure. The blood sample will be obtained at the participant’s primary care clinic , and 
clinic  staff are trained to handle any adverse event from the procedure.  
 Another possible risk is lack of privacy or confidentiality of PHI. A  number of methods 
are employed to maintain confidentiality of participants.  First, questionnaire data are collected i n secure spaces where the interview cannot be overheard.  Secondly, only study 
investigators and key resea rch staff  have access to the study database.  Individual names will 
ultimately be removed from the study database , and consequently, only a unique study 
identifier will be  used to distinguish participants in the database.  Fourth, collected data are 
maintained in locked computer files and file cabinets to which only study investigators have access.  Collected data will be used only for research purposes .  Published data will not 
contain any individual identifiers . 
Protocol #IRB201703386 15 
Version date: 3/15/2019   Another possible risk is increased anxiety due to wanting to lose weight and not being 
able to lose as quickly as one would like. Another possible, but less likely risk, is weight 
gain. The CH Ws and physicians who implement parts of the tested interventions will be 
trained to be supportive of patient participants’  program participation regardless of their 
weight loss.  
There will be no financial risk to the participant.  All study related expenses , including 
physician visits and diagnostic lab tests , will be covered by [CONTACT_4530]. 
 
8. Possible Benefits  
 Participants may personally benefit from taking part in this study since they will learn 
strategies to eat healthier, exercise more, get more rest, and manage stress and depression. They also may lose weight , which, for people with obesity, is often associated with 
improvements in health.    The information obtained in this study will help determine the effectiveness of H ealth -
Smart and the physician- implemented weight loss maintenance programs for promoting 
and/or maintaining weight loss among Black women patients. If these interventions are found to be effective, they can be implemented at other primary care clinics with  other Black 
women  patients . Support would also be provided for testing these interventions with other 
women at primary care clinics who are not Black.  
 
9. Conflict of Interest  
There is no potential conflict of interest.  
Protocol #IRB201703386 16 
Version date: 3/15/[ADDRESS_619549] ein AH. Obesity: A modern Ep idemic. Transa ctions of the A merican Cli nical and 
Climato logical Asso ciation. 2005;116:103-113. 
2.   Danaei G , Ding EL, Mozaffarian D, Taylor B,  Rehm J, Murray CJ, Ez zati M. The 
preventable caus es of de ath in the U nited Sta tes: comparative risk assessment of dieta ry, 
lifestyle, and  metabolic risk fact ors. PLOS Medicine.2009;6(4). 
3.   World Health Organization. Gl obal he alth risks: mortality and burden of disease 
attributab le to selected major risks. W orld Health Org anization, 2009. 
4.   Vucenik I, Stai ns JP. Obesity and  canc er risk: evidence, mechanis ms, and r ecomm endations. 
Annals of  the NewYo rk Academy of Sciences. 2012;1271(1):37-43. 
5.   Bliddal H, Leeds AR,  Christensen R. O steoarthritis,  obesity and weight loss: Evidence, 
hypotheses and horizons–a scopi [INVESTIGATOR_17971]. Obesity Reviews. 2014;15(7):578-586. 
6.   DHHS (U. S. Department of Health and H uman Services) Healthy  People 2010: Objectives 
for Improving Heal th. Wash ington, DC: DHHS ; 2000. 
7.   Ard, J. O besity in the  US: What is the  best role for primary care? BMJ. 2015; 350: 7846. 
8.  Fitzgiboon ML, Stolley MR, Schiffer L, Sharp LK, Singh V, D yer A. Obesi ty reduction bl ack 
intervention trial (ORBIT ): 18-month resul ts. Obesity  (Silver Spring). 2010; 18(12):2317 -
2325. 
9.  Barte J C, ter Bogt NC, B ogers RP, Teixeira PJ, Blissmer B, M ori TA,  Bemelmans WJ. 
Maintenance of weight loss after  lifestyle interventions for overweight and obesi ty, a 
systematic r eview. Obesity Revi ews. 2010; 11(12):899-906. 
10. Butryn ML, Webb V,  Wadden TA.  Behavioral treatment of obesity. Psychi atric Clin ics of 
North America. 2011 ; 34(4):841-859. 
11. Tsai AG,  Wad den TA,  Rogers MA, Day SC, Moore RH, I slam BJ. A primary car e 
intervention for weight loss: results of a  randomized controlled  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Obesity (Silver 
Spring). 2010;18(8):1614 -1618. 
12. Stephen D A. Preventing w eight regain after weight loss. In: Handbook  of O besity: Clinical 
Applic ations.  New Y ork, [LOCATION_002]: CRC Press; 2014: 145-166. 
13. Stolley MR, Fit zgibbon ML, Schiffer L, Sharp LK, Singh V, Van  Horn L, Dyer A. Obesity 
reduction black intervention trial ( ORB IT): Six-month r esults. Obesity  (Silver Spring). 
2009;17(1):100-106. 
14. Tuck er CM, Rice K G, Hou W, et al. Development of the Motiva tors of and Barriers  to 
Health-Smart Behaviors Inventory. Psychological Assessment. 2011 ;23(2):487-503. Doi:  
10.1037/ a0022299.  
15. Tucke r CM, Herman KC, Pederson TR, Higley BP, Montrichard M, Ivery PD . Cultural  
sensitivity in ph ysicia n- patie nt relationsh ips: Perspectives of an  ethnically  diverse sample of 
low-income primary car e patie nts. Medical Care. 2003 ;41(7): 859-870. 
16.  Tucke r CM, Nghiem KN,  Marsiske  M, Robinson AC.  Validati on of a patient-centered 
culturally sensit ive health care  provider inventory using a national s ample of adult 
patients. P atient Education and  Counseling. 20 13;91(3):344-349. 
17.  J ames DC. Weight loss strategies u sed by A frican American  women: Possible implications 
for tailored messages.Journal of Hu man Nutrition and D ietetics. 2012 ; 26(1):71-77. 
18. Marshall G N, Hays RD. The Patient  Satisfa ction Questionnai re Short-Form (PSQ,-18). 
RAND publicat ion no. P-7865. Sa nta Monica,  CA: RAND; 1994. 
 
Protocol #IRB201703386 17 
Version date: 3/15/2019  19. Tuck er CM, Nghiem KN,  Marsiske  M, Robinson AC.  Validati on of a patient-centered 
culturally sensit ive health care  provider inventory using a national s ample of adult 
patients. P atient Education and  Counseling. 20 13;91(3):344-349. 
20. McGinnis P, Davis MM, Howk S, DeSordi M, Thomas M. Integrating pr imary car e 
practi ces and community -based res ources to manage obesity: A br idge-buildi ng toolkit 
for rural  primary care practice transformation. O regon Rur al Practice-Based R esearch 
Network. 2014.  
21. Hagstromer M, Oja P, Sjostrom M. The International Ph ysical A ctivity 
Questionnai re (IPAQ): A study of c oncu rrent and construct  validity. P ublic H ealth 
Nutrition. 20 06;9(6):755-762. 
22. DSQ. Yaroch A L, Tooze J, Thompson FE,  Blanck HM, Thompson O M, Colon-Ramos U,  
Shaikh A, McNutt S, N ebeli ng L. Evaluation of  three short dietary instruments to assess fruit 
and vegetable intake: The National Cancer  Institu te's Food A ttitudes and B ehaviors (FA B) 
Survey External Web Site Policy. Journal of the A cademy of Nu trition and  Dietetics. 201 2; 
112:1134 -7. 
23. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_254582], Fava JL, Raynor HA, LaRose JG, Wing R R. D evelopment and  Validation of the 
Weight Control Str ategies Scale. Obesity . 2014; 21(12): 2429-2436. 
24. Frongillo  EA, Understanding obesi ty and  program  participation in t he context of poverty and 
food ins ecurity. Journal of Nutrition. 2003;133(7):2117-2118. 
25. Skevington SM, Lofty M, O’Connell KA . The World Health Organization’s WHOQOL -
BREF quality of life assessment: Psychometric properties and results of the international 
field trial. A Report from the WHOQOL Group. Quality of Life Research. 2004;13:299-310. 
26. Agency  for Hea lthcare Research and Q uality. Te amSTEPPS: Strategies and tools to 
enhance performance and patient sa fety. 
http://www.ahrq.gov/ professionals/educati on/curriculum-tools/team stepps/index.html 
 