Title:  Intravenous Insulin vs . Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion in Intrapartum Management of Type 
[ADDRESS_363081] N umber:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
Date: June 6, 2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol/Methods  
We conducted a randomized clinical trial at a single tertiary care center in central 
[LOCATION_005] from March [ADDRESS_363082] of Reporting Trials guidelines.  
Inclusion criteria included pregnant patients  aged 18 years or older with a known 
diagnosis of T1DM that were managed with CSII/insulin pump. All included participants had to 
obtain pregnancy and delivery care the study institution and had to be able to provide written 
informed consent in English or Spanish. Patients  were not eligible if they were under the age of 
18 years old, had multiple gestations, had altered state of consciousness intrapartum , were 
critically ill requiring intensive care unit admission, at risk for suicide, presented with diabetic 
ketoacidosis on admission for delivery, had an intrauterine fetal demise prior to labor, fetal 
anomalies, or if the participant was unable to partak e in their own care.  
All eligible participants were approached antenatally during routine prenatal care and 
consented for participation. Participants  were then randomly allocated to either continuation of 
an intrapartum CSII/insulin pump or intravenous in sulin infusion. Permutated block 
randomization with varying blocks sizes was used to stratify randomization by [CONTACT_297608] ( CSII vs. IV). The resulting group allocations were kept in 
sealed, opaque envelopes until opened by [CONTACT_297609]. Patients and 
providers were not blinded to randomization given active participation of providers and patients 
was needed in both study arms. Once admitted for labor, two separate intrapartum glycemic 
protocols were f ollowed based on randomization category (Supplementary Figures 1 and 2).  
All medical records were reviewed for maternal demographics, clinical characteristics, 
and perinatal outcomes  including primary and secondary outcomes . The primary outcome for the 
study was the first neonatal blood glucose level measured after birth. At our institution, it is 
policy that all neonates of mothers diagnosed with pre -gestational diabetes receive a heel -stick 
glucose measurement within the first 2 hours of life. Neonatal h ypoglycemia was defined as 
blood glucose level less than 40 mg/dL, which prompts treatment and further monitoring at our 
study institution.[ADDRESS_363083] a 10 mg/dL difference in mean neonatal blood glucose 
levels between groups with a type 1 alpha error of 0.05 and 80% power with equal group sizes, 
[ADDRESS_363084] pressure 
(CPAP), hyperbilirubinemia, and neonatal cooling . Maternal secondary outcomes included 
intrapa rtum hypoglycemic events defined as blood glucose less than 60 mg/dL, intrapartum 
severe maternal hyperglycemic events defined as blood glucose greater than 200 mg/dL, 
development of diabetic ketoacidosis intrapartum, mode of delivery, shoulder dystocia at  
delivery, development of gestational hypertension or pre -eclampsia, maternal blood transfusion, 
and maternal intensive care unit admission .  
All summary data were collected and managed using REDCap tools hosted at UMASS 
Chan Medical School. Summary data are reported as frequencies for categorical variables and 
mean (standard deviation) or median (interquartile range) for continuous variables. All 
categorical variables were compared using Fisher exact test and Chi square testing where 
appropriate, while con tinuous variables were assessed for normality and t -tests or Wilcoxon rank 
sum tests were used where appropriate. For all analyses, a two -sided significance level of P<0.05 
was considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed using STATA/SE 17 .0 
(StataCorp, College Station, TX).   
 