Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120427] of Surgery on Pain in Lateral Compression Type Pelvic Fractures: 
A Prospective Trial (Pelvis RCT)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
University of Maryland IRB Number: HP -00060038 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_108401] O’Toole, MD  
Safety Monitor: Andrew Pollak, MD 
Version [ADDRESS_120428] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120429] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120430] of surgery on pain in lateral compression type pelvic fractures: a 
prospective trial  
Short Title  Pelvis RCT  
Type of Study  Prospective randomized control trial OR observational outcomes study  
Primary Objective  To determine if surgical stabilization of lateral compression type pelvic 
fractures decreases patient reported pain at [ADDRESS_120431] injury compared 
to non -operative management.  
Secondary Objective  To explore associations between treatment and:  
1. Patient rep orted pain up to [ADDRESS_120432] mobilization (bed to  chair)  
4. Narcotic use up to [ADDRESS_120433] injury  
5. Work productivity & activity impairment up to [ADDRESS_120434]  injury  
Sample Size  We will recruit a sample size of 130 patients (65 per arm) with a 
minimum of 2 week follow -up for the primary outcome  
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Lateral compression type pelvic fracture amendable to both operative or 
non-operative treatment per surgeon opi[INVESTIGATOR_108402] 18 and 80 years of age, inclusive.  
Length of Follow -up 1 year  
 
Study duration: We will recruit for a year and a half. Patients will be followed for 1 year. We 
estimate 4 years total.  
 
Primary outcome measure: Pain as measured by [CONTACT_108422] -reported Brief Pa in Inventory assessment (BPI) 2 -weeks following 
the patient’s injury.  
 
Secondary outcome measures: Length of stay will be determined by [CONTACT_108423]’s index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Time to first mobilization ( bed 
to chair) will be determined using the physical therapy notes during the patient’s index 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108403] -injury and days post -operative treatment (if 
applicable) to time of first mobilization (bed to chair). Narcotic use will be determined by [CONTACT_12783] - 
referencing the patient’s medical record during the index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108404] -up clinic 
appointments with patient -reported usage. Work productivity and impairment will be determined 
using the modified WPAI:SHP questionnaire . Health related quality of life will be measured 
using the VR -12 questionnaire. Pelvic function will be measured using the Majeed Pelvic Score.  
 
Statistical analysis: We are interested in estimating the causal effect of operative treatment 
versus non -operative treatment in lateral compression type pelvic fracture patients. For all our  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120435]. Pollak will review the enrollment numbers and medical compliance annually for the 
duration of the study.  
 
Coordinating Center Principle & Sub -Investigators - [CONTACT_9691] O’Toole (PI) and the sub - 
investigators will be responsible for developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a detailed study protocol, providing oversight on 
study progress and act to correct deficiencies in the conduct of the study. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_9814] - 
investigators will also draft the main publications related to the study, and assist with patient 
consent.  
 
Site Principle & Sub -Investigators - The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_9814] -investigators will be responsible for 
oversight on local study progre ss. The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_9814] -investigators will also contribute to the 
main publications related to the study, and assist with patient consent.  
 
Coordinating Center Research Coordinator - Andrea Howe, research specialist, is responsible for 
maintaining all study documentation, developi[INVESTIGATOR_108405], circulating any changes to study documents including protocols, case report forms, and 
IRB materi als to the research team members and site research coordinators, providing daily 
oversight and management of study implementation, performing data quality control and analysis 
of study results. The coordinating center research coordinator will also conduct  monthly reports 
for each site.  
 
Site Research Coordinator - The site research coordinator is responsible for communicating any 
problems or concerns with the coordinating center, maintaining all local study documentation, 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_108406], and circulating any changes to 
study documents including protocols, case report forms, and IRB materials to the site research 
team members.  
 
Research Team Members - The research team members are responsible for the conduct of t he 
clinical study including patient enrollment, performing study procedures, data collection and 
conducting study follow -up visits.  
 
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
 
Lateral compression type pelvic ring injuries remain the most common type of pelvic fractures 
enco untered. There is a substantial amount of controversy surrounding the treatment of these 
injuries and there is evidence that both operative and non -operative treatment can be successful. 
The crux of the problem is determining which of these patients would benefit from early surgical 
stabilization and which will heal uneventfully without surgery. Many authors site patient pain  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120436]. We propose to prospectively randomize patients with lateral 
compression type pelvic fractures to non -operative versus operative treatment and track which 
group has less pain, less ne ed for narcotic pain medications, and who mobilizes with physical 
therapy faster.  
 
 
POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
If the patient is randomized to operative treatment, he/she will be exposed to all of the risks 
associated with surgery under a general anesthetic including but not limited to: prolonged 
intubation, heart attack, stroke and death. These risks are extremely  rare and will be explained to 
the patient and/or family by [CONTACT_108424], and a separate anesthesia consent will be 
obtained. The risks of the surgical procedure are rare but include: infection, wound break down, 
failure of hardware, and neurologic injury. A separate surgical consent will be provided to go 
into more detail of the risks of the procedure.  
 
The risk of non -operative treatment is displacement of fracture with possible need for surgical 
intervention or prolonged protected weight -bearing. This is unlikely but will be monitored 
closely, as per our standard of care.  
 
While the intake questionnaire and information gathered is of a sensitive nature (income, 
narcotic use, pain and psychiatric history) and it might cause the patient some discomfo rt to 
answer truthfully, all information will be kept confidential and no identifiers will be used in 
publication.  
 
While every attempt will be made to keep all information confidential and the master link 
between the patient study number and personal iden tifiers will be destroyed at the completion of 
the study, there remains a risk of the potential for the loss/breach of confidentiality. This risk will 
be minimized by [CONTACT_108425] a secure, locked location and all electronic 
data wil l be password protected.  
 
There may be risks in this study which are not yet known.  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120437] benefits to patients participating in the study (except for those that may 
accrue from closer clinical observati on as a study patient), participation may help determine the 
best treatment for lateral compression type pelvic fractures in the future.  
 
 
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  
 
To compare [ADDRESS_120438] -injury assessments of patient reported pain of participants undergoing 
operative versus non -operative treatment following a lateral compression type pelvic fracture. 
We hypothesize that there will be a decrease in the Visual Analog S cale (VAS) pain scores in  the 
operative group as compared to the non -operative group both during their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108407] -term outpatient follow  up. 
 
 
SECONDARY  OBJECTIVES  
 
To compare assessments of narcotic use up to [ADDRESS_120439] mobilization (bed to chair) with physical therapy of 
participants undergoing operative versus non -operative treatmen t following a lateral compression 
type pelvic fracture. We hypothesize that the operative group will mobilize out of bed to chair 
with physical therapy faster than the non -operative group.  
 
 
EXPLORATORY OBJECTIVES  
 
To explore associations between treatment  and: 
1. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7577] (index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059])  
2. Work productivity and activity impairment up to [ADDRESS_120440] study is a prospective randomized treatment trial to evaluate outcomes among 
operative versus non -operative lateral compression type fractures.  If the patient does not agree 
to randomization, the patient will be asked to participate in the observational arm of the study. A 
schematic representation of participant enrollment can be found in the figure  below.  
A total of 130 patients will be enrolled (65 per arm). University of Maryland, Shock Trauma 
Center will act as the coordinating center fo r this study and all patient will be recruited from  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 7 of 24   Eligible lateral compression type  
pelvic fractures 
(n=130)  
Operative Treatment  
(n=65)  Non -operative Treatment  
(n=65)  University of Maryland, Shock Trauma Center and Indiana University Health Methodist 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
 
Patients and/or the patient’s legally authorized representative (LAR) will be approached for 
informed consent as soon as is feasible following determination of eligibility.  
 
During the index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], participants will be asked to provide basic demographic 
information, health status and function prior to injury. Study injury characteristics w ill be 
obtained from the surgeon and the participant’s medical  record.  
 
Participants will be prospectively followed at [ADDRESS_120441] of both a clinical examination (when applicable) and interview.  
 
 
  
Figure: Participant Enrollment  
 
 
 
PRIMARY ENDPOINT  
 
The primary endpoint is patient reported pain severity as measured by [CONTACT_108426] (BPI). The BPI [CONTACT_832] a [ADDRESS_120442] of pain on daily function, the location of pain, pain medications and the amount of pain 
relief. There is no scoring  algorithm but the arithmetic mean of the four severity items can be 
used as a measure of pain severity and the arithmetic mean of the seven interference items can be 
used as a measure of pain interference. This assessment has been chosen because it is a s hort, 
reliable, patient reported assessment of pain that has been specifically designed for and validated 
in patients with pain from acute conditions such as postoperative pain.   
“Late” operative treatment 
(by [ADDRESS_120443] injury)   
Non -operative at [ADDRESS_120444] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 8 of 24   SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
 
The secondary endpoints include:  
1. Length of stay. This will be found in the patient’s medical record using the admission 
date and time versus the discharge date and time during his/her index  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
2. Time to first mobilization (bed to chair) . This will be found in the patient’s medical 
recor d during his/her index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Data will be found in the physical therapy 
notes and will be recorded as days post -injury and days post -operative treatment if 
applicable.  
3. Patient reported narcotic use . This is will recorded by [CONTACT_12783] -referencing the  patient’s 
medical record and patient -reported questionnaire about pain medication use. The total 
narcotic use will be converted to the morphine equivalent for statistical  analysis.  
4. Patient reported work productivity and activity impairment . This will be m easured using 
the modified Work Productivity and Activity Impairment (WPAI: SHP) assessment. The 
WPAI: SHP is a 6 -item questionnaire that yields four types of scores: 1 – Absenteeism 
(work time missed); 2 – Presenteeism (impairment at work / reduced on -the-job 
effectiveness); 3 – Work productivity loss (overall work impairment / absenteeism plus 
presenteeism); and 4 – Activity impairment. WPAI outcomes are expressed as 
impairment percentages with higher numbers indicating greater impairment and less 
product ivity, i.e., worse outcomes, as  follows:  
Questions:  
a. currently  employed  
b. hours missed due to pelvic  injury  
c. hours missed due to other  reasons  
d. hours actually  worked  
e. degree pelvic injury affected productivity while  working  
f. degree pelvic injury affected regular  activities  
Scores:  
1. Percent work time missed due to pelvic injury: 
[b ÷ (b + d)] ×  100 
2. Percent impairment while working due to pelvic injury: 
(e ÷ 10) ×  100 
3. Percent overall work impairment due to pelvic injury: 
(b ÷ (b + d) + [1 + (b ÷ (b + d)) × (e ÷ 10)]) ×  100 
4. Percent activity impairment due to pelvic  injury: 
(f ÷ 10) ×  100 
5. Patient reported health related quality of life . This will be measured using the VR -12…. 
Physical and Mental Health Composite Scores (PCS & MCS) are computed using the 
scores of the twelve questions and range from [ADDRESS_120445] deviation of 
10.0.  
6. Patient reported pelvic function . This will be measured using the Majeed Pelvic Score. 
The Majeed Pelvic Score uses five cr iteria chosen for functional assessment after major 
pelvic fractures: pain, standing, sitting, sexual intercourse and performance at work.  Each  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120446] position is given 36 points, in three main categories (aids, gait and  walking ability), 
each of which has six grades. Sitting . Sitting is an important function in relation to the 
pelvis, but less so than gait or walking ability. A total score of 10 points is given in four 
grades. Sexual intercourse . For both men and women, four points are allocated for 
comfort during sexual intercourse. This does not take account of neurological or 
psychological impotence and is recorded in four grades. If, for any reason, sexual 
intercourse has not been attempted, a score of four points is given. Work . Work 
performance is allocated 20 points in five grades, ranging from no regular work to return 
to the same job as before injury with no loss of performance. A patient who was not 
working at the time of his injury is not scored; his overall ass essment is then out of [ADDRESS_120447] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 10 of 24    
 
 
STUDY POPULATION  
 
The study population will be p atients aged 18 -80 with a lateral compression type pelvic fracture 
that go on to receive operative or non -operative treatment of the injury.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Patients that have one of the following pelvic fractures (includes bilateral sacral 
fractures) : lateral compression type 1, lateral compression type 2, lateral  compression 
type 3. 
2. Patients between 18 and 80 years of age,  inclusive.  
3. Patient has reached skeletal  maturity.  
4. The patient’s pelvic fracture is a result of trauma (includes polytraumatized  patients).  
5. The patient/family/guardian is  English -speaking.  
6. The patient’s surgeon agrees to randomization (the patient is amendable to either 
operative or non -operative  treatment).  
7. Patient enrollment and, if applicable, patient randomization, can occur within [ADDRESS_120448] injury.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Patients who satisfy any of the following exclusion criteria will be ineligible for enrollment in 
the study:  
1. The patient has prior sur gical hardware in place that precludes  intervention.  
2. If the patient’s pelvic fracture is classified as LC1 and the associated sacral fracture is 
incomplete as indicated by [CONTACT_108427].  
3. The patient received prio r surgical intervention for his/her current pelvic  injury.  
4. The patient has sacral morphology that precludes percutaneous  fixation.  
5. The patient is non -ambulatory due to an associated spi[INVESTIGATOR_108408].  
6. The patient was non -ambulatory  pre-injury.  
7. The patient  is currently  pregnant.  
8. The patient is enrolled in another study that does not allow  co-enrollment.  
9. The patient is likely to have severe problems maintaining follow  up. 

Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120449] study may be co -enrolled in other 
research studies based on the following guidelines:  
A. Regardless of whether the participant is enrolled in the randomization arm or the 
observational arm of the Pelvis  RCT study, the participant may be co -enrolled in any 
other observational  study.  
B. If the participant is enrolled in the randomization arm, he or she may only be  co-enrolled 
in up to two additional randomized control trials prior to the completion of the 
intervention.  
C. If the participant is enrolled in the randomization arm, he or she may co -enrolled in any 
other randomized control trial after the intervention is  complete.  
D. If the participant is enrolled in the observational arm, he or she may be co -enrolled in  any 
other randomized control trial at any  time.  
 
 
RECRUITMENT  
 
Approximately [ADDRESS_120450] of care practices and the same 
resources (pain management, social work, physical therapy, etc.) will be available to study 
patients as to all trauma patients.  
 
Non-operative Treatment Group  
Patients enrolled in the non -operative treatment group will not undergo surgical intervention for 
their pelvic fracture. They will mobilize as per the surgeon’s instructions according to standard 
of care of for this injury. X -rays will be taken at follow -up cl inic appointments to determine if 
the injury is healing properly or if the pelvis has shifted and may warrant surgical intervention. 
If complications arise and/or surgery is required, crossover will be allowed and recorded within 
study follow -up forms.  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120451] of care for  
the patient’s injury. The patient will mobilize as per the surgeon’s instructions and x -rays will  be 
taken at follow -up clinic appointments to determine if the injury is healing properly.  If 
additional surgery is required or other complications arise, this will be recorded wit hin the study 
follow -up forms.  
 
 
CLINICAL EVALUATION  
 
A summary of the clinical evaluations is outlined below and can also be found in Appendix B.  
 
Medical Record Review  
During the index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], information about the participant (medical history, height and 
weight, etc.) and the participant’s injuries and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108409], including 
mechanism, presence of and severity of other orthopaedic and non -orthopaedic injuries, 
procedures done in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], overall (and ICU) length of stay, time to mobilization (bed to 
chair) in physical therapy, pain medication administration, and discharge disposition.  
 
Assessment of Study Injuries  
The extent and severity  of the pelvic injury will be prospectively assessed by [CONTACT_108428] x -rays are taken. The following injury characteristics will be collected:  
• Lateral compression type classification of the pelvic  fracture  
• Skin defect associated with the pelvic  injury  
• Muscle and tendon injury associated with the pelvic  injury  
• Deep vein injury associated with the pelvic  injury  
• Nerve injury associated with the pelvic  injury  
 
Assessment of Study Injury Treatment  
For participant s undergoing operative treatment, the following information will be obtained:  
• Type of fracture  stabilization  
• Type and timing of fixation  revisions  
• Limb Complications (type, severity, treatment)  
 
Assessments at [ADDRESS_120452] injury  
• Complications since last follow -up (type, severity, treatment)  
• Assessment of fracture  healing  
• Weight bearing status and  ambulation  
• Use of ambulatory  devices  
• Pain assessment  
• Narcotic use  assessment  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120453] -operative treatment (when applicable), and at the [ADDRESS_120454] of care.  
 
 
PARTICIPANT INTERVIEWS  
 
A summary of the participant interviews performed are outlined below and can also be found in 
Appendix D.  
 
Baseline Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108410], participants will be asked about the following:  
• Age, gender, race and ethnicity, and  education  
• Smoking  history  
• Previous injuries (specifically pelvis or  back)  
• Pain medication usage prior to this  injury  
• Work and health status prior to this  injury  
• General and pelvic function prior to this  injury  
. 
Follow -up Interviews  
At 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 mo nths, and 1 year following their injury, participants will be asked 
about the following:  
• Any re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108411]/her pelvic  injury  
• Rehabilitation  received  
• Pain medication  usage  
• Work Status – Work Productivity and Activity  Impairment  
• Pain – Brief Pain Inventory  
• Health Status – VR-12 
• Pelvic Function – Majeed Pelvic  Score  
 
STUDY SCHEDULE  
 
Screening and Consent  
All patients between the ages of 18 and 80 (inclusive) with a lateral compression type pelvic 
fracture will be screened for eligibility by [CONTACT_108429]. Screening wil l typi[INVESTIGATOR_108412]. An eligibility checklist form will be completed on every potentially 
eligible participant and entered onto the electronic data capture system. The treating surgeon will 
be available via pager  to answer questions regarding study eligibility. When the treating surgeon 
is not available, the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_108413]. Contact [CONTACT_71722] [INVESTIGATOR_108414] A. In most cases, questions should be resolv ed at this 
level.  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120455] information about their injury and its  treatment.  
 
Following completion of informed consent, the participant’s study injury characteristics will be 
further adjudicated by a non -treating surgeon as described in the Adjudicating Eligibility Section 
of this protocol. Participants with injuries that are not judged eligible for inclusion will be 
withdrawn from the study.  
 
Enrollment /Baseline  
Once consented into the study, baseline data regarding participant characteristics, injury 
characteristics, fracture classification and medical history/co -morbidities will be collected. 
Characteristics about the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108415]. A brief 
interview will be conducted with the participant. All data will be recorded on the paper Case 
Report Form (CRF) and entered into the electronic data capture system.  
 
Follow -up 
Participants will return for follow -up visi ts at [ADDRESS_120456]  of care, however there may be some circumstances where patients are unwilling to 
return to the clinic. In these situations the research coordinator or research team member may 
obtain as much visit data as possible by [CONTACT_17084]/or medical record review to prevent loss of 
important study information. All data will be recorded on the paper Case Report Form (CRF)  and 
entered into the electronic data capture  system.  
 
Retention  
Every effort will be made to retain participants in the study. We will keep participa nts engaged 
through use of study updates during non -study clinic appointments, and reminder calls/letters for 
upcoming appointment visit window timeframes.  
 
Visit Windows  
Each visit will have an interval of time surrounding the ideal date for the visit dur ing which the 
visit may be completed and the data included in the trial database. This interval is approximately 
[ADDRESS_120457] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 15 of 24   ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 
The study will monitor and report adverse events to ensure participant safety. Each participating 
site is responsible for ensuring that all local IRB requirements for reporting adverse events  (both 
internal and external) are met.  
The safety monitor (SM) is  responsible for providing medical guidance and overseeing 
participant safety for the study. The SM participates in determining the course of action 
necessary to meet safety goals and objectives. This is achieved through the review of Serious 
Adverse Event  reports; resolving safety issues; and interacting with the Principal and Sub - 
Investigators at each site.  
 
Reportable New Information (RNI)  
The following information must be reported to the coordinating center IRB within FIVE (5) 
business days of the inve stigator becoming aware of the information (please note that a separate 
RNI must be completed and submitted for each problem/event/report):  
• Information that indicates a new or increased risk. For  example:  
• New information (e.g., an interim analysis, safety monitoring report,  publication 
in the literature, sponsor report, or investigator finding) indicates an increase in 
the frequency or magnitude of a previously known risk, or uncovers a new  risk 
• An investigator brochure, package insert, or device labeling i s revised to indicate 
an increase in the frequency or magnitude of a previously known risk, or  describe 
a new  risk 
• Withdrawal, restriction, or modification of a marketed approval of a drug,  device, 
or biologic used in the research protocol  
• Protocol violati on that harmed subjects or others or that indicates subjects  or 
others might be at increased risk of  harm  
• Complaint of a subject that indicates subjects or others might be at increased  risk 
of harm or at risk of a new  harm  
• Any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the  research  
• Any harm experienced by a subject or other individual which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_108416] t hat the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of 
harm than was previously known or  recognized  
• A harm is “unexpected” when its specificity or severity are inconsistent with  risk 
information previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_108430], 
severity, frequency, and characteristics of the study  population  
• A harm is “at least probably related to the Human Research procedures” if in  the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_108417], the research procedures more likely than not 
caused the harm (g reater than 50%  probability)  
• Non-compliance with the federal regulations governing human research or with the 
requirements or determinations of the IRB, or an allegation of such  non-compliance  
• Failure to follow the protocol due to the action or inaction of  the investigator or  research 
staff 
• Breach of confidentiality  
• Change to the protocol taken without prior IRB review to eliminate an  apparent 
immediate hazard to a  subject  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 16 of 24   • Incarceration of a subject in a study not approved by [CONTACT_108431]  
• Complaint of a subject that cannot be resolved by [CONTACT_827]  
• Premature suspension or termination of the research by [CONTACT_108432]  
• Unanticipated adve rse device effect (any serious adverse effect on health or safety or  any 
life-threatening problem or death caused incidence in the investigational plan or 
application – including a supplementary plan or application – or any other unanticipated 
serious prob lem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of 
subjects)  
• Audit, inspection, or inquiry by a federal  agency  
• Written reports of study  monitors  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
Serious Adverse Events may be discovered during regularly scheduled visits or though 
unscheduled participant contacts between visits. SAEs will be managed according to the medical 
judgment of the treating physician and source documentation will be maintain ed (e.g. laboratory 
and/or radiology reports, clinical notes, discharge summaries). The following are the categories 
considered for a serious adverse event and must be reported to the IRB during the continuing 
review process:  
• Serious, unexpected, not  related 
• Is unexpected, in terms of nature, severity, or frequency, given the research 
procedures that are described in the protocol and informed consent document and 
the characteristics of the participants eligible for the  study  
• e.g. Death not due to study  participation  
• Serious, expected,  related  
• Is related or possibly related to treatment/procedures under study; possibly  related 
means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome 
may have been caused by [CONTACT_108433]  
• Serious, expected, not  related  
 
Study patients who experience an SAE will be followed until resolution of the event and a final 
report will be submitted to the safety monitor and IRB. Please note that SAE’s and RNI’s may 
overlap and a single eve nt may be classified under both conditions.  
 
 
DATA ANALYSIS  
 
Our primary hypothesis is that the operative treatment group will have lower VAS pain scores 
compared to the non -operative treatment group both during their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108418] - 
term o utpatient follow -up. 
 
Based on the results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we expect pain scores in the non -operative group to have a 
mean of 5.[ADDRESS_120458] deviation of 2.3. Assuming a 20% reduction in pain scores, 130 
patients (65 per arm) are required to have an 80% chance of detecting, as significant at the 5% 
level, a decrease in the primary outcome measure from 5.[ADDRESS_120459] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120460] a 20% reduction in pain.  
Secondary analysis will compare the value of narcotics administer ed at the distinct time periods. 
Tertiary analysis will be comparing the time (in days) to mobilization with physical therapy. The 
previous retrospective pi[INVESTIGATOR_108419] a propensity factor, generated from well 
documented sources of pain. As this is a prospectively randomized trial, we do not anticipate 
needing to accommodate for matching.  
 
 
RANDOMIZATION  
 
Eligible patients will be randomized in equal proportions to one of the two treatment groups: 1) 
operative treatment of the lateral compression type fracture, 2) non -operative treatment of the 
lateral compression type fracture. Allocation will be concealed using a centralized 24 -hour 
computerized randomization system, www.randomize.net , that will allow Internet based 
allocation. The treatment allocation will be stratified on the following prognostic factors to 
ensure balance between the intervention groups: 1) patient intubation status at time of 
enrollment, 2) patient prescription pain medication usage during the month prior to injury.  
 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT  
 
Data will be collected in real time by [CONTACT_29381], research coordinator, or  research 
team member, directly on paper Administrative Forms (AFs) or Case Report Forms (CRFs) 
which will serve as source documents for the study. The study personnel will obtain the 
information necessary to complete the case report forms (CRFs) from sever al sources including 
but not limited to, the patient's medical record, clinical evaluations and patient interviews. These 
forms will NOT contain the patient’s name, SSN, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15168]; they will 
be identified only by a unique patient -specific study number. All data requested on the AF or 
CRF must be completed. Source documents will be signed by [CONTACT_108434]. An electronic data capture system, REDCap, will be used to submit 
data to the coordinating  center located at University of Maryland, Shock Trauma. Upon receipt 
of the data, the coordinating center will make a visual check of the data and will query all 
missing data, implausible data, and  inconsistencies.  
 
The REDCap data entry screens will be s imilar to the paper AFs and CRFs. Data integrity will 
be enhanced by [CONTACT_108435] a variety of mechanisms for 
checking data at the time of entry including referential data rules, valid values, range checks,  and 
consisten cy checks against data already stored in the database. Clinical site personnel will be 
able to view and modify data for participants recruited from their clinical site only. Each time 
data is submitted or modified, it will be validated by [CONTACT_108436].  
 
All AFs and CRFs must be kept secure in locked cabinets or other enclosures that are accessible 
only to study personnel. All electronic data must be password -protected and accessible only to 
study personnel. The coordinating center will be respons ible for backing up all electronically 
submitted data. Hard copy documents containing subject data and patient identifiers (and contact  
[CONTACT_108437] v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 18 of 24   information) will be stored in secure document containers (file cabinets, lockers, drawers, etc.) in 
accor dance with standard document management practices. Paper forms and the files containing 
personally identifiable data at each site will be destroyed within [ADDRESS_120461] for the duration of the study. 
Ongoing data edits and internal audits will be performed to ensure collection of quality data. The 
continuous and timely flow of data from the AFs and CRFs to the REDCap electronic data 
capture system is an essential prerequisite for maintaining data quality.  
 
Monthly performance reports will be completed by [CONTACT_108438]: recruitment, status of follow up , data completion, and 
timelines of data entry.  
 
Missing data queries will be reported on the monthly basis by [CONTACT_23164]. The 
research team will be asked to answer these queries as soon as possible. Any unresolved queries 
will continue to be  reported on the monthly basis.  
 
 
MISSING DATA  
 
As with most prospective studies, missing data will be unavoidable, even with excellent follow 
up. Since the informative nature of missing data cannot be verified from the observed data, we 
will adopt a sensi tivity analysis framework for reporting results. We will analyze data under a 
variety of modeling assumptions regarding how strongly the missingness mechanism is related to 
outcomes. Regarding study conduct, we will:  
1. Limit participant burden and inconvenie nce in data  collection  
2. Select high quality research team  members  
3. Monitor and report missing data rates during the  study  
4. Emphasize the importance of full participation in the study during the consent  process  
5. Collect information on the reasons for missing  data 
6. Actively engage participants in the study and educate them about the importance of their 
engagement  
7. Collect surrogate information on participants who miss clinic  visits  
8. Hold regular meetings to discuss strategies for enrollment and engagement  of 
participation  
 
While these efforts will help to minimize missing data, we recognize that missing data is 
inevitable.  
 
 
RESEARCH ETHICS APPROVAL  
 
This protocol, the consent form template, the AFs, and the CRFs have been reviewed and 
approved by [CONTACT_108439] y of Maryland Institutional Review Board (IRB). The protocol, clinical 
site-specific informed consent forms, and any participant recruitment material will need to be 
reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_108440]’s local ethics board. Prior to commencement of  the 
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120462] 
approval.  
 
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Both a Randomized Control Trial (RCT) consent and Observational (OBS) consent has been 
prepared for the Pelvis RCT study and is attached in Appendix C. The consent form describes 
the purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, and the risks and be nefits of 
participation. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_108420], and this fact will  be 
documented in the patient’s  record.  
 
Eligible patients will be approached for their consent to participate. Informed consent will be 
obtained pr ior to treatment group assignment.  
 
To encourage a high level of participation from eligible patients, the attending surgeon will be 
involved in the consent conversation. The conversation will be initiated by [CONTACT_108441] r and the surgeon together. Patients and their families will 
be informed of the risks and benefits of participation and what will be expected of them if they 
choose to participate. Consent will be obtained in accordance with principles of GCP and ICH 
guide lines.  
 
The study should be presented as a randomized control trial upon initial consent conversation. If 
the patient or LAR declines to participate after full understanding of the trial, only then should 
the observational arm be presented.  
 
Whenever possible, the patient him or herself (as opposed to a proxy) should be consented.  Prior 
to initiating the consent process, a research team member will determine if the patient has the 
ability to understand the relevant study information and commun icate and maintain a choice. If 
it is determined that the patient lacks the capacity to consent, the legally authorized 
representative (LAR) will be  contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
The research staff will endeavor to answer all questions posed by [CONTACT_108442]/her 
family to ensure their understanding of the protocol. A limited number of questions will be asked 
of all patients after they are introduced to the study and have reviewed the consent form. These 
questions assess the person’s understanding of the study and w hat it means to participate, their 
appreciation of the consequences of participation, and their ability to consider alternatives to 
participation. A formal comprehension test may be utilized, or comprehension will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_108443](s) obtaining the  consent. A template for a comprehension test is provided in 
Appendix D.  
 
The research team member will ask the questions and determine the appropriateness of the 
responses. If the research team member is at all unsure about the patient’s ability to consen t s/he 
will consult with the PI.  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 20 of 24   A legally authorized representative (LAR) with reasonable knowledge of the potential participant 
will be approached to consent on the patient’s behalf if one of the following is true:  
• The patient is unresponsi ve or intubated (and likely to remain unresponsive or 
intubated before surgery or [ADDRESS_120463]-injury)  
• The patient cannot adequately answer the questions and it is determined that the 
patient’s level of cognition is not likely to change before surgery or [ADDRESS_120464] procedures. In order of priority the following will be 
approached:  
• Health care agent (identified under a written advance  directive)  
• Court appointed  guardian  
• Spouse  
• Adult child  
• Parent  
• Adult brother or  sister  
• Close friend or other  relative  
 
Guidance will be provided to assist the LAR in making the consent decision. They will be 
advised to base the decision on the patient’s expressed wishes, or, if these are not known, what 
they believe t he patient would have desired under the circumstances of the injury, his or her 
beliefs and values. If the LAR does not know what the patient would have wanted, the LAR will 
be advised to base the decision with the patient’s best interest in mind. They wil l be asked to 
carefully consider how much leeway the patient would likely give the LAR in making the choice 
about participation in the study. When the participant regains capacity to consent during the 
study period, the participant will be re -consented usi ng standard consenting procedures  described 
above.  
 
Recognizing that consent is an ongoing process, the study team will encourage the participants to 
ask additional questions that may arise during the course of their participation in the study.  
 
 
VULNERABL E POPULATIONS  
 
The study will not include children, pregnant women, or prisoners . 
 
 
PARTICIPANT CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to conduct the protocol under the current version of 
Declaration of Helsinki, ICH Guidelines, Good Clinical Practice, and rules of local IRBs. The 
investigator must ensure that the patient’s anonymity be maintained.  
 
Participants will be identified only by [CONTACT_108444], SSN, or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15168]. The Research Coordinator will maintain a separate confidential  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page [ADDRESS_120465] 
(HIPAA).  
 
 
STUDY DISCONTINUATION  
 
Participant s will be informed that they may discontinue the study at any time, for any reason. 
They will be assured that the medical care which they receive at the participating facility will not 
be affected should they elect to discontinue participation in the study . 
 
 
REPORTS  
 
The site research coordinator will respond to all site queries and progress reports monthly to 
ensure quality data collection and address missing data or visits at regular intervals.  
 
 
STUDY RECORDS RETENTION  
 
Study records will be maintained in accordance with current ICH guidelines. Data will be 
maintained for five years following the end of research -related activities. At the end of this 
period, paper forms will be shredded and the file containing personally identifiable data will be 
permanently deleted from local site computers.  
 
 
SUPPORTING LITERATURE  
 
Young JW, Burgess AR, Brumback RJ, Poka A. Lateral compression fractures of the pelvis: the 
importance of plain radiographs in the diagnosis and surgical mana gement. Skeletal Radiol.  
1986;15:103 –109. 
 
Manson T, O’Toole RV, Whitney A, Duggan B, Sciadini M, Nascone J.Young -Burgess 
classification of pelvic ring fractures. Does it predict mortality, transfusion requirements, and 
non-orthopaedic injuries?J Orthop Tr auma.  
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 22 of 24   Burgess AR, Eastridge BJ, Young JW, Ellison TS, Ellison PS Jr, Poka A, Bathon GH, Brumback 
RJ. Pelvic ring disruptions: effective classification system and treatment protocols. J Trauma 
1990;30:848 –856. 
 
Lindahl J, Hirvensalo E. Outcome  of operatively treated type -C injuries of the pelvic ring. Acta 
Orthop. 2005;76:667 –678. 
 
Oransky M, Tortora M. Nonunions and malunions after pelvic fractures: why they occur and 
what can be done? Injury. 2007;38: 489 –496 
 
Routt ML Jr, Kregor PJ, Simonian PT, Mayo KA. Early results of percutaneous iliosacral screws 
placed with the patient in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547]. J Orthop Trauma. 1995;9:207 –214. 
 
Bruce B, Reilly M, Sims S. Predicting future displacement on nonoperatively mana ged lateral 
compression sacral fractures: Can it be done? JOT 2011; 25(9):[ADDRESS_120466] JH. Examination under anesthetic for occult pelvic ring 
instability. JOT 2011;25:529 -537. 
 
Gaski G, Manson T, Castillo R, Slobogean G, O’Too le R. Nonoperative treatment of lateral 
compression type 1 pelvic ring injuries with complete sacral fracture. JOT5407R1.  
 
Kanakaris NK, Angoules AG, Nikolaou VS, Kontakis G, Giannoudis PV. Treatment and 
outcomes of pelvic malunion and nonunions. CORR 2009 ;467:2112 -2124.  
 
Khoury A, Kreder H, Skrinskas T, et al. Lateral compression fracture of the pelvis represents a 
heterogeneous group of complex 3D patterns of displacement. Injury. 2008;39:893 –902. 
 
Barei D, Shafer B, Beingessner D, Gardner M, Nork S, Rout t C. The impact of open reduction 
internal fixation on acute pain management in unstable pelvic ring injuries. J Trauma 
2010;68(4):949 -953. 
 
Tosounidis T, Kanakaris N, Nikolaou V, Ta B, Giannoudis P. Assessment of lateral compression 
type I pelvic ring inj uries by [CONTACT_108445]: which fracture pattern is unstable?  
International Orthopedics 2012;36:2553 -2558.  
 
Castillo R, Mackenzie E, Wegener S, Bosse M, The LEAP study group. Prevalence of chronic 
pain seven years following limb threatening low er extremity trauma. Pain 2006;124:[ADDRESS_120467] JH. Examination under anesthetic for occult pelvic ring 
instability. JOT 2011; 25(9) [ADDRESS_120468] Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 23 of 24   APPENDIX A: STUDY CONTACT [CONTACT_108446]  
[INVESTIGATOR_108401] O’Toole, MD 
Phone: (410) 328 -2981  
E mail: [EMAIL_2138]  
 
Safety Monitor  
Andrew Pollak, MD 
Phone: (410) 328 -1421  
Email: [EMAIL_2139]  
 
Research Coordinator  
Andrea Howe  
Phone: (410) 706 -6823  
Email: [EMAIL_2140]  
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: DATA COLLECTION SCHEDULE  
 
 
Assessment  Screen  
/    
Enroll  Pre- 
Rand. 
Base  Post- 
Rand. 
Base  96- 
hour  2 
week  6 
week  3 
month   
1 year  
Pelvic x -rays X        
Informed Consent  X        
HIPAA  X        
Stratification Levels (AF03)          
Intubation Status (at time of consent)   X       
Prescription Pain Medication Usage  
(during month prior to pelvic injury)   X       
Patient Intake (CRF01)          
Demographics (age, gender,  
race/ethnicity, education)    X      
Smoking History    X      
Previous Injuries    X      
Pre-injury Pain Medication Usage    X      
Pre-injury Work Status (WPAI:SHP)    X      
Pre-Injury Health Status (VR -12)   X      
Pre-Injury Pelvic Function (Majeed  
Pelvic)    X      
Index Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] - Clinical 
Intake (CRF02)          
Length of Stay & Discharge Disposition    X      
Pelvis RCT Protocol v4 (2016.06.01)  Page 24 of 24    
Assessment  Screen  
/    
Enroll  Pre- 
Rand. 
Base  Post- 
Rand. 
Base  96- 
hour  2 
week  6 
week  3 
month   
1 year  
ICU Length of Stay    X      
Date/Time & Mechanism of Injury    X      
Height & Weight    X      
Medical History    X      
Time to Mobilization (Bed to Chair)    X      
Narcotic Use    X      
OR Trip(s) Identification    X      
Classification of All Injuries    X      
Study Injury Characteristics    X      
Study Treatment Characteristics    X      
Patient Follow -Up (CRF03 & CRF04)          
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI)     X X X X X 
Re-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_108421]      X X X X 
Physical Therapy Tracking      X X X X 
Post-Injury Pain Medication Usage      X X X X 
Post-Injury Work Status (WPAI: SHP)      X X X X 
Post-Injury Health Status (VR -12)     X X X X 
Post-Injury Pelvic Function (Majeed  
Pelvic)      X X X X 
Clinical Follow -Up (CRF05)          
Ambulation & Weight Bearing Status      X X X X 
Pain Medication Usage      X X X X 
Fracture Healing Status      X X X X 
Complications (type, severity,  
treatment)      X X X X 
 
 
APPENDIX C: CONSENT TEMPLATES  
 
See attachment.  
 
 
APPENDIX D: AFs and CRFs  
 
See attachment.  