 
 
 
A Phase One Study Investigating the Tolerability and Effects of AZD0530 on Functional 
Neuroimaging Response in Individuals With or Without a Family History of Alcoholism  
 
NCT0226202 6 
 
12/17/18  
 Version 12/17/18
1 | P age “Functional  Neuroimaging of Alcoholism Vulnerability: Glutamate, Reward, Impulsivity,  
and Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer  (PIT), Part II - Saracatinib”
1.Introduction:
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_878383].  This is a 1-site, randomized, within subjects, counterbalanced 
double-blind study of one dose (125 mg) of Saracatinib and placebo. This project explores the 
effects of 1 dose of Saracatinib (an experimental Fyn-Src  family protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
drug (AZD0530)),  in a double-blind, randomized,  counterbalanced manner  on alcoholism risk-
relevant tasks. Drug/placebo will be administered  on [ADDRESS_1227199] and/or impulsivity-related behavior  in different 
contexts, compares the underlying neural circuitry  across tasks, and uses a pharmacologic probe 
of the glutamatergic system  to examine N-methyl-D-Aspartate  and Dopamine  (NMDA/DA) 
interactions. The combined  measures provide the opportunity  to advance our understanding of 
specific aspects  of brain function related to familial  alcoholism vulnerability in an already  well-
characterized population as some members evolve  into alcohol abuse.  In addition, as well as 
conventional within-task  analyses, functional  network connectivity and allied approaches will be 
used to examine brain  networks  across the above  tasks.
2.Background :
The Yale Center for the Translational Neuroscience (CTNA), of which this is one project, 
examines Alcoholism Common Risk Factors  that may act, in part, through  synaptic pathology  
involving the convergence of glutamate  and dopamine inputs  in the ventral striatum and related 
“motivation” circuitry. We hypothesize broadly  that, from a cognitive/behavioral neuroscience 
perspective, the inherited  vulnerability to alcohol  abuse is expressed, in part, as impairment in 
the normal  ability to engage cortico-limbic motivational circuitry by [CONTACT_878414], biasing individuals toward  immediate rewards, exemplified by [CONTACT_878415]. The proposed studies test the hypothesis of DA/NMDA imbalance in reward 
circuitry as a risk factor  for alcoholism and sheds light on potential therapeutic  interventions.
This current study  builds upon our existing IRB-approved research protocol “Functional 
Neuroimaging of Alcoholism Vulnerability:  Glutamate, Reward, Impulsivity, and Pavlovian-to-
Instrumental Transfer (PIT)"  study.  The following additional background will be helpful in 
understanding the  current application: 
The current research  is part of project  2 (PI, Pearlson) of [CONTACT_30321]’s overall 
NIDA P01 center grant,  (Center  for the Translational Neuroscience of Alcoholism-4), to 
be funded by [CONTACT_878416] 2016. 
The overall study examines alcoholism  vulnerability, (which is presumed to result in in 
part from dysfunctional interaction  between  NMDA receptors  and dopamine D2 
receptors in the brain's reward  system), by [CONTACT_878417].
The existing IRB-approved study CTNA Project 3 within the existing  CTNA-3, uses 
memantine, a non-specific NMDA receptor blocker, in an attempt to restore  the presumed  
abnormal balance between an overactive  NMDA and an underactive  DA system,  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
2 | P age(presumed to underlie alcoholism vulnerability),  in individuals at risk for alcoholism by 
[CONTACT_57216] a positive family  history in one or more first-degree relatives, compared to those  
who have a negative  family history. Brain  abnormalities related to this dysfunctional 
NMDA/DA imbalance  are measured experimentally in terms of abnormal  brain  
activation responses to specific functional  MRI tasks and out of scanner  behavioral  tasks 
that we have previously  documented  131-134, and that can be probed  using pharmacologic 
agents that interact in known ways with DA/NMDA circuitry. A major thrust  of this 
project, is that this circuitry is not “broken”  but differentially dysfunctional depending on 
task context  (presumably  from a combination  of differing afferent input from  distributed 
neural networks and possibly reflecting differing cellular engagement not resolvable  
using fMRI).  A corollary  of this is that the system can be reset either more broadly via 
NMDA-R blockade  by [CONTACT_67181] (as demonstrated in CTNA-3),  or in a more fine-
tuned, specific, and possibly more effective way using the Fyn kinase inhibitor, 
Saracatinib, as proposed here. Alcoholism risk: Parental alcoholism is a significant (2- to 
4-fold) risk factor for alcoholism in offspring, and is in part mediated through 
intermediate behavioral traits such as impulsivity23. Impulsivity is a multi-factorial set of 
linked behaviors consisting of several  interrelated cognitive/behavioral phenomena 
including both reward  sensitivity and “rash impulsiveness” 1,25,26,33,34,61,98,111,112. It has 
been defined  both as a “predisposition toward  rapid, unplanned reactions to internal  or 
external stimuli without regard to the negative consequences . . . to the impulsive 
individual or others,”92 and a failure  of response inhibition, to contextually inappropriate, 
prepotent behavior51. Impulsivity is an alcohol risk factor in youth5 persisting in adult 
alcoholics11. Alcohol/drug abusers score  high on impulsivity measures2,62,70,68. Impulsive 
choice biases selection of abused substances in favor of long term rewards9,33,53,91,[ADDRESS_1227200], in part, through synaptic pathology involving  the 
convergence of glutamate and dopamine  inputs in the ventral  striatum and related “motivation” 
circuitry. This anatomically and neurochemically specified hypothesis complements and builds  
on earlier information processing models as reviewed by [CONTACT_878418]99 and data gathered  during  
CTNA-2. We hypothesize broadly  that, from a cognitive/behavioral neuroscience perspective, 
the inherited  vulnerability to alcohol  abuse  is expressed, in part, as impairment in the normal  
ability to engage cortico-limbic motivational circuitry by [CONTACT_878419], 
biasing individuals toward  immediate rewards,  exemplified by [CONTACT_878420]. The suggestion is that disturbances in the interaction of dopamine and glutamate in the 
ventral striatum  are related to reward and motivational processes associated with the risk for 
persistent heavy drinking, including impulsivity23,22,83,96. A major thrust  of Project 3 is that this 
circuitry is not “broken” but differentially  dysfunctional depending on task context (presumably 
from a combination  of differing afferent input from distributed  neural networks and possibly 
reflecting differing  cellular  engagement not resolvable using  fMRI),  as exemplified in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_878384], where NAcc  may over-  or under-activate  depending  on task phase. 
This project builds directly on our prior CTNA research demonstrating that non-alcohol-abusing 
individuals with a family history  of alcoholism (FHP) have a) enhanced responsiveness and 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
3 | P agedifferential cortico-striatal activation compared  to controls in response to the prospect and 
anticipation of monetary rewards and b) abnormal  responsiveness to response inhibition.  These  
inherent, possibly genetic,  differences in reward  processing and response  inhibition  may underlie  
the vulnerability of these individuals to alcoholism.  
More specifically, this pi[INVESTIGATOR_878385]/or impulsivity-related behavior  in different contexts, compares the underlying  neural 
circuitry across tasks, and uses a pharmacologic  probe of the glutamatergic system to examine 
NMDA/DA interactions.  The combined  measures provide  the opportunity  to advance our 
understanding of specific  aspects of brain function related to familial alcoholism vulnerability in 
an already well-characterized population as some members evolve into alcohol  abuse.  In 
addition, as well as conventional within-task analyses, functional network  connectivity and allied 
approaches will be used to examine brain networks across the above tasks.
2a. Characteristics of the  Study Drug and Rationale for Choice.
The FDA has granted  an IND for the study of Saracatinib as proposed to the overall CTNA study 
PI, [CONTACT_30321] at Yale.  AZD0530  (Saracatinib) has been  extensively studied previously  in 
human subjects, including healthy  individuals, patients with solid tumors and elderly  patients 
with Alzheimer’s  disease and controls. It is a fyn kinase inhibitor, and the only clinically 
available drug in its class.
There is wide agreement  that both DA and glutamate signaling are critical to reward circuit 
dysfunction associated  with the risk for alcohol use disorders, but little understanding about these 
two systems  intersect to yield family history positive for alcoholism  (FHP) reward network 
dysfunctions documented by [CONTACT_62236]. This project tests a specific mechanism 
through which disturbances in DA signaling previously  described by [CONTACT_878421]-Receptor (NMDA-R) function in FHP.  Fyn 
inhibition reduces the insertion of NR2B  subunit-containing NMDA-Rs  into synaptic membranes  
(136, 137). For this Project, Fyn inhibition is superior to uncompetitive  NMDA-R antagonists  
such as memantine, that we have studied previously: 
1) whereas uncompetitive  NMDA-R antagonists such as memantine block all brain NMDA-Rs,  
Fyn inhibition limits down-regulation of NMDA-Rs to those synapses where DA signaling might  
up-regulate NMDA-Rs via enhancements  in D1-R signaling (as in the striatal direct  pathway) or 
reductions in D2-R signaling (as in the striatal indirect pathway (135); 2) whereas  available 
uncompetitive NMDA-R antagonists block all subtypes of NMDA-Rs,  Fyn inhibition limits the 
NMDA-R down-regulation to NR2B-containing  NMDA-Rs (136) and 3) whereas  uncompetitive 
NMDA-Rs directly interfere with normal  NMDA-R-mediated signaling,  Fyn inhibition reduces  
receptor number but otherwise leaves NMDA-R signaling  intact. Drugs such as Saracatinib  are 
thus much more specific, “fine-tuned” probes of the  glutamate system.
In view of the above, this proposal  will evaluate whether Fyn inhibition  normalizes reactivity to 
reward-related cues (MIDT), and the reactivity to specific alcohol cues (ACRT) without 
impairing GNG  performance.  Thus, this project will deeply  characterize  the potential 
therapeutic impact of Fyn inhibition for AUDs from  a cognitive neuroscience perspective.  
Further, by [CONTACT_878422] (D1-R,  direct 
pathway) and punishment (D2-R, indirect pathway) learning in contrast to more basic reward 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
4 | P ageoperations or motor inhibition  as examined in CTNA-3,  the current project will shed light on 
whether the benefits  of Saracatinib are related  to its ability  to attenuate  the downstream  signaling  
effects of D1-R  signaling  or promote the downstream signaling  effects of D2-R.  This will shed 
light on dopaminergic contributions  to alcoholism  risk and, possibly, treatment.
Safety data collected to date: [COMPANY_008]  has extensive safety data of this drug in human 
subjects (138-140).  More recently, the doses of Saracatinib that are being used in the current 
study have been safely used in over a 4 week  period  in older patients with Alzheimer disease (by 
[CONTACT_341289].  Strittmatter; see  pi[INVESTIGATOR_878386]).
[COMPANY_008] has extensive safety  data of this drug in human subjects where data were  collected 
from 7 Phase I studies in healthy  male  volunteers  and 5 Phase I studies in patients with solid 
tumors and advanced solid malignancies; [ADDRESS_1227201]  received single or multiple once-
daily oral doses of Saracatinib in [COMPANY_008] sponsored studies. Notably, in a multiple  
ascending dose study,  Saracatinib doses of 60 mg to 185 mg were well tolerated,  and although 
adverse events were noticeably more frequent  and severe at the 250 mg dose, no major safety 
issues were identified from adverse  events at any of the doses  studied.  In a multiple ascending 
dose study, the MTD was 250mg. In patients  with advanced cancer, the MTD  was 175mg. In 
clinical oncology, the duration of Saracatinib treatment has been 2-12+  weeks in most  trials. 
Importantly, with Saracatinib monotherapy,  febrile  neutropenia or other serious hematologic 
adverse events have not been documented in doses equal to or lower than [ADDRESS_1227202] included nausea,  vomiting, anorexia, anemia, palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814],  fatigue, influenza-like 
symptoms, and abnormal liver function tests (138-140).  
Previous animal studies that have tested the effects  of Saracatinib at doses that produced plasma 
levels significantly higher than those used in the current project, or for longer periods of time, 
have shown that the drug can cause problems with the heart, liver, blood  cells, and digestive 
system (including the stomach and intestines).  These harmful  effects have included irritation  of 
the digestive system  (which can lead to symptoms of vomiting and diarrhea).   Other side effects 
include lower blood pressure, higher heart rate, lower  white blood cell counts (infection-fighting 
cells), and higher liver enzymes (which  can be a sign of damage  to the liver). It is not known for 
sure if Saracatinib  would produce the same  harmful effects in humans that it has with long-term 
doses in animals.  However, we will rule out anyone who has any pre-existing conditions  that 
could put them at risk for any of these  changes  through  the use of our extensive  screening 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
5 | P agecriteria.  In addition, animal studies suggest that taking Saracatinib during  pregnancy could result 
in eye defects in the fetus; therefore we will also rule out women who are pregnant or 
breastfeeding and ask all female  and male  (who could possibly pass along drug in sperm) 
participants to  take appropriate birth control measures. 
This proposal  is the first human study to try to correct FHP-related  reward circuit dysfunction by 
[CONTACT_878423]-talk  between  DA and NMDA-R signaling, i.e., by [CONTACT_878424].  It differs from  prior studies of dopamine receptor agonists  and antagonists,  because:  1) 
DA-R receptor agonists and antagonists modulate both canonical (cAMP-, PKA-,  Fyn-
dependent) and non-canonical (i.e., beta-arrestin-dependent) signaling  whereas  Fyn inhibition  
only modulates DA signaling via the canonical pathway.; 2) within the canonical signaling 
pathway dopamine modulates many downstream  signaling  mechanisms (DARPP-32, etc.) 
whereas Fyn is proximal to the desired  consequence, i.e., regulation  of NMDA-R insertion  into 
neural membranes; and 3) DA receptors are widely distributed throughout the brain while 
PDE10A is most densely localized to the striatum and related forebrain structures 125. Because of 
Saracatinib (AZD0530)’s selective  inhibition of Src family  kinases, with high specificity  for Fyn 
kinase, the drug provides  a precise  tool in terms of its activity  on NMDA-Rs.  The drug was 
originally developed by [CONTACT_878425], because  these kinases  
also play a role in tumor invasion and proliferation, and has been found safe and well tolerated in 
both phase 1 and phase 2 clinical  trials (AZ Investigator’s Brochure). However, the Src family 
kinases (SFKs) are highly expressed in brain  and have  major  effects on synaptic plasticity. 
Through well-described molecular mechanisms, Fyn inhibitors reduce  the phosphorylation  of 
NR2B subunits and thereby [CONTACT_878426]-Rs into neural  membranes (see 
Research Strategy).  Saracatinib has good central  nervous system  (CNS) penetration in rodents  
after oral dosing and this has been  verified in human studies of patients  with Alzheimer’s disease 
by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Steven Strittmatter at Yale.  However Saracatinib, or any other Fyn kinase inhibitor, has 
not previously been used  in the investigation or  treatment of alcoholism. 
Saracatinib has been extensively studied in healthy individuals and patients with solid tumors  
and more recently in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD). For our “proof-of-concept”  trial, we 
chose to use the two doses, a lower dose of [ADDRESS_1227203] trials (including  those  by [CONTACT_341289]. Strittmatter 
with AD patients) and shown to be safe. AZ has completed 7 Phase I studies  in healthy 
volunteers and 5 Phase I studies in patients  with solid tumors and advanced solid  malignancies. 
AZD0530 doses of 60 mg to 185 mg were well tolerated, and although adverse  events were 
more frequent at and above 250 mg, no major safety issues  were identified. In patients with 
advanced cancer, the MTD was 175mg. In clinical oncology, the duration  of AZD0530 
treatment has been 2-12+ weeks  in most  trials.  Importantly, with AZD0530 monotherapy  no 
serious hematologic  adverse events  have  been documented  in doses lower  than [ADDRESS_1227204].  [COMPANY_008] will provide the proposed doses  of AZD0530 and 
matching placebos.   
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
6 | P ageConsideration of Alternatives:  With supporting documentation from [COMPANY_008]  we have 
already obtained  an IND from  the FDA to conduct the current study which  involves acute  
dosing with Saracatinib.  We have  also discussed and obtained feedback from  the FDA 
regarding the design and safety  monitoring as described  in the current  project. We recognize 
that there are sufficient safety  data to preclude  observing serious or unexpected  adverse events. 
However, we will monitor all subjects carefully  for safety  throughout and following the 
conclusion of the proposed study; if we identify any safety concerns then we will have  the 
option of modifying the  current proposed project  by [CONTACT_878427]. 
Choice of drug Doses. We selected the [ADDRESS_1227205]. Strittmatter’s ongoing  Yale Alzheimer disease  study. 
Specifically, CNS penetration is excellent (plasma/CSF ratio=0.4). Following  oral dosing, 
125mg produced  brain  concentrations  of 8-46nM (estimated),  simultaneously  producing 
physiologic effects associated with Src/Fyn inhibition without adverse  effects on behavior, or 
significant change in vital signs, EKG or key lab values. Additionally,  the use of [ADDRESS_1227206] 24-hour access to 
a research line where  potential adverse events  can be reported and addressed. Specific 
parameters for intervention discontinuation are  detailed  below.  
3.Major Aims :
The current study consists of ~7-8 hours of screening on one day, and 2 subsequent, separate 6 
½-7 hour study days, each separated by ~ 1 week.  It proposes to examine 90 subjects (45 FHP, 
45 FHN), using the experimental Fyn-Src family protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor drug 
Saracatinib, (AZD0530), which blocks the glutamate system more specifically and predictably 
than memantine. AZ0D530 was developed by [CONTACT_878428]-cancer drug in which  is 
currently in clinical  trials. The relevant Investigator’s Brochure  is appended. [CONTACT_38459]  is 
obtaining permission from Astra Zeneca to use this new drug in the context we describe by [CONTACT_878429]'s existing  approved IND. We will use one dose of the new drug, (125 mg 
versus placebo  in random assignment single-blind fashion), administered 90 minutes  prior  to the 
MRI and other measures, in three separate  experimental study visits. We will compare family 
history positive for alcoholism (FHP;  i.e., affected parent plus other  close relatives) to matched 
family history negative  (FHN; i.e., no affected first-degree relative).   This project explores  the 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
7 | P ageeffects of 125 mg of Saracatinib vs placebo  in a single-blind, randomized, counterbalanced 
manner on alcoholism risk-relevant  tasks.
4.MAJOR HYPOTHESES:
1. AZ0D530 trial with  functional MRI Monetary Incentive  Delay (MID) Task.
During the A1 (reward prospect) phase  of the fMRI MID task, via Saracatinib  blockade  of 
NMDA receptors, compared to placebo, dopaminergic imbalance in reward circuitry of FHP will 
be “reset” such that excessive nucleus accumbens (NAcc) activation during  the A1 phase will be 
normalized and more closely resemble that of matched FHN individuals  on placebo. 
Importance:  tests hypothesis  of DA/NMDA imbalance in reward circuitry as a risk factor for 
alcoholism and sheds light on potential therapeutic  interventions. Logical extension of suggestive 
preliminary data gathered in  prior phase of CTNA with memantine.
2. AZ0D530 trial with  functional MRI Go/No-Go (GNG) Task.
The GNG task measures the ability to inhibit response to a pre-potent  stimulus, assessing an 
orthogonal aspect of behavioral impulsivity to the MID task, but one also hypothesized to be 
related to alcoholism risk.
AZOD530’s blockade  will act to “reset”  dopaminergic imbalance in extended reward system 
circuitry of FHP so that abnormal NAcc, ACC,  and DLPFC activation during  response inhibition  
will be normalized and more closely  resemble that of matched FHN individuals in the placebo 
condition.
Importance:  tests hypothesis of DA/NMDA imbalance in response inhibition  circuitry as a risk 
factor for alcoholism. Logical  extension  of data gathered in  prior phase of CTNA.
Extended network analysis using  functional  connectivity approaches will show interrelationships 
among neural circuits responsible for response  inhibition (GNG) and motivation (MID) and 
additionally their alteration by [CONTACT_878430] (exploratory). 
3. AZ0D530 trial with fMRI Alcohol Cue Reactivity (ACR) task (AKA  ‘NAC’  task). The 
ACR task in alcohol users is related to the brain’s  response in reward-related regions to wanting 
and craving  of alcohol versus matched  soft drink stimuli. Prior data also suggest that Saracatinib 
will suppress cue-induced alcohol  craving, perhaps more markedly in FHP. Aim: to examine  
NAcc response to alcohol-related versus control images using an existing ACR task.
Major hypothesis. FHP who use alcohol will respond with greater  NAcc BOLD  signal to 
alcohol-related cues vs. non-alcohol  cues than matched FHN who use alcohol.  Subsidiary  
hypothesis. Alcohol-using subjects  in general  will show a reduced response to alcohol images  in 
the ACR task during the  Saracatinib condition, but more markedly in FHP.
Importance: examines  additional forms of responsiveness likely relevant to initiation into 
alcohol misuse.
4. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_878387]: Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer (PIT) Elaboration  of MIDT
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
8 | P ageBrain responses to the prospect of reward (A1) phase  of the MIDT may be considered to reflect a 
process of Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer  (PIT); that is, the phase of the task following the 
trial-type cue but before  the imperative  stimulus  indicates the impending necessity  for a speeded 
instrumental response in order to gain a reinforcer;  a process  that we hypothesis  is functionally 
equivalent to PIT. The enhanced striatal  responding during this phase  that we observed  in FHP in 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_878388]. We propose to test this 
hypothesis with a novel fMRI PIT MIDT. Outside of the scanner,  we will train Pavlovian  
predictors of monetary reinforcement; color-based  visual cues that predict monetary reward 
irrespective of the subject’s behavior. Within the scanner we will superimpose these cues on the 
A1 (reward prospect)  phase of the MIDT fMRI task, e.g. the “Win $5” notification  could be 
colored with a predictor  shade  of e.g. red. If neural response to cues signaling reward  are “PIT-
driven,” then Pavlovian predictors of monetary  reward should further invigorate behavioral and 
neural responding, ie fMRI BOLD signal in reward  areas  will increase further. Such a finding 
would link our current  project aims by [CONTACT_68108] a neural mechanism that bridges cue reactivity 
and reward system-related  impulsivity  branches of alcoholism to neurobiological  vulnerability 
research.  
Major hypothesis: Cues that predict monetary reward will act as Pavlovian  incentive stimuli, 
enhancing striatal responding during  fMRI MIDT A1 phase, and by [CONTACT_878431]-time to 
imperative stimuli. We expect this effect to be stronger in FHP than FHN and related to our 
second impulsivity factor  that consists of scores  on the Sensitivity to Punishment/Sensitivity to 
Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ) and Padua inventory.
Importance: This task dissects a component  of the MID, testing the hypothesis  that A1 
responding is a form of PIT. Moreover, it provides an imaging assay of a transfer-like process 
that can be related to real-world drinking behavior, thus informing  upon and extending the key 
finding from CTNA-2.
Exploratory Aims:
5. Probabilistic Selection  fMRI  task  (PST).
Saracatinib effects on this task will be explored with support of the Clinical Core to reinforce 
efforts of other projects to dissect  the role of Fyn in the striatal direct (D1-R) and indirect  (D2-R) 
pathways 141,142
Major hypothesis: Deficient learning of negative reward contingencies (i.e., punishment)  will 
be associated with reduced dorsal  striatum activation  in FHP compared to FHN due to deficits in 
D2-R signaling and downstream enhancement  of NMDA-R  signaling.   Reducing NMDA-R 
signaling with Saracatinib is predicted to normalize, relative to FHNs, the striatal activation 
during punishment learning.
6.  Functional  Connectivity.
Using approaches developed by [CONTACT_878432],  we will explore brain functional  connectivity during rest 
and during task (within and across tasks).
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
9 | P ageMajor hypothesis: We propose to replicate  increased functional connectivity of the NAc in FHP 
compared to FHN, as reported by [CONTACT_62214]143,144.  We propose to determine  whether  
Saracatinib normalizes NAc functional connectivity in FHP,  which would suggest that enhanced 
signaling via Fyn and NMDA-R contribute to the distinct patterns of NAc functional 
connectivity in  the two groups.
EKG: Screening day and subsequent drug administration days- Obtained at request of drug 
manufacturer (A-Z) for screening and safety  monitoring.
Blood Tests: Screening and each subsequent experimental day (at end of the session); CBC, 
liver function, electrolytes, B12, - obtained per A-Z for study safety monitoring purposes.
5.METHODS: 
5.1Research  design  and sample size/statistical power:
Saracatinib has not previously been  used in this context. The purpose of the current study is to 
assess the effect size  of interventions with this medication compared  to placebo.
5.2 Subjects:
Subjects will either  have a family history of alcoholism (FHP) or no family history  of alcoholism 
(FHN; N=45  per group,  to a total of 90 subjects; males and females in equal numbers).We will 
recruit subjects from the general population  by [CONTACT_273232] (e.g. in the Hartford Advocate or 
on Craig’s List). Yale  University will provide  and pay for an encrypted, password-protected 
study cell phone to contact [CONTACT_878433].  Subjects will also have the 
opportunity to agree to text message appointment  reminders in the informed consent form. 
Interested participants will also have  the chance  to respond to web based  advertisements that 
include the option to call in to be screened for eligibility over the telephone  or via a locked  
online survey database.  If participants complete the online pre-screener and are found  eligible 
they will then be contact[CONTACT_878434].
 
The CTNA study coordinator screens all potential  subjects obtained from the above  sources,  and 
a study FH status is determined using the family history approach  operationalized  by [CONTACT_878435]  (FHAM), developed by [CONTACT_341295].  FHPs  are defined as having a 
parent and at least another  first- or second-degree relative with alcohol dependence  OR having  at 
least a father with a history  of alcoholism. If the affected  parent is the mother,  we will rule out 
possible fetal alcohol syndrome, using a standardized symptom  checklist;  FHN will have no 
affected first-degree relative.  We will be selecting  subjects from families with substantial risk 
for developi[INVESTIGATOR_878389], and this increased susceptibility probably reflects increased genetic 
liability.
5.3a Inclusion  Criteria:
Inclusion criteria are equal numbers of men and women between the ages of [ADDRESS_1227207] screened 
toxicologically for drugs of abuse  (and for women of childbearing age, pregnancy) by [CONTACT_878436], any positive  test results in exclusion. Our participants will not come from  a “vulnerable 
population” because participants will not be pregnant women, under legal  coercion or restriction, 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
10 | P ageor mentally impaired so as not to understand  the nature of the research.  They will be able to 
understand the procedures as judged by [CONTACT_878437] [INVESTIGATOR_878390], the purpose and content  of the planned research, and willingly agree to 
participate. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_281747], if the PI [INVESTIGATOR_878391] a participant’s status  precludes 
his/her ability  to participate fully in the informed consent process, these subjects will be 
excluded from the  study  until such time that  proper informed consent can be obtained.
5.3b Exclusion Criteria:
Exclusion criteria  include:
1)A diagnosis of any mood, psychotic,  or current anxiety  disorders  under DSM-V, using 
the SCID-V-RV psychiatric interview
2)A past  and/or current diagnosis of:
a.Alcohol dependence (past alcohol  abuse is OK)
b.Substance abuse or dependence;
3)Report of psychotic  disorder  in a 1º relative,  auditory or visual impairment that interferes 
with test-taking;
4)Prenatal exposure  to alcohol plus currently meeting criteria for features of fetal alcohol  
syndrome;
5)Not speaking English fluently or being  a non-native English speaker, or being educated in 
a primary language  other than English >grade 1;
6)Mental retardation (Full Scale  IQ<70);
7)Traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness  > [ADDRESS_1227208] 30 
days;
8)Presence or history of any medical/neurologic illness  that may affect  brain  physiology 
(e.g., epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], Multiple Sclerosis), including focal brain lesion seen on structural MRI  
(all structural scans  are read by a licensed radiologist);
9)Current pregnancy (all  females will be tested with urine screens on the day of MRI);
10)All participants  will receive a urine screen for the presence of marijuana, cocaine, opi[INVESTIGATOR_244911] a breath screen  to detect the presence  of alcohol;
11)Inability to  comprehend the consent form  appropriately;
12)Other specific  fMRI exclusions include  metal devices, clips or fragments in body (orbital 
x-ray performed if needed);
13)EKG  abnormality indicating  severe cardiac pathology (e.g. atrial fibrillation, chronic 
ischemia);
14)Significant  change  in LFTs, electrolytes,  or CBC.
Saracatinib-related exclusions are current use (within 30 days of screening) of specific 
psychoactive medications (e.g.,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_16709], narcotic analgesics, antiparkinsonian  
medications, systemic  corticosteroids, or medications with significant central anticholinergic  
activity). Current use of warfarin  or the following medications (CYP3A4  substrates  whose 
metabolism may be slowed by [CONTACT_99213]0530, which is also metabolized  by [CONTACT_097]3A4): colchicine, 
carbamazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050], cyclosporine, disopyramide, fluticasone, quinidine, vinblastine, vincristine, 
nifedipi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Also, to avoid potential drug interactions, subjects taking  sildenafil, tadalafil,  and 
vardenafil will be advised to stop taking these  medications for the duration  of the trial. Subjects 
cannot take the following substances which inhibit the CYP3A4  isoenzyme: cimetidine,  
cyclosporine, danazol,  fluconazole,  grapefruit  juice, HIV protease inhibitors, itraconazole, 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
11 | P ageketoconazole, macrolides,  miconazole,  nefazodone,  omeprazole, ritonavir, docetaxel, aromatase 
inhibitors & verapamil.  Other exclusions are absolute neutrophil count <2,000/micro-L, platelets  
<150x103/micro-L, AST, ALT, total bilirubin >1.5 x upper limit of normal (ULN); serum 
creatinine, >[ADDRESS_1227209] (the SAFTEE-see  below)  and be followed up [ADDRESS_1227210] day by 
[CONTACT_878438].  The SAFTEE   is a tool for systematic assessment of adverse effects in clinical 
trials which includes 1) open-ended questions about any changes in physical or health problems, 
appearance, or activity level, and 2) yes/no responses to a specific list of symptoms (which 
correspond to anticipated adverse events associated with Saracatinib). For each symptom 
reported, the date of onset, severity  (minimal, mild, moderate, severe), whether  it was drug-
related, and action taken, is recorded.  The SAFTEE will be administered at each dosing day and 
at post-study  follow up, to monitor and document  rates of adverse  events in a standardized 
manner.
5.4 Timeline
1.Initial phone screening
Screening day:
2.Informed consent/HIPAA
3.Pregnancy  and toxicology screen
4.Determine  eligibility
5.Core battery and neuropsychological  testing
6.Blood  draw  and EKG
Experimental days:
7.Pregnancy  and toxicology screen
8.Saracatinib  effects  scale
9.Medication/placebo administration  by [CONTACT_878439]
10.Vital signs checked (every hour)
11.Rest in designated room while completing Core  intake packet
12.Lunch
13.BART/ EDT
14.Genetic saliva sample
15.MRI
16.EEG
17.Blood  draw  and EKG
18.Subject is compensated for  his/her time*
19.Sign out by  [CONTACT_28839]
20.Cab home
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
12 | P ageCheck  EKG and blood  lab results prior to scheduling each subsequent 
experimental day.
Call subject by [CONTACT_648] [ADDRESS_1227211] experimental session  to 
assess possible side effects.
*As a result of high cancellation rates, subjects will be eligible to receive  an incentive for 
keepi[INVESTIGATOR_878392]. Upon  completion of the study,  subjects will 
receive a $[ADDRESS_1227212] to a local  establishment. This is an addition  to the $25.00per  hour 
compensation for  their  time participating in the study.
Consent:
Will be completed by [CONTACT_878440].
Pregnancy and toxicology  screening:
Will be completed by [CONTACT_878441], who are annually trained on each 
screening.
Medication:
Astra Zeneca  will provide the Saracatinib 125- mg doses, and the placebo will be masked by 
[CONTACT_878442]-appearing tablets by [CONTACT_59919]:
Prescriptions will be made yearly,  and label will include discontinuation  dates from  the 
pharmacy.  [CONTACT_878469]  and study RN will dispose of unused medications utilizing Hartford  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s pharmacy drug discontinuation  system. Saracatinib will be stored in HH Pharmacy 
and the IOL Butler Building, room [ADDRESS_1227213]. Pearlson. Medication sheets that document dispersion  of 
Saracatinib are recorded. Medication: This drug is an experimental Fyn-Src  family protein 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, (AZD0530),  which has a similar, but more specific  action than 
memantine in blocking  the glutamate system. AZ0D530 was developed  by [CONTACT_878443]-cancer drug in which  is currently in clinical trials. The relevant Investigator’s Brochure is 
appended. [CONTACT_38459]  has obtained  permission  from Astra Zeneca  to use this new drug in the 
context, we describe by [CONTACT_878444]'s existing  approved  IND.
EEG/ERP:
The EEG  recording session is non-invasive,  but requires us to maintain a clean contact  [CONTACT_878445]’s scalp.  We scrub the skin under each sensor  placement.   This 
procedure may be mildly uncomfortable, but not painful and may leave small red patches 
afterward that will disappear in a day or two.  An additional risk lies in the possibility  of 
transmission of infection.  To minimize these  risks, careful preparation of skin surfaces using 
sterile supplies  is conducted before attachment  of electrodes, and the elastic cap is sterilized after 
each use.  There  is a very low risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_878393], which  is 
essentially a thick salt-water.   Some of the sounds subjects listen  to in this part of the test may be 
loud or occasionally unexpected.  Subjects may discontinue the session at any time if it becomes 
uncomfortable.
Psychological Ratings/Interviews and Cognitive Tests :  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
13 | P ageAll tasks forms are in study 126237, “Functional Neuroimaging of Alcoholism  Vulnerability: 
Glutamate, Reward,  Impulsivity, and Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer (PIT).”  
Two hours post drug administration subjects will complete the out of scanner  version of BART 
and EDT  (Go/ No-Go, IAT, AAT are completed on screening day) computerized impulsivity 
procedures, and approximately  [ADDRESS_1227214]-drug administration, (the timing used in the prior 
Krupi[INVESTIGATOR_878394])79, they will undergo  the fMRI Monetary Incentive Delay, Go/No-Go  and 
MID/tasks in counterbalanced order.  Subjects’ heart rate and blood  pressure  will be checked 
hourly. 
In addition to the computerized tasks (Go/ No-Go,  IAT, AAT,  BART and EDT)  and the fMRI 
tasks, subjects will complete paper and pencil measures derived from  the CTNA  Clinical Core,  
which consists of the, Clinical Core Accession and Demographic Questionnaire  (CCADQ), 
Family History Assessment Module (FHAM), SCID-E Alcohol Summary (SCID-E),Timeline  
Followback Summary  Sheet (TLFB), Sensation Seeking Scale (SSS), Barratt’s Impulsivity Scale 
(BIS-11), Short Inventory of Problems (SIP-2R), Self Rating  Effects of Alcohol (SRE), Alcohol 
Expectancy Questionnaire  (AEQ), Negative Alcohol Expectancy Questionnaire  (NAEQ),  
Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS), Behavioral Inhibition Activation System (BIS-
BAS),Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS), , Childhood Trauma  Questionnaire  
(CTQ), Drinking Motivations (DV), , Self Report Habit Index (SRHI), UPPS  Impulsive 
Behavior Scale,, PROMIS Alcohol Use Form, and Experimental Delay Discounting Task (EDT). 
Other paper and pencil measures not derived  from the CTNA Clinical Core include the COGA 
Family History  Assessment Module which  is used to screen  for family  history, the ONRC Health  
Questionnaire, Handedness, SPSRQ,  Padua, the AUDIT, and a 14 question questionnaire that 
assesses how the participant is currently feeling  while on the medications. A separate self-report, 
the Borderline  Personality Questionnaire  (BPQ), is being used to assess borderline personality  
traits that are often correlated with substance  use. In addition  to the IQ measures included in the 
CTNA Clinical  Core,  IQ will be assessed  using the Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning  subtests 
from the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence – Second Edition (WASI-II). During the 
Vocabulary subtest of the WASI-II,  subjects  will be audio  recorded so another member of the 
research team can double score the assessment. If the subject does not wish  to be audio recorded 
then it will be arranged to have  another member of the research team  to sit  in during that  time.
Subjects may find the battery of psychiatric  and psychological tests tedious and boring, or 
intrusive. If the former is the case, additional brief breaks will be given during assessment.  The 
latter concern is addressed through use of trained interviewers who have experience discussing  
sensitive material with clinical research subjects.  However,  if a subject  finds a topic  too 
uncomfortable, those  questions will be skipped,  or with severe reactions,  subjects will be 
reminded they can discontinue participation without penalty.
Following study completion, subjects  will only be allowed to be discharged when they have 
minimal subjective  reports  of intoxication  or sedation, their vital signs have returned to baseline, 
and they have been assessed by [CONTACT_878446]. 
MRI :  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
14 | P ageThe FDA has approved  the MRI system and the scanning protocols to be used.  The MRI  
scanning procedure  in a 3 Tesla  system is safe in normal healthy humans.   However, subjects 
who could  suffer potential risks from the MRI scanning procedure include those with metal 
implants (pacemaker,  metal rods, bone screws,  orthodontics, metal  flakes from  metalworking).  
Subjects are told during the informed consent  process about the need to carefully screen for 
metal implants or any other exposure  to metal  in the body.  Subjects who could potentially suffer 
harm will be screened for metal  prior to scanning  using a HH Radiology Department screening 
checklist.  Although  there  is no proven  harm  to developi[INVESTIGATOR_176493], women will be screened  for 
pregnancy before scanning.  Subjects with claustrophobia may experience some  anxiety 
symptoms, and will be discouraged from participating.  Subjects who feel claustrophobic during  
the experiment will be encouraged  to notify experimenters at any time to discontinue  scanning.  
There are no known risks associated with the visual  or auditory stimuli presented during  
recording of event-related fMRI.
Structural MRI: Performed on day 1 only.
Functional MRI tasks: (both study  days)
The Monetary Incentive  Delay (MID) Task: 
MID tasks  dissect anticipatory (motivational) from outcome (consummatory) components of 
reward. Anticipating rewards of many types, including abstract ones such as money, activates 
ventral striatum (VS); VS responds to learned appetitive cues,  while  medial PFC directs energy 
to appropriate goals72,73, and more anterior OFC regions are activated  by [CONTACT_878447].  
Hommer’s fMRI monetary incentive delay task (MID)[ADDRESS_1227215]  
or punishment. He exposed  NAcc  (VS) deficits  during anticipation  of reward in abstinent 
alcoholic individuals  vs. age/sex matched  controls during MID task performance; alcoholics  
activate VS less while  waiting to work  for reward, but they activate similarly  to controls in 
posterior cingulate & ventral PFC in response to feedback about success59. To address whether 
the NAcc abnormality predisposes or is secondary  to alcoholism, Hommer compared healthy 
adults & adolescents to adolescent  children of alcoholic (COA) fathers. The MID task12 
identified increased VS activation during reward  anticipation in young adulthood,  but no change 
in brain states associated  with successfully winning  money.  However,  adolescent COA’s   and 
adult alcoholics126, [ADDRESS_1227216]  anticipation, suggesting that motivational system  hypo-activity  precedes alcoholism 
and may be a risk marker, predisposing an individual to addictions. Thus, since its inception the 
MID has been used in alcohol risk studies; to date we have studied >700  subjects at 3T across 
multiple diagnostic groups (see  preliminary data  section).
Go/No-Go Tasks: An  fMRI Paradigm to  Explore Response Inhibition Circuitry.
Stop signal and Go/No-Go (GNG) fMRI tasks assess one aspect of impulsive decision making, 
namely withholding inappropriate choices27. The GNG  task, in which  the participant  is required 
to refrain from  responding to designated  items within a series of stimuli, has frequently been 
used to examine  cognitive control using fMRI in both healthy  and psychiatric samples.  Cognitive 
control processes,  as embodied in the GNG, are a vital element in inhibiting the immediate 
pursuit of rewarding  stimuli and in developi[INVESTIGATOR_878395] —both  important 
factors in substance abuse52. The neural  circuitry underlying the task has been carefully mapped 
in healthy populations. We have explored fMRI GNG tasks at 3T in detail113 in >1800 total 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
15 | P agesubjects in our lab 113,114. The GNG fMRI literature reveals that the same  regions  are consistently  
implicated. No-Go responses  include  anterior cingulate  cortex (ACC)16,56,61,65,66,85,89,116; 
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)38,61,74,89; dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)4,7,16,21,38,48,65,66,74,89,122; 
inferior parietal  lobule (IPL)4,7,16,38,89,61,122; and pre-motor area BA6 and caudate89,93,122. ACC 
seems essential for conflict response,  decision  formation/action selection, and error monitoring 
15,65,129-131 and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex plays a role in response inhibition131 . Children 
activate these regions  and amygdala  more than adults14, suggesting  a less efficient response  
inhibition system.  Impulsive normal subjects activate paralimbic areas and OFC more during 
response inhibition61 likely to maintain behavioral  inhibition. Substance abusers may show less 
task-related ACC  and PFC activity35, 64.
fMRI Alcohol Cue Reactivity (ACR) Task: 
This Alcohol Cue  Reactivity task102, (15 min.) is programmed in  E-Prime and consists of 44 (i.e., 
22 alcohol and  22 matched soft drink/bottled  water) beverage pi[INVESTIGATOR_878396] 44 degraded stimuli, randomized with 15 fixation periods of 3 different durations (i.e., 2, 4, and  6 seconds to model the hemodynamic  response). To  improve contrast in  the 
primary task condition and contrast of interest, alcohol and non-alcohol stimuli are  programmed 
to be presented four times each (i.e., 88 trials  per condition), while degraded stimuli are each 
presented once (i.e.,  22 trials per  condition). Each pi[INVESTIGATOR_878397] 750 ms with  a 1250 ms 
inter-stimulus interval  (i.e., blank screen)  and intermittent fixation periods (i.e., screen  with  a 
centered fixation). The fixation and shuffled  conditions provide the opportunity  for the eventual 
fMRI studies to contrast activation to alcohol and/or non-alcohol pi[INVESTIGATOR_114302]  a visual and rest 
baseline, respectively. The alcohol  cue reactivity  task is [ADDRESS_1227217] presented. Ratings and  reaction  times  
are logged for  statistical analysis. Task instructions are to press a key  within 2000 ms of stimuli 
presentation in  response to whether participants Like (left button), feel Neutral about (down 
button), or  Dislike  (right  button)  seeing the beverage pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  Participants are instructed to use 
the left, down, and right arrows  in a laptop or computer while practicing the task  outside the 
scanner. Once in the scanner, a  button box is  used.  A practice task  with  non-beverage pi[INVESTIGATOR_878398]. 
fMRI Probabilistic Selection task (PST). 
The PST will be employed as outlined by [CONTACT_878448].1 as successfully implemented by [CONTACT_878449], (Carter) that separately  examines the function  of both reward- (Go) or 
punishment-driven (No Go) learning, in that it enables the assessment  of whether subjects have  a 
bias for choosing frequently-reinforced stimuli,  or for avoiding frequently-punished stimuli. In 
an acquisition phase, participants learn to choose between  three different  stimulus  pairs  
presented in random  order  based  on probabilistic  feedback.  The task, shown by [CONTACT_878450]-ergic  manipulation145, allows assessment of the effects of group and 
reinforcement probability on measures of contingency learning.  The only differences from the 
originally-described 2007 design are that the training phase of this shortened (15 min) version 
consists of 2 (rather than 3) pairs of options, an AB pair (associated  with positive/negative 
outcomes in 85/15% of trials where A is chosen  and 15/85% for B) and a CD pair (associated  
with positive/negative  outcomes  in 70/30% of trials where C is chosen  and 30/70%  for D). On 
the test phase, participants choose between all possible pairs with A, B, C, and D. Go-learning is 
computed by [CONTACT_878451].  NoGo-learning is computed by 
[CONTACT_190898]-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
16 | P ageaveraging performance  on BC and BD test trials. Note  that a full version of a (different) 
computerized version  of the PST is administered  out of scanner, as part of the behavioral Core  
battery.
Out of Scanner Impulsivity and Other Tasks (all 3 experimental days):
The Implicit Association Task (IAT)139
This task measures implicit affective  associations with the alcohol. Using  a computerized sorting 
task, individuals simultaneously  classify  two target conditions, ‘alcohol’ (ie., wine,  beer, pi[INVESTIGATOR_11731], 
vodka, whiskey, wine  cooler) versus ‘soft drink’ (coca cola,  juice, orange soda, root beer,  
sparkling water, 7-up)  , and two affective categories relevant to drinking, ‘pleasant’ (ie. talkative, 
excited, cheerful, happy, funny,  lively),  versus ‘unpleasant’ (i.e., nauseous, listless, awful, 
miserable, sad, annoying).
The Approach Avoidance Task  (AAT)[ADDRESS_1227218] pushes  or pulls  
computer presented stimuli according to a content irrelevant feature, the tilt of the stimulus. 
Pushing the joystick gradually  decreases stimulus size, while  pulling  gradually  increases  
stimulus size. Pulling  is related to more positive evaluations than pushing. The zooming feature 
also generates a sense of  approach or avoidance.
The Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART)144
This is a computer decision-making task that measures risk taking. Participants are presented 
with a series  of “balloons.”  The object is to earn as much money as possible by [CONTACT_275246][INVESTIGATOR_878399]. The point  of explosion varies from  trial to trial and costs participants  
the money they  have earned  in that trial. 
Experiential Discounting Task  (EDT)[ADDRESS_1227219] amount that is delivered immediately and is certain and a probable  
amount that is delayed  and uncertain. The EDT  is sensitive to various levels of alcohol dosing 
(i.e., between 0 and 0.8g/kg)145.
Go/No Go Task
In order to measure  behavioral reaction times, we perform two runs of the go/nogo task, identical 
to that performed  in the scanner and described  earlier, out  of the scanner as well.
PIT task
For the Pavlovian-to-Instrumental Transfer  task (PIT) subjects will be asked  to taste different  
stimuli. The stimuli will be delivered as liquids. Stimuli will be stored in a refrigerator  and 
brought to room temperature before  use. In brief, the liquid delivery  consists of a computer 
running E-Prime, controlling a series  of programmable syringe  pumps with 60ml syringes and 
beverage tubing attached. New tubing and syringes are used for each subject. Our stimuli  will 
contain either a taste (juice or bitter) or a neutral solution.  The juice taste will be one of three 
different flavors  of commercially  available Gatorade that subjects choose.  The bitter and neutral  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
17 | P agesolutions will be prepared  in the laboratory using commercially  available tastes such as: quinine 
sulfate, sodium  bicarbonate and potassium chloride
Subjects are also asked to make  ratings about their perceptions  of these taste stimuli, for 
instance, to judge the intensity  of a taste. All stimuli  are commercially  available products,  or 
made from commercially  available  products. Subjects are then asked to complete several  tasks 
on the computer that require learning how abstract cues might  predict the delivery  of a bitter, 
neutral, or  juice solution. The entire session takes approximately 1 hour and 15 minutes.  
Genetic Sample : Specimen  Collection of Saliva
An oral fluid  sample  will be collected in an Oragene  DNA container provided by [CONTACT_25230].  
This sample  will be used for full genome  analysis (GWAS) to show whether  genes have  a role in 
substance use, identify genes influencing behaviors  and other characteristics of brain structure 
and function,  and examining genetic variation  across groups  - comparing control  subjects to the 
addicted population. To do this we will use Illumina Human1M-Duo Infinium Human1M 
BeadChips that feature > one million markers to interrogate human genetic variation using single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)  and copy number variation (CNV) probes. The BeadChip 
specifically targets genes, tag SNPs,  copy number variation, and other high-value genomic 
regions, offering the most  comprehensive genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_878400] a single microarray. The novel 
CNV content on the Human1M  BeadChip was developed in collaboration with DECODE 
Genetics and features  more than one million SNPs for genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_878401] 52,167  markers designed  to specifically  target  nearly 9,000 copy number variant  
(CNV) regions  of the genome not currently  available in any public database, for a total of over 
1,070,[ADDRESS_1227220]  reached an 
approximate tablespoon  level (takes  about 2-5 minutes).  Subjects will not be allowed to eat, 
drink, smoke or chew gum for [ADDRESS_1227221] attained proper  approval from their 
institution’s IRB. 
6.DATA ANALYSIS: note, as mentioned  earlier,  the current tasks are designed to assess 
effect sizes compared to memantine data gathered as part of the approved  study, in order 
to estimate power for future planned large-scale studies.
6a. General Task Analysis Approaches: 
fMRI – Data Processing:
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
18 | P ageWe will use a traditional massively univariate approach for block and event-related fMRI 
Analysis. Event-related responses are modeled using a synthetic hemodynamic response function  
composed of [ADDRESS_1227222] variability.  Functional images  will be reconstructed  offline and each 
run separately realigned  using  INRIAlign37. A mean  functional image volume  will be 
constructed for each session from  the realigned image volumes, that is then used to determine  
parameters for spatial normalization into the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standardized  
space employed  in statistical parametric mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (SPM). The normalization parameters 
determined for the mean functional volume will then be applied to the corresponding functional 
image volumes for each participant. Finally,  the normalized functional images  will be smoothed 
with a [ADDRESS_1227223] will be selected  using strategies  employed in recent publications from  our group e.g. 113, 
114, 67. 
Statistical Parametric Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (SPM5) analyses will test pre- to post-treatment differences in 
fMRI regions of interest (ROIs) during decision making for owned and control  items  on the 
symptom provocation task. The primary ROIs  for treatment effects  include  bilateral  NAcc,  ACC 
and bilateral OFC.  These  and other  task-relevant ROIs will be defined as 16 mm diameter 
spheres around x, y, z coordinates determined  from our current data.  Mean estimates of signal 
change (i.e., beta-weights  from  fMRI regression models) within each ROI will be examined 
separately using Bonferroni correction will be used to guard  against  alpha inflation due to 
multiple comparisons.  As a secondary analysis, in the event that our new dataset  shows 
somewhat different  main effects of task (i.e., peak activation foci in slightly  different regions), 
we can use the Wake  Forest University  toolbox to draw anatomically-based regions-of-interest.   
SPM analyses can then test these  using averaged  % BOLD signal change  estimates from the 
entire region,  or SPM small-volume correction to determine the peak  group effect difference  
within the study ROIs.
Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_878402]/inefficiently engaged 
due to factors interfering with proper  interregional communication (e.g., disordered cellular 
firing, or as hypothesized here,  NMDAR/DA-D2 abnormalities. The recent emphasis placed  on 
obtaining quantitative measurements of brain  connectivity in psychopathology results from  the 
recognition that complex cognition  is not the product of isolated local neural processing; rather, 
it appears mediated by [CONTACT_878452] 'long-range'  connections between nodes. Such a ‘small-world’ 
architecture appears to be an efficient, effective, and resilient property of neural control  systems. 
Thus we will perform an extended  network  analysis to examine functional connectivity across 
task-related circuits. Multimodal  fusion approaches are a powerful  means to dissect such 
underlying abnormalities across different but overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_878403], and are often  
based around  Independent Component Analysis (ICA). Structural Equation Modeling (SEM)  
performs well preliminarily  in this regard, as do allied analytic strategies,  as shown in our papers  
and those of our collaborators113, 114, 115, 30, 31, 69 that employ such approaches  as Granger  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
19 | P agecausality, functional network  connectivity (FNC), and ICA-DBN,  which  does not involve not 
SEM of ROI's directly, but  is conceptually  related and network based. 
6b. Analyses Based on Specific Aims:
Aim 1
The primary  outcome for this Aim will be BOLD activation during  the A1 phase of the MID 
task. The effects of Saracatinib  treatment  on activation will be assessed using linear mixed 
models. In these models, BOLD response will represent the dependent measure and family 
history status  (FHP vs. FHN) will represent  a between-subjects explanatory variable, while 
treatment (placebo vs. Saracatinib) and ROI (NAcc vs. OFC) will be included  as within-subjects 
factors. All 2-way interactions will be modeled and interpreted using graphical displays and 
appropriate post-hoc tests. In the above analysis, we anticipate a family history by [CONTACT_878453]. Secondary analyses will 
include the above analysis performed for activation levels observed during  the A2 phase and 
examination of additional  ROIs as well as dose and. Similar models as described, excluding 
phase as a factor, will be used to model  BART and EDT outcomes  (subsidiary hypothesis).  In 
these models, we expect  a family history by [CONTACT_878454]. 
Aim 2
BOLD signal activation  in the anterior cingulate  cortex (ACC)  observed during  False Alarms  of 
the GNG task will represent the primary  outcome in this Aim. The effects  of Saracatinib 
treatment on activation  will be assessed using linear  mixed  models with family  history (FHP  vs. 
FHN) included as a between-subjects  factor  and treatment (placebo  vs. Saracatinib)  and response 
type (false alarms vs. correct rejections)  as within-subjects factors.  A significant family  history 
by [CONTACT_878455], but more markedly  in FHN, will be supportive of 
our hypothesis. We will consider  other regions  (BA9,  BA44/45,  BA47, Insula, VS) represented 
as additional  within-subjects factors  in the model described above.  In this analysis, we expect 
Saracatinib to reduce  BOLD signal activation among FHP in each of the regions during  correct 
rejections.
Aim 3
Linear mixed models will be used to evaluate the effects of family history on NAcc BOLD  
response during the ACR  task. These models will include family history  (FHP vs. FHN)  as a 
between-subjects factor  and type of Cue (ETOH-related vs. non-EOTH) as a within-subjects  
factor. We anticipate a significant  group by [CONTACT_878456]-related cues vs. non-alcohol cues compared to 
matched FHN subjects and subsequently experience a greater reduction in NAcc BOLD response  
following Saracatinib  administration. 
Aim 4 
The same statistical  models  described  for Aim 1 will be used to evaluate the effects  of 
Saracatinib and family history on NAcc and OFC activation  during the A1 phase of the PIT-in 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
20 | P agemodified MID task. In these models,  however,  we will include Cue Type (PIT-related vs. Non-
PIT-related) as an additional  within-subjects  variable. We expect a significant family history  by 
[CONTACT_878457], 
with these effects most exaggerated during the presentation of PIT-related  cues. In addition, 
using regression we can test whether PIT responses (using  the out-of-scanner version  used in all 
data from study 126237) show the expected  learning effect.
7.Risks and Data Monitoring Plan:
Under some  circumstances,  it can be a risk for genetic information  about subjects to be known. 
Variation in some genes is known to be directly  related  to risk for certain illnesses. Other genes 
we will be studying in subject DNA may be shown at some  point in the future to be related to 
illnesses. Since the results  of these genetic tests may allow prediction of risk of illness in some 
cases, we will make every effort to keep  the results confidential  (only scientists  working on this 
research project will know the results). We will not make any of our laboratory  results available 
to subjects, nor will we  add them to any medical record or release them to  others.
Known risks  may include but are not limited  to issues  related to insurability  or employability or 
those subjects may become aware of information about themselves  or family members that they 
would have preferred not to know. We will not make any of our laboratory  results  available to 
subjects, nor will we add them to subjects’ medical record  or release them to others. 
Additionally, the research  DNA bank will contain DNA samples identified only by a random 
number to reduce the likelihood that the DNA data is connected to the individual from whom it 
was taken. When saliva is collected, subjects may experience dry mouth during the collection.  
No other physical risks  are associated with this procedure.  
The principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_878404], assuring protocol 
compliance, and conducting  the safety  reviews  at the specified frequency  which  must be 
conducted at a minimum of every 6 months (including when reapproval of the protocol is 
sought). During the review process,  the principal  investigator, [CONTACT_878470],  will 
evaluate whether the study should continue  unchanged, require modification/amendment, 
continue or close to enrollment. In addition,  [CONTACT_878469] will consult regularly as required with 
the DSMB  (see paragraphs below)  and seek guidance from them  as required. Either the principal 
investigator, DSMB or Hartford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878405].
The risks associated with the current study are deemed  moderate because we do not view the 
risks associated with the administration of AZD0530  as minimal.
Although we have assessed the proposed  study as one of moderate  risk, the potential exists for 
anticipated and/or unanticipated  adverse  events, serious or otherwise, to occur since it is not 
possible to predict with certainty the absolute risk in any given individual or in advance of first-
hand experience with the proposed study methods. Therefore, we provide a plan for monitoring 
the data and safety of the proposed study as follows:
Plan for  Grading  Adverse Events and Attribution  of Adverse  Events
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
21 | P ageSide effects/adverse experiences are collected  on standardized forms, using the SAFTEE (Levine  
and Schooler, 1986).  The SAFTEE includes 1) open-ended questions about any changes  in 
physical or health  problems, appearance, or activity  level, and 2) yes/no questions  on a specific 
list of symptoms (which correspond to anticipated  adverse events associated with Saracatinib)  
for a specified time period.  For each symptom reported on the SAFTEE  a rater also records the 
date of onset, severity (minimal, mild, moderate, severe), whether it was drug-related, and action  
taken. The SAFTEE is administered at baseline,  during the inpatient  periods, and every  other  day 
during the outpatient treatment periods. We will monitor  the number of patients experiencing 
symptoms and the severity of symptoms.
Adverse events will be monitored for each subject participating in the study and attributed  to the 
study procedures / design by [CONTACT_62674], [CONTACT_878471], according  to the 
following categories:
a.) Definite: Adverse event is clearly related  to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
b.) Probable: Adverse event is  likely  related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
c.) Possible:  Adverse event may be  related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely not to be related to the investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s).
            e.) Unrelated: Adverse event is clearly not related to investigational 
             procedures(s)/agent(s).         
The following scale will be used in grading  the severity of adverse events noted during the study:
1. Mild  adverse event
2. Moderate adverse event
3. Severe
An adverse  event may be graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse 
Event. Similarly, an adverse event  may be graded as moderate but still meet  the criteria for an 
SAE. It is important for the PI [INVESTIGATOR_22415] “seriousness” 
when determining whether reporting  to the IRB is necessary.
The principal investigator, [CONTACT_878470],  will conduct a review of all adverse events 
upon completion of every study subject. The principal investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_878406], report  to both the HH and Yale IRB’s  plus the DSMB and 
determine collectively  if modifications  to the protocol or consent form are required.
DSMB. 
We will be accessing  the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) developed  for [CONTACT_878472]’s Alcoholism Center. The DSMB  is multi-disciplinary and includes  representatives with 
expertise in the primary components of the proposed trial. The following individuals will be on 
the DSMB as voting members:
Robert Swift, MD, PhD, [CONTACT_341335] (Brown)/ VAMC Chmn.,  DSMB
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
22 | P ageRobert Stout, PhD,  (Yale) Director, Decision  Sci. Int.,  Statistician, DSMB
Howard Zonana, MD, (Yale) Dir., Dept.  Psychiatry Ethics Committee,  IRB Rep., DSMB
Lisa Newton, PhD,  [CONTACT_30326], (Fairfield  Univ). Ethicist,  DSMB
This DSMB will follow the operational guidelines outlined in the YCCI plan for  DSMBs.  
 Frequency of Review  of Safety Reports
Subjects are recruited  at a maximum rate of 2 per month; thus, the DSMB will review safety 
reports two times a year. More frequent meetings  will be scheduled if indicated by [CONTACT_878458].
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan (developed  in accordance with  the NIAAA guidelines)
The DSM plan  must designate an experienced, qualified professional (usually the PI) who 
can distinguish  a serious adverse  event (SAE) from a non-serious adverse  event (AE).
All staff are required  to complete Hartford  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s CITI Training and receive passing scores  
on modules  involving the detection and evaluation of adverse  events, and reporting serious 
adverse events. The P.I. on the project,  [CONTACT_878471], is a trained MD psychiatrist. He is 
responsible for all overall  project management and supervision, including subject clinical 
assessment and medical screening, and drug administration. Each  subject who has an 
unanticipated adverse  event  is checked by [CONTACT_878459]/ or the Principal 
Investigator. Each  event is logged, noted and a write up is placed in their folder.  All events are 
reported to Hartford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878407].
The DSM  plan must indicate that serious adverse events will be reported to the local  IRB 
and to the  NIAAA  project officer within [ADDRESS_1227224].
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
23 | P ageThe DSM plan must specify that female subjects who are pregnant,  nursing, or not using  
effective methods of birth control will be excluded  from studies involving the 
administration of  alcohol and/or drugs.
All females  are pregnancy tested who are of child-bearing age. If they are currently nursing 
pregnant or planning on becoming pregnant within [ADDRESS_1227225] to 
or from the study procedure, but will either take a taxi cab or be driven by a friend/spouse.  
Following assessment, they will be administered either a [ADDRESS_1227226] indicate that NIAAA  
guidelines for the administration of alcohol will be followed.  These guidelines can be found 
at the following web address: http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/extramural/job22.htm  
No alcohol is  administered in this study.
If the study has a follow-up phase, there  must be a specific plan for referral to treatment 
during follow-up of any patient requiring additional intervention due to significantly 
increased alcohol consumption or serious psychiatric/medical symptoms. 
Other than a phone call from study staff one week post last study drug dose, the study does not 
have a follow up phase. The purpose of phone  call is to follow-up on any symptoms participants 
may have  to the study drug. Since  the study drug does not affect alcohol consumption and is only 
provided at single doses,  and since  this study does not recruit subjects meeting criteria for DSM-
IV alcohol dependence, careful monitoring post-last dose for adverse  effects  using EKG and 
biochemistry is sufficient as a safety monitoring plan for this  drug.
The DSM plan must indicate that all adverse events during follow-up  will be reported 
(SAEs within 48 hours) to the IRB and  NIAAA.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
24 | P ageThis study does not have a follow up phase,  other than a phone call one week after the last study 
dose. All participants  have  access  to a 24 hour, 7 days/week line to the Principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_878408]. 
The DSM plan must briefly describe the procedures for data quality  assurance  and 
confidentiality.
Confidentiality risks will be minimized  by [CONTACT_878460] a locked file cabinet. We will maintain  
confidentiality by [CONTACT_878461]-HIPAA compliant  and approved  by [CONTACT_878462]. All information and data concerning volunteers are confidential 
and never  released to anyone outside of the project without the volunteer's written authorization. 
The identity of participants is never  revealed in research reports or conferences. A Certificate of 
Confidentiality will be  obtained.
Protection of these data will be maintained through password protected databases and computer 
workstations, as well as with auto-locking  room doors  and locked  file cabinets that contain this 
data.  Overview by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pearlson and audits by [CONTACT_878463][INVESTIGATOR_307], Yale University HIC, and 
NIAAA will ensure  proper compliance with these and all confidentiality protocols.
Data quality  is assured by [CONTACT_878464], use of forms designed to minimize 
errors and  oversight from  the data  management component of the clinical core. 
Data will be analyzed and made available  to other qualified  researchers  on request.   All data are 
kept in locked file cabinets in a locked  office and all information entered into a database is 
password protected. Data are kept on average  for [ADDRESS_1227227]. 
This is  not a phase III clinical trial.
ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements: The application includes a trial which  requires  registration in 
ClinicalTrials.gov.
References
1. Allen, T.J.; Moeller,  F.; Rhoades,  H.M.; and Cherek, D.R.  Impulsivity and  history of 
drug dependence. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 50(2):137-145, 1998.
2. Anderson,  A.K., and Sobel, N. Dissociating intensity from valence as sensory  inputs  to 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
25 | P ageemotion. Neuron, 39(4):581-3, 2003.
3. Asahi, S.;  Okamoto, Y.; Okada, G.; Yamawaki, S.; and  Yokota, N. Negative correlation 
between right  prefrontal activity during response inhibition  and impulsiveness: a fMRI 
study. European Archives of Psychiatry & Clinical Neuroscience, 254(4):245-51, 2004.
4. Barnes, G.M.; Welte, J.W.; Hoffman,  J.H.; and  Dintcheff,  B.A. Shared predictors of 
youthful gambling,  substance  use, and delinquency. Psychol Addict Behav, 19(2):165-74,  
2005.
5. Beck, A.; Schlagenhauf, F.;  Wustenberg,  T.; Hein, J.;  Kienast,  T.; Kahnt,  T.; Schmack, 
K.; Hagele, C.; Knutson, B.; Heinz,  A.; and  Wrase, J. Ventral striatal activation during  
reward anticipation correlates with impulsivity in  alcoholics. Biol  Psychiatry , 66(8):734-
42, 2009.
6. Bellgrove, M.A.; Hester, R.; and Garavan, H. The functional neuroanatomical  correlates 
of response variability: Evidence from  a response inhibition task.  Neuropsychologia, 
42(14):1910-1916, 2004.
7. Berns, G.S.; McClure,  S.M.; Pagnoni, G.; and Montague, P.R.  Predictability modulates 
human brain response to reward. Journal of Neuroscience, 21(8):2793-8, 2001.
8. Bickel,  W., Odum AL, Madden  GJ. Impulsivity and cigarette smoking: delay discounting 
in current, never  and ex-smokers.  Psychopharmacologia, 146:447-454, 1999.
9. Bisaga, A.,  and Evans, S.M.  Acute effects of memantine in  combination with  alcohol  in 
moderate drinkers.  Psychopharmacology (Berl) , 172(1):16-24,  2004.
10. Bjork, J.M.;  Hommer, D.W.; Grant,  S.J.;  and Danube, C. Impulsivity in  abstinent  
alcohol-dependent patients: relation  to control subjects and  type 1-/type 2-like traits.  
Alcohol, 34(2-3):133-50, 2004.
11. Bjork, J.M.;  Knutson,  B.; Fong, G.W.; Caggiano, D.M.;  Bennett, S.M.; and Hommer, 
D.W. Incentive-elicited brain  activation in adolescents: similarities  and differences from  
young adults. Journal of Neuroscience, 24(8):1793-802,  2004.
12. Blum, K.; Braverman,  E.R.; Holder,  J.M.;  Lubar, J.F.; Monastra, V.J.; Miller, D.; Lubar, 
J.O.; Chen, T.J.; and Comings, D.E. Reward  deficiency syndrome: a biogenetic model for 
the diagnosis and  treatment of impulsive, addictive, and  compulsive  behaviors. Journal  of 
Psychoactive Drugs , 32:1-112, 2000.
13. Booth, J.R.;  Burman, D.D.; Meyer,  J.R.; Lei, Z.; Trommer,  B.L.; Davenport, N.D.; Li, 
W.; Parrish, T.B.; Gitelman, D.R.; and Mesulam,  M.M. Neural  development of selective 
attention and response inhibition. Neuroimage, 20(2):737-51, 2003.
14. Botvinick, M.M. Conflict monitoring and decision making: reconciling two perspectives 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
26 | P ageon anterior cingulate function. Cogn Affect  Behav Neurosci, 7(4):356-66, 2007.
15. Braver,  T.S.; Barch, D.M.; Gray, J.R.; Molfese, D.L.; and  Snyder, A.  Anterior cingulate  
cortex and response conflict: effects of frequency,  inhibition  and errors. Cerebral  Cortex , 
11(9):825-36, 2001.
16. Breiter, H.C.; Gollub,  R.L.; Weisskoff,  R.M.; Kennedy, D.N.;  Makris, N.; Berke, J.D.; 
Goodman, J.M.; Kantor, H.L.; Gastfriend,  D.R.; Riorden,  J.P.; Mathew, R.T.; Rosen, 
B.R.; and Hyman, S.E. Acute effects of cocaine on human brain  activity and  emotion.  
Neuron, 19(3):591-611, 1997.
17. Breiter, H.C.; Aharon, I.; Kahneman, D.; Dale, A.; and Shizgal, P. Functional imaging of neural responses to expectancy and experience of  monetary gains  and losses. Neuron, 
30(2):619-39, 2001.
18. Cardinal, R.N., and Everitt, B.J. Neural  and psychological mechanisms underlying 
appetitive learning: links  to drug addiction.  Current  Opi[INVESTIGATOR_878409] , 14(2):156-
62, 2004.
19. Cardinal, R.N.; Winstanley, C.A.; Robbins, T.W.;  and Everitt, B.J. Limbic corticostriatal 
systems and delayed reinforcement. Annals of the  [LOCATION_001] Academy  of Sciences, 2004.
20. Casey,  B.J.; Trainor, R.J.;  Orendi, J.L.; Schubert, A.B.;  Nystrom, L.E.; Giedd, J.N.; 
Castellanos, F.;  Haxby, J.V.; Noll, D.C.; Cohen, J.D.; Forman, S.D.; Dahl, R.E.; and  
Rapoport, J.L. A  developmental functional MRI  study of prefrontal  activation during 
performance of a  Go-No-Go task. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(6):835-847, 
1997.
21. Coleman,  L.G., Jr.; Jarskog,  L.F.;  Moy, S.S.; and Crews,  F.T. Deficits in adult prefrontal 
cortex neurons and behavior following early post-natal NMDA antagonist treatment. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav, 93(3):322-30, 2009.
22. Congdon, E., and Canli, T. A neurogenetic  approach to impulsivity.  J Pers, 76(6):1447-
84, 2008.
23. Cummings,  P., and Quan, L. Trends in unintentional drowning:  the role of alcohol  and 
medical care.  JAMA, 281(23):2198-202, 1999.
24. Dawe, S.;  Gullo, M.J.; and Loxton, N.J. Reward drive  and rash impulsiveness  as 
dimensions of impulsivity: Implications for  substance misuse. Addictive Behaviors, 
29(7):1389-1405, 2004.
25. Dawe, S.,  and Loxton,  N.J. The role of impulsivity in the development of substance use 
and eating disorders. Neuroscience  & Biobehavioral Reviews, 28(3):343-51, 2004.
26. de Wit, H.; Enggasser, J.L.; and Richards,  J.B. Acute administration of d-amphetamine 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
27 | P agedecreases impulsivity in healthy volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology , 27(5):813-25, 
2002.
27. Delgado, M.R.; Nystrom, L.E.; Fissell, C.; Noll, D.C.; and Fiez, J.A. Tracking the hemodynamic responses to reward and  punishment in  the striatum.  Journal  of 
Neurophysiology, 84(6):3072-3077, 2000.
28. Delgado, M.R.; Locke, H.M.; Stenger,  V.A.; and Fiez, J.A. Dorsal striatum responses to 
reward and  punishment: Effects of valence  and magnitude manipulations. Cognitive,  
Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience , 3(1):27-38,  2003.
29. Demirci, O.; Clark, V.P.; Magnotta, V.A.; Andreasen, N.C.; Lauriello, J.; Kiehl, K.A.;  
Pearlson, G.D.;  and Calhoun, V.D. A Review  of Challenges  in the Use of fMRI  for 
Disease Classification / Characterization and A Projection  Pursuit Application  from 
Multi-site fMRI Schizophrenia  Study. Brain Imaging Behav, 2(3):147-226, 2008.
30. Demirci, O.; Stevens, M.C.;  Andreasen,  N.C.; Michael, A.; Liu, J.; White, T.; Pearlson, 
G.D.; Clark, V.P.; and  Calhoun,  V.D. Investigation of  relationships between fMRI  brain  
networks in the  spectral domain using ICA and Granger causality reveals distinct 
differences between schizophrenia  patients and healthy controls. Neuroimage, 46(2):419-
31, 2009.
31. Elliott, R.; Newman, J.L.; Longe, O.A.; and Deakin, J.F.W.  Differential response patterns  
in the striatum  and orbitofrontal cortex to financial reward in  humans: a  parametric  
functional magnetic resonance  imaging study.  Journal of Neuroscience , 23(1):303-307, 
2003.
32. Evenden,  J.L. Impulsivity:  A discussion  of clinical and  experimental findings.  Journal  of 
Psychopharmacology, 13(2):180-92, 1999.
33. Evenden,  J.L. Varieties of  impulsivity.  Psychopharmacology, 146(4):348-361, 1999.
34. Forman, S.D.; Dougherty,  G.G.; Casey,  B.J.;  Siegle, G.J.;  Braver, T.S.; Barch,  D.M.; 
Stenger, V.A.; Wick-Hull, C.; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_878410], L.A.; and  Lorensen,  E. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_878411]-
dependent activation  of rostral  anterior cingulate. Biological Psychiatry , 55(5):531-7,  
2004.
35. Freire, L.; [COMPANY_002], A.; and Mangin, J.F. What  is the best similarity measure for motion  
correction in fMRI time series? IEEE  Trans  Med Imaging, 21(5):470-84, 2002.
36. Friston,  K.J. Commentary and opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]: II.  Statistical  parametric  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: ontology and  
current issues. J  Cereb Blood Flow Metab, 15(3):361-70, 1995.
37. Garavan, H.; Ross, T.J.; and Stein, E.A. Right  hemispheric  dominance of inhibitory 
control: an  event-related functional  MRI study. Proceedings of  the National  Academy of 
Sciences of  the [LOCATION_002] of America, 96(14):8301-6, 1999.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
28 | P age38. George,  M.S.;  Anton, R.F.; Bloomer, C.; Teneback, C.;  Drobes,  D.J.;  Lorberbaum,  J.P.;  
Nahas, Z.; and Vincent, D.J.  Activation  of prefrontal cortex and anterior thalamus in 
alcoholic subjects on exposure  to alcohol-specific cues. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 58(4):345-
52, 2001.
39. Glahn,  D.C.;  Almasy, L.; Blangero, J.; Burk, G.M.; Estrada, J.; Peralta, J.M.;  Meyenberg,  
N.; Castro, M.P.; Barrett, J.; Nicolini, H.; Raventos,  H.; and Escamilla, M.A. 
Adjudicating neurocognitive endophenotypes for  schizophrenia. Am J  Med Genet B 
Neuropsychiatr Genet , 144(2):242-9, 2007.
40. Glahn,  D.C.;  Bearden, C.E.; Barguil,  M.; Barrett,  J.; Reichenberg,  A.; Bowden, C.L.; 
Soares, J.C.; and  Velligan, D.I. The Neurocognitive Signature [CONTACT_878468]. Biol Psychiatry, 2007.
41. Glahn,  D.C.;  Lovallo, W.R.;  and Fox, P.T.  Reduced  amygdala  activation in  young adults 
at high risk of  alcoholism: studies from the oklahoma family health  patterns  project.  Biol  
Psychiatry, 61(11):1306-9, 2007.
42. Glahn,  D.C.;  Paus, T.; and Thompson, P.M. Imaging genomics: Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_878412]. Hum Brain  Mapp, 28(6):461-3, 2007.
43. Glahn,  D.C.;  Thompson, P.M.; and Blangero,  J. Neuroimaging endophenotypes:  
Strategies for finding genes influencing brain structure and function.  Hum Brain Mapp, 
28(6):488-501, 2007.
44. Gottfried, J.A.; Deichmann, R.; Winston, J.S.; and Dolan, R.J. Functional heterogeneity in human olfactory cortex: An event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
study. Journal of Neuroscience , 22(24):[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE], 2002.
45. Gueorguieva, R., and Krystal, J.H. Move over ANOVA: progress in  analyzing repeated-
measures data  and its reflection in papers published in  the Archives of General 
Psychiatry. Arch  Gen Psychiatry, 61(3):310-7, 2004.
46. Haber,  S.N.,  and Knutson, B.  The Reward  Circuit: Linking  Primate Anatomy and Human  
Imaging. Neuropsychopharmacology , 2009.
47. Hager,  F.; Volz,  H.P.; Gaser, C.; Mentzel,  H.J.; Kaiser, W.A.; and  Sauer, H. Challenging 
the anterior attentional system with a continuous performance  task: a functional  magnetic  
resonance imaging  approach.  European Archives of Psychiatry  & Clinical Neuroscience, 
248(4):161-70, 1998.
48. Heinze,  H.J.;  Heldmann,  M.; Voges,  J.; Hinrichs,  H.; Marco-Pallares, J.; Hopf, J.M.; 
Muller, U.J.; Galazky,  I.; Sturm, V.; Bogerts, B.; and Munte,  T.F. Counteracting 
Incentive Sensitization in  Severe  Alcohol  Dependence using Deep Brain Stimulation of 
the Nucleus Accumbens: Clinical and Basic Science Aspects. Front  Hum Neurosci, 3:22, 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
29 | P age2009.
49. Heitzeg, M.M.;  Zucker, R.A.; and Zubieta, J.-K. Frontal dysregulation  during  response 
inhibition in children of alcoholics. American  Journal of  Neuropsychopharmacology, 
Abstracts 2008.
50. Hershey, T.; Black, K.J.; Hartlein, J.;  Braver, T.S.; Barch,  D.M.; Carl, J.L.; and  
Perlmutter, J.S. Dopaminergic  modulation  of response inhibition: an  fMRI  study. Brain  
Res Cogn Brain Res , 20(3):438-48,  2004.
51. Hester, R.; Nestor,  L.; and Garavan,  H. Impaired  error  awareness  and anterior  cingulate 
cortex hypoactivity in chronic cannabis  users.  Neuropsychopharmacology, 34(11):2450-
8, 2009.
52. Heyman, G.M. Resolving the  contradictions  of addiction.  Behavioral  & Brain  Sciences , 
19(4):561-610, 1996.
53. Hintze, J. NCSS, LLC. Haysville,  Utah, 2008.
54. Hoffman, P.L. NMDA  receptors in alcoholism. Int Rev  Neurobiol, 56:35-82,  2003.
55. Holroyd, C.B.; Nieuwenhuis, S.; Yeung, N.; Nystrom, L.; Mars, R.B.; Coles, M.G.; and Cohen, J.D. Dorsal  anterior  cingulate cortex  shows  fMRI response to  internal and  
external error signals. Nature Neuroscience , 7(5):497-8, 2004.
56. Holter, S.M.; Danysz,  W.; and Spanagel, R. Evidence for alcohol  anti-craving  properties 
of memantine. Eur J Pharmacol, 314(3):R1-2, 1996.
57. Hommer, D.W.;  Knutson,  B.; Fong, G.W.; Bennett, S.; Adams, C.M.; and  Varnera, J.L. 
Amygdalar recruitment during anticipation of monetary rewards: an event-related fMRI study. Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences , 985:476-8, 2003.
58. Hommer, D. Motivation  in alcoholism.  International Conference on Applications of  
Neuroimaging to Alcoholism. New Haven, CT, 2004. pp. http://info.med.yale.edu/ctna/ICANA_dr_program.htm.
59. Hommer, D., Bjork JM, Knutson B, Caggiano D, Fong G,  Danube  C. Motivation in 
children of  alcoholics. Alc  Clin Exper Res, 28(5):22A, 2004.
60. Horn,  N.R.; Dolan,  M.; Elliott, R.; Deakin, J.F.; and Woodruff, P.W. Response inhibition  
and impulsivity: an fMRI  study.  Neuropsychologia, 41(14):1959-66, 2003.
61. Jentsch,  J.D.,  and Taylor, J.R. Impulsivity resulting from frontostriatal dysfunction in 
drug abuse: implications for the control  of behavior  by [CONTACT_329795]-related stimuli. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) , 146(4):373-90, 1999.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
30 | P age62. Johansson, A.K., and Hansen, S.  Novelty  seeking and  harm avoidance  in relation to 
alcohol drinking in intact  rats and  following axon-sparing lesions  to the amygdala and 
ventral striatum. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 37(2):147-56, 2002.
63. Kaufman,  J.N.; Ross, T.J.; Stein, E.A.; and Garavan, H. Cingulate hypoactivity in 
cocaine users during a GO-NOGO task as  revealed by [CONTACT_15992]-related functional magnetic 
resonance imaging.  Journal  of Neuroscience, 23(21):7839-43, 2003.
64. Kiehl, K.A.;  Liddle, P.F.; and Hopfinger,  J.B. Error processing  and the rostral anterior  
cingulate: an event-related fMRI study. Psychophysiology, 37(2):216-23, 2000.
65. Kiehl, K.A.;  Smith, A.M.; Hare, R.D.;  and Liddle,  P.F. An event-related potential 
investigation of response inhibition in schizophrenia  and psychopathy. Biological  
Psychiatry, 48(3):210-21, 2000.
66. Kiehl, K.A.;  Stevens, M.C.; Laurens, K.R.; Pearlson, G.; Calhoun, V.D.; and  Liddle, P.F. 
An adaptive reflexive processing  model of neurocognitive function: supporting evidence  
from a large scale  (n = 100) fMRI study of an  auditory  oddball task.  Neuroimage, 
25(3):899-915, 2005.
67. Kilts,  C.D.;  Schweitzer, J.B.; Quinn, C.K.; Gross, R.E.; Faber, T.L.; Muhammad,  F.; Ely, 
T.D.; Hoffman, J.M.;  and Drexler,  K.P. Neural activity related  to drug craving in  cocaine  
addiction. Arch  Gen Psychiatry, 58(4):334-41, 2001.
68. Kim, D.I.; Manoach, D.S.; Mathalon, D.H.; Turner, J.A.; Mannell, M.; Brown, G.G.;  
Ford, J.M.;  Gollub, R.L.; White,  T.; Wible, C.; Belger, A.; Bockholt, H.J.; Clark, V.P.; 
Lauriello, J.;  O'Leary, D.; Mueller,  B.A.;  Lim, K.O.; Andreasen, N.; Potkin,  S.G.; and 
Calhoun, V.D. Dysregulation of working memory and  default-mode networks in 
schizophrenia using independent component  analysis,  an fBIRN and  MCIC  study.  Hum  
Brain Mapp, 30(11):3795-811,  2009.
69. Kirby, K.N.; Petry,  N.M.; and Bickel,  W.K. Heroin addicts have higher discount rates  for 
delayed rewards  than non-drug-using controls. Journal  of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 128(1):78-87, 1999.
70. Knutson, B.;  Westdorp, A.; Kaiser, E.; and Hommer, D.  FMRI visualization of brain 
activity during a monetary incentive delay task. Neuroimage , 12(1):20-7, 2000.
71. Knutson, B.;  Fong,  G.W.;  Bennett, S.M.; Adams,  C.M.; and Hommer, D. A region of 
mesial prefrontal cortex  tracks monetarily rewarding outcomes: characterization with  
rapid event-related fMRI.  Neuroimage, 18(2):263-72, 2003.
72. Knutson, B.;  Bjork,  J.M.;  Fong, G.M.; Hommer, D.W.;  Mattay, V.S.; and Weinberger, 
D.R. Amphetamine modulates human incentive processing. Neuron, 43(2):261-9, 2004.
73. Konishi, S.; Nakajima, K.; Uchida, I.; Sekihara, K.; and Miyashita, Y.  No-go dominant 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
31 | P agebrain activity  in human inferior prefrontal  cortex revealed by [CONTACT_878465].  European Journal of Neuroscience, 10(3):1209-13,  1998.
74. Koob, G.F.; Sanna, P.P.;  and Bloom, F.E.  Neuroscience of addiction. Neuron, 21(3):467-
76, 1998.
75. Koob, G.F. Neuroadaptive  mechanisms of addiction: studies on the extended amygdala. 
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol, 13(6):442-52,  2003.
76. Koob, G.F. Alcoholism: allostasis and beyond. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 27(2):232-43, 2003.
77. Koob, G.F.; Roberts, A.J.; Kieffer,  B.L.; Heyser, C.J.; Katner, S.N.; Ciccocioppo, R.;  and 
Weiss, F. Animal models  of motivation  for drinking in rodents with a  focus on opi[INVESTIGATOR_878413].  Recent  Dev Alcohol, 16:263-81, 2003.
78. Krupi[INVESTIGATOR_25195], E.M.; Neznanova, O.; Masalov, D.;  Burakov, A.M.; Didenko, T.; Romanova, 
T.; Tsoy, M.; Bespalov, A.; Slavina, T.Y.;  Grinenko, A.A.; Petrakis,  I.L.; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289], B.; 
Gueorguieva, R.;  Zvartau, E.E.; and Krystal,  J.H. Effect of memantine  on cue-induced  
alcohol craving in recovering  alcohol-dependent patients. Am J Psychiatry, 164(3):519-
23, 2007.
79. Krystal,  J.H.;  Petrakis, I.L.;  Krupi[INVESTIGATOR_25195], E.; Schutz,  C.; Trevisan, L.; and  D'Souza, D.C.  
NMDA receptor antagonism and the ethanol intoxication signal:  from alcoholism  risk to  
pharmacotherapy. Ann N Y Acad Sci, 1003:176-84, 2003.
80. Krystal,  J.H.;  Petrakis, I.L.;  Mason, G.; Trevisan, L.; and  D'Souza, D.C. N-methyl-D-
aspartate glutamate receptors  and alcoholism: reward, dependence,  treatment, and  
vulnerability. Pharmacol Ther, 99(1):79-94,  2003.
81. Krystal,  J.H.;  D'Souza, D.C.;  Gallinat,  J.; Driesen, N.; Abi-Dargham, A.; Petrakis, I.;  
Heinz, A.; and Pearlson, G. The vulnerability to alcohol  and substance  abuse  in 
individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia. Neurotox Res, 10(3-4):235-52,  2006.
82. Lehohla, M.; Kellaway, L.; and Russell, V.A. NMDA receptor function in  the prefrontal  
cortex of a rat model  for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Metab Brain  Dis, 19(1-
2):35-42, 2004.
83. Lejuez,  C.W.; Aklin,  W.M.;  Zvolensky, M.J.; and  Pedulla, C.M. Evaluation  of the 
Balloon Analogue Risk  Task (BART) as a predictor of  adolescent real-world risk-taking 
behaviours. Journal of  Adolescence, 26(4):475-9, 2003.
84. Liddle,  P.F.; Kiehl, K.A.; and Smith, A.M. Event-related fMRI  study of response 
inhibition. Human Brain Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 12(2):100-9, 2001.
85. Mannell,  M.V.;  Franco, A.R.; Calhoun, V.D.; Canive, J.M.; Thoma, R.J.; and Mayer,  
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
32 | P ageA.R. Resting  state  and task-induced deactivation:  A methodological comparison in 
patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls. Hum Brain  Mapp, 2009.
86. Marczinski,  C.A., and Fillmore, M.T. Dissociative antagonistic effects  of caffeine on 
alcohol-induced impairment of behavioral  control. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol, 
11(3):228-36, 2003.
87. Meda, S.A.; Stevens, M.C.; Potenza, M.N.; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289], B.; Gueorguieva, R.;  Andrews, 
M.M.; Thomas, A.D.; Muska, C.; Hylton, J.L.; and Pearlson,  G.D. Investigating the 
behavioral and  self-report constructs of  impulsivity  domains  using principal  component  
analysis. Behav  Pharmacol, 20(5-6):390-9,  2009.
88. Menon, V.; Adleman, N.E.; White,  C.D.; Glover, G.H.;  and Reiss, A.L. Error-related 
brain activation during a Go/NoGo  response  inhibition task.  Human Brain Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] , 
12(3):131-43, 2001.
89. Michael, A.M.; Baum, S.A.;  Fries, J.F.; Ho, B.C.; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_98803], R.K.; Andreasen, N.C.; and 
Calhoun, V.D. A method to fuse  fMRI tasks through spatial correlations: applied to  
schizophrenia. Hum Brain  Mapp, 30(8):2512-29, 2009.
90. Mitchell,  S.H. Measures of impulsivity in cigarette smokers and non-smokers. 
Psychopharmacology, 146(4):455-64, 1999.
91. Moeller, F.; Barratt, E.S.; Dougherty, D.M.; Schmitz, J.M.; and Swann,  A.C.  Psychiatric 
aspects of  impulsivity. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(11):1783-1793, 2001.
92. Mostofsky, S.H.;  Schafer, J.G.; Abrams, M.T.; Goldberg, M.C.; Flower, A.A.;  Boyce, A.; 
Courtney, S.M.;  Calhoun, V.D.; Kraut, M.A.; Denckla, M.B.; and Pekar,  J.J. fMRI  
evidence that the neural basis of response inhibition is task-dependent.  Cognitive  Brain  
Research, 17(2):419-30, 2003.
93. Nagy,  J. Alcohol  Related Changes in Regulation of NMDA Receptor  Functions. Curr 
Neuropharmacol, 6(1):39-54, 2008.
94. O'Doherty, J.P.; Deichmann, R.; Critchley,  H.D.; and Dolan,  R.J. Neural responses 
during anticipation of a primary  taste reward. Neuron, 33(5):815-26, 2002.
95. Oliver, Y.P.; Ripley, T.L.; and  Stephens, D.N. Ethanol effects on impulsivity  in two 
mouse strains: similarities to diazepam  and ketamine. Psychopharmacology  (Berl), 
204(4):679-92, 2009.
96. Pagnoni, G.; Zink, C.F.; Montague,  P.R.; and Berns, G.S. Activity in human  ventral 
striatum locked to errors of reward  prediction. Nature  Neuroscience, 5(2):97-8, 2002.
97. Patton, J.H.; Stanford, M.S.; and Barratt,  E.S.  Factor structure of the Barratt  
impulsiveness scale.  Journal  of Clinical Psychology. 51(6):768-74. , 1995.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
33 | P age98. Petrakis, I.L.;  Limoncelli, D.; Gueorguieva,  R.; Jatlow, P.; Boutros,  N.N.;  Trevisan, L.; 
Gelernter, J.; and  Krystal, J.H. Altered  NMDA glutamate  receptor  antagonist response  in 
individuals with a  family  vulnerability to alcoholism. Am J Psychiatry, 161(10):1776-82, 
2004.
99. Porjesz,  B., and Begleiter, H. Neurophysiological factors in individuals at risk for 
alcoholism. Recent  Developments  in Alcoholism, 9:53-67,  1991.
100. Poulos, C.X.; Le, A.D.; and Parker,  J.L. Impulsivity predicts individual susceptibility to  
high levels  of alcohol self-administration. Behavioural Pharmacology , 6(8):810-814,  
1995.
101. Pulido,  C.; Brown, S.A.;  Cummins, K.; Paulus, M.P.;  and Tapert,  S.F. Alcohol  cue 
reactivity task  development. Addict Behav, 2009.
102. Reuter, J.; Raedler, T.; Rose, M.; Hand, I.; Glascher, J.; and Buchel, C. Pathological gambling is linked  to reduced  activation  of the  mesolimbic reward system. Nature 
Neuroscience, Epub  Jan 09,  2005.
103. Ridderinkhof, K.R.; van den  Wildenberg, W.P.; Segalowitz, S.J.; and Carter, C.S. 
Neurocognitive mechanisms of cognitive control: the  role of prefrontal  cortex in  action 
selection, response inhibition, performance monitoring, and reward-based learning. Brain Cogn, 56(2):129-40, 2004.
104. Saunders,  B.; Farag,  N.; Vincent, A.S.; Collins, F.L., Jr.; Sorocco, K.H.;  and Lovallo, 
W.R. Impulsive  errors on a Go-NoGo reaction time task: disinhibitory traits in relation to 
a family history of alcoholism. Alcohol Clin Exp  Res, 32(5):888-94, 2008.
105. Schuckit, M.A. Ethanol-induced changes  in body  sway  in men at high  alcoholism risk. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 42(4):375-9, 1985.
106. Schuckit, M.A.; Tsuang, J.W.; Anthenelli, R.M.; Tipp, J.E.;  and Nurnberger, J.I., Jr. 
Alcohol challenges in  young men from alcoholic pedigrees and control  families:  a report 
from the COGA project. J Stud Alcohol , 57(4):368-77, 1996.
107. Schuckit, M.A., and Smith, T.L. An 8-year  follow-up of 450 sons of alcoholic and 
control subjects.  Arch Gen Psychiatry, 53(3):202-10,  1996.
108. Schweinsburg, A.D.;  Paulus, M.P.; Barlett,  V.C.;  Killeen, L.A.;  Caldwell,  L.C.;  Pulido,  
C.; Brown, S.A.;  and Tapert, S.F. An FMRI study  of response  inhibition  in youths  with  a 
family history  of alcoholism. Annals of the [LOCATION_001]  Academy  of Sciences, 2004.
109. Small, D.M.; Zatorre,  R.J.; Dagher, A.; Evans, A.C.; and  Jones-Gotman, M.  Changes  in 
brain activity related to eating  chocolate:  from pleasure to  aversion. Brain, 124(Pt  
9):1720-33, 2001.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
34 | P age110. Stein, D.J.; Hollander,  E.; Simeon, D.; and Cohen,  L. Impulsivity scores in  patients with  
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Nervous &  Mental  Disease, 182(4):240-1, 
1994.
111. Stein, D.J.; Trestman,  R.L.; Mitropoulou, V.; Coccaro, E.F.; Hollander, E.; and Siever, 
L.J. Impulsivity and serotonergic  function in compulsive personality disorder. Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry & Clinical  Neurosciences, 8(4):393-8, 1996.
112. Stevens, M.C.; Kiehl, K.A.; Pearlson, G.D.; and Calhoun, V.D. Functional neural networks underlying  response inhibition in adolescents and adults. Behav Brain  Res, 
181(1):12-22, 2007.
113. Stevens, M.C.; Kiehl, K.A.; Pearlson, G.D.; and Calhoun, V.D. Brain network dynamics  
during error commission. Hum Brain Mapp, 30(1):24-37, 2009.
114. Sui, J.; Adali, T.; Pearlson, G.D.; and Calhoun, V.D. An  ICA-based  method  for the 
identification of optimal FMRI  features and components using combined group-
discriminative techniques.  Neuroimage , 46(1):73-86, 2009.
115. Swainson, R.;  Cunnington,  R.; Jackson,  G.M.; Rorden,  C.; Peters,  A.M.;  Morris,  P.G.;  
and Jackson, S.R. Cognitive control  mechanisms revealed by [CONTACT_878466]: evidence 
from repeated task-switching.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(6):785-99, 2003.
116. Tapert, S.F.;  Cheung, E.H.; Brown, G.G.;  Frank, L.R.; Paulus, M.P.; Schweinsburg, 
A.D.; Meloy, M.J.; and Brown, S.A. Neural response to alcohol stimuli in adolescents with alcohol use disorder. Arch Gen  Psychiatry , 60(7):727-35, 2003.
117. Tapert, S.F.;  Brown, G.G.; Baratta, M.V.; and Brown,  S.A. fMRI BOLD  response to 
alcohol stimuli in alcohol dependent  young women. Addict Behav, 29(1):33-50, 2004.
118. van Wageningen, H.; Jorgensen, H.A.; Specht, K.; Eichele,  T.; and Hugdahl, K.  The 
effects of the glutamate  antagonist  memantine on brain activation to  an auditory 
perception task.  Hum Brain  Mapp , 30(11):3616-24, 2009.
119. Volavka, J.; Czobor, P.;  Goodwin, D.W.;  Gabrielli, W.F., Jr.; Penick, E.C.; Mednick, 
S.A.; Jensen, P.; and Knop, J. The electroencephalogram after alcohol administration in high-risk men  and the development of alcohol use disorders 10 years later. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry, 53(3):258-63, 1996.
120. Ward, R.J.;  Lallemand, F.;  and de Witte, P. Biochemical and neurotransmitter changes 
implicated in alcohol-induced brain  damage  in chronic or 'binge drinking'  alcohol  abuse.  
Alcohol Alcohol , 44(2):128-35, 2009.
121. Watanabe, J.;  Sugiura,  M.; Sato, K.; Sato, Y.; Maeda,  Y.; Matsue,  Y.; Fukuda, H.; and 
Kawashima, R.  The human prefrontal  and parietal  association  cortices are  involved  in 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
35 | P ageNO-GO performances: an  event-related fMRI study. Neuroimage, 17(3):1207-16, 2002.
122. Wiers, R.W.; Bartholow, B.D.; van den Wildenberg, E.; Thush, C.; Engels, R.C.;  Sher, 
K.J.; Grenard, J.; Ames, S.L.; and Stacy,  A.W. Automatic and  controlled processes and 
the development of addictive behaviors in adolescents:  a review  and a model.  Pharmacol 
Biochem Behav, 86(2):263-83, 2007.
123. Wise, R.A. Neurobiology of addiction.  Current  Opi[INVESTIGATOR_878409] , 6(2):243-51, 
1996.
124. Worsley, K.J., and  Friston,  K.J. Analysis of fMRI time-series revisited--again. 
Neuroimage, 2(3):173-81,  1995.
125. Wrase,  J.; Schlagenhauf,  F.; Kienast,  T.; Wustenberg,  T.; Bermpohl,  F.; Kahnt, T.; Beck, 
A.; Strohle, A.; Juckel, G.; Knutson, B.; and Heinz, A. Dysfunction  of reward processing 
correlates with  alcohol craving in detoxified alcoholics. Neuroimage, 35(2):787-94,  2007.
126. Talmi,  D.; Seymour, B.; Dayan,  P.; and  Dolan, RJ. Human pavlovian-instrumental  
transfer. J Neurosci., 28(2):360-8,  2008.
127. Dickinson, A.; Smith J.; and Mirenowicz J. Dissociation of Pavlovian and  instrumental  
incentive learning under dopamine  antagonists. . Behav Neurosci.  114(3):468-83,  2000.
128. Botvinick MM, Cohen JD, Carter  CS Conflict monitoring and  anterior  cingulate cortex: 
an update. Trends  Cogn Sci , ;8(12):539-46.  2004
129. Carter CS.; Braver TS.; Barch  DM.; Botvinick MM.; Noll  D. and Cohen JD. Anterior 
cingulate cortex,  error detection, and the online monitoring of performance.  Science . 
1;280(5364):747-9, 1998. 
130. Aron  JL.; and  Paulus MP. Location, location:  using functional magnetic    resonance 
imaging to pi[INVESTIGATOR_757827]. Addiction.;[ADDRESS_1227228]  
1:33-43. 2007. 
131. DeVito  EE, Meda SA, Jiantonio R, Potenza  MN,  Krystal  JH, Pearlson GD. Neural
correlates  of impulsivity in  healthy  males and  females with  family histories of 
alcoholism. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Sep;38(10):1854-63. PubMed  PMID: 
23584260; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3746701.
132. Narayanan  B, Stevens MC,  Jiantonio RE, Krystal JH, Pearlson  GD. Effects  of 
memantine on  event-related potential, oscillations, and  complexity in individuals with 
and without family histories of alcoholism. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2013 Mar;74(2):245-57. PubMed PMID:  23384372;  PubMed  Central  PMCID:  PMC3568163.
133. Dager  AD, Anderson BM, Stevens MC, Pulido C, Rosen R, Jiantonio-Kelly RE, Sisante 
JF, Raskin SA,  Tennen H, Austad CS, Wood RM, Fallahi CR, Pearlson  GD. Influence of 
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
36 | P agealcohol use and family  history of alcoholism  on neural response to alcohol cues in college 
drinkers. Alcohol  Clin  Exp Res. 2013 Jan;[ADDRESS_1227229]  1:E161-71. PubMed  PMID: 
23078363; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3548054
134. Andrews  MM, Meda  SA, Thomas  AD, Potenza MN,  Krystal JH, Worhunsky P,  Stevens  
MC, O'Malley  S, Book GA, Reynolds B, Pearlson  GD.  Individuals  family history  
positive for  alcoholism show  functional magnetic resonance  imaging differences in 
reward sensitivity that  are related to impulsivity factors. Biol Psychiatry. 2011Apr 
1;69(7):675-83. PubMed PMID:  21126735; PubMed Central  PMCID:  PMC3677031.
135. Hu JL, Liu G, Li YC, Gao WJ,  Huang YQ. Dopamine D1 receptor-mediated NMDA 
receptor insertion  depends on Fyn but not Src kinase pathway in prefrontal cortical 
neurons. Molecular brain. 2010;3:20. 
136. Wang J, Lanfranco MF, Gibb SL, Yowell QV, Carnicella S,  Ron  D. Long-lasting 
adaptations of the NR2B-containing NMDA receptors in the dorsomedial striatum play a crucial role  in alcohol consumption and  relapse. J  Neurosci. Jul 28 2010;30(30):[ZIP_CODE]-
[ZIP_CODE]. 
137. Nagy J. Alcohol  related changes  in regulation  of NMDA receptor  functions. Current 
neuropharmacology. Mar 2008;6(1):39-54. Dalton RN,  Chetty  R, Stuart M,  Iacona RB, 
Swaisland A. Effects of the  Src inhibitor saracatinib (AZD0530) on renal function  in 
healthy subjects.  Anticancer research.  Jul 2010;30(7):2935-2942. 
138. Baselga J, Cervantes A, Martinelli  E, et al. Phase I safety, pharmacokinetics, and  
inhibition of SRC activity study of saracatinib  in patients with  solid tumors.  Clinical  
cancer research  : an official journal of the American Association for  Cancer Research. 
Oct 1 2010;16(19):4876-4883. 
139. Fujisaka Y, Onozawa Y, Kurata T, et al.  First  report of  the safety, tolerability, and 
pharmacokinetics of the Src kinase  inhibitor saracatinib (AZD0530) in Japanese patients 
with advanced solid  tumours.  Investigational  new drugs. Feb 2013;31(1):108-114. 
140. Hannon  RA,  Finkelman RD, Clack  G, et al. Effects of Src kinase inhibition  by [CONTACT_878467] 
(AZD0530) on bone  turnover  in advanced malignancy in  a Phase I study. Bone.  Apr 
2012;50(4):885-892.
141. Frank  MJ, Seeberger LC, O'Reilly  R C.  By [CONTACT_91243]:  cognitive reinforcement 
learning in parkinsonism. Science. Dec 10 2004;306(5703):1940-1943.
142. Frank  MJ, Moustafa  AA, Haughey  HM, Curran T, Hutchison  KE. Genetic  triple 
dissociation reveals multiple  roles for dopamine  in reinforcement learning.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci  U S A. Oct 9 2007;104(41):[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE].
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018
 Version 12/17/18
37 | P age143. Cservenka  A, Casimo K, Fair DA, Nagel BJ. Resting  state  functional connectivity of the 
nucleus accumbens in  youth  with a family history of  alcoholism. Psychiatry  research. 
Mar 30 2014;221(3):210-219.
144. Weiland  BJ, Welsh RC, Yau WY, Zucker RA, Zubieta JK, Heitzeg MM. Accumbens 
functional connectivity  during  reward  mediates sensation-seeking  and alcohol use in  
high-risk youth. Drug and alcohol dependence. Feb 1 2013;128(1-2):130-139.
145. Waltz  JA, Frank  MJ, Robinson  BM, Gold JM. Selective reinforcement learning deficits 
in schizophrenia support predictions from computational models of striatal-cortical  
dysfunction. Biological psychiatry. Oct 1 2007;62(7):756-764.
HHC-IRB
IRB NUMBER: HHC-2015-0263
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/17/2018