Stress, Salt Excretion, and Nighttime Blood Pressure  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] Last IRB approval date: 01/07/2025   
 Page 1 of 10 Study Title:  Stress, S alt Excretion, and Nighttime Blood P ressur e (SABRE)  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_609462], MD  
IRB Number: AAAS0154  
 
1. Study Purpose and Rationale  
     Blood  pressure  (BP) has a diurnal  rhythm;  it is normally  highest  during  the daytime  period  and lowest  
durin g the nighttime  period  (BP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) . The diurnal  pattern  of BP over  a 24-hour  period  can be 
assessed  using  ambulatory  BP monitoring  (ABPM).   Evidence  indicates  that an abnormal  diurnal  pattern  
of BP on ABPM,  defined  by [CONTACT_609471][INVESTIGATOR_609463], is associated  with  an increased  
risk of cardiovascular  disease  (CVD)  events.   
     Psychological  stress  occurs  when  an individual  perceives  that the environmental  demands  exceed  
his/her  adaptive  capacity.   An individual’s  response  to events  that are representative  of this overload,  
such  as perceived  stress  and negative  affect  including  anger,  hostility,  depression,  vital  exhaustion,  and 
symptoms  of posttraumatic  stress  disorder,  are associa ted with  reduced  BP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_98710]/or  higher  
nighttime  BP.  Exposure  to environmental  factors  which  tax an individual’s  ability  to cope,  including  
lower  socioeconomic  status,  job strain,  and perceived  racism,  are also associated  with  reduced  BP 
dippi[INVESTIGATOR_98710]/or  higher  nighttime  BP.  This study  will examine  the disruption  of the normal  diurnal  
pattern  of sodium  excretion  by [CONTACT_609472] a novel  biological  mechanism  underlying  an 
abnormal  diurnal  pattern  of BP. 
     During  the daytime  period,  the normal  response  to sodium  intake  is increased  BP, which  leads  to 
increased  urinary  sodium  excretion.   Most  of the sodium  that a person  consumes  is excreted  during  the 
daytime  period,  and a minimum  is excreted  during  the nighttime  period.  It has been  hypothesized  that 
when  urinary  sodium  excretion  does  not occur  during  the daytime  period,  urinary  sodium  excretion  is 
shifted toward  the nighttime  period.   Increased  urinary  sodium  excretion  at night  is accompanied  by [CONTACT_609473].   
     Exposure  to an acute  stressor  using  a mental  stress  task normally  increases  urinary  sodium  excretion  
in the laboratory  setting.   However,  there  is substantial  variability  between  individuals  in the degree  of 
stress -induced  sodium  excretion.   Individuals  with  lower  stress -induced  sodium  excretion  who  
experience  psychologic al stress  during  the daytime  may  exhibit  a shift  of urinary  sodium  excretion  from  
the daytime  to nighttime  periods  due to an inability  to excrete  additional  sodium  during  the daytime.   
This abnormal  diurnal  pattern  of urinary  sodium  excretion  may,  in turn,  be associated  with  a smaller  
decline  in BP from  the daytime  to nighttime  periods,  leading  to reduced  BP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_609464]. The overall  goal  of the proposed  study  is to examine  the associations  between  
psychological  stress,  the diurnal  pattern of sodium  excretion,  and the diurnal  pattern  of BP. The aims  of 
the study  are: 
Primary Aim  1: To examine the association between urinary sodium excretion after provoked 
psychological stress and the diurn al pattern of sodium excretion.  
Primary Aim 2 : To examine the association between the diurnal pattern of sodium excretion  
and the diurnal pattern of BP.  
     Two secondary or exploratory aims that will also be investigated:  
Secondary Aim : To examine whether the association between urinary sodium excretion after 
provoked stress and the diurnal pattern of sodium excretion is modified by [CONTACT_609474], experienced during the daytime period.  
 Page 2 of 10 Exploratory Aim : To determine the sociodemographic, behavioral, and psychological trait s, 
chronic stress, and biological stress -related factors that are associated with lower stress -induced 
sodium excretion. Identification of these factors will help determine who is at ri sk for having a 
differential sodium excretion response to psychological stress.  
 
2. Study Design  
     The study  will be conducted  both  in the laboratory  and in the naturalistic  environment  with  a multi -
ethnic  sample  of [ADDRESS_808175] -stress,  and recovery;  salivary  cortisol  will be measure d 
at baseline  and post -recovery;  the urinary  albumin -to-creatinine  ratio  will be measured  at baseline;  
plasma  angiotensin  II and epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]/norepi[INVESTIGATOR_609465] -stress,  and 
a basic  metabolic  panel,  a lipid  panel,  and a Hemoglobin  A1c assessment  will be used  at the baseline  
only.   Blood  pressure  and heart  rate will be measured  continually  during  the Laboratory  Visit (every  five 
minute s) and for the following  24 hours  (every  30 minutes).  
     In the naturalistic  environment,  during  the 24-hour  period  following  the Laboratory  Visit, the diurnal  
pattern  of sodium  excretion  (measured  during  the daytime  and nighttime)  will be assessed  by [CONTACT_609475].  Heart  rate will be monitored  
using  ABPM  and ecological  momentary  assessments  (EMA)  of perceived  stress  will be surveyed.  
     The study has high clinical  significance for improving our  understanding of how psychological stress, 
sodium excretion and its diurnal  pattern, and the diurnal  pattern of BP are linked, and has the potential 
for identifying a treatment target to reduce the CVD risk associated with r educed BP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_007].    
 
3. Study Procedures  
     a. Participant Engagement  
     Interested  individuals  will review  an online  information  sheet  and provide  consent  to participate  in an 
electronic  eligibility  screen.   This form  will provide  the contact  [CONTACT_609476],  
clinical  research  coordinator,  and IRB office  to ensure  that all questions  about  the study,  form,  and 
participant ’s rights  are answer ed before  consent  for screening  is provided.   Consent  must  be provided  
before  access  to the eligibility  screen  is allowed.  
     Individuals  who  pass  the initial  eligibility  screen  will be asked  to provide  contact  [CONTACT_609477] a research  coordinator  by [CONTACT_609478]  a participant -specified  contact  
[CONTACT_609479] . Participants  who  pass  the initial  screen  will also be asked  to provide  their  gender.  This 
is done  to ensure  that gender  distributio n in recruitment  and enrollment  can adhere  to the targeted  
proportions . During  this contact,  the coordinator  will ensure  that potential  participants  understand  the 
study,  are eligible  to participate,  and can communicate  in English  satisfactorily.   After  all participant  
questions  are answered  and eligibility  has been  reconfirmed,  an Enrollment  Visit  will be scheduled.   If 
the Enrollment  Visit cannot  be scheduled  at this time,  the research  coordinator  will contact  [CONTACT_609480]. When  scheduling  the Enrollment  Visit,  the coordinator  
will ask the participant  not to smoke  within  one hour  before  the scheduled  visit time.   
     For the Enrollment  Visit,  participants  will come  to the Shimbo  Hypertension  Lab (Tower  1) at the 
Columbia  University  Medical  Center  between  [ADDRESS_808176] .  A HIPAA  Authorization  form  will also be provided  to the participant.   The 
provision  of consent  on both  forms  is necessary  for further  study  participation.   If consent  is provided,  
demographic  information  will also be collected  at this time.  Participants  will also be asked  to provide  a 
home  address  so coordinators  can provide  an estimation  of transportation  costs  that can be reimbursed  
in future  visits.  Then,  the clinical  research  coordinator  will measure  participant  blood  pressure  three  
times  with  one-minute  intervals  between  measurements.   Measurem ents  will be made  using  an Omron  
HEM -907XL  device.   These  measurements  will be used  to ensure  that participants  are not in violation  of 
the study’s  eligibility  criteria  concerning  hypertension .  The coordinator  will also ensure  that participants  
have  readily  available  veins  for blood  draws  during  the Laboratory  Visit.  A copy  of blood  pressure  
readings  will be provided to participants.   Next,  the “ISQ: Psychometric  Evaluation ” will be administered  
as a short  survey  to ensure  that participants  do not experience  insomnia,  another  condition  precluding  
participation  in the study.  If the participant  does  not meet  eligibili ty criteria  for either  blood  pressure  or 
insomnia,  then  the participant  is compensated  and the visit will end.  
     If the participant  remains  eligible,  then the “Life  Events  Checklist”  and “PTSD  Checklist”  will be 
provided  separate  from  the other  measure s to ensure  that the completion  of these  two questionnaires  
does  not alter  stress  felt during  the Laboratory  Visit. Stress - and demographic -related  measures  will be 
presented  to participants  using  Qualtrics  opened  on a provided  laptop , and the insomnia  survey  will be 
administered  as a paper  form . The participant’s  weight,  height,  hip and waist  circumference,  gender,  
age,  normal  activity  level s, and dietary  limitations  will then  be recorded  on a Bionutrition  Center  form .  
In addition,  a list of foods  provided  by [CONTACT_609481].   This information  will be recorded  for 
research  use and forward ed to the Bionutrition  Center  to prepare  the meals  and snacks  that will be 
consumed  in the three  days  prior  to the Laboratory  Visit.  
     Finally,  the resea rch coordinator  will provide  the participant  with  a home  polysomnography  device  
and instruct  him or her in its use.  This tool is used  to detect  sleep  apnea,  a condi tion that will preclude  
participation  in the study.   An instruction  sheet  will be provided  to participants  with  the device  for their  
reference.   This device  will be used by [CONTACT_609482] .  
Collected  data  will be analyzed  when  the device  is returned  to the Shimbo  Hypertension  Lab (Tower  1) 
within  [ADDRESS_808177]  be returned  to the clinical  research  coordinator.   After  returning  the 
device,  participants  will also be informed  as to whether  they  are eligible  to participate  in the remainder  
of SABRE.   If eligible,  the Pre-Laboratory  and Laboratory  Visits  will be scheduled  at this time .  Regardle ss 
of whether  participants  experience  sleep  apnea,  they  will be provided  with  a form  that details  their  
measured  AHI (Apnea -Hypopnea  Index)  and the AHI cutoffs  that represent  mild,  moderate,  and severe  
obstructive  sleep  apnea.    
     If sleep  apnea  (mild,  moderate  or severe)  is identified  in a study  participant,  the participant  will be 
informed  that such  a diagnosis  warrants  further  evaluation  and possible  treatment  by a physician.   The 
participant  will also be provided  with  a summary  of the assessment  results  upon  request  (a sample  
report  is included  for IRB review).   The participant  will have  the option  to bring  the report  to a physician  
they  already  have  a treatment  relationship  with  or, if they  do not have  a primary  care  physician,  then  
research  staff  will offer  to refer  the participant  to a primary  care  physician  at Columbia  University  
Medical  Center/Columbia  Doctors.  
      If participants  do not experience  sleep  apnea  and are fully  eligible  for the study,  he or she will then  
work  with the clinical  research  coordinator  to schedule  the Pre-Laboratory  and Laboratory  Visits  or 
 Page 4 of 10 confirm  the dates  that were  proposed  at the Enrollment  Visit.   Additionally,  the clinical  research  
coordinator  will make  the necessary  preparations  for these  visits, including  informing  the Bionutrition  
Center  about  the need  for prepared  meals,  scheduling  an examination  room  in the Irving  Institute  for 
Clinical  and Translational  Resea rch (CTSA),  and preparing  materials  for the visit.    
     Within  eight  weeks  of the Enrollment  Visit,  the Pre-Laboratory  Visit  will occur.   At this time,  the 
participant  will be provided  with  meals  and snacks  prepared  by [CONTACT_609483].   
These  meals  will be packed  into a portable  cooler  for participant  convenience.  In addition,  the 
participant  will have  been provided  with  the link to the SABRE  Online  Measures  one week  prior  to the 
Pre-Laboratory  Visit . The research  coordinator  will check  in with  the participant  at this time  to verify  
they  have  completed  the questionnaire  by [CONTACT_609484].  These  
measures  ask about  different  aspects  of life and personality,  and they  may  be completed  at any time  
before  the Pre-Laboratory  Visit.    
     At the end of the Pre-Laboratory  Visit, participants  will be informed  that fees  associated  with  parking  
or transportation  to their  desired  destination  with  the cooler  of food  can be reimbursed  during  the final  
visit,  provided  they  pay in cash  and keep  the receipt.   
     Starting  the mornin g after  the Pre-Laboratory  Visit,  participants  will be asked  to eat only  this specially  
prepared  food  for the next  3 days.   No additional  foods  or drinks  may  be consumed  other  than  water , 
plain decaf  or mint  or chamomile  tea without  sugar,  milk  or other  additives,  and up to one cup,  or 
approximately  8 fluid  ounces,  of black  coffee/tea  per day.   The meals  and snacks  consumed  each  day will 
contain  the same  total  amount  of salt.  The diet that will be provided  to participants  is not a dietary  
intervention  designed  to lower  the amount  of sodium  in a person’s  diet,  but rather  to keep  the amount  
of dietary  sodium  fixed  during  the study  visits.  As such,  the amount  of dietary  sodium  (as well  as 
potassium)  are considered  to be a moderat e amount,  which  is consistent  with  the average  amount  a US 
adult  is taking.  Please  see 
https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/80400530/pdf/1112/Table_1_NIN_GEN_11.p df. The 
participant  will eat this food  for the three  days  following  the Pre-Laboratory  Visit  and leading  up to the 
Laboratory  Visit.   The rese arch  assistant  will contact  [CONTACT_609485] . The Laboratory  Visit  will be scheduled  [ADDRESS_808178]  on Monday.    
     For the Laboratory  Visit, participants  will come  to the Shimbo  Hypertension  Lab (Tower  1) at the 
Columbia  University  Medical  Center.   Appointments  will be scheduled  between  8 AM and 9 AM in the 
morning  four  days  after  the Pre-Laboratory  Visit.   This visit should  be attended  in a fasting  state  (without  
eating  or drinking  anything  more  than  small  sips of water  after  midnight  of the day before . Participants  
will also be asked  to not exercise  for 12 hours  before  the visit and to not smoke  within  the hour  prior  to 
the visit.   At 30 minutes before  the appointment , the participant  will be asked  to drink  8 ounces  of  
Poland  Spring  water  that will be provided  prior to the appointment.   
     The research  coordinator  will escort  the participant  to the adult  outpatient  unit of the Irving  Institute  
for Clinical  and Translational  Research  (CTSA)  on PH-[ADDRESS_808179],  he/she  will be aske d to use the bathroom  to void  their  bladder , if 
possible .  The participant  will then  return  to the exam  room  chair  and drink  about  one cup of bottled  
spring  water.   At this time,  the research  coordinator  will attach  a SpaceLabs  OnTrak  Ambulatory  Blood  
Pressure  Monitor  (ABPM)  blood  pressure  cuff to his/her  upper  arm.   This device  will automatically  
inflate  and measure  blood  pressure  ever y five minutes  for the duration  of the Labo ratory  Visit,  excluding  
time  spent  in the bathroom  and times  when  blood  is drawn .  The participant  will then  rest by [CONTACT_84022]  a 
movie  for [ADDRESS_808180] period,  the participant  will be 
aske d about  the level  of stress he/she  is feeling  using  a Visual  Analog  Scale  (VAS).  A sample  of saliva  will 
be collected  by [CONTACT_100576].   The participant  will again  use the bathroom  where  he/she  will 
be asked  to urinate  into a collection  container.   He/she  will return  to the exam  room  chair  and a blood  
sample  of about  31.[ADDRESS_808181]  is not available  to 
draw  the participant’s  blood  within  the exam  room,  participants  will be escorted  to the phlebotomist  
within  the CTSA  for this service.  
     Next,  the participant  will drink  about  one cup of bottled  spring  water.   During  the next  10 minutes,  a 
research  assistant  (separate  from  the research  coordinator)  known  as the stress  inducer  will read  a 
mental  stress  script  and conduct  two stress  tests.   First,  the participant  will be shown  a series  of words  
for five minutes  and a research  coordinator  will ask him/her  to name  [CONTACT_609490]  (Stroop  Color -
Word  Conflict  Task) .  Then,  for another  five minutes,  the participant  will be asked  to complete  a mental  
arithmetic  task,  comprising  of a series  of subtractions  and additions  (Mental  Arithmetic  Task) .  The 
stress  inducer  will adjust  the difficulty  of the task appropriate  for each  participant.   The stress  inducer  
will ask the participant  to work  as quickly  and accura tely as possible  for both  tasks.   
     Immediately  after  the math  task,  the participant  will be asked  about  the level  of stress  he/she  is 
feeling  using  a VAS measurement .  Then,  the participant  will use the bathroom,  where  he/she  will be 
asked  to urinate  into a collection  container.   He/she  will return  to the exam  room  chair  and another  
blood  sample  of about  24.[ADDRESS_808182]  is not 
available  to draw  the participant’s  blood  within the exam  room,  participants  will be escorted  to the 
phlebotomist  within  the CTSA  for this service.  
     Next,  the participant  will drink  about  one cup of bottled  spring  water  and remain  inactive  during  for a 
post -stress  recovery  period.   During  this time, participants  will rest naturally,  allowing  for elevated  heart  
rate,  increased  blood  pres sure,  and other  stress  symptoms  to recover .  Twenty  minutes  following  the 
end of the stress  induction , a saliva  sample  will be collected.   After  30 minutes  of recov ery, the 
participant  will be asked  about  the level  of stress  he/she  is feeling  for a final  time,  using  a VAS 
measurement . Then,  he/she  will use the bathroom  and asked  to urinate  into a collection  container  one 
final  time.  
     Before  leaving  the Laboratory  Visit,  the participant’s  non-dominant  arm will be fitted  with  a new  
standard  ambulatory  blood  pressure  monitor  (ABPM) .  A research  coordinator  will explain  how  to use 
the device,  provide  one detailed  instruction  sheet  and one concise  instruction  sheet,  and provide  a 
paper  form  where  the times  at which  participants  fall asleep,  wake  up, take  naps,  and remove  the 
device  may  be listed.   Participants  will also recei ve a cooler  containing  two urine  collection  bottles,  
which  are to be used  following  the Laboratory  Visit.   The participant  will also receive  instructions  on the 
two bottles  for collecting  daytime  and nighttime  urine , respectively,  over  the next  [ADDRESS_808183]  limit  their  alcohol  intake  to one drink  during  the 24 hour  period.  The 
Laboratory  Visit  may  take  up to 3 hours.  
     The clinical  research  coordinator  will ensure  that,  at 5 random  times  throughout  the day and evening , 
the participant  will be prompted  by [CONTACT_609486] 5 short  questions  through  
Qualtrics .  The questions  will ask about  how  participants  feel in that moment . 
 Page 6 of 10      After 24 hours,  participants  will return  the ABPM  device , the cooler  containing  both  urine  collection  
bottles , and the cooler  containing  any remaining  food  from  the diet to Shimbo  Hypertension  Lab (BB-
210 or Tower  1).  They  will complete  a final  5-question  survey  through  Qualtrics , identical  to the ones  
they  received  via text that will ask them  about  the emotions  they  were  feeling  that morning  prior  to the 
visit.  Participant s will be provided  the option  of having Lyft concierge  rides  coordinated  for them  while  
traveling  with  the cooler , our research  team  will coordinate  this service.  Alternatively,  transportation  
may  be provided  at the discretion  of the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a case -by-case  basis.  Patient  
satisfaction  surveys  will be provided  at this time  if participants  are interested  in completing  one.   
     b. Blood, Urine, and Saliva Analysis  
     During  each  Laboratory  Visit, three  sample s of urine  and two samples  of saliva  will be collected.   In 
addition,  blood  will be drawn  twice.   On the following  day,  two additional  samples of urine,  one for the 
previous  day and one for the previous  night,  will be returned  to the Shimbo  Hypertension  Lab (Tower  1) 
by [CONTACT_2299].  
     Saliva  will be collected  using  a salivettes  tube  and salivary  cortisol  will be measured  at the baseline  
and recovery  time  points.   The first blood  draw  of 31.[ADDRESS_808184] for a basic  
metabolic  panel  (which  includes  glucose  and creatinine ), a lipid  panel  (including  cholesterol,  low density  
and high  density  lipoproteins,  and triglycerides),  Hemoglobin  A1c,  Angiotensin  II, and Catecholamines.  
The second  blood  draw  of 24.5 milliliters  will be tested  for Angiotensin  II and Catecholamines.   An 
approximate  total  of 56 mL of blood  will be collected.   The urine  collected  during  the laboratory  study  
will be tested  for sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  creatinine,  Endothelin -1, and volume.   The Albumin  to 
Creatinine  ratio  in urine  will also be measured  at the baseline  time  point.   Urine  collected  during  the 
ambulatory  session  will also be tested  for sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  creatinine,  and volume.   
 
   c. Provid ing Results to the Participant  
After completing the study, the participant will be given the following results: total cholesterol, low -
density lipoprotein, high -density lipoprotein, triglycerides, hemoglobin A1c, glucose, and creatinine. 
Please see attached SABRE Blood Draw Results_REPORTING TEMPLATE . The participant will also be 
provided the resu lts from the ABPM. Please see  ABPM REPORT_EXAMPLE  and ABPM REPORTING 
TEMPLATE . The participant will be given the option to not receive these results (i.e. opt -out). The 
participant  will be invited to share the results with their  health care provider. If they  do not have a 
health care provider, the research staff will offer to refer the participant to a primary care physician at 
Columbia University Medical Center/Columbia Doctors.  
 
4. Statistical Procedures  
Data Preparation: All variables will be reviewed for outliers and internally inconsistent values. Once a 
valid, final data set is compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602], variable distributions will be evaluated for non -normality and data 
transformations will be  applied as needed. Winsorization may be employed to reduce the effect of 
extreme, but valid, observations on data analyses. Although transformed data will be used for primary 
inferential analyses, the description of data will feature the original (untrans formed) metric for ease of 
interpretation.    
Missing Data: Given the reasons for missing data (i.e., laboratory error or equipment failure), missing 
data for our primary variables will likely conform to a “missing completely at random” (MCAR) pattern. 
How ever, we will use the less restrictive “missing at random” (MAR) -analytic techniques (e.g. mixed 
effects regression, multiple imputation) for the analyses. For those who are missing a small number of 
items used to construct a psychosocial scale, we will us e the EM algorithm in SAS’ PROC MI procedure to 
estimate the expected scale score for these participants conditional on their responses to all the other 
 Page 7 of 10 items; this is the best estimate, assuming MAR, of their scores. Although w e anticipate few missing dat a 
for the primary variables (i.e. stress -induced sodium excretion, diurnal  patterns of sodium excretion and 
BP) as 100% of the participants in the SABRE  pi[INVESTIGATOR_609466], we have conservatively 
allowed for approximately 5% (N= 11) of the [ADDRESS_808185] som e missing data. A 
minimum  sample size of 200 participants without missing data will provide adequate power for testing 
our primary hypotheses.  
Fidelity Checks: VAS stress ratings will be collected before and after laboratory stress induction.  VAS 
stress ratings will be monitored during the conduct of the study to ensure that the manipulation (i.e. 
mental stress tasks) is having its intended effects. If the stres s tasks are not having their intended 
effects, [CONTACT_609491] will work with the research staff to bolster the dose of the experimental 
manipulation that is administered. The focus of these fidelity  checks will be on the magnitude of the 
pre-/post -stressor cha nge in VAS  ratings rather than on the statistical significance of the effects (which 
may be limited by [CONTACT_19462]). The r esearch coordinator  will be blinded to the VAS stress ratings.  
Analytical  Approach  for Each  Aim:  
Primary  Aim 1:  Standard  regression  analysis  will be used.  We will estimate  the unadjusted  relation  of 
awake -to-sleep  ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate to change  in urinary  sodium  excretion  rate with  
stress . Next,  we have  a priori  selected  the following  covariates  for adjustment  in a multiple  regression  
model:  age,  sex, race/ethnicity  (non-Hispanic  whites,  non-Hispanic  blacks,  Hispanics,  and other) , and 
body  mass  index.  Age,  sex, and race/ethnicity  are standard  covariates  in studie s of hypertension  given  
their  well -known  associations  with  BP. Body  mass  index  is included  as a covariate  since  it is associated  
with  both  lower  stress -induced  sodium  excretion  and lower  day-to-night  ratio  of urinary  sodium  
excretion  rate.  The statistical  significance  of the coefficient  for the change  in urinary  sodium  excretion  
rate with  stress  in this adjusted  model  will constitute  the primary  test of the hypothesis.  Sensitivity  
analyses  will be performed  to assess  whether  the strength  of the association  changes  when  additional  
covariates  are included.  Higher  clinic  SBP/DBP  and parental  history  of hypertension  are associated  with  
lower  stress -induced  sodium  excretion.  Fasting  blood  glucose  and 24-hour  creatinine  clearance  are 
associated  with  lower  daytime -to-nighttime  ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate. Each  of these  will be 
evaluated  as candidate  covariates  by [CONTACT_609487]  (awake -to-
sleep  ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate)  at p<0.10.  Finally,  secondary  analy ses will use generalized  
additive  models  (GAM)  to explore  potential  non-linearity  of the relationship,  using  PROC  GAM  in SAS.  
Primary  Aim 2: The same  approach  for Hypothesis  1 will be used  for the analysis  of this hypothesis.  SBP 
dippi[INVESTIGATOR_609467],  respectively.  The a priori  
covariates  that will be included  in adjusted  models  are: age,  sex, race/ ethnicity,  body  mass  index,  24-
hour  sodium  excretion,  24-hour  potassium  excretion,  24-hour  creatinine  clearance,  FENa,  current  
smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  and fasting  blood  glucose.  In addition  to age,  sex, and race/ethnicity  
(which  were  chosen  because  they are standard  covariates  in hypertension  studies),  the other  measures  
were  chosen  as covariates  as they  may  confound  the association  between  the diurnal  pattern  of sodium  
excretion  and the diurnal  pattern  of BP. Sensitivity  analyses  will be performed  after additional  covariates  
are included  in the adjusted  model.  Prior  studies  have  suggested  that physical  activity  and fasting  
glucose  are associated  with  the diurnal  pattern  of BP. Each  of these  measures  will be evaluated  as 
candidate  covariates  using  the same  approach  described  above  for Primary  Aim 1.  
 
Sample  Size and Minimum  Detectable  Effect  Sizes  for Primary  Aims:  The sample  size for this study  was 
selected  to ensure  80%  power  to detect  a bivariate/partial  correlation  between  the primary  predictor  
and outcome  of r=0.20  or greater;  this is conservative,  but consis tent  with  our preliminary  data  in which  
the correlation  between  the change  in urinary  sodium  excretion  rate with  stress  and awake -to-sleep  
 Page 8 of 10 ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate (Primary  Aim 1) was 0.25,  and the correlation  of awake -to-sleep  
ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate and SBP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  (Primary  Aim 2) was 0.30.  The minimum  sample  
size required  to detect  this effect  size with  power  80%  is 194 with  valid  data  for the three  primary  
measures  (change  in urinary  sodium  excretion  rate with  stress,  awake -to-sleep  ratio  of urinary  sodium  
excretion,  and SBP dippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]).  We are targeting  a final  minimum  sample  size with  complete  data  of 200.    
Secondary  Aim:  The ecological  stress  level  for the awake  period  during  which  participants’  sodium  
excretion  is monitored  will be defined  as the mean  perceived  stress  level  across  the Ecologic  Momentary  
Assessment  (EMA ) reports.  Ecological  stress  is conceptua lized  as a moderating  variable . Controllin g for 
the effects  of this measure  and stress -induced  sodium  excretion,  we will test their  multiplicative  
interaction  term;  an extension  of the regression  model  used  to test Primary  Aim 1. A positive  interaction  
effect  would  provide  the first empi[INVESTIGATOR_609468] -induced  sodium  excretion  rate to have  a lower  daytime -to-
nighttime  ratio  of urinary  sodium  excretion  rate is stronger  among  those  who  experience  higher  stress  
during  the day of monitoring.  Although  a moderator  is not required  to be associated  with  the outcome,  
we will examine  the association  between  mean  perceived  stress  and daytime -to-nighttime  ratio  of 
urinary  sodium  excretion  rate.  In the SABRE  pi[INVESTIGATOR_27041],  the correlation  coefficient  for this association  
was -0.42.   
Exploratory  Aim:  Univariable  and multivariable  linear  regression  analyses  will be performed  to assess  
which  factors  are independently  associated  with  lower  stress -induced  sodium  excretion.  All models  will 
adjust  for age,  sex, and race/ethnicity.  Variables  entered  into subsequent  multivariable  regression  
models  will include  other  social  determinants  (place  of birth,  years  living  in the US, primary  language  
spoke  in the home,  education  attainment,  employmen t status,  health  insurance  status , marital  status,  
household  income,  household  size,  social  cohesion  and safety,  social  support ), behavioral  factors  (body  
mass  index,  current  smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  physical  activity,  recreational  drug  use),  
psychological  traits  and other  psychosocial  constructs , chronic  stress  factors  (related  to work,  marriage,  
finances,  caregiving,  discri mination;  perceived  stress;  and childhood  adversity),  and biological  stress  
measures  (baseline  angiotensin  II, epi[INVESTIGATOR_609469],  BP, heart  rate,  endothelin -1, and 
cortisol;  and change  in these  measures  with  stress).  Given  the large  number  of predictors  being  
examined,  we will apply  a false  discovery  rate of 0.05  (rather  than  ignore  the inflated  risk of Type  I 
errors  or use the excessively  conservative  Bonferroni  correction),  and interpret  the results  as 
“hypothesis  generating”  rather  than  “con firmatory”.  
Additional  Explo ratory  Analyses : Social  determinants  including  place  of birth, years  living  in the US, etc. 
will be evaluated  as candidate  covariates  by [CONTACT_609488]  1 and 2 at p<0.10.  The analyses  for Primary  Aim [ADDRESS_808186]  (angry/hostile,  
aggravated/irritated,  sad/blue/depressed,  and anxious/tense/ nervous ) instead  of perceived  stress  to 
determine  whether  negative  affect  moderates  the association  between  lower  stress -induced  sodium  
excretion  and an abnormal  diurnal  pattern  of sodium  excretion.  This analysis  will be repeated  using  a 
composite  negative  affect  score  derived  by [CONTACT_609489] [ADDRESS_808187]  ratings.  
We will evaluate  multiplicative  interaction  terms  of sex and separately  race/ethnicity  with  stress -
induced  sodium  excretion  to test for group  differences  in its association  with  the diurnal  pattern  of 
sodium  excretion  and with  the diurnal  pattern  of sodium  excretion  to test for group  differences  in its 
associat ion with  diurnal  pattern  of BP. 
 
 Page 9 of 10 5. Risks  
There  may  be risks  or discomforts  associated  with  taking  part in this study.  
There  may  be minimal  discomfort  during  and after  the Laboratory  Visit  due to the blood  pressure  arm 
cuffs  that are used  in clinical  blood  pressure  measurements  and ambulatory  blood  pressure  monitoring.   
The discomfort  is temporary  and minor.  The ambulatory  monitor  takes  measurements  every  30 
minutes .  This may  also cause  disturbances  to sleep.  
Risk of Blood Draw  
The risks  of having  blood  drawn  are soreness  and/or  a black  and blue  mark  at the site where  the blood  is 
drawn.   Sometimes,  participants  feel uncom fortable  at the time  of the blood  draw.  Occasionally,  
participants  feel lightheaded  or faint.   There  is also a small  risk of infection  whenever  blood  is drawn.    
Risk from Sensitive Questions  
This research  study  involves  psychological  testing.   The questi ons being  asked  may  be sensitive  and 
personal  in nature.   It is possible  that answering  some  questions  may  cause  stress.   Participants  will be 
instructed  to immediately  inform  the study  coordinators  if they  become  upset  or anxious .  The study  
staff  will then stop  performing  psychological  testing.    
Risk of Breach of Confidentiality  
A risk of taking  part in this study  is the possibility  of a loss of confidentiality.   Loss  of confidentiality  
includes  having  personal  information  shared  with  someone  who  is not supposed  to see or know  about  
your  information.   The study  team  plans  to protect  participant  confidentiality.  
 
6. Benefits  
Participants  will not receive  personal  (direct)  benefit  from  taking  part in this research  study.   However,  
the information  collecte d from  this research  may  help  others  in the future.    
 
7. Alternatives  
Participants  may  choose  not to take  part in this research  study.  
 
8. Data and Safety Monitoring  
The research  team  will monitor  the study  to prevent  any risks  or dangers  that may  occur  and will 
appropriately  report  any adverse  events  according  to IRB policy.   
     If a participant feels upset or experiences emotional distress, a member of the research team will be 
available to talk to them and discuss appropriate care.   He/she will be offered a period of rest from 
study activities, and he/she will also be reminded t hat participation may be discontinued willingly at any 
time. Further, should any psychological issues arise, clinical psychologists on staff at the Shimbo 
Hypertension Lab  (BB-210 and Tower 1 ) will also be available to evaluate the participant. If the 
participant needs further attention, he/she will be escorted to the emergency room for further 
evaluation. If there is no immediate risk, the participant will remain until the end of the study visit and 
be discharged. Participants will then be referred to thei r primary care doctor and as appropriate, the 
Columbia University Psychiatry Referral Line for further management.  
     Participants  will be provided  with  copi[INVESTIGATOR_609470] -hypopnea  index  
(AHI)  measurements  after  this data  is collected  at the Enrollment  Visit  or during  the following  night .   
     The average  blood  pressure  reading  will be accompanied  by a group  of recommendations  from  the 
American  Heart  Association  regardin g actions  that should  be taken  for abnormal  values.   If the average  
BP (systole  ranges/diastole  ranges)  is high  normal,  or 120-139/80 -90 mmHg,  it will be recommended  
that participants  ask a physician  about  lifestyle  changes  and be rechecked  within  a year.   If the average  
 Page 10 of 10 BP is mildly  elevated,  or 140-159/90 -99 mmHg, it will be recommended  that participants  meet  with  their  
doctors  to confirm  this reading  and receive  instruction  within  a month.   If the average  BP is high,  or 160-
179/100 -109 mmHg,  it will be recommended  that participants  meet  with  their  doctors  for a follow -up 
within  a week.   If the average  BP is very  high,  or 180-209/110 -119 mmHg,  it will be recommended  that 
participants  meet  with  their  doctors  for a follow -up within  a week.   If the average  BP is equal  to or 
greater  than  210/120,  participants  will be escorted  to the emergency  room  for immediate  care.  
     The measured  AHI value  will be accompanied  by a list of AHI ranges  that correspond  to mild,  
moderate,  or severe  sleep  apnea.   If the participant’s  measured  AHI falls outside  of the normal  range,  
the participant  will be informed  that such  a diagnosis  warrants  further  evaluation  and possible  
treatment  by a physician,  and the form  itself  will reiterate  that they  inform  their  regular  physician  of 
these  results  and ask for further  guidance.   If the participant  does  not have  a primary  care  physician,  
then  research  staff  will offer  to refer  the participant  to a primary  care  physician  at Columbia  University  
Medical  Center/Columbia  Doctors  for follow -up. 