 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
A Multi-Center Group to Stu dy Acute Liver Failure 
 
   
Version 7.0 
 
 
April 1, 2016 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_236502] M. Lee, M.D.  
 
Clinical Coordinating Center:  UT S outhwestern Medical C enter at Dallas 
 
[ADDRESS_582153]. 
POB1, Suite 420 
Dallas  TX [ZIP_CODE] 
([PHONE_9550] 
fax: ([PHONE_9551] 
 
emai l: [EMAIL_8755] 
 
 
 
 
Data Coordination Unit: Medical Un iversity of South Carolina 
 
Director: Valerie Durkalski , PhD 
[ADDRESS_582154] 
MSC 815 
Charleston, SC [ZIP_CODE] 
([PHONE_9552] 
fax: ([PHONE_9553] 
email: durkals [EMAIL_8756] 
 
  
 
National Clinical Trial Identified Number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
NCT # added to cover sheet on 13Jan2022  
 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  [ADDRESS_582155] ................................................................ ............................. 10 
E. CONF IDENTIALITY................................................................................................ ........................ 11 
F. INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES ................................................................ .............. 12 
G. STA TISTICAL ANALYSIS ................................................................................................ ............. 12 
G. REIMBURSEME NT ................................................................................................ ......................... 12 
H. REFERENCES  ................................ ................................................................................................ .. 12 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  3  
 
 
A.  SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
 
 
Acute liver failure (ALF) is a dramatic syndrome in which previously healt hy 
individuals rapi[INVESTIGATOR_455462] a variety of causes, develop 
hepatic encephalopathy, and become critically ill within days.  The mortality is 
high, up to 94%.   Even in the era of liver transp lantation, more than 40% die, 
either due to complications of this devastating disease or becaus e donor organs 
are not available.  Since ALF occurs relatively infrequently, no one c enter in the 
US has a  large enoug h experience  to conduct important studies of this condition. 
The Acute Liver Failure Study Gro up had received funding from the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) from September [ADDRESS_582156] aims of 1) gathering data and serum on ALF patients, and 2) developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_455463] N-acetylcysteine (NAC) for ALF  and  these  have  largely  
been  accomplished .  Clinical  data  and  serum collected since January 1, [ADDRESS_582157] yielded new insi ghts into the natural 
history and outcomes of ALF.  One important trend has been an apparent 
increase in the number of patients with drug-induce d acute liver failure, which 
currently represents >50% of all cases. The unique availability of blood and 
tissue samp les from a large number of patients with ALF has triggered more 
than 140 ancillary studies, gene rated over 70 original articles on all aspects  of 
ALF. An additio n in 2009 was the Acute Liver Injury (A LI) study, capturing earlier 
stage disease, prior to the onset of ence phalopathy and advanced liver failure. 
 
 
 
The specific aims of the study listed are below: 
 
Specific Aim 1: To conti nue and extend the current highly successful registry 
tracking secular trends in ALF, with several adde d features: a  tighter study group, 
conti nuation of the ALI study, more detailed data and specimen gathering on each 
case, electronic data capture, and use of detailed check  lists for ICU  management,. 
Emphasi s will be placed on gathering tissue sampl es for mechanistic studies  and 
detailed intensi ve care unit (ICU) data while improving prognostic sco ring systems. 
 
Specific Aim 2: To further elucidate the pathogenesis of liver injury and multi- 
organ failure. We continue to undertake  studies of basic  mechanisms of the innate 
and adaptive immu ne respons es, the role of genetic predisposition, cytokines, 
coag ulation, endothelial dysfunction and hepatic  regeneration that initia te, sustain 
and resolve ALF. 
 
Specific Aim 3:  To evaluate the safety and efficacy of new prognostic and 
therapeutic agents in the management of ALF and ALI.  
 
B. BACK GROUND AND SIGNIFICANC E 
 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  4  
B.1. Introduction: Historical persp ective. Acute liver failure (ALF) was first 
recognized as a speci fic and unique entity in  the early 1950’s.  Defined as including 
coag ulopathy and encephalopathy, cerebral edema is a unique feature of acute 
liver failure that frequently leads to death.1,2 Survival has improved in recent years 
from <10% to ~60% due in part to the use of liver transplantation and an evolution 
to more benign etiologies. Even now t his catastrophic illness can progress within 
hours  to coma and death due to multi-organ dysfuncti on.3,4 We estimate that 24% 
of those  listed for transplantation die because a liver graft cannot be found in time. 
Althoug h ALF is truly an orphan disease affecting only about 2,[ADDRESS_582158] lethal mani festation. 
 
Acute Liver Injury (A LI), a milder form of ALF: Patients with ALF represent  the most 
severe end of a spectrum of advance d liver injury. A second group of patients 
worthy of study are those with acute liver injury who have coag ulopathy but do not 
reach the threshold of ence phalopathy. Few studies  have been performed on this 
less severe group; however, their morbidity and mortality may approach that of 
conv entionally defined ALF.[ADDRESS_582159] ALF earlier in their illness for several reasons:  first, we might be able 
to better predict who will progress to full liver failure; second, the current definition 
requiring encephal opathy limits the number of patients available for study at any 
site; finally, therapeutic trials  might have greater efficacy if  begun at earlier disease 
stages.  
 
B.2. Prior studies in ALF: Specific Etiologies. Early reports of acute liver failure 
were limited to small series from individual centers over many  years. The lack of 
speci fic serologic tests led  to most cases being attributed on clinical grounds to 
viral hepatitis,2,[ADDRESS_582160] common cause. Early on, no 
hepatitis A or acetaminophen toxicity cases were recognized.  In the 60’s t hrough 
the 1980’s,  the etiologic makeup of ALF was uncle ar, in part because  of lack of 
accurate diagnoses, but also becaus e there was no central ALF registry. Our 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  5  
 
 
initial report of 295 patients seen between 1994 and 1996 at the 14 initia l Acute 
Liver Failure Study G roup (ALFSG) centers was the first systemat ic multi-center 
review of etiologies and outcomes. That study identified acetaminophen toxicity 
as present in 20% of ALF patients.[ADDRESS_582161] 
conti nued to change further over the years with an apparent decline in viral 
hepatitis, and a r emarkable incre ase in a cetaminophen toxicity to its current le vel 
of ~44-50% of cases.8,[ADDRESS_582162] goals of the ALF Study t hen were to more carefully define the 
etiologies of ALF on a national scale, and to finally allow in-depth study of 
speci fic AL F cause s such as autoimmune ALF, viral hepatitis and Wilson disease 
(WD). 
 
B.3. Outcome in Acute Liver Failure and the Role of Transplantation: Despi[INVESTIGATOR_455464], the final clinical common pathway of acute liver 
failure is remarka bly si milar across all patient groups. Coagulopathy, 
ence phalopathy and cerebral edema consti tute a hallmark triad, but hypotension 
and renal insufficiency, susceptibility to  infection and other multi-organ system 
failure are typi[INVESTIGATOR_455465]. Causes of death include cerebral edema, 
multi-organ failure, sepsis,  cardiac  arrhythmia or respi[INVESTIGATOR_1399]. Factors 
associated with prognosis, scoring systems and analysis of intensive care prior 
to transplant—all these features of ALF have been exceedingly difficult to study 
at a single institution. The short-term survival of patients after transplantation is 
said to be less than that of patients with cirrhosis, presumably due to the severity 
of illness and the emergent nature of the surgery performed, but specific studies 
of post-transplant outcomes have not been available previously. In the US, under 
the authority of the United Network of Organ Sharing (UNOS)  criteria, acute liver 
failure remains the only criterion for the most urgent listing category, status 1. 
However, data regarding ALF provided by [CONTACT_455473]’ focus is directed toward transplantation and not to the underlying 
diseases prior to transplantation. We have recently published an analysis of the 
outcomes of patients with ALF listed for transplantation, indicating that etiology of 
ALF governs outcomes both with and without transplantation.10 
 
B.4. Therapeutic  Trials: Prior to 1998, therapeutic trials  in ALF were limited to 
those  performed at a single center, Kings College Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_455466] 
([LOCATION_006]). Only one multi-center US therapy trial in ALF had taken place: steroid 
therapy was tested for fulminant hepatitis  B in the 1970’s and its negative results 
finally reported in 1991.[ADDRESS_582163] machine 
(BAL ) sponsored by [CONTACT_455474] 2004.[ADDRESS_582164]: Research in acute liver failure in the US prior to the 
ALFSG remai ned limited due to lack of a coordin ated effort.  Much of the data 
conce rning  ALF came either from London or from single US sites over many 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  6  
 
 
years time, were not nece ssarily representative of the overall [LOCATION_002]’ 
experience  and few therapy trials were performe d. 
 
 
 
C. STUDY MECHANICS  
 
The virtue (and difficulty) in studying acute liver failure is that t he syndrome 
evolves rapi[INVESTIGATOR_455467] n quickly (eit her death, survival, or 
transplantation occur within one to three weeks in  most cases).  Most study 
patients will be cared for in an intensive care unit setting.  The key to accurate 
and complete data collection is rapid accession of all eligible patients into the 
study. Both for data and bio-sample collection purposes, and particularly  for 
therapeutic trials, late study entry  will skew results, and may preclude inclusion of 
patients. 
 
C.1.   Study monitors/site visits/marketin g. Monitoring visits to the sites are 
undertaken by [CONTACT_455475] [INVESTIGATOR_455468] a half years, providing supp ort for the investigators and 
coordin ators and quality control  with regard to data collection and the therapeutic 
trial. Source  documents are reviewed for accuracy and further data queries 
subm itted. The study has a Website, acuteliverfailure.org,  as well as providing  
patient information brochures  in lay language.   
 
C.2.   Governance . The Clinical Coordinating Center PI [INVESTIGATOR_455469] a multiple PI [INVESTIGATOR_455470], a n Executive Committee, 
Ancillary Studies  and Publications committees actively participating. We have 
face-to-face meetings at AASLD, DDW and, most important, a 1-1/[ADDRESS_582165] 
monthly teleconferences to update coordin ators and site investigators a nd 
encourage enrol lment. 
 
C.3.  Eligibility Criteria: Our present system provides that when a patient with 
suspect ed acute liver failure arrives at a study site, the local site investigator or 
his coordinator is promptly notified. The patient is evaluated and a determination 
is made as to whether he or she qualifies for the data and serum collection 
portion  of the study. Criteria for ALF to enter a patient to the study must include 
altered mentation of any degree, evidence  of moderately severe coag ulopathy 
(INR ≥ 1.5) and a presumed acute illness onse t of less than [ADDRESS_582166] Acute Liver 
Injury (ALI) and meet the following criteria: 
1) Hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_105458] 
2) If presumed acetaminophen etiology: acute hepatic illness < 2  weeks,  with 
INR ≥ 2.0, alanine aminotra nsferase (ALT) of ≥ 10X ULN. 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  7  
 
 
3) If presumed non-acetaminophen etiology: acute hepatic ill ness  of < 26 
weeks,  with INR ≥ 2.0, ALT of ≥ 10X ULN, total bilirubin of ≥ 3.0 mg/dL. 
 
C.5.  Screening. A screen failure log is entered monthly into WebDCUTM  at each 
enrol ling site, docu menting demographic information and the reasons for failure to 
enrol l. These are principally related to inability to  ob tain informed consent (or 
refusal presence  of liver failure without evident encephalopathy lack  of available 
next of kin or ‘other’—tra nsplanted before patient could be enrol led, for example. 
 
C.6.   Informed Consent:    When a patient is identified at a study site, the site 
Principal Investigator (PI) obtains separate informed consents f or the data/blood 
and urine/tissue registry and DNA (up to 2 conse nts total).  Informed written 
conse nt from the patient's next of kin (since by [CONTACT_108], patients enrol led in the 
study will not have normal mental functioning) is required for data and specimen 
collection ([ADDRESS_582167] day urine and plasma samples and liver tissue 
where available). A separa te consent is re quired for collection of a DNA 
speci men.   A copy of the consent(s) shall be given to the person signing the 
form. The consent fo rm must embody the legally required element s of informed 
conse nt. The site investigator shall give the patient’s representative adeq uate 
time to read the form prior to signature. The subject or the next of kin can 
withdraw the subject from the study at any time, and this decision will not 
influenc e  the  treatment  otherwise  offered.  A  copy  of  the  data  and  serum 
collection conse nt must be placed in the medical chart and the original securely 
kept in the study files. The DNA conse nt should not be filed in the medi cal chart 
but stored securely in the study files. 
 
C.6.a. Patients meeting criteria for ALI, by [CONTACT_108], do not have enceph alopathy 
and can therefore sign their own cons ent forms. If any doubt exists about mental 
status, then they are consid ered to have ALF and require cons ent by [CONTACT_455476]. 
Patients that meet criteria for ALI and subsequently  becom e encephalopathic are 
consid ered to have consented for the entire study.  If this occurs, th e subject 
beco mes enrol led in the ALF study. The first day that ALF criteria are reach ed 
beco mes day [ADDRESS_582168]  (IRB).  In the case of cognitively impai red individuals, 
the next of kin or guardian will serve as the responsible party for cons ent 
purposes. The NIH guidelines on the inclusion of women  and minorities as 
patients in clinical research will be obse rved. Emergency conse nt procedures will 
be invoked, if prior approval for such is obtained from the site’s IRB.  
 
C.7.  Overall  Subject  Manag ement:  A  detailed  standardi zed  management 
protocol is available at each site (see reference 13). This protocol has been 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  [ADDRESS_582169] outlin ed 
established expert opi[INVESTIGATOR_3078] n in this orphan disease area regarding 
management.14,15  In additio n, ALFSG has performed clinical trials  of the use of 
N-acetylcysteine for non-acetaminophen acute liver failure,16 and is currently 
undertaking a trial of OCR-002, ornithine phenylacetate, for the treatment of 
elevated ammonia levels in the ALF setting. 
 
C.8. Data collection:  Every effort has been made to streamline data accession  and 
entry .  Data is entered electronically in to the study database at the enrol ling sites. 
The study database , called WebDCUTM, is developed and maintained by [CONTACT_455477] (MUSC) . As data is 
subm itted, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_455471] t he 
data,  and generate queries to resolve discrepancie s. 
 
After informed consent, the site investigator must detail all aspects of study 
admission, history, physical exam, lab data and clinical course,  including t he 
presumed diagnosis, applying standard  criteria. The details of patient history are 
often lacking in these very ill referral patients where,  by [CONTACT_108], mental changes 
must have occurred to be included in the study. 
 
A defined set of clinical measurements will be available to the site investigator 
largely done  as standard of care for acute liver failure: complete blood count, 
chem istry profile including aminotransferases, alkaline  phos phatase and bilirubin; 
coag ulation studies  including prothrombin time and activated partial t hromb oplastin 
time, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus and acetaminophen levels. 
Serologic studies f or acute hepatitis A, B, C and HIV, ceruloplasmin levels, and a 
drug screen to include cocaine, opi[INVESTIGATOR_455472]. 
Demographic data, medical history and data influencing etiology including  drug and 
alcohol intake, all pharmaceutical agents,  herbals and other xenob iotics ingested in 
the prior six months will be recorded. 
 
Data  collection  for  cases  of  ALF  or  ALI  related  to  acetaminophen  poisoning 
includes a  two-part questionnaire that th e subject may be asked to respond to, 
once they begin to recover. Once medically st able,  these  patients may be 
approached by [CONTACT_455478] a 
detailed questionnaire regarding use of acetaminophen prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], a 
diagnostic scre en for psychiatric illnesse s, symptom severity score for depression, 
and a short i mpuls ivity sca le. There will be no additio nal collection of bio-samples 
for these patients. 
 
Data will be collected through Day 7 unless the patient undergoes transplantation, 
dies or is discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  At Day 21, patients will be contact[CONTACT_455479]. 
 
 
 
 
 
C.9.  Bio-sample collection: 
 
C.9.a.  Serum:  Daily serum samples (two 10 ml serum separating tubes)  are 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  [ADDRESS_582170] day of study for up to 7 days, aliquoted in 500 µL 
aliquots and stored at –[ADDRESS_582171] develops ence phalopathy (qualifies as having 
ALF) then collection begins again as study day 1 of ALF study, conti nuing for a 
total of no more than 14 days.  
 
C.9.b.  Plasma:  A single 10 ml blood sample will be obtained on study admission 
in EDTA and / or citrated tubes, and the plasma separated, aliquotted in sim ilar 
fashion to serum, marked clearly as plasma, and stored at –80o prior to shipme nt 
to the Reposi tory.  However, if an ALI subject develops encephalopathy (qualifies 
as having ALF) a second plasma sample will be collected. 
 
C.9.c.  Urine:  Ten ml of urine is to be collected on the day of study admission or 
the following day, to be aliquotted in 1 ml aliquots stored at –80o and shipped with 
other  samples  to  the  Repository. However,  if  an  ALI  subject  develops 
ence phalopathy (qualifies as having ALF) a second urine sample will be collected. 
These samples (serum, plasma  and urine) are labeled  with sample specific pre- 
printed labels containing: the NIDD K site number, the ALF site number, subject 
EDC ID number (generated by [CONTACT_455480]), and collection date. 
They are stored at -80º and batch shipped Monday thru Wednes day to the NIDD K 
Reposit ory  at  approximately  3-month  intervals  dependi ng  on  the  quantities 
involved. 
 
C.9.d.  Tissue:  Liver tissue samples in the form of stained /unstained slides, frozen 
tissue, and blocks are to be sent to the NIDD K Repository from all patients who 
have  a  liver  biopsy,  liver  transplant  or  autopsy.  Frozen  tissue  should  be 
accessioned where possible  at the time of explantation. 
 
In the case of an explant, we suggest that 10-20 g of liver tissue be collected for 
storage at -80º and sectioned in speci al 10 ml cryovials provided by [CONTACT_455481]. The liver tissue should be shipped frozen with other bio-samples or 
separa tely as needed on dry ice to the NIDDK Reposi tory. 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  10  
 
 
 
C.4.f.  DNA:  Samples are to be collected only after the speci al separa te DNA 
conse nt has been signed.   The separate conse nt is necessary becaus e of the 
more complex issues surrounding  archiving DNA.  Only a single time point  draw is 
nece ssary to collect the blood for extraction of DNA that can be archived for future 
DNA tests.  This should be collected on all patients when possibl e; however, those 
of particular  interest include suspected drug toxicity, indeterminate cases and 
acetaminophen toxicity cases.  Archiv ing DNA samples provides a unique source 
of information regarding ALF that can only be obtained from DNA - many of the 
tests for this aspect of the study are only now being  developed, but should  provide 
totally different body of know ledge in the future. 
 
The logistics for obtaining the DNA sample nece ssitate drawing the blood at only 
one time point, on a Monday , Tuesday or Wedne sday, using at least two 10 ml 
lavender  top (EDTA) tubes which must be shipped overnight at ambient 
temperature, by [CONTACT_455482].  A shipment 
notification email must be sent to:  [EMAIL_8757] 
on the day  of  shipment to notify UTSW.  DNA samples can be collected at any 
time and need not be drawn on the first hospi[INVESTIGATOR_19156]. The extracted DNA will be 
shipped from UTSW to the central NIDD K repository in batch  shipments. 
 
C.10.  Subject Withdrawal:  It is the right of the subjec t’s family or next of kin or 
the physicians caring for each  subject  to discontinue from the study at any ti me. 
Data and samples c ollected before discontinuation should be maintained if there 
is no objection.   Progression to liver transplantation, intubation, placement of 
intra-cerebral pressure moni toring devices or other standard of care procedures 
should  be unaffected by [CONTACT_455483]. 
 
 
 
 
D. INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW BOARD  
 
The Institutional Review Board (IRB)  at the Clinical Coordinating Center and at 
each  study site must provide a current approval for the study to proceed.   No 
subject  enrol lment can occur before IRB approval has been obtained at that site. 
The Clinical Coordin ating Center and the Principal or Site  Investigator will assure 
that an appropriately constit uted IRB, that complies with the requirements of 21 
CFR 56, will be responsible for the initial and conti nuing review appro val of the 
clinical study at each individual site.  A photocopy of the site's IRB  appro val and 
conse nt form must be forwarded to the Clinical Coordinating Center. 
 
The Clinical Coordin ating Center will also assure that the sites will promptly 
report  to  the  IRBs  conc erned  all  changes  in  the  research  activity,  all 
unanticipated problems involving risks to human subjects or others, and that 
he/she will not make any chang es in the research  without IRB approval except 
where  nece ssary  to  eliminate  apparent  immediate  hazards  to  the  human 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  [ADDRESS_582172] or another from 
serious harm, as in cases of child abuse . 
 
Data that are protected by a Certificate of Confidentiality may be disclose d under 
the following circu mstance s: 
 
• Voluntary   disclosure   of   information   by   [CONTACT_455484], or authorization by [CONTACT_455485], employers, or other third parties.  
 
• Voluntary reporting  by [CONTACT_455486], such as child abuse or 
threat of other potential violence  by [CONTACT_455487],  provided such intention is specified in the informed conse nt document. 
 
• Voluntary compl iance by [CONTACT_455488] a communi cable disease, provided such 
intention is specified in the informed cons ent docu ment. 
 
• Release  of  information  by  [CONTACT_455489]  &  Human 
Services (DHH S) as required for audits  of research  records or to t he Food and 
Drug Administra tion (FDA)  as required under  the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.). 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  12  
 
 
F. INCLUSION OF WOME N AND MINORI TIES 
 
Acutely ill ALF patients are not amenable to conv entional recruitment methods. 
They are evaluated on admission in the ICU s etting without consideration of race 
or gender.   In our retrospective study, patients were nearly equally divided 
between the sexes, althoug h there are more women  (74%)  than men in the 
current prospective study.  There is no preponderance of any racial group, other 
than that represented by [CONTACT_455490][INVESTIGATOR_295900].   No exclusion will be 
made on the basis of race, ethnic group or gender.  Criteria for inclu sion of 
women  and minorities will be those established in the NIH guidelines. 
 
G. DATA ANALYSIS 
 
The collected registry data is analyzed for various study-wide papers as well as 
ancillary st udies.   Each study/paper proposal goes through a formal review 
process by [CONTACT_455491] a detailed plan of the 
objec tives, nece ssary registry data, analysis plans and timel ine. All publications 
are approved by [CONTACT_455492]. 
 
G. SITE REIMBUR SEMENT 
 
Site reimbursement is a flat yearly rate based on past performance and will be 
disbursed quarterly  throughout the year d ependent on time worked on study for that 
quarter and after invoicing by [CONTACT_455493] e. 
 
H. REFERENC ES 
 
1)  Trey C, Davidson CS. The management of fulminant hepatic failure. In: 
Popper H, Schaffner F, eds. Progress in liver diseases. [LOCATION_001]: 
Grune & Stratton; 1970: 282-98. 
2)  Ritt DJ, Whelan G, Werner DJ, Eigenbro dt EH, Schenke r S, Combes B. 
Acute hepatic  necrosis with stupor or coma. An analysis of thirty-one 
patients. Medicine. 1969;48:151-72. 
3)  Lee WM, Schiødt FV. Fulminant hepatic failure. In: Schiff ER, Sorrell 
MF, Maddrey WC, eds. Schiff's Disease s of the Liver. 8th ed. 
Philadelphia:  Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_10354]-Raven Publishers;  1999: 879-95. 
4)  Benha mou J-P. Fulminant and subfulminant liver failure: definition and 
cause s. In: Williams R, Hughes RD, eds. Acute liver failure. Improved 
understanding and better the rapy. London : SmithKline Beecham 
Pharmaceuticals;1991:6-10. 
5) Hoofnagle JH, Carithers RL, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] C, Ascher N. Fulminant hepatic 
failure: summary of a workshop. Hepatology. 1995;21:240-252. 
6)  Elinav E, Ben-Dov I, Hai-Am E, Ackerman Z, Ofran Y. Predictive value 
of admission and follow-up Factor V and VII levels in patients with acute 
hepatitis and coagulopathy. J Hepatol 2005;42:82-6. 
ALF Protocol  7.0, p.  13  
 
 
7)  Schiødt FV, Atillasoy E, Shakil O, Lee WM, et al. Etiology and outcome 
for 295 patients with acute liver failure in the [LOCATION_002].  Liver 
Transplant Surg, 5:29-34, 1999. 
8) Ostapowicz GA, Fontana RJ, Schiodt FV, Larson A,  Davern TJ, Han 
SBH,  Lee WM, et al., Results of a prospective study of acute liver 
failure at 17 tertiary care centers in the [LOCATION_002]. Ann Intern Med 
2002;137:945-54. 
9)  Larson  AM, Fontana RJ, Davern TJ, Polson J,  Lalani EK, Hynan LS, 
Reisch  JS, Shakil OA, Schiødt FV, Ostapow icz GA, Lee WM and the 
ALFSG. Acetaminophen-induced acute liver failure: Results of a United 
States multice nter, prospecti ve study. Hepatology 2005 :42:1367-72. 
10) Reddy KR, Ellerbe C, Schilsky  M, Stravitz RT, Fontana RJ, 
Durkalski V, Lee WM, Acute Liver Failure Study Group. 
Determinants of Outcome Among Patients with Acute Liver Failure Listed for Liver Transplantation in the US. Liver Transpl 2015 Sep 30. [Epub head of print].  
11)Rakela J, Mosley JW, Edwards VM, and the Acute Hepatic  Failure 
Study Gro up. A double-blinded, randomized trial of hydrocortisone in 
acute hepatic  failure. Dig Dis Sci. 1991; 36:1223-8. 
12)Demetriou AA, Brown  RS Jr, Busuttil RW, Fair  J, McGuire BM, 
Rosenthal P, et al. Prospecti ve, randomized, multicenter, controlled trial 
of   a   bioartificial   liver   in   treating   acute   liver   failure.   Ann   Surg 
2004;239:660-7. 
13)Stravitz RT, Kramer AH, Davern T, Shaikh AO S, Caldwell SH,  Mehta 
RL, Blei AT, Fontana RJ, McGuire BM, Rossaro L, Smith AD, Lee WM 
and t he Acute Liver Failure Study Gro up. Intensive care of patients with 
acute liver failure: Recommendations of the U.S.  Acute Liver Failure 
Study Group. Crit Care Med. 2007;35:2498-2508. 
14)Polson J, Lee WM. AASLD Po sition Paper: Acute Liver Failure.  
Hepatology 2005, 41:1179-97. 
15)Lee WM, Stravitz RT, Larson  AM. Introduction to the revised American 
Association for the Study of Liver Disease s Position  Paper on a cute liver 
failure 2011. Hepatology 2012; 55:965-7. 
16)Lee WM, Hynan LS, Rossaro L, Fontana RJ, Stravitz RT, Larson  AM, 
Davern TL III, Murray NG, McCashland T, Reisch J, Robuck PR and the 
ALFSG. Intravenous N -acetylcysteine impro ves transplant-free survival in 
early stage non-acetaminophen acute liver failure. Gastroenterology 
2009; 137:856-864. 