Study ID: [REMOVED]
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  2 of 45 
STUDY ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
 
Investigator's Statement 
I have read and understand the foregoing protocol entitled: “A CL inical Study to Evaluate 
the Safety A nd Effectiveness of the Ce Rene Dev Ice to Treat Heav Y Menstrual Bleeding 
(CLARITY )” and all corresponding amendments and agree to conduct the st udy as 
outlined herein. 
 
Confidentiality 
I understand that all information not previously published concerning this study and Channel Medsystems devices is confidential. The confidential information includes, but 
is not limited to, the study protocol, case report forms, and s tudy data. I agree not to 
publically disclose such confidential information without first acquiring written permission from Channel Medsystems. 
 
Ethics Committee / Investigational Review Board Approval 
I acknowledge that I will not begin enrolling subjects into thi s study before obtaining 
approval from my local ethics committee or investigational revi ew board. 
 
Deviations 
I understand my obligation to complete this study with full adh erence to the written 
protocol, informed consent, and Instructions for Use. I underst and that deviations from the 
protocol impair the ability to interpret the study data. Unless  required to protect the health 
and/or safety of the individual subject, I will not knowingly d eviate from the protocol without 
first obtaining written permission from the study sponsor. 
 
  
 
           
Investigator's Name (please print)  
 
       
Investigator's Signature      D a t e  
  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  3 of 45 
 
 
SIGNATURE [CONTACT_418657]’S MEDICALLY RESPONSIBLE PERSON  
 
 
[INVESTIGATOR_418656] t o the content of the clinical study protocol as 
presented.    
 
 
 
          
Name (please print) 
 
 
 
       
Signature        [CONTACT_418658], CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  4 of 45 
 
 SIGNATURE [CONTACT_418659] 
 
 
 
[INVESTIGATOR_418626] f inal clinical study protocol 
as presented.    
 
NOT APPLICABLE; THERE IS NO STUDY PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR 
 
         ,  M D  
Name (please print) 
 
 
 
NOT APPLICABLE       
Signature        [CONTACT_418660][INVESTIGATOR_418627]: 
 NOT APPLICABLE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528061] / ETHICS COMMITTEE APPROVAL  ..................................... [ADDRESS_528062] Recruitment  ............................................................................................................. 28 
6.1.2  Screening Evaluations  ......................................................................................................... 28 
6.2 PBLAC  DIARY: SCREENING AND FOLLOW -UP REPORTING  ............................................... [ADDRESS_528063] TREATMENT (+3 DAYS ) ............................................................. ................... [ADDRESS_528064] TREATMENT (+ 2 WEEKS ) ............................................................. ............. [ADDRESS_528065] TREATMENT (± 4 WEEKS ) ............................................................. ........... [ADDRESS_528066] TREATMENT (± 4 WEEKS ) ............................................................. ........... [ADDRESS_528067] TREATMENT (± 4 WEEKS ) ............................................................. ......... [ADDRESS_528068] TREATMENT (± 4 WEEKS ) ............................................................... ....... [ADDRESS_528069] TREATMENT (± 4 WEEKS ) / SUBJECT EXIT ............................................. [ADDRESS_528070] RETENTION  .............................................................. ........................................ 43 
11 REFERENCES ................................................. ............................................................... . 44 
 
 
  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  7 of 45 
STUDY SYNOPSIS 
INTENDED USE The Cerene Cryotherapy Device (Cerene) is intended to ablate th e 
endometrial lining of the uterus in premenopausal women with he avy 
menstrual bleeding due to benign causes for whom child bearing is 
complete. 
STUDY 
PURPOSE The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and effecti veness of 
the Cerene Device. 
STUDY DESIGN This is a prospective, multi-center, single-arm, open-label, no n-
randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_2397]. The Cerene Device will be used to tre at heavy 
menstrual bleeding due to benign causes in women who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
Subjects will be assessed following ablation treatment through Month 12 
for all study endpoints and at Month 24 and 36 for any addition al medical 
or surgical interventions needed to manage continued heavy menstrual 
bleeding.   
NUMBER OF 
SUBJECTS 242 subjects will undergo Cerene cryoablation treatments. 
STUDY CENTERS Up to 20 centers in 3 countries  
STUDY 
EVALUATIONS Primary safety endpoint: 
 Incidence of serious adverse events and serious device-related  
adverse events at 12 months 
Primary effectiveness endpoint: 
 Reduction in menstrual bleeding at 12 months; success is defin ed 
as a score of  ≤ 75 measured using a pi[INVESTIGATOR_418628] (PBLAC) 
Additional evaluations:  
 Amenorrhea rate at Month 12 
 Subject-reported peri-procedural pain experience  Evaluation of dysmenorrhea at Month 12  Quality of Life outcome at Month 3, 6, and 12: using the 
Menorrhagia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) and the Premenstrual 
Symptoms Impact Survey (PMSIS)  
 Month [ADDRESS_528071] or office visit to include a n 
assessment of gynecologic adver se events, additional medical or  
surgical interventions for continued heavy menstrual bleeding, QoL 
measurements by [CONTACT_418641], type of contraception and 
compliance, and pregnancy query 
 Evaluation of uterine access and healing at Month 12  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  8 of 45 
STUDY SYNOPSIS 
STUDY 
DURATION Total Duration: [ADDRESS_528072] age 25 to 50 years, inclusive 
3. Endometrial cavity measurements within the following paramet ers: 
 Sounded length of uterine cavity (exocervix to fundus) no grea ter 
than 10 cm; AND  
 Endometrial cavity length (internal os to fundus) must be 
between 2.[ADDRESS_528073] 10 mm 5. Menstrual blood loss with a PBLAC score of ≥ 150, within 3 m onths of 
informed consent, for: 
Two baseline cycles; OR 
One baseline cycle in a woman who has at least 3 prior months 
documented failed medical therapy; or has a contraindication to  
medical therapy; or cannot tolerate medical therapy; and/or was  
offered and declined medical therapy 
6. Premenopausal confirmed by [CONTACT_418642] ≤ 30 IU/L when ag e is 
> [ADDRESS_528074] 
is currently using a hormonal birth control method, has been on  said 
method for ≥ 3 months prior t o informed consent, and agrees to remain 
on the same hormonal regimen up to the 12-month follow-up visit . 
8. Provides written informed consent using a form that has been  approved 
by [CONTACT_3488]/EC 
9. Agrees to follow-up exams and data collection requirements 
10. Demonstrates an understanding of how to record menstrual bl ood loss 
using a menstrual pi[INVESTIGATOR_78082] 
11. Has predictable, cyclic menstrual cycles  
EXCLUSION 
CRITERIA 1. Pregnant or has a desire to conceive  
2. Endometrial hyperplasia as confirmed by [CONTACT_27183]  
3. Active endometritis  
4. Active pelvic inflammatory disease  
5. Active sexually transmitted disease (STD) 
6. Presence of bacteremia, sepsis, or other active systemic inf ection 
 7. Active infection of the genitals, vagina, cervix, or uterus 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  9 of 45 
STUDY SYNOPSIS 
8. Known/suspected abdominal, pelvic, or gynecological malignan cy 
within the past 5 years  
9. Known clotting defects or bleeding disorders  
10. Abnormal cytology on Human papi[INVESTIGATOR_28597] (HPV) testing not  treated 
according to local standards. 
11. Prior uterine surgery that interrupts the integrity of the uterine wall (e.g., 
transmural myomectomy or classical cesarean section).  
12. Previous low transverse cesarean section where the myometri al wall 
thickness at the thinnest section of the scar is less than [ADDRESS_528075] com plaints, 
imaging, or clinician’s judgment 
15. Presence of an implantable contraceptive device (e.g. Essure™ or 
Adiana™) 
16. Currently on medications that could thin the myometrial mus cle, such 
as long-term steroid use (except inhaler or nasal therapy for asthma)  
17. Currently on anticoagulants  
18. Abnormal or obstructed cavity, specifically:  
a) Septate or bicornuate uterus or other congenital malformation o f the 
uterine cavity  
b) Polyps larger than 1 cm (in larges t dimension) or which are lik ely to 
be the cause of the subject’s heavy menstrual bleeding  
c) Any submucosal myoma  
d) Any myoma that distort(s) the endometrial cavity  
e) Any myoma, polyp configuration, uterine position, and/or uterin e 
anomaly that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871],  
i. obstructs or hinders treatment access to the endometrial cavity  
ii. prevents deployment of the device  
iii. and/or is contraindicated for use of the investigational device  
19. Currently using an intrauterine device (IUD), including Mir ena™ device, 
and unwilling to remove the IUD  
20. Post-partum ≤ 6-months  
21. Considering participation in a research study of an investigational drug 
or device that would begin during the course of this investigat ional study 
22. Any general health or mental, or other situation or conditi on which, in 
the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689], could represent an increased r isk for the 
subject or impact the subject’s ability to comply with protocol  
requirements  
  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528076] in heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB).  Although the minimally 
invasive procedures that are collectively known as endometrial ablation (EA) were originally 
developed more than 100 years ago (Fritsch 1898), and further e volved in the early and mid-20th 
century (Bardenheuer 1937, Cahan and Brockunier 1967, Droegemueller, Greer et al. 1970, 
Droegemueller, Greer et al. 1971), it is only in the past [ADDRESS_528077] selected women experiencing the symptom of HMB.  
Endometrial ablation has been classified as “first generation” and “second generation,” but 
confusion regarding just what was “first” and what was “second”  has led to a more descriptively 
accurate classification of resectoscopic and non-resectoscopic technique.  Whereas the earliest 
non-resectoscopic techniques were introduced in the late 19th ( Fritsch 1898) and early 20th 
century (Bardenheuer 1937), intrauterine application of the uro logical resectoscope introduced in 
the late 1980s was responsible for the widespread adoption of e ndometrial ablation as a viable 
therapeutic procedure (Vancaillie 1989).  Resectoscopic endomet rial ablation (REA) requires the 
use of a modified urological resectoscope that includes an endo scope (a hysteroscope), a 
mechanism for instilling and removing fluid distending media, a nd a radiofrequency electrode 
shaped as a barrel, ball ("rollerball") or wire loop that is us ed to remove or destroy the endometrial 
lining.  These techniques typi[INVESTIGATOR_418629].  Potential risks of these procedures 
include cervical laceration, uterine perforation and subsequent  sequelae, and fluid overload that 
may result in heart failure and pulmonary edema, and, if electr olyte-poor solutions are used, 
hyponatremia and related encephalopathy, an event that contribu tes to the mortality associated 
with these procedures (Ayus, Wheeler et al. 1992, Istre, Skajaa et al. 1992, Baggish, Brill et al. 
1993, Corson 1994, Overton, Hargreaves et al. 1997, Munro 2010) .  Furthermore, it is evident 
that both the clinical outcome and the incidence of these complications are directly related to the training and skill of the surgeon (Overton, Hargreaves et al. 1997, Pooley, Ewen et al. 1998).  
Non-resectoscopic endometrial ablation (NREA) techniques use on e of a number of approaches 
to destroy the endometrium but do not require the use of a rese ctoscope and the accompanying 
large volumes of fluid, thereby [CONTACT_418643].  In addition, NREA techniques typi[INVESTIGATOR_418630]/or provide 
surgeon feedback to at least some degree and, while they can’t be perceived to be “global” in impact, the clinical outcome is less dependent upon the skill a nd training of the surgeon.  
Furthermore, and to some degree, depending on the technique, th ey can be performed in the 
context of an office procedure room, potentially using local an esthesia.  
 
In 1997, the [LOCATION_002] Food and Drug Administration approved the first global endometrial 
ablation (GEA) device (M eyer, Walsh et al. 1998) designed to tr eat heavy menstrual bleeding, in 
selected women with normal endometrial cavities.  The GYNECARE THERMACHOICE® Uterine 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  12 of 45  
Balloon Therapy System (Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ) comprise s a 5.5 mm outside diameter 
(OD) balloon-tipped catheter that is blindly positioned in the endometrial cavity and then filled with 
fluid that is subsequently heated by a remotely located controller “box” to 188°F (87°C) for eight 
minutes.  In 2001, the FDA approved the other devices.  The Hydro ThermAblator® System ([LOCATION_011] Scientific Corp., Natick, MA) is a 7.8 mm OD sheath that is used to deliver saline into the endometrial cavity under hysteroscopic guidance (Corson 2001).  Upon confirmation of proper 
positioning, the remotely located controller system heats the s aline solution until it reaches the 
target temperature of 93°C, which it holds for 10 minutes befor e the system is cooled. The 
NovaSure® Impedance Controlled Endometrial Ablation System (Hologic, Inc., Bedford, MA) is a 7.2 mm probe that, following blind positioning in the endometri al cavity, deploys a triangular 
bipolar mesh electrode (Cooper, Gimpelson et al. 2002).  Follow ing passage of a gas-based 
confirmation test, the system is activated by [CONTACT_418644].  When the 
combination of coagulation and desiccation results in a thresho ld local impedance of 50 ohms, 
the machine turns off, generally following about 90 seconds of therapy.  The Her Option® Office 
Cryoablation Therapy (CooperSurgical, Inc., Trumbull, CT) uses a 5.5 mm OD cryoprobe that is 
blindly positioned in the endometrial cavity, but which can, in  many instances, be confirmed by 
[CONTACT_2207] (Duleba, Heppard et al. 2003).  When activated by [CONTACT_418645], the system is capable of producing temperatures of negative 148 °F (minus 100°C) to freeze the 
uterine lining.  This device is used with ultrasound guidance to monitor the ablation procedure with treatment times typi[INVESTIGATOR_418631] 10 – 20 minutes.  I n 2015, the FDA approved the 
Minerva Endometrial Ablation System (Minerva Surgical, Inc., Re dwood City, CA) which uses a 
bipolar 480 kHz RF power generator and controller for endometrial ablation.  The handpi[INVESTIGATOR_418632].  Treatment is 
achieved during a two minute procedure from heat conduction thr ough the distal end of the 
handpi[INVESTIGATOR_235712] a small amount of bi-polar RF current travelling through the target tissue (
U. S. 
Food and Drug Administration, Minerva™ SSED, 2015).  (U. S. Food and Drug Administration , 
Minerva™ SSED, 2015).  Collectively and individually, these NREA techniques have been associated with fewer severe adverse events than was the experi ence with REA (Lethaby, Hickey 
et al. 2009).  
Channel Medsystems, Inc. ([LOCATION_004], [LOCATION_003]) has developed the Ce rene Cryotherapy Device 
(Cerene Device) to address the unmet clinical need for a totally handheld device with a narrow 
diameter probe and fast treatment time that could also be used in the office setting with limited 
requirements for sedation or anesthesia (deep sedation).  The d istally-located cavity-conforming 
liner is filled with nitrous oxide from the device handle, whic h freezes and ablates the adjacent 
endometrium.  The ablation procedure should be less painful tha n those performed with the 
hyperthermic (heat-based) ablation techniques due to the anesthetic effect of the cryogenic fluid on nerves in the uterine tissue (Evans 1981).  As well, the tissue healing response to cryoablation is favorable, has been well documented (Droegemueller, Makowski et al. 1971, Schantz and 
Thormann 1984, Chua, Chou et al. 2007, Baust, Gage et al. 2009) , and may preserve access to 
the endometrial cavity in subsequent years.  By [CONTACT_418646], or 
adhesions, that make sampling of the endometrium difficult (Sha rp 2012), treatment with the 
Cerene Device may reduce the risk of impaired cavity access.  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  13 of 45  
The Cerene Device is intended to reduce treatment time and to deliver consistent results that are 
less dependent on physician skill levels.  The Cerene Device is  also designed to tailor the ablation 
to the endometrial cavity being treated, while delivering consi stent ablation depths throughout the 
cavity and simultaneously reducing ablation depth in thinner ar eas of the myometrium, particularly 
the cornual regions and the lower segment.  The device is designed as an alternative to 
hysterectomy, aiming to achieve the desired reduction in heavy menstrual bleeding while reducing 
the risks associated with major surgery, such as illness or dea th.  This device requires no incision 
and, therefore, is minimally invasive. 
 This multi-center, international, single arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_418633].  The objective of the study is to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the Cerene Device i n a population of subjects with 
heavy menstrual bleeding due to benign causes.    
1.2 Description of the Cerene Device 
Channel Medsystems’ Cerene Device (Figure 1) is handheld and des igned to safely treat heavy 
menstrual bleeding (HMB).  The device uses 
cryothermic energy to achieve 
uniform ablation depths  throughout the uterine cavity  
  The cryothermic ener gy is provided by a liquid-to-gas 
phase change of nitrous oxide (N 2O)   During the 2½ minute treatment 
cycle, liquid N 2O (originating from a small cylinder located in the device hand le) flows through a 
Nitinol tube and into an infusion lumen with multiple jets.  This liquid N 2O is infused into an ultra-
thin  polyurethane liner (balloon) and phase changes into gas.  The gaseous N 2O is 
exhausted through a flexible tube exiting the bottom of the han dle.   
 
s a result, the 
Cerene Device is able to treat uterine cavities ranging in length between 2.5 and 6.5 cm.   
 
 
 
 
  

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  14 of 45  
Figure 1: Cerene Device 
 
 
 
The status and sequential operating instructions are displayed on the device’s LCD screen.  After 
removal from sterile packaging, a twist ring is rotated to open  the N 2O valve and turn on the 
device.  The user is then prompted to press the button and insert the device to the fundus.  The small diameter of the device  is designed to fa cilitate insertion and minimize the 
need for dilation.  After insertion, the device prompts the user to partially retract the sheath and press the button a second time to slowly inflate and deploy the  distal portion of the liner.  Once 
the preset pressure is reached, the device prompts the user to retract the sheath to the full cavity 
length (shown on the LCD).  A third button press initiates trea tment.  The uterine cavity is gently 
pressurized  with filtered air, deflated and re-pre ssurized a second time.  A final 
liner leak detection test is completed and then the N
2O flow is automatically initiated.  At any time, 
the user can pause or stop the procedure.  After 2½ minutes, N 2O flow is stopped and the user is 
prompted to vent the remaining N 2O.  Vacuum is initiated within the liner to expedite device 
removal.  After use, the entire device is disposed per local pr actice. 
 
Numerous features ensure the safety of the Cerene Device.   
 
 
 
 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  15 of 45  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3 Report of Prior Investigations 
Channel Medsystems c
onducted multiple studies during the develo pment of the Cerene 
Cryotherapy Device.  These included extirpated, peri-hysterecto my, pre-hysterectomy trials.  In 
addition, a feasibility study was conducted that included the intended population of subjects for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_16076].  These trials were designed to establish the final device configuration and assure that 
the device would deliver the intended energy in a safe and effe ctive manner in a clinical setting. 
 
The feasibility study was a prospective, single-arm, multi-cent er study to evaluate the safety and 
potential effectiveness of the cryotherapy device in reducing h eavy menstrual bleeding and to 
define parameters for a future pi[INVESTIGATOR_418634] d support a pre-market approval 
application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  Three (3) Canadian clinical sites 
participated  
 forty (40) subjects underwent endometrial cry otherapy treatment.  Thirty 
seven (37) evaluable subjects completed six (6) months of follo w-up.  Twenty-four (24) of the 37 
subjects consented to and completed additional follow up visits  at nine (9) months and twelve (12) 
months post treatment. 
 
The primary safety endpoint was the incidence and severity of adverse events at 6 months.  The 
primary efficacy endpoint was the reduction in menstrual bleedi ng at 6 months defined as a score 
of < 75 using a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_111219] (PBLAC).   
 
The feasibility protocol included subjects with a broad range o f uterine cavity measurements: 
uterine sound measurement of < 14 cm and endometrial cavity len gth (internal os to fundus) 
between ≥ 2.5 cm and ≤ 8.0 cm.  A reduction in menstrual bleedi ng was demonstrated in the 
majority of evaluable subjects treated.  At baseline, all subje cts had a PBLAC score of ≥ 150 and 
at the 6 month visit, 75% of evaluable subjects had a PBLAC sco re of ≤ 75.   
 
In the proposed CLARITY pi[INVESTIGATOR_2397], the effectiveness of the Channel Medsystems 
Cryotherapy device will be compared to an FDA established objective performance criterion 
(OPC).  The OPC approach utilizes data from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_418635].  In general, the endometrial ablation systems that comprise the OPC are indicated for a uterine sound  measurement of ≤10 cm.  
Therefore, Channel Medsystems tabulated the PBLAC data from the  feasibility study for subjects 
with a uterine sound measurement between 6 and 10 cm, inclusive , and endometrial cavity length 
≥ 2.5 cm to ≤ 6.5 cm.  At the 6 month visit, 81% of this group of subjects had a PBLAC score of ≤ 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  16 of 45  
75.  The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_2397] o f the Channel Medsystems cryot herapy device will include only 
subjects with a uterine sound measurement of ≤ [ADDRESS_528078] ablation treatment for all 
safety and effectiveness endpoints and at months 24 and 36 for any additional medical or surgical 
interventions that were needed to manage continued heavy menstr ual bleeding.   
 
2.1 Study Objectives 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the Cerene Device. 
 
2.2 Primary safety endpoint  The incidence of serious adverse events and serious device-rela ted adverse events at twelve (12) 
months will be evaluated. 
 
2.3 Primary effectiveness endpoint  
The reduction in heavy menstrual bleeding will be evaluated.  Success is defined as a reduction 
in menstrual bleeding at 12 months to ≤ 75 as measured by a Pic torial Blood Loss Assessment 
Chart (PBLAC). 
 
2.4 Additional evaluations following Ablation treatment 
 Amenorrhea rate at Month 12 
 Subject-reported peri-procedural pain experience 
 Evaluation of dysmenorrhea at Month12  Quality of Life outcomes at Month 3, 6, and 12: using the Menorrhagia Impact Questionnaire 
(MIQ) and the Premenstrual Symptoms Impact Survey (PMSIS)  
 Month [ADDRESS_528079] or office visit to include an assessment of gynecologic 
adverse events, additional medical or surgical interventions fo r continued heavy menstrual 
bleeding, QoL measurements by [CONTACT_418641], contraception type  and compliance, and 
pregnancy query 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  18 of 45  
 Evaluation of uterine access and healing at Month [ADDRESS_528080] meet all  of the following inclusion criteria prior to ablation treatmen t: 
1. Refractory heavy menstrual bleeding with no definable organi c cause 
2. Female subject age 25 to 50 years, inclusive 
3. Endometrial cavity measurements within the following paramet ers: 
 Sounded length of uterine cavity (exocervix to fundus) no greater than 10 cm; AND  
 Endometrial cavity length (internal os to fundus) must be between 2.[ADDRESS_528081] 10 mm 
5. Menstrual blood loss with a PBLAC score of ≥ 150, within 3 months of informed consent, 
for: Two baseline cycles; OR 
One baseline cycle in a woman who has at least 3 prior months documented failed medical 
therapy; or has a contraindication to medical therapy; or canno t tolerate medical 
therapy; and/or was offered and declined medical therapy 
6. Premenopausal confirmed by [CONTACT_418642] ≤ 30 IU/L when ag e is > [ADDRESS_528082] is curren tly using a hormonal birth 
control method, has been on said method for ≥ 3 months prior to  informed consent, and 
agrees to remain on the same hormonal regimen up to the 12-month follow-up visit. 
8. Provides written informed consent using a form that has been  approved by [CONTACT_275719]/EC 
9. Agrees to follow-up exams and data collection requirements 
10. Demonstrates an understanding of how to record menstrual blood loss using a menstrual 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_78082] 
11. Has predictable, cyclic menstrual cycles  
 
3.[ADDRESS_528083] NOT meet any of the following exclusion criteria prior to ablation treatment : 
1. Pregnant or has a desire to conceive  
2. Endometrial hyperplasia as confirmed by [CONTACT_27183]  
3. Active endometritis  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  19 of 45  
4. Active pelvic inflammatory disease  
5. Active sexually transmitted disease (STD)  
6. Presence of bacteremia, sepsis, or other active systemic inf ection  
7. Active infection of the genitals, vagina, cervix, uterus 
8. Known/suspected abdominal, pelvic, or gynecological malignan cy within the past 5 years  
9. Known clotting defects or bleeding disorders  
10. Abnormal cytology on HPV testing not treated according to l ocal standards  
11. Prior uterine surgery that interrupts the integrity of the uterine wall (e.g., transmural 
myomectomy or classical cesarean section).   
12. Previous low transverse cesarean section where the myometri al wall thickness at the 
thinnest section of the scar is less than [ADDRESS_528084] complaints, imaging, or clinician’s 
judgment 
15. Presence of an implantable contraceptive device (e.g. Essure™ or Adiana™)  
16. Currently on medications that could thin the myometrial mus cle, such as long-term steroid 
use (except inhaler or nasal therapy for asthma)  
17. Currently on anticoagulants  
18. Abnormal or obstructed cavity, specifically:  
a. Septate or bicornuate uterus or other congenital malformation o f the uterine cavity  
b. Polyps larger than 1 cm (in largest dimension) or which are likely to be the cause of the subject’s heavy menstrual bleeding  
c. Any submucosal myoma  
d. Any myoma that distort(s) the endometrial cavity  
e. Any myoma, polyp configuration, uterine position, and/or uterine anomaly that, in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_871],  
i. obstructs or hinders treatment access to the endometrial cavity  
ii. prevents deployment of the device  
iii. and/or is contraindicated for use of the investigational device  
19. Currently using an intrauterine device (IUD), including Mir ena™ device, and unwilling to 
remove the IUD  
20. Post-partum ≤ 6-months  
21. Considering participation in a research study of an investigational drug or device that 
would begin during the course of this investigational study  
22. Any general health or mental, or other situation or conditi on which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_684], could represent an increased risk for the subject  or impact the subject’s ability 
to comply with protocol  requirements 
 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  21 of 45  
4.1.2 Primary Safety Endpoint 
The primary safety endpoint is the proportion of women in the study who experience a serious 
adverse event or serious device-related adverse event.  The ana lysis of this endpoint will be 
descriptive.  The number of women experiencing a serious adverse event or serious device-related adverse event, the num ber evaluated, the percentage and  the 95% exact confidence 
interval will be presented. In addition, these items will be provided for specific individual events.   
 
4.1.3 Sample Size 
Assuming the success rate of the Cerene device in the ITT popul ation is 75%, then [ADDRESS_528085] 85% power to show Cerene is superior to a n OPC of 66% with an overall 
Type I error rate < 2.5%. If 5% of patients drop-out, then the Cerene device must have a success 
rate among patients with complete 12-month follow-up of at least 79% in order to achieve a 
success rate in the ITT population of 75%.  If 10% of patients drop-out, then the Cerene device 
much achieve a success rate of approximately 84% among patients with complete 12-months 
follow-up in order to achieve a success rate in the ITT populat ion of 75%.   
 
4.1.4 Study Populations 
All women for whom a treatment with the device is placed in the cavity and treatment is attempted 
comprise the intention-to- tr eat (ITT) population.  The primary effectiveness analysis will be done 
in the ITT population.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.[ADDRESS_528086] a 97.9% probability 
that PE ≥ 0.66.  
 
Even if early success is declared, final trial success will be evaluated when all [ADDRESS_528087] a 97.9% probability that PE > 0.66.  I f an early success is declared, 
Channel Medsystems will approach FDA with an early request for market approval (i.e. PMA) of 
the Cerene device should there be at least a 97.9% probability that PE ≥ 0.66. Note that the final 
clinical report’s success rate will still be based on the evalu ation when all [ADDRESS_528088] the 
opportunity to complete follow-up for the 12-month primary endpoint.    
4.1.7  Patient Accountability and Missing Data 
Subjects that exit the study for any reason will be tabulated a nd the reason will be recorded.  Also 
an accountability analysis will be presented to show compliance  with planned study visits.  The 
number and percentage of subjects with study visits will be presented based on the number that 
are eligible for each visit.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  23 of 45  
4.1.8 Statistical Method 
[IP_ADDRESS] Character of Study Variables 
A routine assessment is done to assure that the data of the study complies with the assumptions 
of the tests to be used. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Analysis of Baseline Characteristics of the Study Popul ation 
A descriptive analysis of the subjects enrolled in the study will be presented.  For continuous 
variables the mean, standard deviation (SD), number evaluated, median, minimum, and 
maximum will be provided.  For categorical variables, the numbe r with the characteristic, the 
number evaluated, the percentage, and the exact 95% confidence limits will be provided. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Primary effectiveness analysis 
Yi12 be the [ADDRESS_528089] i.  Let Ii12 be the success indicator for the ith patient 
at 12 month.  I i12 will be 1 where Yi12 is less than or equal to  75 and will be 0 where Yi12 is greater 
than 75.  Let π = Pr( Ii12 = 1) be the probability of success at 12 months.  We model the  log odds 
of success,  
 = log(π/1-π) 
as having a normal distribution.  The prior distributions for the log-odds of success is  
 ~ N(0, 22), 
 
When converted from the log-odds scale back to the original pro bability scale, the resulting prior 
distribution for the log odds of success has a median of 50% and a 95% probability that the 
success rate is between 2% and 98%.  At each interim and at the final analysis we calculate the 
posterior probability that π  > 66% . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Longitudinal Modeling  
Patients will be assessed at 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_528090] not yet reached 12 months of foll ow-up.  We utilize the information 
from patients with incomplete follow-up to the extent that these earlier observations are correlated with the final 12-month value.  A Bayesian model is built to learn how the early endpoints are 
correlated with the final 12-month endpoint and patients with complete follow-up information this 
model.   
 
A linear regression model is created to model the association between the baseline, 3-, and 6-
month values with the 12-month value. Therefore, there are thre e instances of the model.  Each 
model instance is identical.  
 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  24 of 45  
[IP_ADDRESS] Operating Characteristics 
In order to determine the performance of this trial design, we simulated it 5000 times across 
various assumptions for the PBLAC over time. Under the null hypothesis, that response rate is 
the same as the OPC, 66%, this trial will declare success with 2.5% probability.  This is the 
simulated one-sided Type I error rate in this scenario.  Under an alternative hypothesis, that the 
response rate is 75%, this trial will declare early success wit h approximately 30% probability.  The 
total probability of trial success in this scenario is 87%.  This is the power of the trial in this scenario.  There is less than a 1% probability that a trial that qualifies an early success would not still be successful at the final analysis with complete data. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Primary safety analysis 
The primary safety analysis will be a descriptive presentation of the proportion of subjects with 
any serious adverse event and/or  serious device-related adverse  event.  The number with an 
event, the number evaluated, the percent, and the exact 95% confidence interval will be provided.  The total number of events will also be provided. A secondary a nalysis will be done for all adverse 
events and the same information will be provided. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Additional Analyses (if any) 
1. Amenorrhea rates will be recorded and presented descriptivel y at Month 12. 
2. Subject-reported procedure pain experience will be recorded and presented descriptively. 
3. Evaluation of dysmenorrhea at Month12 
4. Quality of Life (QOL) outcomes at six months and twelve mont hs post-procedure 
compared to baseline (measured using MIQ and PMSIS) will be pre sented descriptively. 
5. Evaluation of uterine access and healing at twelve months po st-procedure will be 
assessed and reported descriptively. 
6. Additional medical or surgical interventions to address exce ssive bleeding will be reported 
descriptively. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Detailed Statistical Analysis Plan 
Prior to database lock for the interim analysis, a detailed sta tistical analysis plan will be drafted 
and approved. 
 
[ADDRESS_528091] / Ethics Committee Approval 
The Sponsor will obtain national regulatory authority approvals prior to initiating the study at a 
clinical site.  The study will be conducted in accordance with the applicable local law(s) and 
regulations in the country in which it is conducted, all requirements set forth in the clinical protocol, Good Clinical Practices (GCP), the provisions of the Declaratio n of Helsinki (World Medical 
Association Declaration of Helsinki, 2000), and the Sponsor’s C linical Department Standard 
Operating Procedures . 
 The investigator will obtain prospective approval of the study protocol, protocol 
amendments/changes, Informed Consent Form, and other relevant documents (e.g. 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  25 of 45  
advertisements) from the IRB/EC prior to study start at his or her site.  All correspondence with 
the IRB/EC should be retained in the site study file.   
 
5.2 Informed Consent 
The complete study and its required visits and assessments will be carefully discussed with the 
study subjects using an IRB/EC approved informed consent from ( ICF).   
 The Investigator or designee will explain all relevant aspects of the study to each subject to 
facilitate her understanding of the information.  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_418636]:  study purpose, screening procedures, study procedures, fol low-up visits, risks and 
discomforts, alternative treatm ents.  Each subject will be prov ided ample time and opportunity to 
ask questions, have questions answered, and, without coercion or undue influence, to consider 
whether to voluntarily participate. The subject will be informe d about the right to withdraw from 
the study at any time without prejudice.  The subject will sign  the ICF before any study specific 
examinations and/or procedures are performed to confirm subject eligibility.  The clinical site will retain the original signed ICF in the subject’s study file or m edical record or per institutional 
requirement and provide the subject with a copy of the signed and dated ICF.    
The ICF to be used should be the IRB/EC approved version.  The ICF and any other written 
information provided to a subject will be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s consent, or there is an amendment to the protocol 
that necessitates a change to the content of the subject inform ation and / or the written ICF.  Any 
revision to the ICF must be approved by [CONTACT_1201]/EC prior to use.  The Investigator will inform the subject of changes to the ICF, ask the subject to confirm her agreement to continue participate in the study by [CONTACT_166806], and provide the subject with the revised copy.  The signed 
ICF for each subject will be available for inspection by [CONTACT_10577] (or designee), FDA, IRB/EC, 
or other regulatory agency at the clinical site. 
 
5.[ADDRESS_528092] will be assigned a unique study identification numb er (Study ID number) after signing 
the ICF.  The subject number will be sequential in the order in  which a subject signs the ICF.  The 
study ID number, used to identify the subject throughout the st udy, will include a unique country 
number, site number, and subject number.   
 
5.[ADDRESS_528093] (MAB) and/or a Clinical Events 
Committee (CEC).   
 
 
All records of event review w ill be documented and maintained 
in the sponsor’s master study file.   
 
5.[ADDRESS_528094], or other.  The Sponsor may terminate an Investigator 
and site from participation if there is evidence of an Investig ator’s failure to maintain adequate 
clinical standards or evidence of continued serious protocol de viations.   
 
If the study or a specific site is closed prematurely, regulato ry bodies, IRBs/ECs, and study 
subjects will be promptly notified.  Site investigators will di scuss with subjects any standard of 
care for future medical follow-up.  The Sponsor will provide the site with details regarding archiving 
of study data and retention, return, or destruction of other st udy materials.   
  

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528095] her menstrual  blood loss using a PBLAC diary 
to confirm a PBLAC menstrual blood loss score of ≥ 150, within 3 months of informed consent, 
as follows: 
 For two baseline cycles; OR 
 For one baseline cycle if the subject has at least 3 prior mon ths documented failed medical 
therapy, or a contraindication to medical therapy, or cannot tolerate medical therapy, and/or 
was offered and declined medical therapy. 
 Sites will collect and review subject screening PBLAC diaries.  The screening PBLAC diary(s) will 
be scored to confirm the subject meets the PBLAC inclusion criteria.  If the investigator determines 
that the screening PBLAC diary was not recorded correctly, the subject may be asked to complete 
another diary for an additional menstrual cycle.  
 
Subjects treated with the Cerene device will be required to mai ntain a monthly PBLAC diary to 
track their blood loss after ablation treatment.   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528096] becomes amenorrheic following ablation treatment , the investigator will determine 
whether a urine and/or blood test for pregnancy is indicated, based upon subject symptoms. 
 
6.[ADDRESS_528097] Preparation for Treatment 
 Urine for pregnancy 
 Confirm subject eligibility 
 Uterine sound measurements  Endometrial thickness measurement:  
 Administer pre-procedure medications for anesthesia and/or ana lgesia 
 
6.4.2 Ablation Treatment 
NOTE :  Introduction of air and/or bubbles via saline hysteroscopy i mmediately prior to the ablation 
could interfere with the subsequent ablation.  Use of CO
[ADDRESS_528098] ablation treatment is 
not indicated. 
 Prepare subject for ablation procedure per standard practice 
 Administer local analgesics, paracervical block, and anesthesia per investigator 
discretion 
 Record all analgesia/anesthetics administered  Initiate the ablation treatment with the Cerene Device per the Instructions for Use and 
physician training materials 
 Assess and record subject’s pain intensity (0-10): 
1. After subject preparation and cervical dilation, but before device insertion  
2. After device insertion (before liner deployment)  3. After liner deployment (before ablation)  4. After [ADDRESS_528099] ablation: one additional pain measurement between >15 and 30 
minutes, inclusive. 
 Ultrasound monitoring during device placement and ablation may  be used, but is not 
mandatory 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  32 of 45  
 Dispose of Nitrous oxide per standard hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418637]/or according to 
Instructions for Use and physician training materials 
 
6.[ADDRESS_528100]-Treatment through Discharge 
 Allow the subject to recover following treatment and monitor h er per standard practice  
 Record medication administered post-procedure 
 Record adverse events 
 Assess and record subject’s pain intensity at discharge/discha rgeability 
 Record the subject’s time and date of discharge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Record time and date th e subject 
is eligible for discharge 
 
 
  
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_528101] treatment (+3 days)  
 Contact [CONTACT_418647] 
(telephone or office visit) 
 Record subject’s adverse events 
 Assess subject’s pain intensity (0-10)  
 
6.[ADDRESS_528102] treatment (+ 2 weeks) 
 Perform pelvic exam  
 Query subject on return to activities of daily living 
 Record Adverse Events   Review PBLAC diary recording and instructions.  Remind subject  to submit monthly 
PBLAC diary. 
 Query subject regarding the use of additional medications or s urgical procedures to 
manage heavy menstrual bleeding 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528103] treatment (± 4 weeks) 
 Perform pelvic exam, if needed 
 Administer MIQ and PMSIS questionnaires 
 Collect and review PBLAC  Query subject regarding the use of additional medications or s urgical procedures to 
manage heavy menstrual bleeding 
 Record Adverse Events since last follow-up 
 
6.[ADDRESS_528104] treatment (± 4 weeks) 
 Perform pelvic exam, if needed 
 Administer MIQ and PMSIS questionnaires  Collect and Review PBLAC  Query subject regarding the use of additional medications or s urgical procedures as 
intervention to manage heavy menstrual bleeding 
 Record Adverse Events since last follow-up 
 
6.[ADDRESS_528105] treatment (± 4 weeks) 
 Perform pelvic exam  
 Collect FSH when age is > 40 years  Administer MIQ and PMSIS questionnaires 
 Assess uterine cavity access and healing via hysteroscopy 
 Collect and Review PBLAC 
 Query subject regarding the use of additional medications or s urgical procedures as 
intervention to manage heavy menstrual bleeding 
 Record Subject satisfaction and recommendation  Record Adverse Events since last follow-up 
 
 
 
 
  
 
6.[ADDRESS_528106] Treatment (± 4 weeks) 
Collect the information listed below during the subject’s office or telephone contact [CONTACT_765]. 
 Query the subject regarding: 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  34 of 45  
1. Any medication that she is taking or any surgical procedure or other treatment 
that she has undergone for uterine bleeding 
2. Gynecologic adverse events 
3. Type of contraception, compliance with contraception, and if she is pregnant or 
had a pregnancy 
4. Menstrual status 
5. Satisfaction with the results of the Cerene treatment and willingness to 
recommend the procedure to a friend or relative 
 Administer the MIQ and PMSIS questionnaires during the contact  
 
6.[ADDRESS_528107] Treatment (± 4 weeks) / Subject Exit 
Collect the information listed below during the subject’s office or telephone contact [CONTACT_765]. 
 Query the subject regarding: 
1. Any medication that she is taking or any surgical procedure or other treatment 
that she has undergone for uterine bleeding 
2. Gynecologic adverse events 
3. Type of contraception, compliance with contraception, and if she is pregnant or 
had a pregnancy 
4. Menstrual status 
5. Satisfaction with the results of the Cerene treatment and willingness to 
recommend the procedure to a friend or relative 
 Administer the MIQ and PMSIS questionnaires during the contact  
 Exit subject at this visit per protocol 
 
[ADDRESS_528108] during a clinical study, 
regardless of whether or not it is considered related to the procedure / investigational device.  
 
Anticipated signs and symptoms (e.g. nausea, crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) which oc cur in the recovery room will 
not be considered adverse events unless they occur with greater severity or intensity than anticipated.    
It is the responsibility of the investigator to report all adve rse events as required by [CONTACT_3181].  
Adverse event information will be collected throughout the stud y at each subject contact [CONTACT_418648].  Adverse events will be recorded on  the Adverse Event CRF by [CONTACT_418649], anticipated or unanticipated, 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528109] be followed until it has subsided or, in case of permanent 
impairment or residual effects, until the event stabilizes, and  the overall clinical outcome has been 
ascertained.  
 
Severity of Adverse Events: The definitions below will be used to rate the severity of adverse 
events for this study.  
 Mild: Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated and transient; causing no 
loss of time from normal activities; symptoms would not require  medication or a 
medical treatment; signs and symptoms are transient. 
 Moderate: Marked symptoms and discomfort severe enough to cause moderate 
interference with the subject’s usual activities.  Symptomatic treatment is possible. 
 Severe: Incapacitating with inability to do work or usual activities; s igns and symptoms 
may be of systemic nature or require medical intervention and/or treatment. 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418638]. 
 
Serious Adverse Events (SAE):  An Adverse event is categorized as an SAE if it meets any of 
the criteria listed below.  SAE categorization is independent of the severity rating applied above. 
 Death 
 Life-threatening: the subject was at substantial risk of dying  at the time of the adverse 
event, or if use or continued use of the device or other medica l product might have 
result in the death of the subject 
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (initial or prolonged) due to an adverse event  
Emergency room visits that do not result in admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418639] (e.g., life-threatening; required intervention to 
prevent permanent impairment or damage; other serious medically  important event). 
A hospi[INVESTIGATOR_23565]: 
o The admission results in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_8932] 12 hours  
o The admission is pre-planned (such as elective or scheduled su rgery arranged 
prior to the start of the study) 
o The admission is not associated with an AE (such as hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418640]) 
 Disability or permanent damage 
o Disability means a substantial disrupt ion of a person’s ability to conduct normal life’s 
functions 
 Requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent  impairment of a body 
function or permanent damage to a body structure 
 Congenital anomaly / birth defect caused by [CONTACT_27178] a medical product prior to 
conception or during pregnancy 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  37 of 45  
 Any medically important serious  adverse event as judged by [CONTACT_418650], but it may 
jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical inte rvention (treatment) to 
prevent one of the other outcomes. Examples include allergic br onchospasm requiring 
treatment in an emergency room, serious blood dyscrasias (blood disorders) or 
seizures/convulsions that do not result in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  Th e development of drug 
dependence or drug abuse would also be examples of important medical events. 
 
Serious Deterioration in the State of Health, per Health Canada  SOR/98-282: 
 Serious Deterioration in the State of Health, as defined in the Health Canada 
Regulations, involves: life-threatening disease, disorder or ab normal physical state,  
 The permanent impairment of a body  function or permanent damage to a body 
structure, or  
 A condition that necessitates an unexpected medical or surgica l intervention to 
prevent such a disease, disorder or abnormal physical state or permanent 
impairment or damage. 
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE):  Any serious adverse effect on health or safety 
or any life-threatening problem or death caused by, or associat ed with, a device, if that effect, 
problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the 
investigational plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application, or investigator’s 
brochure), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the 
rights, safety, or welfare of subjects. 
 Near incident:  Any malfunction or deterioration in the characteristics and/or performance of the 
device which might have led to death or serious deterioration i n health; incident occurred and is 
such that if it occurred again, it might lead to death or serio us deterioration in health.  
 
Adverse Event Relationship:  The relationship of an Adverse Event to a pre-existing condition, 
underlying disease, screening procedure, ablation procedure or treatment, or the device will be 
attributed as not related or related.  
Adverse Event Status (outcome) :  The outcome of an adverse event should be assessed at 
every subject contact [CONTACT_418651], or is ongoing.  It can be updated 
if new information is received.  The status should be recorded as follows: 
 Resolved: the AE has stopped and the stop date should be recorded.  
NOTE: The severity of an AE may change.  If the severity change s, the AE with 
the existing severity should be recorded as resolved and the st op date when the 
severity changed should be entered.  A new AE with the updated severity 
should be recorded with a start date that the severity changed.    
 Resolved with residual side effects:  this outcome would be recorded if the AE has 
stabilized but a pathological or residual condition continues. Therefore, the AE 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  38 of 45  
symptom(s) has not completely r esolved and a new baseline for the subject/ 
patient is established since full recovery is not expected (the AE is expected to 
continue for an undetermined amount of time).  A stop date for the AE should be 
recorded as the approximate date of AE stabilization. 
 Not resolved:  this outcome would be recorded at subject exit if the adverse event 
has not stopped or stabilized.  A stop date for the AE should N OT be recorded. 
 Fatal: this outcome would be recorded if the subject expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697].  The stop date for the 
AE is recorded as the date of death. 
 Other: this outcome would be recorded if any of the outcomes l isted above do not 
apply.  The reason for other should be specified.  A stop date for the AE may or may not be recorded. 
 
[ADDRESS_528110] risk and clinical risk 
analyses performed by [CONTACT_1034].   
 Abdominal bloating 
 Abdominal pain 
 Additional intervention for bleeding  Anesthesia-related, adverse reaction or over-medication  Cervical stenosis 
 Cervical tear/injury 
 Damage to adjacent organs (e.g. bowel burn or bladder injury) (Note:  a severe bowel 
injury could potentially lead to death)  
 Dysmenorrhea 
 Dyspareunia 
 Embolism  Endometritis  Fever 
 Hematometra 
 Infection, sepsis, or death due to sepsis  Nausea 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  39 of 45  
 Nitrous oxide impairment (dizziness) 
 Pelvic crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007] 
 Pelvic or abdominal injury resulting from excessive uterine pressures  Possible missed diagnosis of uterine cavity pathology post-end ometrial ablation 
 Post-ablation tubal sterilization syndrome 
 Pregnancy (Note: Pregnancy following ablation may be life thre atening to both mother 
and fetus) 
 Urinary tract infections  Uterine perforation 
 Uterine synechiae (Asherman’s syndrome ) 
 Vaginal bleeding 
 Vaginal discharge  Vomiting  Some or all of these risks may require a need for reoperation or subsequent treatment 
and/or may lead to permanent disability or death. 
 
Note: Vaginal discharge usually happens during the first few days following treatment and may 
last as long as six weeks.  It is generally described as bloody during the first few days, a mixture of blood and f luid for another week , then followed by a  watery discharge that can 
be substantial at times.  This is an anticipated symptom of the cryotherapy treatment and is not considered an adverse event unless the vaginal discharge  suggests infection. 
 
There is also the possibility of an unanticipated reaction to t he study device and/or medications 
used during the procedure that could require emergency interven tion.  Subjects with known 
sensitivity to drugs that may be used during the procedure are excluded from study participation.  
Should a subject experience a significant side effect for which  there is concern, she will be 
managed per investigator standard of care and institutional req uirements. 
 
If sedation is used, potential risks from the agents and/or gas es used include postoperative pain, 
nausea and vomiting, dizziness, drowsiness, shivering, liver toxicity, and/or cardiovascular 
events.  Trained professionals with extensive experience and ex pertise who routinely administer 
anesthesia to subjects will be responsible for the induction an d associated monitoring required 
for this type of procedure.  Study subjects will be monitored t hroughout treatment, recovery, and 
discharge per investigator and institution requirements.  In ad dition, the risks of blood draws 
include temporary pain and discomfort from the needle stick, an d/or tenderness, redness or 
bruising at the site, bleeding, fainting and lightheadedness.  
 
This list of risks may not be co mplete and it is possible that unforeseen risks could occur.  There 
is also the risk that the procedure may not be effective or the  subject may not be able to be treated 
because of obstructions within the cavity, an unusual cavity shape, or inadequate uterine 
dimensions that are determined at completion of screening on th e day of study treatment. 
 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528111] 
eligibility criteria, study requirements, data collection and r eporting requirements, and the 
investigator’s responsibilities to satisfy regulatory, ethical,  and Sponsor’s requirements.  The 
study monitor will identify the types and location of source do cumentation in use at the site.  
 
The study monitor will monitor study data to verify that the su bject’s rights and well-being are 
protected, the study investigator is conducting the study in co mpliance with the protocol and the 
investigator’s agreement, and to ensure reported data are authentic, accurate and complete.  
Remote and on-site data monitoring will be utilized.  It is the Investigator’s responsibility to ensure 
the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the data reported  in the subject’s CRF.   
 The Investigator will allow direct access to subject files and source documents for the purpose of 
verifying CRF entries and assist with the study monitor’s activ ities as required.  Clinical site staff 
will provide adequate time, office accommodations, and resource s (including copy machine, 
phone, and/or internet access) to the study monitor for monitoring visits.  Source documentation 
supporting the CRF data should indicate the subject’s participa tion in the study and should 
document the dates and details of study procedures, AEs, and su bject status.  Source documents 
must be signed and dated by [CONTACT_418652].   
 A third-party monitor has been appointed as the data management  CRO for this study. 
Study Monitor: 
  
  
  
 

 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  41 of 45  
9.1 Responsibilities of the Sponsor 
Sponsor responsibilities include but are not limited to:  
 Conducting this clinical study in compliance with all applicab le regulatory requirements 
and guidelines, specifically in accordance with FDA regulations as described in 21 
CFR 50 and 56 and 812, ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011(E) Clinical investigation  of medical devices 
for human subjects – Good clinical practice, IRB/EC requirement s, and the Informed 
Consent provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki. 
 Ensuring study oversight. 
 Monitoring study data to verify that the subject’s rights and well-being are protected.  
 Informing the clinical investigator of any new information about the study that may 
affect the health, safety or welfare of the subjects, or which may influence her decision 
to continue participating in the study. 
 Providing the clinical investigator with the study protocol an d the CRFs on which to 
document the study evaluation variables for each subject. 
 Selecting qualified investigators to conduct this clinical stu dy. Each Investigator will 
sign an Investigator Agreement prior to the study start.  Finan cial Disclosure 
Statements will be completed, as required. 
 Maintaining copi[INVESTIGATOR_106152], records of shipment and disposition of devices, 
adverse device effects, records related to the signed investiga tor agreements, and 
other records related to the clinical study. 
 
9.[ADDRESS_528112] be licensed a physician in his/her country of employ ment.  The investigator will affirm 
by [CONTACT_5657]/her signature [CONTACT_418661]'s Agreement that he/sh e will fulfill his/her responsibilities 
to this clinical study. 
Investigator responsibilities include but are not limited to:  
 Protecting the rights, safety, and welfare of subjects under h is/her care 
 Ensuring that all subjects meet eligibility criteria prior to treatment 
 Obtaining initial and ongoing IRB/EC Approval of the protocol 
 Obtaining subject informed consent using an IRB/EC approved in formed consent form 
 Performing subject evaluations and reporting data as specified in the protocol  Documenting and reporting protocol deviations 
 Retaining original records for the timeframe required by [CONTACT_418653] 
 Ensuring investigational devices are dispensed only to study s ubjects and under the 
direct supervision of the investigator or co-investigators 
 Maintaining records of investigational device disposition 
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  [ADDRESS_528113] will  be informed that representatives 
of the Sponsor, IRB/EC, or regulatory authorities may inspect, review, and photocopying of the 
subject records and that all personal information will be maint ained in strict confidence and in 
accordance with local data protection requirements and/or laws.   In the event a subject’s data are 
used for educational, presentation, and/or publication purposes , subject identity will be masked 
to protect the subject’s confidentiality.  
10.[ADDRESS_528114] in an emergency.  Such notice shall be given as soon as possible, but in no event later than five working days after th e emergency occurred.  Except in 
such an emergency, prior approval of Channel Medsystems Inc. is  required for any deviation from 
the protocol.  Approval from the IRB/EC also is required if the se changes or deviations are 
expected to affect the rights, safety or welfare of human subje cts. 
 
10.3 Investigator Reports 
Investigators are required to prepare and submit the following complete, accurate and timely 
reports on this investigation (See Table below) 
  
 Clarity Clinical Study Protocol, CIP-0101, Rev. K  
 
Confidential. Do not reproduce without written permission  Page  44 of 45  
11 References 
Ayus, J. C., J. M. Wheeler and A. I. Arieff (1992). "Postoperative hyponatremic encephalopathy 
in menstruant women." Ann Intern Med 117(11): 891-897. 
Baggish, M. S., A. I. Brill, B. Rosensweig, J. E. Barbot and P.  D. Indman (1993). "Fatal acute 
glycine and sorbitol toxicity during operative hysteroscopy." J  Gynecol Surg 9: 137-143. 
Bardenheuer, F. (1937). "Elektrokoagulation der Uterusschleimha ut zur 
Behandlungklimakterischer Blutungen." Zentralblatt fur Gynakolo gie 4 : 209-211. 
Baust, J. G., A. A. Gage, A. T. Robilottto and J. M. Baust (200 9). "The pathophysiology of 
thermoablation: optimizing cryoablation." Curr Opin Urol 19(2): 127-132. 
Bushnell, D. M., M. L. Martin, K. A. Moore, H. E. Richter, A. R ubin and D. L. Patrick (2010). 
"Menorrhagia Impact Questionnaire: assessing the influence of h eavy menstrual bleeding 
on quality of life." Curr Med Res Opin 26(12): 2745-2755. 
Cahan, W. G. and A. Brockunier, Jr. (1967). "Cryosurgery of the uterine cavity." Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 99(1): 138-153. 
Chen, Y. H., D. L. DeMets and K. K. Lan (2004). "Increasing the  sample size when the unblinded 
interim result is promising." Stat Med 23(7): 1023-1038. 
Chua, K. J., S. K. Chou and J. C. Ho (2007). "An analytical stu dy on the thermal effects of 
cryosurgery on selective cell destruction." J Biomech 40(1): 100-116. 
Cooper, J., R. Gimpelson, P. Laberge, D. Galen, J. G. Garza-Leal, J. Scott, N. Leyland, P. Martyn 
and J. Liu (2002). "A randomized, multicenter trial of safety a nd efficacy of the NovaSure 
system in the treatment of m enorrhagia." J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 9(4): 418-428. 
Corson, S. L. (1994). "Hyponatremic encephalopathy after endometrial ablation." JAMA : the 
journal of the American Medical Association 271 (5): 344; author reply 345. 
Corson, S. L. (2001). "A multicenter evaluation of endometrial ablation by [CONTACT_418654]." The Journal of th e American Association of 
Gynecologic Laparoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_11437] 8(3): 359-367. 
Droegemueller, W., B. Greer and E. Makowski (1971). "Cryosurger y in patients with dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding." Obstet Gynecol 38(2): 256-258. 
Droegemueller, W., B. E. Greer and E. L. Makowski (1970). "Prel iminary observations of 
cryocoagulation of the endometrium." Am J Obstet Gynecol 107(6): 958-961. 
Droegemueller, W., E. Makowski and R. Macsalka (1971). "Destruc tion of the endometrium by 
[CONTACT_418655]." Am J Obstet Gynecol 110(4): 467-469. 
Duleba, A. J., M. C. Heppard, R. M. Soderstrom and D. E. Townse nd (2003). "A randomized study 
comparing endometrial cryoablation and rollerball electroablati on for treatment of 
dysfunctional uterine bleeding." J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 10(1): 17-26. 
Evans, P. J. (1981). "Cryoanalgesia. The application of low temperatures to nerves to produce 
anaesthesia or analgesia." Anaesthesia 36(11): 1003-1013. 
Fleiss, J. L. (1993). "The statistical basis of meta-analysis."  Stat Methods Med Res 2(2): 121-145. 
Fritsch, H. (1898). "I. Uterusvapokauterisation, tod durch septische peritonitis nach spontaner 
sekundarer perforation." Centralblatt fur Gynakologie 52: 1409-1418. 
 