Ver. 7/25/2016 1 
  
 
Title:  Development of an Internet -based Behavioral Pain Management Intervention  
 
Protocol Approval by [CONTACT_573023]:   7/25/[ADDRESS_752233] number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752234] DESCRIPTION  
 
1. Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_572993] , Ph.D.*  
Co-Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_572994], Ph.D .* 
 
Co-Investigators:  
Joseph Goulet, Ph.D. * - VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
Marc Rosen, M.D. – VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
Cynthia Brandt, M .D.*– VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
William Becker, M.D. – VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
Woody Levin * – VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
 
Co-Investigators not at VACHS  
David Williams, Ph.D. – University of Michigan  
Matthew Bair, M.D. – Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana  
Sarah K rein, Ph.D. – VA Ann Arbor  Healthcare System  
Kenneth Weingardt, Ph.D. – Web Services, Office of Mental Health Services , Washington DC  
Haseena Rajeevan , Ph.D.  – Yale University  
Robert Kerns, PhD – Yale University  
 
 
Study Staff:  
TBD* – VA Connecticut Healthc are System  
TBD* – VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
*Access to PHI  
 
Title: Development of an Internet -based Behavioral Pain Management Intervention  
 
2.  Purpose:  
The proposed study includes development, evaluation of preliminary efficacy, and usability tes ting of a 
behavioral self -management program (the VPMRC) involving cognitive -behavioral and progressive 
physical activity components for CLBP delivered via the Internet. The intervention will be developed and 
tested during 2 phases: (1) Development (Phase 1) and (2) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_572995] (Phase 
2). 
 
Phase 1: Development  
The primary aim of this phase of the project is to develop an integrated, Internet -based behavioral pain 
self-management intervention called the Veteran Pain Management Resou rce Center (VPMRC).  The first 
phase of the project will involve development of the VPMRC based on materials previously developed by 
[CONTACT_573024]. During this phase, an Expert Panel (EP) of clinician 
investigators, inc luding several with specific expertise and experience in developi[INVESTIGATOR_14632] e -health 
interventions, will assist the PIs in preparing the initial content for the VPMRC. The EP will provide regular 
feedback that will be us ed to modify the VPMRC over a 14-month development period. This phase of the 
project also involves obtaining feedback from 15 Veterans with chronic low back pain (CLBP) to assess 
usability of the VPMRC, ease of navigation of the website, functionality of the website, and overall 
particip ant satisfaction with the VPMRC program.  
 
Phase II:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_572996] a pi[INVESTIGATOR_572997], usability of, and satisfaction with the  VPMRC.  
The primary hypothesis  is that a clinically meaningful reduction in pain interference with functioning post -
exposure to the VPMRC will be observed compared to baseline ratings.  
The secondary hypothesis  is that Veterans who participate in the VPMR C will report a clinically 
meaningful reduction in pain intensity and statistically significant improvements on other important 
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752235] (credibility), use, and 
satisfaction with the VPMRC.  
 
3.  Background:  
Limitations of current interventions for CLBP  
For years, the practice of pain medicine has over -emphasized expensive and modestly effective 
treatments for CLBP, while under -utilizing inexpensive evidence -based behaviorally -oriented approaches 
that have demonstrated comparable or superior effect.1,2,3,4,[ADDRESS_752236] been demonstrated to be efficacious and 
effective,  but are rarely used in routine clinical practice. Optimal care should combine both 
pharmacological and non -pharmacological behavioral interventions – but again, this is rarely done. 
Patients have historically considered behavioral interventions to be “mental health” resulting in reluctance 
to accept the need for a “psychological” treatment for their pain. It is imperative that a viable delivery 
platform be developed to facilitate Veteran access to efficacious non -pharmacological interventions. Such 
integrated delivery has become the “gold standard” of care for other chronic medical conditions such as 
diabetes, congestive heart failure, and asthma.  The de velopment of the Veterans Pain Management 
Resource Center (VPMRC) represents a necessary “first step” in providing comparable evidence -based 
disease management for CLBP – a long anticipated transformation in how clinical pain medicine is 
practiced.  
 
Behav ioral interventions for pain self -management  
Cognitive -behavioral therapy  
Psychological interventions  such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) have demonstrated efficacy 
for reducing pain and improving function in persons with a broad spectrum of pain -related conditions and 
have become the most commonly cited alternatives to traditional medical and rehabilitation approaches to 
chronic pain management.6,7,8 CBT is informed by a theory of chronic pain that suggests that patients' 
beliefs, attitudes, and co pi[INVESTIGATOR_564049] a central role in determining their experiences of pain .[ADDRESS_752237] that it is specifically 
designed to simultaneou sly target reductions in pain and associated disability, emotional distress, and 
improve overall quality of life. CBT is a structured, time -limited, and goal -oriented therapeutic approach 
that can be delivered in either small groups or individual outpatien t sessions. Therapy usually involves six 
to twelve outpatient treatment sessions during which a range of cognitive (e.g., attention diversion, 
development of copi[INVESTIGATOR_52497] -statements) and behavioral (e.g., activity pacing, mental relaxation and other 
stress reduction) pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_572998]. Progress toward individually -tailored goals for treatment 
and pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_572999]. Kerns and colleagues published a m eta-analysis of psychological interventions 
for chronic back pain and documented moderate to large effects of psychological interventions, including 
CBT, in reducing pain and pain -related interference relative to waiting list control conditions.[ADDRESS_752238] relationship with function, the 
presence of chronic pain can result in decreased activity levels and self -protective behaviors such as 
guarding and avoidance of physical ac tivity due to fear of pain exacerbation or potential re -injury.9,10 Over 
time, such behaviors can lead to reduced muscle tone, increased pain, and functional disability – a 
vicious cycle that perpetuates the persistence of pain and low levels of functionin g.[ADDRESS_752239] spi[INVESTIGATOR_23585]. Research shows that physical activity can help prevent recurrence 
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752240] effective strategy for improving pain includes a 
supervised, yet individually designed home -based exercise program, consisting of high -dose intensity 
exercise (defined by [CONTACT_573025]). However, studies also suggest that a variety of 
exercise programs or interventions including yoga as well as aerobic (e.g., walking) and strengthening 
exercises result in bot h clinically and statistically significant improvements in outcomes for patients with 
CLBP.5,11, [ADDRESS_752241] focused on US Veteran populations. McMahon and 
colleagues examined a web -based intervention compared to usual care for management of b lood 
pressure and glucose among Veterans with diabetes.19 Participants in the web -based condition 
demonstrated lower and clinically meaningful hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) values and systolic blood 
pressure over [ADDRESS_752242] -intervention compared with control participants. Using the same sample of 
participants cited by [CONTACT_573026],19 Fonda and colleagues compared “diabetes distress” in Veterans 
receiving usual care for diabetes to those receiving an Internet -based care management program for 
diabetes.20  Results in dicated that participants (mean age 61 years) in both conditions demonstrated a 
decrease in diabetes distress; however, those with sustained usage of the Internet -based program 
showed significantly greater decreases in diabetes distress compared to non -users. In addition, glycemic 
control was positively correlated with a measure of diabetes -related distress, such that reductions in 
HbA1c were associated with reductions in distress. These results suggest the promise of an Internet -
based program, even among o lder Veterans.   
Internet -based interventions for chronic pain  
 To date, few published studies have evaluated Internet -based interventions for chronic pain.  A 
recently published meta -analysis included [ADDRESS_752243] or to receive access for six w eeks to an Internet -based intervention comprised 
of education, cognitive skills acquisition, behavioral rehearsal, and generalization and maintenance.22 
Statistically significant improvements on measures of pain catastrophizing, control over pain, and “abi lity 
to reduce pain” were reported.  None of the reported studies were noted to include Veterans. The authors 
concluded that, although only small improvements in pain were noted across the studies, greater 
improvement in pain -related disability was noted i n studies that examined this variable, and that the 
efficacy of cognitive behavioral interventions was particularly supported.  
4.  Significance:   
VHA has recognized numerous challenges in achieving its Pain Management Strategy objectives.  
Of particular r elevance to the current proposal, VHA has specifically recognized the need to develop 
systems of care that promote equitable access to specialty healthcare services for Veterans regardless of 
geography and socioeconomic barriers. Pain management has been i dentified by [CONTACT_573027].  
The short term objective of this project is to conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_573000] -based self -
management program, the VPMRC, for Veterans with CLBP that is compatib le with VA IT architecture 
and MHV. The evaluation will examine preliminary efficacy of the VMPRC for reducing pain -related 
interference, pain severity, and related problems commonly associated with CLBP, and will also test the 
usability of and satisfactio n related to the VPMRC. If successful, the long term objective is to migrate the 
Ver. 7/25/2016 5 
 VPMRC to the MHV platform to provide widespread and easy access for Veterans across VHA regardless 
of geography or other access barriers.  
 
5. Research Plan:   
The proposed st udy includ es development, evaluation of preliminary efficacy, and usability testing of 
a behavioral self -management program (the VPMRC) involving cognitive -behavioral and progressive 
physical activity components for CLBP delivered via the Internet. The int ervention will be developed and 
tested during 2 phases: Development (Phase 1) and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_572995] (Phase 2). 
Because the proposed study includes 2 phases, each phase will be described separately.   
Phase 1: Development  
The primary aim  of this phase of the project is to develop an integrated, Internet -based behavioral 
pain self -management intervention called the Veteran Pain Management Resource Center (VPMRC).  
The first phase of the project will involve development of the VPMRC based o n materials previously 
developed by [CONTACT_573024]. Five specific studies from our investigative 
team provide additional background for the development of the VPMRC and for informing this phase of 
the project. : A Clinic al Science R&D Service Merit Award to [CONTACT_564154] titled “Efficacy of tailored cognitive 
behavior therapy for chronic back pain”, HSR&D funded Short Term Project, “Pi[INVESTIGATOR_573001]”, an efficacious web -based behavioral self -management 
program (WEB -SM) known as “Living Well with Fibromyalgia.”, an Internet -mediated exercise intervention 
for Veterans with CLBP that was tested at the Ann Arbor VA Medical Center, and a RR&D study 
examining a motivational inter viewing intervention for Veterans with mental health conditions applying for 
VA disability benefits that has recently been translated for delivery via the Internet at VACHS.  
During this phase, an Expert Panel (EP) of clinician investigators, including sev eral with specific expertise 
and experience in developi[INVESTIGATOR_14632] e-health interventions, will assist the PIs in preparing the initial 
content for the VPMRC. The EP will provide regular feedback that will be used to modify the VPMRC over 
a 14-month dev elopment period.  
Process:   Development of the VPMRC will follow an iterative process between the informatics experts 
and the Expert Panel (EP; described below). The initial content will be developed based upon the 
Veteran -centered materials for self -manag ement of CLBP described above. A prototype web site with a 
single module (i.e., Introduction Module) will be developed in conjunction with the informatics expert and 
programmer ([CONTACT_573047] ) and a graphic designer incorporating User -Centered Desig n 
processes. Once a draft of the first module is completed, the EP will be convened by [CONTACT_577] (with 
LiveMeeting capability) to review the content and prototype navigation for the site. Draft materials for 
each of the remaining modules will be devel oped iteratively by [CONTACT_573028]. Rajeevan  and 
added to the VPMRC prototype. On a monthly basis, the EP will be asked to review and comment on new 
content. Once all modules are completed and reviewed, an initial version of the entire VPMRC will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_573029] 15 Veterans (see below for further detail) to assess usability, ease of 
navigation, and functionality. Based upon feedback from this round of review, modifications will be made 
to the beta version of the VPMRC program followed  by a second review by [CONTACT_269601]. Final modifications to 
the VPMRC program will be made prior to releasing it into the production environment for the Phase II 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_86234].  
Compatibility with VA WebOps Standards:  Compatibility with VA WebOps Stand ards and VA IT 
architecture requirements is ensured by [CONTACT_573030] -investigators. [CONTACT_573048] is National Director of Web Services for the Office of Mental Health Services. [CONTACT_573049] is Director of the In formatics Core of the PRIME Center and is a member of the eHealth 
QUERI project. [CONTACT_573050]  will work with the EP and with Drs. Weingardt and Brandt to develop the 
VPMRC using guidelines provided by [CONTACT_91719] (i.e., WebOps standards) to ensure that the VPMRC i s 
compatible with the VHA’s web environment and can ultimately be integrated into the MHV platform. 
Initially, the VPMRC will be hosted on a Yale University  server and will not be tied to the VHA’s Intranet. 
TheWebOps standards specify software and server compatibility (i.e., [CONTACT_573050]  will build the VPMRC 
using Microsoft tools to ensure compatibility), security and privacy (i.e., no PHI will be collected in the 
VPMRC), accessibility (e.g., section 508 guidelines), compatibility with web browsers, space quotas, and 
file type restrictions. Attention will also be given to representation of VHA using correct decals, symbols, 
and disclaimers about content while in development phases, although the interface design may be 
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752244]. Rajeevan  will also build the VPMRC with 
knowledge of the “Clinic in Hand” chronic pain mobile application for smartphones to ensure compatibility.   
Composition of the VPMRC  
As currently envisioned,  the VPMRC program will contain two components, a participant home page 
and several behavioral and cognitive pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_573002] -supported methods of 
managing CLBP.   
Home Page:  The home page will contain a number of features including (a) the ability to log in and 
be recognized by [CONTACT_78311] (which will be required to access features of the program), (b) a self -
assessment survey to guide users to the modules of most relevance based upon problem areas (e.g., low 
scores on measures of adaptive copi[INVESTIGATOR_573003] , pacing, mental relaxation), readiness to make 
behavioral changes, and preferences, (c) a site map indicating utilization and progress within skill 
modules, (d) a link to summary information associated with self -monitoring or activities tied to each 
modul e, and (e) optional customization applications such as daily tips, pain news, links to resources, and 
similar functionality.  
Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_573004]:   Table 1 provides an overview of the preliminary modules to be 
adapted for the VPMRC program.  Each modu le will adhere to a common structure composed of the 
following: (1) a video lecture on the specific skill topic by a subject matter expert, (2) an opportunity for 
self-assessment regarding the content covered in the video lecture followed by [CONTACT_573031]’s current behavior with known or recommended standards, (3) a demonstration 
video or animation modeling how skills can be used to modify the behaviors associated with the content 
of each module, and (4) a tool for setting goa ls and for developi[INVESTIGATOR_573005]. This behavioral action plan can also be shared with family or clinicians. In addition, 
each module will include tools for identifying and overcoming barriers to change, and supp orting resource 
materials specific to each module (e.g., self -monitoring forms, information about the skill that can be 
shared with a physician).   
Table 1.  Introduction to Intervention and Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_573006], explain pain 
cycle, introduce goal setting  
1. Progressive Physical 
Activity  Walking  Instructions for walking and benefits of increased 
activity; goal setting (increase distance walked by 
10%/week)  
 
2. Physical Activity  Stretching/Body Mechanics  Instructions for stretching and body mechanics 
benefits; goal setting (perform stretching 
exercises once/ day)  
  
3. Relaxation  Diaphragmatic Breathing  Instructions for diaphragmatic breathing and 
benefits; goal setting (pra ctice 20 minutes/day)  
 
4. Relaxation  Progressive Muscle 
Relaxation  Instructions for progressive muscle relaxation and 
benefits; goal setting (practice 20 minutes/day)  
 
5. Adaptive stress 
response  Identifying negative thoughts  Influence of negative thoughts on pain, activity, 
and mood; self -monitoring negative thoughts 
(maintain daily diary)  
6. Adaptive stress 
response  Using positive copi[INVESTIGATOR_573007]; self -monitoring (maintain daily diary)  
  
7. Pacing  Activity pac ing  Pace activities based on time rather than pain 
level; goal setting (set daily goals and maintain 
daily diary)  
8. Pacing  Pleasant activity scheduling  Using pleasant activity scheduling to increase 
activity and enhance mood; goal setting (select 
daily goa ls and maintain daily diary)  
9. Addressing pain 
flares  Skill consolidation and 
relapse prevention  Planning for relapse and pain flares; goal setting 
for sustaining improvements  
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752245] of the EP members, their disciplines, and a brief description of 
their areas of particularly relevant expertise.  
Table 2. Expert Panel Membership  
Expert Panel Clinician  Study Role  Expertise  
Diana Higgins, Ph.D.  
(Clinical Psychologist)  EP lead; Project Coordinator; 
oversee production of 
VPMRC (content and patient 
interface)  • Adapting behavioral interventions for delivery via 
the Internet for Veterans  
• Psychologist therapi[INVESTIGATOR_573008], Ph.D.  
(Clinical Psychologist)  EP lead; oversee content of 
VPMRC; dissemination lead  • National Program Director for Pain Management  
• Director, PRIME Center  
• Pi[INVESTIGATOR_573009],  psychosocial pain assessment 
instruments, and a model of readiness to adopt 
behavioral changes for pain management  
David Williams, Ph.D.  
(Clinical Psychologist)  EP lead; development of 
VPMRC; translation of face -
to-face treatment for Internet 
delivery  • Leading contributor to development of pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_573010]  
• Lead author of cognitive behavioral intervention in 
prior Gulf War Veteran Illness VA Cooperative 
Studies Project  
• Developed Internet -based interventions for pain 
including “Livi ng-well with FM”  
Alicia Heapy, Ph.D.  
(Clinical Psychologist)   Development of VPMRC; 
translation of face -to-face 
treatment for Internet delivery 
for Veterans  • Associate Director, PRIME Center  
• Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/implementing clinical trials using IVR to 
disseminate  CBT for Veterans with chronic pain 
who have limited access to specialized care  
Marc Rosen, M.D.  
(Psychiatrist)  Development of VPMRC; 
translation of face -to-face 
treatment for Internet delivery 
for Veterans  • Adapting a behavioral intervention for Veterans 
with mental health conditions who are applying for 
VA benefits for Internet delivery  
Matthew Bair, M.D.,M.S.  
(Primary Care 
Physician)  Development and content 
expert; implementing VPMRC 
into primary care setting  • Investigator at the Center of Excellence on 
Implementing Evidence -Based Practice  
• HSR&D Career Development Awardee, focus on 
pain management in VA primary care settings  
William Becker, MD  
(Primary Care 
Physician)  Development and content 
expert; implementing VPMRC 
into primary care setting  • Investigat or at the PRIME Center  
• HSR&D Career Development Awardee, focus on 
pain management in VA primary care settings  
Sarah Krein, Ph.D., RN  
(Doctoral -level Nurse)  Development of VPMRC; 
translation of face -to-face 
treatment for Internet delivery 
for Veterans; con tent expert 
for progressive physical 
activity  modules  • Investigator at the VA Center for Clinical 
Management Research  
• Utilizing the Internet as a delivery platform for 
exercise interventions  
Pre-pi[INVESTIGATOR_573011] a complete initial version of the VPMRC is developed, the intervention will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_60528]  a 
small sample of Veterans (N=15) to determine usability, ease of navigation, and functionality. Based on 
suggested sample sizes for qualitative research, which recommend using at least 6 participants23,24for a 
phenomenologic approach (i.e., designed to capture the essence of the experience25 to obtain thematic 
saturation), we opted to enroll 15 participants to achieve thematic saturation and to reduce the likelihood 
Ver. 7/25/2016 8 
 that we will obtain bi modal opi[INVESTIGATOR_573012].  This phase is designed to solicit feedback from 
participants to further develop and modify the VPMRC program.  
Procedure:  Eligible participants (N=15) will be asked to participate in two, 2.5 hour visits during 
which they will complete inform ed consent, complete the tailoring self -assessment, and review the 
modules using a computer at VACHS while the Research Assistant (RA) prompts the participant for 
feedback and records his/her feedback.  During the first visit, participants will be asked to  complete the 
informed consent, review the program’s homepage, complete the tailoring self -assessment, and review 
the first 3 treatment modules while providing verbal, audio -recorded feedback (e.g., using the “Think 
Aloud” method).  Participants will be gi ven a homework assignment to login to their account on [ADDRESS_752246] -intervention Measure to obtain quantitat ive feedback.  Table 3 
describes study visits, assessment measures, and qualitative and quantitative data collection for Phase I.   
Table 3: Phase I Visits and Assessments  
Visit  Visit description  Assessments  
Consent,  
Self-
Assessment  
& 
First 3 
Modules  • Consent  
•  • Issue userID and temporary      
      password  
•  • Review first 3 treatment    
      modules  
 • Informed Consent  
• Participant will provide verbal feedback about his/her    
  experience with the homepage, self -assessment, and    
  first 3 modu les which will be recorded by [CONTACT_21118] (Think  
  Aloud Method)  
Final 6 
Modules  
& 
Data 
Collection  •  • Report experience accessing  
      modules at home  
•  • Review final 6 treatment  
      modules      
   • Post -intervention assessment  
 • Participant will provide verbal feedback about his/her  
  experience with the final 6 modules which will be  
  recorded by [CONTACT_21118] (Think Aloud Method)  
• Post -intervention questionnaire assessing participants’  
  experience with the intervention  
Feedback from Veterans will  be reviewed with the EP which will subsequently make 
recommendations to the VPMRC developers for further modifications to the program.  As the refinements 
are made, the EP will continue to interact with the developers to ensure that the feedback from the 
Veterans is adequately addressed and incorporated in the final version of the VPMRC.  
Assessments: The primary focus of assessment during Phase I is to gather qualitative and 
quantitative feedback during and after completion of the intervention regarding th e layout of the website, 
ease of navigation and use, relevance of the materials presented, appeal of the program, understanding 
of key concepts, appropriateness of the graphics and multimedia interface, problems encountered, 
amount of material presented, a nd general likes, dislikes, overall functionality of the program, and 
recommendations for change.  
Intra-intervention Assessment: Qualitative information will be collected through a “Think Aloud” 
process in which the participants provide unstructured verba l feedback while engaging in the computer 
task.  This feedback is recorded by a member of the study staff who will be present in the room with the 
participant.  Think Aloud is a popular method for testing usability and for revision of novel applications th at 
involves a participant providing verbal feedback about an application to a “listener” (i.e., a research 
assistant [RA]) that is recorded and then transcribed for coding and analysis.[ADDRESS_752247]-intervention Measure: Participants will be administered an inv estigator -created measure 
designed to assess the layout of the website, ease of navigation, relevance of the materials presented, 
appeal of the program, understanding of key concepts, appropriateness of the graphics and multimedia 
interface, ease of use, p roblems encountered, amount of material presented, and general likes, dislikes. 
These data will be used to guide modification of the VPMRC.  
Phase II:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_573013]. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752248] is to execute a  pi[INVESTIGATOR_573014], usability of, and satisfaction with the VPMRC. A single treatment condition (Usual 
Care [UC] plus VPMRC) X two evaluation periods (baseline and [ADDRESS_752249] -baseline ) design with 
multiple d ependent measures will be employed. Participants in the study will be 55 Veterans with CLBP. 
Participants will continue to receive care as usual from their primary care providers (PCPs) and other 
healthcare providers.  
 
Recruitment    
VistA Search:  We will identify potential Veterans for inclusion from available electronic medical 
record (EMR) data in VistA. All Veterans 18 years or older from VACHS (Station 689) with low back pain 
defined using the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision diagnostic codes related to low 
back pain (724, 7240x, 7241x, 7242x, 7243x, 7244x, 7245x, 7246x, 7247x, 8460x, and 8472x ) will be 
considered eligible. We will attempt to oversample OEF/OIF/OND, female, and minority Veterans , as 
these Veterans have high preva lence rates of chronic musculoskeletal pain conditions and are of 
particular interest in the context of the proposed study. We will then identify Veterans in this group to 
exclude psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_573015] [ADDRESS_752250] (EMR), or behavioral alert flag in the EMR.   
 A letter will be sent to the identified Veterans from their PCPs informing them about the study and 
inviting them to participate. Veterans will be provided with information about the  voluntary nature of the 
study and the option to “opt out” from further contact [CONTACT_573032], email or letter.  Veterans who do not contact [CONTACT_573033] t the study and, if interested, to be screened for participation. Screening will include several 
of the key eligibility criteria for the study (e.g., confirmation of presence of CLBP, readiness to engage in 
self-management for pain, interest in Internet -based pain care, and absence of medical and psychiatric 
comorbidities). If screening suggests potential eligibility, and if the Veteran is interested, an in -person 
appointment for obtaining written informed consent and baseline assessment data will be schedu led. 
Solicitation letters will be mailed in waves in order to prevent overwhelming our capacity to offer 
participation in a timely manner.  
We also will post  the already  approved flyer in the following venues: 1) patient care waiting areas , 2) 
flat screen informational te levisions around the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 3 ) Good Morning VA Connecticut 4) VA 
Connecticut’s Facebook page,  5) vet centers (after  securing their permission) and 6 ) at the Pain 
Education table.  We also will provide advertisement language in “ The Prime  Times ”, a PRIME Center 
community newsletter . 
 
Procedures  
Veterans meeting eligibility criteria based on screening (e.g., by [CONTACT_648]) will be scheduled to meet in 
person with the RA to obtain written informed consent and to complete all baseline study measur es. 
Immediately upon completing the measures, the participant will meet sepa rately with the study 
coordinator to receive instructions for accessing the VPMRC, and additional logistical details related to 
their participation in the study. Participants will be provided with a userID and temporary password for 
accessing the VPMRC program.   
Questionnaires and inventories that comprise the principle outcome measures will be reassessed at 
[ADDRESS_752251] data in the HSR&D funded “Women 
Veterans Cohort St udy” (WVCS; PI: C. Brandt). The RA and TrialDB data manager will check the TrialDB 
reports for accurate and timely completion. The RA  will contact [CONTACT_573034] [ADDRESS_752252] -intervention 
assessment. Table 4 outlines specific assessment measures to be collected  at each assessment point. 
Participants will be paid $75 for their participation in each of the two assessments.  
Table 4. Phase II Assessment Schedule  
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752253] -
baseline TrialDB  
Regular computer/Internet access  X   
Readiness to Change Checklist  X   
Interest in Internet -based pain self -
management  X   
Can walk one block?  X   
Consent Form  X   
Chart/Medication Review  X  X 
WHYMPI -Interference Scale  X  X 
Numeric Rating Scale of Pain 
Intensity (0 -10) X  X 
Profile  of Mood States  X  X 
Beck Depression Inventory  X  X 
Multidimensional Fatigue Scale  X  X 
MOS Sleep Scale  X  X 
Behavioral Goal Adherence   X X 
Patient Treatment Satisfaction Scale    X 
Treatment Credibility Scale    X 
Module(s) completed   X  
Usability o f Module   X  
Time and content accessed   X  
Post -intervention Measure    X 
In addition to completing assessments at baseline and [ADDRESS_752254] -baseline. The brief phone contacts will serve to confirm continued Internet access to the 
VPMRC and to remind participants to continue to complete the VPMRC modules. Qualitative and 
quantitative feedback will be obta ined. Questions will be asked on the following dimensions: goal 
adherence for previous week’s goals (using a 0 -10 Likert scale, where 0 indicates no adherence to 
completing the goal and 10 indicates complete adherence), feedback regarding usability of the previous 
week’s module(s), and specific indication of modules most recently completed. The study staff member 
will also solicit questions about the content of the VPMRC and provide clarifying answers to these 
questions. Strict limits will be placed on the nature of the responses and length of time of the calls (i.e., no 
greater than 10 minutes).     
Intervention Description (UC+VPMRC)  
Usual Care (UC):  All participants will continue to receive whatever pain care they have been 
receiving. There will be no at tempt by [CONTACT_573035]. Although it is 
beyond the scope of this project to influence pain care at VACHS, it may be important to know that 
VACHS continues to work to implement the VHA’s stepped care model and to ensure that accepted 
standards for pain assessment and treatment are met for all Veterans. Within the primary care setting, a 
Primary Care Pain Workgroup works to promote system improvements related to pain care. Facility 
performance improvement data document a high r ate of adherence to performance criteria related to 
documentation of pain assessments, treatment plans, and reassessment of the effectiveness of the 
interventions. Participants in this study will be encouraged to discuss pain concerns with their PCP. 
Resul ts from the Stepped Care for Affective Disorders and Musculoskeletal Pain (SCAMP) trial conducted 
in both VHA and non -VHA settings and involving a collaborative care intervention for improving pain 
outcomes indicated that spi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] -over for pain outcomes are l ikewise minimal.27 Whatever minor spi[INVESTIGATOR_573016], results in a conservative estimate of the intervention’s efficacy.  
Veteran Pain Management Resource Center (VPMRC):   Participants will continue to receive UC 
as described above, in addition to receivi ng access and being encouraged to complete the VPMRC 
program. The VPMRC will be accessed via the Internet at the participant’s home or other regular access 
point. The VPMRC will guide participants in initially completing a self -assessment screening tool fo r 
module selection and in setting personally -relevant goals, in addition to assisting them with tracking 
progress made toward goal accomplishment. The skill modules identified by [CONTACT_193526] -assessment will be 
listed and available to the patient to access, le arn, and practice through written text, guided narration, 
video demonstration, and interactive printable action plans to assist patients in learning and practicing 
Ver. 7/25/2016 11 
 pain self -management skills. Participants will be encouraged to complete the skill modules a t their own 
pace. Participants will also be able to access other modules not identified by [CONTACT_193526] -assessment if they 
are interested in completing them. Participants will be provided with a pedometer at the baseline 
assessment to facilitate completion of the exercise/walking module, which requires patients to track the 
number of steps walked each day.  
Attrition  
The RA and study coordinator will monitor the study for attrition and follow -up with participants when 
they appear at risk for withdrawal or report  the intent to withdraw. If a participant contacts the study 
coordinator to withdraw, s/he will first ask if there is a problem that s/he can address that would allow 
them to stay in the study. If not, s/he will ask subjects who wish to withdraw from treat ment if they will 
consider continuing to complete the follow -up assessments. To keep losses -to-follow -up at a minimum, 
every effort, including reminder e -mails and follow -up phone calls, will be made to collect post -baseline 
data. We will also prospectivel y collect the reasons for missing data such as “patient refusal due to 
difficulty completing skill modules” or “patient moved away”. Reasons for missing data will be evaluated 
during data analysis.  
Outcome Measures   
Standardized and reliable interview and questionnaire measures will be used to assess outcome and 
process variables. These outcome measures are similar to those we have used in prior CBT efficacy 
studies and are consistent with CONSORT and IMMPACT guidelines. In addition to these outcomes we 
also propose to examine treatment satisfaction, treatment credibility, and goal accomplishment.  
Primary Outcome:   
Pain Interference: The 9-item Interference subscale of the West Haven -Yale Multidimensional Pain 
Inventory (WHYMPI) assesses pain -related interf erence in social, work and household functioning and 
has demonstrated good internal consistency (0.86) and stability (0.85 over 2 weeks).[ADDRESS_752255] as a core outcome measure for this domain.29  A 
reduction i n WHYMPI -Interference Scale scores of 0.6 or greater has been identified as an indicator of 
meaningful improvement in physical functioning and will be employed in this study.30   
 
Secondary Outcomes:  
Pain intensity:  Self-report of pain is recognized as t he gold standard for pain assessment given the 
inherently subjective nature of pain.  Although the numeric rating scale (NRS), verbal rating scale (VRS), 
and the visual analogue scale (VAS) are all reliable and valid measures of pain, there are differences  that 
led to the IMMPACT recommendation and our selection of the NRS as the primary measure of pain. Of 
particular note is the fact that the NRS is the accepted measure for screening for the presence and 
intensity of pain for the VHA, and it is quite famil iar to Veterans. Data from several studies suggest that 
use of this measure, relative to the VRS and VAS,  yields fewer missing observations and is preferred by 
[CONTACT_573036], especially among older persons and among those prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438].31 The NRS  can 
be easily administered by [CONTACT_5640] a research assistant, via the telephone, or online as is proposed for this 
study.  In this trial, participants will be asked, “Please rate your pain by [CONTACT_573037] 24 hours on a 0 (no pain) to 10 (pain as bad as you can imagine) 
scale”.32  A clinically -meaningful reduction in pain intensity will be defined as a reduction in pain of 30% on 
the NRS relative to baseline NRS.  This threshold is also consistent with  IMMPACT recommendations 
based on an analysis of ten studies that examine changes in absolute ratings of pain intensity and 
independent ratings of treatment satisfaction.33 
Emotional functioning: Overall functioning will be assessed using the 65 -item Profi le of Mood States 
(POMS), a multidimensional measure of emotional functioning designed to assess six dimensions of 
mood and can be used in non -psychiatric or physically ill populations.34 Internal consistency (0.84 to 0.95, 
depending on subscale) and test -retest reliability (0.65 to 0.74, depending on subscale) is good. 
Depressive symptom severity will be assessed using the 21-item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) a 
widely used self -report measure with excellent internal consistency (.92) and stability (.80 -.90).[ADDRESS_752256].26 
Fatigue:  Clinical fatigue will be assessed using the Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI).36 The 
MFI can be scored to produce 5 dimensions: general fatigue, physical fatigue, mental fatigue, reduced  
motivation, and reduced activity.  
Ver. 7/25/2016 12 
 Sleep Problems : Sleep problems will be assessed using the MOS Sleep Scale. The MOS is 
segregated into subscales addressing seven sleep domains (i.e. sleep disturbance, snoring, awaken 
short of breath or with headache, ad equacy of sleep, somnolence, a problems index 1 and a problems 
index 2).  An additional single item assesses quantity of sleep.37 
Behavioral Goal Adherence:  Goal adherence for previous week’s goals will be assessed via 
telephone on a weekly basis for [ADDRESS_752257] -baseline using a 0 -10 Likert scale, where 0 indicates no 
adherence to completing the goal and 10 indicates complete adherence.  
Tertiary outcomes:  
Module completion:   Participants will be asked during weekly (for 10 weeks) phone calls placed by 
[CONTACT_573038] (i.e., how many modules completed, which modules) during 
the previous week. In addition, the web developer will build a database to track time spent on each 
module, which modules were accessed, and number of times e ach participant accessed the program. 
This database will be linked only to userID and will not be linked with PHI.  
Module usability : Participants will be asked during weekly phone calls about usability of modules.  
Specifically, they will be asked to rate each completed module on a 0 -10 scale where 0= very difficult and 
10=very easy, in terms of accessing information presented, understanding information presented, setting 
a module goal, navigating the module.  
Treatment credibility:  Participants’ judgments o f treatment credibility will be assessed at the post -
baseline assessment interval using a questionnaire adapted from Borkovec and Nau.[ADDRESS_752258] reliability of .83.  
Patient satisfa ction :  Patient satisfaction will be assessed by [CONTACT_573039] a 5 -item satisfaction survey designed to assess patient satisfaction with 5 domains of pain 
care.39 This measure shows good internal consistency (.83 -.90 across  two samples) and significant 
associations to follow -up treatment satisfaction and staff and patient ratings of patient improvement.  
VPMRC program -specific feedback:  Participants will be administered an investigator -created 
measure designed to assess the layout of the website, ease of navigation, relevance of the materials 
presented, appeal of the program, understanding of key concepts, appropriateness of the graphics and 
multimedia interface, ease of use, problems encountered, amount of material presented , and general 
likes and dislikes  
Sociodemographic status and pain -relevant variables: Participants’ age, sex, education level, 
racial/ethnic background, and marital status will be assessed at the time of the baseline examination. 
Pain-specific factors suc h as pain duration, number and location of pain sites, past and current pain 
treatments, cause of pain, and presence of radicular symptoms, will also be assessed at baseline.  
Pain medication:  At baseline, medication use will be assessed by [CONTACT_573040]. Medications will be coded into several 
categories, namely non -steroidal anti -inflammatory, non -opi[INVESTIGATOR_2467], opi[INVESTIGATOR_2467], and 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_573017]/hypnotics u sing a recording sheet used in our prior studies. The  
specific medication used, its dose, and schedule of administration will be recorded. At [ADDRESS_752259] -
baseline, this information will again be collected via patient self -report using Trial DB, and parti cipants’ 
medical records will be independently reviewed for changes in medication regimen from baseline by [CONTACT_573041].  
Analytic Plan  
Because the overall goal of the project is to develop a pain self -management resource for Veterans, 
the VPMRC , we will employ an iterative process of formative evaluation through two distinct Phases in 
order to optimally revise and modify the VPMRC. All analyses will be conducted in the service of further 
refining and optimizing the usability and effectiveness of  the program. Ultimately, these data and the 
subsequent modifications to the VPMRC will produce a resource that can be submitted to examination of 
efficacy through a randomized controlled trial.  
Phase I:  Development of the VPMRC  
Using the Think Aloud pro tocol, qualitative data will be collected regarding participants’ verbal, audio -
recorded feedback of their experiences with navigating the VPMRC homepage, self -assessment, 
resources, and reviewing the treatment modules. Consistent with a phenomenologic app roach (i.e., 
capturing the essence of the participant’s experience),  the qualitative feedback collected from each of the 
two study visits for each participant will be transcribed, coded, and systematically analyzed for emerging 
themes. These analyses will be shared with members of the EP and will be used to inform modification of 
Ver. 7/25/[ADDRESS_752260] -intervention Measure will provide information regarding the 
usability, ease of navigation, and functionality of the program and specific modules. Descriptive statistics 
(e.g., means, standard deviations, frequencies) will be calculated for these data.  
All quantitative and qualitative data collected, with input from members of the EP, will be used to 
guide modification of the VPMRC to reduce identified issues with navigation of the site, graphics and 
audio effects, relevance of materials for the population, ease of use with respect to the self -assessment, 
homepage functions, and other related issues. These changes will be made prior to initiating the pi[INVESTIGATOR_573018].  
Phase II: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_573019] -to-Treat principle. If 
missing data are minimal (e.g., <5%), we will conduct a complete case analysis; otherwise, imputation 
methods will be used to fill in the missing values. Several imputation ap proaches will be considered after 
inspection of the missing data rates and before any analyses of treatment effects are conducted. These 
approaches would include imputing the worst and best value (i.e., bounds on the treatment effects) and 
using multiple i mputation assuming missing at random. These approaches would be supplemented by 
[CONTACT_573042]. Only pre -specified baseline variables that may 
affect the outcome will be considered as adjustment variables in a sensit ivity analysis. These variables 
include age, race/ethnicity, gender, educational attainment, and depressive symptom severity.  
The primary endpoint is the mean difference in baseline to post -baseline follow -up scores on the 
primary measure of pain interfere nce (i.e., WHYMPI -Interference Scale) at [ADDRESS_752261] of treatment adjusted for the 
pre-specified set of baseline cova riates. Analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) will be employed to control 
for differences among participants in baseline scores and to determine whether participant characteristics 
are associated with changes in scores on outcome variables across time.   
Becaus e the primary and secondary hypotheses test differences in outcome measure scores across 
time, we will use paired t -tests, or their non -parametric analogs (e.g., Mann -Whitney test) to compare 
mean (or median) scores on the outcomes across time. Given the m ultiplicity of tests for secondary 
outcomes (i.e., six outcomes) and the power of the study, in addition to maximizing sample size, we will 
use the Bonferroni procedure p -value, which we conservatively estimate to be p =0.008, based on an 
overall significa nce of p=0.05/6, to account for the number of comparisons. Our six secondary outcomes 
will be examined with the purpose of informing future modifications to the VPMRC and additional 
hypothesis generation. We have not grouped within subsets in order to ensu re a more conservative 
approach.  Tertiary hypotheses will examine data related to usability (use of and functionality) and 
satisfaction (satisfaction, credibility) with the VPMRC and will be collected only at [ADDRESS_752262] -baseline. 
Descriptive statistics will be employed to examine these data in order to describe participants’ 
experiences with the VPMRC.  
As in Phase I, quantitative data from the Post -intervention Measure with added data from the weekly 
phone calls for Phase II regarding usability of and sa tisfaction with the VPMRC will be used to modify the 
program. In addition, we will use specific primary and secondary outcomes data to inform modification of 
the VPMRC. For instance, if the data suggest a significant reduction in pain interference, but mor e 
modest changes in fatigue or depression, specific modules, such as Pacing (the pleasant activity 
scheduling copi[INVESTIGATOR_104285]) or Adaptive Stress Response (the using positive copi[INVESTIGATOR_573020]) 
will be targeted for further content and presentatio n enhancement to increase benefit to patients on these 
important related outcomes. We will also use data from tertiary outcomes to further modify presentation of 
the various treatment modules.  For example, if certain modules are clearly preferred, as indi cated by 
[CONTACT_573043], other, less -preferred modules 
may be further enhanced (e.g., changes to audio -visual aspects, presentation of content within modules) 
to increase use, interest, and satisfa ction.  
Ver. 7/25/2016 14 
  
6.  References :  
1. Chou R, Huffman LH.  Nonpharmacologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_573021]: a review of 
the evidence for an American Pain Society/American College of Physicians clinical practice guideline. 
Ann Intern Med. 2007;147 :492-504.  
2. Martel B, O’Connor P, Kerns RD, Becker W, Morales KH, et al. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_573022]: a systematic review and meta -analysis of their prevalence, efficacy, and association with 
addiction. Ann Intern Med, 2007;146 :116-127.  
3. Turk DC. Clinica l effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of treatments for patients with chronic pain. Clin 
J Pain. 2002; 18:355-365.  
4. Hoffman BM, Papas RK, Chatkoff DK, Kerns RD. Meta -analysis of psychological interventions for 
chronic low back pain. Health Psychol.  2007; 26:1-9. 
5. Van Tulder MW, Ostelo R, Vlaeyen JWS, Linton SJ, Morley SJ, et al. Behavioural treatment for 
chronic low back pain (Cochrane Review). 2004; Issue 3. In The Cochrane Library , Chichester, [LOCATION_006].  
6. Lamb  SE, Hansen Z, Lall R, Castelnuovo E, Withers EJ, Nichols  V, Potter R, and Underwood MR. 
Group cognitive behavioral treatment for low -back pain in primary care: a randomized controlled trial 
and cost -effectiveness analysis. Lancet. 2010; 375:916-923. 
7. Dobscha SK, Corson K, et al. Collaborative care for chronic pai n in primary care: a cluster 
randomized trial. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 2009; 301:[ADDRESS_752263], Jacob M. Psychological aspects of back pain. In S. Newman & M. Jacob (Eds.), 
Psychological aspects of rheumatic disease. London: Bailliere Tindall. 1993.  
9. Krein SL, Heisler M, et al. Overcoming the influence of chronic pain on older patients' difficulty with 
recommended self -management activities. Gerontologist. 2007; 47(1): [ADDRESS_752264] of chronic pain on diabetes patient’s self -
management. Diabetes Care.  2005; 28(1):65 -70. 
11. Clark JD. Chronic pain prevalence and analgesic prescribing in a general medical population. J Pain 
Symptom Manag. 2002; 23(2):131 -137. 
12. Wodcock J. A difficult balance – pain management, dr ug safety and the FDA. New Engl J Med , 
2009;361:2105 -2107.  
13. Crosby [CONTACT_573044], et al. Survey of pain among veterans in Western [LOCATION_001]. Pain Management Nursing.  
2006; 7(1):[ADDRESS_752265], et al. Veterans' reports of pain and associations with ratings of health, he alth-risk 
behaviors, affective distress, and use of the healthcare system. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2003; 40(5):371 -
379. 
15. Mitchinson AR, Kerr EA, Krein SL. Management of chronic noncancer pain by [CONTACT_573045]: when is pain control a priority?. Am J Ma nag C. 2008; 14(2):[ADDRESS_752266], Sellinger J, Goodin BR. in press. Psychological treatment of chronic pain. Ann Rev Clin 
Psychol . 
17. Smeets RJEM, Vlaeyen JWS, Hidding A, Kester ADM, Van der Heijden GJMG, Van Geel ACM, 
Knottnerus JA. Active rehabilitation fo r chronic low back pain: Cognitive -behavioral, physical, or both? 
First direct post -treatment results from a randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders . 
2006;7 :5. 
18. Christensen H, Griffiths KM, Farrer L. Adherence in internet interventions fo r anxiety and depression. 
J Med Internet Res . 2009; 11(2):1438 -8871.  
19. Hollon SD, Muñoz RF, et al. Psychosocial intervention development for the prevention and treatment 
of depression: promoting innovation and increasing access. Biol Psychi.  2002; 52(6):610 -630. 
20. Wagner B, Knaevelsrud C, Maercker  A. Internet -based cognitive -behavioral therapy for complicated 
grief: a randomized controlled trial. Death Stud . 2006;30:429 -453.  
21. Ybarra ML, Eaton WW. Internet -Based Mental Health Interventions. Ment Health Serv Res . 
2005; 7(2):[ADDRESS_752267] AL, Kazis LE, Wagner TH. Disparities in health -related internet use by [CONTACT_573046]: results from a national survey . J Informat Prim Care . 2010; 18(1): 59 -68.  
23. Fonda S, McMahon G, Gomes H, Hickson S, Conlin P. Changes in Diabetes Distress Related to 
Participation in an Internet -Based Diabetes Care Management Program and Glycemic Control. 
Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology. 2009; 3(1):117 -124. 
Ver. 7/25/2016 15 
 24. Macea DD, Gajos K, Calil YAD, Fregni F. The Efficacy of Web -Based Cognitiv e Behavioral 
Interventions for Chronic Pain: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Pain. 2010; 11(10):917 -929. 
25. Keogh E, Rosser BA, Eccleston C. e -Health and chronic pain management: Current status and 
developments. Pain.  2010; 151:18-21. 
26. Boris -Karpel S. Pol icy and practice issues in pain management. In M.E. Ebert & R.D. Kerns (Eds.). 
Behavioral and psychopharmacologic pain management: London, England : Cambridge University; 
2011.  
27. Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Martin BI. Back pain prevalence and visit rates: estimates fr om U.S. national 
surveys. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 2002; 31(23):[ADDRESS_752268], Rosenberg R, Jamison RN, Caudill MA, Haythornthwaite J. Readiness to adopt a self -
management approach to chronic pain: The Pain Stages of Change Questionnaire (PSOCQ). Pain. 
1997; 72: [ADDRESS_752269], Habib S. A critical review of the pain readiness to change model.  Pain.  2004; 5:357-367.  
30. Jensen MP, Nielson WR,  Kerns RD. Toward the development of a motivational model of pain self -
management. Pain.  2003; 4:477-492.  
31. Jensen MP, Turner JA, Roman o JM, Strom SE. The chronic pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_102626]: development and 
preliminary validation . Pain. 1995;60(2):[ADDRESS_752270]. Two brief versions of the multidimensional pain 
readiness to change questionnaire, version 2 (MPRCQ2). Clin J Pain. 2009 ;25: 48-57. 
33. Farrar JT, Young JP, LaMoreauxb L, Werthb JL, Pooleb RM. Clinical importance of changes in 
chronic pain intensity measured on an 11 -point numerical pain rating scale. Pain.  2001; 94(2):149 -
158.  
34. McNair D, Lorr M, Dopp leman L. Profile of Mood States . San Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial 
Testing Service;1971.  
35. Beck AT, Steer RA, Garbin MG. Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression Inventory: Twenty -
five years of evaluation. Clin Psychol Rev.  1988; 8:77-100.  
36. Smets  EMA, Garssen B, Bonke B, De Haes JCJM. The multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) 
psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess fatigue. J Psychosom Res . 1995;3 9(3):[ADDRESS_752271], et al. Summary and discussion of MOS mea sures. In Stewart 
AL, Ware JE (eds.), Measuring functioning and well -being: The Medical Outcomes Study approach. 
Durham, NC:  Duke University Press;1992:pp. 345 -371.  
38. Borkovec TD, Nau CD. Credibility of analog therapy rationales. J Exp Psychol Gen .1972;  3: 257-269. 
39. Kerns RD, Otis JD, Rosenberg R. Veterans’ reports of pain and associations with ratings of health, 
health risk behaviors, affective distress, and use of the healthcare system. J Rehabil Res Dev . 
2003; 40:371-380.  