 
Protocol:  
Omega -3 Fatty Acid Supplementation to ADHD  Pharmacotherapy in ADHD Adults with DESR Traits: A 
Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
 
 
 
Craig B.H. Surman, MD  
Joseph Biederman, MD  
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_619120]: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 2 I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Deficient Emotional Self Regulation (DESR) in ADHD Population  
Recent work has demonstrated that adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADH D) are at elevated 
risk for deficient emotional self regulation (DESR) 1-6.  DESR  refers to 1) deficits in self -regulating the 
physiological arousal caused by [CONTACT_63177]; 2) difficulties inhibiting inappropriat e behavior in response to 
either positive or negative emotions; 3) problems refocusing attention from strong emotions and 4) difficulty 
executing an organized response, mental or behavioral, to emotionally activating situations4.  DESR traits include 
low frustration tolerance, impatience, quickness to anger, and being easily excited to e motional reactions. In 
adults, these difficulties have been associated with significant impairments, including occupational impairment, 
educational failure, criminal history, adverse driving outcomes, marital satisfaction, and parenting stress.  
Although t hey have been shown to be elevated among ADHD patients 4, 7-9, in DSM -IV, DESR traits are not 
considered to be diagnostic of the disorder.  Importantly, although DESR is also associated with anxiety and 
mood disorde rs 6, it differs from the core emot ional features of these disorders because the cardinal feature of 
these disorders is the experience of strong emotions, not their self -regulation 10. Because DESR is not a 
diagnostically specific domain, it has not previously been specifically targeted in treatment trials of ADHD.   
Barkley 5 found that 60% of adults with ADHD in a clinical sample reported traits of DESR, in contrast to 15% of 
controls. We found a similar prevalence of DESR in our family study of ADHD adults [ADDRESS_822988] correlation between the 
sum of ADHD symptoms and the sum of items indexing DESR (0.49, unpublished data) among 20 6 ADHD 
adults enrolled in a family study and a lower correlation among 114 ADHD adults enrolled in a treatment trial 
(r=0.16, unpublished data).  This suggests that changes in DESR will not routinely follow changes in ADHD 
symptoms during treatment trials.    
Our prior work has shown that the high rates of DESR among ADHD patients cannot be accounted for by [CONTACT_619126] 6.  In that study, although DESR was significantly 
associated with mood and anxiety disorders, it was significantly elevated a mong ADHD patients even after 
statistically adjusting for the presence of both lifetime history and current status of these disorders. In fact, mood, 
anxiety and ADHD made independent contributions to DESR. These findings underscore the point that DESR is 
not simply the experience of the strong emotions that are cardinal symptoms of mood and anxiety disorders.  
Instead, DESR indexes the ability to self -regulate such emotions 4, 10. 
Barkley  et al. 5 examined the frequency and severity of problems with DESR in three groups:  Adults with ADHD 
(N=146), Clinical control adults not diagnosed with ADHD (N=97), and a Community control gr oup (N=109).  
Adults with ADHD had significantly more DESR than either Clinical or Community adults.  DESR uniquely 
contributed to 6 of 10 domains and overall impairment.  We then evaluated this issue using more detailed 
measures of occupational impairment , educational history, criminal history, adverse driving outcomes, marital 
satisfaction, parenting stress, and offspring severity of ADHD, ODD, & CD.    Severity of DESR independently 
contributed to most measures of impairment beyond severity of the two AD HD symptom dimensions, and in 
many cases was the only predictor of some impairments.  They concluded that DESR severity is not merely 
redundant with ADHD symptom dimensions but adds additional explanatory and predictive power to 
understanding various forms  of adult impairment.  
Another study by [CONTACT_619127] (N = 135) and control (N = 75) children 
followed to adulthood (mean age 27 years) 12. They examined the additional contribution of DESR apart f rom 
ADHD symptoms to global ratings of impairment in 10 major life activities, adverse occupational and educational 
outcomes, criminal and driving outcomes, and money management difficulties at ages 21 and 27. DESR was 
associated with impairments beyond th ose contributed by [CONTACT_619128].  Similar findings were 
identified by [CONTACT_27156].  We evaluated DESR and functional impairments among 206 adults with ADHD and 123 
adults without ADHD 6. We used the Quality of Life, Enjoyment and Satisfaction Scale -Short Form (QLES -Q-
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 3 SF) and  Social Adjustment Scale Self Report (SAS -SR) to assess quality of life and psychosocial functioning. 
Among the ADHD subjects, individuals with extreme DESR symptoms had lower quality of life reports on all [ADDRESS_822989], only partially 
effective.  Reimherr et al. 2 reported a double -blind, placebo -controlled, crossover trial of OROS -methylphenidate 
(MPH) of [ADDRESS_822990], 
leading to residual disability.  For example, ADHD patients without emotional r egulation deficits showed a 49% 
improvement in ADHD symptoms compared with only 29% for ADHD patients with emotional regulation 
deficits 2.   In an open label study of Lisdexamfetamine Dimesylate (LDX) for ADHD adul ts, In work with Adler 
et al. (under review), we assessed the effects of immediate release mixed amphetamine salts (MAS IR) and 
extended release MAS (MAS XR) on ADHD symptoms and on emotional dysregulation as measured by [CONTACT_619129].  Although both medicat ions led to robust statistically significant improvements in DSM -IV ADHD 
symptoms both during the day and in the evening, neither medication led to significant improvements in 
emotional dysregulation.  
Treatment of DESR in ADHD with OROS -MPH  
We recently com pleted a 6 -week, parallel design, randomized, placebo controlled study of OROS -MPH treatment 
in ADHD adults (OROS -MPH N=40; Placebo N=47). We assessed behaviors reflective of DESR with the 
Emotional Control subscale of the Behavior Rating Inventory of Exec utive Function - Adult Version (BRIEF -A).  
In this sample, we had previously shown robust efficacy for OROS -MPH in the treatment of DSM -IV ADHD 
symptoms 18.  In contrast, OROS -MPH did not separate from placebo in the treatment on the Emotional Control 
subscale of the  BRIEF -A.  The subgroup of subjects demonstrating good response of their ADHD symptoms 
(Clinical Global Impressions -Improvement ≤2 and ADHD rating scale decrease>30%) still showed poor 
emotional control at the end of the study.  
Omega -3 Fatty Acids  
One poss ible therapeutic approach suitable for the treatment of DESR is omega -3 fatty acids.  This is for several 
reasons: 1) omega -[ADDRESS_822991] some benefits in the management of severe mood 
dyregulation in the context of bipolar disorder  in children, a condition that is also frequently associated with 
ADHD; 2) across several studies, ADHD patients have been shown to have lower blood levels of essential fatty 
acids 19, 3) omega -[ADDRESS_822992] been shown to improve some cases of de pression, which is also associated 
with DESR; and 4) omega -[ADDRESS_822993] as precursors for prostaglandins and eicosano ids (second messengers) in normal cell physiology.  
Eicosapentaeonic acid is a metabolite of alpha -linolenic acid, an essential fatty acid (i.e., which must be ingested 
for survival).  EPA in turn is metabolized to form docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).  Essenti al fatty acids, in large 
part EPA and DHA, make up 20% of the brain’s dry weight.  Various studies show that omega -[ADDRESS_822994] beneficial effects on health by [CONTACT_619130][INVESTIGATOR_805], decreasing platelet aggregation, preventing diabetes 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_822995].  As omega -3 fatty acids are part of normal metabolism, the likelihood of unwanted side 
effects is low.  Thus far the only adverse effects reported with omega -3 fatty acids are mild gastrointestinal 
disturbance (loose sto ol), minimized by [CONTACT_619131].  
It has been postulated that phospholipid abnormalities in cell membranes may be implicated in psychiatric 
disorders in general and in bipolar disorder in particular 28-31.  This is the so -called “phospholipid theory of 
psychopathology”, which  proposes that neurotransmitter receptor functioning is affected by [CONTACT_619132][INVESTIGATOR_619121] 29, 30, [ADDRESS_822996] to propose that a deficiency of essential fatty acids caused ADHD.  They 
based this hypothesis on several sources of evidence: 1)  Boys are more likely than girls to have ADHD and males 
are known to have much higher fatty acid requ irements than females;  2)  many of the ADHD children they 
studied had abnormal thirst, a cardinal sign of EFA deficiency; 3)  Many of the ADHD children they studied 
showed eczema, allergies and asthma which had been associated with fatty acid deficiencies; and 4)  zinc 
deficiency has been reported in ADHD [ADDRESS_822997] implicated omega -3 fatty acids in ADHD.  In a review of eight studi es 19, two found no 
differences between ADHD patients and controls but six found ADHD to be associated with low omega -3 fatty 
acid levels and/or higher omega -6 to omega -3 ratios.  The negative studies were small, and one did not make a 
formal ADHD dia gnosis but instead assessed “maladaptive hyperactive” children.  Because it is not possible to 
obtain brain levels of fatty acids from ADHD patients, we cannot determine the degree to which these peripheral 
findings implicate fatty acid associated brain dy sfunction.  The fatty acid differences between ADHD and control 
youth do not appear to be due to dietary differences [ADDRESS_822998] proposed that dietary supplements with fish oil (a concentrated source of EPA and DHA) 
have been useful in the tre atment in adults of schizophrenia 34, 41, 42, subthreshold psychosis [ADDRESS_822999] dose (1 gram) showed a significantly 
better outcome than the placebo group on three depression rating scales.  Nemets et al [ADDRESS_823000] study of omega -3 fatty acids for bipolar disorder, 
was a 4 -month double blind placebo controlled study in which the authors added EPA+DHA, a total of 9.6g (6.2g 
and 3.4 g r espectively) to ongoing treatment in 30 adults with bipolar disorder 47. These authors reported a 
significantly longer period of remission for those supplemented with omega -3s.  Furthermore, these omega -3 
supplemented subjects performed better on measures of depression and functioning than the placebo group.   On 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_823001] compared to that for risperidone.  Subjects had blood tests measuring omega -3 
and omega -6 fatty acid levels at baseline, week 8 and monthly for 3 more months after the end of the acute study 
period.  Fourteen subjects had blood analyzed for omega -3 fatty acids at baseline, eleven at week 8, and only 4 
subjects during the subsequent follow -up visits.  Changes in blood levels did not reach statistical significance due 
to small sample size. Nonethe less, certain trends were evident.  Plasma and RBC levels of DHA+EPA increased 
steadily from baseline to endpoint, with the majority increase by [CONTACT_5875] 8. In both plasma and RBCs, the ratio of 
omega -[ADDRESS_823002] of D ESR on daily functioning, along with 
the known healthful effects of omega -3 and its benign side effects profile, studying this agent for the treatment of 
DESR in ADHD is an important next step. If Omega 3 is efficacious in ameliorating DESR, it would repre sent a 
safe, acceptable, and widely available treatment alternative to a persistent, common, and broadly impairing set of 
symptoms.  
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Primary Aims  
Aim 1:  Assess the efficacy of omega -3 fatty acids in the treatment of DESR among ADHD adults  treated 
with traditional ADHD pharmacotherapy . Hypothesis 1:  omega -3 fatty acids will be safe and effective for the 
treatment of DESR when used in combination with traditional medication  (FDA approved medication to treat 
ADHD)  for treating adults with ADH D. 
Aim 2:  Assess the side effect profile of omega -3 fatty acids in the treatment of DESR among ADHD adults  
treated with traditional ADHD pharmacotherapy .  Hypothesis 2:  The combined use of omega -3 fatty acids 
plus traditional ADHD medication  (FDA approved  for treatment of ADHD ) will be well tolerated in adults with 
ADHD.  
Exploratory Aims  
Aim 3: Assess effects of omega -3 fatty acid supplementation on ADHD symptoms and associated features in 
ADHD adults  treated with traditional ADHD pharmacotherapy . Hypothe sis 3:  predicts that compared to 
ADHD  treatment alone, omega -3 fatty acid treatment as a supplement to ADHD  treatment will yield a greater 
reduction of ADHD symptoms (as measured by [CONTACT_619133]), symptoms of executive dysfunction (as 
measured by [CONTACT_619134] F-A subscales) and functioning (as measured by [CONTACT_619135]). This is a reasonable hypothesis 
given that stimulants  and other ADHD treatments  are not fully effective in treating ADHD symptoms 50. 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
We plan to enroll 6 0 subjects to the study. We will recruit subjects from the pool of existing subjects and new 
referrals to the Pediatric Psychopharmacology Program at the MGH.  If a potential subjec t's clinician ascertains 
that the patient has an interest in study participation, the clinician will offer contact [CONTACT_619136].  The patient can then contact [CONTACT_267197]. All 
subjects that enter the study will undergo standard screening and diagnostic procedures. Clinical records are not 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_823003] participate in our general screening protocol entitled, 
“Screening Protocol for Adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder” (Protocol # 2002 -P-001856). After 
participating in this screening protocol, subjects are assigned to specific studies based upon eligibility 
requirements (i.e. age, prior medication efficacy or tolerability).   For the current study, we will scree n for traits of 
DESR using [ADDRESS_823004] phone screen administered to potential participants in studies of adult ADHD at our program.  
Individual’s scoring > 65 by T -score on the Emotional Control scale, or those with sufficient symptoms for further 
evaluation by [CONTACT_192255], will be screened in person for the study.  We will also screen subjects using the 
36-item DERS, which measures emotional control. P otentially eligible subjects (as per the results of screening 
protocol) will receive a link to complete this screen via email. Subjects who score >99 (representing more than 1 
SD above the mean) will be eligible. Subjects who meet criteria based on either the BRIEF -A Emotional Control 
scale or the DERS will be eligible to participate.  
Study Entry Criteria  
Inclusion  
1. Male or female adults ages [ADDRESS_823005] ers, Fourth Edition 51 (DSM -IV) based on clinical assessment. Childhood onset will be defined 
according to established research criteria, requiring onset of two symptoms of inattentive or of 
impulsive/hyperactive t raits by [CONTACT_14898] 12.  
3. A score of 24 or more on the Adult ADHD Investigator Symptom Report Scale (AISRS ), or, for those 
individuals stably treated with a medication approved by [CONTACT_619137] , a CGI -ADHD severity score of 
no greater than 4 (“moderately ill”).  
a. Those subjects treated with traditional ADHD pharmacotherapy must be on a stable, 
effective dose (per clinician evaluation) of an FDA -approved treatment for ADHD for at 
least one month at the time of enrollment.  
4. A DESR T -score on the BRIEF -A Emotio nal Control Scale of at least 65 and/or a score of 99 or more on the 
DERS.  
Exclusion  
1. For those subjects not treated for their ADHD at the time of enrollment,  a history of non -response or 
intolerance to methylphenidate  at adequate doses as determined by [CONTACT_271896].  
2. A history of intolerance to omega -3 fatty acids as determined by [CONTACT_15370].  
3. Pregnant or nursing females.  
4. Serious, unstable medical illness including hepatic, renal, gastroenterological, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], cardiovascular, 
endocrinologic (thyroid ), neurologic (seizure), immunologic, or hematologic disease.  
5. Glaucoma.  
6. Clinically unstable psychiatric conditions including suicidality, homicidality, bipolar disorder, psychosis, or 
lifetime history of a clinically serious condition potentially exacerba ted by a stimulant such as mania, or 
psychosis . 
7. Tics or a family history or diagnosis of Tourette’s syndrome.  
8. Current (within 3 months) DSM -IV criteria for abuse or dependence with any psychoactive substance other 
than nicotine.  
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 7 9. Allergies to fish or shellf ish; multiple adverse drug reactions.  
10. Any other concomitant medication with primarily central nervous system activity other than specified in 
Concomitant Medication portion of the protocol.  
11. Current use of MAO Inhibitor or use within the past two weeks.  
12. Investigator and his/her immediate family; defined as the investigator’s spouse, parent, child, grandparent, or 
grandchild.  
 
While stably treated or remitted hypertension (defined by a stable current blood pressure of no more than 120/80) 
is not exclusionary,  any subject with a history of high blood pressure  not treated for ADHD at study entry  will be 
asked to obtain approval from their primary care physician certifying that their hypertension is stable and that they 
may safely begin stimulant therapy. Subject s not treated for ADHD upon entry into the study  will be informed of 
the cardiovascular risks of OROS -MPH, and any subject with a history of hypertension who is unwilling to 
consult with their current treater  prior to beginning treatment with OROS -MPH —or to grant study staff 
permission to consult with the subject’s current treater —will be excluded because of the potential risks to subject 
safety. Per the FDA approved OROS -MPH package insert, high blood pressure is not a contraindication of 
OROS -MPH therapy;  however, due to the cardiovascular side effects, it is recommended that subjects with a 
history of high blood pressure be monitored carefully. Cardiovascular risk factors are carefully monitored 
throughout the study for all subjects by [CONTACT_619138]/blood pressure readings at 
every office visit. Patients with current hypertension are not eligible.  
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
Informed consent will be obtained prior to the performance of any protocol procedures and prior to admin istration 
of study drug. The informed consent and assent documents will be used to explain in simple terms the risks and 
benefits of study participation to the subject. The nature of the study will be fully explained to the subject by a 
board -certified phy sician who is either the primary investigator or co -investigator. The subject will be encouraged 
to ask questions pertaining to their participation in the study and the subject may take as much time as they feel 
necessary to consider his/her participation in the study as well as consult with family members or their physician.  
Participation in this study is voluntary and the subjects may withdraw from the study at any time. The IRB -
approved informed consent documents will be signed and dated by [CONTACT_619139].  
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
We will conduct a 12 -week, double blind, placebo -controlled, randomized clinical trial to compare efficacy and 
tolerability of Omega -3 fatty acids for DESR as a supplement to FDA approved treatment for ADHD (“traditional 
ADHD treatment”)  in ADHD adults. We will randomize 30 subjects to Omega -3 fatty acids plus  traditional 
ADHD treatment  and 30 to placebo plus traditional ADHD treatment . OROS -methylphenidate (OROS -MPH) will 
be prescribed openly to all  subjects not receiving treatment for ADHD  at trial entry. This is ecologically valid 
because long -acting stimulants are first line treatments for ADHD. For subjects taking a stable dose of medication 
for ADHD  (as defined by a stable, effective dose for at  least one month) prior to study entry, Omega -3 (or 
placebo) will be administered as a supplement to their treatment regimen as usual, which will be monitored by [CONTACT_619140]’s current prescriber.  
After providing s tudy information and obtaining IRB approved informed consent, participants will  complete a 
brief interview to obtain demographic background information. They will then undergo  a comprehensive  
assessment including a psychiatric assessment reviewing current  and lifetime DSM -IV Axis I conditions,  medical 
history, physical assessment (vitals, EKG, and urine screening tests ) and a neuropsychological evaluation to 
confirm and IQ>80,  which can be completed at evaluation or baseline . The information obtained at thi s visit will 
be reviewed to assure that all inclusion and exclusion criteria are met prior to receiving study medication at the 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 8 baseline visit. Subjects who do not meet all the criteria for enrollment after these assessments will be 
discontinued.  
We antici pate that subjects may enter this trial following completion of/withdrawal from other protocols in our 
office, and that there may be procedural overla p. So as to not burden subjects  with redundant time commitments, 
we will use the following diagnostic  data previously collected:  If a subject has completed an evaluation with one 
of the study clinicians within the previous year prior to entrance into this study, they will not be asked to repeat 
any overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_35228]. W ith subjects’ permission,  we will use the diagnostic data that had been 
previously collected. However, the study clinician will review the interval time period to assess for clinically 
significant medical or psychiatric history, to ensure that the subject meets appropriate study e ntrance criteria.   
Any subjects taking medication exclusionary to the study must be tapered off this medication prior to baseline 
visit.  Only subjects not responding to current treatment will be tapered from medication. Subjects will not be 
asked to tape r a medication that is optimally and comfortably managing clinical concerns for entry into this study.  
Medication tapers will be monitored by [CONTACT_619141].  
Participants who fulfill the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be randomized to placebo or Omega -3 fatty acids 
treatment for the period of 12  weeks. The MGH Clinical Trials pharmacy will be responsible for creating and 
maintaining the study medication randomization schema . 
Vital signs (blood pressure, pu lse, weight) will be measured at every visit. Height will be measured at baseline 
and at the end of the study. Electrocardiograms will be performed at evaluation and again at the end of the study. 
In addition, a urine drug screen will be performed at evalu ation, week 6, and week 12. If the participant is found 
to have taken an illicit drug, he/she will have a discussion with the doctor to determine if he/she can be in the 
study; subjects will be discontinued if there is  evidence of ongoing substance use. Fe males who are able to have 
children will also have a urine pregnancy test at evaluation, week 6, and week 12. If a participant has a positive 
pregnancy test she will not be able to take part in the study.  Those subjects who terminate study participation 
before the completion of the study will be asked to complete all tasks scheduled to take place on the final study 
visit at the time of study discontinuation.  
Subjects will be evaluated at weeks 1- 6, [ADDRESS_823006] ering 
measures of  efficacy (CGI , GAF, AISRS, BRIEF -A), tolerability (adverse events), and safety (vital signs). 
Neuropsychological assessments will be repeated at study endpoint.   
Although every effort will be made to encourage subjects to keep regularly scheduled appoint ments, in the event 
that a subject is unable to come into the office within a reasonable timeframe of a scheduled visit, and the treating 
research clinician feels that subject safety will not be jeopardized by [CONTACT_5634], the clinician can conduct the visit 
with the subject over the telephone. However, study evaluation visit, baseline visit, mid -point visit (week 6) or the 
final study visit may not be conducted over the phone. Additionally, phone visits may not replace scheduled office 
visits for two consecut ive visits. This interval of office visits with phone contact [CONTACT_619142] a recent methylphenidate trial conducted in adults at our research unit.  
During the study, the following , assessments and instruments wi ll be used:  
Background Information:  
 Subjects will complete a brief interview after the informed consent process to obtain demographic 
information including: socioeconomic status, educational history, occupation, marital status, history of 
head  injuries, an d history of trauma.  
Neuropsychological battery:  
 Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) Vocabulary and Matrix: to calculate verbal, 
performance, and full -scale IQ.  
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_823007] Automated Battery (CANTAB):  
CANTAB is designed  to look at frontal lobe (executive functioning) . Select s ubtests will include the following:  
 Spatial Working Memory (SWM), tests comprehension, learning and reversal.  
 Stockings of Cambridge (SOC), assesses spatial planning and motor control.  
 Intra -Extra Dimensional Set Shifting (IED), tests rule acquisition and attentional set shifting.  
 Reaction Time (RTI), measures speed of response.  
 Rapid Visual Information Processing (RVP), tests sustained visual attention.  
 Affective Go/No -go (AGN), assesses inform ation processing biases for positive and negative stimuli.  
 Verbal Recognition Memory (VRM), assesses immediate free recall, and immediate  and delayed 
recognition memory  
Clinician rated assessments:  
 DSM -IV Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scale. The GAF will assess global functioning using a 
scale from 1 (worst) to 100 (best).  
 Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) scale for ADHD as well as for Mood and Anxiety and DESR . The 
CGI is a measure of illness severity, improvement, and efficacy of treatment; CGI’ s for mood and anxiety 
will capture emergent comorbid psychiatric symptoms.  
 DSM -IV based Adult ADHD Investigat or Symptom Rating Scale (AISRS). Each of the individual 
symptoms of ADHD is rated 0 to 3 on a scale of severity.  
 Hamilton Depression (HAM -D) and Anxiety52 (HAM -A) Scales  to evaluate depr ession/anxiety 
symptoms.  
 Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) to evaluate any suicidal behavior.  
 Adverse  Experiences  and Concomitant Medications.  
Subject rated scales:  
 The 18 -item ADHD Rating Scale to evaluate frequency of ADHD symptoms on a scale of 0 to 4.  
 The 75 -item Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function – Adult Form (BRIEF -A) to assess level s 
of executive function deficits.  
 The 36 -item Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale53 (DERS) to provide an overall emotional 
regulation score, as well as scores measuring the following sub -domains: (1) awareness and 
understanding of emotion; (2) acceptance of emotion; (3) ability to stay on task during negative emotion 
(e.g., refrain from impulsive behaviors); and (4) access to effective emotional regulation strategies.  
 The [ADDRESS_823008] Schedule54 (PANAS) to measure expe rience of positive and 
negative emotions.  
 The 32 -item Acceptance and Action Questionnaire55 (AAQ) to measure the use of experiential avoidance 
as an emotion regulation strategy.  
 The 10 -item Emotion Regulation Questionnaire56 (ERQ) to measure the use of two emotion regulation 
strategies: reappraisal and suppression . 
 The Adult Self -Report Form57 (ASR) to measure a wide range of psychiatric syndromes (i.e., depressiv e 
problems, anxiety problems, antisocial personality problems) in adults. The ASR provides dimensional 
scale scores for each syndrome that are age - and gender -normed.  
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 10  The 34 -item Aggression Questionnaire58 (AQ) to assess components of aggression and hostility.  
 The Social Adjustment Self Report Questionnaire (SAS) to measure overall social adjustment and 
satisfaction.  
 The 16 -item Quality of Life Enjoyment & Satisfaction Q uestionnaire (Q -LES-Q) to measure overall 
satisfaction across different aspects of daily life.  
 The 8 -item Emotional dysregulation subscale of the Barkley Current Behavior Scale —Self-Report (CBS 
DESR) to measure emotional reactivity.  
 The 25 -item Endicott Wo rk Productivity Scale (EWPS) to measure behaviors and feelings likely to 
reduce productivity and efficiency in work activities.  
 
Self-report and clinician -rated measures will be collected using DatStat IllumeTM, a platform for electronic data 
capture that streamlines data collection and management, and ensures data integrity, resulting in improved data 
quality. The DatStat software allows researchers to design and implement study surveys for collecting, storing, 
retrieving, and manipulating data electronica lly. Participants and/or research staff enter survey responses into 
electronic assessment forms, and the responses are then transmitted securely via encrypted connection and stored 
in a secured database. This electronic data capture obviates the need for s ubsequent data entry by [CONTACT_3655], thus 
minimizing human error.  
 
These surveys are completed securely via the internet by [CONTACT_619143]. 
For this study, participants and staff will complete the electronic assessments on  computer terminals at the 
research site under the supervision of study staff.  
In the event that the electronic data capture system is unavailable during a study visit (due to technical issues), 
rating scales will be collected in paper and then entered int o the program manually once the system becomes 
available.  
For quality control purposes, clinician -administered measures completed during the visits may be audiotaped, 
with sub jects’ permission. These recordings will be used to monitor quality control and inter-rater reliability in 
this study by [CONTACT_978]. Each recording will be coded with subject initials and number to maintain confidentiality. 
These recordings will be de -identified and stored on a password protected computer accessible only to the 
appropriat e study staff . 
Upon completion of the study, participants can choose to pursue follow -up care, as possible, at our MGH practice 
or continue treatment with their primary care physician. Study clinicians may also offer psychiatric referrals to 
treaters in th eir communities.  
Study Medication  
At the baseline visit, subjects will receive a prescription for OROS -MPH , or instructions to continue with their 
current ADHD treatment  regimen,  and will be randomized to receive either Omega -3 fatty acids or placebo (und er 
double blind conditions).  
For those subjects not on stable ADHD  treatment (defined as a stable , effective  dose for at least one month , 
determined by [CONTACT_619144] , of a medication that is FDA approved to treat ADHD ), OROS -MPH will be 
openly presc ribed.  OROS -MPH and Omega -3 treatment will be concurrently titrated. OROS -MPH will be openly 
prescribed, starting with an initial dose of 36 mg/day. OROS -MPH will be titrated to optimal response (not 
exceeding a maximum daily dose of 1.3 mg/kg or 108 mg/da y, whichever is lower), according to clinician 
judgment , during the first six weeks of the trial.   During this titration period , dose will be increased on a weekly 
basis in 18 -36 mg/day increments, according to clinician judgment, with the goal of obtainin g a well -tolerated and 
effective dose, according to a priori definitions of efficacy as at least a  CGI-Improvement of 1 or 2.  At any time, 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_823009] discontinues treatment. At subsequent visits, a 
higher dose may be resumed if tolerated.  
Those individuals on an effective, stable dose of traditional ADHD  treatment (as defined by a stable , effective  
dose for at least one month, as determined by [CONTACT_1003] , of a medication that is FDA approved  for the 
treatment of ADHD ), will continue with this treatment as usual. Currently -treated subjects must have a CGI -
ADHD severity rating of no greater than 4 (“moderately ill”), because a score greater than [ADDRESS_823010] and will provide us with a detailed Certificate of Analysis 
attesting to the contents of the capsules. Our proposed dosing is well within the FDA approval for EPA. The 
MGH Cl inical Trials pharmacy will fill Omega -3/placebo prescriptions labeled with subject study ID number and 
randomization number, but all study -staff will remain blind to the subject’s assignment. The study clinician will 
be responsible for dispensing Omega -3/placebo.   
At each visit, measures of safety and effectiveness will be administered and subjects will be evaluated for 
response and side effects to the treatment. To assess and ensure drug accountability and compliance, study 
medication will be returned an d counted at study visits.  
Information regarding subjects' status of assignment to medication or placebo will be available at all times  
through the MGH Clinical Trials Pharmacy . In addition, the randomization list will be available to the 
investigator at all times, in case of emergency.  
Concomitant Medications / Treatments  
A detailed past and present treatment history will be taken as part of initial evaluation. Patients who are currently 
stably treated with an SSRI , SNRI, or Wellb utrin will be permitted to continue on their current regimen, provided 
the patient’s regimen remains the same throughout the study.  Subjects treated with these medications must be on a 
stable dose for at least one month prior to study entry.  No new SSRI medications , SNRI medicati ons, Wellbutrin,  
or alterations to the current regimen may be initiated throughout the duration of study participation. Other than 
SSRIs , SNRIs, or Wellbutrin , concomitant medications with primarily central nervous system activity are not 
allowed in this s tudy.  No subject will be tapered from medication that is useful to him or her.  Non -
pharmacological treatments such as individual, family or group therapy will be allowed if they were in place 
before the patient joined the study.  The patient’s therapy re gimen must remain the same throughout the study.  
 
Study Discontinuation Criteria  
Subjects who 1) develop intolerable AE(s) despi[INVESTIGATOR_619122]; 2) have (a) clinically relevant serious AE(s) 
as determined by [CONTACT_619145]; 3) have worsening ADHD symptoms (much 
worse or very much worse as rated on CGI -Improvement at two consecutive visits); or 4) have emergent 
psychosis, suicidality, substance use, or worsening mood and/or anxiety (much worse or very much worse as rat ed 
on CGI -Improvement ); 5) subject non -compliance or withdrawal; 6) pregnancy will no longer continue in the 
study.  If study participation is discontinued due to safety reasons, participants will receive two follow -up visits, 
giving adequate time for appro priate psychiatric referrals to treaters in their communities.  
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS   
Data processing and management will follow procedures developed by [CONTACT_619146].  60 subjects will be randomized (1:1) into one of two treatment groups: omega -[ADDRESS_823011] statistical analyses will be employed. Changes in outcome ratings within and between study groups over 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 12 time will be tested with longitu dinal generalized estimating equation (GEE) regression models estimated using 
STATA within the framework of the general linear model (GLM).  Each model will predict outcome scores from 
treatment group (binary predictor), study visit (ordinal predictor) and  the group by [CONTACT_23259].  All analyses 
will be intention to treat (ITT).  
Our primary test of Hypothesis 1 examines the change in DESR symptoms (as measured by [CONTACT_333653] -A 
Emotional Control scale) over 12 weeks. This hypothesis predicts a significan t group by [CONTACT_619147].  Hypothesis 2 examines side effects associated with the combined use of omega -
3 fatty acids plus ADHD medication .  The prevalence of binary side effects reported over the course of the tria l 
(i.e. for each side effect, the cumulative sum from the first assessment to endpoint) will be compared between 
groups using Poisson regression at study endpoint.  We will compare continuous measures with longitudinal GEE 
models as for Aim 1. Hypothesis 3  predicts that compare d to ADHD treatment alone, omega -3 fatty acid 
treatment as a supplement to ADHD treatment will yield a greater reduction of ADHD symptoms (as measured by 
[CONTACT_619133]), symptoms of executive dysfunction (as measured by [CONTACT_619148] -A su bscales) and functioning 
(as measured by [CONTACT_619135]).  These analyses will use the GEE framework as used for Hypothesis 1.  For 
Hypotheses 1, the power to detect a 0.[ADDRESS_823012] size for 
treatments of ADHD symptoms by [CONTACT_105] -stimulants  (~0.7) or stimulants (~0.9) [93], an effect size of 0.5 is similar 
to what is seen for the effects of ant idepressants for depression [94] and thus would be considered clinically 
significant. For  our analyses of cumulativ e binary adverse events at endpoint, although there are many statistical 
tests, we will use an alpha level of 0.05 to err on the side of safety.  For low counts of AEs in the  ADHD 
treatment only group (e.g., 2) we will have 86% power to detect a 1.7 -fold i ncrease or more in the ADHD 
treatment plus omega -3 group. For higher counts in the ADHD treatment group only (e.g., 10) power will be 
higher; we will have 91% power to detect a 1.[ADDRESS_823013] questionnaires:  Some questions may mak e subjects feel uncomfortable. 
Subjects may refuse to answer any question. In the event that a participant reports risk of harm to himself or 
herself, or to another person, study clinicians will assess the level of risk, and take appropriate actions, inclu ding 
disposition of an immediate referral to a local Psychiatric Emergency Room.  
Study Medication – Omega -3 Fatty Acids:  In prior Omega -[ADDRESS_823014] common side effects 
reported were diarrhea, nausea, fishy aftertaste, belching, irritable bo wel, indigestion, and other symptoms of 
digestive upsets. These events were mild, transient, and infrequent.  In the prescribing information for Lovaza (an 
FDA approved Omega -3 formulation), the most common adverse events (incidence >3% and greater than 
placebo) were belching, infection, flu syndrome, and dyspepsia.  
Study Medication – OROS -MPH  (for subjects not treated for ADHD at trial entry) : The medication used in this 
study for subjects who are not treated for ADHD at trial entry will be one of the most  commonly prescribed 
stimulant class of medication; the extended duration methylphenidate, OROS -MPH (Concerta®) . OROS MPH is  
currently FDA -approved for ADHD in children, adolescents and adults. C ommonly -observed side effects 
associated with the use of OROS  MPH include difficulty falling asleep, low appetite, headaches, stomachaches, 
nervousness, and dizziness. Side effects tend to be mild. Rare, but s erious side effects of OROS MPH include 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 13 seizures, eyesight changes, and blockage of esophagus, stomach or in testine. There are also reports of changes in 
behavior or cognition , including psychotic symptoms, and aggression/hostility. Persons with a history of t ics may 
experience return of symptoms. OROS MPH is a federally controlled substance which can be abused or lead to 
dependence. Heart -related problems including sudden death, stroke and heart attack, have been reported with use 
of methylphenidate and other stimulant medicines. Recently published controlled data from our group has 
demonstrated efficacy and tol erability of OROS MPH in a large sample of healthy adults with ADHD (Biederman 
et al, 2006). Dosing for this protocol is consistent with our clinical experience with this medication.  
Study Medication —ADHD  Medications:  Stimulants are considered a first line  of treatment for ADHD. 
Commonly prescribed stimulant medications include Methylphenidate (Ritalin, Metadate, Daytrana); 
Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin); Amphetamine -Dextroamphetamine (Adderall); Dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, 
Dextrostat); and Lisdexamfetamine  (Vyvanse).  
Commonly observed side effects associated with the use of these FDA -Approved stimulants include insomnia, 
decreased appetite, weight loss, headache, increased pulse, and shifting moods.  Other less common side effects 
include irritability, stom ach pain, headache, depression, hair loss, and lack of spontaneity. Stimulants have also 
been associated with more rare, but serious, side effects such as sudden death, stroke, and heart attack in adults 
with a history of heart disease.  
In addition to sti mulants, Atomoxetine (Strattera) is approved for the treatment of ADHD in adults. Commonly 
observed side affects associated with the use of this medication include constipation, nausea,  dry mouth, 
decreased appetite, dizziness, erectile dysfunction, and ur inary hesitation.  Other less common side effects include 
abdominal discomfort, fatigue, irritability, and drowsiness.  
Subjects receiving ADHD  pharmacotherapy prior to trial entry will continue their regimen as usual. While the 
study clinician will not be p rescribing ADHD treatment  to those subjects  being stably treated prior to study entry, 
s/he will monitor subjects  closely in collaboration with their primary prescriber.   
 
Confidentiality  
All research -related records, initiated as a result of a subject’s p articipation in this study that reveal the subject’s 
identity, will remain confidential except as may be required by [CONTACT_2371]. Results of urine drug or pregnancy testing 
will not become part of the subject’s medical record. Data obtained from this study will no t identify the subjects 
individually. Subjects will be assigned code -names and ID numbers.  Data obtained from our studies may be 
published. Original research -related records may be reviewed by [CONTACT_66926], and 
regulatory authorit ies, for the purpose of verifying clinical trial procedures and/or data. Information may be held 
and processed on a computer.  Access to these computerized records will be password protected and restricted to 
study staff. Subjects will only be contact[CONTACT_619149].  
VIII.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
There may be no direct benefit to subjects participating in this study. Potential benefi ts to the participants include 
education about ADHD, a trial of medication that could be continued after the study, and the opportunity to 
contribute to medical science and thus help others with similar disorder.  
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 14 SUMMARY  
  Eval  Baseline               
(Visit 0) Week 
1 Week 
2 Week 
3 Week 
4 Week 
5 Week 
6 Week 
9 Week 12 (Or 
Drop)  
                      
Consent  X          
Procedures  
ECG  X         X 
Vital Signs 
(weight, BP, 
pulse)  X X X X X X X X X X 
Height  X         X 
Urine Drug 
Screen  X       X  X 
Urine  
Pregnancy 
(females only)  X       X  X 
Assessments  
Background 
Interview  X          
WASI  X          
CANTAB  X* X*      X  X 
Clinician 
Interview  X          
Clinician Rated Scales  
AISRS  X X X X X X X X X X 
CGIs   X X X X X X X X X 
HAM -D; 
HAM -A  X      X  X 
C-SSRS   X      X  X 
GAF   X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse 
Events   X X X X X X X X X 
Concomitant 
Medications   X X X X X X X X X 
Patient Rated Scales  
BRIEF -A X X      X  X 
ADHD RS   X X X X X X X X X 
DERS  X  X           X   X 
PANAS    X           X   X 
AAQ    X           X   X 
ERQ    X           X   X 
ASR    X           X   X 
AQ   X           X   X 
SAS   X           X   X 
Q-LES-Q   X           X   X 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 15 CBS - DESR 
Subscale    X           X   X 
EWPS    X           X   X 
* Can be completed at evaluation or /baseline  
 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 16  
IX. REFERENCES  
1. Reimherr F, Marchant BK, Strong RE, et al. Emotional dysregulation in adult ADHD and 
response to atomoxetine. Biol Psychiatry 2005;58(2):125 -131. 
2. Reimherr FW, Williams ED, Strong RE, Mestas R, Soni P, March ant BK. A double -blind, 
placebo -controlled, crossover study of osmotic release oral system methylphenidate in adults with 
ADHD with assessment of oppositional and emotional dimensions of the disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 
2007 Jan;68(1):93 -101. 
3. Barkley RA,  Murphy KR, Fischer M. ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says. [LOCATION_001], NY: 
Guilford Press; 2008.  
4. Barkley RA. Deficient Emotional Self -Regulation: A Core Component of Attention -
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Journal of ADHD and Related Disorders 2010;1 (2):5 -37. 
5. Barkley RA, Murphy KR. Deficient Emotional Self -Regulation in Adults with Attention -
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorders (ADHD): The Relative Contributions of Emotional Impulsiveness  and 
ADHD Symptoms to Adaptive Impairments in Major Life Activitie s. Journal of ADHD and Related 
Disorders 2010;1(4):5 -28. 
6. Surman C, Biederman J, Spencer T, Miller C, Faraone SV. Understanding Deficient Emotional 
Self Regulation in Adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Controlled Study. The 
Journal o f ADHD and Related Disorders In press.  
7. Wender PH. Attention -Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults. [LOCATION_001], NY: Oxford 
University Press; 1995.  
8. Barkley RA. Behavioral inhibition, sustained attention, and executive functions: constructing a 
unifyin g theory of ADHD. Psychol Bull 1997 Jan;121(1):65 -94. 
9. Nigg JT, Casey BJ. An integrative theory of attention -deficit/ hyperactivity disorder based on the 
cognitive and affective neurosciences. Dev Psychopathol 2005 Summer;17(3):785 -806. 
10. Rosen PJ, Eps tein JN. A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_619123]. Journal of ADHD and Related Disorders 2010;1(4):39 -52. 
11. Reimherr FW, Marchant BK, Strong RE, et al. Emotional dysregulation in adult ADHD and 
response to ato moxetine. Biol Psychiatry 2005 Jul 15;58(2):125 -131. 
12. Barkley RA, Fischer M. The unique contribution of emotional impulsiveness to impairment in 
major life activities in hyperactive children as adults. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolesce nt Psychiatry 2010;49(5):503 -513. 
13. Fried R, Monuteaux MC, Hughes S, Jakubowski A, Biederman J. Driving deficits in young 
adults with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of ADHD & Related Disorders 2009;1(1):49 -
57. 
14. Thompson AL, Molina B S, Pelham W, Jr., Gnagy EM. Risky driving in adolescents and young 
adults with childhood ADHD. J Pediatr Psychol 2007 Aug;32(7):745 -759. 
15. Fischer M, Barkley RA, Smallish L, Fletcher K. Hyperactive children as young adults: driving 
abilities, safe drivin g behavior, and adverse driving outcomes. Accid Anal Prev 2007 Jan;39(1):94 -105. 
16. Biederman J, Fried R, Monuteaux MC, et al. A Laboratory Driving Simulation for Assessment of 
Driving Behavior in Adults with ADHD : A Controlled Study. Annals of General P sychiatry 2007;6:4.  
17. Barkley RA, Cox D. A review of driving risks and impairments associated with attention -
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the effects of stimulant medication on driving performance. J Safety 
Res 2007;38(1):113 -128. 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 17 18. Biederman J, Mick EO, Surman C, et al. Comparative acute efficacy and tolerability of OROS 
and immediate release formulations of methylphenidate in the treatment of adults with attention -
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. BMC Psychiatry 2007 Sep 14;7(1):49.  
19. Raz R, Gab is L. Essential fatty acids and attention -deficit -hyperactivity disorder: a systematic 
review. Dev Med Child Neurol 2009 Aug;51(8):[ADDRESS_823015] S, Nilsen H, Nordoy A, Bonaa KH. Effects of highly purified 
eicosapentaenoic acid and doco sahexaenoic acid on fatty acid absorption, incorporation into serum 
phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_619124]. Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] 1998;33(2):131 -138. 
21. Abe T, Sakurada T, Kuribayashi Y, et al. Clinical results of MND -21 or peripheral circulatory 
disorder. J Cli n Therap & Med 1987;3:[ADDRESS_823016] of oral administration of highly purified 
eicosapentaenoic acid on platelet function, blood viscosity and red cell deformability in healthy human 
subjects. Atherosclerosis 1983 ;46(3):321 -331. 
23. Sato M, Katsuki Y, Fukuhara K, et al. Effects of highly purified ethyl all -cis-5,8,11,14,17 -
icosapentaenoate (EPA -E) on rabbit platelets. Biol Pharm Bull 1993;16(4):362 -367. 
24. Sato M, Katsuki Y, Kanehiro H, et al. Effects of ethyl all -cis-5,8,11,14,17 -icosapentaenoate on 
the physical properties of arterial walls in high cholesterol diet -fed rabbits. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 
1993;22(1):1 -9. 
25. Nobukata H, Ishikawa T, Obata M, Shibutani Y. Long -term administration of highly purified 
eicos apentaenoic acid ethyl ester prevents diabetes and abnormalities of blood coagulation in male 
WBN/Kob rats. Metabolism 2000;49(7):[ADDRESS_823017] 1985;76(6):[ADDRESS_823018] of dietary omega -3 fatty 
acids on coronary atherosclerosis. A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Ann Inter n Med 
1999;130(7):[ADDRESS_823019] 1998;48(2 -3):149 -155. 
29. Horrobin DF, Glen AI, Vaddadi K. Th e membrane hypothesis of schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 
1994;13(3):195 -207. 
30. Horrobin DF. The membrane phospholipid hypothesis as a biochemical basis for the 
neurodevelopmental concept of schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 1998;30(3):193 -208. 
31. Stoll A, Sever us E, Freeman M, et al. Omega 3 fatty acids in bipolar disorder. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 1999;56:407 -412. 
32. Horrobin DF, Bennett CN. The membrane phospholipid concept of schizophrenia. In: Hafner H, 
Gattaz WF, Janzarik W, eds. Search for the causes of schizo phrenia. Berlin; [LOCATION_001]: Springer 
Verlag; 1999: 1 -17. 
33. Horrobin DF, Bennett CN. Depression and bipolar disorder: relationships to impaired fatty acid 
and phospholipid metabolism and to diabetes, cardiovascular disease, immunological abnormalities, 
cancer, ageing and osteoporosis. Possible candidate genes. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 
1999;60(4):217 -234. 
34. Peet M, Laugharne J, Rangarajan N, Horrobin D, Reynolds G. Depleted red cell membrane 
essential fatty acids in drug -treated schizophren ic patients. J Psychiatr Res 1995;29(3):[ADDRESS_823020] 
2005 Nov;35(11):691 -699. 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ [ADDRESS_823021]. Membrane phospholipid abnormalities in postmortem brains 
from schizophrenic patients. Schizophr Res 2000 Mar 16;42(1):[ADDRESS_823022] of n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake on 
phospholipid fatty acid composition in plasma and erythrocytes. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;63(6):925 -932. 
38. Colquhoun I, Bunday S. A lack of essential fatty acids as a possible cause of hyperactivity in 
children. Med Hypotheses 1981;7(5):67 3-679. 
39. Arnold LE, Disilvestro RA. Zinc in attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc 
Psychopharmacol 2005 Aug;15(4):619 -627. 
40. Brookes KJ, Chen W, Xu X, Taylor E, Asherson P. Association of Fatty Acid Desaturase Genes 
with Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2006;60(10):1053 -1061.  
41. Peet M, Brind J, Ramchand CN, Shah S, Vankar GK. Two double -blind placebo -controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_619125]. Schizophr Res 2001;49(3) :243-251. 
42. Puri BK, Richardson AJ, Horrobin DF, et al. Eicosapentaenoic acid treatment in schizophrenia 
associated with symptom remission, normalisation of blood fatty acids, reduced neuronal membrane 
phospholipid turnover and structural brain changes. Int J Clin Pract 2000 Jan -Feb;54(1):57 -63. 
43. Amminger GP, Schafer MR, Papageorgiou K, et al. Long -chain omega -3 fatty acids for indicated 
prevention of psychotic disorders: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010 
Feb;67(2):[ADDRESS_823023] drugs. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 2002;59(10):913 -919. 
45. Nemets H, Nemets B, Apter  A, Bracha Z, Belmaker RH. Omega -3 treatment of childhood 
depression: a controlled, double -blind pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Am J Psychiatry 2006 Jun;163(6):1098 -1100.  
46. Nemets B, Stahl Z, Belmaker RH. Addition of omega -3 fatty acid to maintenance medication 
treatment for recurrent unipolar depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2002;159(3):477 -479. 
47. Stoll AL, Renshaw PF, Yurgelun -Todd DA, Cohen BM. Neuroimaging in bipolar disorder: what 
have we learned? Biological psychiatry 2000;48(6):[ADDRESS_823024] RM, Baldassano  C, Perlis RH, Ginsburg DL. Treatment of Bipolar Depression. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry 2003;Roundtable Monograph(Supplement):1 -11. 
49. Wozniak J, Biederman J, Mick E, et al. Omega 3 fatty acid monotherapy for pediatric bipolar 
disorder:  A prospective  open label trial. European Neuropsychopharmacology 2007;17(6 -7):440 -447. 
50. Faraone SV, Buitelaar J. Comparing the efficacy of stimulants for ADHD in children and 
adolescents using meta -analysis. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2009 Sep 10.  
51. American Psy chiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: 
Fourth Edition Text Revision (DSM -IV-TR). 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association; 2000.  
52. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurological an d Neurosurgical Psychiatry 
1960;23:56 -62. 
53. Gratz KL, Roemer L. Multidimensional Assessment of Emotion Regulation and Dysregulation: 
Development, Factor Structure, and Initial Validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. 
Journal of Psychop athology and Behavioral Assessmen 2004;26(1):[ADDRESS_823025]: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol 1988 Jun;54(6):1063 -1070.  
55. Hayes SC, Strosahl KD, Wilson KG, et al. Measuring experiential avoidance: A preliminary test 
of a working model. The Psychological Record 2004;54:553 -578. 
Study Protocol: Omega 3 and DESR Traits  
Version : AME 25, 12/05/ 2014 
 19 56. Gross JJ, John OP. Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: implications for 
affect, relationships, and well -being. J Pers Soc Psychol 2003 Aug;85(2):348 -362. 
57. Achenbach TM, Rescorla LA. Manual for ASEBA Adult Forms & Profiles. Burlington, VT: 
University of Vermont, Research Center for Children, Youth, & Families; 2003.  
58. Buss AH, Warren WL. Agressi on Questionnaire: Manual. Los Angeles, CA: Western 
Psychological Services; 2000.  
59. StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 10. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP; 2007.  
 
 