Page [ADDRESS_622475] SW  
Washington, DC [ZIP_CODE]  
 
PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATOR  :  [INVESTIGATOR_484246] -Giordano   
TITLE  :  TrueTear in Sjogren’s Disease 
Patients   
PROTOCOL #  :  [ADDRESS_622476] day, a baseline 
Schirmer’s test is performed after the patient’s eyes have been anesthetized. The 
duration of this test is five minutes. At the end of the five minutes, the tear production 
is measured using th e Schirmer strips. The patient must produce ten millimeters or less 
in at least one eye to qualify for the study. Next, the TrueTear device is simulated using 
two cotton swabs. One cotton swab is inserted into each nostril. Using Schirmer strips to 
measure  tear production, t he patient swirls the cotton  swabs around in their nostrils 
until they produce four millimeters  above their baseline in at least one eye. The patient 
is then to hold the cotton swabs in their nose for the remainder of the five minutes.  In 
order to qualify for the study, the patient must produce four millimeters or greater in 
the study  eye. In instances where the patient is of child -bearing age, a pregnancy test is 
performed to ensure that the patient is not pregnant.     
 
After visit one,  visit two can be completed the following day or any day during the next 
forty -five days. During visit two, the effectiveness of the device is tested. The patient is 
randomized to which application method, internal or external,  is used first . During both 
the first and second applications, Schirmer strips are used to measure tear production  
over the course of five minutes . For the first three minutes, the device is used. For the 
remaining two minutes, the device is removed.  Between the first and second 
appli cations, there must be a waiting period of at least forty -five minutes. This break 
ensures that the patient’s tear glands have enough time to restore. Thi s is necessary for 
accurate measurement of the effectiveness of the device.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_622477] will be factored in. 
This will help us determine whether or not the order of application methods impacts the 
final results. Next, we will examine each stimulation method (cotton swabs , internal 
application with TrueTear device, and external application with TrueTear device)  relative 
to baseline  to see if the changes are statistically significant  from baseline , and to 
determine an estimate d mean change.  We also plan to compare each appl ication method 
to each other to determine if there is a statistically significant difference. While making 
the comparison, we also want to separately account for two different factors, patients on 
Sjogren’s medication vs. patients not on Sjogren’s medicati on and patients with a 
baseline Schirmer of less than [ADDRESS_622478] deviation.  
 