 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 1 of 11 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_643125]  
 
09-10-2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 11 
 Date: __ September  10, 2018       
Principal Investigator: _ Jennifer Payne ________________  
Application Number: __ IRB000162134  
 
 
JHM IRB  - eForm A  – Protocol  
 
1. Abstract  
The management of Bipolar Disorder during pregnancy is not simple. Studies have 
demonstrated  that at least 80% of women who stop mood stabilizing medications for pregnancy 
relapse psychiatrically 1,2. However, relapse is also quite common in women who continue taking 
mood stabilizing medication with studie s demonstrating approximately a 30 -37% relapse rate -most 
with depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] 1,2. Depression during pregnancy is associated with functional impairment 
and unhealthy behaviors in the mother, including higher bod y mass index, less prenatal care, 
higher rates of substance use, less healthy nutrition, and decreased rates of breastfeeding 3-8. 
Untreated psychiatric illness in pregnancy is also directly correlated with worse n eonatal and child 
outcomes, including significantly increased risks of preterm birth and low birth weight,3-[ADDRESS_860886] risk factors for postpartum depression, 
13 which is associated with increased colic, impaired maternal -infant bonding 14 and parenting 
behavior 15 16, worse child outcomes (including lower IQ, sl ower language development and 
behavioral disturbance 17, and potentially devastating consequences including suicide and 
infanticide. Thus, many women with Bipolar Disorder  choose to continue medication during 
pregnancy - but it remains unclear if th ere are specific approaches that will minimize their risk of 
relapse.  
One likely explanation for the high relapse rate of Bipolar Disorder during pregnancy despi[INVESTIGATOR_643126]. Pregnancy induces both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
changes, which can result in decreased serum blood levels and decreased treatment efficacy. 
During pregnancy, the increased volume of distribution, alterations in hepatic clearance of drugs 
(including metabolism through cytochrome P450 enzymes), increased hepatic blood flow, 
increased glomerular filtration rate, and direct interactions with sex steroids 18 can all lead to 
substantial differences in the drug dose -serum level relationship across pregnancy, with dramatic 
and rapid changes in the postpartum.  
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) is considered standard of care for a number of psychiatric 
medications – including tho se with a narrow therapeutic window, established therapeutic ranges, or 
significant variability in their pharmacokinetic properties.  TDM can be an especially crucial guide 
to clinical treatment during pregnancy, but remarkably, there are no established pr otocols for the 
monitoring of levels and dosing of psychiatric medications in pregnancy. Most pregnant 
psychiatric patients are therefore managed based on symptom recurrence. In contrast, there are 
established protocols for monitoring blood levels and prop hylactic management of antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_643127], including lamotrigine which is also a mood stabilizing medication. We 
propose to collect pi[INVESTIGATOR_643128], adverse events, and obstetrical and infant 
outcomes of preg nant women with Bipolar Disorder who undergo prophylactic TDM for a 
commonly used mood stabilizing medication during pregnancy - lamotrigine. Our primary 
hypothesis is that prophylactic TDM for lamotrigine will result in a lower than expected rate of 
psychiatric  relapse which, based on the literature, is approximately 30%. Along with testing this 
hypothesis we will collect adverse event data and obstetrical and infant outcomes to assess the 
safety of our protocol.  
 
2. Objectives :  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 11 
 a) Specific Aim 1:  Collect preliminar y data on the psychiatric outcomes of pregnant women 
with Bipolar Disorder who undergo a TDM protocol for lamotrigine. Hypothesis: Women 
undergoing a TDM protocol for lamotrigine will have a low rate (defined as <30%) of 
psychiatric relapse. Psychiatric ou tcomes will be defined by [CONTACT_303958], the Edinburgh 
Postnatal Rating Scale (EPDS) and the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS).  
 
b) Specific Aim 2: Collect adverse event data from preg nant women with Bipolar Disorder 
undergoing a TDM protocol for lamotrig ine.  Adverse event data will be collected using the 
[LOCATION_006]U side effect semi -structured interview and the Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side 
Effects Rating (FIBSER) scale.  
 
c) Specific Aim 3: Collect preliminary data on the obstetrical outcomes of preg nant  women 
with Bipolar Disorder who undergo a TDM protocol for lamotrigine. Obstetrical outcomes 
will be defined by [CONTACT_643135] (PES).  
 
d) Specific Aim 4: Collect preliminary data on  infant outcomes whose mothers underwent a 
TDM protocol for lamotrigine.  Pediatric outcomes will be defined by [CONTACT_643136] a pediatrician and by a neurobehavioral assessment using the Neonatal 
Intensive Care Un it (NICU) Network Behav ioral Scale (NNN S). 
 
3. Background : 
Evidence indicates that serum levels of lamotrigine decrease by 200 -250% across pregnancy 19, and 
that the clearance of lamotrigine can be increased [ADDRESS_860887] been reported for therapeutic efficacy with 
higher levels correlated with increasing signs of toxicity 21.  In the epi[INVESTIGATOR_527201], there is a published 
protocol for lamotrigine management before, during, and after pregnancy 22 for seizure control as follows:   
 Prior to pregnancy, adjust lamotrigine dose to minimum effective dose to attain clinical 
stability.  Obtain a reference concentration (RC), preferably when the patient is not taking 
oral contraceptives . 
 During pregnancy, monitor lamotrigine concentration every 4 weeks.  If serum 
concentration falls below RC, increase lamotrigine dose by 20 -25% and re -measure serum 
level after 4 additional weeks.  If serum level does not fall below RC, maintain same dose  
but check level again in four weeks.  
 After pregnancy, obtain serum level within 1 -2 weeks.  IF level is above the RC, decrease 
dose by 20 -25% and re -measure serum level in 1 -2 weeks.  Continue until RC is reached,  
and level is stable on two repeated check s.  If patient had dose increased more than 3 times 
during pregnancy, do no wait until after delivery to obtain serum level; rather, implement 
first dose decrease (by 20 -25%) in the first days following delivery, then monitor every [ADDRESS_860888] partum time period with up to a 600% increase 
in the level -dose relationship after childbirth. The authors recommended that, based on their 
findings, psychiatrists should monitor lamotrigine levels on a monthly basis in pregnant women 
with Bipolar Disorder  and prophylactically increase lamotrigine based on a pre -pregnancy or early 
pregnancy RC. They also recommended tapering lamotrigine (if increased during pregnancy) in the 
immediate postpartum time period. This recommendation has not been further tested f or safety and 
it remains unclear if prophylactic TDM will prevent destabilization of Bipolar Disorder . 
a)  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_860889] 30%1,2. 
Although our study design will not demonstrate superiority, it will provide preliminary evidence 
of efficacy and safety data for both the participant and her infant and will be the largest study 
examining a specific approach to managing lamotrigine during pregnancy in patients with 
Bipolar Disorder . We hope these data will then serve as a basis for a multisite randomized trial 
of prophylactic TDM for lamotr igine compared to treatment as usual in the future.  
 Pregnant women with Bipolar Disorder who are taking lamotrigine will be evaluated 
monthly during pregnancy including a clinical evaluation and a blood draw for lamotrigine 
levels  at each visit . Based on the TDM protocol described below  their lamotrigine dosing will 
be adjusted as needed based on their blood levels compared to the RC that was obtained prior to 
pregnancy or early in pregnancy while clinically stable. After delivery women and their infants 
will be assessed at 1, 2, 4, and [ADDRESS_860890] 
chosen to take lamotrigine during pregnancy with a goal of maintaining a sample size of 16 
allowing 4 drop -outs.  
Recr uitment. Participants will primarily be recruited through the Johns Hopkins Women’s 
Mood Disorders Center (WMDC) and through referrals from the Obstetrics department. We 
will advertise on the WMDC Facebook site, the WMDC research site, EPIC and in local 
publications.  
Lamotrigine Dosing Adjustments . At the time of study enrollment each participant will 
have a RC defined based on either 1) a pre -pregnancy serum level (for the current lamotrigine 
dosage) or 2) a serum level drawn at the time of enrollment.  Wh ile we will preferentially use a 
pre-pregnancy RC since pregnancy hormone levels can affect lamotrigine levels, many 
psychiatrists do not routinely check lamotrigine levels and from a practical perspective we will 
obtain a lamotrigine at study entry to pro mote study participation and recruitment. Participants 
will be clinically well at the time of enrollment so that the serum level will be correlated with 
clinical stability. Lamotrigine levels will then be drawn monthly and the dose adjusted to 
maintain the  RC. Specifically, if the monthly serum level is more than 0.5µg/mL lower than the 
RC, the dose will be adjusted by 20 -25% and checked again at the next monthly visit. Higher 
levels than the RC are unlikely, since levels generally decrease across the cours e of pregnancy, 
but the dose will not be adjusted down unless there is a clinical indication (i.e. toxicity). 
Postpartum, all participants will be instructed to taper to the lamotrigine dose that was being 
taken at the time of the RC over the course of two  weeks. While this does not follow the exact 
neurology,  protocol described above (Background), we believe this approach makes sense 
since it will be more consistent and avoid the potential problem of toxicity. It also follows the 
recommendations of Clark e t al 23. 
Data Collection  
a) Maternal Psychiatric Outcomes : We will monitor maternal ps ychiatric outcomes 
based on the EPDS, YMRS and clinical interview. The primary endpoint is the proportion of 
women who experience psychiatric relapse from the time of enrollment to 6 weeks postpartum. 
Relapse  will be defined as one of the following: meetin g SCID criteria for a Major Depressive 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], meeting SCID criteria for a hypomanic or manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], development of high risk 
suicidal plan or attempt, or psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 11 
 b) Maternal Adverse Event Outcomes : Adverse events will be monitored by  [CONTACT_2329] a 
semi -structured interview, (the [LOCATION_006]U side effects rating scale) at every visit as well as the self -
rated Frequency, Intensity and Burden of Side Effects Rating scale ( FIBSER ). Adverse events 
will be considered as related to the TDM protocol if they  were not present at baseline or 
worsened in severity and were noted after a change in dosing. A preliminary analysis will be 
conducted comparing adverse events in participants who underwent dose increases during 
pregnancy to those that did not (assuming t here are participants who did not undergo dosage 
increase).  
c) Maternal Obstetrical Outcomes : Maternal obstetrical outcomes will be extracted 
from the delivery admission chart which will be reviewed by [CONTACT_643137], [CONTACT_643150]. The Perinatal Eve nts Scale ( PES) will be used to collect a majority of these 
outcomes including Past Obstetrics History, Medical Risk Factors, Obstetric Risk Factors, 
Progress in Labor, Method of Delivery and Complications. A preliminary analysis will be 
conducted comparin g obstetrical outcomes in participants who underwent dose increases in 
pregnancy to those that did not (assuming there are participants who did not undergo dosage 
increase).  
d) Newborn Outcomes :  Newborn outcomes will be extracted from the delivery 
admission  chart which will be reviewed by [CONTACT_643138], [CONTACT_643151].  We will use 
the infant outcomes portion of the P eripartum Events Scale (which includes Apgar scores and 
Infant Complications) and, in addition, collect infant weight, measurements, g estational age and 
need for medical interventions or NICU admission. A preliminary analysis will be conducted 
comparing infant outcomes for participants who underwent dose increases during pregnancy to 
those that did not (assuming there are participants wh o did not undergo dosage increase). All 
infants will also undergo a neurobehavioral assessment at weeks 2, 4 and 6 postpartum using the 
Neonatal I ntensive Care Un it (NICU) Network Behav ioral Scale (NNN S). Our research assistant 
will receive training at the  Brown Center for the Study of Children at Risk which has a 
standardized training on the use of  NNN S. The NNNS will be used to identify any infant 
neurobehavioral effects of the TDM protocol. A preliminary analysis will be conducted 
comparing infant neurob ehavioral outcomes for participants who underwent dose increases 
during pregnancy to those that did not (assuming there are participants who did not undergo 
dosage increase).  
 
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participant s. Each subject 
will be seen approximately [ADDRESS_860891] in the Women’s Mood Disorders 
Center, however home visits by [CONTACT_643139] a participant cannot come to 
the Center (for example if a pa rticipant is on bedrest) to maintain participation and continuity . 
 
c. Blinding , including justification for blinding or not bl inding the trial, if applicable.   Not 
applicable. Subjects will be receiving the drug t hat is part of their usual care and we will b e 
collecting pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299].  
 
d. Justification o f why participant s will not receive routine  care or will have current therapy 
stopped.  Participants will undergo more clinical care than is currently routine in that they will 
be monitored on a monthly basis and the ir lamotrigine dosing adjusted as part of a TDM 
protocol.  
 
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group.   There will be no placebo or 
non-treatment group.  
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_860892] to follow -up or are noncompliant with the study protocol.   
 
g. Description of what happens to participant s receiving therapy  when study ends or if a 
participant ’s participation in the study end s prematurely.   Participants will return for 
clinical care to their outpatient provider at the end of the study or if their participation ends 
prematurely.  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria    
Inclusion Criteria. Pregnant women with a history of Bipolar Disorder (Bipolar Disorder I, 
Bipolar Disorder II or Bipolar Disorder  not otherwise specified) who are taking lamotrigine 
and who intend to continue lamotrigine through pregnancy will be enrolle d. All participants 
must be in the first [ADDRESS_860893] also 
be on stable doses of lamotrigine (for the past 4 weeks), have an EPDS <13, a YMRS <[ADDRESS_860894] active suicidal ideation or who are clinically 
unstable will be excluded. Participants who are dependent on alcohol, marijuana or other 
substances in the 90 days prior to study entry will be excluded.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used .  
Lamotrigine is an evidence -based treatment  for Bipolar Disorder  in pregnancy .  The rationale 
for our TDM/ dosing regimen is based on recommendations in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_527201]. There is 
currently no established protocol for the dos ing of these drugs in pregnant patients with Bipolar 
Disorder . 
 
b. Justification and safety infor mation if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -
FDA approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant  
populations are changed.   There are no drugs with FDA approval for the management of mood 
disorders in pregnancy.  Therefore,  we must use FDA approved drugs for non -FDA approved 
indications, a common clinical practice.  
 
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered . Not applicable.  
 
7. Study Statistics .   
We will perform d escriptive statistics that include percent tabulations for categorical 
variables, means with standard deviations for continuous variables, and medians with ranges where 
more appropriate.  The primary endpoint is the proportion of women who experience psychi atric 
relapse from the time of enrollment to 6 weeks postpartum. Relapse will be defined as one of the 
following: meeting SCID criteria for a Major Depressive Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], meeting SCID criteria for a 
hypomanic or manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], development of high risk suicida l plan or attempt, or psychiatric 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. We do not have a comparison group but would normally  expect a relapse rate of 
approximately 30% based on the literature  We will also collect and describe adverse events, 
obstetrical and infant outcomes.   
 
8. Risks . 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 11 
 a) Medical Risks.  The risks and discomforts are expected to be minimal and rare. During 
interviews, the participants may experience some discomfort or anxiety because of the personal 
nature of the questions. There may be some risk that the research par ticipant may find the 
diagnostic interview uncomfortable or feel it is an invasion of privacy. Venipuncture may be 
associated with the momentary discomfort of the needle stick, fainting, bruising and rarely 
infection. There is also a risk for loss of confi dentiality . Other risks include maternal side 
effects or toxicity from lamotrigine, infant side effects or toxicity from lamotrigine, and 
maternal psychiatric relapse.  
 
b) Steps Taken to Minimize Risks : 
 
Interviews, Questionnaires:  A trained research assista nt will be available at all times while 
the participant is filling out questionnaires.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_643129], and WMDC clinicians (including a psychiatrist) will be onsite during the 
administration as well.  Should  the participant become distressed, the study staff member can 
provide reassurance and evaluate her psychiatric state. Participants will be informed during 
screening and consenting procedures that they do not have to answer or complete tasks that 
cause the m distress.  Each participant will be directed to inform the study team member if she 
wishes to skip a certain part. If the study staff member determines that the participant is 
experiencing a psychiatric emergency, the steps listed below under that headin g will be taken.  
 
Blood draw:   In order to decrease the risks associated with venipuncture, we will employ 
staff that is experienced in blood drawing procedures.   
 
Psychiatric Urgency/Emergency : Management of Psychiatric Urgency/Emergency:   In 
order to mi nimize the risk of suicide, we will follow the following procedures for protection 
against this risk:  
 
 Each participant will be asked directly at every visit whether or not they are having thoughts 
about harming themselves or anyone else, including their c hild/children. All study personnel 
have (or will have) experience in interviewing participants with psychiatric disorders and 
will have been trained how to handle reports of suicidal ideation or threats of harm to others 
– including when to call 911 or cam pus security.  
 
 The study psychiatrists will be available by [CONTACT_643140].  
 
 An emergency contact [CONTACT_643141] c ontacts, an emergency contact [CONTACT_9702], the participant’s 
psychiatric outpatient treatment provider’s name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_643142]’s home address as well as contact [CONTACT_402739]’s obstetrician 
and the infant’s pediatric ian. This will provide important information in case of psychiatric 
or medical urgency/emergency. All participants will sign a release of information form in 
order to allow study personnel to contact [CONTACT_643143]/or providers if 
necessary du ring the study.  
 
 If a participant who reports suicidal or otherwise harmful thoughts (to themselves or others) 
is judged to be at risk by [CONTACT_243116], they will be taken to the Emergency 
Room/Emergency Mental Health. The Emergency Room is on th e same campus as the study 
sites.  If the participant is interviewed by [CONTACT_643144], the participant 
will be instructed to go to the emergency room and if there is a question regarding 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_860895] the police complete a welfare check.  
 
 If the participant is not at risk of harming herself or others but is psychiatrically ill, the study 
psychiatrist will provide clinical care as necessary until the participant can be seen by [CONTACT_643145] . The participant will remain in the study and undergo 
all study visits and procedures as long as consent continues .   
 
Obstetrical Urgency/Emergency : Should one of the participants develop an urgent 
obstetrical problem, the participant will either be taken to  the local Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Clinic or Emergency Room, whichever seems more appropriate. Both the Clinic and the 
Emergency Room are on the same campus as the study site. The subject’s private obstetrician 
will also be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
Lamotrigine toxic ity: Every participant will be monitored closely for side effects/signs of 
toxicity during the trial. Because the RC will be established prior to pregnancy or early in 
pregnancy we anticipate that the likelihood of significant side effects or toxicity in t he 
participants is very low. If a participant does develop side effects or signs of toxicity the dose of 
lamotrigine will be lowered by [CONTACT_243116].  At every visit the participant will fill out a 
Frequency, Intensity  and Burden of Side Effect Sc ale (FIBSER) to monitor for significant side 
effects from the protocol. Obstetrical outcomes will be assessed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hueppchen from the 
Gynecology and Obstetrics Department.  
 
Neonatal toxicity : It is possible that increased dosing of lamotrigine during pre gnancy will 
lead to increased side effects or toxicity in the newborn. We do not anticipate  this outcome 
since the protocol is used in the management of seizure disorders and there have not been 
reports of adverse effects in infants whose mothers participa te in these protocols. We will 
monitor for this potential risk by [CONTACT_643146] a review of the medical 
record by a pediatrician ([CONTACT_643151]) and by [CONTACT_54215] a neurobehavioral exam using the 
Neonatal I ntensive Care Un it (NICU) Network Behav ioral Scale (NNN S) at 2, 4, and [ADDRESS_860896] the exam appropriately.  
 
Neonatal I ntensive Care Un it (NICU) Network Behav ioral Scale (NNN S) Exami nation: 
The NNNS is a standardized neurobehavioral exam that is used in infants. It primarily consists 
of observation of the infant, reflex testing and holding the infant. The primary risk is that the 
infant will become upset and cry. Our research assistan t will have undergone an intensive  5 day 
training at Brown and will learn as part of the training how to minimize this risk.   
 
c) Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
Reports will be made to the IRB and necessary healthcare provider s in the event of an 
unanticipated problems or study deviations. The study team will follow IRB protocol to 
determine if a deviation or problem needs to be reported immediately or if it can be reported at 
the yearly continuing review.  All serious adverse e vents will be reported to the IRB 
immediately by [CONTACT_978].  
 
d) Legal Risks:  
Confidentiality : Careful procedures will be employed to protect the confidentiality of all 
participants.  Participants will be assigned unique ID identifiers not associated with persona lly 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_860897] psychiatric patients. Participants may avoid psychiatric relapse by 
[CONTACT_643147].  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_643130] e ffective management strategies for bipolar disorder during pregnancy  
will allow us to decrease the associated maternal and infant mor bidity and mortality by [CONTACT_643148] -period .  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration . Detail compensation for participants including possible total 
compensation, proposed bonus, and any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing 
the protocol.   Participants will be compensated for par king or taxi service for their visits.  In 
addition, they will receive compensation up to the amount of $450 if they complete the entire 
study.  If the participant fails to complete all visits, they will be paid based on the visits spent in the 
study: Part icipants will be paid $25 for each pregnancy visit completed and $75 for each 
postpartum visit. If participants opt for a home visit postpartum, they will receive $50 instead. 
Participants will also be paid a bonus of $100 for achieving a minimum of 5 preg nancy visits and 2 
postpartum visits in order to encourage continuity of participation.  Lab costs for lamotrigine levels 
will be covered by [CONTACT_643149].  If acute medical care or medical or psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_643131] o f the study, the individual participant and/or their health insurance 
will be expected to cover those costs.  
 
11. Costs  
The participant and her insurance company will cover the cost of lamotrigine and any other 
prescribed medications. The study will cover the cost of the lamotrigine blood draws and laboratory 
processing.  If acute medical care or medical or psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_643132], the individual participant and/or their health insurance will be expected to cover 
those costs.  
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 10 of 11 
  
References  
1. Viguera AC, Whitfield T, Baldessarini RJ, et al. Risk of recurrence in women with bipolar 
disorder during pregnancy: prospective study of mood stabilizer discontinuation. The American 
journal of psychiatry. 2007;164(12):1817 -1824; quiz 1923.  
2. Newport DJ, Stowe ZN, Viguera AC, et al. Lamotrigine in bipolar disorder: efficacy during 
pregnancy. Bipolar Disord. 2008;10(3):432 -436. 
3. Le Strat Y, Dubertret C, Le Foll B. Prevalence and correlates of major depress ive epi[INVESTIGATOR_643133]. Journal of affective disorders. 2011;135(1 -
3):128 -138. 
4. Barker ED, Kirkham N, Ng J, Jensen SK. Prenatal maternal depression symptoms and 
nutrition, and child cognitive function. The Briti sh journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental 
science. 2013;203(6):417 -421. 
5. McPhie S, Skouteris H, Fuller -Tyszkiewicz M, Hill B, Jacka F, O'Neil A. Relationships 
between mental health symptoms and body mass index in women with and without excessive 
weight gain during pregnancy. Midwifery. 2015;31(1):138 -146. 
6. Kim HG, Mandell M, Crandall C, Kuskowski MA, Dieperink B, Buchberger RL. Antenatal 
psychiatric illness and adequacy of prenatal care in an ethnically diverse inner -city obstetric 
population. Archives of women's mental health. 2006;9(2):[ADDRESS_860898] of maternal depression 
during pregnancy on perinatal outcomes: a systematic review and meta -analysis. The Journal of 
clinical psychiatr y. 2013;74(4):e321 -341. 
8. Dennis CL, McQueen K. The relationship between infant -feeding outcomes and postpartum 
depression: a qualitative systematic review. Pediatrics. 2009;123(4):e736 -751. 
9. Diego MA, Field T, Hernandez -Reif M, Cullen C, Schanberg S, K uhn C. Prepartum, 
postpartum, and chronic depression effects on newborns. Psychiatry. 2004;67(1):63 -80. 
10. Ashman SB, Dawson G, Panagiotides H, Yamada E, Wilkinson CW. Stress hormone levels 
of children of depressed mothers. Development and psychopathology . 2002;14(2):333 -349. 
11. Essex MJ, Klein MH, Cho E, Kalin NH. Maternal stress beginning in infancy may sensitize 
children to later stress exposure: effects on cortisol and behavior. Biological psychiatry. 
2002;52(8):776 -784. 
12. Halligan SL, Herbert J, Go odyer IM, Murray L. Exposure to postnatal depression predicts 
elevated cortisol in adolescent offspring. Biological psychiatry. 2004;55(4):376 -381. 
13. Robertson E, Grace S, Wallington T, Stewart DE. Antenatal risk factors for postpartum 
depression: a synt hesis of recent literature. General hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9417]. 2004;26(4):289 -295. 
14. Akman I, Kuscu K, Ozdemir N, et al. Mothers' postpartum psychological adjustment and 
infantile colic. Arch Dis Child. 2006;91(5):417 -419. 
15. Flynn HA, Davis M, Marcus SM, Cun ningham R, Blow FC. Rates of maternal depression in 
pediatric emergency department and relationship to child service utilization. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 
2004;26(4):316 -322. 
16. McLearn KT, Minkovitz CS, Strobino DM, Marks E, Hou W. The timing of maternal 
depressive symptoms and mothers' parenting practices with young children: implications for 
pediatric practice. Pediatrics. 2006;118(1):e174 -182. 
17. Grace SL, Evindar A, Stewart DE. The effect of postpartum depression on child cognitive 
development and behavi or: a review and critical analysis of the literature. Archives of women's 
mental health. 2003;6(4):263 -274. 
18. Deligiannidis KM, By[INVESTIGATOR_171205] N, Freeman MP. Pharmacotherapy for mood disorders in 
pregnancy: a review of pharmacokinetic changes and clinical recomme ndations for therapeutic drug 
monitoring. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2014;34(2):244 -255. 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Versi on 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 11 of 11 
 19. Fotopoulou C, Kretz R, Bauer S, et al. Prospectively assessed changes in lamotrigine -
concentration in women with epi[INVESTIGATOR_643134], lactation and the neonatal  period. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_573186]. 2009;85(1):60 -64. 
20. Polepally AR, Pennell PB, Brundage RC, et al. Model -based lamotrigine clearance changes 
during pregnancy: clinical implication . Annals of clinical and translational neurology. 
2014;1(2):99 -106. 
21. Hirsch L J, Weintraub D, Du Y, et al. Correlating lamotrigine serum concentrations with 
tolerability in patients with epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]. Neurology. 2004;63(6):1022 -1026.  
22. Sabers A. Algorithm for lamotrigine dose adjustment before, during, and after pregnancy. 
Acta neurol ogica Scandinavica. 2012;126(1):e1 -4. 
23. Clark CT, Klein AM, Perel JM, Helsel J, Wisner KL. Lamotrigine dosing for pregnant 
patients with bipolar disorder. The American journal of psychiatry. 2013;170(11):1240 -1247.  
 