 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
1 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442011] prospective, multicenter, injury care and outcomes 
research of relevance to the Department of Defense (Do D). 
     Hemorrhage and Traumatic Brain Injury  (TBI) are responsible for the largest proportion of all 
trauma -related deaths. It is the poly -trauma patient who suffers both hemorrhagic shock and 
traumatic brain injury where a paucity of evidence exists to direct treatment, limiting the development of beneficial trauma practice guidelines.  
     The use of Whole Blood (WB) for early trauma resuscitation has been touted as the ‘essential 
next step’ in the evolution of trauma resuscitation.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_355036], little 
is known regarding WB’s benefit relative to the ‘current practice’ ratio- based blood component 
therapy  in the acutely bleeding patient , and even less is known regarding its effects in patients 
with TBI.  
 
AIM#1 : Evaluate patient centered outcomes associated with early whole blood resuscitation 
practice as compared to component resuscitation in poly -trauma patients with hemorrhagic shock 
and further characterize outcome benefits in those with traumatic brain injury .  Whole blood 
Clinical Pr actice Guidelines will be prepared, including staff training resources, and provided for 
use by [CONTACT_355074].  
 
AIM#2 : Characterize blood pressure and resuscitation endpoints  during the acute resuscitation 
phase of care and the associated/attributable out comes for traumatic brain injury in patients with 
hemorrhagic shock.  
 
General Hypothesis  #1: Whole blood resuscitation will be associated with improved mortality and 
resuscitation outcomes in poly -trauma patients  and long term neurological outcome in those 
patients with traumatic brain injury as compared to those resuscitated with component therapy.  
 General Hypothesis #2: Differences in prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355037] 6 months.  
 Study Design: The LITES network will perform a multicenter, prospective, observational cohort study over a 4-year period to determine the impact of whole blood resuscitation in trauma patients 
with hemorrhagic shock at risk of large volume resuscitation with and without TBI.  Early whole 
blood resuscitation will be compared to standard component resuscitation. The study will also 
further characterize bl ood pressure and resuscitation endpoints  in poly -trauma  
 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
2 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
 
patients with traumatic brain injury. Trauma sites with appropriate characteristics will be selected 
within  the LITES Network across the country.  
 Study Setting: The study will be performed utilizing busy level I trauma  centers within the LITES 
Network loc ated across the country, at sites where either whole blood has currently been 
incorporated into standard of care or where component blood transfusion is being utilized for patients in hemorrhagic shock at risk for large volume resuscitation.  
 
Study Populat ion: The study will focus on patients who suffer blunt or penetrating injur y, 
transported to a Task Order [ADDRESS_442012] prospective, multicenter, injury care and outcomes 
research of relevance to the Department of Defense (DoD). Clinical trials from the point of inju ry 
in the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355038], thr ough ICU and beyond 
discharge are feasible and critical to the overall goals of the network. Novel capabilities include 
prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355039] k severity and sequent ial coagulopathy measurements. 
The network and leadership have a track record of Exception From Informed Consent (EFIC) trials  for planned emergency research and expertise with those injury subtypes including 
traumatic brain injury, hemorrhagic shock and coagulopathy  of trauma , poly -trauma and severe 
extremity trauma. In addition to the track record and proven capabilities, the LITES N etwork uses 
a central IRB and efficient methods to minimize time, resources, cost and regulatory burdens to 
improve recruitment, consent rates and ease of data acquisition in order to promote successful 
execution of those task orders provided to the network from the DoD.      
 
     Traumatic injury represents an incredible health care burden in the [LOCATION_002] and 
worldwide.
1 Hemorrhage and Traumatic Brain Injury  (TBI)  are re sponsible for the largest  
proportion of all trauma -related deaths.2-[ADDRESS_442013] treatment , limiting the development of  beneficial trauma practice guidelines.   
     Ongoing traumatic blood loss is complicated by [CONTACT_355075] t shock and organ dysfunction.
8-17 Secondary to 
increasing evidence and knowledge, in-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_355040] 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
3 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442014] decade to reduce the coagulopathic response to ischemia and tissue 
injury .18-23 The underlying principle of current resuscitation practice focuses on preventing or 
reversing the effects of coagulopathy with the early use of a balanced component transfusion 
strategy (1:1:1 -  plasm a: packed red blood cells: platelets).24 This reconstituted strategy has also 
been coined ‘whole blood- like’ resuscitation despi[INVESTIGATOR_355041] a compositional standpoint 
relative to Whole Blood (WB) .25-[ADDRESS_442015] for treating 
hemorrhagic shock during World War I and II, prior to sweepi[INVESTIGATOR_355042].
27 The use of WB for early trauma resuscitation is making a resurgence, primarily based 
upon the military experience28-32 and has been touted as the ‘essential next  step’ in the evolution 
of trauma r esuscitation .26,33  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_355043], little is known regarding 
WB’s  benefit relative to the ‘current practice’ ratio based blood component therapy in the acutely 
injured patients and even less is known regarding its effects in patients with TBI.    
 
     Permissive hypotension has  been thought  to improve outcome in injured patients with 
hemorrhagic shock  in the  prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355044].34-[ADDRESS_442016] simultaneously been monitoring  
 
Figure 1  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
4 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
WB patients for hemolytic side effects from ABO mismatched whole blood.42 In 27 non -group O 
patients, there were no significant differences in laboratory hemolysis markers . (Figure 1) These 
preliminary and published data verify the feasibility and safety of this type of intervention in 
patients with hemorrhagic shock, providing the backdrop for the successful execution of the proposed observational cohort . Other trauma centers in the LITES Network are initiating and 
executing similar WB programs which we will utilize for the current proposal.   
 
Objectives/Specific Aims/Hypothesis  
 
     Due to the need to robustly characterize the safety and efficacy of cold -stored, urgent release, 
whole blood resuscitation in poly -trauma patients and provide essential insight into the most 
appropriate resuscitative target for injured patients with  both hemorrhagic shock and TBI, we 
propose the following primary AIMs.  
 
AIM#1 : Evaluate  patient centered outcomes associated with early whole blood resuscitation 
practice as compared to component resuscitation in poly-trauma patients  with hemorrhagic shock  
and further characterize outcome benefits in those with traumatic brain injury . 
  
AIM#2 : Characterize blood pressure and resusci tation endpoints  during the acute resuscitation 
phase of care and the associated/attributable outcomes for traumatic brain injury  in patients with 
hemorrhagic shock.  
 
Hypothesis #1 A: Whole blood resuscitation will be associated with a lower 4  hour mortality in 
poly-trauma patients as compared to those resuscitated with component therapy . 
 
Hypothesi s #1B : Whole blood resuscitation will be associated with a lower incidence of 12 hour 
and 24 hour mortality, a lower incidence of death from exsanguination, incidence of MOF, 
nosocomial infection, improved transfusion ratios, lower overall blood transfusion requirements 
and shorter time to hemostasis as compared to those resuscitated with component therapy.  
 
Hypothesis #1C : Whole blood resuscitation will be associated with an improved Glasgow 
Outcome Score -Extended at [ADDRESS_442017] injury as compared to those resuscitated with 
component therapy  in patie nts with traumatic brain injury.  
 
Hypothesis #2A : A nadir prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355045] 120 mmHg will be associated with improved traumatic brain injury outcomes at discharge and at 6 months.  
 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
5 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Hypothesis #2B : The magnitude of the dose depth curve of systolic blood pressure during the 
prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355046] 6 months following traumatic brain injury.  
 
Research Design and Methods  
 
Study Design: The LITES N etwork will perform a multicenter, prospective, observational cohort 
study over a [ADDRESS_442018] component resuscitation. The study will also  further  
characterize blood pressure and resuscitation endpoints  in poly-
trauma patients with traumatic brain injury . Six trauma sites with 
appropriate characteristics will be selected from network sites across the country. ( Figure 2 ) 
 
Study Setting : The study will be performed utilizing busy level I 
trauma  centers from within the LITES N etwork located across the 
country, at sites where either whole blood has currently been incorporated into standard of care or where component blood transfusion is being utilized for patients in hemorrhagic shock at risk for large volume 
resuscitation.  Due to the paucity of trauma centers who are currently utilizing whole blood for  
trauma patients as standard of care, the potential to incorporate additonal sites may be required 
over time.  
 
Study Population : The study will focus on patients who suffer blunt or penetrating injury, 
transported to a Task Order 002 participating LITES trauma center with evidence of hemorrhagic 
shock  at risk of large volume resuscitation.  
 
Inclusion Criteria : Patients with blunt o r penetrating injury who meet the following cr iteria:  
1, 2, and 3  
 
1) Has 2 or more of any of the following:  
a. Hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤ 90 mmH g) in the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355047] [ADDRESS_442019] abdominal ultrasound is positive or equivocal  or deferred by [CONTACT_355076] a need for emergent 
laparotomy, thoracotomy, or vascular exploration.  
Figure 2  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
6 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
d. Heart Rate ≥ 120 in the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355048] 60 minutes of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_355049] . 
 
AND 
2) Taken to the Operating Room (laparotomy, thoracotomy or vascular exploration) or 
Interventional Radiology within 60 minutes of arrival.  
AND 
3) Blood/blood component transfusion in prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885],  ED or OR within 60 minutes 
of arrival . 
 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
1) Age < 15 
2) CPR > 5  consecutive minutes without ROSC  
3) Penetrating brain injury with brain matter exposed 
4) ED death  
5) Known pregnancy  
6) Known Prisoners  
 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be assessed based on available information at the time of 
enrollment.  Although all reasonable efforts will be made by [CONTACT_355077][INVESTIGATOR_355050], due t o the nature of the emergency pre-
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885], there may be occasions where the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355051], including qualifying vitals, from the referring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_355052] .  
In these instances, if,  after subsequent review of outside hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3491]/or EMS agency  
documentation, it is determined that the subject did not meet inclusion criteria and/or met 
exclusion criteria, the subject will remain enrolled in the study based on the information available 
at the time the subject was enrolled in the study . 
 
Recruitment and Consent  
Initial blood sampling must be performed as early as possible after arrival ( 0 (+ up to 2), 4 (+/- 2) 
and 24 hours (+/ - 12)). Because the initial early samples will be drawn before many subjects are 
able to consent due to their illness, and before surrogate decision- makers are typi[INVESTIGATOR_355053], we are requesting waivers of consent to be used for: A) initial medical record review 
to verify eligibility, and B) [ADDRESS_442020] 36 hrs of admission. Subjects whose medical conditions improve to the point of 
being able to make their own medical decisions will sign a consent to continue further study -
related procedures. Subjects who remain critic ally ill, receiving continuous or intermittent 
sedatives, who are obtunded/disoriented from illness or injury, or are unable to dictate their own care will have proxy consent obtained from their previously appointed power of attorney (if one 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
7 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
exists) or the  subject’s le gally authorized representative. If there is no designated LAR, a proxy 
will be selected consistent with state laws.  
 
Waiver of Consent [A]        Medical record review for the identification of potential subjects  
 
The research involves no mor e than minimal risk to the subjects  [45 CFR 46.116 (d)(1)] . 
 
The screening procedure poses minimal risk to the subjects. It involves a chart review to determine eligibility that will be performed on the medical records or by [CONTACT_124268]/treating 
clinician(s).  
 
The only risk is breach of confidentiality that will be minimized by [CONTACT_355078] a research code number; and storing the coded, de identified data on a 
secure pass word protected data base behind a University firewall.  
 
The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects  [45 CFR 
46.116 (d)(2)] . 
 
Access to and use of patient medical record information will be limited to the research study 
investigators and their staff who already have access to this PHI based on the clinical 
responsibilities of the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_355054] . 
 The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration [45 CFR 46.116 
(d)(3)] . 
 
It is not practicable to try to obtain consent simply  to identify eligible patient participants  
 
Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation [45 CFR 46.116 (d)(4)] . 
 It is unlikely that any information pertinent to the trauma patient's care wi ll be obtained through 
this limited recruitment activity.  
 
Waiver of Consent [B]   Blood sampling during the first 36  hrs of admission.  
 
The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects  [45 CFR 46.116 (d)(1)] . 
 
Blood samples for this study will be obtained in conjunction with draws for clinical care whenever 
possible. In cases where it is not possible to coordinate research sample collection with clinical 
sample collection, trauma patients will already have an ex isting central line that can be utilized to 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
8 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
obtain the sample or venipuncture will be performed by [CONTACT_355079].  
 
Obtaining three 20 ml samples of blood will pose only minimal risk to these patients as collection of the samples will be via existing vascular access using aseptic techniques.  
The risk of a breach of confidentiality will be minimized by [CONTACT_355078] a research code number; and storing the coded, de- identified data on a 
secure pass word protected data base behind a University firewall.  
 
The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects  [45 CFR 
46.116 (d)(2)] . 
 
The acquisition of blood samples will be performed by [CONTACT_355080], 
under the oversight of  the Principal Investigator, a physician with a research focus on 
coagulopathy, massive transfusion and clinical outcomes of traumatic injury  
 
The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration [45 CFR 46.116 
(d)(3)] . 
 Understanding the early response to whole blood administration, component therapy and hemorrhagic shock is an important focus of this proposal since early factors influence later events 
such as the development of multiple organ failure. Identifying and discovering which early 
mechanistic biomarkers might influence outcomes in this population is an important part of this study.   
 
Samples are required in the first  [ADDRESS_442021] to occur in relationship to this early whole blood and component 
transfusion window. Sampling beyond these early time points will not allow the main objectives of 
the study to be accomplished.  
 Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.   [45 CFR 46.116 (d)(4)].  
 
Subjects whose medical conditions improve to the point of being able to make their own medical 
decisions will sign a HIPAA -compliant consent to continue further study -related procedures. 
Subjects who remain critically ill, receiving continuous or intermitt ent sedatives, who are 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
9 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
obtunded/disoriented from illness or injury, or are unable to dictate their own care will have proxy 
consent obtained in compliance with local regulations.  
  
A Waiver of HIPAA Authorization is also requested and justified, to be used in conjunction 
with the Waiver of Consent [B], for the extraction of research data from the medical record.  
 To ensure that this research use of the PHI involves no greater than m inimal risk to privacy, 
describe your plan to protect patient -subject identifiers from improper use or disclosure . 
[45 CFR 164.512 (i)(2)(ii)(A)(1)]  
 All electronic data will be stored on a secure password protected server. Each subject will be given a uni que study identifier, which will be used for all patient samples and all clinical data 
sheets. The key to identify subjects with their unique study number will be kept on a secure drive 
and only accessed by [CONTACT_978], co -investigators or their designees accor ding to the University of 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355055].  
 
Describe your plan to destroy patient -subject identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with the research.   Indicate at what point in the research those identifiers will 
be destroyed.   If ap plicable, provide a health, research or legal justification for retaining 
the identifiers.  [45 CFR 164.512 (i)(2)(ii)(A)(2)]  
 
At the time of data entry , all patient identifiers will be stripped  and the data will be entered in a 
computerized database by [CONTACT_355081]. Any info 
collected in hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_355056] a locked area until data entry  is completed . Only the 
PI, co -investigators or their designees will have access to this password protected database.  A 
linkage to the actual patient will be kept on a separate secure password protected server .Provide 
your assurance that this information will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity (i.e., other than the listed investigators and their research staff), except as 
required by [CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for 
which the IRB has granted a waiver of the written HIPAA authorization.  [45 CF R 164.512 
(i)(2)(ii)(A)(3)] 
 All information generated in the course of the study  will be accessed by [CONTACT_355082]. Any sharing outside the University will be done with deidentified data.  
 Why could this research not practicably be conducted unless the waiver of written HIPAA 
authorization is granted? [45 CFR 164.512 (i)(2)(ii)(B)] . 
 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
10 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442022] information? [45 CFR 164.512 (i)(2)(ii)(C)] . 
 
It is not possible to conduct this time- sensitive research in the Emergency Department and ICUs 
unless we are able to collect real time data to meet the outcomes associated with whole blood vs 
blood component therapy such as time to hem ostasis, nosocomial infection,  transfusion reaction  
and multiple organ failure.  
 
Explain why the nature and amount of the medical record information that will be collected 
is felt to be the minimum necessary in order to conduct this research study.  [45 CFR 
164.514 (d)] . 
 
Only medical information that is pertinent to the outcomes will be collected.
 
 If no appropriate legally authorized representative can be identified, the subject’s ability to provide direct consent will be assessed until the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]. For subjects with some decision- making ability but who still require proxy consent , subjects’ assent for participation may 
be obtained verbally. If the subject improves to the point of being capable of his or her own medical decision- making, the subject’s consent will be obtained to continue participation. A copy of the 
informed consent  document may be placed in the medical record. The original informed consent 
document will be kept with the study records in a locked file cabinet and a copy given to the 
subject or the subject’s legally authorized representative. Consent and proxy consent  will be 
obtained by [CONTACT_355083].  
 
In cases where the LAR is not present in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], the consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_648]/fax 
or electronically. The study will  be discussed with the LAR over the telephone. If the LAR agrees, 
the consent form (ICF) will be e- mailed or faxed or texted to the number provided by [CONTACT_55639]. 
The research staff will go over the ICF with the Legally Authorized Representative. If the LAR 
agrees to participate in the research, the LAR will sign the ICF and send back to the research 
staff by [CONTACT_6791], text or scanned by e- mail. In cases where the proxy does not have access to a 
scanner or fax, they may take an electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_355057] 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
11 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442023] or their LAR will return the consent using a study provided postage paid envelope. If a signed consent 
document is not obtained, we don’t receive any signed no research activities will be performed 
nor data will be extracted from the medical record, beyond 36 hours period covered by [CONTACT_355084].  Samples and data acquired under those Waiver s will be 
retained.  
 
Whole Blood Transfusion Sites : Busy, Level [ADDRESS_442024] 
4 units of WB  will be selected for participation with preference given to ≥ 6 units urgent release 
WB capabiliti es. WB sites will be selected based upon the ability to enroll 33% of patients  for the 
overall cohort study. As WB resuscitation becomes increasingly more widely adopted , there exists 
the potential to include additional WB sites from within the network as respective institutional 
practice changes over the 4 year time point of the study. Similarly, t here exists the potential to 
incorporate additional trauma sites into the LITES network based upon their  abilities to enroll poly -
trauma patients in hemorrhagic shock and the utilization of WB resuscitation.  As different trauma 
sites may utilize differing WB products with different titer levels, matching processes, and 
leukocyte reducing capabilities, these WB characteristics will be document ed for all sites and  for 
all WB units and respective patients enrolled.  
 
Component Transfusion Sites : Busy, Level 1 trauma centers from within the LITES N etwork will 
be selected based upon the ability to enroll patients with the proposed inclusion and exclusion 
criteria  who currently utilize  initial ratio based resuscitation (1:1:1 or 1:1:2)  for patients at risk of  
large volume transfusion and are able to perform all necessary requirements for the planned 
prospective cohort study proposed.  There is the potential  for sites to differ based upon their 
current massive transfusion protocol and these  standard practices will be documented for each 
site.  
 
Primary TBI Subgroup Stratification: Pres ence or absence of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) will be 
the principle subgr oup stratification for the study. Presence of TBI will be based upon CT imaging 
results (classification: subarachnoid, subdural, intracerebral hemorrhage, intracranial injury , 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_13873], +/ - shift, multifocal with specific classification) and TBI severity w ill be characterized and 
grouped by [CONTACT_275762], Abbreviated Injury Severity (AIS) coding, ICD -10 head region severity scores 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
12 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442025] 
images (first two performed) from all part icipating sites in patients with a head abbreviated injury 
score of 2 or greater (head AIS >2). These images will allow the determination of Rotterdam CT 
head scores to appropriately  classify traumatic brain injury severity. Serial head CTs (first two) 
will also be assessed for progression of injury. An independent and blinded neuroradiologist from 
the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355058].  
 Due to t he nature of the population being studied, there will be patients who have clinically evident 
TBI but who do not have a head CT completed due to clinical intervention being a higher priority 
than diagnostic imaging. Often when patients require urgent clini cal interventions, diagnostic 
scans (including CTs) are deferred until the patient is stabilized and the emergent issue is 
resolved.  Unfortunately, this means that sometimes a patient expi[INVESTIGATOR_355059], and a 
CT is never obtained.  Therefore, pa tients who present in extremis with a clinically obvious TBI 
(eg: unhelmeted motorcyclist, falls from height, etc.) will be included in the TBI sub -group even if 
they do not have head CTs completed.  
 
Primary  Study  Outcome : The cohort study will be principally powered using [ADDRESS_442026] appropriate for hemorrhagic shock clinical trials .24,43 Promoting survival beyond this 
time period may represent  the critical period that is required for an injured patient to be transported 
to a higher echelon of care, particularly when injury occurs in austere environments.  
 
Secondary Non-TBI Clinical Outcomes : Secondary clinical outcomes will include 12 hr mortality, 
24hr mortality, 28 day mortality, time to hemostasis  (defined by a WB or PRBC transfusion rate; 
≤ 1unit/hour and surgeon directed intraoperative assessment ), death from 
exsanguination/hemorrhage, blood and blood component transfusion requirem ents (over 1st four 
hours and total at 24hrs ), Multiple Organ Failure, nosocomial i nfection,  transfusion reaction, 
venous thromboembolism  (VTE) , ICU free days and v entilator free days . 
 
TBI Specific Outcomes : For the overall TBI subgroup, the principle outcome will be 6 month 
Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS -E). Additional TBI specific outcomes will include 
hemodynamic parameters (serial systolic and diastolic blood pressure and heart rate 
measurem ents), prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], arrival,  serial and discharge Glasgow Coma Scale scores, need for 
craniectomy/craniotomy, need for mannitol administration, need for paralysis, need for barbiturate 
coma, need for hypertonic saline administration, need for ICP monitoring, ICP pressures  (initial, 
max daily x 7 days) , TBI progression based  upon serial CT imaging in initial [ADDRESS_442027] (GOAT score) at discharge . Each accrual site will 
transfer the TBI patient’s name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and basic injury characteristics, GOAT 
results, and discharge disposition  to the Clinical Coordinating Center in Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109].  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
13 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Suicidal or emotionally distressed participants: If a participant reports suicidal ideation during the 
GOS -E, a risk assessment will be performed immediately by a trained neuropsychological 
technician under the supervision of a licensed  neuropsychologist. If the participant is found to 
NOT be at imminent risk, resources will be given to the participant in the form of the Suicide 
Hotline and The Brain Injury Association of America website URL.  The technician will compose 
a 'Note To File'  detailing their assessment and will make the other study team members aware of 
their assessment. If the participant is found to be at imminent risk, the technician will encourage 
the participant to go to their nearest local emergency room. These actions w ill be noted in the 
case file.  
 
Predefined Subgroups : Predefined subset analyses in addition to  principle  TBI subgroup analysi s 
will be performed looking at 1)  patients enrolled from the scene of injury versus those enrolled 
from a referral hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 2)  patients with a preinjury history of vitamin K antagonist medication 
versus those without, 3 ) patients with preinjury history of an tiplatelet medication versus those 
without , 4) patients with preinjury history of novel anti coagulant use versus those without , 5) 
patients who ultimately did or did not require massive transfusion ( ≥ [ADDRESS_442028] 24hrs) , 
6) patients who ultimately did or did not meet a critical transfusion threshold of ≥ 4 units PRBCs 
or whole blood in a 2 hour time period,  7) patients who ultimately did or did not require ≥ [ADDRESS_442029] 24hrs , 8) patients who did or did not receive leukocyte reduction WB products, 9)  
TBI patients who did or did not receive a craniectomy/ craniotomy, 10 ) TBI patients who did or did 
not require ICP monitoring.  It is recognized that the study is not appropriately powered for these 
subgroup comparisons and the results and conclusions formulated from these subgroup analyses 
will be considered exploratory in nature and will not be  used as a basi s for treatment 
recommendations.  
       
Specific Outcome Definitions : 
 
Denver MOF Score : The appropriate classification and timing of  mortality will be captured 
in the data elements collected as described above. 
Of similar importance is the morbidity which ensues 
for those who survive their initial injury. Data elements that include the ability to calculate the 
Denver post -injury multiple organ failure score
44-[ADDRESS_442030] 7  days for those who 
are admitted to the ICU > 48 hours. ( Figure 3) A total 
score > [ADDRESS_442031] -injury day 7 or ICU 
discharge. Patients not residing in the ICU will be 
given a score of 0. If data elements are missing on 
specific days, the individual score for that missing 
component will be obtained from the prior day’s  
laboratory values.     
Figure 3 .  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
14 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
 
Nosocomial Infection/Sepsis Data Elements : Nosocomial infections and sepsis outcomes 
will be derived fr om microbiology records and based upon positive cul ture evidence 
including bronchoalveolar  specimens, blood cultures, wound cultures, organ space 
cultures and urinary tract cultures.  Over the first 30 days of admission, quantification and 
location of speci men and classification of organism (Gram+, Gram -, species) will be 
collected. Quantitative thresholds for ventilator associated pneumonia, catheter related 
blood stream infections and urinary tract infection will be utilized as determined by [CONTACT_355085]  (www.cdc.gov/nhsn ). 
 
Time to Hemostasis:  The time to hemostasis outcome variable will be determined by [CONTACT_355086] a nadir transfusion requirement of [ADDRESS_442032] 4 hours, the patient will be designated 
a ‘non- hemostasis’ patient . 
 
Death from Exsanguination/Hemorrhage : Those patients who succumb on the operating 
table, IR suite or ICU due to uncontrolled coagulopathy or hemorrhage in the first [ADDRESS_442033] their mortality classified as exsanguination/hemorrhage. This will be determined by [CONTACT_355087].   
 
Acute Hemolytic Transfusion Reaction: We will utilize and characterize acute hemolytic 
transfusion reactions as defined by [CONTACT_6750]/National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) 
Hemovigilance Surveillance definition ( www.cdc.gov/nhsn ). 
 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
15 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442034] 
(GOAT) : For TBI subjects, we  will obtain the 
GOAT score at the time of discharge and the 
calculated score per standard methods.48 
(Figure 4) GOAT is a 10- item questionnaire 
used to quickly assess post -traumatic 
amnesia following head injury. The GOAT is read orally to the patient and may be easily administered at the bedside. The total score 
accounts for orientation of person, place, and 
time, and recollection of events  pre and post - 
injury. Cutoff scores are available to identify 
abnormal, borderline, and normal orientation 
and it  will additionally determine if a subject is 
able to provide continuing participation consent if consented by [CONTACT_355088].  
Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale (6 months -
GOSE ): For TBI subjects, the  GOSE score will 
be obtained at 6 months +/ - 1month by [CONTACT_355089] , whichever  is 
feasible. For those TBI subjects who were 
unable to consent at discharge, the GOAT will 
be administered to assess their ability to 
provide direct consent, prior to the 
administration of the GOSE.   When the 
assessment is done by [CONTACT_648], the verbal 
consent of participants who have regained the ability to consent, will be obtained to allow the GOSE to be completed.  The score is able to characterize 6 month functional status 
into 8 well defined categories as shown in (Figure 5) .  
 
Classification of Mortality : Classification of the underlying mechanisms responsible for 
mortality are essential to appropriately characterize regional variation and preventable 
morbidity and mortality. Classification of mortality outcomes will be assigned at the level 
of the enrolling institution by [CONTACT_355090]. A predefined list of mortality 
classifications will be provided and adjudicated upon at the site level and will include 1 ) 
Hemorrhage/ Exsanguination, 2) TBI/herniation, 3) Multisystem Organ Failure, 4) Sepsis, 
5) ARDS, 6 ) Coagulopathy, 7) Cardiac Arrest  with 1 -6, 8) Pulmonary Embolism, 9) 
Withdrawal of Care as well as other pertinent causes of injury related death.  
 
Figure 5  
Figure 4 

 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
16 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Clinical Laboratory Endpoints : Measurements of hemostasis (TEG, PT/PTT, INR ; 0 hour(+ up to  
2 hours ), 4 hour (+/-2 hours ) and 24 hour  (+/-12 hours )) for all patients and  hemolysis labs (LDH, 
haptoglobin, bilirubin ; 0 hour (+up to 2 hours ), 4 hour (+/- 2 hours ), and 24 hour  (+/- 12hours) ) for 
all patients will be obtained.  Plasma  samples for mechanistic outcomes will be drawn,  stored, 
aliquoted and banked . The timing of all laboratory draws will follow local state and central IRB 
guidelines and local IRB guidelines at those sites who  do not cede those guidelines to the central 
IRB at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109]. The specific  planned timing of draws are shown in  (TABLE 
1).   
 
Screening/Outcome Data and Sample Collection: Patients will be screened for inclusion and 
exclusion criteria for the cohort study at the time of or soon after trauma center arrival and will 
undergo early blood sampling ( Arrival + up to 2hrs ). LITES N etwork sites selected for the 
prospective cohort s tudy will have the capabilities to follow the patient to the OR, IR suite or ICU 
to obtain samples/labs and to record and monitor ongoing resuscitation, blood and blood 
component transfusion, mortality time points, time to hemostasis and death due to exsanguination for up to 4 hours  from arrival or 
until hemostasis is obtained or 
patient death occurs . Due to the 
early requirement of initial 
blood samples for this cohort 
study, a waiver of consent for 
the initial patient screening and 
early blood draws (first 36hrs post-injury) will be obtained 
from the  
 central IRB. When available,  
blood samples will be drawn from an indwelling catheter (arterial o r venous) . If no 
indwelling catheter is available, then venipuncture will be performed following standard state and IRB requirements. 
Clinical laboratory samples  will 
be sent at each LITES N etwork 
site following each sites 
laboratory guideline/requirements. Blood samples for storage will be drawn, centrifuged, 
separated, processed, and stored at -80°C for batched shippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The schedule of proposed data 
and sampling can be found in ( TABLE 1 ). 
 TABLE 1.  
 
 
 
 
Procedures/Measurements  
Prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355060] (+up to2 
hours)  
4 hours  (+/-2 hours) 
post admission  
24 hours  (+/-12 
hours)  post 
admission  
At discharge 
At 6 months  (+/- 1 
monht)  
Whole blood administration   x X    
Component therapy administration   x X    
Resuscitation data (WB, component 
transfusion)  x x X x x  
Survival   x X x x x 
Mechanistic Banked Samples   x X x   
Hemostasis (PT, INR, TEG)   x X x   
Hemolysis Labs                                                      
(Lactate Dehydrogenase, haptoglobin, 
bilirubin)   x X x   
Mechanistic Biomarkers   x X x   
CBC  x x x   
Serial Vitals (GCS, Blood pressure, Heart 
rate)  x x X x   
GOAT (Galvenston Orientation Amnesia 
Test) +     x  
Extended Glasgow Coma Scale +      x +TBI Subjects  
 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
17 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Clinical Coordinating Center : Clinical Coordination specific for Task Order 002 will be performed 
by [CONTACT_355091] (Multidisciplinary Acute Care Research Organization) and its dedicated research 
team at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], including all regulatory requirements, provider and 
coordinat or training and monitoring.  
 
Institutional Review Board: A central IRB will be utilize d at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355061] . All current LITES N etwork sites have 
IRBs which  have experience and engagement with central IRB procedures. A wa iver of initial 
consent up to 36 hours for screening and early sampling will be obtained from the central  IRB 
allowing early sampling prior to consent . 
 
Data Coordinating Center  (DCC) : Data Coordination specific for Task Order [ADDRESS_442035] with all statistical analyses.  
 
Data Collection : Based upon the ability to appropriately  execute AIMs I and II, the associated 
hypotheses generated and the primary and secondary outcomes proposed, the following data will 
be obtained on enrolled patients:  
 
Demographic  and Injury Data: Age, gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, 
mechanism  of injury, ISS, AIS scores , serial vitals (blood pressure, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_862]), presence of TBI , ICU days, ventilator day, length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] , patient medication 
and past medical hi story.   
Prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] D ata: Time of injury, scene time, serial vital signs (GCS, blood pressure, 
heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]), transport characteristics, times and description of prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355062] (intubation, lines), medications , medic qualifications, crystalloid fluids, blood 
or blood component transfusion, adjuncts including tranexamic acid.  
ED Data:  Arrival time, serial vitals (GCS, blood pressure, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]), 
procedures , meds, resuscitation requirements ( crystalloid , blood or blood component), 
adjuncts including tranexamic acid, factor VII, PCC, fibrinogen, ED disposition.  
OR Data : Procedures,  operations,  resuscitation requirements ( crystalloid, blood or blood 
component ), type of anesthesia, vasopressor requirement, adjuncts including tranexamic 
acid,  factor VII, PCC, fibrinogen,  disposition, serial vitals (blood pressure, heart rate) , OR 
disposition, core temperature.  
Resuscitation Data: Whole blood resuscitation, time of transfusion, WB characteristics 
(titer, blood type, matched/unmatched, leukocyte reduced, platelet sparing), component 
blood resuscitation, time of transfusion, transfusion ratios, adjuncts including t ranexamic 
acid, factor VII, PCC, fibrinogen.  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
18 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Outcome D ata: 4 hour, 6 hour and 24 hour mortality , MOF  score (7days), nosocomial 
infection, acute hemolytic transfusion reaction, cause of mortality, time to hemostasis, 
venous thromboembolism (VTE) . 
TBI Data: Serial GCS, TBI severity (AIS codes), TBI classification (subarachnoid, 
subdural, intracerebral hemo rrhage, epi[INVESTIGATOR_13873], +/ - shift, multifocal with specific 
classification) TBI progression, ICP data, operative intervention, paralysis, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_355063], hypertonic resuscitation, GOAT and GOSE at discharge and [ADDRESS_442036] de -identified data configured for 
compi[INVESTIGATOR_355064].   
 
Mechanistic Banked Samples : Samples within the 0  hour (+ up to  2 hours ), at 4  hours (+/- 2 hours ) 
and 24 hours (+/ - 12 hours ) will collected and stored for analyses. We will perform batched sample 
analyses of enrolled patient subgroups  +/- coagulopathy  and +/ - TBI across the receipt of WB vs. 
component therapy . We will measure markers of endothelial cell injury including Syndecan- 1 and 
Hyaluronan,  markers of neurological injury and  neuron cell death including S100B protein and 
Neuron Specific Enolase (NSE) , and end points of c oagulopathy including Thrombin- antithrombin 
complex (TAT), activated Protein C (aPC), tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA) and Plasminogen 
Activator Inhibitor (PAI -1). 
 
Sample Tracking, Management and Storage: After sample obtainment, processing and storage,  
samples will initially be batched sent to the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355065], managed and stored until the necessary translational or mechanistic  
measurement are performed. The CCC and DCC have a long track  recor d of coordinating such 
processes . 
 
Power Analysis : The prospective cohort study will utilize time to [ADDRESS_442037] an to initiate sampling on 1,050  
patients over the enrollment time period of the study. With an 85% consent rate which is an 
estimate based upon prior studies of similar nature, we will consent for participation 892 patients 
for the study. Wit h an estimate baseline rate of 4 hour mortality of 11.1 % derived from the 
PROPPR study, there will be 90% power to detect a hazard ratio of 1.9.  
 Calculations are based on the primary aim of the study based on the following assumptions:  
• Type I error rate of 0.05  
• Two-sided alternative hypothesis  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
19 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
• 6 sites will be involved, three whole blood and three  component sites  
• Each site will enroll 175 participants in 3.5 years of enrollment, of which, 85% will be 
eligible for the study (149)  
• The calculations are based on Cox proportional hazard model  
• A 4 hour event rate in the control (non -whole blood) group of 0.[ADDRESS_442038] ratio that can be detected over a range of event rates in the 
control group is also presented in Table 1.  
Table 1: Detecta ble Effect Sizes Event Rate in the Control Group  
Event Rate                .[ADDRESS_442039] Rate  2.69  1.70  .37  .30  .27  .30 
 
• For Aim 1C, a nonparametric analysis of variance will be used to compare the distribution 
of the GOS -E between the two groups. An effect size of 0.17 could be detected.  
• For aim 2A, a nonparametric analysis of variance will be used to compare the distribut ion 
of the GOS -E between the two groups. An effect size of 0.28 could be detected.  
• For aim 2B, a nonparametric correlation coefficient will be used to assess the association 
between GOS -E and the area under the systolic blood pressure curve. For each, a 95% 
confidence interval with a width of 0.19 can be estimated.  
• For all secondary analyses, the type I error rate was set to 0.05, with a two- sided 
alternative hypothesis, and 90% power. For the Aim 1, the sample size will be 1,190. For 
Aim 2, the sample size will be limited to those with a traumatic brain injury. For the 
purposes of this study, this is expected to be 35% or a total of 417 participants.  
Analyses  
  
AIM# 1: The analysis will begin by [CONTACT_355092]. The characteristics will be 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
20 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442040] for differ ences between 
the proportions. For continuous characteristics, m eans (medians) and standard deviations 
(interquartile ranges) will be calculated and t -tests (Wilcoxon) will be used to compare the means 
(distributions) among those who receive and do not receive whole blood.  
 
Hypothesis#1A : For the primary outcome, the  time to death will be generated for each participant.  
Kaplan- Meier curves will be generated for each treatment group and a log -rank test will be used 
to compare the distribution of the cumulative proportion.   A hierarchical  Cox-proportional hazards 
regression  model will be used to control for the within -institution clustering. The hierarchical Cox -
proportional hazards  regression model will then be used to assess the independent impact of 
whole blood on time to death after controlling for the clustering effect and potential confounding 
effect s of baseline characteristics. The model will include main effects for whole blood usage and 
a propensity sc ore for receiving whole blood. The propensity score for the use of whole blood will 
be generated using a boos ted logistic regression model. The dependent variable in the model will 
be the use of whole blood and the independent variables will be the baseline characteristics of 
the population.  The Cox -proportional hazards model will be used to estimate t he cumulative 
probability of death 4 hours.  
 
Hypothesis #1B: The analytic approach for the secondary outcomes included in Hypothesis#1B 
will vary  based on the type of outcome. For binary outcomes (e.g., 12 hour and 24 hour mortality, 
death from exsanguinati on, incidence of MOF, nosocomial infection), the same analytic approach 
that was carried out for Hypothesis 1a will be implemented.   
 
For continuous outcomes (e.g., transfusion ratios, blood transfusion requirements) a two-
sided t -test for correlated mean s will be used to compare the means between those receiving and 
not receiving whole blood. A hierarchical analysis of variance model will be used to control for the  
within -institution clustering. The model will be used to assess the independent impact of w hole 
blood after controlling for the clustering effect and the potential confounding. The model will 
include main effects for whole blood usage and propensity for receiving whole blood.   
 
Finally, for time to event analyses (e.g., time to hemostasis), a bivariate hierarchical Cox 
proportional hazards regression model will be generated to compare the time to event between 
those receiving and those not receiving whole blood. Again, the hierarchical model will be used 
to control for within- institution c luster ing. In a second step, to determine the independent effect of 
whole blood after controlling for potential confounding effects, the propensity score will be added to the model.  
 
Hypothesis#1C : A two -sided z -test for correlated proportions will be used to compare the 
distribution of GOS -E proportions between those receiving and not receiving whole blood. This 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
21 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version [ADDRESS_442041] s of baseline 
characteristics. The model will include main effects for whole blood usage and propensity for 
receiving whole blood.  
 
AIM#2 : The analyses for the second aim will be restricted to the subset of participants who will be 
characterized as having a traumatic brain injury.   
 
Hypothesis#2A : The analysis will begin by [CONTACT_355093] a 
prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355066] t o [ADDRESS_442042] for differences between the proportions. For continuous 
characteristics, means (medians) and standard deviations (interquartile ranges) will be calculated and t -test (Wilcoxon) test will be used to compare the means (distributions) among those who 
receive and do not receive whole blood.   
 
A two -sided z -test for correlated proportions will be used to compare the distribution proportions 
of GOS -E at [ADDRESS_442043] s of baseline characteristics. As was done in Aim#1A, 
the propensity for a prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355067] 120 mmHg will be generated  using a boosted logistic regression model which will 
include all baseline characteristics, including site and whole blood usage.  The same analytic approach will be used to measure outcomes at discharge except a hierarchical logistic regression model will be used.  
 
Hypothesis#2B : The area under the curve of systolic blood pressure during the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355068]. The analysis will begin by 
[CONTACT_355094]. For discrete variables, 
bivariate linear regression models will be generated (area under the curve as the dependent 
variable and the discrete baseline characteristic  as the independent variable). For continuous 
characteristics, the correlation will be assessed.   
 
Hierarchical models will be used to adjust for within- institution clustering. Hierarchical bivariate  
linear regression models will be used to assess the association of baseline characteristics associa ted with area under the curve. A stratified propensity analysis will be used to estimate the 
association of area under the c urve with GOS -E at six months. A hierarchical linear regression 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
22 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
model will be generated using the area under the curve as the dependent variable and the 
baseline characteristics as independent variables to generate an estimated area under the curve 
(propensity score) for each subject. The population will then be separated into five strata of equal sample size, based on the propensity. Within each stratum, the association of the area under the 
curve with outcome will be assessed using a hierarchical polytomous logi stic regression model 
(outcome: GOS -E at six months, independent variable:  area under the curve).   
 To determine the association across strata and if the association differs across strata, a 
multinomial polytomous regression model with GOS -E at six months as the outcome, area under 
the curve, an indicator of stratum, and the two- way interaction as independent variables w ill be 
fit.   
 The same analytic approach will be used to measure outcomes at discharge except a hierarchical 
logistic regression model will be used.   
 
Subgroup Analysis : The general approach to assess the homogeneity of a treatment effect across 
subgroup will be to include an interaction term between the treatment variable and the 
characteristics defining the subgroup in the regression model. A statistically significant interaction term would indicate that the null hypothesis of a homogenous effect would be rejected indicating a differential effect of the treatment across the subgroups. For example, when examining the homogeneity of the effect of whole blood on the primary outcome among those with and without 
a traumatic brain injury, the hierarchical logi stic model will be modified to include a main effect for 
traumatic brain injury and the two -way interaction between whole blood use and traumatic brain 
injury.  
 
Interim Analysis : There will be two aspects of the interim analysis. First, for efficacy, the Lan and 
Demets approach will be utilized to conduct the interim efficacy analysis. This approach is 
preferable over other approaches because it is flexible to the number of interim analyses 
conducted during the course of the study. The Lan and DeMets approach requires the use of a 
spending function to allocate the type I error to the interim analysis. The O’Brien and Fleming 
spending function which minimizes the type I error allocated to the interim analysis, saving the 
vast majority for the primary analyses  will be used. For the proposed interim analysis, assuming 
that 50% of the study will be completed, it is estimated that the type I error allocated to the interim analysis will be 0.005, leaving 0.048 of the type I error for the primary outcome analysis .
 
  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
23 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
Time Line:  The study will occur over a 4 year period with a 6 month start up period, an interim 
analysis at 2 years and a 3.5 year enrollment period.  
  

 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
24 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 1. Rhee P, Joseph B, Pandit V, et al. Increasing trauma deaths in the [LOCATION_002]. Ann 
Surg. 2014;260(1):13- 21. 
2. Kauvar DS, Lefering R, Wade CE. Impact of hemorrhage on trauma outcome: an overview 
of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], clinical presentations, and therapeutic c onsiderations. J Trauma. 
2006;60([ADDRESS_442044]):S3 -11. 
3. Hoyt DB. A clinical review of bleeding dilemmas in trauma. Semin Hematol. 2004;41([ADDRESS_442045] 1):40 -43. 
4. Coronado VG, Xu L, Basavaraju SV, et al. Surveillance for traumatic brain injury -related 
deaths --[LOCATION_002], 1997- 2007. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2011;60(5):1- 32. 
5. Curry N, Hopewell S, Doree C, Hyde C, Brohi K, Stanworth S. The acute management of 
trauma hemorrhage: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care. 
2011;15(2):R92.  
6. Curry N,  Stanworth S, Hopewell S, Doree C, Brohi K, Hyde C. Trauma- Induced 
Coagulopathy -A Review of the Systematic Reviews: Is There Sufficient Evidence to Guide 
Clinical Transfusion Practice? Transfus Med Rev. 2011.  
7. Hawryluk GW, Bullock MR. Past, Present, and Future of Traumatic Brain Injury Research. 
Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2016;27(4):[ADDRESS_442046] B. Predicting 
life-threatening coagulopathy in the massi vely transfused trauma patient: hypothermia and 
acidoses revisited. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):857- 861; discussion 861- 852. 
9. Patt A, McCroskey BL, Moore EE. Hypothermia -induced coagulopathies in trauma. Surg 
Clin North Am. 1988;68(4):[ADDRESS_442047] WB. Acidosis -induced coagulopathy. Surg 
Forum. 1979;30:471 -473. 
11. Shaz BH, Winkler AM, James AB, Hillyer CD, Macleod JB. Pathophysiology of Early Trauma -Induced Coagulopathy: Emerging Evidence for Hemodilution and Coagulation 
Factor Depletion. J Trauma. 2011.  
12. Gentilello LM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355069]. Trauma critical care. Am J Resp ir Crit Care Med. 2001;163(3 
Pt 1):604- 607. 
13. Wilson RF, Dulchavsky SA, Soullier G, Beckman B. Problems with 20 or more blood transfusions in 24 hours. Am Surg. 1987;53(7):410- 417. 
14. Ferrara A, MacArthur JD, Wright HK, Modlin IM, McMillen MA. Hypotherm ia and acidosis 
worsen coagulopathy in the patient requiring massive transfusion. Am J Surg. 
1990;160(5):515 -518. 
15. Moore EE. Thomas G. Orr Memorial Lecture. Staged laparotomy for the hypothermia, 
acidosis, and coagulopathy syndrome. Am J Surg. 1996;172( 5):405 -410. 
16. Holcomb JB. Methods for improved hemorrhage control. Crit Care. 2004;[ADDRESS_442048] 2:S57 -
60. 
17. Shackford SR, Mackersie RC, Holbrook TL, et al. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_355070]. A 
population- based analysis. Arch Surg. 1993;128(5):571 -575. 
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
25 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
18. Holcomb JB. Traditional transfusion practices are changing. Crit Care. 2010;14(3):162.  
19. Holcomb JB, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_39102]. Optimal use of blood in trauma patients. Biologicals. 
2010;38(1):[ADDRESS_442049] 6 hours of massive transfusion improves 
outcomes in a large multicenter study. Am J Surg. 2009;197(5):565- 570; discussion 570.  
21. Borgman MA, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_39102], Perkins JG, et al. The ratio of blood products transfused affects 
mortality in patients receiving massive transfusions at a combat support hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. J 
Trauma. 2007;63(4):805 -813. 
22. Holcomb JB. Damage control resuscitation. J Trauma. 2007;62([ADDRESS_442050]):S36- 37. 
23. Holcomb JB, Jenki ns D, Rhee P, et al. Damage control resuscitation: directly addressing 
the early coagulopathy of trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62(2):307 -310. 
24. Holcomb JB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al. Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red blood 
cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2  ratio and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PROPPR 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(5):471- 482. 
25. Strandenes G, Berseus O, Cap AP, et al. Low titer group O whole blood in emergency 
situations. Shock. 2014;[ADDRESS_442051] 1:70 -75. 
26. Murdock AD, Berseus O, Hervig T, Strandenes G, Lunde TH. Whole blood: the future of traumatic hemorrhagic shock resuscitation. Shock. 2014;[ADDRESS_442052] 1:62- 69. 
27. Chandler MH, Roberts M, Sawyer M, Myers G. The US military experience with fresh 
whole blood during the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2012;16(3):153 -159. 
28. Beckett A, Callum J, da Luz LT, et al. Fresh whole blood transfusion capability for Special 
Operations Forces. Can J Surg. 2015;58([ADDRESS_442053] 3):S153- 156. 
29. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_39102], Strandenes G, Rein EB, Seghatchian J, Hervig T. Symposium on fresh whole 
blood for severe hemorrhagic shock: from in- hospi[INVESTIGATOR_355071]. 
Transfus Apher Sci. 2012;46(1):113 -117. 
30. Yazer MH, Jackson B, Sperry JL, Alarcon L, Triulzi DJ, Murdock AD. Initial safety and 
feasibility of cold -stored uncrossmatched whole blood transfusion in civilian trauma 
patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(1):21- 26. 
31. Seheult JN, Triulzi DJ, Alarcon LH, Sperry JL, Murdock A, Yazer MH. Measur ement of 
haemolysis markers following transfusion of uncrossmatched, low -titer, group O+ whole 
blood in civilian trauma patients: initial experience at a level 1 trauma centre. Transfus 
Med. 2016.  
32. Bahr MP, Yazer MH, Triulzi DJ, Collins RA. Whole blood for the acutely haemorrhaging 
civilian trauma patient: a novel idea or rediscovery? Transfus Med. 2016.  
33. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_39102], Pi[INVESTIGATOR_355072], Strandenes G, et al. Whole blood for hemostatic resuscitation of major bleeding. Transfusion. 2016;[ADDRESS_442054] 2:S190- 202. 
34. Bickell WH, Wall MJ, Jr., Pepe PE, et al. Immediate versus delayed fluid resuscitation for 
hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injuries. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(17):1105-
1109.  
 
Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT)  
26 
LITES Task Order 2: Shock, Whole blood and Assessment of TBI (SWAT) . Version 5 dated 2019 -12-04 
35. Schreiber MA, Meier EN, Tisherman SA, et al. A controlled resusci tation strategy is 
feasible and safe in hypotensive trauma patients: results of a prospective randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_2284]. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(4):687 -695; discussion 695- 687. 
36. Dutton RP, Mackenzie CF, Scalea TM. Hypotensive resuscitation during  active 
hemorrhage: impact on in- hospi[INVESTIGATOR_34380]. J Trauma. 2002;52(6):1141- 1146.  
37. Theusinger OM, Madjdpour C, Spahn DR. Resuscitation and transfusion management in trauma patients: emerging concepts. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2012;18(6):661 -670. 
38. Berry C, Ley EJ, Bukur M, et al. Redefining hypotension in traumatic brain injury. Injury. 
2012;43(11):1833 -1837.  
39. Fuller G, Hasler RM, Mealing N, et al. The association between admission systolic blood 
pressure and mortality in significant traumatic brain injury: a multi -centre cohort study. 
Injury. 2014;45(3):612 -617. 
40. Spaite DW, Hu C, Bobrow BJ, et al. Mortality and Prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_355073]: Implications for the Hypotension Threshold. JAMA 
Surg. 2017;152( 4):360- 368. 
41. Vrettos T, Poimenidi E, Athanasopoulos P, et al. The effect of permissive hypotension in combined traumatic brain injury and blunt abdominal trauma: an experimental study in 
swines. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016;20(4):620- 630. 
42. Seheult  JN, Triulzi DJ, Alarcon LH, Sperry JL, Murdock A, Yazer MH. Measurement of 
haemolysis markers following transfusion of uncrossmatched, low -titre, group O+ whole 
blood in civilian trauma patients: initial experience at a level 1 trauma centre. Transfus 
Med. 2017;27(1):30- 35. 
43. Fox EE, Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Bulger EM, Tilley BC, Group PS. Earlier Endpoints are 
Required for Hemorrhagic Shock Trials Among Severely Injured Patients. Shock. 
2017;47(5):567 -573. 
44. Sauaia A, Moore EE, Johnson JL, et al. Temporal  trends of postinjury multiple- organ 
failure: still resource intensive, morbid, and lethal. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2014;76(3):582 -592, discussion 592- 583. 
45. Sauaia A, Moore EE, Johnson JL, Ciesla DJ, Biffl WL, Banerjee A. Validation of postinjury multiple organ failure scores. Shock. 2009;31(5):438- 447. 
46. Sauaia A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Norris JM, Lezotte DC, Hamman RF. Multiple organ failure can be predicted as early as 12 hours after injury. J Trauma. 1998;45(2):291- 301; 
discussion 301- 293. 
47. Sauai a A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Haenel JB, Read RA, Lezotte DC. Early predictors of 
postinjury multiple organ failure. Arch Surg. 1994;129(1):39- 45. 
48. Levin HS, O'Donnell VM, Grossman RG. The Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test. A practical scale to assess c ognition after head injury. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1979;167(11):675 -
684. 
 