 
 
 A Mobile Personal Health Record for Behavioral Health Homes  
IRB00067447   
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
A Mobile Personal Health Record for Behavioral Health Homes  
 
Protocol Dated June 13th, 2017 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Project  Summary/Abstract  
 
Poor  quality  of medical  care is a major  contributor  to excess  medical  morbidity  and premature mortality  
in persons  with serious  mental  illnesses  (SMI).  To address  this problem,  community  mental  health providers  
are increasingly  partnering with safety  net medical  providers  to develop behavioral  health homes,  integrated  
clinics  in which  persons  with SMI receive coordinated medical  and mental  health care.  However,  behavioral  
health homes  have faced  logistical and privacy  challenges  in integrating  electronic  medical  records  across  
organizations.  This application  proposes  to develop and test a mobile  Personal  Health Record  (mPHR)  to 
overcome this problem  while  more  fully engaging  patients  in their health care.  The mPHR will have  the 
capability  to access medical  and mental  health  medication and lab data in real time;  to help clients  set and 
maintain health  and lifestyle  goals;  to provide medication and appointment  prompts  and reminders;  and to 
facilitate  communication  with providers  via asynchronous  communication with the EHRs.  
This three- phase  study  will develop,  test, and disseminate the mPHR.  During  the first phase,  we will 
develop the app building  on experience and preliminary  data from a PC-based PHR project,  and link it to the 
medical  and mental  health EHR in a behavioral  health home.  During  the second phase,  we will conduct  a 
randomized trial of the mPHR  in 300 subjects  randomized to the mPHR or usual  care.  The study  will use an 
adaptive design,  which  will implement  the app in five 6-month  cohorts  of 60 subjects.  After  each cohort,  the 
app will be updated  based  on feasibility  and acceptability  findings,  new research and commercial  
developments  in PHR apps,  and changes  in usual  care in the clinic  and community  practice.  Analyses  will 
examine overall  effects  of the intervention,  and whether  there is a change in its benefits  across  study  cohorts.  
Study  outcomes  will include  quality  of preventive and cardiovascular  care;  patient  activation and provider  
management  of chronic  illness;  and service  use including  medication  compliance,  missed  appointments,  
emergency  department  use, and costs  of care from a societal  and managerial  perspective.  During  the final 
phase of the intervention,  the app will be disseminated to behavioral  health homes  across  the country  through  
a national  technical  assistance center.  
The proposed study  will apply  a novel  technology  that has not previously  been studied in mental  
health settings,  will be conducted in a new organizational  model  of care that is anticipated  to become  
widespread in community  mental  health in the coming  years,  and will use an innovative adaptive design that 
will ensure that the intervention  remains  relevant  and updated throughout  the study  period.  A multidisciplinary  
team  including mental  health services researchers,  experts  in information  technology  and app design,  and 
policymakers  with expertise in public  sector  integration will help ensure that the study  results  will help 
transform  care delivery  in mental  health safety  net setting s. 
Project  Narrative 
 
This study  will be the first to test a mobile  PHR for use in behavioral  health homes.  If successful,  it will 
provide a vital tool for empowering patients  and improving  quality  of care in these emerging  models  of service  
delivery.  
II. SPECIFIC  AIMS  
A long literature  has demonstrated that persons  with serious  mental  illnesses  have poor quality  of 
medical  care,  1 which  is a major  contributor  to excess  medical  morbidity  and premature  mortality.2  In response  
to this public  health problem,  an emerging  model  of care has developed - the behavioral  health home  – a clinic  
based in a community  mental  health center,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_764623] a safety  net medical  
provider,  where persons  with serious  mental  illnesses  receive coordinated medical  and mental  health care.[ADDRESS_1047702]  important  features  of organized  
models  of care delivery.  6 
In general  medical  populations,  electronic  Personal  Health  Records  (PHRs)  have shown considerable  
promise in reshapi[INVESTIGATOR_764624]- centered.  With the growing  use and 
capabilities  of smartphones  even amongst  disadvantaged sectors  of the population,  there  is an opportunity  to 
develop PHRs  for mobile  platforms,  or mobile  Personal  Health  Records  (mPHRs).7    By [CONTACT_764656]’  medical  and mental  health  Electronic  Health  Records  (EHRs),  mPHRs  can deliver  real-time 
information,  assist  in adherence to medication regimens  and appointments,  and facilitate  communication  
between patients  and providers.[ADDRESS_1047703]  the capability  to access medical  and mental  health medication and           
lab data in real time;  to provide medication and appointment  prompts  and reminders;  to help clients  set and 
maintain health and lifestyle  goals;  and to facilitate  communication with providers.  An adaptive randomized  
design,[ADDRESS_1047704]  will address  three  specific  aims:  
Specific  Aim 1: Develop  a smartphone Android application  (app)  that will link the medical  and mental  health  
EHRs  in a behavioral  health home.  
Specific Aim 2: Evaluate,  using  an adaptive,  randomized controlled study  design,  the effects  of the mPHR on 
patient  and provider  indicators  in a sample of 5 sequential  cohorts  of 60 subjects,  half of whom  will receive the 
mPHR (300 subjects  total).  
H1: As compared with the treatment  as usual  group,  subjects  with an mPHR  will have  higher  performance on 
indices  of cardiometabolic  and preventive quality  of care.  
H2: As compared with the treatment  as usual  group,  subjects  with an mPHR  will have greater  improvement  in 
patient  activation  and provider  management  of chronic  illness.  Patient  activation and provider  management  of 
chronic  illness  will partly  mediate the relationship between the intervention and quality  of care.  
Specific Aim 3: Evaluate the impact  of the mPHR  on service  use and costs  of care.  
H3: As compared with the treatment  as usual  group,  subjects  with a mPHR  will have  better  medication  
compliance,  fewer  missed  appointments,  fewer  ED visits,  and have a modest  increase in costs.  Medication  
compliance,  missed  appointments,  reduced ED use, and regular  mPHR use will, in part, mediate the 
relationship between the intervention and costs  of care.  
The proposed study  is highly  innovative in the intervention,  the setting,  and the study  design:  1) This 
study  applies  a novel  technology  that has not previously  been studied in mental  health settings;  2) The 
research will be conducted in a new organizational  model  of care,  the behavioral  health home,  that is 
anticipated to become widespread in community  mental  health  in the coming  years4; and 3) This research  uses  
an adaptive research design  that will ensure that the intervention  remains  relevant  using  periodic  updates  
throughout  the study  period.[ADDRESS_1047705]  to maximize  its potential  to 
transform  care in safety  net behavioral  health settings.  
III. RESEARCH STRATEGY  
IIIA. Background and Significance  
A literature  extending  back  more  than 70 years  has demonstrated the high rates  of medical  morbidity  
and excess  mortality  in persons  with serious  mental  illness  (SMI).[ADDRESS_1047706]  by [CONTACT_764657][INVESTIGATOR_764625]  --clinics  
based in mental  health  settings  where  persons  with serious  mental  illnesses  receive coordinated  medical  and 
mental  health care.3  In 2009,  SAMHSA began funding  a series  of demonstration projects  through  its Primary  
Care  Behavioral  Health  Integration  (PBHCI)  initiative.[ADDRESS_1047707] been  
developed as partnerships  between community  mental  health  centers  (CMHCs)  and primary  care provider  
organizations,  the majority  of which  (67%)  are Federally  Qualified  Health  Centers  (FQHCs).[ADDRESS_1047708],  a growing  number  of CMHCs  are developi[INVESTIGATOR_764626] a means  of caring for their patients’  medical  needs.  In Georgia alone,  16 out of the state’s  [ADDRESS_1047709] developed partnerships  with public  sector  medical  providers  with the goal of jointly  caring  for 
patients’  medical  and mental  health  needs.  Missouri  was recently  awarded one of the nation’s  first Medicaid  
demonstration  health  home waivers,  which  will develop  health homes  for patients  with comorbid conditions  
through  partnerships  between CMHCs  and FQHCs.[ADDRESS_1047710] vendors;  thus,  communication across  clinics,  even when they are in the same  building,  is limited  by [CONTACT_764658] -legal  barriers  and ultimately  translates  to obstacles  in serving  the consumer.  These  
organizations  typi[INVESTIGATOR_764627]  (e.g. note sign offs) and separate  
privacy  policies  governing access  to, and use of, the records.  A [ADDRESS_1047711]  as “An electronic  application through  which  
individuals  can access,  manage,  and share  their health information,  and that of others  for whom  they are 
authorized,  in a private,  secure,  and confidential  environment.”22  Although  the empi[INVESTIGATOR_764628],  existing  studies  show  promise for PHRs  as tools  for improving care.  In a qualitative  study  by [CONTACT_764659], 
patients  reported  that providing  printed  summary  information to patients  at the end of a clinic  visit improved their 
understanding of their care,  enhanced their relationships  with providers,  improved their satisfaction  with care,  
and motivated them  to adhere to treatment  plans.23  Jerden  and Weinehall  found  that 25% of patients  who 
received a PHR booklet  reported making  one or more  lifestyle  change,  most  commonly  by [CONTACT_764660].[ADDRESS_1047712] limited  access to personal  computers  with high speed  
internet  access.25 
Mobile  PHRs  might  be expected to help improve quality  of care for patients  with serious  mental  
illnesses  by [CONTACT_764661].  17 
(see Figure  1). Patient  factors  include  lack of familiarity  with current  treatments,  cognitive  limitations  that may 
lead to missed  appointments  or medication dosages,  and difficulty  in effectively  communicating with 
providers.1, [ADDRESS_1047713]’s  concept  of patient  activation,  which  
comprises  an individual’s  capacity  to manage his or her own illness  and work  effectively  within  the formal  
health system.  26-[ADDRESS_1047714]  that spans  multiple  systems of care,  and facilitating  
communication across  organizations  and between patients  and providers.  
 
Figure 1: Conceptual model for mPHR  
 
 
A 2011 survey  found that 72% of persons  with SMI from a large  rehabilitation  facility  owned and 
regularly  used a cell phone or smartphone,  suggesting  the appropriateness  of the use of mobile  apps  to 
improve care in these  populations.[ADDRESS_1047715]  and Potential  Innovation 
IIIB1a:  Overview:  The proposed project  will develop and test a mobile  PHR to improve quality  of medical  care in 
behavioral  health homes.  In the initial  stage,  a mobile  PHR will be developed for the Android platform,  building 
on pi[INVESTIGATOR_26923] a PC-based PHR developed by [CONTACT_2362].  Subsequently,  the app will be studied     
using  an adaptive randomized controlled study  among  patients  treated  in a behavioral  health  home,  updating  
the app every  [ADDRESS_1047716],           
we will work  through  the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  healthcare to disseminate  the app to 
behavioral  health homes  and other  CMHCs  nationwide.  
IIIB1b.  Innovation:  The proposed study  is innovative in at least three  ways:  1. It will apply  a novel  technology  
that has not previously  been used in behavioral  health homes  or other  mental  health  settings.  2. It will be 
conducted in a new organizational  model  of care,  the behavioral  health home,  that is anticipated to become  
widespread in community  mental  health settings  in coming  years  and 3. It uses  an innovative,  adaptive  
research  design  that will ensure that the intervention remains  relevant  throughout  the study  period.  
IIIB2:  Preliminary  Data  
IIIB2a.  Study  team  experience and expertise:  The study  team  includes  a unique blend of researchers,  
information  technology  experts,  and policymakers  that will optimize  the potential  both for successful  completion  
and maximal  public  health impact.  Benjamin Druss  MD, the principal  investigator,  is a psychiatrist  and professor  
of health  policy  at the Rollins  School  of Public  Health  at Emory  University  whose work  focuses on improving  
health and healthcare  for persons  with serious  mental  illnesses.  He is the principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_764629],  a randomized study  of a partnership- based behavioral  health home for persons  with serious  
mental  illness,  and the AHRQ -funded  My Health  Record study,  which  developed and pi[INVESTIGATOR_764630]- 
based PHR for patient s with serious  mental  illness.  He was a member  of the planning  group for the 
NIMH/AHRQ  sponsored conference  “Mental  Health  & Health  IT Research:  The Way Forward,”  which  helped  
define gaps  in research  in information  technology  in mental  health.  Silke  von Esenwein,  PhD has worked  on all 
of these projects  as a co-investigator;  she has presented  extensively  about  the use of health information  
technology  among  persons  with serious  mental  illnesses.  Paul Weiss,  MS is a biostatistician  with extensive  
experience in analyzing  clinical trials  as well as in mobile  app design.  Ellen  Zegura,  PhD is professor  and Chair  
in the Department  of Computer  Science at the Georgia Institute  of Technology.  She is an expert  in developi[INVESTIGATOR_764631].  Elaine  Warren,   
M.S.C., is an IT consultant  with over ten years  of experience in development  and operation of information Mobile  
PHR  Patient  Factors  
⇑Activation  
⇑Adherence  
⇓Missed  appts  ⇑Quality  of Care  ⇑Outcomes  
⇔ Cost  
Provider  factors  
⇑Coordination of  care 
systems  including  mobile  application  design.  Michael  Lardiere  MSW  is the Vice President  of Health  Information  
Technology  and Strategic  Development  for the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  Healthcare and one 
of the nation’s  experts  in the use of IT in safety  net health and mental  health  settings,  as well as in newly  
emerging behavioral  health home models.  
IIIB2b.  Developi[INVESTIGATOR_764632]-testing  a PC-based  Personal  Health  Record  for persons  with SMI: “An Electronic  
Personal  Health  Record  for Mental  Health  Consumers”  developed and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]-tested  the first PHR for persons  
with SMI and medical  comorbidity,  called  My Health Record.  This PHR was developed as a collaborative effort  
between Emory  investigators,  experts  in development  and implementation of medical  PHRs,  and mental  health  
consumer  leaders.  
Because it was 
implemented  in a CMHC  
without  an EHR,  it was 
developed as a 
standalone program,  in 
which  patients  entered all 
data into a PC-based  
PHR with the help of their 
care manager.  
IIIB2c.  Computer  literacy   
curriculum:  At baseline,  
approximately  1/[ADDRESS_1047717] of the curriculum,  a 
majority  of participants  
greatly  increased their knowledge of the internet,  ability  to access health information  and community  
resources,  needing  an average of 2.2 hours  to complete the training  modules.  
IIIB2d.  Feasibility:  A total of 170 subjects  were  successfully  randomized,  and there has been  a greater  than 
90% retention rate in the study  through  the 1-year follow  up. Using  online  tracking  of accessing  the PHR,  71/85  
(83.6%)  subjects  in the intervention group have accessed  the PHR at least  monthly  to obtain health information  
using  computers  at public  libraries,  in their own home,  and at internet  cafes.  
IIIB2e.  Potential  effectiveness  in improving patient  activation  and quality  of care:  The two primary  outcomes  for 
this pi[INVESTIGATOR_764633] (as recommended by [CONTACT_764662]).  Each  was balanced at baseline,  but showed  clinically  and statistically  significant  
improvements  at 12-month  follow -up. At 12-month follow  up, patients  in the PHR intervention had an average 
patient  activation  score  of 59.9 (out of a possible  score  of 100) compared  to 55.2 for the control  group.  The  
total proportion  of recommended  preventive medical  services  was double that in the case  versus  the control  
group (40%  versus  20%,  p<0.001)  (See  Table 1). 
 
Table  1: Outcomes  of PC-Based  Personal  Health  Record  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_764634]  (n=85)  Case (n=85)  p value  
Patient Activation  Baseline 55.6 ± 14.4 55.1 ± 14.3 0.83 
12-Month  55.2 ± 14.6 59.9 ± 12.5 0.043  
Total  Preventive  Services  Baseline 0.27 ± 0.09 0.26 ± 0.10 0.22 
12-Month  0.20 ± 0.11 0.40 ± 0.13 <0.001 

IIIB2f. Focus  Groups:  We conducted two focus  groups  with participants  in the PHR study,  one with participants  
who used the PHR monthly  throughout  the study  (83.7%  of the intervention group),  to assess  acceptability  and 
experience in using  it. We conducted a second focus  group among  non-users  of the PHR (16.3%  of the 
intervention group).  The groups  were  convened and conducted  using  standard procedures  as described by 
[CONTACT_764663].30 31-34  Acceptability  among PHR Users:  Among  regular  PHR  users  in the first focus  group (n=8),  
clients  expressed  a high degree of enthusiasm  for the PC-based PHR.  They  described using  it to track  
treatments  and appointments:  “It’s great,  I use it to stay on top of my meds  and appointments  with my doctor.”  
They  described how it made them  more  aware of their self management  needs.  “It helps  me remember  to take 
my blood sugar  and work  on keepi[INVESTIGATOR_764635].”  Finally,  several  described it as supporting  their broader  recovery  
goals.  “I feel like it lets me make  progress  on my whole  heath,  helps  me keep the physical  together  with the 
mental  and spi[INVESTIGATOR_37312].”  Reasons  for not using  the PHR  among non-users:  In the focus  group of participants  who 
did not use the PHR at least  once  per month  (n=7),  we examined the reasons  for non-use. The two most  
common  reasons  for non-use were  1. Difficulty/time  spent  in entering PHR data “It’s a good  idea,  but it takes  too 
much time trying  to put everything  in about  my meds  and all.” and 2. Lack  of easy  access  to a computer  “I use 
the one at the library,  but the library  closes  at 7. How am I supposed to look at it after that?”  
Acceptability  of using  mobile  phone interventions  and potential  interest  in using  a mobile  PHR in the  
population:  In both of the groups,  participants  were  asked about  potential  interest  in a smartphone -based  
mobile  PHR as an alternative to the PC-based PHR.  Participants  who did not own smartphones  (11/15 total)  
generally  found it easy  to use the demonstration  smartphone in the focus  group and found  the interface  
relatively  easy  to use. Participants  reported,  “This  is like a computer  but it’s easier  to use.”  “It’s easy  to see 
since  it’s all lit up”. Those  who used PHRs  felt that a mobile  platform  could provide added ease  of accessibility  
“I’d like that since  I could always  have  it in my pocket.”  Those  who did not use their PHR felt that it could help 
overcome the barriers  to use. “Yeah,  if I didn’t  have  to write  all that in there  it would help….I  wouldn’t  have to 
find a computer  to use it…” 
IIIB2g.  Summary:  Preliminary  qualitative  and quantitative data using a PC-based PHR suggest  high potential  
feasibility  and acceptability,  along with potential  benefits  on patient  activation  and quality  of primary  medical  
care.  The primary  barriers  to use of the PHR  – time and effort needed  in entering  data,  and common  lack of 
access to a computer  – could both be overcome by [CONTACT_2329]  a mobile  PHR platform.  
 
IIIB3  Study  Site 
The Four Corners  clinic  in Austell,  Georgia  was established  in [ADDRESS_1047718] behavioral  health  
homes  in the country  funded under  SAMHSA’s  Primary  Care  Behavioral  Health  Integration  (PBHCI)  grants.  
The clinic  is a satellite  clinic  of the West  End Medical  Center  Federally  Qualified  Health  Center  (FQHC),  co- 
located within  the Cobb County  Community  Mental  Health  Center  (CMHC).  The Four Corners  clinic  is staffed  
by a full time nurse practitioner  and RN from the FQHC,  and two care coordinators  who are paid for by [CONTACT_764664].  It provides  comprehensive primary  and preventive  care to patients  with one or more  cardiometabolic  
risk factor  (high blood pressure,  diabetes,  elevated  cholesterol).  This partnership model  between an FQHC  
and a CMHC is the most  prevalent  organizational  model  used  in behavioral  health homes.  [ADDRESS_1047719] been enrolled since  2010,  with an 
enrollment  rate of approximately  200 new patients  per year.  The 
Table  2: Characteristics  of Four  Corners  Clinic  target  enrollment  goal will be 1,[ADDRESS_1047720] elevated BMI (60%),  blood pressure  (77%),  and 
elevated LDL cholesterol  (64%).  
Characteristics  of the EHRs:  Both the West  End Medical  FQHC  
and the Cobb County  CMHC have  fully functional  EHR;  
however,  these EHRs  do not currently  have the ability  to share  
data or information across  the two organizations.  Clinicians  in 
the Four Corners  clinic  enter  notes  into the West  End Medical  
Clinic  record,  then make  electronic  copi[INVESTIGATOR_764636],  and 
then,  cut and paste these  into the Cobb County  EHR.  
The Cobb  County  CMHC  uses  Carelogic,  a behavioral  
health EHR that is in use in over [ADDRESS_1047721]  to a website or 
server.  Fields  that can be selected include laboratory  values,  medications,  and upcoming  appointments.  Each  Va riable  % 
Demographics  
Femal  e  
65% 
African-American 22% 
Age 25 to 34 years  old 17% 
Age 35 to 44 years  old 43% 
Age 45 to 54 years  old 16% 
Cardiometabolic  Risks  
Borderli  ne or High  BP  
77% 
Borderli  ne or High  HgB A1C 41% 
High cholesterol  50% 
 
of the patient  portal  features  also has the capability  to provide asynchronous  email  communication  with the 
provider  team.  The portals  are protected  by [CONTACT_764665]- compliant,  secure  data transfer.  
 
IIIB4:  Specific Aim 1: Develop a smartphone Android application  (app)  and link it to the medical  and 
mental  health EHR in a behavioral  health home.  The application will be developed during  the first 9 months  
of the study.  After  hiring  staff and establishing  the study  team,  a beta version of the app will be constructed,  
incorporating  and building  on features  developed for the PC-based PHR,  then subsequently  refined using  
qualitative  techniques  focusing  both on design and content  of the mPHR.  
IIIB4a.  App Development :The app will be programmed in Android,  an open -source,  Linux -based operating  
system  for smartphones  with a Java  programming interface.  The mobile  Android app will be developed using  
the Android Software  Development  Kit. [ADDRESS_1047722]  electronic  PHRs.  The HealthVault  security  system  works  with cryptographic  constructs  available  
more  widely  on smart phones  to preserve user privacy.  HealthVault  supports  mobile  platforms  by [CONTACT_764666] -source,  community -supported  client  libraries.37 An app developer  supervised by [CONTACT_764667]  M.S.C. will 
develop this app. 
Data  fields  from the EHR from each  of the participating  sites will be uploaded to the HealthVault  server  
using  the patient  portal  feature on each  of the EHRs.  Data  are stored  in XML format;  with user consent,  multiple  
user records  can be downloaded from the HealthVault  servers  for aggregate  analysis.[ADDRESS_1047723].  
Passwords  are a minimum  of eight  characters  and are required to use mixed  case  letters,  numbers,  and 
punctuation.  This information will be used to populate fields  on the handheld device from data in the CMHC  
EHR and the FQHC EHR using  a user-friendly  interface  tailored to the needs  and potential  cognitive  limitations  
of the population.  To ensure privacy  and safety  of data,  no health data will be stored  on the mobile  device  – all 
will be maintained on the HealthVault  server.  
IIIB4b  Mobile  PHR structure:   
The mPHR will comprise four sections:  1. Information  downloaded directly  from the EHRs;  2. 
Information  entered  by [CONTACT_123896];  3. Prompts  and reminders  for medications  and upcoming  appointments,  
and self-management;  and 4. Communication with the care team.  
To address  limitations  in computer  
literacy  and cognitive  deficits  in some  of the 
population,  information will be presented  
using  a simple  user interface  and graphics,  
suitable for a 6th grade  reading  level.  A 
“traffic  light”  system38 will be used to 
represent  laboratory  and anthropomorphic  
findings,  indicating  whether  values  are 
normal  (green),  borderline (yellow)  or 
abnormal  (red).  
i. Information  directly  downloaded  from the  
EHR: A PHR can help improve patient  
activation by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_764637].[ADDRESS_1047724]  may also help 
providers  to better  coordinate the care they deliver  and make  it more  patient -centered.40 Using  the patient  
portal  feature on the two EHRs,  the mPHR will download to HealthVault  and then display  in the mPHR:  
1. Current  medications  will be presented,  including  separate  categories  for medical  and psychotropic  
medications,  along with the indications.  
2. Any known allergies.(food,  medication,  or otherwise)  and contraindications  will be displayed.  
3. The PHR will present  lab values  including  glucose,  cholesterol,  and hemoglobin A1c, along with a traffic  
light indicator  of whether  the values  are at target  or abnormal.  
4. Anthropomorphic  measures  will be displayed,  including  blood pressure,  weight,  BMI and waist  
circumference,  with a traffic  light indicating  whether  values  are abnormal,  borderline,  or normal.  
5. Dates  and upcoming  appointments  (medical  and psychiatric)  will be provided.  
6. Name  [CONTACT_3669]  [CONTACT_764668].  
Figure  2: Mobile PHR  structure  
ii. Subjects  will have the ability  to enter  data on personal  goals  either  directly  into the app or on a PC, via the 
secured  HealthVault  website.  Fields  entered by [CONTACT_764669]:  
1. Current  resources  and health care needs:  This section  includes  details  that the patient  identifies  as 
potentially  relevant  for healthcare professionals,  including:  disabilities;  challenges  in transportation;  need for a 
translator,  role of spi[INVESTIGATOR_764638],  and living  situation.  
2. Goals  and Action  Steps:  This is a worksheet  developed for the PC-based PHR  that asks the respondent  
to identify  longer  term health goals,  and small,  short -term steps  and specific  actions  to be taken in order  to 
pursue those goals.  Action  plans,  which  involve  setting  and tracking  short -term health goals,  has been shown  
to be a highly  effective  strategy  for increasing  activation  and promoting  health behavior  change.41 
iii.Electronic  Prompts  and Reminders:  Prompts  and reminders  will be provided 1. At the time that each  
medication dosage  is due; 2. Two weeks  before  each  medication refill;  and 3. One day before  each medical  
and mental  health visit. 
iv.Communication with providers:  The HealthVault  Message  Center  allows  patients  to send  and receive  
encrypted email  to and from healthcare providers  including  the care coordinator  and any other  providers  who 
opt-into the subjects’  mPHR.  All messages  are stored  in the Microsoft  HealthVault  record.  
IIIB4c.  Access  controls:  Participants  can choose to share  data with providers,  family  members,  and friends,  
and will be able to assign  an access  level to each person listed  on the plan to determine  the level of access  
each member  has to the specific  fields.  Access may include the ability  to fully edit the plan,  view only,  or to 
have no access  to the plan.  
IIIB4d:  Role of the care coordinator:  PHRs  are most  effective  if they are used in conjunction with providers  who 
use them  as tools  to engage patients  in their care.  42, 43 The Four Corners  clinic  employs  two full-time care 
coordinators,  bachelor -level care managers  who provide education and help coordinate patient  care.  For the 
study,  we will train the care coordinators  to use the mPHR as a tool for patients  in the mPHR care condition.  
IIIB4e:  Training  
i.Training  the care coordinator  in use of the app and ongoing  supervision:  After  the app is developed  each  of 
the CMHC care coordinators  will receive an interactive,  3-hour training  program  by [CONTACT_764670],  and by 
[INVESTIGATOR_29794],  Zegura  and Druss  in use of the app and the computer  literacy  training  program.  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_764639]:  1. 
Use of smartphones  by [CONTACT_764671]. 2. An overview  of the computer  literacy  curriculum  3. A review  of 
each of the each  of the components  of the app (medications;  laboratory  values;  consumer -derived data on 
health goals;  prompts  and reminders  for medications  and upcoming  appointments;  communicating  with 
providers.  Monthly  meetings  with the care coordinators  will discuss current  experiences  and troubleshoot  
problems.  
ii. Training  clients  in use of the app and ongoing  support:  The training  of clients  by [CONTACT_764672].  The care coordinator  will provide a two- 
session,  one-on-one overview  of use of smartphones  and the mPHR.  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_764639]:  1) Overview  of 
smartphones,  including  basic  features  from the training  curriculum  (turning  on; charging;  using apps),  based on 
the computer  literacy  curriculum  for persons  with SMI developed by [CONTACT_2362];  2) An overview  of each of 
the components  of the app; and 3) Troubleshooting  (what  do to if an app is not working;  what  to do if a phone is 
lost or stolen).  Initial demonstration  will be followed by [CONTACT_764673].  This process  will be continued until the subject  demonstrates  
proficiency  in using  the smartphone and each component  of the intervention app. Development  and refinement  
of the training in Aim [ADDRESS_1047725].  
iii.App maintenance  and troubleshooting:  The app developer  will maintain the app and be available  by 
[CONTACT_764674],  care managers,  and study  staff to troubleshoot  any problems  that arise.  
IIIB4f. Refine  the intervention using semi-structured consumer  interviewers:  After  the beta version of the app is 
developed,  one-on-one semi -structured interviews  will be conducted with [ADDRESS_1047726] their own 
smartphone.  For this formative work  in Aim 1, each  participant  will be shown  a smartphone  with the app and 
asked questions  about  the usability  and content  of each of the four components  of the app (lab and medication  
information  downloaded from the EHR;  personal  details  and goals  entered  by [CONTACT_2299];  electronic  prompts  
and reminders;  and secured communication with the provider).  Participants  will be asked:  How easy  is it         
for you to use this program? What  is hardest  for you about  using  it? What  changes  would make  it more  useful  
to you? All interviews  will be tape recorded and transcribed.  Analysis  of these  transcripts  will include  both 
deductive and inductive analysis,  and proceed  in three phases:44, 45  1) preliminary  analysis  relying  
predominantly  on a set of deductive codes  representing  the initial objectives  of the interviews  (e.g. ascertaining  
participants’  experiences  in using  each  of the three components  of the phone  application.);  2) in-depth  analysis  
based on the emergence  of key inductive themes,  or concepts  identified  by [CONTACT_764675];  and 3) interpretation and synthesis  of key concepts  in the data based on a thorough  and systematic  
exploration of both inductive  and deductive themes.  
After  these  interviews  are completed and analyzed,  the app developer,  IT experts  (Warren,  Zegura),  
and PI [INVESTIGATOR_764640].  Based  on the findings  and recommendations  from this steering  group,  
the app designer  will make  further  refinements  of the intervention prior to the full randomized  trial. 
 
IIIB5:  Specific  Aim 2: Evaluate,  using an adaptive,  randomized controlled  study  design,  the effects of 
the mPHR on patient  and provider  indicators in a sample of 5 sequential  cohorts  of 60 subjects,  half of 
whom  will receive  the mPHR.  
IIIB5a.  Recruitment  and Randomization:  Subjects  will be recruited from a roster  of clients  from the Four 
Corners  Behavioral  Health  Home.  Characteristics  of the clinic  are described in IIIB3. The inclusion  criteria  for  
participation  in the clinic  include having  a serious  mental  illness  and at least one cardiometabolic  risk factor.  
The only exclusion criterion  will be inability  to consent  based on a 6-item,  validated screener.  46 These  
relatively  inclusive  criteria  were  chosen  to optimize  generalizability  to other  behavioral  health homes;  
preplanned analyses  will assess whether  the intervention is effective  across  putative  moderators  such  as 
baseline health and computer  literacy.  
Subjects  who meet  eligibility  criteria  and who provide informed consent  to participate  will be randomly  
assigned  in blocks  of 60 (30 case  and 30 controls),  to either  receive the mPHR  or continue in usual  care in the 
clinic.  Subjects  who do not own an Android- based  smartphone will be provided  with one loaded with the study  
app for the 6-month duration  of the intervention.  Those who own an Android- based smartphone will be offered  
the option of having  the Android app loaded onto their own smartphone  for the duration  of the intervention.  All 
participants  will participate  in the baseline assessment  and those assigned  to the mPHR group will receive the 
two-session,  one-on-one app training described above  in IIIB4e.  Randomization will be stratified  by [CONTACT_764676]- based  smartphone for the study.  A computer -generated algorithm  
and concealment  of allocation techniques  will be used to minimize  assignment  bias.  
IIIB5b.  Adaptive randomized design:  The landscape  of public  sector  mental  health service  delivery  is evolving  
in the context  of health  reform  and grassroots  development  of new models  of care in communities.19 
Simultaneously,  new health technologies,  particularly  in the mobile  space,  are rapi[INVESTIGATOR_764641].  47    More  
flexible  study  designs  are need to ensure that study  findings  are relevant.48 
To address  these  issues,  the study  will use an adaptive randomized design . An adaptive  design uses  
the cumulative  knowledge of current  treatment  successes and failures  to change  qualities  of the ongoing  trial.9  
A total of 5 cohorts  of 60 subjects  each  will be sequentially  enrolled in the trial for 6 months  each,  with half 
randomized to receive  the mPHR,  after which  2 months  will be spent  updating  and modifying  the intervention 
prior to the next cohort,  while  recruiting  the new cohort  of subjects.  Modifications  to the app will be made  
based on 1. Feasibility  and acceptability  of the app within  the current  cohort  2. New developments  in health 
and PHR apps  3. Changes  in usual  care both in the clinic  and other  behavioral  health homes.  Analyses  will 
examine both overall  effects  of the intervention,  and whether  there  is a change  in its benefits  over time.  
i. Assessing  feasibility  and acceptability:  At the end the 6-month  intervention,  participants  will return for a follow  
up assessment  of feasibility  and acceptability,  assessment  of quality  of care and health outcomes.  Feasibility  
will be assessed  by [CONTACT_764677]. A 1-5 
Likert  scale  will be used to rate degree  of mastery  of each  of the components  of the application,  with a score  of 
3 in each category  representing a “passing  grade.”  Acceptability  will be tested by [CONTACT_764678]. 
With informed consent,  information from the app will be downloaded to the study  server  automatically  on a 
weekly  basis;  information will include  the number  of times  each  component  of the app is accessed  and the 
particular  component  that is used.  
ii. Reviewing  technological  advances  in mobile  health technology:  Using  methodology  used in other  
systematic  app review  studies,[ADDRESS_1047727]  searches  every  6 months  in the official  
application stores  for five major  smartphones:  iPhone  (App  Store),  Android  (Android  Market),  Blackberry  (App  
World),  Nokia/Symbian  (Ovi)  and Windows  Mobile (Marketplace),  within  the health/lifestyle  and medical  
categories,  for products  related to personal  health records  or health management.  Any new products  will be 
downloaded to examine new developments  or features  that could be incorporated  into the mPHR.  
iii.  Reviewing  changes  in usual  care:  Changes  in the usual  care condition  at both the clinic  and patient  level will 
be reviewed every  six months.  Deborah Strotz, MSW,  is the director  of the Four Corners  clinic.  Each  year,  she 
will present  updates  on any changes  in staffing  or structure of the clinic.  At the subject  level,  questions  will 
review  whether  subjects  in each group own smartphones,  and whether  and how they have  used any health  
apps  in the past 6 months.  
iv. Reviewing  national  changes  in care delivery  in community  mental  health.  Behavioral  health homes  are a 
relatively  recent  innovation,  and their structure  is continuing  to evolve.  More  generally,  models  of service  
delivery  in the public  specialty  mental  health  sector  are changing at a rapid  pace.  In his role as Vice President  
of Health  Information Technology  for the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  Healthcare,  Michael  
Lardiere  conducts  an annual  survey  of all community  behavioral  providers  on changes  in organizational  
structure  and use of technology.  He also provides  consultation  to providers  including all SAMHSA PBHCI  
grantees  on topi[INVESTIGATOR_764642].  For each cycle,  he will provide an update on new organizational  developments  in 
community  mental  health  and use of health  technology.  
Every 6 months,  the study  team  will meet  to review  these developments  in health technology  and in 
mental  health systems.  At the meeting,  the team  will develop recommendations  for updates  to the mPHR  app 
which  the app developer  will implement  in the next cohort.  This process  will seek  to balance  fidelity  the core 
features  of the PHR while  allowing  flexibility  to ensure relevance to real-world  settings,  paralleling  strategies  
used in mental  health dissemination and implementation studies.  50, 51 Analyses  will account  for potential  
differences  across  cohorts  due to these  modifications  (IIIB5c).  
IIIB5b:  Outcome  Measures  for Specific  Aim 2: 
i.Overview:  The conceptual  model  predicts  that an mPHR can improve  quality  of medical  care by [CONTACT_764679].  Quality  of cardiometabolic  and preventive  services will be 
the main  study  outcomes,  and these will be drawn directly  from the West  End EHR.  Patient  activation,  provider  
management  of chronic  illness,  and medication adherence  will be studied  as intermediate (mediating)  
outcomes,  and cardiometabolic  quality  of care and health related quality  of life will also be studied as key distal  
outcomes  resulting  from better  quality  of care.  Data  from each of the two EHRs  will be used for generating  the 
quality  indicators.  Outcome  assessments  will be tracked at [ADDRESS_1047728]  over time.  
ii.Qualilty  of Care  Measures:  
1. Quality  indicators  for the cardiometabolic  risk factors  will be drawn from the two electronic  health records  
using  indicators  from the Community  Quality  Index  (CQI)  study,  the largest  and most  comprehensive study  of 
quality  of care ever conducted in the United  States.52 53, 54  There  are 9 indicators  for hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035],  13 for 
hypertension,  and 13 for diabetes;  each covering  domains  of screening,  diagnosis,  treatment,  and follow -up. 55 
A quality  score  for each  condition is generated by [CONTACT_764680]  a participant  is eligible  for indicator.  
2. Quality  of Preventive Medical  Services:  Quality  indicators,  as well as the populations  eligible for each  
preventive measure,  will be obtained  from the U.S. Preventive Services  Task  Force  (USPSTF)  guidelines.  56 
For the study,  we will include items  with strong  research  evidence (evidence grade  “A” or “B” to support  their 
use. 
iii.Intermediate Outcomes:  
These  outcomes  are postulated to be both important  measures  of the intervention,  and pathways  through  
which  the intervention  may improve quality  of medical  care.  
1. Patient  Activation:.  The study  will assess patient  activation,  as measured by [CONTACT_764681] (PAM).[ADDRESS_1047729] high validity  reliability  (infit values  of 0.71- 1.44)  and criterion  validity  
based on concordance with related constructs  including  self-management  behaviors.26 27 medication  
adherence,  and outcomes  including quality  of life.28 
2. Provider  Management  of Chronic  Illness:  The Patient  Assessment  of Chronic  Illness  Care  (PACIC)  is a 20- 
item,  patient  self-report  instrument  developed by [CONTACT_764682],  Wagner  et al.that  assesses  the extent  to which  
patients  with chronic  illness  report  receiving  care that aligns  with the Chronic  Care  Model.  57, [ADDRESS_1047730]  reliability  (r = 0.58 during  the course  of 3 months)  and to be associated with 
improved health behaviors,58  global  patient  ratings  of their health care,  and quality  of life. 60 
iv.Clinical Outcomes:  
Better  quality  of care is a first step to improving cardiometabolic  outcomes,  and improvement  in process  
measures  have been shown  to predict  better  clinical outcomes.  61, 62  We therefore  hypothesize that the mPHR  
will result  in improved cardiometabolic  and quality  of life outcomes.  For the purposes  of the study,  these  will be 
treated as secondary  outcomes.  
1. .The Framingham  Cardiovascular  Risk Index  provides  the 10-year risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_764643].  It is calculated  based on a weighted score  based on age, blood pressure (4 levels),  smoking  status  
(yes/no),  diabetes  (yes/no),  total cholesterol  (3 categories),  and HDL cholesterol  (3 categories).  The index  has 
been used successfully to assess  cardiovascular  risk in populations  with severe  mental  illnesses.  63-66 
Secondary  analyses  will examine changes  in individual  cardiometabolic  risk. 
2. Health  Related Quality  of Life: The SF-36 is a measure of Health  Related  Quality  of Life constructed  for use 
in the Medical  Outcomes  Study.  67, 68 A summary  Physical  Component  Summary  (PCS)  and Mental  
Component  Summary  (MCS)  scores can be constructed  from the survey,  scored between 0 (poor  health)  to 
100 (perfect  health).  [ADDRESS_1047731]  reliability,  and concurrent  and discriminative  validity.70, 71 
v. Potential  Confounding/Moderating Variables:  It is essential  to assess  balance across  key variables  that 
could confound  results.  It is also important  to examine key moderators  such  as baseline  health and computer  
literacy;  groups  with higher  levels  of literacy  at baseline might  be expected  to have better  study  outcomes.  
1. Sociodemographic  characteristics:  Demographic  factors  such  as age, ethnicity,  health  insurance status,  and 
income will be assessed  at baseline,  and included  in all multivariate  models.  
2. Health  Literacy  and computer  literacy  may be moderators  of the intervention effect  –that is, individuals  with 
higher  levels  of literacy  may be more  able to fully engage  with the mPHR and derive maximal  benefit  from the 
intervention.  Health  literacy  will be assessed  using the STOFHLA,  a brief instrument  that ranks  respondants’  
reading  and numeracy  health literacy  on a scale  of 1-100.72 Computer  literacy  will be assessed  using  a 27-item 
measure  developed by [CONTACT_764683].73 Each  of these  surveys  has been conducted in nationally  representative  
samples,  allowing  for benchmarking findings  derived from the current  study.  
IIIB5c:Data  Analytic  Strategy  for Specific  Aim 2: 
i.Overall  data analytic  strategy:  All analyses  will be conducted as intent -to-treat. The primary  analytic  
technique  for assessing  differences  between the study  groups  will be random  regression.[ADDRESS_1047732]  as a function of 1) randomization group  
2) time since  randomization 3) group*time interaction.  The group*time interaction will be the primary  
parameter  estimate  of interest, since  it represents  the difference  in change between the two randomization  
arms  over time.  All models  will also include any parameters  that vary at baseline at the p=0.05 level.  
ii. Analytic  issues  for the adaptive design:  Because  the intervention will be updated every  [ADDRESS_1047733], and group*time*cohort  will also be studied to assess whether  the effects  of the intervention change as it 
is updated.  Because the core features  of the intervention  will not change over time,  we hypothesize  that these  
differences  will not be statistically significant.  
iii. Sample Size Calculation:  The study  sample  size was calculated  to produce  a statistical  power  of 0.8 for 
detecting  a significant  change  in RAND composite  CQI measure for cardiometabolic  quality  of care.  The 
sample size calculations  for random  regression  models  for the primary  study  outcomes  follow  the method  
outlined by [CONTACT_764684].76  We are conservatively  estimating  10-20% attrition.  Using  this approach,  we estimate  
that an initial  sample size of [ADDRESS_1047734]  a 10% difference  in the composite  
quality  index  with an intraclass  correlation of 0.3, which  would  be considered a clinically  significant  
improvement.52 
iv: Mediation analysis  for intermediate outcomes:  In addition to examining  patient  activation and provider  
chronic  care as intermediate endpoints  in the study,  we will also conduct  analyses  to see whether  they partly  
mediate the association between the intervention group and quality  of care.  Mediation analyses  will use 
adaptations  of structural  mean models  developed for use in mediation analysis  in complex  randomized trials  
developed by [CONTACT_546237].  77, 78 Using  the M Plus package,  79  separate models  will be constructed to examine the 
relationship between the independent  variable (study  arm),  the outcome  (quality  of care)  and each mediating  
variable.  Models  will determine  whether  1. Intervention status  is associated with improved quality  of care          
at [ADDRESS_1047735]  errors . 
v. Moderator  analysis  for health and computer  literacy:  Moderator  analyses  make  it possible  to identify  what  
types  of clients  benefit  most  from a given  intervention.  The approach  will follow Kenny  et al’s method  for 
analyzing  moderator  effects  in randomized  trials  using  random  regression.  81 For each analyses  assessing  
heath and computer  literacy  as potential  moderators,  we will add a group*time*moderator  interaction  term,  the 
statistical  significance  of which  will allow  us to assess  the presence of moderation.  All appropriate  lower -order  
interactions  will also be included in the model.  
IIIB6:  Specific  Aim 3: Evaluate the impact  of the mPHR on service  use and costs  of care.  Handheld  
devices  can help improve adherence to medically -indicated treatments  by [CONTACT_764685];  82, 
[ADDRESS_1047736] profile for the intervention from both a societal  and managerial  
perspective.  
IIIB6a.  Outcome  measures  for Specific  Aim 3. 
i. Medical  and mental  health service  use: Health  service  use will be assessed  via chart  review  for all services  
provided by [CONTACT_764686],  supplemented by a validated self-report  instrument  
developed for the CATIE  trial 84 to capture  any service  use outside  of the two organizations.  The following  
categories  of service  use will be calculated:  1. Primary  care medical  visits  2. Specialty  medical  visits  3. Medical  
Emergency  Department  (ED) visits  4. Medical  Inpatient  days  5. Mental  Health  outpatient  visits  6. Mental  health  
ED visits  7. Mental  health inpatient  days.  
ii. Missed  appointments:  A separate field is available  in each of the EHRs  for missed  appointments.  This will be 
modeled as a two-part model  (any missed  visit, number  of missed  visits  among  those  with a missed  visit).  
iii. Medication Adherence:  Adherence will be assessed  using  chart  records,  by [CONTACT_58833]  a medication  
possession ratio (MPR),  defined as the number  of days  of treatment  dispensed divided by [CONTACT_764687]  (excluding  the last prescription)  85, 86 for those patients  with each of the target  study  
conditions  (diabetes,  hypertension,  and hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035]).  Separate indicators  will be calculated  for each class  of 
medications  used  to treat diabetes,  hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035],  and hypertension,  with an average  value  across the three  
cardiometabolic  conditions  used  as an aggregate  measure  of adherence.  
iv. mPHR use: The study  will capture  mPHR use 1. To assess feasibility  of the intervention by [CONTACT_542438];  2. To assess  fidelity  to the study  intervention and 3. To conduct  exploratory  mediation analyses  to 
assess whether  greater  app use is associated  with better  study  outcomes.  Each  instance  of mPHR use will be 
logged along with time and date information  indicating the specific  fields  of the mPHR used,  and amount  of 
time spent  with the PHR.  Event  auditing will categorize whether  1. Users  view fields  without  changing  data or 2, 
Users  change fields  in the mPHR.  
IIIB6b:  Data  Analytic  Strategy  for Specific  Aim 3: 
After  conducting  bivariate  analyses,  random  regression will be used to assess service  use outcomes  at 
follow up, using  the group*time interactions  as the primary  variable of interest.  See IIIB5c  for more  detail  on the 
analytic  models.  The study  team  has extensive experience in conducting  these  service  use analyses.87 
i. Service  Use analyses:  Separate models  will be developed for each service  use category  as a dependent  
variable.  These analyses  will focus  on the intervention’s  impact  on medication adherence,  no shows,  and ED 
use. Additionally,  a series  of mediation analyses  will test the conceptual  model  postulating  that changes  in 
service  use will moderate  clinical and cost outcomes.  In particular,  we will test whether  improved medication  
adherence , reduced ED service  use, and reduction in missed  appointments  predicts  improved quality  of 
cardiometabolic  care,  increased use of preventive services,  and reduced  costs.  A second  set of mediation  
analyses  will examine whether  there is a dose- response  association between  use of the mPHR and quality  of 
care.  These will be exploratory,  recognizing  that regular  mPHR users  may be more  engaged  in their care at 
baseline than other  enrollees.  Mediation  analysis  will follow  the methods  described in IIIB5c.  
ii. Costs  from the Health  System  Perspective:  Unit costs  for all services  will be assigned to each  service  type 
based on median national  expenditures  for each type of service  from the Medical  Expenditure Panel  Survey.[ADDRESS_1047737]  
measures  of resources  consumed in establishing and maintaining  it.89 90.91 Technology  costs  will include  costs 
of the smartphone  and monthly  data plan,  including  total data use associated  with the mPHR,  which  could be 
borne by [CONTACT_368111] a provider  organizaiton.  Care  coordinators  will keep  logs of all mPHR visits  to use for 
assessing  the portion of their total hours  per week  spent  on working  with the mobile  PHR in intervention  
clients.  Analysis  methods:  Cost analyses  will follow  standard  approaches  from the cost-effectiveness  
literature.  92-94    For the health system  perspective,  all expenditures  will be counted as positive  costs.  Analyses  
will compare change across  total costs between the mPHR and control  groups,  using  the group*time variable  
as the parameter  of interest.  
iii.  Costs  from the Managerial  Perspective (CMHC,  FQHC):  Conditions  under  which  a program  can be 
financially  viable  is among  the most  pressing and salient  questions  underlying  managers’  decisions  to adopt  
and maintain those programs.[ADDRESS_1047738]  
to the health  system  perspective,  reimbursements  will be treated  as negative  costs.  
Billing  rates  will be obtained for Medicaid,  Medicare,  private insurance,  and for uninsured  clients  (state  
or federal  block  grant  rates)  for each  type of visit. Returns  will be assessed  varying  key parameters  that could  
exist in implementing the program  under  real-world  conditions:  1. Insurance  case  mix (Medicaid versus  
uninsured);  2. Provider  type working  with the mPHR  (bachelor’s  level,  MSW,  RN); and 3. Patient  flow (number  
of patients  using  the mPHR).  Financial  sustainability,  defined  as conditions  in which  reimbursement  payments  
break  even,  or exceed intervention costs,97 will be assessed  at 6 and 12 months  after implementing  the 
intervention,  examining  whether,  or at what  point,  potential  reimbursement  for services  would exceed staff 
costs for administering  the intervention.  
 
Table:  Summary  of Study  Measures  
 Baseline  6 months  12 months  Source  
Quality  Measures      
Medical  quality  measures  (RAND)  X X X Chart  Review  (EHRs)  
Quality  of preventive  services  (USPTF)  X X X Chart  Review  (EHRs)  
Clinical  Outcome  Measures      
Framingham  cardiovascular  risk score  X X X Chart  Review  (EHRs)  
Individual  measures  of cardiometabolic  risk X X X Chart  Review  (EHRs)  
Physical  and Mental  Health  Related  Quality  of Life X X X Interview  
Intermediate  Outcome /Mediator  Variables      
Patient activation (PAM)  X X X Interview  
Provider  management  of chronic  illness  (PACIC)  X X X Interview  
Potential  Confounders/Moderator  Variable      
Sociodemographics  X X X Chart  review  (EHRs)  
Health  and computer  literacy  X X X Interview  
Service  Use and Cost      
Use of medical  and MH services  X X X Chart  review  (EHRs),  interview  
Missed  appointments  X X X Chart  Review  (EHRs)  
Medication adherence  (MPR)  X X X Chart  review  (EHRs)  
Use of PHR  X X X Chart  review  (mPHR)  
Costs/payments  X X X Chart review  
 
IV. DISSEMNATION  PLAN  
Passive  diffusion  of findings  through  the research  literature  is a slow and unreliable means  of achieving  
uptake of scientific  innovations.98 To optimize  dissemination of the app, we will include a formal  dissemination  
plan for the app in partnership  with the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  Healthcare,  led by [CONTACT_764688].  The app will be disseminated  to behavioral  health homes  funded through SAMHSA’s  PBHCI  program  
(96 sites anticipated  by [CONTACT_764689] 2012)  through  the Center  for Integrated  Health  Solutions,  funded  by 
[CONTACT_764690].  That site offers  a 
range  of technical  assistance  to PBHCI  grantees,  including  regional  meetings,  webinars,  and online tools.  In his 
role as a consultant  to that Technical  Center,  [CONTACT_546246]  regularly  conducts  webinars  and provides  technical  
assistance  to sites in developi[INVESTIGATOR_764644].  The mPHR app will be made freely  available  
and [CONTACT_546246]  and Michael  Lardiere will present  at the annual  PBHCI  grantee meeting explaining  how to use it 
in behavioral  health homes.  Beyond its role for PBHCI  grantees,  the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  
Healthcare  also provides  a broad  range  technical  assistance  to its 1,[ADDRESS_1047739]. Druss  and Michael  Lardiere will present  annual  
workshops  at the National  Council  for Community  Behavioral  Healthcare’s  annual  meeting,  and will present      
a webinar  to reach  community  providers  who are unable to attend that meeting.  
V. ADDRESSING  POTENTIAL  LIMITATIONS  
We believe the proposed  study  has a number  of strengths,  including addressing  an issue  of high public  
health importance  to a vulnerable population,  the use of a novel  health information technology  innovation,  an 
innovative study  design,  high potential  for generalizability,  and rich opportunities  for dissemination.  
Nonetheless,  we also recognize several  potential  issues.  
A.Challenges  in using  technology  inter entions  in public  sector  populations:  We recognize that rates  of 
smartphone use in persons  in poor populations  is likely  to be lower  than usage in the general  population.  
However,  extrapolating  from the history  of cell phone  diffusion, competition is likely  to drive  prices  down  and 
encourage  widespread use in coming  years,  with particularly  extensive uptake  in poor and minority  
communities.  99-[ADDRESS_1047740]  persons  treated  in the public  mental  health sectors  will own their own 
smartphones,  adding  to ease of dissemination.  
B.Challenges  specific  to persons  with SMI: We recognize based on our existing work  that about  a third of 
persons  with SMI may have gaps  in health and computer  literacy  and cognitive symptoms  associated  with 
poverty,  lower  educational  attainment,  and underlying symptomatology.  We are addressing these  challenges  
by 1.ensuring  that it is designed to fit the cognitive  and literacy  needs  of the population,  2. using  a mobile  
platform  to ensure  internet  connectivity,  and 3. providing  all participants  in the intervention group with a 
modified computer  literacy  training  program  developed as part of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732].  While  all members  of the 
behavioral  health home will be eligible  to enroll  in the study,  analyses  will examine whether  persons  with lower  
rates  of health or computer  literacy  at baseline  derive  the same benefit  as higher  literacy  participants.  
C.Challenges  in ensuring  privacy:  Several  steps  will be taken  to ensure that these data are protected and 
deleted if a pho e is lost or stolen.  All smartphones  will be password protected,  with only the client  and study  
administrator  informed  about  the password.  All patient  data will be stored  on the secured HealthVault  server,  
none will be stored  on the smartphone.  If a phone  is lost or stolen,  Emory’s IT  Department  will remotely  disabl  
the smartphone,  and wipe all data including  the study  app. 
C. Challenges  in addressing  potential  contamination:  Because the program  will be conducted in a single  
behavioral  health home,  there  is the potential  for contamination  if providers’  practices  are changed by [CONTACT_764691].  Such  contamin  tion would end to reduce the effect  size of the intervention,  increasing  the 
possibility  of type II error.[ADDRESS_1047741] changes  in process  of care 
measures  for the usual  care group to assess  for potential  effects  on control subjects.  
 
VI. TIMELINE:  
During  the first 9 months,  we will we will develop  a beta version of the app and refine  it using  qualitative  
techniques.  Next,  5 cohorts  of 60 subjects  each  will be sequentially  enrolled in the trial for 6 months  each;  
after each  cohort,  [ADDRESS_1047742]  (mPHR)  for 
persons  with serious  mental  disorders  treated in behavioral  health homes.  In the first phase of the study,  the 
study  team  will develop and refine the app based on qualitative  interviews.  In the second  phase,  5 cohorts  of 
60 subjects  will be randomized  to receive either  the mPHR or usual  care.  During  the final phase,  the program  
will be disseminated through  a national  technical  assistance  center  to behavioral  health  homes  nationwide.  
 
VIIA:  Protection of Human  Subjects  
VIIA1:  Sources  of research  material:  Sources  of research material  will include interviews  with subjects  and 
administrative  data from the Four Corners  Behavioral  Health  Home  in Cobb County,  GA. Interviews  will be 
audiotaped and transcribed.  Audiotapes  will be destroyed once  interviews  have  been transcribed.  
 
VIIA2:  Plans  for Recruitment  of Subjects:  
Subjects  will be recruited  from a roster  of clients  from the Four Corners  Behavioral  Health  Home.  All of these  
patients  have a diagnosis  of a serious  mental  illness  and one or more  cardiometabolic  risk factor.  The only 
exclusion criterion  will be inability  to consent  based  on a 6-item,  validated screener.  46 
 
VIIB:  Informed  Consent:   
VIIB1.  Qualitative  interviews:  All eligible  participants  in interviews  will be offered  written  informed consent.  The 
informed consent  process  will describe  the risks and benefits  of participating  in the interviews,  focusing  on the 
potential  for breach  of confidentiality.  
 
VIIB2.  Randomized Trial:  All participants  will be offered written  informed consent.  The procedures  of the study  
and the informed  consent  document  will be thoroughly  reviewed with the subject  in both verbal  and written  form 
by a trained research  assistant.  Only those subjects  demonstrating  adequate comprehension will be consented  
and enrolled in the study.  Study  personnel  will also obtain permission  to recontact  [CONTACT_764692] -up assessments.  
The informed consent  process  will include the following:  notification  that participants  will be interviewed  
three times  (baseline,  six-month,  and 1-year follow -up); that half of participants  (selected  at random)  will 
complete  and maintain a smartphone- based,  mobile personal  health record;  that agreement  to participate in the 
study  does  not obligate participants  to accept  any particular  treatments;  and that participants  are free to 
withdraw  from any part of the study  (either  the intervention  program  or the follow -up assessments)  at any time.  
 
VIIC: Potential  Risks  
VIIC1. Breach of confidentiality:  It is essential  to monitor  and minimize  the possibility  of a breach in 
confidentiality  either  via the mobile  personal  health record,  care coordinator,  research  staff (interviewer),  or 
through inappropriate  access  to the smartphone- based mobile  PHR.  These issues are particularly  salient  in the 
use of information  technology,  whose goal is to consolidate and improve access to health information.  Section  
VIID1  describes  the mechanisms  for addressing these  potential  privacy  concerns.  
 
VIIC2: Acute  medical  or mental  health crisis : It is possible that patients  will be found to be in a medical  or 
mental  health crisis  at the time of screening  or that a new problem  will emerge sometime  during  the study.  
Section VIID2  describes  mechanisms  for safely  addressing  these potential  problems.  
 
VIIC3.Subject  Burden:  Study  assessments will always  result  in an expenditure of time and inconvenience for 
subjects,  as well as the potential  for discomfort  or embarrassment  related  to the content  of the interview.  
 
VIID Adequacy  of Protection against  Risks:   
VIID1.  Protecting against  breach  of confidentiality:  
VIID1a:  Privacy Protections  for the mPHR:   
1. Patient’s  role in selecting  who has access to health  information:  Patients  assign  an Access  Level  to each  
person listed  on the plan to determine the level of access each member  has to the specific  health record.  
Access may include the ability  to fully edit the plan,  view only,  or to have no access  to the plan.  
2. Password features:  Upon  registration,  all mPHR users  (patients,  providers,  and other  care team  members)  
obtain a unique identification and an encrypted password.  Passwords  are a minimum  of eight  characters  and 
are required to use mixed  case  letters,  numbers,  and punctuation.  
3. Data  storage:  Data  will be stored  on HealthVault  servers,  which  are password protected and HIPAA  
compliant.  No patient  data will be stored locally  on the smartphones.  All data transfers  to and from the server  
use [ADDRESS_1047743] or stolen,  Emory  IT will remotely  wipe all apps  and data off of 
the smartphone.  
4. Auditing Capabilities:  Full-content  auditing  makes  it possible  to give users  as much  access to the 
application as needed to easily  perform  their tasks,  but with the understanding  that a full report  of 
their activities  is always  available.  Participants  will be encouraged to review  their own audit  
trails  to see who has accessed their mPHR.  
There  are two different  types  of auditing  that occur  within  the mPHR.  Event  auditing  occurs 
when information is logged when users  take certain  actions  (but do not change data).  Data  
auditing  occurs  when the results  of data operations  (inserts,  updates,  and deletes)  are logged.  
Each  table in the mPHR schema that holds  dynamic  user-generated content  has an associated  audit  table.  
Separate logs are kept for logins,  searching  for a mPHR,  viewing  the mPHR,  viewing  particular  screens,  and 
viewing  a user’s  registration  information.  
The project  manager  will print weekly  logs of auditing  activities  for all patients  in the study.  If there  is 
any evidence of a breach  (e.g. inappropriate  attempts  to view or change the record  by [CONTACT_764693]),  the principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_764645],  and appropriate action  
will be taken.  
 
VIID1b:  Protecting  privacy for the study  and study  data:   
1. For the qualitative interviews,  no identifying  information  will be included in the transcripts  of the interviews  or 
in any publications  or reports  that emerge  from those  reports.  
2. For the randomized trial, all interviews  will be held in a private  area away  from the clinical  care area.  
3. For study  data, unique identifiers  will be generated  for all study  subjects;  these  will be the only identifiers  
used in files used for data entry  and analysis.  The file linking  these  identifiers  to patient  names  and addresses  
will be stored  in a separate locked  file that will be available only to the principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_764646].  All research files will be stored  in password- protected computer  files or locked  file cabinets.  
Identifying information  such  as name,  address,  and telephone  number  will be available  only to those study  
personnel  responsible for contact[CONTACT_764694].  
 
VIID2:  Protocol  for addressing  acute  medical  or mental  health  crisis:  
If patients  will have  a medical  or mental  health  crisis  either  at the time of an interview  by [CONTACT_263412],  the research  assistant  will immediately  contact  [CONTACT_62674].  Based  on the clinical  
situation,  acuity,  and patient  preferences,  a decision will be made whether  to a. Contact  [CONTACT_102]’s  primary  
care provider  or mental  health clinician  or b. Escort  the patient  to the Emergency  Room  for a full evaluation.  
 
VIID3.  Minimizing  subject  burden:  To minimize  the interview  burden for the randomized trial, interviews  will be 
scheduled at a time and location that is as convenient  as possible for patients  –when possible,  prior to or 
directly  after a Four Corners  Clinic  appointment.  Interviews  will be conducted in a private,  comfortable setting.  
If a subject  appears  tired or anxious,  the subject  will be asked if he or she wishes  to rest, take a break,  or 
terminate the interview.  Monetary  reimbursement  for each  interview  and focus  group  meeting  will help 
compensate subjects  for the time and effort expended.  Monetary  reimbursement  for attendance  at each  
training session  will help defray  any needed transportation or childcare expenses.  
 
VIIE Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed Research  Project  to the Subjects  and Others:  
VIIE1.  For subjects  in the usual  care group of the trial: For those  in the usual  care arm of the randomized trial, 
patients  will not receive  any direct  health benefits  from participation.  
 
VIIE2.  For subjects  in the intervention group:  Subjects  participating  in the intervention group are expected to 
directly  benefit  from the mPHR.  As described in the body  of the proposal,  hypothesized benefits  include  
improved quality  of care and better  clinical outcomes.  
 
VIIE3.  For other  persons  treated in public  safety  settings: The study’s  results  are hoped  to inform  the 
development  of other  programs  to improve care for clients  with serious  mental  Illness.  
VIIE4  Risk Benefit  Ratio:  Given  the protections  to ensure  confidentiality,  ensure high quality  of the intervention,  
and minimize  subject  burden,  and the potential  benefits  of improved care for patients  in the active  treatment  
group of the randomized  trial, we anticipate a favorable risk-benefit  ratio for the projects.  
 
VIIF.  Data  Safety  and Monitoring Plan 
VIIF1.  Responsibility,  Frequency,  and Content  of Data  Safety  Monitoring:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_764647].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_764648] a monthly  basis  
during  the course of the study.  A three -member  DSMB  committee will be assembled who will review  study  
recruitment  and any potential  adverse events  twice  each year.  A semi -annual  report  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_764649]  a brief description  of the randomized trial; baseline  demographic  characteristics,  and retention and 
disposition of study  participants.  
 
VIIF2:  Adverse Event  Reporting:  Serious  adverse events  are expected to be unlikely.  If one occurs,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_764650]. The PI, in consultation with co-investigators  and others  as 
needed,  will review  the adverse event  report  and determine the need for subsequent  action.  Any subsequent  
action will also be documented  and reported to the Emory  IRB. 
 
VIIF3:  Confidentiality  and Integrity  of Data:   
VIIF3a.  Qualitative  interviews:  No identifying  information  will be included in the transcripts  of interviews  or in 
any publications  or reports  that emerge from those reports.  All audiotapes  will be destroyed  after transcripts  
have been made,  and the transcripts  will be kept in a locked file. 
VIIF3b.  Randomized trial: PHR data will be stored on HIPAA compliant  HealthVault  servers;  no patient  data will 
be stored on study  smartphones.  Unique identifiers  will be generated  for all study  subjects;  these  will be the 
only identifiers  used  in files used for data entry  and analysis.  The file linking  these  identifiers  to patient  names  
and addresses  will be stored  in a separate  locked file that will be available  only to the principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_764651].  All research files will be stored  in password- protected comp uter files or locked file cabinets.  
Identifying information  such  as name,  address,  and telephone  number  will be available  only to those study  
personnel  responsible for contact[CONTACT_764694].  
VIIF3c  HIPAA:  The Emory  University  Institutional  Review Board has developed a series  of guidelines  and 
amendments  to their review  process  to ensure that all research  protocols  are compliant  with the privacy  
provisions  of the Health  Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act. We will work  closely  with that office to 
ensure that any final IRB protocol  is in full compliance with this act. 
VIIG1. Inclusion of Women  Women will be included in the enrollment  process  and we expect  them  to be 
well-represented based  on the characteristics  of the CMHCs  from which  they are recruited.  
 
VIIG2.  Inclusion  of Minorities  Minority  groups  are well-represented in the mental  health centers,  and will be 
included based  on their representation in that population.  
 
 
TARGETED/PLANNED  ENROLLMENT:  Number  of Subjects*  
 
Ethnic  Category   
Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic  or Latino  8 4 12 
Not Hispanic  or Latino 187 101 288 
Ethnic  Category  Total  of all Subjects  195 105 300 
 
Racial  Categories  
American  Indian/Alaska  Native  0 0 0 
Asian  4 2 6 
Native  Hawaiian  or Other  Pacific  Islander  0 0 0 
Black  or African  American  43 23 66 
Hispanic  or Latino  8 4 12 
White  140 76 216 
Other  0 0 0 
Racial Categories:  Total  of All Subjects  [ADDRESS_1047744] different  health problems  and needs  from adults,  they would not 
easily  be integrated into the broader  intervention,  and hence will not be included in intervention.  Approximately  
5% of patients  in the four corners  behavioral  health home  is between the ages  of [ADDRESS_1047745]  that special  accommodations  will be needed for the group.  
REFERENCES  
 
1. Mitchell AJ,  Malone  D, Doebbeling  CC. Quality  of medical care for people  with  and without  comorbid  
mental  illness  and substance misuse:  systematic  review of  comparative studies.  Br J Psychiatry.  
2009;194(6):491- 9. 
2. Druss BG, Bradford  WD,  Rosenheck RA, Radford  MJ, Krumholz  HM. Quality of  medical  care and  
excess mortality  in older patients with mental disorders. Arch Gen  Psychiatry. 2001;58(6):565- 72. 
3. Alakeson V, Frank RG, Katz RE. Specialty care  medical  homes  for people with severe, persistent  
mental disorders. Health  Aff (Millwood). 2010;29(5):867- 73. 
4. Alexander L, Druss B. Behavioral health homes  for persons with  mental  and substance use conditions. 
Washington, DC; 2012  
5. Scharf D, Vaughan C, Eberhart N, Schmidt  N, Dutta  T, Burnham  A. Inegrating primary  care services in  
to behavioral  health settings  for persons  with serious  mental illness:  first lessons learned  from  SAMHSA's  
Primary and  Behaviroal  Health  Care Integration (PBHCI) grants program.  PBHCI annual grantee presentation;  
May; San Diego, CA2011. 
6. Carter  EL, Nunlee -Bland  G, Callender  C. A patient -centric, provider -assisted diabetes telehealth self- 
management  intervention for urban minorities. Perspectives  in health information  management  / AHIMA,  
American Health  Information  Management  Association. 2011;8:1b. PMCID: 3035826. 
7. Lee J, editor. Smart health:  Concepts  and status  of ubiquitous  health  with  smartphone ICT  Convergence  
(ICTC); 2011 Sept 28- 30, 2011.  
8. Chong C -C, Watanabe F. From  Mobile Phones to Personal  Wellness Dashboards. Pulse,  IEEE.  2010:57-  
63. 9. Brown  CH, Ten Have  TR, Jo B, Dagne  G, Wyman  PA, Muthen B, Gibbons RD. Adaptive designs for  
randomized trials  in public  healt h. Annu  Rev Public Health.  2009;30:1- 25. PMCID: 2778326.  
10. Maltzberg  B. Mortality  Among Patients  with  Mental Disease. Utica: [LOCATION_001] State Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_546216]; 
1934. 11. Osborn DP, Levy G, Nazareth I, Petersen I, Islam A, King MB. Relative risk  of cardiovascular  and 
cancer mortality  in people  with severe  mental  illness  from  the [LOCATION_008]'s  general practice  research  
database. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(2):242- 9. 
12. Felker  B YJ, Short  D. Mortality  and medical  comorbidity among psychiatric patients: a review.  
Psychi atr Serv. 1996;47(12):1356- 63. 
13. Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J. A systematic  review of mortality in schizophrenia: is  the differential  
mortality gap worsening over time?  Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(10):1123- 31. 
14. Hoang  U, Stewart  R, Goldacre MJ.  Mortality  after  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_764652]: retrospective  study  of linked English hospi[INVESTIGATOR_764653], 1999- 2006. BMJ. 
2011;343:d5422. PMCID: 3172324. 15. Druss BG, Bornemann  TH. Improving  health and  health  care for persons  with serious  mental illness:  the 
window for US federal policy change.  JAMA : the journal of the  American  Medical Association.  
2010;303(19):1972- 3. 
16. Manderscheid RW.  Premature death among  state mental health agency consumers:  assessing progress in  
addressing  a quiet  tragedy.  Int J Public Health. 2009;[ADDRESS_1047746] 1:7- 8. 
17. Druss BG, Newcomer  JW. Challenges and solutions to integrating mental  and physical health care. J  
Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(4):e09.  
18. Kilbourne  AM, Morden NE, Austin  K, Ilgen  M, McCarthy JF, Dalack G, Blow FC. Excess heart - 
disease- related  mortality in a national  study of patients with mental disorders: identifying  modifiable risk  
factors. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2009;31(6):555- 63. 
19. Druss  BG,  Mauer  BJ. Health  care reform  and care at the behavioral health --primary care interface.  
Psychiatr Serv. 2010;61(11):1087- 92. 
20. Missouri Department  of Mental Health. Health  Care Homes.  2012 [updated 2012; cited]; Available  
from:  http://dmh.mo.gov/about/chiefclinicalofficer/healthcarehome.htm.
 
21. Tang PC, Lansky D. The missing  link: bridging the patient -provider  health information gap. Health Aff  
(Millwood). 2005;24(5):1290- 5. 
22. Markle Foundation. Connecting  for Health.  The perso nal health working group final  report.  : Markle  
Foundation;  [ADDRESS_1047747], 2003  
23. Tang PC, Newcomb  C. Informing  patients: a guide  for providing  patient  health  information. J Am Med  
Inform  Assoc. 1998;5(6):563- 70. 
24. Jerden  L, Weinehall  L. Does  a patient -held health  record give rise to lifestyle changes?  A study in  
clinical  practice.  Family  practice. 2004;21(6):651- 3. 
25. Crawford S. The New Digital Divide. [LOCATION_001] Times.  [ADDRESS_1047748]  J, Mahoney  ER, Tusler  M. Development  of the Patient Activation Measure  
(PAM): conceptualizing and measuring  activation in patients and consumers. Health  Serv Res.  2004;39(4 Pt  
1):1005- 26. 
27. Hibbard JH, Mahoney ER, Stock R, Tusler M. Do  increases  in patient  activation  result in improved  self- 
management  behaviors?  Health  Serv  Res. 2007;42(4):1443- 63. PMCID: 1955271.  
28. Mosen  DM,  Schmittdiel J, Hibbard J, Sobel  D, Remmers  C, Bellows  J. Is patient  activation associated  
with outcomes  of care for adults  with  chronic  conditions?  The Journal of ambulatory care management.  
2007;30(1):21- 9. 
29. Ben-Zeev D, Davis KE, Kaiser S, Krzsos I, Drake RE. Mobile Technologies Among People with  
Serious  Mental  Illness:  Opportunities for Future  Services. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2012. 
30. Morgan D.  Planning  Focus Groups. In: Morgan DaK, RA., editor. The Focus  Group Kit. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1998. 
31. Berkman LF,  Blumenthal J,  Burg  M, Carney  RM, Catellier  D, Cowan  MJ, Czajkowski  SM, DeBusk  R, 
Hosking  J, Jaffe  A, Kaufmann PG, Mitchell P, Norman  J, Powell LH, Raczynski  JM, Schneiderman  N. Effects  
of treating depression and low perceived social  support  on clinical  events  after  myocardial infarction:  the 
Enhancing  Recovery  in Coronary  Heart  Disease Patients (ENRICHD) Randomized  Trial.  JAMA : the journal  of 
the American  Medical Association.  2003;289(23):3106- 16. 
32. Brown J. The use of focus groups in clinical research.  In: Miller BCaW,  editor. Doing  Qualitative  
Research. Thousand Oaks, CA.: Sage. p. 109- 24. 
33. Krueger R. Analyzing and Reporting Focus Group Results. Thousand Oaks,  CA:  Sage  Publications.;  
1997. 34. Morgan DaK, RA. The Focus Group Kit. London: Sage; 1998.  
35. Lardiere  M. A National  Survey  of Health  Information Technology  (HIT)  Adoption in  Federally  
Qualifi ed Health  Centers. Bethesda,  MD:  National  Association of Community  Health Centers; 2009  
36. Android Developers Software  Kit,.  [cited];  Available from:   
http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html .
 
37. ;  [cited]; Available  from: http://developer.healthvault.com/ . 
38. Hawley KL, Roberto CA, Bragg MA, Liu PJ, Schwartz MB,  Brownell  KD.  The science on front -of- 
package  food labels.  Public  Health  Nutr.  2012:1- 10. 
39. Kim J, Bates  DW. Analysis  of the definition and  utility of personal health records using  Q methodology.  
Journal of medical Internet  research.  2011;13(4):e105. PMCID:  3278091.  
40. Reti SR, Feldman  HJ, Ross SE, Safran C. Improving  personal health records for patient -centered care. J  
Am Med Inform  Assoc. 2010;17(2):192- 5. PMCID: 3000780. 
41. Lorig  K. Action  planning:  a call to action.  Journal  of the American Board of Family Medicine :  JABFM.  
2006;19(3):324- 5. 
42. Tobacman  JK, Kissinger P, W ells M, Prokuski J, Hoyer  M, McPherson  P, Wheeler  J, Kron -Chalupa  J, 
Parsons C, Weller P, Zimmerman  B. Implementation  of personal health records by [CONTACT_764695] a VAMC  
general  medicine clinic.  Patient  Education and Counseling. 2004;54(1):27 -33. 
43. Kaelber  DC, Jha AK, Johnston D, Middleton B, Bates DW.  A Research Agenda for Personal Health  
Records (PHRs).  J Am  Med Inform  Assn. 2008;15(6):729- 36. 
44. Elo S, Kyngas H. The qualitative content analysis  process. J Adv  Nurs. 2008;62(1):107- 15. 
45. Richards L. Handling Qualitative  Data: A Practical Guide . Thousand Oaks,  CA: Sage  
Publications ; 2009 . 
46. Callahan CM,  Unverzagt FW,  Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC.  Six-item screener  to identify  cognitive  
impairment among  potential subjects for clinical  research. Med Care. 2002;40(9):771- 81. 
47. Ehrenreich  B, Righter  B, Rocke DA, Dixon L, Himelhoch S.  Are mobile  phones and handheld 
computers being  used  to enhance  delivery  of psychiatric  treatment?  A systematic  review.  J Nerv Ment Dis.  
2011;199(11):886- 91. 
48. Luce BR, Kramer  JM, Goodman SN, Connor JT, Tunis  S, Whicher  D, Schwartz JS. Rethinking  
randomized clinical  trials  for comparative effectiveness  research:  the need  for transformational  change. Ann  
Intern  Med.  2009;151(3):206- 9. 
49. Rosser BA, Eccleston C. Smartphone  applications for pain management.  Journal of telemedicine  and 
telecare. 2011;17(6):308- 12. 
50. Kilbourne AM,  Neumann  MS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62113], Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing  evidence -based  
interventions in  health care: application  of the replicating  effective programs  framework.  Implement Sci. 
2007;2:42. PMCID:  2248206. 
51. Proctor  EK, Landsverk  J, Aarons  G, Chambers D,  Glisson  C, Mittman B.  Implementation research  in 
mental health  services:  an emerging science with  conceptual,  methodological, and  training  challenges.  Adm  
Policy Ment Health. 2009;36(1):24- 34. 
52. McGlynn EA, Asch SM, Adams  J, Keesey J, Hicks J,  DeCristofaro  A, Kerr  EA. The quality  of health  
care delivered to adults in the United  States.  N Engl  J Med.  2003;348(26):2635- 45. 
53. Brook R. The RAND/UCLA appropriateness method. In:  McCormick K, Moore S, Siegel R, editors. 
Clinical practice guideline development:  methodology  perspectives.  Rockville, Md, November: Agency  for 
Health  Care Policy  and Research;  1994. p. 59- 70. 
54. Shekelle PG,  Kahan JP, Bernstein SJ, Leape LL, Kamb erg CJ, Park RE. The reproducibility of a method 
to identify the overuse and underuse of  medical procedures. N  Engl J Med. 1998;338(26):1888- 95. 
55. Asch S, Clark K. Hypertension. Santa Monica, CA:  RAND; [ADDRESS_1047749], Patterson  ME,  Sleath  BL. Psychological  distress as  a barrier  to preventive  
care in  community -dwelling  elderly  in the [LOCATION_002]. Med Care. 2006;44(2):187- 91. 
57. Glasgow RE, Wagner  EH, Schaefer J, Mahoney LD, Reid RJ, Greene SM. Development  and validation 
of the Patient Assessment  of Chronic  Illness  Care (PACIC).  Med Care. 2005;43(5):436- 44. 
58. Glasgow RE, Whitesides  H, Nelson CC, King DK. Use of the Patient Assessment  of Chronic Illness  
Care (PACIC) with diabetic  patients:  relationship  to patient characteristics, receipt of  care,  and self- 
management.  Diabetes  care. 2005;28(11):2655 -61. 
59. Tsai AC, Morton SC, Mangione  CM, Keeler  EB. A meta -analysis  of interventions  to improve care for  
chronic  illnesses.  Am J Manag Care. 2005;11(8):478- 88. 
60. Schmittdiel J, Mosen DM, Glasgow RE, Hibbard J, Remmers  C, Bellows J. Patient  Assessment  of 
Chronic Illness Care (PACIC)  and improved patient -centered outcomes for chronic  conditions. J  Gen  Intern  
Med. 2008;23(1):77 -80. 
61. Donabedian A. The quality of medical  care. Science. 1978;200(4344):856- 64. 
62. Rossi MC, Lucisano G, Comaschi  M, Coscelli C, Cucinotta D, Di Blasi P, Bader G, Pellegrini F,  
Valentini U,  Vespasiani  G, Nicolucci  A. Quality  of diabetes  care predicts  the development  of cardiovascular  
events: results of the AMD -QUASAR study.  Diabetes  Care. 2011;34(2):347- 52. PMCID: 3024347.  
63. Cohn T, Prud'homme  D, Streiner D, Kameh  H, Remington  G. Characterizing coronary  heart disease risk  
in chronic  schizophrenia:  high  prevalence of  the metabolic  syndrome. Can J Psychiatry. 2004;49(11):753- 60. 
64. Goff DC, Cather C, Evins AE, Henderson DC, Freudenreich O, Copeland PM, Bierer M, Duckworth K, 
Sacks  FM.  Medical  morbidity and  mortality in  schizophrenia:  guidelines  for psychiatrists.  J Clin  Psychiatry.  
2005;66(2):183- 94; quiz 47, 273- 4. 
65. Correll  CU,  Frede rickson AM,  Kane JM,  Manu  P. Metabolic syndrome  and the risk of coronary heart  
disease in  367 patients  treated  with  second -generation antipsychotic drugs. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(4):575-  
83. 
66. Del Valle MC, Loebel AD, Murray S,  Yang R, Harrison DJ, Cuffel  BJ. Change in framingham  risk 
score in patients with schizophrenia: a post hoc analysis of  a randomized, double -blind, 6 -week trial of  
ziprasidone  and olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Prim  Care Companion  J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;8(6):329- 33. 
67. McHorney  CA,  Ware  JE, Jr.,  Raczek  AE. The MOS  36-Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -36): II. 
Psychometric and  clinical tests  of validity  in measuring  physical and mental health constructs. Med Care.  
1993;31(3):247- 63. 
68. McHorney CA, Ware JE,  Jr., Lu JF, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36- item Short -Form  Health Survey (SF - 
36): III. Tests of data quality, scaling assumptions, and  reliability  across diverse patient groups. Med Care.  
1994;32(1):40- 66. 
69. Ware JE,  Jr., Kosinski  M, Bayliss  MS,  McHorney CA, Rogers WH,  Raczek A. Comparison of methods  
for the scoring and statistical analysis of SF -36 health profile  and summary  measures:  summary of results from  
the Medical  Outcomes Study.  Med Care. 1995;33([ADDRESS_1047750]):AS264 -79. 
70. Tunis SL, Croghan TW,  Heilman  DK, Johnstone  BM, Obenchain RL. Reliability, validity, and  
application  of the medical outcomes study  36-item short -form health survey (SF -36) in schizophrenic patients  
treated  with  olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_764654]. Med  Care.  1999;37(7):678- 91. 
71. Russo J, Trujillo CA, Wingerson  D, Decker K, Ries R, Wetzler  H, Roy -By[CONTACT_7943] P. The MOS 36- Item 
Short Form  Health Survey: reliability,  validity, and preliminary  findings  in schizophrenic outpatients. Med  
Care. 1998;36(5):752- 6. 
72. Baker DW,  Williams  MV, Parker RM, Gazmararian  JA, Nurss J. Development  of a brief test  to measure  
functional  health  literacy.  Patient Educ Couns. 1999;38(1):33- 42. 
73. Hargittai E.  An Update  on Survey  Measures  of Web -Oriented Digital Literacy. Soc  Sci Comput Rev.  
2009;27(1):130- 7. 
74. Bryk A. Hierarchical linear models: appl ications  and data analysis methods.  Newbury Park, CA.: Sage;  
1992. 
75. Ten Have TR,  Localio  AR.  Empi[INVESTIGATOR_764655]. Biometrics.  1999;55(4):1022- 9. 
76. Diggle P, Liang K, Zeger S. Analysis of  longitudinal data Oxford: Clarendon Press.;  1994.  
77. Ten Have T, Elliot M, Joffe  M, Datto C. Causal Models  for Randomized Physician  Encouragement  
Trials in Treating Primary  Care Depression. Journal  of the American  Statistical Association. 2004;99(485):16-  
25. 78. Ten Have T, Joffe M, Lynch K, Maisto S, Brown G, Beck A. Causal mediation  analyses with rank  
preserving  models. Biometrics. 2007;in  press.  
79. Muthen L, Muthen B.  Mplus  users  guide:  the comprehensive modeling program  for applied  researchers  
(Version 2.14). . Los Angeles: CA.; 1998 80. MacKinnon D,  Dwyer  J. Estimating mediated effects  in prevention studies. Evaluation Review.  
1993;17(2):144- 58. 
81. Kenny DA, Calsyn RJ, Morse GA, Klinkenberg WD,  Winter JP,  Trusty  ML. Evaluation of treatment  
programs  for persons with severe mental illness: moderator  and mediator effects.  Eval Rev. 2004;28(4):294-  
324. 82. Stockwell  MS,  Kharbanda  EO, Martinez  RA,  Vargas  CY, Vawdrey DK, Camargo  S. Effect of a text  
messaging intervention on influenza  vaccination  in an urban, low -income pediatric  and adolescent  population:  a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA.  2012;307(16):1702- 8. 
83. Szilagyi PG, Adams  WG. Text messaging:  a new  tool for improving  preventive services. JAMA.  
2012;307(16):1748- 9. 
84. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS,  McEvoy  JP, Swartz  MS,  Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis SM, 
Davis CE, Lebowitz BD, Severe J, Hsiao  JK. Effectiveness of  antipsychotic  drugs  in patients  with  chronic  
schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(12):1209 -23. 
85. Steiner JF, Prochazka AV.  The assessment  of refill compliance using pharmacy  records: methods,  
validity, and applications. J  Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  1997;50(1):105- 16. 
86. Cramer  JA, Benedict A, Muszbek N, Keskinaslan  A, Khan ZM. The significance of compliance and  
persistence in the treatment of diabetes, hypertension and dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_17939]: a review. Int J Clin Pract.  
2008;62(1):76- 87. 
87. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA, Compton MT, Zhao L, Leslie  DL. Budget  impact and  sustainability  of 
medical  care management  for persons with serious mental  illnesses. Am  J Psychiatry. 2011;168(11):1171- 8. 
88. Cohen JW,  Cohen SB, Banthin JS. The medical  expenditure  panel survey: a national information  
resource to support healthcare cost  research  and inform  policy  and practice. Med Care. 2009;47([ADDRESS_1047751] 1):S44-  
50. 89. Hlatky  MA.  Economic endpoints  in clinical  trials.  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_19274].  2002;24(1):80- 4. 
90. Rosenheck RA, Druss B, Stolar M, Leslie D, Sledge  W. Effect of declining mental health  service use  on 
employees  of a large corporation. Health Aff (Millwood). 1999;18(5):193- 203. 
91. Wolff N,  Helminiak TW, Tebes  JK. Getting  the cost right  in cost-effectiveness analyses. Am  J 
Psychiatry.  1997;154(6):736- 43. 
92. Gold MR. Cost -effectiveness in health and medicine.  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford Univer sity Press; 1996.  
93. Manning  WG,  Jr. Panel  on cost-effectiveness  in health  and medicine recommendations:  identifying  
costs.  J Clin  Psychiatry.  1999;[ADDRESS_1047752] 3:54 -6; discussion 7- 8. 
94. Weinstein  MC,  Siegel  JE, Gold  MR,  Kamlet MS,  Russell  LB. Recommendations of  the Panel  on Cost - 
effectiveness in Health and Medicine.  JAMA : the journal of the  American  Medical Association.  
1996;276(15):1253- 8. 
95. Grimshaw  J, Eccles M, Thomas  R, MacLennan G, Ramsay  C, Fraser C, Vale L. Toward evidence -based  
quality  improvement. Evidence (and  its limitations) of  the effectiveness  of guideline  dissemination and  
implementation  strategies 1966- 1998. J  Gen Intern Med. 2006;[ADDRESS_1047753] 2:S14- 20. 
96. Mauskopf  JA, Sullivan  SD, Annemans  L, Caro  J, Mullins CD, Nuijten M, Orlewska  E, Watkins  J, 
Trueman  P. Principles of  good practice for budget impact  analysis:  report  of the ISPOR  Task  Force  on good 
research practices --budget impact  analysis. Value Health. 2007;10(5):336- 47. 
97. McBryde -Foster MJ.  Break -even  analysis  in a nurse -managed  center. Nurs Econ. 2005;23(1):31- 4, 3. 
98. Morris ZS, Wooding S, Grant J. The answer is 17 years,  what is the question: understanding time  lags in  
translational research.  Journal  of the Royal  Society of Medicine. 2011;104(12):510- 20. 
99. Washington J.  For minorities, new  "digital divide" seen.; 2011 January 10, 2011 
100. Sarashohn- Kahn  J. How smartphones are changing  helath care for consumers and  providers:  [LOCATION_004]  
Helath  Care Foundation;  2010 April  2010  
101. Ettner R. Smartphones  to Overtake Feature Phones  in U.S.  by 2011;  2010 
102. Cuzick R , Edwards R, Segnan N. Adjusting for non- compliance  and contamination  in randomized  
clinical  trials.  Stat Med.  1996;16(9):1017- 29. 