DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 1 
 
 
PEG IFN -alpha2a (Pegasys®) therapy in patients with chronic 
myeloproliferative diseases (excluding Philadelphia chromosome 
positive chronic myeloid leukemia).DM03 -0109  
 
1.0 H ypothesis 
 
PEG IFN- a2a (Pegasys®) is an effective and tolerable 
treatment for patients with essential thrombocythemia 
(ET) and polycythemia vera (PV).  
  
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 The primary objective of this study is to determine 
the efficacy of PEG IFN -α2a in patients w ith 
chronic myeloproliferative diseases: ET and PV.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_465189] category of chronic myeloid disorders.  Because the clonal process originates at the stem -cell level, with 
retention of cellular differentiating capacity, chronic myeloproliferative diseases are characterized by [CONTACT_371850].  Currently, specific disease classification is based on the predominant pattern of myeloid -cell proliferation and the presence or absence of 
reactive bone- marrow fibrosis, with or without 
extramedullary hematopoiesis (Tefferi et al.).  Thrombocytosis and absolute erythrocytosis are prerequisites for the diagnosis of ET and PV, respectively.  Life expectancy in ET approaches that of an age- and sex -matched control population, and median 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 2 
survival exceeds 15 years in young patients with PV.  
Nevertheless, these disorders are considered incurable and treatment is directed at reducing morbidity and preventing life- threatening complications.  Vasomotor 
disturbances (headaches, dizziness, acral dysesthesia, erythromelalgia, visual symptoms), thrombohemorrhagic events, and the risk of transformation into acute myeloid leukemia or AMM/MF characterize the clinical course of both ET and PV (Tefferi et al.).  
 
Vasomotor symptoms may occur in up to one- third of the 
patients and are usually controlled with aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248].  Bleeding complications, in the absence of platelet anti -aggregant 
therapy, are infrequent (< 1% pt/yr) and usually inconsequential.  In contrast, thrombotic complications are more frequent and may even be fatal, especially in PV. In both ET and PV significant proportion of patients experience a thrombotic epi[INVESTIGATOR_371840] (10% -
15%) or at diagnosis (10% -20%).  During follow -up, the 
risk of thrombosis in both ET and PV depends on the patient's age and previous history of thrombosis (Rozman et al.). In comparison to a control population adequately matched for age, sex, and cardiovascular risk factors, patients with ET were found to be at a significantly 
increased risk for thrombosis (1% v 7% pt/yr).  The risk 
was highest for patients older than 60 years (15% pt/yr) 
and for those with a previous history of thrombosis (31% pt/yr).  The thrombogenic effects of advanced age and histo ry of previous thrombosis were confirmed by [CONTACT_371851].  Therefore, patients with ET who are older than 60 years and/or have a history of previous thrombosis are considered ‘high- risk for thrombosis’.  
Additional risk factors may include the presence of cardiovascular risk factors, especially smoking.  The degree of thrombocytosis or platelet -function 
abnormalities has not been correlated with thrombotic risk. 
 
In one of the largest retrospective studies ever conducted in patients with PV, thrombosis was observed in 19% of 1213 patients followed up for a median of 5.3 years.  Thrombotic risk was correlated with advanced age (> 4% pt/yr for patients older than 60 years versus 1.8% pt/yr for those younger than 40 years) and a history of thrombosis.  These and other risk factors for thrombosis (treatment with phlebotomy alone, increased phlebotomy 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 3 
requirement) were previously identified during the original 
Polycythem ia Vera Study Group studies.  Similar to the 
observation in ET, the absolute platelet count was not predictive of a thrombotic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] (Silverstein et al.).  
 
3.1.1 ET 
 
Transformation into acute myeloid leukemia or AMM/MF is rare in ET (< 2% in most large series).  Therefore, treatment efforts in ET should strive to reduce thrombotic events in high- risk-for thrombosis patients without 
increasing the intrinsically low risk of leukemic transformation.  To that effect, a recent randomized study of high- risk-for-thrombosis patients with ET demonstrated 
that treatment with hydroxyurea, compared with no myelosuppressive therapy, resulted in a significant decrease in thrombotic events (3.6% v 24% during a median follow -up of 27 months).  Follow -up was too short 
to assess risk of leukemic transformation (Tefferi, Silverstein and Hoagland).  
 
Acute myeloid leukemia has been reported in ET in the presence or absence of antecedent chemotherapy.  In nonrandomized studies of patients with ET, acute myeloid leukemia was reported to develop after treatment 
with both alkylating and nonalkylating agents.  Some 
case reports have underscored the significant risk of acute myeloid leukemia associated with long- term use of 
hydroxyurea in ET.  Regardless, the leukemogenic potential of  hydroxyurea is generally believed to be lower 
than that of alkylating agents.  As such, the risk -benefit 
ratio favors the use of hydroxyurea therapy in high- risk-
for-thrombosis patients with ET older than 60 years.   
 
The choice of a platelet -lowering agent in younger 
patients who are at risk for thrombosis is currently a matter of controversy (Fenaux et al., Nand et al.). Anagrelide is an oral imidazoquinazolin derivative that is used to treat ET. Because anagrelide has an anticyclic AMP phosphodiesterase activity (and accordingly inhibits 
platelet aggregation in humans), the drug initially was tested for its potential use as a platelet antagonist.  However, initial human studies at relatively low doses revealed a potent but reversible thrombocytopenic activity.  To date, this thrombocytopenic effect has been 
observed only in humans and occurs at plasma 
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465190] (occurring in more than 
one third of patients receiving treatment).  Other side-effects related to the vasodilatory effect include fluid-retention or edema (24%), dizziness (15%), and postural hypotension, occurring at high single- dose levels.  The 
cardiac effects include palpi[INVESTIGATOR_371841] (27%), tachycardia and other arrhythmias (<10%), and congestive heart failure (2%).  Less common side- effec ts 
include diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea and transient rash.  Rarely observed events with treatment have included hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_371842], pulmonary fibrosis, and abnormal liver function tests.  In one small study of 20 patients with ET treated with 
anagrelide, eight patients experienced side- effects and 
treatment with the drug was discontinued in six patients. 
Therefore, anagrelide therapy should be avoided in 
patients with heart disease, and the drug should be given carefully to elderly patients.  In addition, although anagrelide has no mutagenic activity, it is currently not advised for use during pregnancy (Anagrelide study group).  
 
3.1.2 PV 
 All patients with PV require phlebotomy, with the goal of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_371843] 45% in men and 42% in women.  This maneuver prolongs survival by [CONTACT_16538], but not abolishing, the risk of thrombosis.  The residual risk of early thrombosis (33%)  is reduced further by 
[CONTACT_371852] (10%).  In contrast, the addition of chemotherapy has not been shown to decrease the risk of transformation into acute myeloid leukemia (< 2%) or myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (9%) observed in patients receiving treatment with phlebotomy alone.  Instead, some of the currently available 
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465191] been shown to increase 
the risk of leukemic transformation to 11% (chlorambucil), 8% (radiophosphorus), 7% (pi [INVESTIGATOR_141741]), or 6% 
(hydroxyurea).  On the basis of these observations, hydroxyurea is currently recommended as a supplement to phlebotomy for patients with PV who are at risk for thrombosis.  
 
The goal of therapy in PV is not only to prevent thrombosis but also to reduce the risk of transformation into acute myeloid leukemia or AMM/MF.  As such, new therapeutic agents need to be explored in both ‘low -risk’ 
and ‘high- risk’ patients with PV.  ‘Low- risk’ patients with 
PV remain at an increased risk for thrombosis  and 
transformation into acute myeloid leukemia or AMM/MF.  Regardless, it currently is assumed that the risk -benefit 
ration favors treatment with phlebotomy alone in this group of patients.  Such an assumption may not hold true when the specific agents are considered that are less leukemogenic than alkylating agents or radiophosphorus (Silverstein et al.).  
 
In ‘high- risk’ patients with PV the decision to institute a 
myelosuppresive agent should take into account not only the potential benefit in preventing  thrombosis but also the 
risk of inducing therapy -related acute myeloid leukemia 
and the possible negative impact on pregnancy. The leukemogenic potential of the currently preferred agent, hydroxyurea, appears to be lower than that of alkylating agents or radiophosphorus.  However, several studies have suggested that in comparison with phlebotomy alone, the long- term use of hydroxyurea may be 
associated with an increased risk of the development of myelodysplastic syndrome or acute myeloid leukemia.  Therefore, in ‘high- risk’ patients younger than 60 years, 
interferon- α may be considered a reasonable alternative 
to hydroxyurea as a myelosuppresive agent.  Specifically, 
interferon- α may be considered for ‘high- risk’ young 
women who may be pregnant or are of childbearing age 
and for control of refractory pruritus.  
 
Anagrelide is a nonmyelosuppressive, selective platelet -
lowering agent.  The decrease in thrombotic risk associated with PV has been shown only with the use of 
myelosuppressive agents.  However, the degree of thrombocytosis has not been correlated with thrombotic 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 6 
risk in PV.  Therefore, no theoretical rationale currently 
exists to encourage the use of anagrelide in PV (Berk et al.). 
 
3.[ADDRESS_465192] on hematopoietic progenitor cells from which the abnormal clone arises.  Dose-dependent suppression of progenitor cells has been demonstrated in vivo and in vitro and it affects both normal and clonal progenitors.  However, there is evidence for a selective action on clonal progenitor cells.  
In patients with ET treated with interferon- α, the decrease 
in platelet count has been associated with a significant decrease in the number and size of bone- marrow 
megakaryocyte progenitors (CFU -M).  Similarly, a 
significant decrease in erythroid (BFU -E) and 
granulocyte- macrophage (CFU -GM) progenitors was 
associated with the elimination of the need for 
phlebotomy in patients with PV treated with interferon- α.  
This synchronous decrease in both circulating mature 
hematopoietic cells and progenitor cells is consistent with an inhibitory effect on the progenitors as the mechanism of controlling thrombocytosis and erythocytosis (Partaneu et al.).  
 
Earlier work by [CONTACT_371853] n-α could suppress excessive thrombocytosis in 
Ph-positive CML (Talpaz et al. 1983).  Subsequent 
reports confirmed the platelet -lowering activity of 
interferon- α in chronic myeloproliferative diseases.  
Numerous investigators have since reported on the therapeutic effects of interferon- α in ET.  These include 
platelet -reduction (up to 80% - 100% response rate), 
resolution of splenomegaly and control of disease-
associated symptoms.  Also, several authors have reported sustained, unmaintained remissions following 
discontinuation of long- term interferon- α therapy.  
Remission induction doses ranged from 3 to 5 million 
units per day given subcutaneously, with an average response time of 12 weeks.  Maintenance doses were lower, consistent with a decrease in bone-m arrow 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 7 
megakaryocyte mass seen with continuous interferon- α 
therapy.  Interferon- α is not know to be leukemogenic or 
teratogenic, and it does not cross the placenta.  
Consequently, treatment with interferon- α may be 
considered during pregnancy.  
 
Preliminary  reports on interferon- α as a new therapy for 
PV appeared in the late 1980s.  Subsequent studies confirmed the benefits of interferon- α in PV, which 
include induction of complete hematologic remission (up 
to 70% - 80% response rate) and resolution of disease-
associated symptoms and/or splenomegaly.  It is now 
thought that interferon- α antagonizes the action of 
platelet -derived growth factor (PDGF) in addition to its 
direct effect on erythroid progenitors (Silver RT).  
Inhibition of PDGF may be effective in MF as well.  Doses used to obtain these responses varied between 4 and 27 million units subcutaneously per week, with an average maintenance does of 3 million units three times 
a week.  One of the major benefits of interferon- α therapy 
in PV has been the ability to control refractory pruritus 
(75% response rate) and to improve quality of life.  
Recent reports suggest that interferon- α may have the 
potential to suppress the abnormal clone in PV, 
analogous to its ability to induce cytogenetic remission in CML .  Eradication or suppression of the malignant clone 
has major implications for altering the natural history of PV, with its inherent risk of transformation into leukemia or myelofibrosis (Lewis et al.).  
 
Toxicity and cost are major obstacles to the use of 
interferon- α therapy.  The adverse dropout rate has been 
approximately 17% and 20% among treated patients with 
ET or PV, respectively.  Upon initiation of therapy, most patients experience a transient influenza- like syndrome 
associated with fever and chills, myalgias, headache, and arthralgias.  Premedication with acetaminophen is usually helpful in ameliorating these acute side- effects.  Chronic 
side-effects include fatigue, nausea, anorexia, weight -
loss, diarrhea, increased liver transaminase, altered mental status, and depression.  Also, the exacerbation or development of autoimmune disease, including autoimmune thyroiditis, immune- mediated hemolytic 
anemia or thrombocytopenia, and symmetric polyarthropathy in patients receiving long- term interferon -
α therapy has been described (Silver RT).  
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465193] that this agent induces significantly less side 
effects while it is probably more active. We conducted a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_371844] -interferon α-2b (PEG Intr on) in 
patients with ET.  Patients with a history of persistent 
(greater than 2 months) platelet counts > 600 x 109/L, 
with hyperplasia of bone marrow megakaryocytes in the 
absence of an alternate identifiable cause of thrombocytosis were eligible. Patients were required to have either thrombo- hemorrhagic signs and/or symptoms 
in a previously untreated patient; persistence of thrombo-hemorrhagic signs and/or symptoms in a patient 
receiving anagrelide, interferon- α, or hydroxyurea; or 
intolerance to anagrelide, interferon- α, or hydroxyurea. 
The initial PEG -interferon α-2b dose was from 1.5 to 4.5 
µg/kg/week subcutaneously with subsequent dose 
adjustments as indicated by [CONTACT_371854]. Eleven patients (9 female, median age 54 years 
(range 26- 69) were treated. PEG -interferon α-2b rapi[INVESTIGATOR_371845]. The median duration of PEG -interferon α-2b 
therapy on study was 9 months (4- 17). No patient had 
signs or symptoms of thrombosis or hemorrhage while on 
study. Ten (91%) patients were in CR after 2 months of 
therapy, 11 (100%) after 4 months. One patient discontinued therapy at 4 months because of persistent Grade 3 fatigue and a second at 5 months because of anxiety and depression.  Thus, we believe that PEG -
interferon α-2b has significant activity in patients with ET 
(Alvarado et al.)  
 3.[ADDRESS_465194] described thirty years ago (Folkman). Over the last decade, advances in molecular, cytogenetic, and cellular techniques have highlighted the powerful prognostic and therapeutic implications of the angiogenic process as it relates to human malignancy.  Most of the early work focused on identification, quantification, and implication of vascularity on the 
biology and clinical behavior of solid tumors (Scappaticci). More recently, malignant hematologic disorders have been studied and the importance of bone marrow vascularity (angiogenesis) on the natural history 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 9 
and possible therapy of these diseases is beginning to 
emerge (Thomas, Kerbel and Folkman).   
 One of the earliest reports describing the role of angiogenesis in a hematologic malignancy examined bone marrow from children with ALL (Perez -Ataye et al .). 
Median microvessel density was significantly higher in the bone marrow of patients with ALL compared to normal controls. Studies of microvessel density have been duplicated in patients with AMM/MF, CML, ET, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic  
syndrome (MDS), and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL): bone marrow from patients with these diseases all demonstrated statistically higher levels of vascular density compared with normal bone marrow (Thomas, Di Raimondo et al.).  
 The molecular and cellular mechanisms responsible for the angiogenic process are becoming better understood. As a substitute for microvessel density, other surrogate markers are being explored, particularly serum or plasma levels of known angiogenic factors. Vascular endothelial  
growth factor (VEGF) remains one of the most potent positive regulators of endothelial cell proliferation that has been described.  New data suggest some overlap 
between endothelial and hematopoietic cells, and the 
possibility that angiogenic factors may also play a role in the growth and proliferation of hematopoietic cells (Kerbel and Folkman, Albitar). To understand the role of VEGF in the neoplastic process, studies have correlated serum levels in patients with a variety of solid human malignancies and clinical outcome (Scappaticci). Similar 
studies are emerging in patients with hematologic malignancies (Thomas, Albitar, Di Raimondo et al.).  For example, VEGF was first identified as a possible paracrine growth factor in patients with AML (Fiedler et al.), and was shown to be an independent predictor of 
outcome in patients with AML (Aguayo et al.). Our recent study found increased expression of VEGF in marrow cells from patients with CML and the high VEGF levels correlated with poor outcome of patient with chronic phase CML (Verstovsek et al.). In addition, we found high levels of VEGF receptor 1 and 2 in CML patients.  While levels of receptor expression did not correlate with any particular disease phase, there was a statistically significant correlation between higher levels of VEGF- R2 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 10 
expression and prognosis.  These findings support 
VEGF -R2 over -expression as an independent prognostic 
indicator for shortened survival in patients with chronic phase CML.  Similarly, a number of studies found not only in creased bone marrow microvessel density but also 
increased circulating angiogenic factors in other myeloproliferative diseases (ET, PV, MF) (Di Raimondo et al., Musolino et al.). Finally, the levels of circulating angiogenic factors are being used in the assessment of efficacy of anti -angiogenic therapy: for example, 
circulating levels of VEGF have been correlated with thalidomide’s efficacy in hematological diseases.   
 
Interferon -α has been shown to have antiangiogenic 
effects (reviewed in Kerbel and Folk man). The first 
evidence that interferon-
α had anti -endothelial activity 
was reported in [ADDRESS_465195] growth factor (FGF) and interferon- α has been 
shown to downregulate FGF expression in human cancer 
cells. There is now evidence that interferon- α therapy in 
CML may be successful at least in part due to its antiangiogenic properties as angiogenic factors are suppressed in treated patients (Di Raimondo et al.).  
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_465196] described by [CONTACT_371855] (Isaacs et al.) as substances produced by [CONTACT_371856], they are produced and secreted by [CONTACT_371857]03 -[ADDRESS_465197] been identified: alfa, beta, and gamma.  These classes are not 
homogenous, and each may contain several different molecular species of interferon.  For example, at least [ADDRESS_465198] undergone 
extensive clinical investigation.  To date, interferon  has been approved in numerous countries for the treat ment 
of chronic hepatitis B and C (CHC), hairy -cell leukemia, 
AIDS- related Kaposi’s sarcoma, condylomata acuminata, 
renal cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma, chronic myelogenous leukemia, basal cell carcinoma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, multiple myeloma, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides), chronic delta hepatitis and laryngeal papi[INVESTIGATOR_28602].  Interferon 
α is 
also being used in combination with a multiplicity of chemotherapeutic agents in the investigational treatment of a variety of malignancies and in combination with ribavirin, amantadine, mycophenolate mofetil, and nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs in the 
investigational treatment of patients with CHC.  
 
Current treatment regimens require frequent administration of interferon 
α.  Treatment intervals may 
range from three times per week to as often as once daily for periods of several months to a year or longer.  The frequency of interferon 
α administration is determined by 
[CONTACT_371858] (daily for certain oncology indications and three times weekly for virology indications) and the pharmacokinetic properties of the protein.  In various studies, the reported terminal elimination half -life for interferon 
α ranges from [ADDRESS_465199] comparisons, anti -tumor efficacy 
appears inferior in those studies where the median interferon 
α dose delivered is less than 3.6 MIU/m2/day.  
Similarly, trials performed in Ph -positive CML suggest 
that an increased AUC, with associated prolonged tumor exposure to the interferon 
α effect, may be more critical 
than peak interferon α levels in mediating an anti -
leukemic effect.  Early discontinuation of interferon α due 
to toxicity could adversely affect a patient’s ability to achieve a response.   
 
If the same clinical benefit can be achieved with a long-acting interferon 
α, the requirement for multiple injections 
will be reduced and result in great subject convenience.  Given the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
PEG IFN- α2a and preliminary assessments of tolerability, 
PEG IFN- α2a may widen the therapeutic index for 
conventional interferon- and offer an improved risk 
benefit ratio.  
 
4.3  PEG IFN- α2a 
 
PEGs are amphiphilic polymers of ethylene glycol of 
varying average molecular weights that can be covalently 
attached to proteins.  Modification of proteins with PEG has resulted in increased serum half -life and reduced 
immunogenicity for a number of proteins.  The properties of pegylated proteins vary with the number of P EG 
molecules attached per protein molecule and the structure (e.g., linear or branched) and average molecular weight of the PEG polymer.  A number of proteins used for patient therapy have now been modified with PEG and evaluated clinically.  All of these pegylated proteins have increased half -lives relative to the 
unmodified proteins.  Pegylated proteins are also less immunogenic or nonimmunogenic.  
 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 13 
Hoffmann- La [COMPANY_002] has developed a modified form of 
interferon α-2a, pegylated interferon α -2a (PEG IFN -α2a, 
Pegasys), which is chemically modified by [CONTACT_371859] a 40K branched methoxy polyethylene 
glycol moiety. Compared with interferon α -2a, PEG -IFN 
α-2a exhibits sustained absorption, decreased systemic 
clearance, and an approximately tenfold increase in serum half -life. The biological activity of PEG IFN -α2a, as 
measured by 2,5- OAS activity, is similarly prolonged, 
resulting in a significantly improved pharmacodynamic response compared with interferon α -2a. 
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data obtained 
from animals (rat and monkey), phase I studies in healthy volunteers, and phase II and III studies in patients with 
chronic hepatitis C (CHC) indicate that PEG IFN -α2a 
injected once a week has the potential for superior efficacy as compared with interferon α -2a injected three 
times a week. The adverse effect profile to date is similar to that observed with interferon α -2a. A phase I 
ascending dose study in patients with renal cell 
carcinoma has been completed, and the dose being used in the phase II study is 450  µg. Enrollment in a phase I study in patients with Ph- positive CML has been 
completed. Although a true MTD was not reached, the dose used in phase III CML study was also 450 µg.  
 
4.4  Pharmacokinetics of PEG IFN -α2a 
 
The structure of the PEG moiety directly affects the 
clinical pharmacology of PEG -IFN α-2a. Specifically, the 
size and branching of the 40 kDa PEG moiety define the 
absorption, distribution, and elimination of PEG -IFN α-2a.  
The pharmacokinetics of PEG -IFN α-2a were studied i n 
healthy subjects and hepatitis C infected patients.  Absorption of PEG -IFN α-2a was sustained, peak serum 
concentrations were reached 72 to 96 hours after dose 
administration, and measurable concentrations were seen within 3 to 6 hours of a single dose.  Dose 
proportional increases in AUC and Cmax were seen in 
patients who received once weekly doses of PEG -IFN α-
2a.  The absolute bioavailability was 84% and was similar to that seen with IFN α -2a. 
 
The systemic clearance was about 100 mL/h, which was 100-f old lower than that of interferon α -2a.  After an 
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465200] interferon.  
The terminal half -life after subcutaneous dosing was 
longer (about 80 hours, range of 50 to 140 hours).  After intravenous dosing, the steady -state volume of 
distribution was 6 to 14 liters.  Based on studies in rats, the drug is distributed to the liver, kidney, and bone marrow as well as being highly concentrated in the blood.  
 
Metabolism is the main clearance mechanism for PEG -
IFN α-2a. The kidneys eliminated less than 10% of a 
dose as the intact PEG -IFN α-2a.  The metabolic profile 
of PEG -IFN α-2a has not been fully characterized.  
Studies in rats showed that the PEG moiety remained attached as the protein portion was metabolized. The 
metabolic products of PEG -IFN α-2a (including the PEG 
moiety attached to the metabolized interferon) were 
excreted in the urine and bile.  In rats, the half -life of the 
radiolabeled PEG moiety was about 10 days and,  thus, 
within about 40 days the PEG moiety was eliminated from the body.  
 
In patients with CHC, steady -state serum concentrations 
increased twofold to threefold compared with single- dose 
values and reached steady state within 5 to 8 weeks of once weekly dose administration. Once steady state was achieved, there was no further accumulation of PEG -IFN 
α-2a.  The peak to trough ratio after 48 weeks of 
treatment was about 1.5 to 2.0.  PEG -IFN α-2a serum 
concentrations were sustained throughout the 1- week 
dose interval (168 hours).  
 
4.5  Preclinical Studies with PEG IFN- α2a  
 
The pharmacologic and immunomodulatory properties of 
PEG IFN-
α2a relative to those of interferon α-2a were 
evaluated in both in vitro and in vivo studies. Since the 
biological activity of interferon α -2a is species restricted, 
these studies were performed using cells (bovine, 
human) or animals (cynomolgus monkeys) in which 
interferon α-2a is active. The following were the main 
observations:  
 • PEG IFN- α2a  retains both the antiviral and 
antiproliferati ve activities of unmodified 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 15 
interferon α -2a, although usually with lower 
specific activity.  
• PEG IFN- α2a  causes less of an immunogenic 
response in mice than interferon α -2a. 
• PEG IFN- α2a  is immunogenic in monkeys, as 
was anticipated based on the immunogenicity of 
interferon α-2a in monkeys, but this observation is 
not considered predictive of the immunogenic potential of PEG IFN -α2a  in humans.  
 
The antiproliferative effects of PEG IFN -α2a and 
interferon α-2a were compared in an in vitro assay 
against a series of tumor cell lines, including a CML line 
(K562), four renal cell carcinoma cell lines (ACHN, A -
498, G -402 and Caki -1), and four malignant melanoma 
cell lines (HS- 294-T, A-375, SK -MEL-28 and SK -MEL-3). 
The data demonstrate that PEG IFN -α2a  maintai ns 
antiproliferative activity against this range of human 
tumor cells. As in vitro models cannot account for the 
pharmacokinetic advantage of PEG IFN -α2a, the most 
appropriate assessment would be in vivo models, in which this potential benefit of the molecule should be 
observed. The in vivo antitumor effects of PEG IFN -α2a  
were evaluated in nude mice bearing human tumor 
xenografts. Nude mice were injected with tumor cells subcutaneously and tumors were allowed to grow until well-established tumors were present. Treatment with 
either PEG IFN -α2a  once per week or unmodified 
interferon α-2a three times per week was administered sc 
in the opposite flank from the tumor for 4 to 6 weeks. The 
total weekly doses for PEG IFN -α2a and interferon α -2a 
were equivalent.  In A-498– bearing nude mice, treatment 
with 100 g of interferon α -2a three times per week 
significantly inhibited growth of this tumor compared with 
untreated controls. In animals treated with 300 µg 
(measured as micrograms of interferon α -2a) of PEG 
IFN-α2a once per week, PEG IFN -α2a was more active 
than interferon α -2a in inhibiting tumor growth and also 
resulted in tumor regression. In similar experiments using 
two other renal cell carcinoma cell lines (ACHN and Caki -
1), a clear trend toward increased ac tivity of PEG IFN-
α2a over interferon α -2a was found but without the 
statistical significance seen with A -498. In conclusion, 
PEG IFN- α2a shows marked antitumor activity when 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 16 
administered to nude mice bearing human renal cell 
carcinoma tumor xenografts.  
 4.6  Clinical Studies in Healthy Volunteers  
 
PEG IFN- α2a  was administered by [CONTACT_371860] 92 healthy volunteers in a phase I double-
blind study. Volunteers received single ascending doses of 45, 135 or 270 µg of PEG IFN -
α2a or 3 MIU (15 µg) o r 
18 MIU (90 µg) of unmodified interferon α -2a. Results 
showed that:  
 
• PEG IFN- α2a had a more favorable 
pharmacokinetic profile than interferon α-2a, with 
decreased clearance and a serum t½ 
approximately 10- fold higher.  
• PEG IFN- α2a had an improved pharmacodynamic 
profile as compared with interferon α-2a, as 
measured by a prolonged elevation of 2’5’ -
oligoadenylate synthetase following single- dose 
administration.  
• The safety and tolerability profiles of PEG IFN -α2a  
are similar to  those of interferon α-2a. Neutropenia 
was more frequent and more marked in PEG IFN -
α2a  treated patients, but neutrophil counts 
recovered in all cases in less than two weeks following drug administration.  
 4.7 Clinical Studies in Chronic Hepatitis C (CHC)  
 In a phase II dose- finding study in patients with non-
cirrhotic CHC, doses of 45, 90, [ADDRESS_465201] 
profile was similar to the adverse events observed with 
interferon α-2a, and a dose of 180 µg has been found 
acceptable in patients with CHC. At the 270 µg dose 
level, 18 of 40 patients required dose modification; however, for patients with CHC a neutrophil count of less 
than 1.0 x 10
9 /L was considered dose limiting. There 
were no cases of neutropenic sepsis. A second phase II 
study has been conducted in [ADDRESS_465202] been completed; all studies used Roferon-A as a 
comparator. In total, data have been generated in 995 hepatitis patients treated with doses of 45 µg (20 pts), 90 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 17 
µg (116 pts), 135 µg (215 pts), 180 µg (604 pts), or 270 
µg (40 pts) PEG IFN -α2a. Results showed that:  
 
Results from a Phase II PEG IFN -α2a ascending dose 
study confirm the optimal dose of PEG IFN -α2a for the 
treatment of CHC to be 180 µg once weekly.  Sustained 
virologic response was 36% in CHC patients without cirrhosis treated with this dose.  These results also confirm significant improvements in liver histology for 
patients treated with either PEG IFN -α2a or standard 
interferon α2a  therapy.  Pharmacokinetic data from a 
Phase III multinational study further support the once weekly 180 µg dose of PEG IFN -α2a for the treatment of 
CHC.  
 Results from a Phase II PEG IFN -α2a pharmacokinetics 
study confirm the feasibility of similar once- weekly PEG 
IFN-α2a dosing in CHC patients with cirrhosis as in 
healthy volunteers and noncirrhotic hepatitis C patients.   
 One Phase III PEG IFN -αa study reports virologic 
sustained responses of 39% in CHC patients without 
cirrhosis (28% in CHC patients with Genotype 1 infection) 
when treated with 180 g PEG IFN -α2a once weekly for 
48 weeks.  A second Phase III study reports virologic 
sustained responses of 38%  in previously untreated CHC 
patients with or without cirrhosis treated with either 135 g or 180 g of PEG IFN -2a once weekly for 48 weeks.  
Sustained virologic response among CHC patients with Genotype 1 infection were 22% and 19% following 180 g 
and 135 g of PEG IFN -α2a once weekly for 48 weeks, 
respectively. Additionally, histologic improvement 
(defined as  2- point improvement from baseline on post -
liver biopsy) occurred in 58% and 48% of patients treated 
once- weekly with 180 g and 135 g of PEG IFN -α2a, 
respectively.  
 A Phase II/III PEG IFN -α2a study reports virologic 
sustained responses of 30% in difficult -to-treat CHC 
patients with cirrhosis when treated with [ADDRESS_465203] 
interferon α2a therapy.  
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 18 
 
The overall frequency and types of adverse events, laboratory abnormalities and drug discontinuati ons 
reported during a 48- week course of PEG IFN -α2a 
therapy administered once weekly, appear similar to that 
of a 48- week course of interferon α 2a therapy 
administered three times a week.  Adverse events 
included fatigue, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, flu- like 
symptoms, nausea, vomiting, injection site reactions, fever, chills, diarrhea, alopecia, abdominal pain, depression, irritability, insomnia, rigors, dizziness and anorexia. Laboratory abnormalities included neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, abnormal ALT values, hypothyroidism 
and hyperthyroidism. The incidence of premature withdrawals for adverse events and laboratory abnormalitites were similar between the PEG IFN -
α2a 
dose groups and the interferon α-2a group 
(approximately 10%).  
 4.8 Clinical Studies in Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC)  
 A phase I/II dose- finding study in advanced or metastatic 
RCC is fully recruited. Twenty -seven patients had been 
entered into the phase I portion of this study and dosed in cohorts of six patients with once weekly PEG  IFN-
α2a 
180 µg, 270 µg, 360 µg, 450 µg or 540 µg. Dose limiting toxicities occuring at 540 µg PEG IFN -
α2a included 
elevated liver transaminases (1 patient with grade 3 ALT), and fatigue (1 patient with grade 3 fatigue). For this 
reason, the MTD was determined to be [ADDRESS_465204] stopped treatment 
for safety reasons: thrombocytopenia (180 µg), increased alkaline phosphatase (450 µg) and GI bleeding/sepsis/seizure, unrelated to treatment (450 µg). Most patients in the RCC study are tolerating PEG IFN -
α2a well. The types of adverse events have been similar 
in nature to that of unmodified 
α-interferons. Adverse 
event reports are available for [ADDRESS_465205] frequently occurring (>5%) adverse events include: fatigue, fever, chills, myalgia, nausea, headac he, 
decreased appetite, back pain, dizziness and diarrhea. Changes in laboratory values have generally been mild to 
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465206] demonstrated confirmed partial response (18.5%); 12 patients completed the 6- month study and 10 continued treatment 
in a maintenance phase.  
 
4.9  Prior Clinical Experience with PEG IFN- α2a in 
Hematological Diseases  
 
4.9.1 Safety of PEG -IFN -α2a in the Treatment of 
Ph-positive CML:  Study NO15764 
 Study NO15764 is a phase I, open- label, nonrandomized, 
dose- escalation trial of the safety and efficacy of PEG 
IFN-
α2a in Ph- positive CML.  A total of  43 patients 
received either PEG -IFN α-2a monotherapy (three at 270 
µg and six each at 360, 450, 540 or 630 µg) or PEG -IFN 
α-2a plus cytosine arabinoside (ara- C) combination (six 
at 450 µg of PEG -IFN α-2a plus 10 mg of ara- C, six at 
540 µg of PEG -IFN α-2a plus 10 mg or ara- C, and four at 
540 µg of PEG -IFN α-2a  plus 20 mg of ara- C).  The 
PEG -IFN α-2a doses were given once weekly.  The ara- C 
doses were given daily.  However, for patients in the 540-µg PEG -IFN 
α-2a plus 20- mg ara -C group, ara- C was 
given only  on [ADDRESS_465207] 
frequently observed adverse events included fatigue, 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 20 
headache, rigors, myalgia, decreased appetite, diarrhea, 
nausea, night sweats, pyrexia, and injection site pain or irritation. 
 
As of November 20, 2001, four patients had died.  One 
patient treated with 450 µg of PEG -IFN -α2a died of 
lymphoma.  The reasons for the other three deaths (one from the PEG- IFN -α2a 270- µg group and two from the 
PEG -IFN -α2a 630- µg group were not specified.  These 
three deaths occurred 5, 14, and [ADDRESS_465208] one patient who experienced a serious adverse event.  The serious adverse events that were reported included thrombocytopenia, transfusion reaction, gastroenteritis, herpes simplex, viral infection, unevaluable reaction (pregnancy in spouse), pyrexia, device failure, hernia repair, lymphoma, dehydration, diarrhea, liver fatty, blood bilirubin increased, weakness, pleuritic pain, and atherosclerosis.  About tw o-thirds of the serious adverse 
events were possible, probably, or remotely related to the study drug and usually needed dose reduction or, in a few cases, premature treatment discontinuation.  However, most of these serious adverse events resolved without  sequelae.  
 
A total of 12 patients withdrew from the study for safety -
related reasons.  Four of the six patients with 540 µg of 
PEG -IFN 
α-2a plus 10 mg of ara- C withdrew, while none 
of the patients treated with 360 µg of PEG -IFN or 540 µg 
of PEG -IFN α-2a plus 20 mg of ara- C withdrew for safety 
related reasons.  One or two patients from each of the 
remaining treatment groups withdrew for safety -related 
reasons.  Of the 12 patients whose treatment was discontinued prematurely for safety reasons, eight patient s were withdrawn for adverse events including 
irritation of the buccal mucosa, lymphoma, mucositis and pruritic rash, fatigue, leg pain, neuropathy, and weakness of the lower extremities; and four patients were withdrawn for laboratory abnormalities including thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, abnormal liver function tests, and elevated bilirubin.  
 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 21 
4.9.2 Safety of PEG -IFN α-2a in the Treatment of 
Ph-positive CML:  Study NO16006 
 
Study NO16006 is a phase III, randomized, open- label, 
parallel -arm, multicenter trial comparing the efficacy and 
safety of PEG -IFN α-2a and interferon α-2a in patients 
with recently diagnosed Ph- positive CML never treated 
with interferons.  Patients have been randomly assigned 
to receive subcutaneous injection of either 450 µg of 
PEG -IFN α-2a once weekly or 9 MIU of interferon α-2a 
daily (titrated upward from a starting dose of 3 MIU daily) for up to 12 months.  Responders to treatment may continue treatment for an additional year.  As of November 19, 2001, 71 and 74 patients who received PEG -IFN 
α-2a and interferon α-2a, respectively, had 
safety data available.  
 
Eight -five percent and 77% of patients treated with PEG -
IFN α-2a and interferon α-2a, respectively, had one or 
more adverse events.  The most common adverse events from  both treatment groups were similar to those 
seen with interferon treatment, such as pyrexia, myalgia, fatigue, rigors, diarrhea, nausea, arthralgia, headache, appetite decreased, and anorexia.  Most of these events occurred more frequently in the PEG -IFN 
α-2a-treated 
patients than in the interferon α-2a-treated patients.  
 
Two patients from each treatment group have died.  CML, aggravated general condition, and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura each led to the death of one patient.  The reason for the fourth death was not specified.  
 
Fourteen percent of patients treated with PEG -IFN 
α-2a 
and 15% of patients treated with interferon α-2a had 
experienced serous adverse events.  About one- third of 
the reported serious adverse events were possibly, probably, or  remotely related to the study drug and 
required dose reduction or premature treatment discontinuation.  However, most of these serious adverse events resolved without sequelae.  For the PEG -IFN 
α-
2a-treated patients, serious adverse events were 
reported more often as general disorders and disorders of blood and the lymphatic system; for the interferon 
α-
2a-treated patients, serious adverse events were 
reported more often as general disorders, 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 22 
musc uloskeletal, connective tissue, and bone disorders, 
and cardiac disorders.  
 
Six PEG -IFN α-2a-treated patients (8%) and eight 
interferon α-2a-treated patients (11%) withdrew because 
of adverse events or laboratory abnormalities.  For the 
PEG -IFN α-2a treatment group, the safety reasons for 
patient withdrawal included acute hip pain, thrombocytopenia, very high WBC counts, and low neutrophil and platelet counts and low hemoglobin 
concentration.  For the interferon 
α-2a treatment group, 
the safety reasons for patient withdrawal included myalgia, depression, anaphylaxis, femoral head necrosis, and positive chest x -ray and flu- like syndrome.  
  4.10 Rationale for Dosage Selection  
 The PEG -IFN dose for this phase II study has been 
selected based on safety results, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) determined in the phase I study in patients with  Ph -positive CML, in combination with ara- C (Talpaz 
et al. 2000), and a minimum of [ADDRESS_465209] balance between immunostimulatory/antiproliferative effect and long- term 
tolerability.  To increase safety of the medication, the 
starting dose, will be 90µg and may be increased to 
doses of 180µg, 270µg, 360µg, and 450µg provided 
patients do not experience significant side effects.  
 4.11 Update of study results  as of 01/15/[ADDRESS_465210] patients had extensive prior therapi[INVESTIGATOR_371846] 40 patients with PV had phlebotomies.  With a median folllowup of 24 months on Pegasys therapy, the overall hematologic repsonse rate was 81% with PV (complete 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 23 
in 78%) and 92% with ET (complete in 86%).  These 
results are the best ever achieved with any form of therapy in PV and ET.  In addition, measuring JAK2 V617F mutations, we observed complete molecular responses in 12% of patients and any molecular response in 53% of  patients.  Side effects were 
accetable.  At the Pegasys dose of 90 mcg weekly Grade 3 neutropenia was observed in only 8% of patients and other side effects (fatigue, dizziness, depression) in only 4% of patients each.  These findings are a true therapeut ic breakthrough in the managment of PV and 
ET and have been also reproduced by [CONTACT_371861] (Kiladjian et.al Blood 112;3065,2008) who reported with Pegasys therapy in 40 patients with PV a CHR in 78%, a complete molecular response in 24%, and a major molecular response in 69%.   
 Hoffman -La[COMPANY_002], the Company, declined to expand the 
study and provide free drug.  Our results suggest this is the best available treatment for these patients.  We would like to expand the study and continue therapy   with 
Pegasys commercial preparation.  We propose to include up to 100 patients with PV and 100 patients with ET.  This will allow a more precise estimate of hematologic and molecular response with long term follow up, a better 
estimate of long term survival and toxicity profiles, and a 
treatmen t of patients on protocol which affords better 
care by [CONTACT_371862] a large cohort including an evaluation of prognostic factors that determin molecular response and long term outcome.  Our data was presented at ASH 2008 (Quintas -Cardama, Blood 112:653, 2008).  
  Update September, 2019  
Sixteen patients remain on study for a median of 12 years (range 11 - 13).  All patients are on a stable dose 
of pegylated interferon with normal blood counts.  None of the patients have experience drug- related adverse 
reactions in [ADDRESS_465211] follow up of patients with ET or PV treat ed 
with pegylated interferon.  
 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 24 
 
5.0 Patient Eligibility Criteria  
5.1 Inclusion Criteria 
 
• Following diagnoses:  
 
--ET:  Patients with PLT > 600 x109/l documented 
in the past 12 months; hyperplasia of 
marrow megakaryocytes in the absence of identifiable cause of thrombocytosis and in the absence of Ph chromosome. Patients with ET and lower PLT will be eligible if attributable to prior ET therapy.  
--PV:  Patients should have Hb >/= 15g/dl (except if patient is having phlebotomies done or is taking hydroxyurea)  and documented past 
diagnosis  
 
• P
erformance status < 2 (ECOG scale; see Appendix 
A). 
• A ge greater than 18 years since disease is extremely 
rare in younger age group.  
• A dequate liver function: total bilirubin of < 2.0 mg/dl  
(except for patients with Gilbert’s Syndrome) and 
AST (SGOT) or ALT (SGPT) < [ADDRESS_465212] (or < [ADDRESS_465213] if considered due to tumor), and renal function (serum creatinine < 2.0 mg/dl)  
• Signed informed consent indicating that patients are 
aware of the investigational nature of this study in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_371847] M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.  The only acceptable consent form is the one approved by [CONTACT_941] M.D. Anderson Cancer Center IRB.  
• Willingnes s and ability to comply with the 
requirements of the protocol for the duration of the study.  
• Patients must have been off chemotherapy for [ADDRESS_465214] of the patient.  
 5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Pregnant or lactating women.  
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 25 
• Patients with prior history of another malignancy or 
concurrent malignancy, except for the following: 
basal cell carcinoma of the skin, carcinoma in situ of the cervix, or other malignancies if the patient is disease free >3 years.  
• Patients with history of ischemic retinopathy . 
• Patients with history of severe cardiac disease: 
NYHA Functional Class III or IV, myocardial 
infarction within 6 months, uncontrolled ventricular tachyarrythmias or unstable angina.  
• Patients with history of medically significant 
psychiatric disease if not controlled, especially 
endogenous depression (does not include reactive depression post -cancer diagnosis), psychosis and 
bipolar disease.  
• Patients with seizure disorders requiring 
anticonvulsant therapy.  
• Patients with known i nfection with HBV, HIV, or 
other active systemic infection.  
• Patients with known autoimmune disease except for 
rheumatoid arthritis . 
• Patients with renal disease on hemodialysis.  
• Patients taking continuous or chronic high- dose 
systemic steroids; if discontinued, there must be a minimum washout period of one month before study drug is begun.  
• Patients with known hypersensitivity to PEG -IFN 
α-2a or its components.  
 
6.0 Treatment Plan 
6.1 Start of Therapy  
 This is a Phase II (activity), non- randomized, open- label 
study. All patients will be registered  in the Clinical Oncology Research Database (CORE) at MD Anderson Cancer Center after the informed consent is signed. Medication will be dispensed to patients from MD Anderson Pharmacy.  
 
• PEG-IFN 
α-2a will be given subcutaneously once 
weekly and may be self -administered.  
• Starting dose of PEG -IFN α-2a is 90 micrograms 
subcutaneously weekly.  
• Treatment will be given as long as it benefits the 
patient (see section 9.1)  
 
DM03 -[ADDRESS_465215] injection in the clinic or 
may be taught self -injection techniques for self -
administration at home, if the patient and investigator feel comfortable with this arrangement. Patients not able to return to MD Anderson Cancer Center  for injection teaching may receive teaching from their local physician.  Prior to receiving multi -dose vials, patients local 
physician will be provided with a letter explaining the teaching needs of the patients along with a teaching 
documentation form (s ee appendix  I).The teaching 
documentation form must be completed and returned to MD Anderson Cancer Center prior to the patient receiving study drug in multi -dose vials.  PEG -IFN 
α-2a 
will be provided as either ready -to-use solution in single 
use glass vials  or as multi -dose vials. Contents require 
no mixing before use.  
 6.2 Dose Escalation and Dose Reduction  
 
 
Dose Level  Dose of Pegasys in micrograms SQ 
weekly  
[PHONE_7698] mcg 
[PHONE_7699] mcg 
[PHONE_7700] mcg 
[PHONE_7701] mcg 
0(starting dose)  90 mcg 
-1 45 mcg  
-2 45 mcg every other week  
 
 
Any patient who experiences grade 1 or 2 adverse event (see NCI -CTC guidelines, appendix C) should be 
maintained on the assigned dose if possible. Treatment should be put on hold if a patient experiences any of the following:  
  
• grade 3- 4 laboratory abnormalities  
• grade 3- 4 constitutional toxicity  
 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 27 
 
Dose adjustments may be made at the discretion of the treating physician.  
 Questionable cases should be resolved by [CONTACT_371863].  
 
7.0 Pretreatment evaluation 
The pre- treatment evaluation will be aimed at 
confirming/establishing the diagnosis.  The evaluation will consist of a through assessment of the following  tests: and will be done within a month of enrollment in the study (unless noted otherwise):  
 
•A complete primary evaluation with physical 
examination 
•CBC, platelet counts, differential  
•Serum creatinine, bilirubin, SGPT 
•Pregnancy test (if of child bearing potential)  
•Βone marrow aspi[INVESTIGATOR_22602]; cytogenetic studies; 
if not done in the last 3- 6 months  
 
  
 
8.0 Evaluation During Study 
• Follow up visits at MD Anderson every 3- [ADDRESS_465216] year, then every 6- 12 months  and 
thereafter approximately once yearly or at the discretion of the treating physician.  
 
• CBC, platelets, differential, creatinine, bilirubin, 
and SGPT are recommended  twice per year or at 
the discretion of the treating physician.  
 
• Thyroid function test s are recommended once per 
year or  at the discretion of the treating physician. 
• Bone marrow aspi[INVESTIGATOR_371848] 3- [ADDRESS_465217] year, then if needed; 
cytogenetics once when in complete remission if abnormal prior to therapy.  
  
 
 8.[ADDRESS_465218] name (principal investigator/MD Anderson Leukemia staff treating physician), phone, and fax numbers.  The patient’s local doctor will be identified, contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], and the protocol details discussed.  
 
All therapy will be given under the care of the patient’s local doctor and MD Anderson Leukemia staff treating 
physician. The patient’s local doctor should contact [CONTACT_371864], and the modifications should be initiated only by [CONTACT_371865], and complications will be dictated at each follow- up visit.  
 From past experience, it is recognized that treatment provided in collaboration with patient’s local doctor outside MD Anderson may occasionally result in some difficulties such as 1) not performing tests as required, 2) not sending results of tests or updates of patient courses, 3) and not informing on toxicities and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. This type of therapy is already broadly practiced in the community. Therefore: 1) we will discuss with the 
patient’s local doctor about the protocol and doses, 2) we 
will make significant efforts (contact [CONTACT_371866]) to retrieve the information (tests, toxicities, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]), and 3) we will document all the information on follow -up visits.  Since information may 
still be missing in one or more components in some patients (e.g. missing CBC or SMA -7, missing drug 
administration record), these types of difficulties will be collecte d and documented in the patient’s medical 
record. This will reflect the oncology community practice 
of the program.  
 
9.0 Criteria for Response and Toxicity  
9.1 Criteria for Response  
 9.1.1 ET 
CR = Reduction of PLT to <440x10
9/l and disappearance 
of thromboembolic events, without the use of anagrelide or hydroxyurea  
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 29 
PR = Reduction of PLT by 50% but still >440x109/l or 
reduction of thromboembolic events by 50%, without the 
use of anagrelide or hydroxyurea 
 
9.1.2 PV 
CR = Normalization of Hb (< 15.0g/dl), no phlebotomies needed, and disappearance of splenomegaly by [CONTACT_23302], without the use of anagrelide or hydroxyurea  PR = A 50% reduction in phlebotomies rate or splenomegaly reduced by 50% by [CONTACT_23302], without the use of anagrelide or hydroxyurea 
 
9.[ADDRESS_465219] the right to withdraw from the study at any time for any reason. An excessive rate of withdrawals can render the study uninterpretable; therefore, unnecessary withdrawal of subjects should be avoided. Should a subject decide to withdraw, all efforts will be made to complete and report the observations as thoroughly as possible. Criteria for discontinuation of therapy include:  
 
• C
learly documented progressive disease 
(increasing requirement for blood transfusion, 
increasing spleen size, increasing platelet or white blood cell count, increasing frequency of phlebotomies, or frequency of thromboembolic events) or no response  (see section 9.1) within 6 months from the start of the therapy on a given dose (i.e. continuously on the same dose level of PEG -IFN 
α-2a). Caution:  Patient without response 
after [ADDRESS_465220] the dose escalated if possible (see section 6.2); if no response when on the escalated dose for 6 months, then therapy should stop.  
• S
evere toxicities not responding to dose adjustments 
(see section 6.2)  
• Non-compliance to protocol requirements (see section 
5.0) 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 30 
• Development of other conditions for which, in the 
Investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], it is in the subject’s best 
interest to be withdrawn from the study.  
 
11.0 Statistical Considerations 
11.1 This is a phase II trial of  PEG IFN -a2a 
(Pegasys®) as a treatment for ET and PV.  In each disease, a response rate of 35% or more would be accepted as evidence for a good efficacy to be further pursued in this disease subsets in larger randomized or combination studies.  Therefore, in each disease category, the study will stop if response is 07, < 1/11, <2/15.  Otherwise it will accrue 80 patients to better define the response and toxicity profiles.  Also, in the total study group, a severe toxicity rate of <20% is allowed.  Therefore, the study will also stop if severe toxicity is observed in >7/15, 11/30, 15/45.  
 11.2 Update of statistical considerations as of 
1/15/2009  
 Experience in 76 patients has shown very high response rates of 78% to 86% in ET and PV.  This expansion of the study is to provide patients with the best available treatment, Pegasys, at an optimal dose schedule, in the context of a study using the commercial drug.  Up to 100 patients with ET and 100 patients with PV will be treated.  This will allow for 1) a large scale capture of more precise response data (hematologic, molecular), 2) detailed analysis of side effects, 3) evaluation of longer term prognosis and survival, and 4) analysis of potential prognostic factors associated with molecular response.  Such analyses will be conducted using standard analytical methods.  
 
12.[ADDRESS_465221] 
identifiers from improper  use. HIPAA Identifiers (name, medical record number) 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 31 
will be collected but will be replaced by [CONTACT_89096]; complete 
confidentiality will be maintained during this retrospective evaluation, manuscript preparation, and submission.  
 
 
(a) The research protocol includes an adequate plan to destroy the 
identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with conduct of the 
research. Identifiers (name, medical record number) will be collected but 
will be replaced by [CONTACT_89096]; Complete confidentiality will be maintained during this retrospective evaluation, manuscript preparation, and submission. Identifiers will be destroyed within 
1 year of publication  
 
 
(b) The research protocol includes adequate written assurances that the PHI 
will not be  reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, or for other 
research.  
Complete confidentiality will be kept during this retrospective evaluation, manuscript 
preparation, and submission.  This data will not be used for any other purpose and will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, or for other research.  
 Anonymized information will be retained by [CONTACT_371867]  
 
2. The research could not practicably be conducted without access to and use of 
the PHI. Access and use of PHI is essential to conducting this study and meeting the 
study objectives.  
 
 
13.0 References  
 
1. Aguayo A, Estey E, Kantarjian H, Manshouri T, Gidel C, Keating M, Giles F, Estrov Z, Barlogie B, Albitar M. Cellular vascular endothelial growth factor is a predictor of outcome in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood  94:3717- 3721, 
1999.  
2. Albitar M. Angiogenesis in acute myeloid leukemia 
and myelodysplastic syndrome.  Acta Haematol   
106:170- 176, 2001 
3. Alvarado Y, Cortes J, Verstovsek S, Thomas D, Faderl S, Estrov Z, Kantarjian H, Giles FJ. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_371849]- alpha 2b in patients 
with Es sential Thrombocythemia. Cancer 
Chemother Pharmacol , in press, 2002  
4. Anagrelide Study Group. Anagrelide, a therapy for thrombocythemic states: experience in 577 patients. Am J Med . 92:69- 76, 1992 
5. Berk PD, Wasserman LR, Fruchtman SM, Goldberg JD. Treatment of polycythemia vera: a 
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 32 
summary of clinical trials conducted by [CONTACT_371868].  
6. Di Raimondo F, Palumbo GA, Molica S, Giustolisi R.  Angiogenesis in chronic myeloproliferative diseases.  Acta Haematol   106:177- 183, 2001 
7. Fenaux P, Simon M, Caulier MT, Lai JL, Goudemand J, Bauters F. Clinical course of essential thrombocythemia in 147 cases. Cancer  
66:549- 556, 1990 
8. Fiedler W, Graeven U, Ergun S, Verago S, Kilic N, Stockschlader M, Hossfeld DK. Vascular endothelial growth factor, a possible paracrine growth factor in human acute myeloid leukemia. Blood  89:1870- 1875, 1997  
9. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med  285:1182- 1186, 1971  
10. Giles FJ. Maintenance therapy in the myeloproliferative disorders: the current options. Br J Haematol  [ADDRESS_465222] 1:92- 95, 1991  
11. Isaacs A, Lindenmann J. Virus interference. I. The interfereron. Proc R Soc  147:258, 1957  
12. Kerbel R, Folkman J.  Clinical translation of angiogenesis inhibitors.  Nat Rev Cancer   2:727-
739, 2002  
13. Lewis SM et al: Thrombocythaemia. Clin Haematol  
1:339, 1972 
14. Musolino C, Calabro L, Bellomo G, Martello F, Loteta B, Pezzano C, Rizzo V, and Alonci A.  Soluble angiogenic factors:  implications for chronic myeloproliferative disorders .  Am J 
Hematol   69:159- 163, 2002  
15. Nand S, Stock W, Godwin J, Fisher SG. Leukemogenic risk of hydroxyurea  therapy in polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia and myeloid metaplasia with myelofibrosis. Am J Hematol . 52:42- 46, 1996 
16. Nielsen B et al: Myelodysplastic syndrome in polycythaemia vera. Br J Haematol  55:193, 1983  
17. Ozer H, George SL, Schiffer CA, et al.  Prolonged subcutaneous administration of recombinant alfa-2B interferon in subjects with previously untreated Philadelphia chromosome- positive chronic -phase 
chronic myelogenous leukemia: Effect on remission duration and survival: Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study 8583.  Blood .  82:2975-
2984, 1993  
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 33 
18. Partanen S et al: Haematopoietic progenitors in 
essential thrombocythaemia. Scan J Haematol.  
30:130, 1983 
19. Perez -Ataye AR, Sallan SE, Tedrow U, Connors 
S, Allred E, Folkman J.  Spectrum of tumor 
angiogenesis in the bone marrow of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Am J Pathol  
150:815- 821, 1997 
20. Roman C, Giralt M, Feliu E, Rubio D, Cortes MT.  Life expectancy of patients with chronic nonleukemic myeloproliferative disorders. Cancer . 
67:2658- 2663, 1991.  
21. Scappaticci FA.  Mechanisms and future directions for angiogenesis -based cancer therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  J Clin 
Oncol   20:3906- 3927, 2002  
22. Silver RT: Interferon -2b: a new treatment for 
polycythemia vera. Ann Intern Med 119:1091, 
1993  
23. Silverstein MN, Tefferi A. Erythrocytosis and polycythemia vera. In: Bennett JC, Plum F, eds Cecil Textbook of Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders , 920-922, 1996  
24. Talpaz M, Mavligit G, Keating M, Walters RS, Gutterman JU. Human leukocyte interferon to 
control thrombocytosis in chronic myelogenous 
leukemia. Ann Intern Med. 99:789- 792, 1983 
25. Talpaz M, Cortes J, O’Brien S, Wenske C, 
Rittweger K, Rakhit A,  Hooftman L, Kantarjian H.  
PEG -Interferon--2A (PEGASYSTM) with or without 
cytarabine in patients with relapsed or refractory chronic phase CML.  Blood  96:736a, 2000  
26. Tefferi A, et al. New drugs in essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera. Blood Rev. 11:1- 7, 1997 
27. Tefferi A, Silverstein MN, Hoagland HC. Primary thromboythemia. Semin. Oncol .  22:334- 340, 1995  
28. Thall, PF, Simon, R,  Estey, EH: Bayesian sequential monitoring designs for single- arm 
clinical trials with multiple outcomes. Statistics in Medic ine 14:357- 379, 1995.  
29. Thall, PF, Simon, R,  Estey, EH: New statistical strategy for monitoring safety and efficacy in single- arm clinical trials. J. Clinical Oncology 
14:296- 303, 1996.  
30. Weinfeld A et al: Platelets in the myeloproliferative syndrome. Clin Haematol  4:373, 1975  
DM03 -0109 
September 16 , 201 9 
Page 34 
31. Thomas DA, Giles FJ, Cortes J, Albitar M, 
Kantarjian HM.  Antiangiogenic therapy in leukemia.  Acta Haematol   106:190- 207, 2001 
32. Verstovsek S, Lunin SD, Kantarjian H, Manshouri T, Talpaz M, Faderl S, Cortes J, Albitar M.  Clinical relevance of VEGF receptors 1 and 2 in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia.  Leuk Res  , in 
press  
33. Verstovsek S, Kantarjian H, Manshouri T, Cortes J, Giles FJ, Rogers A, Albitar M.  Prognostic 
significance of cellular vascular endothelial growth factor expression in chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia.  Blood  99:2265- 2267, 2002  
 
 
 