1 
 Study Title:  WIC -Based Intervention to Promote Healthy Eating Among Low -Income Mothers  
NCT Number:  040383385  
Document Type:  Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Document Date:  October 19, 2021  
  
2 
 Objectives  
This study examined the preliminary efficacy of a novel, theory -driven intervention designed for 
adults served by [CONTACT_162737], Infants, and Children 
(WIC) . Primary outcomes were vegetable intake (objectively assessed using dermal carotenoids 
as a biomarker of intake and via self -report) and the redemption of WIC Farmers’ Market 
Nutrition Program (FMNP) vouchers for fruit and vegetable purchases at farmers’ markets  
(objectively assessed using data provided by [CONTACT_254718]) . Potential hypothesized mediators of 
intervention effects were vegetable -related knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors ; physical activity , 
and weight status. Intervention effects on the redemption of WIC cash value vouchers (CVV ) at 
farmers'  markets, participant satisfaction with the program, and the cost -effectiveness of the 
intervention also were examined.  The CVV are issued monthly by [CONTACT_254719]’ markets in New Jersey, the location o f the study.  
 
Setting, Design, and Sample  
The setting for the research was a large, New Jersey -based WIC agency located in a densely 
populated  primarily Hispanic urban area. The intervention was evaluated in three of the agency’s 
17 sites selected based on similarity in size and the demographics of participants served (one 
randomized to the intervention study group and two to the control group). As the intervention was 
delivered at the site level, randomiza tion was by [CONTACT_254720].  
Inclusion criteria were 1) English - or Spanish -speaking adult, 2) FMNP voucher recipi[INVESTIGATOR_254717] a child voucher recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], 3) no known restrictions on food intake, 4) not less than 3 
months from expected delivery date (if pregnant), and 5) eligible to receive WIC benefits for at 
least [ADDRESS_309514] 1, 2019 . 
Across sites, trained bilingual English/Spanish -speaking research staff contact[CONTACT_254721], provided a description of the study, and confirmed 
eligibility. Interested adults were orally adm inistered an outcome battery of self -report measures. 
During appointments, biometric measures (height, weight, and carotenoid levels) were taken. 
Participants also were recruited from the WIC clinic where they completed all measures in person. 
All particip ants provided informed consent verbally, prior to completing telephone assessments, 
and in writing prior to completing in -person assessments. Thereafter, a WIC administrator 
confirmed whether adults completing all assessments had received FMNP vouchers. Th ose who 
did not were informed that they were ineligible and were thanked for their involvement.   
In total, 29 7 adults were enrolled.  Participants enrolled at the intervention site (n = 160) 
received routine services provided by [CONTACT_254722]. Those enrolled at control sites (n 
= 137) received routine services only. Across sites, all participants were contact[CONTACT_254723]-up measures at mid - and post -intervention ([ADDRESS_309515] -baseline, respectively). As 
at baseline, research staff contact[CONTACT_254724] ; during appointment s, biometric measures were taken. 
To enhance retention, across sites, research staff mailed appointment reminders to participants and 
confirmed appointments via telephone one day in advance, maintained multiple contacts for 
participants, and updated partic ipants’ contact [CONTACT_43411]. Honoraria, gift 
cards redeemable at local supermarkets and discount chain stores, also were provided to 
participants for completing successive assessments. Participants received a $10 honorarium at 
baseline a nd at mid -intervention; to enhance response rates, the amount was increased to $[ADDRESS_309516]-intervention (participants received up to $40 in honoraria in total). For self -report data 
assessed via the outcome battery, [ADDRESS_309517]-baseline assessment 
3 
 (143 participants in the intervention group and 130 in the control group); for biometric measures, 
the corresponding figure was 261 (137 in the intervention group and 124 in the control group).  
 
Intervention  
Designed to address ind ividual and broader systems -level influences on vegetable intake, the 
intervention was conceptually grounded in the Social Ecological Model and Social Cognitive 
Theory.1 According to the Social Ecological Model, behavior is shaped by [CONTACT_254725], i.e., intrapersonal and interpersonal factors, community and organizational 
factors, and public policies.2 Social Cognitive Theory emphasizes targeting the environment 
(factors external to a person), behavioral capacity (knowl edge and skills to perform a behavior), 
and self -efficacy (confidence in the ability to perform a behavior) using self -control strategies 
such as monitoring and feedback to regulate behavior, observational learning (the acquisition of 
behaviors by [CONTACT_254726] g outcomes of others’ behavior, ideally, credible and relatable role models); 
and reinforcement (incentives, rewards, and feedback) to increase the likelihood of a behavior.3,4 
The program consisted of 1) a WIC -based farmers’ market to improve community ac cess to 
vegetables, and among those purchasing items at the market, home vegetable availability; 2) 
behaviorally focused instruction to enhance social support for vegetable consumption and build 
vegetable -related knowledge, skills, and self -efficacy; 3) fi eld trips to an area farmers’ market to 
further improve vegetable access, provide opportunities for experiential and hands -on learning, 
and enable participants to apply knowledge and skills learned at the WIC -based market to a real -
world setting; 4) teleph one coaching and support before and after trips to facilitate plans to 
incorporate vegetables into daily meals, 5) recipe demonstrations and tastings to build vegetable 
knowledge, preparation skills, and taste preferences; and 6) handouts to reinforce vege table 
knowledge and preparation skills. The program logic model is shown in the figure.  
The WIC -based market was implemented at the intervention site in the summer of 2019 
during the FMNP voucher issuance period. Participants presenting for appointments (d uring 
which they would receive FMNP vouchers) were directed to wait in a classroom with the market. 
Nutrition educators provided group -based instruction to participants while waiting for 
appointments, conducted recipe demonstrations and tastings (in total,  3 recipes were 
demonstrated), and instructed participants to return to the classroom after appointments to receive 
additional instruction and a recipe pack containing handouts and the ingredients for one of the 
recipes to try at home. Participants also le arned that they had the option to purchase fruits and 
vegetables at the WIC -based market with their FMNP vouchers. Nutrition educators provided 
personalized, 1:1 instruction to participants returning to the classroom after appointments.  
Thereafter, partici pants completed up to three field trips to the area farmers’ market (one 
each in September, October, and November). The same individuals who delivered nutrition 
education at the WIC -based market scheduled the trips and provided group -based instruction to 
participants during trips. At the market, the educators conducted recipe demonstrations and 
tastings (3 recipes per trip, differing each month), distributed recipe packs containing the 
ingredients for one of the recipes, and provided 1:1 instruction to part icipants. The educators also 
provided telephone coaching and support to participants before and after trips. The 5 -month 
intervention was implemented between July 1, 2019 , and November 30, 2019.  
 
Measures  
At baseline, participants reported their age, race,  ethnicity, nativity, language preference and 
years in the US (if foreign born), pregnancy and breastfeeding status, educational attainment, 
car ownership and access, supplement use, smoking status, and past 7 -day exposure to 
4 
 secondhand smoke. Food securit y status was assessed with an item from the Household Food 
Security Survey Module (“ Have you or other adults in your household worried whether your 
food would run out before you got money to buy more?”).5 Participants also completed a 
validated measure of social desirability trait, the tendency to respond to self -report measures in 
a manner consistent with expected norms.6 As children aged 2 to 5 years were eligible to 
receive FMNP vouchers, a measure of the number of children per household aged 2 to 5 year s 
was constructed based on FMNP voucher data provided by [CONTACT_254718].  
 
Vegetable intake  was objectively measured with pressure -mediated reflection spectroscopy, a 
safe, reliable, and valid method for noninvasively assessing dermal carotenoids as a biomarker 
of intake.7 Carotenoid levels were assessed with a portable device, the Veggie MeterTM 
(Longevity Link Inc., Salt Lake City, UT), by [CONTACT_254727]. Scans were 
conducted in triplicate and the average of the three scans was recorde d. Scores can range from 
zero to 800, with higher scores indicating higher dermal carotenoid levels. Vegetable intake also 
was assessed via self -report with one of two items in a brief fruit and vegetable screener 
developed by [CONTACT_29630]  (“How many cups of vegetables [including 100% 
vegetable juice] do you eat or drink each day?”).[ADDRESS_309518].9 
 
FMNP voucher redemption  was objectively a ssessed once at the end of the voucher redemption 
period (June 1 to November 30, 2019) using data provided by [CONTACT_254718]. WIC reported whether 
participants redeemed any vouchers (yes/no) over this period.  
 
Knowledge of vegetable intake recommendations  was assessed with an item from the Food 
Attitudes and Behaviors Survey.10 Based on their responses, participants were classified as 
knowledgeable of the recommended cups/day of vegetables (yes/no) as per the My Plate 
amounts for women aged [ADDRESS_309519] 
moderate reliability and validity.12 Participants responded to items querying whether they had 
any fresh, canned, and frozen vegetables at home (yes/no).  Those responding affirmatively were 
asked to report which vegetables they had at home. Two measures of availability were 
constructed based on the responses: 1) the quantity or total number of vegetables at home, and 2) 
the variety or number of different i tems at home.  
 
Vegetable taste preferences  were assessed with a single item, “Overall, how much do you like 
the taste of vegetables?” Responses were on a 7 -point scale ranging from not at all (1) to a lot 
(7). Higher scores indicated greater taste preferences.  
 
Social support for vegetable consump tion was assessed with the item, “How much would you 
say people in your life support you to eat vegetables?” Responses were on a 7 -point scale 
ranging from not at all (1) to a lot (7). Higher scores indicated greater social support.  
 
Vegetable preparation practices  were assessed with three items from the Project EAT -II survey.[ADDRESS_309520] month: 1) 
bought fresh vegetables, 2) prepared a green salad, and 3) prepared a dinner with vegetables. 
Responses were on a 5 -point scale ranging from never (1) to more tha n once a week (5).  
 
5 
 Vegetable preparation skills  were assessed with the following item: “How would you rate your 
overall skill in preparing vegetables?” Responses were on a 7 -point scale ranging from poor (1) 
to excellent (7). Higher scores indicated great er preparation skills.  
 
Self-efficacy for vegetable consumption  was assessed  with an adapted version of a 5 -item 
measure of self -efficacy for fruit and vegetable consumption.14 The measure was adapted by 
[CONTACT_254728] (sample item: “I feel 
I can prepare recipes with vegetables.”).14 Responses were on a 4 -point scale ranging from 
strongly disagree (1) to strongly agr ee (4); higher scores indicated greater self -efficacy.  
 
Physical activity  was operationalized as meeting current physical activity guidelines and was 
assessed with a validated 2 -item measure.15 Participants reported the frequency and duration of 
moderate and vigorous intensity physical activity, respectively, in a typi[INVESTIGATOR_3711]. Item responses 
were assigned point values and summed to derive a total score. Score ranges were used to 
classify participants as meeting physical activity guidelines (yes/no ).15 
 
Weight status  was measured as body mass index (BMI), calculated as weight in kilograms 
divided by [CONTACT_254729].16 Height and weight were measured with participants 
wearing light clothing without shoes using standardized methods and equipment (Se ca 876 scale 
and Seca 213 stadiometer [Seca Corp., Chino, CA]).17  
 
Cash value voucher redemption was assessed using data provided by [CONTACT_254730] (June 1, 2019, to November 30, 2019). WIC 
reported whether participants redeemed any CVV  at farmers’ markets  (yes/no) over this period.  
 
Satisfaction w ith the intervention  was assessed at post-intervention among participants who 
received the intervention. A single item measure (with response options on a 7 -point scale ranging 
from very dissatisfied [1] to very satisfied [7]) was used to assess overall satisfaction with the 
program . Participants also completed a 5-item satisfaction measure developed by [CONTACT_473] 
(sample i tem: “The program was interesting;” Cronbach’s α = 0.90 ). Responses were on a 7 -point 
scale ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree  (7). Ratings were averaged across items 
to derive a total score. Higher scores indicated greater satisfaction . Participants also responded to 
open -ended items on w hat was liked most and least about the program, what, if anything, could be 
done to improve it; and the most important thing learned in the program.  
 
Hypotheses  
Primary (Outcome Evaluation)  
H1: At mid - and post -intervention, greater improvements in vegetable intake and FMNP voucher 
redemption will be found among participants who receive the intervention relative to those who do not.  
 
 
Secondary (Mediation Analyses)  
H2: Program effects on vegetab le intake will be mediated by [CONTACT_254731] -related 
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors; p hysical activity , and weight status.  
 
Exploratory Aims  
1. To evaluate intervention effects on the redemption of CVV at farmers’ markets.  
2. To examine satisfaction with the intervention among participants who receive it.  
3. To determine the cost -effectiveness of the intervention.  
 
[ADDRESS_309521] square means by 
[CONTACT_254732], 95% confidence intervals were estimated for the differences. To 
quantify the magnitude of between -group differences, adjusted Cohen’s d was calculated as the 
difference between least square means divided by [CONTACT_254733] e.  
Logistic regression analysis was used to relate FMNP voucher redemption to study arm. 
The analysis was adjusted for the aforementioned covariates, i.e., age, race, breastfeeding 
status, and exposure to secondhand smoke. Odds ratios (ORs) were estimated wit h 95% 
confidence intervals. For FMNP voucher redemption, effect size was measured using ORs, 
where 1.[ADDRESS_309522].  
 
Exploratory Analyses  
Preliminary analyses revealed that 12 participants redeemed CVV at farmers’ markets, all in the 
intervention arm. Thus, a formal analysis of intervention effects on CVV redemption was not 
conducted. Mean ratings on measures of satisfaction with the intervention (on a 7 -point scale) 
were computed. Scores at  or above 5.[ADDRESS_309523] -effectiveness ratios (expressed as cost per intervention effe ct) were 
estimated in [ADDRESS_309524].  
 
  
7 
 References  
1. Di Noia,J, Monica D, Sikorskii A, Gonzalez K, Abuhadba L. Feasibility of a farm -to-WIC 
intervention. Public Health Nutr . 2019;22(18):3405 -3415. 
2. Berlin L, Norris K, Kolodinsky J, Nelson A. The role of social cognitive theory in farm‐to‐
school‐related activities: Implications for child nutrition. J Sch Health . 2013;83(8):589 -595. 
3. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitiv e Theory . Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall; 1986.  
4. Bandura A. Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory. Psychol Health . 
1998;13(4):623 -649. 
5. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. U.S. Household Food Security 
Surv ey Module. Available at: https://www.ers.usda.gov/topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/food -nutrition -
assistance/food -security -in-the-us/survey -tools/. Accessed September12, 2020.  
6. Hays RD, Hayashi T, Stewart AL. A five -item measure of socially desirable response set. 
Educ Psychol Meas . 1989;49(3):629 -636. 
7. Scherr RE, Laugero KD, Graham DJ, et al. Innovative techniques for evaluating behavioral 
nutrition interventions. Adv Nutr . 2017;8(1):113 -125. 
8. Yaroch AL, Tooze J, Thompson FE, et al. Evaluation of three short dietary instruments to 
assess fruit and vegetable intake: The National Cancer Institute’s food attitudes and behaviors 
survey. J Acad Nutr Diet . 2012;112(10):1570 -1577.  
9. Ogunbode A, Owolabi M, Ogunbode O, Ogunniyi A. What’s in your hands? A systematic 
review of dietary assessment me thods and estimation of food sizes in a primary care clinic. J 
Med Trop . 2018;20(2):[ADDRESS_309525] CA, Nebeling LC, et al. Development and implementation of the 
National Cancer Institute’s Food Attitudes and Behaviors Survey to assess correlates of fruit 
and vegetable intake in adults. PLoS One . 2015;10(2): e0115017.  
11. US Department of  Agriculture. How Many Vegetables are Needed? 
https://www.choosemyplate.gov/eathealthy/vegetables. Accessed June 28, 2020.  
12. Bryant MJ, Ward DS, Hales D, Vaughn A, Tabak RG, Stevens J. Reliability and validity of 
the Healthy Home Survey: A tool to measure fa ctors within homes hypothesized to relate to 
overweight in children. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act . 2008;5:23.  
13. Laska MN, Larson NI, Neumark -Sztainer D, Story M. Does involvement in food preparation 
track from adolescence to young adulthood and is it associated  with better dietary quality? 
Findings from a 10 -year longitudinal study. Public Health Nutr . 2012;15(7):1150 -1158.  
14. Dannefer R, Abrami A, Rapoport R, Sriphanlop P, Sacks R, John M. A mixed -methods 
evaluation of a SNAP -Ed farmers' market -based nutrition edu cation program. J Nutr Educ 
Behav . 2015;47(6):516 -525. 
15. Marshall AL, Smith BJ, Bauman AE, Kaur S. Reliability and validity of a brief physical 
activity assessment for use by [CONTACT_254734]. Br J Sports Med . 2005;39:294 -297. 
16. Centers for Disease Control and P revention. About Adult BMI. 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/index.html. Accessed June 27, 2020.  
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Anthropometry Procedures Manual. Available at: 
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/2017 -
2018/manuals/2017_Anthropometry_Procedures_Manual.pdf. Accessed April 21, 2020.  