Feasibility and Acceptability of Mobile Mantram 
Repetition Program for Veterans With PTSD 
(IVI 22-115)
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
August 12, [ADDRESS_337066] -traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD)  can play critical role in  
reducing PTSD and associated symptoms in Veterans , especially  for those who remain symptomatic after treatment 
with other evidence -based interventions , those who prefer complimentary and integrative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] , or those who 
have difficulty accessing traditional face -to-face mental health services . The value of these prog rams is their ability 
to provide Veterans with more options  in their recovery journ ey and to reach a broad range of Veterans across 
multiple settings , including remote rural contexts.  
The Mantram Repetition Program (MRP) is a meditation -based practice tha t consists of the repetition of a 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_276078], one -pointed attention , and slowing down. MRP has been shown to reduce stress in several  high-risk 
populations , and  two large randomized, controlled studie s show that MRP reduces PTSD symptoms among 
Veterans . A brief, web -based, self -directed  version of MRP has been developed to increase the accessibility of 
evidence -based PTSD treatment. This version of MRP  was tested in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_276079] , 
demonstrating its ease of use and success in getting students to engage with the practice . The proposed  mixed 
method study will use the Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, Maintenance (RE -AIM) framework to 
evaluate the mobile MRP in Veterans with PTSD  in two conditions: self -directed and with text/phone support . Data 
from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_276080] P delivery strategy  and the development of a full -scale trial 
to test its effectiveness  and implementation outcomes, as well as barriers and facilitators, and other contextual  
factors . 
Aim 1 . To assess the reach and implementation of the mobile Mantram Repetition Program  using a mixed methods 
approach focusing on  feasibility, acceptability, appropriateness, and facilitators  of and barriers to program 
implementation.  
Aim 2 . To compare Veterans who are self -directed users of mobile MRP versus Veterans who receive text and 
phone support  in terms of engagement with the intervention and change in PTSD and associated symptoms .  
2   
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is common among US military Veterans  (Gradus, 2007) . Untre ated, 
PTSD is chronic and highly impairing  (Santiago et al., 2013)  thus it is a high priority for the VA. Current evidence -
based treatments can be highly effective; nonetheless, many Veterans remain symptomatic even after successful  
treatment  (Steenkamp et al., 2020) . Further, many Veterans express a preference for alternative approaches or 
complements to other treatment strategies  (Whitehead & Kligler, 2020) . Consistent with  the Hannon Act, both 
meditation and spi[INVESTIGATOR_139965] -based approaches are potentially important avenues for  restoring Whole Health for 
Veterans.  
The Mantram Repetition  Program  (MRP) is a meditation -based approach that involves silent repetition of a 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_276081] -pointed attention and  slowing down  (Bormann et al., 2014) . 
The MRP is a transdiagnostic intervention, with documented positive effects o n a range of outcomes, including 
improved stress management among healthcare workers ( e.g., Leary  et al, 2018 ) and caregivers (e.g., Bormann et 
al., 2009)  and better copi[INVESTIGATOR_276082] (e.g., Bormann et al., 2006) . Importantly, two large 
randomized controlled trials with Veterans have demonstrated that MRP was associated with large effect 
size reduction symptoms of PTSD  as well as increased spi[INVESTIGATOR_176315] -being and reduced insomnia  (Bormann et 
al., 2012, 2018) . The MRP can be taught in person or remotely, including by [CONTACT_276091] -recorded video s or by 
[CONTACT_15098], paraprofessional or lay people.  For example, the MRP was recently applied to increase patient -centered 
care and decrease burnout in nurses via internet -based learning (Kostovich et al., 2021) . Recent work in ou r lab 
demonstrated that MRP can be taught in a self -directed manner through a series of brief videos delivered via 
Qualtrics. This brief, self-guided, web-based version of MRP was implement ed with an undergraduate student 
sample and showed good retention in the program  (88% completed the full intervention and 8 7% completed the 
follow -up assessment ). Mantram repetition was regularly utilized by 80% of the group, and 9 6% endorsed applying 
the concept of slowing d own. On average, participants were practicing 4 -5 days/week (Vannini, et al, 2021) . These 
initial data on the feasibility and acceptability of th is MRP implementation strategy  show promise for use in  
Veterans , given the demand for a wide range of easily -accessible  and complementary and integrative  treatment 
options .  
eScreening  is a web -based, patient -facing  screening and information -provision system developed with 
Veteran and staff feedback  that allows for the rapid capture of self -report data and has been shown to improve the 
quality  of documentation and access to care  (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_154164]., 2019) . Across multiple VHA facilit ies, eScreening has 
been utilized over 34,000 times with Veterans in Transition Care Management , primary care, and mental health 
settings ; eScreening supports both screening and measurement -based deployment of evidence -based 
psychotherapy. In 2016, the eSc reening program was named a Gold Standard Practice for diffusion throughout 
VHA by [CONTACT_276092] -Secretary for Healt h (Elnahal et al., 2017) . eScreening is available nationwide and is a promising 
platform for the delivery of MR P to Veterans.  
 
The goals of this study are  to (1) better understand mobile MRP by [CONTACT_276093],  feasibility, 
acceptability , appropriateness , barriers and facilitators ; and (2) compare effectiveness (i.e., mantram use, 
PTSD and associated symptoms) of self-directed MR P (i.e., used without support from a facilitator ) to 
supported MR P (i.e., text/phone support  provided by a facilitator ) in Veterans with PTSD using the existing 
VA eScreening platform for delivery of the program.  
 
This project is responsive to several  HSR&D priorities. If successful, this program would enhance access to 
care, thereby [CONTACT_276094] . This project also target s PTSD and 
associated symptoms, including  insomnia , important mental health issues  prioritized by [CONTACT_69287]&D . This project 
features meditation, which is of interest to an increasing number of Veterans and a potential component of the 
Whole Health  approach, whereby [CONTACT_276095], including spi[INVESTIGATOR_25824]. Finally,  this study 
uses eScreening , an electronic, self -report screening system, developed by [CONTACT_276096] .  Consistent with the aims of the SWIFT -IVI program, we will pi[INVESTIGATOR_276083] a future fully -powered implementation trial with the aim of rapi[INVESTIGATOR_276084].  
  
[ADDRESS_337067] 
and analyze  data to inform future implementation of the MR P (Palinkas et al., 2019) . 
 
Participants  
Participants will be 40 Veterans with PTSD residing in San Diego County, CA. These individuals will be 
recruited from VA clinics (self - and provider -referral) and through community outreach (e. g., advertisements). 
Eligibility is intentionally broad to approximate future real-world  users of MR P. 
Inclusion : Veteran, 18 or older, primary clinical complaint of PTSD, ability to access internet-enabled smart 
phone , tablet , or com puter . 
Exclusion : Cognitive impairment or mental health concerns that necessitate a higher level of care or interfere 
with the ability to consent or engage in study activities (serious mental illness, untreated alcohol or substance 
use disorder, serious su icidality or homicidality, marked cognitive impairment) .  
 
Interventions  
MRP consists of four online training modules  that were developed for a Veteran audience  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jill 
Bormann, the developer of the intervention.  They cover the basic intervention components: choosing a mantram,  
slowing down , attentional control and habit  formation . These videos were created in conjunction with PsychArmor, 
Inc., a non -profit organization that provides training to multiple sectors who support Veterans and  are available via 
internet  (refer to Letter of Support from [CONTACT_276100]) . In the self-directed condition , enrolled Vet erans will 
not be contact[CONTACT_276097].  In the support ed 
condition , Veterans will receive a daily text reminder to practice their mantram  (e.g., “Did you find a moment to 
practice your mantram today? Please respond YES, NO or HELP if you would like to talk to one of our staff.”) . 
Those who answer in the a ffirmative will receive praise and an offer of support (e.g., “Great job! A regular pra ctice 
happens one day at a time!”). Those who answer in the negative will receive brief encouragement and an offer of 
assistance  (e.g., “You can repeat your mantram at any spare moment. Would you like to speak with a trainer about 
working it into your day? ”). A request for help will be followed by a personal text and call by [CONTACT_464].  
 
Procedures  
Following provision of written informed consent and HIPAA authorization using a telehealth -based informed 
consent process, Veterans will confirm access to a st udy-compatible device (Internet -enabled smart phone, tablet 
or computer) and be administered a semi -structured interview ( MINI ) and brief cognitive screen (blind MoCA)  via 
telephone by a trained Research Assistant (RA) to confirm  eligibility .  If deemed eligible , the Veteran will be 
randomly assigned to one of two conditions: self-directed MRP or supported MRP. Veteran involvement then 
proceeds as follows:  
1. Veterans complete a brief assessment battery  (see Measures ) including  demographics  and mental health 
symptoms  using eScreening . 
2. Veterans access the training  videos  via eScreening . 
a. Day 1: All complete a brief symptom screener  (see Measures ), watch a ~ 15-minute  instructional 
video (#1) and answer comprehension and credibility questions about the video . 
b. Days 2 -7: Supported condition  only: They are prompted daily to engage in meditation practice  and 
may receive support toward that end (see Interventions ). 
c. Day 8:   All complete a brief symptom screener and questions about meditation practice, watch a ~ 15-
minute  instructional video (#2), and answer comprehension questions about the video.  
d. Days 9 -14: Supported condition  only: Daily prompts/support . 
e. Day 15: All complete a brief symptom screener and questions about meditation practice, watch a 
~15-minute  instructional video (#3), and answer comprehension questions about the video.  
f. Days 16 -21: Supported  condition  only: Daily prompts/support . 
g. Day 22: All complete a brief symptom screener and questions about meditation practice, watch a 
~15-minute  instructional video (#4), and answer comprehension questions about the video.  
h. Days 23 -28: Supported condition only:  Daily prompts/support . 
4  3. Veterans complete a brief assessment battery about mental health symptoms and answer questions about 
the feasibility , acceptability, and appropriateness of mobile MRP (Weiner et al., 2017) .  
  
Data Collection  and Measures   
We will collect data f or the r each, implementation , and effectiveness  outcomes of RE -AIM (Glasgow et al., 
2019)  as depi[INVESTIGATOR_28071] [ADDRESS_337068] two dimensions of RE -AIM (i.e., 
adoption and maintenance). The advantage of this mechanism for delivering MRP is that it  is self-directed, requiring 
little or no support from pr oviders , and utilized similarly to other VA apps (e.g., PTSD Coach); consequently, factors 
related to the providers ’ adoption of mobile MRP are minimal.  Collection of data pertaining to maintenance is 
beyond the scope if this one -year study, but it will b e an important factor to measure in the full -scale trial of this self -
directed adaptation of the delivery of MR P with or without support in Veterans with PTSD.  
 
Table 1.  Select RE-AIM Implementation Outcomes and their Assessment  
RE-AIM Definition  Measure/Instrument  Data source  
Reach   
 The absolute number, 
proportion, and 
representativeness of 
participants  Number of screenings  
Percent eligible/ineligible  
Refusal rate 
Characteristics of participants  Study 
recruitment logs  
eScreening  
platform surveys  
Implementation   
 
 How much and how well 
the MR P is implemented 
and how it is received by 
[CONTACT_276098] (AIM)  
Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM)  
Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FIM)   
Credibility of MR P 
% of videos completed with comprehension  
Satisfaction with MR P 
Mantram use  eScreening 
platform surveys  
Qualitative 
interview  
Effectiveness  
 
 The impact of an 
intervention on Veteran 
outcomes  Brief Symptom Screen  
PCL-5 
PHQ -9 
ISI 
Brief PHI  eScreening  
platform surveys  
Screening  
The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview ( MINI  7.0) (Sheehan et al., 1998)  will be used to assess 
suicidality, substance dependence, and serious mental illness . Blind MoCA  (Wittich,  et al. , 2010) , which  is a 
version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment that can be used to assess for cognitive impairment  via 
videoconferening , will assess cognitive readiness to participate . Demographic characteristics  include age, 
gender, race/ethnicity, relationship status , years of education, SES/income/living situation, residential ZIP code, 
occupation/work status, branch of service/highest rank, service connection/disability status.  
Reach Measures  
The number of screenings , percent eligible/ineligible , and  refusal rate will be calculated, and 
characteristics  of participating Veterans with PTSD  will be compared those who refuse or are ineligible and to 
clinical eScreening data from the facility to assess  generalizability.  
Implementation Measures  
The Acceptability of Intervention Measure ( AIM), Intervention Appropriateness Measure ( IAM), and 
Feasibility of Intervention Measure ( FIM) developed by [CONTACT_276099] , 2017) will be used to calculate mean ratings of 
acceptability , appropriateness, and  feasibilit y. A Qualitative Interview  will be used to collect additional qualitative 
data on the AIM, IAM, FIM using the interview guides that we have previously modified for use in our other studies  
(McCreight et al., 2019; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_154164]., 2021) . We will also explore barriers and facilitators of the  implementation of 
MRP. Credibility ratings  of the intervention will be assessed with three items adapted from Borkovec & Nau  
(1972) . Ratings that are comparable to previous studies using mantram suggest that acceptability is retained in this 
format.  Compr ehension Questions  will be  module -specific and test the participants ’ knowledge and understanding  
of each video. Using a conservative approach, we will not consider a video completed unless the comprehension 
question is answered successfully. The questions  were developed for the Vannini et al. (2021) pi[INVESTIGATOR_276085]. 
Satisfaction  will be assess ed using a set of five-point Like rt scale (1 =very dissatisfied ; 5=very satisfied) items 
rating  the module narrator, learning outcomes , overall course, and module content.  The Mantram Use Scale , which 
has been used in several MR P efficacy studies, queries aspects of mantram use (frequency, practice/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 
sleep).  
5  Effectiveness Measures  
A brief symptom screen  (items [ADDRESS_337069] week) will be 
used as a weekly indicator of mental state. The PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 version ( PCL-5, Bovin et al., 2016)  will 
be used to quantify PTSD symptoms over the past week. PCL -5 scores demonstrated good internal consistency (α 
= .96), test -retest reliability (r = .84), and convergent and discriminant validity  (Blevins et al., 2015) . The Patient 
Health Questionnaire depression items ( PHQ -9; Kroenke et al., 2001)  will be used to quantify depression severity. 
The PHQ -9 has strong internal consistency (0.74 -0.81), validity, and demonstrated responsiveness to change  (Titov 
et al., 2011) . The Insomnia Severity Index ( ISI; Bastien et al., 2001) , a 7-item instrument that assesses the  
consequences of and distress rela ted to insomnia , which is a common and impairing problem associated with 
PTSD . Research compared insomnia symptoms  assessed with the ISI to weekly sleep diaries and overnight 
polysomnography for insomnia disorder  and found a total score of ≥10 on the ISI indicates insomnia disorder  in 
community samples with excellent internal consistency (Morin  et al. , 2011).  The 21 -item Brief Personal Health 
Inventory ( Brief PHI ; Department of Veterans Affairs, 2019)  is a self -reflection tool that assesses all aspects of 
Whole Health corresponding to the Circle of Health (Department of Veterans Affairs, 2019) . It consists of a series of 
closed and open ‐ended questions that encourage Veterans to reflect on the multiple facets of health outlined in the 
Circle of Health and Well ‐Being. Veterans are asked to rate their overall general physical well -being, 
mental/emotional well -being and daily life on a 1 -5 scale, in which 1 = miserable and 5 = great. Current state (now) 
and ideal state (goal) functioning for each of the nine areas of the Circle of Health  are rated . The Brief PHI has been 
recently used Almklov and colleagues (submitted) to characterize Veterans’ nee ds and preferences for services.  
 
Data Analysis  
Quantitative Analysis.  Quantitative data from surveys and study databases will be summarized using 
descriptive statistics  including frequencies, proportions, measures of central tendency (mean and median), and 
variability (standard deviation and interquartile range) along with data visualization methods, such as frequency 
tables, bar charts, line graphs, and scatter plots to understand implementation and effectiveness outcomes.  95% 
confidence intervals will be calculated when estimating proportions and means. Change from baseline to each post -
intervention on effectiveness measures and mantram use will be calculated overall an d by [CONTACT_19313] (self -directed vs 
supported). Wilcoxon signed rank test and rank sum test will be used to examine the change in each group and 
compare the change between two groups. Linear mixed effects model will be used to examine the trajectory of 
change fro m baseline to post -intervention.  
Qualitative analysis . Interviews will be recorded and transcribed. All qualitative data  will be coded using a 
rapid qualitative data analytic approach . Unique and common themes across the two groups will be compared.  Data 
analysis will be led by [CONTACT_6283]. Rabin and Lindamer and will also include qualitatively -trained members of the research 
team.  
A matrix approach will be used to triangulate data from quantitative and qualitative sources. We will use a 
joint display analysis to support the integration of different data sources and types.  Unique and common themes 
emerging across the two groups (self -directed and supported) will be identified and described.  
Sample size.  As a feasibility study, the sample size was not pr ojected to ensure enough study power for 
hypothesis testing. We assessed the effect size of the effectiveness measures ( e.g., PCL-5) that can be detected 
with the planned sample size and 80% power. The effect size for change in outcome from baseline to pos t 
treatment in each intervention group and for overall was estimated based on a paired t -test. With a sample size of 
[ADDRESS_337070] size would be clinically meaningful thus signaling 
the need for additional study.  The sample size asse ssment was also conducted for assessing feasibility measures 
(e.g., initiation  rate). First, we assessed the precision of estimates based on projected sample size. We considered 
a range of target rate from 0.60 to 0.90 and estimated the width of the 95% ex act binomial confidence interval for 
overall and for each intervention group . If an estimated intervention initiation rate is 0.80, a sample size of 40 (total) 
and 20 (per intervention group) will produce a two -sided 95% confidence interval with a width of  0.243 and 0.335, 
respectively. If an estimated intervention initiation rate is 0.90, the width of the 95% CI is reduced (becomes more 
precise) with the same sample size projected above.   
6  BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES CITED 
Almklov, E. Shi, S., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289], J,O.E., Heppner, P., Afari, N., Lindamer, L. ( submitted ). Characterizing Veteran 
Response s on the Brief Personal Health Inventory to Inform Whole Health Care. Psychological Services . 
Bastien, C. H., Vallières, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the insomnia severity index as an outcome 
measure for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine , 2(4), 297 –307.  
Blevins, C. A., Weathers, F. W., Davis, M. T., Witte, T. K., & Domino, J. L. (201 5). The Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5): Development and Initial Psychometric Evaluation. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress , 28(6), 489 –498.  
Borkovec, T. D., & Nau, S. D. (1972). Credibility of analogue therapy rationales. Journal of B ehavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry , 3(4), 257 –260.  
Bormann, J. E., Gifford, A. L., Shively, M., Smith, T. L., Redwine, L., Kelly, A., Becker, S., Gershwin, M., Bone, P., & 
Belding, W. (2006). Effects of spi[INVESTIGATOR_276086] s: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine , 29(4), 359.  
Bormann, J. E., Liu, L., Thorp, S. R., & Lang, A. J. (2012). Spi[INVESTIGATOR_276087] -related PTSD. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine , 19(4), 496 –502.  
Bormann, J. E., Thorp, S. R., Smith, E., Glickman, M., Beck, D., Plumb, D., Zhao, S., Ackland, P. E., Rodgers, C. 
S., Heppner, P., Herz, L. R., & Elwy, A. R. (2018). Individual treatment of posttraumatic stress disorde r using 
mantram repetition: A randomized clinical trial. American Journal of Psychiatry , 175(10), 979 –988.  
Bormann, J. E., Weinrich, S., Allard, C. B., Beck, D., Johnson, B. D., & Holt, L. C. osc. (2014). Chapter 5 mantram 
repetition: an evidence -based co mplementary practice for military personnel and veterans in the 21st century. 
Annual Review of Nursing Research , 32, 79–108.  
Bormann, J., Warren, K. A., Regalbuto, L., Glaser, D., Kelly, A., Schnack, J., & Hinton, L. (2009). A spi[INVESTIGATOR_276088]. Family and 
Community Health , 32(4), 345 –353.  
Bovin, M. J., Marx, B. P., Weathers, F. W., Gallagher, M. W., Rodriguez, P., Schnurr, P. P., & Keane, T. M. (2016). 
Psychome tric properties of the PTSD checklist for diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders -fifth 
edition (PCL -5) in veterans. Psychological Assessment , 28(11), 1379 –1391.  
Department of Veteran Affairs. Circle of Health . Retrieved April 11, 2021, from 
https://www.va.gov/WHOLEHEALTH/circle -of-life/index  
Department of Veterans Affairs. (2019). Personal Health Inventory -Short Form: PHI -S. 
Elnahal, S. M., Clancy, C. M., & Shulkin, D. J. (2017). A framework for disseminating clinical best practices in t he 
VA health system.  Journal of the American Medical Association  (Vol. 317, Issue 3, pp. 255 –256).  
Glasgow, R. E., Harden, S. M., Gaglio, B., Rabin, B., Smith, M. L., Porter, G. C., Ory, M. G., & Estabrooks, P. A. 
(2019). RE -AIM planning and evaluation fr amework: Adapting to new science and practice with a 20 -year 
review. Frontiers in Public Health , 7(MAR).  
Gradus, J. L. (2007). Epi[INVESTIGATOR_276089] . 
Kostovich, C. T., Bormann, J. E., Gonzalez, B., Hansbrough, W., Kelly, B., & Collins, E. G. (2021). Being present: 
Examining the efficacy of an Internet Mantram Program on RN -delivered patient -centered care. Nursing 
Outlook , 69(2), 136 –146.  
Kroenke, K., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., & Williams, J. B. W. (2001). The PHQ -9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine , 16(9), 606 –613.  
7  Leary, S., Weingart, K., Topp, R., & Bormann, J. (2018). The Effect of Mantram Repetition on Burnout and Stress 
Among VA Staff. Workplace Health and Safety , 66(3), 120 –128.  
McCreight, M. S., Rabin, B. A ., Glasgow, R. E., Ayele, R. A., Leonard, C. A., Gilmartin, H. M., Frank, J. W., Hess, P. 
L., Burke, R. E., & Battaglia, C. T. (2019). Using the Practical, Robust Implementation and Sustainability Model 
(PRISM) to qualitatively assess multilevel contextual  factors to help plan, implement, evaluate, and 
disseminate health services programs. Translational Behavioral Medicine , 9(6), 1002 –1011.  
Morin, C. M., Belleville, G., Bélanger, L., & Ivers, H. (2011). The insomnia severity index: Psychometric indicators to 
detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep , 34(5), 601 –608.  
Palinkas, L. A., Mendon, S. J., & Hamilton, A. B. (2019). Innovations in Mixed Methods Evaluations. In Annual 
Review of Public Health  (Vol. 40, pp. 423 –442). Annual Reviews Inc.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289], J.O.E., Afari, N., Floto, E., Almklov, E., Conner, S., Rabin, B., & Lindamer, L. (2019). Implementing 
eScreening technology in four VA clinics: A mixed -method study. BMC Health Services Research , 19(1).  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289], James O E, Lindamer, L., Afari, N., Depp, C., Villodas, M., Hamilton, A., Kim, B., Mor, M. K., Almklov, E., 
Gault, J., & Rabin, B. (2021). Implementing eScreening for suicide prevention in VA post -9/11 transition 
programs using a stepped -wedge, mixed -method, hybrid type -II implementation trial: a study protocol. 
Implementation Science Communications , 2(1).  
Santiag o, P. N., Ursano, R. J., Gray, C. L., Pynoos, R. S., & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_16614], D. (2013). A Systematic Review of PTSD 
Prevalence and Trajectories in DSM -5 Defined Trauma Exposed Populations: Intentional and Non -Intentional 
Traumatic Events. PLoS ONE , 8(4), [ZIP_CODE].  
Sheeha n, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., Hergueta, T., Baker, R., & 
Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): The development and 
validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatr ic interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry , 59(SUPPL. 20), 22 –33.  
Steenkamp, M. M., Litz, B. T., & Marmar, C. R. (2020). First -line Psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_276090] -Related PTSD. In 
JAMA - Journal of the American Medical Association  (Vol. 323, Issue 7, pp. 656 –657). JAMA.  
Titov, N., Dear, B. F., McMillan, D., Anderson, T., Zou, J., & Sunderland, M. (2011). Psychometric comparison of 
the PHQ -9 and BDI -II for measuring response during treatment of depression. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy , 
40(2), 126 –136.  
Vannini, M.B.N., McLean, C.L., Bormann, J.E., Lang, A. J. (2021). The Feasibility of a Brief Internet Delivered 
Mantram Repetition Training Program with Undergraduate Students. Submitted for Publication . 
Ware, J. E., Kosinski, M., & Kelle r, S. D. (1996). A 12 -Item Short -Form Health Survey: Construction of Scales and 
Preliminary Tests of Reliability and Validity. Medical Care , 34(3), 220 –233.  
Weiner, B. J., Lewis, C. C., Stanick, C., Powell, B. J., Dorsey, C. N., Clary, A. S., Boynton, M. H., & Halko, H. 
(2017). Psychometric assessment of three newly developed implementation outcome measures. 
Implementation Science .  
Whitehead, A. M., & Kligler, B. (2020). Innovations in Care: Complementary and Integrative Health in the Veterans 
Health Admi nistration Whole Health System. Medical Care , [ADDRESS_337071] 2 , S78 –S79.  
Wittich, W., Phillips N., Nasreddine,Z. S., Chertkow, H. (2010). Sensitivity and specificity of the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment modified for individuals who are visually impaired. Journa l of Visual Impairment & Blindness , 
104(6), 360 –368. 