Official title: Engaging in Advance Care Planning Talks Group Visit 
Intervention  
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: August 24, 2020  
Document type:  Study Protocol with Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
  
Study Protocol   
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :  The main goal of the ENACT ( ENgaging in Advance Care 
planning Talks) Group Visit intervention is to integrate a patient -centered ACP process into 
primary care, ultimately helpi[INVESTIGATOR_280343]. This stud y will determine: a) how the ENACT Group Visit intervention can be refined 
and adapted with input from patients, clinicians, staff, and healthcare system leaders to 
achieve high fidelity for essential components of the intervention while allowing adaptabil ity to 
individual clinic settings and patients from diverse cultural backgrounds; b) meaningful ACP 
outcomes of the intervention to these key stakeholders; and c) feasibility, acceptability and 
preliminary efficacy of the ENACT Group Visit intervention com pared to a comparison arm. 
We will pursue the following aims:  
Aim 1:  Develop and refine the ENACT Group Visit intervention prototype to have standardized 
essential components of the intervention, to be adaptable across clinic settings, and to 
prioritize AC P outcomes important to key primary care stakeholders (i.e., patients, clinicians, 
staff, and the healthcare system). We will conduct structured focus groups with stakeholders 
to answer key questions for intervention refinement:  
Question 1a:  What do patien ts identify as essential components of the intervention? What 
intervention changes do they suggest to address their ACP needs in the group visit context, 
including strategies to overcome common barriers to participation?  
Question 1b:   What do clinicians, s taff, and system leaders identify as essential components of 
the ENACT Group Visit intervention and needed adaptations to promote implementation (e.g., 
clinician involvement, documentation, follow up)?  
Question 1c:  What do stakeholders identify as meaningf ul ACP outcomes for the ENACT Group 
Visit intervention (e.g., patient self -efficacy, readiness for ACP, clinician knowledge of patient’s 
values, ACP documentation)?  
Aim 2:  Conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_209911] (RCT) to test the feasibility, acceptabilit y, and 
preliminary efficacy of the ENACT (ENgaging in Advance Care planning Talks) Group Visit 
intervention compared to a mailed advance directive (AD) arm.  
Hypothesis 2a:  It is feasible to recruit, randomize, and retain patients, with high intervention 
fidelity.  
Hypothesis 2b:  Patients and clinicians will rate ENACT Group Visit intervention as clinically 
appropriate, acceptable, and low burden.  
Hypothesis 2c:  Patients in the ENACT Group Visit intervention will have increased engagement 
in ACP outcomes, informed by [CONTACT_172961] 1 (i.e., primary outcome: documentation of surrogate 
decision maker; secondary outcomes: advance directive completion, readiness to complete 
ACP actions, ACP discussions), compared to a mailed AD arm.  
II. Background and Significance :  
Healthcare systems need interventions that promote integrated advance care planning (ACP) 
discussions for older adults in primary care. The 2014 Institute of Medicin e “Dying in 
America” report emphasized that ACP is essential to ensuring that patients receive care 
reflecting their values, goals, and preferences.[ADDRESS_342050] ACP conversa tions and lack clinic -based 
processes to facilitate ACP.(3) A novel ACP group visit in primary care may promote ACP for 
older adults by [CONTACT_280354].  
ACP interventions in primary care settings to promote advance directiv e completion have a 
moderate overall effect size and the most effective approaches combined educational 
materials for patients coupled with a patient -healthcare provider interaction that was typi[INVESTIGATOR_222877] a one -on-one setting.[ADDRESS_342051] not been effectively implemented into real -world clinical practice.  
To address the need for a disseminable patient -centered ACP model of care for older adults in 
primary care settings, we developed an Advance Care Planning Group Visit (ACP -GV) 
intervention prototype at the University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_280344] 
(e.g., discussing ACP) and documentation (e.g., surrogate decision makers, advance 
directives) in August 2013. This intervention is an innovative approach to promoting AC P in 
primary care settings by [CONTACT_280355]13, the strengths of 
facilitated discussions within the group medical visit setting (i.e. group dynamics to promote 
behavior change) , and ACP patient resources (e.g., PREPARE website14 and The 
Conversation Project Starter Kit15) to facilitate effective communication and patient 
engagement related to ACP. The ini tial intervention prototype involved groups of older adults 
(age 65+) who participated in two sessions, one month apart, facilitated by a physician and 
social worker. Findings from the clinical demonstration quality improvement intervention 
(COMIRB #13 -2291) suggested that older adults were willing to engage in ACP discussions 
and document their wishes (described below).[ADDRESS_342052] (ENgaging in Advance Care planning Talks) Group Visit intervention.  
The ENACT Group Visit intervention is an innovative model of care that needs to be rigorously 
tested in a randomized contro lled trial to determine whether it improves ACP documentation 
and informed discussions for older adults compared to usual care. Currently, 50% of 
UCHealth Denver Metro primary care patients over the age of [ADDRESS_342053] had detailed 
conversations with loved ones or healthcare providers (UCHealth Outpatient Advance 
Directives Report, Feb 2017). Additionally, the rate of advance directives available within the 
electronic medi cal record so that they are available during a medical epi[INVESTIGATOR_280345] 50%. To this end, the current research study will refine, adapt and test the ENACT 
Group Visit intervention, focusing on real -world clinical settings. Because the first ACP gr oup 
visit prototype focused on engaging patients in primary care settings in a patient -centered 
ACP process, the proposed research project will extend this work by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_280346]. The n eed for new models 
that promote ACP is highly relevant given the approval by [CONTACT_280356] 1, 2016.17  
III. Preliminary Studies:    
Intervention Structure (COMIRB #13 -2291)  - At University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (UCH), we 
conducted the initial ACP -GV prototype intervention, which was named the “Conversation 
Group Medical Visit.” The intervention aims to engage patients in an interactive discussion of 
key ACP concepts and suppo rt patient -initiated ACP actions (i.e. choosing decision -
maker(s), deciding on preferences during serious illness, discussing preferences with 
decision -makers and healthcare providers, and documenting advance directives). The group 
visits involve two [ADDRESS_342054] Group Visit intervention 
structure and facilitator considerations. The discussions include sharing experiences related 
to ACP , considering values related to serious illness, choosing a surrogate decision -
maker(s), flexibility in decision making, and having conversations with decision -makers and 
healthcare providers.[ADDRESS_342055] ive discussion that promotes 
opportunities for patients to learn from others’ experiences.  
Table [ADDRESS_342056] Group Visit Intervention  
Overview of intervention  Session format (2 hours)  Time  
Sessions: Two sessions, 1 month apart  Arrival, check -in, medical update   
Introductions and rapport building  30 min  
20 min  
Participants: 8 -10 adults; option to 
bring a potential surrogate to the 
sessions  
Facilitators: Provider and social worker 
or RN  
Location: Clinic conference room  ACP discussion                              
Discussion of individual ACP 
goals  
Opt.: Individual visits with clinician  60 min  
10 min  
10 min  
Preliminary data  - We implemented the prototype ACP -GV intervention for older adults (age 
65+) in 3 UCHealth primary care clinics in 16 ACP -GV intervention cohorts (n=118) between 
Oct 2013 -June 2015. This prior work and experience supports our ability to complete the 
current study. Compared to prior to participating, more patients reported having detailed 
ACP conversations with their loved ones about their wishes (19% to 42%, p<0.001). Medical 
record review showed increased rates of advance directives (20% to 57%, p<0.001)  and 
documentation of a medical durable power of attorney [MDPOA] or medical proxy 
documentation (39% to 79%, p<0.001) (Table 2, McNemar’s Test). While the intervention 
focuses on patient -initiated ACP goals and actions via education and support from the 
group, patients often chose to complete an advance directive.  
Lessons learned and current gaps  – From the initial quality improvement project, we identified 
specific intervention components of the ACP -GV intervention. These components are: 
patient and group characteristics, facilitator characteristics and communicati on skills, ACP 
resources, primary care provider integration, and clinic resources. Building on these 
preliminary insights, Aim [ADDRESS_342057] Group Visit 
intervention  
IV. Research  Methods  
A.  Outcome Measure (s):   
Aim 1:  We have identified multiple potential outcomes for each key research question. In line 
with qualitative research methods, we anticipate that new outcomes of interest will be iteratively 
identified during the analytic process for each of the s tudy questions.   Table 2.  ACP -GV outcomes  Baseline, n (%)  3 month, n (%)  p-value  
ACP documentation, n = 118  
Advance directive  23 (20)  67 (57)  <0.001  
MDPOA or medical proxy  46 (39)  94 (79)  <0.001  
Table 3.  Intervention 
Components  Potential Essential vs. Adaptable Features  
1.1. What are essential/adaptable features of the ENACT Group Visit intervention? Table [ADDRESS_342058] Group Visit intervention? Table 4.  
Table 4.  Potential Patient -centered Outcomes  
ACP discussions, decisions, or documentation  
ACP knowledge  
Self-efficacy or patient readiness for ACP   
Patient, clinician satisfaction  
Knowledge of patient’s wishes  
 
Aim 2:  Outcome measures for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_280347]. These outcomes are guided by a Sudore et al conceptual 
framework of ACP engagement outcomes14, the RE -AIM evaluation framework19 and the 
Implementation Outcomes Framework20, as described in Table 5 . In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we will 
focus on measures of Reach, Efficacy  (Effectiveness) and Implementation.  
 
 Patient and Group 
characteristics  Age; Gender; Interested in groups; Group size; Participation 
with spouse/partner; Patient cognitive status  
Facilitator skills  Communication skills; Teaching skills; Medical and ACP 
knowledge  
ACP resources  Conversation Starter Kit; PREPARE website; Colorado 
MDPOA  
PCP integration  Desire for individualized follow up; Desire to share ACP with 
PCP 
Clinic resources  Meeting space; Workflows; Staffing needs  
 
 
 
 
Primary Outcome:  Change in documentation of surrogate decision maker  
Table 5. Patient -centered and implementation outcomes for Aim 2.  
Aim 2 outcomes  Measure/Outcome  Data Sources  Time Point  
2.1. Feasibility (Implementation outcome)  
Recruitment 
(related to Reach)  % individuals who 
participate of eligible 
patients by [CONTACT_6903] -based 
screening  Demographics of 
participants and 
non-participants  After 
screening 
complete  
Randomization  No difference in 
demographics across 
study arms (age, gender, 
racial composition, 
advance directive in EMR 
at baseline)  Demographics of 
participants  After 
randomization 
complete  
Retention  % individuals who 
complete 6 month follow 
up; % who complete 
ENACT gr oup visit 
intervention arm (both 
visits)  Participant 
database  0 to 6 months.  
Intervention fidelity 
(ENACT group visit 
intervention arm 
only)  -Adherence to intervention 
manual  
-Quality of program 
delivery  Facilitator 
checklist; team 
notes  Post-
intervention  
2.2 Acceptability (Implementation outcome)  
Clinical 
appropriateness  Perceived fit or relevance  Patient survey 
after session A, , 
and patient/PCP 
interviews  Post-
intervention 
(ENACT group 
visit 
intervention 
arm) Acceptability  -Satisfaction with content;  
-Satisfaction with delivery  
Level of burden  Usefulness  
 
2.3 Advance Care Planning Outcomes (patient -reported effectiveness)  
Primary Outcome Measure:  
1. Change in documentation of the surrogate decision maker  
Measure: An MDPOA form is in electronic medical chart  
Time Frame: 0, 3, 6, 12 months  
Secondary Outcome Measure:  
2. Change in advance directive in medical record  
Measure: Any advance directive is present in the medical chart  
Time Frame: 0, 3, 6, 12 months  
3. Change in readiness to engage in ACP  
Measure: Four patient reported questions regarding readiness to engage in specific parts of the 
advance care planning process (i.e. signing official papers to name a medical decision maker; 
talking to the dec ision maker; talking to the doctor; signing official papers putting their wishes in 
writing)  
Time Frame: 0, 6 months  
4. Change in participant choice of a surrogate decision maker  
Measure: Patient report - "Have you decided who you want your medical decisi on maker to be?"  
Time Frame: 0, 6 months  
5. Change in participant discussions of values and care preferences with surrogate decision 
maker  
Measure: Patient report - "Have you talked with your decision maker about what kind of medical 
care you would want i f you were very sick or near the end of life?"  
Time Frame: 0, 6 months  
Other Pre -specified Outcome Measures:  
6. Percent of Recruitment (Reach)  
Measure: Percent of individuals who participate of eligible patients, by [CONTACT_6903] -based screening  
Time Frame: From  date of pre -screening until the date of participants' decision to enroll in study 
or not, up to 3 months  
7. Percent of Retention  
Measure: Percent of individuals who complete the intervention and the 6 month follow up  
Time Frame: Enrollment thru 6 month follow up  
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
 
Population and Setting:  UCHealth patients and associated patient -invited observers, primary 
care providers (PCPs), clinical staff, and healthcare system leaders.  
Aim [ADDRESS_342059] 6 focus groups (5 -6 
participants each), including each of the following groups: patients (including those who 
participated in ACP GV prototype and those who did not), PCPs, and staff. Additionally, 4 -6 
healthcare system lead ers will be interviewed.  
Aim 2 will recruit up to 120 older adults (≥ age 50) from University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (UCH) 
primary care clinics and UCHealth Northern Colorado (Snow Mesa Internal Medicine). We will 
invite patients, observers, and patient’s PC P. We will enroll [ADDRESS_342060] 
100 subjects complete the study.  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
Aim 1: Patients will be ages 65 or older. Clinicians will be PCPs, including physicians, advanced 
practice nurses, and/or physician assistants. Multidisciplinary staff members will include nurses, 
medical assistants, social workers, and/or schedulers who a re members of primary care clinics 
teams. Healthcare system leaders related to UCHealth primary care practices will include 
medical directors, nurse managers, ambulatory service chiefs, and other administrative leaders.  
Aim 2: Patients will be ages 50 year s and older, and receive primary care at UCHealth. 
Observers will be adults (>age 21) who are invited by [CONTACT_280357]. PCPs can participate if at least one of their patients is 
enrolled in either stu dy arm.  
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
Exclusion criteria for Aim [ADDRESS_342061] cognitive impairment 
as assessed by [CONTACT_280358] (SPMSQ). We are assessing for memory impairment and 
dementia in order  to exclude subjects who may have decision -making challenges. We will 
exclude individuals who do not have a phone, ability to travel to clinic, or someone who can 
assist with reading ACP materials if they are visually impaired. We will also exclude individ uals 
planning to move in the next six months. Individuals who have a spouse or partner currently 
enrolled in the study will also be excluded in order to maintain independence of participants.  
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods   
 
This study will refine th e ENACT Group Visit intervention using key stakeholder input to adapt 
the intervention to individual clinical settings and prioritize stakeholder outcomes for ACP (Aim 
1), and conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_280348] (Aim 2) (Figure 3).  
 
Aim 1: To develop and refine the ENACT Group Visit intervention prototype to have 
standardized essential components of the intervention, to be adaptable across clinic settings, 
and to prioritize ACP outcomes important to key primary care stakeholders (i.e., patients, 
clinicians, staff, and the healthcare system).  
Recruitment:   
Patients - Using existing clinical relationships (including through the ACP -GV quality 
improvement effort), we will recruit for focus groups (patients, clinicians, staff) and interviews 
(healthcare system leaders). We will also ask permission to recruit patients from the 

UCHealth Patient Advisory Council . We will specifically recruit both men and women, ages 
65 and older, and diverse self -reported racial/ethnic backgrounds to maximize potential for 
generalizability. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_280359] (or up to [ADDRESS_342062] method) and/or up to [ADDRESS_342063] Group Visit intervention into clinical work flow, we will include clinicians from each 
discipline (MD, NP, PA) who had patients participate in the prototype, as well as University 
providers who did not have patients involved in the ACP -GV prototype. We will also invite 
clinical staff who were involved in the ACP -GV prototype and those who were  not. 
Multidisciplinary staff members will include nurses, medical assistants, social workers, 
and/or schedulers. Healthcare system leaders will include medical directors, nurse 
managers, ambulatory service chiefs, and other administrative leaders. The stu dy PI [INVESTIGATOR_280349], staff, and healthcare system leaders by [CONTACT_220664] -person to recruit for 
the study.  
All participants will be consented in person and provide written consent if they agree to 
participate. The consent process will take place immediately prior to the focus groups or 
interviews. See Table 6.  
Research Methods:  We will use a structured focus group process, Nominal Group Technique22, 
to obtain qualitative data from patients, clinicians, and staff to answer key questions for 
intervention refinement. Like an in -person Delphi panel, Nominal Group Technique provides a 
structure to achieve prioritized recommendations from participants. By  [CONTACT_280360], we 
will receive individual stakeholder and group -level input to reach consensus on how to refine 
the ENACT Group Visit intervention so that it has high fidelity to essential components, 
adaptability to clinic settings, and focuses on cl inically meaningful ACP outcomes.  
We will conduct focus groups with patients, clinicians, and staff (total of 6 groups). Each 
Nominal Group Technique Session will include [ADDRESS_342064] semi -structured 30 -minute interviews in person or by [CONTACT_280361][INVESTIGATOR_280350] (n=4 -6). All groups and interviews will be conducted at a convenient 
location for p articipants.  
Nominal Group Technique Sessions:  Participants will be given a description of the purpose of 
the Nominal Group Technique session and how they will actively provide input as individuals 
and as a group. We will provide a description of the ENACT  Group Visit intervention and its 
goals, the prototype intervention manual, and the key discussion questions. For each topic, 
individuals will first independently generate their own ideas. Then, the group will share ideas 
and engage in a discussion that re fines the suggestion. Lastly, the group will rank ideas to 
provide prioritized input. The focus group/interview guides, including key discussion questions, 
will be updated iteratively based on emerging data and analysis.   
For Topic 1, participants will rev iew the intervention domains, including the potential essential 
components (Table 3), and identify areas that are unclear, poorly described, or missing. For 
Topic 2, participants will suggest adaptations or changes that are important to implementing the 
intervention into specific clinic settings or for individuals from diverse cultural backgrounds. We 
will solicit input related to the PCP’s role in the intervention, clinical documentation, or 
subsequent follow up needs. For Topic 3, participants will descri be meaningful outcomes from 
the ENACT Group Visit intervention. Potential outcomes include self -efficacy, readiness to 
engage in ACP, and values -based discussions, decisions, and ACP documentation. Clinicians 
and healthcare system leaders will be asked for  input on “minimum clinically important 
differences” for each outcome. At the end of a session, we will summarize the ranked ideas for 
participants. We will incorporate input into subsequent sessions for iterative input. After all 
groups are completed, we will conduct a final combined session with patients, clinicians, staff or 
leaders (up to 10 total participants), as a form of member checking to assure that we have 
reached consensus on intervention refinements.  
Aim [ADDRESS_342065]. Adaptable components will be included in the manual, as they outline how the 
intervention can be modifi ed to a clinic setting or specific patient population.  
Aim 2:  Conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_280351], acceptability, and preliminary efficacy of 
ENACT (ENgaging in Advance Care planning Talks) Group Visit intervention compared to a 
mailed advance dir ective (AD) arm.  
Study design: We will conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_280352]. an AD -
only control arm  among older adults (≥ age 50) in a primary care clinic ( Schematic ). We will 
assess feasibility, patient and clinician acceptability,  and preliminary efficacy on 3, 6, and 12 -
month ACP outcomes using validated instruments (i.e., primary outcome: MDPOA completion, 
secondary outcomes: advance directive completion, self -efficacy, readiness, ACP discussions 
[informed by [CONTACT_45061] 1]).  
Schematic for Aim 2 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
ENACT (ENgaging in Advance Care planning Talks) Group Visit Intervention Study 
Flowchart.  
*Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire  
**ACP resources include Conversation Starter Kit, PREPARE website pamphlet  
*** Observers will be adults who are invited by [CONTACT_280362].  
**** Primary care providers includes Physicians, advance practice nurses, and physician 
assistants.  
Patient Pre -Screening  – We will recruit patients from U CHealth primary care clinics, which are 
settings with which study team members have a treatment relationship. We will use chart 
review to screen potential patients for eligibility, with support from UCHealth Clinic personnel 

who have access to population -health tools. We will ask for a list of patients who are [ADDRESS_342066] of p otential patients from chart review, primary care clinicians will be 
sent a letter/e -mail informing them about the study. We will ask them to review a list of their 
patients and to provide permission/endorsement for patient(s) who would be appropriate for 
the study based on their judgment that the patient is appropriate for a group visit (i.e. does 
not have severe cognitive impairment or hearing loss to make a group visit very difficult). 
Clinicians will be asked to provide permission for the study team to contact [CONTACT_280363]. Additionally, clinicians will be informed that if they do not respond 
one week after the 3rd attempt to contact [CONTACT_280364] (including by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone, and/or in person), we will assume assent to contact [CONTACT_280365] a letter 
describing the study will be sent to patients on behalf of the study team. We will obtain 
permission from the Practi ce Directors before their clinicians are contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
In addition, we will also recruit patients directly from clinic by [CONTACT_280366], provider referral, and utilizing University of Colorado's free web -based 
advertisements,  and local online community boards. Participants can contact [CONTACT_280367], by [CONTACT_648], or by [CONTACT_6968].  
We expect that >90% of patients from the administrative data pull will be eligible based on 
study criteria. Prior to study consent, we will determin e eligibility using the Pre -Screening 
template. Based on our preliminary experiences, around 25% will agree to participate and 
provide informed consent. To reach a goal of 120 enrolled subjects, we anticipate 
approaching 480 patients. We will over -enroll b y 20% to reach the target study sample size 
of 100, allowing for individuals who chose not to complete the entire ENACT Group Visit 
intervention (both visits). We will monitor recruitment and retention to understand reasons 
for declining.  
In total, this st udy will approach up to 660 subjects. For Aim 1, we anticipate screening up to 
100 subjects (inclusive of patients, clinicians, staff, healthcare system leaders). For Aim 2, we 
will screen up to 480 patients, invite up to 60 observers and invite an estimat ed 20 primary care 
providers of enrolled patients. We estimate enrolling 200 subjects for study completion including 
40 participants in Aim 1 and 120 patients, an estimated 20 observers (not required for study 
outcomes), and up to 20 primary care providers  (not required for primary outcome assessment) 
in Aim 2.  
 
 
 
Recruitment, Screening and Consent Visit:  
Patients - Patients will be contact[CONTACT_280359] (or up to 2 emails, if available 
in the EMR) and/or up to 3 phone call attempts. Patien ts will answer brief questions by 
[CONTACT_280368] (assessing for 
lack of phone, ability to travel to clinic, ability to view written ACP materials, plans to move if 
any, and current enrollme nt in the study of a spouse or partner). A waiver of HIPAA 
authorization has been requested for this telephone pre -screen.  
Patients will then participate in a verbal consent process by [CONTACT_648]. We will read the consent 
form to potential subjects, allowing t ime for questions and discussion, and then assess 
comprehension of the study using 5 true/false questions. (Supporting Materials: Consent 
Verification) If comprehension questions are not answered correctly, education and 
reassessment of comprehension are r epeated. If subjects take more than two passes 
through the comprehension assessment, formal assessment for cognitive impairment will be 
completed using the Short Portal Mental Status Questionnaire. If patients are cognitively 
impaired they will be excluded . If they are not cognitively impaired, we will redo the teach -
back one more time, after which the patient will be deemed ineligible for the study if they are 
unable to answer all comprehension questions correctly. Once complete comprehension is 
achieved, we will ask patients to provide verbal consent which will be documented. We are 
requesting a waiver of documentation of consent. A copy of the consent form detailing the 
date and time of consent will be provided to patients.  
Observers - Once a patient has agreed to enroll in the study AND is randomized to the ENACT 
Group Visit intervention, we will ask patients if they want to include an "observer" to 
participate with them in the ENACT Group Visit intervention . We will obtain name [CONTACT_280381] [CONTACT_280369]. Over the phone, we will describe 
the study, the dates of the patient’s assigned ENACT Group Visit intervention sessions, and 
consent the observer for the study over the phone if they are interested in participating. We 
have requested a waiver of documentation of consent for this activity. Observers who agree 
to participate will attend the group visits and be invited to complete brief surveys and/or 
interviews. Observers themselves will not be registered as patients, so th eir insurance will 
not be billed and co -pays will not apply to observers. Although the personal health 
information is minimal (name, telephone number), we are requesting a waiver of HIPAA 
authorization.  
Clinicians – For clinicians who have a patient enrolled in the study, study personnel will contact 
[CONTACT_280370] a fter the [ADDRESS_342067] been 
collected to invite them to provide their perspective on the ACP intervention. If the clinician 
agrees, they will be consented by [CONTACT_54769] a waiver of documentation is requested. 
Clinicians will be asked to complete brief  surveys (i.e. clinical relevance, acceptability, 
burden) and/or interviews to evaluate the potential impact of the study. This recruitment of 
PCPs is after the ENACT Group Visit intervention cohorts have been completed to limit PCP 
contamination, where PC P behavior may be directly influenced by [CONTACT_280371]. Since the ENACT Group Visit intervention is medical care, we 
acknowledge that PCPs will be aware that their patients are involved in the study.  
 
 
Randomization:  Patients will be randomized in blocks of [ADDRESS_342068] Group Visit Intervention Arm:  We will implement the ENACT Group Visit intervention. It 
will consist of up to [ADDRESS_342069] Group Visit 
intervention arm, allowing for patient cancellations. The intervention will be conducted based on 
an intervention manual that will be refined and adapted during Aim 1. Participants will receive 
the Colorado Medical Durable Power of Attorney (MDPOA) form  and the Conversation Starter 
Kit by [CONTACT_280372]. An ENACT Group Visit intervention cohort will be started 
each month, with the goal of starting all cohorts within 6 mo nths of starting Aim 2.  
Intervention resources, which will be updated based on Aim 1 input, are included as an 
appendix to this protocol.  Table 6. Summary of methods  of obtaining consent  
 Participant type  Method of 
consent  Consent type  Timing  
Aim 1  Patient, clinicians, 
staff, healthcare 
system leaders  In person  Written  Immediately prior to 
focus 
group/interview  
Aim 2  Patient: Pre -screen  By [CONTACT_280373], clinician 
permission, and 
outreach letter to 
patient.  Patient: Eligibility, 
Consent, and 
Baseline 
Assessment  Telephone [Waiver of 
documentation of 
consent, with waiver of 
HIPAA authorization]  
Observers  By [CONTACT_280374] [Waiver of 
documentation of 
consent, with waiver of 
HIPAA authorization]  After a patient is 
randomized to the 
ENACT Group Visit 
intervention arm  
Clinicians  By [CONTACT_280375] [Waiver of 
documentation of 
consent]  After 6 month 
patient -outcomes 
are complete  
Control Arm:  Patients randomized to the control arm will receive by [CONTACT_2319] a Colorado MDPOA, 
the Conversation Starter Kit, and a cover letter to encourage them to discuss ACP with their 
primary care provider. They will also receive the local standard of care, which incl udes 
opportunities to discuss ACP with their PCP during routine clinical one -on-one office visits. After 
collection of [ADDRESS_342070] of care, it has been previously offered at 3 
UCHealth primary care clinics as part of a quality improvement initiative.  
Follow up assessments:  
Patient -centered and imp lementation measures will be collected as study outcomes as 
described previously in Table 5.  
For Aim 2, after the [ADDRESS_342071] been collected, we will approach all 
PCPs who had a patient enrolled in the study (both ENACT Group Visit intervention or control 
arm) to invite them to provide PCP -level acceptability outcomes (i.e. clinical relevance, 
acceptability, burden) through brief interviews. We will recruit PCPs after the ENACT Group 
Visit intervention cohorts have been completed to limit PCP contamination, where PCP behavior 
may be directly influenced by [CONTACT_280376].  
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
Aim [ADDRESS_342072] 
Group Visit interventio n will be beneficial to its refinement and implementation, and has very low 
potential for psychological distress related to discussing ACP and/or end -of-life issues.  
Aim 2 study procedures include a) minimum necessary patient demographic information relate d 
to screening, recruitment and retention rates; b) participant self -reported demographics; c) 
advance care planning (ACP) outcomes (documentation of advance directives, documentation 
of medical durable power of attorney or medical proxy decision maker) at  baseline, 3, 6, and 12 -
months; d) ENACT Group Visit intervention evaluations after session 2; e) brief participant 
telephone interviews at 6 month follow up; f) group visit audio and video -recordings and study 
team de -briefing notes related to each ENACT Group Visit intervention; g) PCP interviews and 
clinic -level implementation measures. Data collection tools and request for audiovisual release 
have been included in this COMIRB application. The potential minimal risks include breach of 
confidentiality and  privacy, which is not greater than the potential usual risk encountered 
through participating in routine medical care, and potential for psychological distress related to 
discussing advance care planning and/or end -of-life issues.    
Plans to minimize ris k related to psychological discomfort - The ENACT Group Visit intervention 
has been developed, and will be iteratively refined in Aim 1, to promote effective group 
dynamics and a supportive environment, while minimizing participants' discomfort. Research 
staff will be trained to address psychological distress and will follow standard procedures for 
referral for mental health evaluation. The mailed letter that the control group and the ENACT 
Group Visit intervention participants receive will include a health care provider contact [CONTACT_280377]/or end -of-life issues.  
Plans to minimize risks related to loss of confidentiality -  At the beginning of each ENACT 
Group Visit intervention, in line with local standard s of care for group medical visits practices 
at UCHealth, all participants will be asked to review and sign a standard clinical group visit 
consent form that outlines privacy guidelines including HIPAA and describes how standard 
medical visit insurance co -pays apply. The consent form from the ACP -GV prototype is 
provided as an example (supporting materials); in the quality improvement initiative, 100% 
of the participants signed this form. Although all participants will have already provided 
informed consent  before arriving to the ENACT Group Visit intervention, this process will 
include a reminder that participants are participating in a research study, participation is 
voluntary, and to maintain privacy and confidentiality. All written and audio/visual reco rdings 
and consent materials will be in locked cabinets and on password -protected, encrypted 
computers.  
 
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
Aim 1:  Potential problem - Patients and other key stakeholders may not be able to provide 
specific, actionable input to refine the ENACT Group Visit intervention .  
 Compared to a less structured focus group, Nominal Group Technique is an efficient method 
to achi eve stakeholder consensus for intervention refinement. Overall feasibility is supported by 
[CONTACT_3476]’s experience using Nominal Group Technique and patient advisory boards are 
familiar with working with researchers, supporting the achievement of quali ty patient input. While 
stakeholders may not identify a “gold standard” ACP outcome for the intervention, the study 
team can suggest ACP outcomes from the literature. We desire stakeholder input on 
intervention outcomes to understand end -users’ priorities.  If stakeholder input diverges, or to 
improve generalizability for primary care settings that are not well represented by [CONTACT_104977], 
the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_280353] -convene an expert Advisory Panel from The Colorado Health Foundation 
prototype study to reach consen sus. 
Aim 2:  Potential problem – Patient recruitment to a complex intervention related to advance care 
planning may be slow.  
 Our prior experience suggests that scheduled patients may cancel at the last minute. Thus, 
we have built in use of administrative s earches to identify potentially eligible patients and will 
ask PCPs to endorse the study in a recruitment letter sent to patients on their behalf. We have 
allotted sufficient recruiting resources and multiple methods, and will over -schedule each 
ENACT  Grou p Visit intervention cohort so that a goal of 10 patients per cohort is more likely.  
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
Aim 1 : By [CONTACT_8345], initial data analysis occurs during the Nominal Group Technique sessions as 
participants generate ideas, refine ideas as a g roup, and rank ideas at the end of the session. A 
research assistant will create detailed field notes to outline this analysis and collect participants’ 
written notes. All sessions (~2 hours each) will be audiotaped and transcribed. After each 
session, the  study team will conduct a team -based, deductive content analysis13,14 of transcripts 
and field notes to identify essential components for standardization, adaptable components that 
can be changed to meet particular clinic setting needs, and prioritize ACP outcomes. Detailed 
logs of analysis and interpretation, transcripts, and coding will be maintained to ensure 
transparency. The focus group and interview guides will be updated iteratively based on 
emerging data and analysis to ensure data is rich and trustworthy, thereby [CONTACT_280378]’ input.  
Aim 2: To assess feasibility, we will track recruitment and participation rates, including reasons 
for not participating. We will compare patient demographics by [CONTACT_280379] t -test. We will assess intervention fidelity using a Fidelity Checklist  that we 
develop in Aim 1, confirming with field notes and transcript analysis. Analyses will be intent -to-
treat by [CONTACT_280380]. We will describe acceptability measures using means and 
standard deviations for [ADDRESS_342073]. The intervention will be a) feasible if ≥85% of intervention arm participants attend both 
sessions (retention rate) and b) acceptable if acceptability measure means are at least 4.[ADDRESS_342074] sizes. Within arms, McNemar’s test will be used to assess for pre - and post -
study change in ACP outcomes at 6 months. To address potential missing, a secondary 
analysis using linear mixed mod els will be conducted using all available data collected at 
baseline and 6 months.  
Power Calculation: While the proposed study is not powered to detect statistically significant 
differences for the ACP outcomes, we will compare [ADDRESS_342075] sizes and stakeholder input on minimally clinically important 
differences in ACP outcomes will inform future trials. With a s ample size of 50 patients per 
group and assuming a control arm advance directive completion rate of 20% based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_116378], the detectable rate, with power=80% (alpha=0.05), in the ENACT Group Visit  intervention 
arm will be 46% (26% increase). With power= 90% (alpha=0.05), we can detect a 50% rate in 
the intervention arm.  
 
G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
This research study will clearly define the key intervention components, facilitator skills, 
and patient perspectives on feasibility, acceptability, and meaningful ACP outcomes for this 
novel ENACT Group Visit intervention. This study will provide rational and justification for and 
data to inform design of a future pragmatic trial of the ENACT Group Visit intervention in 
multiple clinics. Findings will enable the ENACT Group Visit intervention to be adapted to 
individual clinic and patient populations. This knowledge is critical to future efforts to refine the 
intervention, train facilitators, implement and test the intervent ion with high fidelity.  
 
  
 
 
H. References:  
 
1. Institute of Medicine. Dying in America: Impro ving Quality and Honoring Individual 
Preferences Near the End of Life. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 
2015. doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/[ZIP_CODE].  
2. McMahan RD, Knight SJ, Fried TR, Sudore RL. Advance care planning beyond advance 
directives: perspectives from  patients and surrogates. J Pain Symptom Manage.  
2013;46(3):[ADDRESS_342076] of discussions about advance directives on patients' satisfaction with primary care. 
J Gen Intern Med.  2001;16(1):32 -40. 
4. Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A, et al. Associations between end -of-life discussions, patient 
mental health, medical care near death, and caregiver bereavement adjustment. JAMA.  
2008;300(14):1665 -1673.  
5. Silveira MJ, Kim SY, Langa KM. Advance directives and outcomes of surrogate decision 
making before death. N Engl J Med.  2010;362(13):1211 -1218.  
6. Sachs GA, Stocking CB, Miles SH. Empowerment of the older patient? A randomized, 
controlled trial to increase discussion and use of advance directives. J Am Geriatr Soc.  
1992;40(3):[ADDRESS_342077]. Completing an advance directive in the primary 
care setting: what do we need for success? J Am Geriatr Soc.  2007;55(2):277 -283. 
8. Lund S, Richardson A, May C. Barriers to advance care planning at the end of life: an 
explanatory systematic review of implementation studies. PLoS One.  
2015;10(2):e0116629.  
9. Scott JC, Conner DA, Venohr I, et al. Effectiveness of a group outpatient visit model for 
chronically ill ol der health maintenance organization members: a 2 -year randomized trial 
of the cooperative health care clinic. J Am Geriatr Soc.  2004;52(9):1463 -1470.  
10. High DM. Advance directives and the elderly: a study of intervention strategies to 
increase use. Geron tologist.  1993;33(3):342 -349. 
11. Landry FJ, Kroenke K, Lucas C, Reeder J. Increasing the use of advance directives in 
medical outpatients. J Gen Intern Med.  1997;12(7):412 -415. 
12. Dipko LR, Xavier K, Kohlwes RJ. Advance directive group education in a VA outpatient 
clinic. Soc Work Health Care.  2003;38(2):93 -106. 
13. Bruffee KA. Collaborative Learning: Higher Education, Interdependence, and the 
Authority of Knowledge. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1993.  
14. Sudore RL, Knight SJ, McMahan RD, et  al. A Novel Website to Prepare Diverse Older 
Adults for Decision Making and Advance Care Planning: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. J Pain Symptom 
Manage.  2013.  
15. The Conversation Project.  http://theco nversationproject.org/starter -kit/intro/ . Accessed 
October 13, 2012.  
16. Lum HD, Jones J, Matlock DD, et al. Advance Care Planning Meets Group Medical 
Visits: The Feasibility of Promoting Conversations. Ann Fam Med.  2016;14(2):125 -132. 
17. Centers for Medi care and Medicaid Services. "CMS Finalizes 2016 Medicare Payment 
Rules for Physicians, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] & Other Providers." [ADDRESS_342078]. 2015. 
https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Press -releases/2015 -Press -
releases -items/2015 -10-30.html . Accessed October 31, 2015.  
18. Lum HD, Sudore RL, Bekelman DB. Advance Care Planning in the Elderly. Med Clin 
North Am.  2015;99(2):[ADDRESS_342079] of health 
promotion interventions: the RE -AIM framework. Am J Public Health.  1999;89(9):1322 -
1327.  
20. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, et al. Outcomes for implementation research: 
conceptual di stinctions, measurement challenges, and research agenda. Adm Policy 
Ment Health.  2011;38(2):[ADDRESS_342080] behavior change in multiple advance care planning behavi ors. PLoS One.  
2013;8(9):e72465.  
22. Dunham R. Nominal Group Technique: A User's Guide. 2006.; 
http://ww w.sswm.info/sites/default/files/reference_attachments/DUNHAM%201998%20N
ominal%20Group%20Technique%20 -%20A%20Users'%20Guide.pdf . Accessed 
September 23, 2015.  
 