Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 1 of 24   
PROTOCOL TITLE : 
Post-Stroke Optimization of Walking using Explosive Resistance: Concurrent effects on 
Depression (POWER -D Trial)  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_340547] 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 2 of 24    
1.0 Objectives  / Specific Aims  
The purpose of this project is to determine the efficacy of POWER training for treating 
post- stroke  depressive  symptoms.  We will also determine  if depression  limits  response  to 
rehabilitation  and the extent to which changes in depression are associated with 
improvements in functional performance post -stroke. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -I’s have experience 
performing all of the proposed methodologies. Specifically, we have extensive experience  
implementing  exercise  programs  in persons  post-stroke;  13,31,32, [ADDRESS_421381]-stroke walking;13,36 and diagnosing and treating depression . 37,38,39,40   
Aim 1: Determine the efficacy of POWER training for treating PSD  
We hypothesize significant reductions in HRSD scores in both groups, with improvements 
following POWER greater than control. We also expect greater response and remission 
rates in the POWER group.  
Aim 2: Determine the influence of PSD on the rate and extent of response to POWER 
training  
We posit that POWER training -induced improvements will be attenuated, though still 
significant, in depressed subjects. In addition, we hypothesize that improvements in 
walking speed  and lower extremity muscle power generation will be contingent upon 
improvements in HRSD and that a critical threshold will determine the point at which 
depression is reduced thereby [CONTACT_340560] . 
2.0 Background  
With a surviving cohort of nearly 7 million individuals, stroke is the leading cause of long -
term disability in the United  States.  Of the ~795,[ADDRESS_421382], with 
more than 60% of persons post -stroke reporting limitations  in mobility related to walking. 
[ADDRESS_421383]-stroke depression (PSD) is the most common neuropsychiatric consequence of stroke. 
Four out of five individuals  develop  major  depressive  disorder  within  seven  years  of stroke  
onset  and point  prevalence  estimates for PSD are ~30%. 3 Thus, more than 2 million 
individuals  with PSD are presently living in the U.S. Current  pharmacological  treatments  
for depression  in older individuals  are generally  ineffective  (65-75% will not achieve  
remission)  and often  come  at the cost of significant side effects (e.g. seizure, delirium and 
falls). 6,22 Importantly, a review of treatment options for PSD found no evidence to support 
the routine use of drugs or psychological treatments for PSD 5 and in a recent meta -analysis, 
23 of 25 prospective studies that met the  criteria  for inclusion  indicated  that anti-depressant  
treatments  were  a significant  predictor  of prospective  falls, independent of reduced physical 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 3 of 24  and cognitive function. 23 These  issues highlight the need for alternative (non -drug) 
treatm ents with fewer side effects to successfully reduce PSD  symptoms.  
Individuals with PSD are largely ignored in rehabilitation research and limited data 
describe the effects of depression on rehabilitation outcomes.  
Depression is reported to interfere with functional outcomes. [ADDRESS_421384] -stroke Optimization of Walkin g 
using Explosive Resistance (POWER) training ( VA RR&D RX000844). 13,31,[ADDRESS_421385] -stroke deficits in muscle power generation. 
Interventions targeting  muscle  power  (i.e. training  at high-velocities)  in the aged elicit  an 
over two-fold greater  improvement  in peak power, when compared to slow velocity 
training, and explain more of the variab ility in functional performance. 27,28,[ADDRESS_421386] its potential to improve depression (see 
preliminary studies). The feasibility of resistance training to target depression has been 
shown in individuals following stroke and data from neurologically  healthy  subjects  
suggest  the nature  of POWER  training  may be key to its effectiveness  for treating PSD. 12 
Specifically, trials in older (non -stroke) subjects show benefits of resistance training on 
depressive symptoms and walking are dependent on training at high intensities, with 
reduced depressi on associated with  improvements  in  muscle  strength  and  function. 11 
Similarly, high -intensity resistance training  significantly improves  depression  in subjects  
at high risk for metabolic  syndrome,  with changes  in depression  correlated  with change in 
muscle  strength. 29 
INNOVATION  
Novel approach to treat PSD  
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421387] step in a longer line of investigation aimed at the 
development of appropriate therapeutic strategies to effectively ameliorate (attenuate) 
functionally limiting impairments in persons post -stroke. We believe that it will prove 
impossible to make substantial progress in patient -specific neurorehabilitation evaluation, 
treatment and outcomes without each being strongly based on a continually refined 
theoretical framework. Many contemporary neurorehabilit ation strategies  are based on 
assumed relationships between impairments of body structure & function, activity and 
participation; yet little evidence exists to define how these domains mechanistically relate 
to one another and the personal factors (e.g. depression) that m ay limit participation. The 
proposed studies would move this topic forward by [CONTACT_340561];  thereb y providing  key data for 
future  work  to improve the a priori identification of fundamental barriers (and facilitators) 
to therapy.  
Preliminary Studies for Aim 1 :  
POWER  training  is highly effective  at improving  post-stroke  muscular  and locomotor  
function:  (J Rehab  Research & Development. 52(1):77 -84, 2015)  
Twelve subjects (6 –[ADDRESS_421388] -stroke) participated in [ADDRESS_421389] -training improvements in lower 
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421390] comfortable walking speeds.  Specifically,  strength  increased  by 25.0 and 
23.3 percent in the paretic and non - paretic plantar flexor (PF) muscle groups, respectively. 
Improvements    in knee extensor (KE) strength were not as large, with gains of 14.[ADDRESS_421391] -
training. Self -selected walking speed increased from 0.71 to 0.92 m/s, exceeding the 
clinically meaningful difference reported for participants post -stroke. Fastest comfortable 
walking speed increased from 1.10 to 1.51 m /s. 
POWER training improves depressive severity:  
We have enrolled and trained 10 subjects to date with mild to moderate PSD in POWER 
training. We measured depression severity (HRSD),  at pre-, mid- and post-training  time 
points  over the 12 week training period. HRSD scores prior to training (15.1 ± 7.5) 
decreased after 6 weeks (10.8 ± 4.3) and  12 weeks (8.5 ± 3.3) of training. In addition, 7 
subjects realized a >50% reduction in depression severity (i.e. response) and [ADDRESS_421392] achieved remission (i.e. HRSD < 10). Although we did not have a 
compari son group with PSD in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], these data suggest the potential for POWER 
training to positively impact depression severity in individuals with  PSD.   
3.[ADDRESS_421393] -stroke 
Optimization of Walking using Explosive Resistance (POWER) training; a high -velocity, 
high-intensity lower extremity resistance training intervention that improves post -stroke 
muscular and lo comotor function (RR&D RX000844). [ADDRESS_421394] POWER training reduces symptoms in those with mild to moderate depression 
(Figure 1). We seek to build upon these findings to determine its efficacy (vs. control) in 
treating  PSD.  
Chronic stroke survivors with mild to moderate depression (n=32) will be randomly assigned 
to the intervention (POWER) or attention control (stretching) group. POWER training will 
take place over a 12 -week period (3 sessions/week) with exercises including leg press, calf 
raises, and jump training, all performed at high concentric velocity, as well as trials of fast 
walking. We will perform bi -weekly measurements of depressive severity using the 
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD).  
Chronic stroke survivors with mild to moderate depression (n=16) as well as age (± 5 yrs), 
gender and severity -matched (determined by [CONTACT_141604]) non -depressed stroke subjects 
(n=16) will complete [ADDRESS_421395] 
(6MWT) and the amount of community walking measured via step activity monitors (SAM).  
Stretching is being used as an attention control condition for POWER training.  Control 
subjects will participate in a stretching protocol for the same duration (i.e. 60 minutes per 
session) and frequency (3 days per week) for [ADDRESS_421396] equal 
interaction with the study staff and controlling for the effects of repeated social interaction 
on depressive symptoms.  
 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 6 of 24  4.0 Study Endpoints  
The primary outcome for this trial will be the absolute change in depression using the HRSD from 
baseline to week 12 compared between AET+rTMS and AET+sham groups.   
  
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria / Study Population  
Subjects (male and female), ages [ADDRESS_421397] had a new 
ischemic stroke.  
Inclusion criteria will be: 1) age 18 -85; 2) stroke at least  6 months  prior , 3) residual paresis 
in the lower extremity (Fugl -Meyer LE motor score <34); 4) ability to walk without 
assistance and without an AFO during testing and training at speeds ranging from 0.2 -0.8 
m/s; 5) no antidepressant medications or no change in doses of  psychotropic medication for 
at least 4 weeks prior to the study (6 weeks if newly initiated medication); 6) HRSD question 
#9 regarding suicide <2; and 7) provision of informed cons ent. In addition, depressed 
subjects will screen for probable major depressive disorder (PHQ -9 > 10) and be diagnosed 
using the Structured Clinical Interview for Depression (SCID) according to the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Four th Edition (DSM -IV). All subjects who 
meet criteria for training must complete an exercise tolerance test and be cleared for 
participation by [CONTACT_5989] .  
Exclusion criteria will be: 1) Unable to ambulate at least 150 feet prior to stroke, or 
experienced intermittent claudication while walking; 2) history of congestive heart failure, 
unstable cardiac arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, severe aortic stenosis, angina 
or dyspnea at rest or during ADL’s; 3) History of COPD or oxygen dependence; 4) 
Preexisting neurological disorders, dementia or previous stroke; 5) History of major head 
trauma; 6) Legal blindness or severe visual impairment; 7) history of p sychosis or other Axis 
I disorder that is primary; 8) Life expectancy <1 yr.; 9) Severe arthritis or other problems 
that limit passive ROM;10) History of DVT or pulmonary embolism within 6 months; 11) 
Uncontrolled diabetes with recent weight loss, diabetic  coma, or frequent insulin reactions; 
12) Severe hypertension with systolic >200 mmHg and diastolic >[ADDRESS_421398]; 13) 
attempt of suicide in the last 2 years or at suicidal risk assessed by [CONTACT_99705]; 14) 
History of seizures or currently prescribe d anti -seizure medications; 15) Current enrollment 
in a clinical trial to enhance motor recovery; 16) Pregnancy  verified by [CONTACT_106066] . 
6.0 Number of Subjects  
A total of 48 chronic stroke survivors will be accrued locally . 
7.0 Setting  
Locomotor Energetics and Assessment Laboratory : This 1350 ft2 laboratory is a shared 
resource supported in part by [CONTACT_232723], and features 
equipment capable of collecting kinematic, kinetic, electromyographic data during walking. 
This laboratory is adjacent to a small workshop available for the construction, repair, and 
alteration of simple mechanical devices.  
Locomotor Rehabilitation Laboratory : This laboratory encompasses an [ADDRESS_421399] 
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421400] recruitment : The pool of candidates for the study will be recruited from 
rehabilitation programs at the Medical University of South Carolina; the Ralph H. Johnson 
VAMC; and Charleston area communities. The combination of MUSC Stroke Center and 
the Ralph H. Johnson pr ovide a unique environment from which to recruit participants for 
this study and we have on -going collaborative relationships with both entities. The MUSC 
program holds Joint Commission's Certificate of Distinction for Primary Stroke Cen ters 
which recognizes centers that make exceptional efforts to foster better outcomes for stroke 
care. The Stroke Center research team will assist with recruitment by [CONTACT_340562]. Rack cards and flyers with basic study 
information and study investigator contact [CONTACT_340563]. Additionally, the rack cards an d flyers with be distributed to area 
rehabilitation clinics.    
 The MUSC Stroke Center sees over 50 new stroke patients per month and routinely screens 
all patients for eligibility to our various research studies.  
In addition, since the proposed research investigates stroke recovery it will be supported by 
[CONTACT_232722] (CTTR) Core of the NIH -funded Center 
of Biomedical Research Excellence (COBRE) in Stroke Recovery at MUSC. The CT TR 
Core provides subject recruitment resources through a bioinformatics -enabled database 
registry. Currently (November, 2017) there are [ADDRESS_421401] screened positive for PSD (PHQ -9 > 10), all of whom have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_340564]. As evidence of our ability to recruit subjects with PSD, 
we ([CONTACT_290584] and [CONTACT_95052]) have been successfully recr uiting subjects for a trial as 
part of the South Carolina Center for Stroke Recovery Research. Over the duration of this 
study (~26 months) we have successfully enrolled subjects with PSD at a rate that would 
meet the goals for the proposed study. Thus, we  are confident that recruitment goals will be 
met without difficulty . 
9.[ADDRESS_421402] in a private 
room in the MUSC College of Health Professions Building. There will be no set period 
between informing the prospective participant and obtaining the consent. In every session, 
participants will be reminded that they may end their participation in the study at any point.  
 
10.0 Study Design  / Methods  
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421403] screening and clinical assessments: After enrollment, participants will be 
thoroughly evaluated for functional  and cognitive  impairments  as well as physical  
performance.  Descriptive  physical  performance  testing will include the lower extremity 
Fugl-Meyer Assessment (FMA -LE), Stroke Impact Scale (SIS), Berg Balance Scale (BBS) 
and the NIH Stroke Scale . The FMA -LE is a 34 -point scale assessing lower extremity 
function through a progression of items examining more complex movements, speed, and 
coordination. The SIS is a stroke -specific outcome measure that assesses physical function 
and other dimensions of  health -related quality of life: emotion, communic ation, memory and 
thinking, and social role function.  The physical  functioning  domain  includes  strength,  hand  
function,  mobility,  and activities  of daily  living. 71,72,[ADDRESS_421404] within the Center for 
Rehabilitation Research in Neurological Conditions who will be blinded to training group 
assignment.  
Clinical Assessments:  The proposed assessments are standard to post -stroke intervention 
trials. Including these assessments strengthens our design by [CONTACT_340565].  We feel that the proposed benefits of our training will be most 
significant if they are shown to impact behaviors other than that which is targeted as the 
primary outcome and relate to other domains of function suggested to put individuals post -
stroke at risk for disability.  
• Dynamic Gait Index (DGI) : The DGI evaluates the ability to adapt to changes in task 
demands. The DGI rates performance from 0 (poor) to 3 (excellent) on eight different 
gait tasks, including even surfaces, changing speeds, head turns in a vertical or 
horizontal direction, steppin g over or around obstacles, and gait with pi[INVESTIGATOR_87176], and 
steps. 42 The DGI examines complex walking tasks (e.g. accelerating, turning, head 
turns) and provides valuable information regarding dynamic balance (as opposed to 
static b alance assessed using the BBS) and often reveals deficits that otherwise would 
not be identified.  
• Step Activity Monitor (SAM): The SAM is worn on the ankle to quantify daily step 
activity. The SAM is a microprocessor -driven accelerometer that permits the 
researcher to count strides and observe activity during predetermined time spans. The 
SAM is 98% -99% accurate and has a test -retest reliability post -stroke of 0.98. 43 The 
SAM will be worn for two consecutive days at a 6 -second epoch, per the LEAPS 
protocol. 8 Information about the effects of POWER training on the amount of 
community steppi[INVESTIGATOR_340548].  
• 6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT) : Timed walking tests are primarily a measure of 
functional capacity.[ADDRESS_421405] the Rivermead Mobility Index 
(r=0.75) and 10 -meter walk time (r= -0.61). 46 The 6MWT has a high intra - and 
interrater reliability (ICCs = 0.82 -0.95). 45 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 9 of 24  Assessment of depression severity:  The Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD) 
and the Montgomery - Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) are the most widely used 
instruments for obtaining ratings of depressive symptoms. The HRSD samples a broader 
array of symptoms and is the primary o utcome for this project. However, the MADRS is 
also sensitive to therapeutic change and includes more focus on vegetative symptoms. Thus, 
we will utilize a single structured interview that contains the questions necessary to complete 
both the HRSD and MADRS. The order of questions results in a more efficient interview, 
clustering material of similar content, thereby [CONTACT_340566]. Items that require patient 
observation (e.g., retardation, agitation) or spontaneous pat ient report (e.g., HRSD mood 
item) occur towards the end so scores are not contaminated by [CONTACT_340567][INVESTIGATOR_1102]. Items dealing with somatic symptoms (e.g., sleep) occur before items focusing on 
psychological state (e.g., guilt, suicide) so as  to develop rapport during the earlier part of the 
interview leading to fuller disclosure of symptoms that are difficult to discuss. Critically, the 
rater administering the interviews will not be involved with any other aspects of the study. 
A trained psyc hiatry practitioner ([CONTACT_95052] or one of his colleagues) will assess depression 
severity bi -weekly. Test -retest reliability for the HRSD is extremely high (0.94; 95% CI 
0.89-0.97) and thus appropriate to use for repeated measure of depression severity. 41 
Depression will be classified as mild (HRSD = 12 -16) or moderate (HRSD ≥17) and 
diagnosed upon enrollment using the Structured Clinical Interview for Depression (SCID) 
according to the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM -
IV). 
Assessment of cortical excitability and neuroplastic potential via PAS: A means of 
testing “neuroplastic potential”, without dependence on subject motivation and effort 
(frequently impaired in depression) is via a non - invasive brain stimulation protocol called 
paired associative stimulation (PAS). PAS uses repeated, timed and  paired peripheral nerve 
stimulation and TMS of the contralateral motor cortex and induces consistent changes in 
excitability of the motor cortex in healthy subjects as demonstrated by  [CONTACT_340568].  
Prior to PAS, all participants will be assessed for potential contraindications to TMS using 
a safety -screening questionnaire. This screen as well as the PAS assessments will be 
performed by [CONTACT_340569]. 
Single pulse cortical stimulation will be delivered using a Bi -Stim module magnetic 
stimulator (The Magstim Company Limited; Whitland, [LOCATION_006]) with a figure -of-eight coil 
(P/N 3190; 70mm outer diameter of each winding; maximal output of 2.2T). We wi ll use a 
combination of on -line surface electromyography (sEMG) recordings to view peak -to-peak 
motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitude and a neuro -navigation system to identify the 
optimal coil position for stimulation of the abductor pollicus brevis (APB)  muscle. The 
neuro -navigation system consists of a stereotaxic passive marker and camera system 
(Polaris Vicra P6, NDI, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and Brainsight software (Rogue 
Research Inc.; Montreal, Quebec, Canada), which will allow us to track the loc ation of the 
figure -of-eight coil and ensure consistency during resting motor threshold (RMT) and 
SI1mV (stimulus intensity necessary to induce a 1 -millivolt MEP response) assessments.  
In order to locate the APB muscle ‘hotspot’ we will use a suprathresho ld stimulation 
intensity on the hand area of the primary motor cortex to elicit MEP’s of the APB muscle. 
The area on the hand knob of the motor cortex that produces the largest and most 
consistent MEP’s of the APB muscle will be marked as the ‘hotspot’ usi ng the neuro - 
navigation system.  After locating the participant’s APB muscle ‘hotspot’ we will then 
assess the participant’s RMT. We define the RMT as the amount of TMS output 
(expressed in percentage of maximal stimulator output [%MSO]) necessary to indu ce an 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 10 of 24  MEP that exceeds or is equivalent to a peak -to-peak amplitude of 50μV (.05mV) in 50% of 
stimulations. To estimate RMT, we will utilize an automated version of a simple adaptive 
parameter estimation by [CONTACT_79738] (SA -PEST) procedure developed at MUS C. 47 
Following RMT assessment, we will assess the participant’s SI 1mV. The same ‘hotspot’ 
location and SA -PEST procedure will be used to determine the participant’s SI 1mV, 
however the SA -PEST program will be set to search for MEP amplitudes of approximately 
1-mV. Once established, the SI 1mV will be used as a primary measure of corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_340549]. Using the %MSO of the SI 1mV we will then collect [ADDRESS_421406] MEP’s at a rate of 
0.25Hz. Once MEP’s are collected, participants will be set -up for peripheral nerve 
stimulation. Stimulation of the median nerve of the non -dominant arm will be delivered via 
constant current stimulator (DS7A ; Digitimer, Hertfordsh ire, [LOCATION_006]). Bipolar electrodes will 
deliver a 200μs square wave pulse at an intensity equal to 300% sensory perceptual 
threshold. Perceptual threshold will be determined each session and will be defined before 
any stimulation protocols are commenced. Single pulse TMS will be applied to the APB 
muscle representation on the contralateral motor cortex 25ms (ISI25) after the delivery of 
median nerve stimulation. A train/delay generator (Digitimer, Hertfordshire, [LOCATION_006]) will 
trigger paired peripheral nerve stimulatio n and brain stimulation. A total of 200 paired 
stimuli will be delivered at rate of 0.25 Hz, resulting in a total stimulation time of ~[ADDRESS_421407] MEP’s will be reassessed immediately after PAS, and then every 15 
minutes for one hour.  
We will utilize the PAS measures at baseline, after 2,4,6,8,10 and 12 weeks of treatment 
(or control) as well as at the follow -up time point to assess whether the interventions 
change PAS measured neuroplastic potential. We will use PAS to assess cortical 
excitability (SI 1mV) as well as neuroplastic potential (represented by [CONTACT_340570] -
stimulation MEP amplitude). We will compare PAS measures at baseline to after either 
POWER or control. We will also compare repeated PAS measures in patients with a nd 
without PSD (Aim 2) to determine whether PSD inhibits neuroplasticity, and if effective 
treatments reverse the impaired potential for plasticity.  
Electromyographic assessment: Surface electromyography (sEMG) will be collected 
using 2cm by 2cm surface recording electrodes and will be placed perpendicular to the 
orientation of the fibers of the APB muscle belly, on the participant’s non -dominant hand. 
Prior to sEMG placement the s ite of the APB muscle will be lightly abraded and cleaned 
with pre -packaged alcohol swabs. All EMG signals will be collected using Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2531]2 v7.12 
software (Cambridge Electronic Design; Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]) and will be amplified (x1000 ) and 
bandpass - filtered (100 -2000 Hz) using a CED 1902 amplifier (Cambridge Electronic 
Design; Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]), and sampled at 5000 Hz using CED Micro 1401 -3 data acquisition 
unit (Cambridge Electronic Design; Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]). Data will be saved directly to  a 
network drive for offline analysis. During all stimulation protocols sEMG activity will be 
continuously monitored in order to ensure that the APB muscle is not  voluntarily active.  
Exercise Tolerance Testing : Prior to training, a bicycle ergometry protocol modified from 
the LEAPS trial [ADDRESS_421408] pedaling at ~60 revolutions per minute 
(RPM) and 0 Watts (W) of workload, with workload will be increased by ~[ADDRESS_421409] will be terminated prior to 
achieving maximum effort for predefined symptomatic, clinical, and electrocardiographic 
criteria. Symptom -related reasons for termination include  angina, dyspnea, and fatigue. 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 11 of 24  Fatigue is defined as either voluntary exhaustion or inability to maintain a minimum cycling 
cadence of 40 RPM. Clinical criteria for termination include: 1) Hypertension: ≥ 220/120 
mmHg, or 2) Hypotension: a drop in diastolic blood pressure >20 mmHg, and O2 saturation 
<85%. Electrocardiogram criteria include: 1) ≥ [ADDRESS_421410] segment 
depression, 2) sustained paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia (>30 beats), and 3) sustained 
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (>30 beats). If the te st is terminated because of 
electrocardiographic findings, the subject will be managed medically as needed, referred for 
care, and disapproved for participation. Resting blood pressure and heart rate will be 
obtained prior to initiation of exercise as well  as after the subject has been sitting on the 
stationary bicycle for [ADDRESS_421411] monitoring during testing and training : Blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) will 
be monitored prior to, during, and at completion of each session. Subjects’ resting diastolic 
BP must be <100 mmHg, systolic < 200 mmHg, and heart rate <110 beats/min to begin the 
testing. [ADDRESS_421412] complaints of shortness of breath, light -
headedness, confusion, severe headache, or dyspnea; onset of angina; excessive blood 
pressure (systolic BP > 200mm Hg, diastolic BP >110 mm Hg), or drop in systolic BP >10 
mm Hg and inappropriate bradycardia (drop in heart rate >15 bpm).  
Experimental protocol for walking data collection: At the beginning of the first training 
session of every other week (bi -weekly), subjects will walk on a 10m. long gait mat 
(GaitRite) to measure self -selected and fastest comfortable walking speed and other 
spatiotemporal parameters. Subjects will be permitted a practice trial, and then be asked to 
complete three trials at each speed. For all trials, subjects w ill wear their own shoes and be 
asked to walk without an assistive device or ankle -foot orthosis. A safety harness mounted 
to the ceiling will protect the subject but will only support their body weight in the case of a 
loss of balance. A physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_340550].  
Post-stroke Optimization of Walking using Explosive Resistance (POWER) training : 
Individuals with chronic post -stroke hemiparesis will undergo training to improve muscle 
power generation for 12 weeks (3 times/week) that includes both resistive and task -specific 
elements. Session duration will be ~60 minutes (inclusive of rest interva ls) although the total 
time will depend on the amount of rest needed for a given individual. Training will include 
five distinct resistance activities aimed at improving muscle power -- each previously 
reported to contribute to improved walking (Table 1). Sit to stand and leg press exercises are 
elements of programs shown to be effective in improving strength and walking performance 
in the post - stroke population. [ADDRESS_421413] community steps (10”) 
to further  challenge neu romuscular requirements of the task. Calf raises (i.e. plantar flexion) 
will be performed on a small step so as to allow for adequate range of motion. In addition, 
our pi[INVESTIGATOR_340551], focused on lower extremity muscle power 
gener ation, is part of a comprehensive program that improves gait speed in people with post -
stroke gait deficits. Sit to stand, step -up and calf raise activities will be performed within the 
novel overground body -weight support (BWS) environment enabled by [CONTACT_340571] -G (ZeroG, 
Bioness Inc., Valencia, CA), whether receiving support or not, to provide the maximum 
safety possible.  
During the initial training session, subjects will perform the individual component tasks 
beginning with least amount of BWS (or highest load) required for successful completion of 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 12 of 24  the required number of repetitions in order to match the participant’s ability to the difficulty 
of the task. 49 BWS will be progressively reduced to determine the minimum support 
necessary to complete each task. Participants will be progressed within each task by 
[CONTACT_340572] 5% of body mass (or adding 5% load for leg press) upon successfully 
meeting the goals  for progression (see Table 1). An adjustable weighted vest will be utilized 
to increase mass by 5% during training once support is not required for successful task 
completion. Subjects will not be permitted to use assistive devices and physical assistance  
will not be provided during training.  
Sit to stand, leg press, step -up and calf raise activities will be performed under two conditions 
within each training session. Condition 1 will include performing two sets of ten repetitions 
with the targeted amount of resistance for the given session and  based on rate of progression 
throughout training. Condition 2 will require the participant to perform as many repetitions 
as possible during a 20 second period utilizing either 80% of the resistance from Condition 
1 or an increase in BWS of 20%. This cond ition is designed to encourage high velocity and 
hence high -power output contractions. Given our focus on muscle power generation, all 
participants will be instructed to perform the concentric portion of each exercise at maximum 
velocity regardless of the prescribed condition, followed by a controlled eccentric 
contraction. This approach is adapted from programs specifically targeting power training 
in aging populations with mobility deficits and shown to result in significant increases in 
peak power genera tion when compared to slower velocity training, while achieving similar 
gains in strength. 50,51,52  
For jump training, subjects will be familiarized with the equipment and, during the initial 
training session, will complete a total of 30 (3 sets of 10) bilateral ground contacts (jumps). 
We will begin the first session at a resistance of ~20% of body mass .  Based on individual 
subject ability, external resistance will be increased (or decreased) and resistance 
documented. The number of 
jumps will be increased to 45 in 
week two and to 60 thereafter 
(the goal being to complete the 
prescribed # of jumps in ≤  3 
sets). Upon successful 
completion of at least 60 
ground contacts (e.g. complete 
clearance from foot plate; 
Figure 5), resistance will be 
increased in increments of 5 lbs. or 5% body mass, whichever is greatest.   As subjects feel 
comfortable, and no later than week 4, unilateral jump training will be performed using each 
leg, the goal being to progress to a reciprocating jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_136677] (i. e. alternating legs each 
jump for a total of 60 jumps per leg). Throughout the training protocol, a minimum of two 
sessions at a given resistance will be required before load is increased and resistance will be 
held consistent between limbs throughout the training program. Session intensity will be 
systematically progressed and modified by [CONTACT_340573].  
Progressive loaded overground fast walking : As part of each training session, subjects will 
perform [ADDRESS_421414] walking (10 meter per trial). These trials are intended to emphasize 
the task -specific lower extremity power generation required to accomplish increased 
walking speeds. Subjects wi ll be asked to complete all trials without an assistive device or 
ankle -foot orthosis at speeds ≥ 125% of self -selected overground velocity. Although we will 
Figure 5:  Exercise apparatus used for jump training  
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 13 of 24  not allow the use of an AFO, subjects will be permitted to wear an ankle brace for medial -
lateral support (AirCast®) that allows for plantarflexion and dorsiflexion voluntary 
movements. Subjects will walk over our instrumented walkway (GaitRite) so as to p rovide 
real time feedback of speed as well as spatio - temporal parameters of walking for each trial. 
These trials will also be performed in the ZeroG harness to protect the subject in the case of 
a loss of balance as well as to provide body -weight support as needed to facilitate walking 
at the required speeds. After each session, the average speed will be calculated and compared 
to the self -selected speed. When the average speed exceeds 125% of self -selected speed, we 
will decrease BWS by 5% for the next tr aining session. At the point when subjects are able 
to successfully exceed 125% of self -selected speed without body -weight support, a weighted 
vest will be worn and mass systematically added to allow progression. Note that in order to 
provide the optimal s timulus for increasing propulsion, we will provide an amount of BWS 
to offset to the added mass. This has been shown to engage the muscles most responsible for 
generating propulsion to a greater extent 53 and should optimize the power training stimulus 
for the muscles generating propulsion.  
It is important to point out that progression for muscle power training and overground 
steppi[INVESTIGATOR_340552] (or added mass) as tolerated, allowing 
for increased “resistance” and graded exercise. The overground permissive envir onment 
allows safe training without assistive devices or and allows determination of the precise 
ability level of the individual for a task. In creating a constant permissive environment, we 
are able to identify precisely how much support is required for i ndependent completion of 
the task while simultaneously eliminating falls risk. This environment allows the participant 
to engage in therapy at a consistently more challenging level than is allowed in conventional 
rehabilitation. This approach is based on a  philosophy known as the “challenge point 
framework”, which theorizes that one’s ability level is defined by [CONTACT_340574] (50%) chance of success or failure, 49 a level of difficulty that is 
rarely matched in clinical r ehabilitation due to increased potential for falls.  
Attention Control (Stretching): Stretching is being used as an attention control condition 
for POWER training.  Control subjects will participate in a stretching protocol for the same 
duration (i.e. 60 minutes per session) and frequency (3 days per week) for [ADDRESS_421415] -stroke populat ion and designed for individuals 50 years of 
age and older and will include activities targeting upper and lower extremity flexibility. 54 
Specifically, subjects in this group will perform traditional stretching movements targeting 
flexors and extensors of the knees, ankles and hips bilaterally. In addition, low back 
rotations, bridging, prone extensions and hip abduction will also be perfor med.  Upper 
extremity movements will include shoulder flexion, horizontal flexion/abduction, internal 
and external rot ation as well as wrist flexion and extension.  As individual levels of 
flexibility increase, the level of difficulty will be increased accordingly. Heart rate responses 
to the stretching program will be intentionally kept below 40% heart rate reserve. The 
stretching will be overseen by a licensed physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_340553].  
*** To provide the best care possible, those initially randomized to the control group will 
be offered the opportunity to re -enroll into POWER training should they still meet criteria 
for depression at the follow -up time point.  
Dynamometric Assessment: Isometric and isotonic assessments will be performed for knee 
extension and ankle plantar flexion at bi -weekly intervals throughout POWER using a 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 14 of 24  Biodex isokinetic dynamometer (Biodex Corp., Shirley, NY). Prior to testing, each subject 
will go through a period of familiarization and warm -up consisting of 5 minutes of cycling 
and three sub -maximal contractions. During isometric testing, maximum volun tary isometric 
contraction (MVIC) will be defined as the highest torque achieved during 3 maximal 
contractions (~[ADDRESS_421416]). If MVIC 
values during the three trials differ by [CONTACT_726] 5%, additional contra ctions will be 
performed.  During isotonic testing, peak power will be assessed using 40% of MVIC. 
Differences in lower extremity maximal velocity are shown to occur at relatively low 
external forces (e.g. 40% 1 RM) and are most closely associated with gai t velocity in older 
individuals. [ADDRESS_421417] powers is > 10%, additional contractions will 
be performed. Power -angle curves will be plott ed and the peak powers recorded. During all 
dynamometric testing, subjects will be instructed to (1) develop torque as fast as possible 
and (2) produce a maximal contraction. Subjects will be given an auditory cue and receive 
continuous visual feedback. Al l contractions will be performed with subjects positioned in 
the dynamometer and the axis of the dynamometer aligned with the joint axis of rotation. 
Proximal stabilization will be achieved with straps at the chest, hips, and knee as appropriate. 
In order to increase sensitivity, the force transducer signal will be amplified and fed into a 
data acquisition unit (Lab View Inc.) and corrected for the effects of gravity.  
11.0 Specimen Collection and Banking  
 N/A 
 
12.0 Data Management   
Data Analysis Plan: We will compare the effects of POWER training (vs. control) on HRSD 
scores. We will also determine response (≥50% reduction in symptoms) and remission 
(HRSD < 10) rates following training and at a six-month follow -up. We will utilize repeated 
measures mixed effects models to assess significant changes in outcomes between groups. 
Time and group will serve as dependent variables, as well as their interactions. A random 
intercept term will be included in the model to account for clustering within subjects. Various 
error structures associated with the repeated measures will be considered (e.g. compound 
symmetry vs. auto -regressive).  
We will determine if PSD limits response to treatment by [CONTACT_340575] (post -pre) in outcomes in depressed vs. non -depressed subjects 
utilizing repeated measures mixed models. Time (seven occasions), group (depressed vs. 
non-depressed) and their interaction will serve as dependent variables.  Three primary 
dependent variables of interest here are, self -selected walking speed (SSWS)  and paretic leg 
power generation. A random intercept term will be included in the model to account  for 
clustering within subjects. Various error structures associated with the repeated measures 
over time will be considered (e.g. compound symmetry vs. auto -regressive). Analyses 
incorporating differences in outcomes as dependent variables will examine wh ether changes 
over time are more pronounced in depressed versus non -depressed subjects as well as 
whether changes are more pronounced in depressed subjects with the greatest improvement 
in HRSD. These models will also incorporate random subject effects to account for within -
subject dependence. To determine associations between changes in outcomes, we will look 
at the relationships between outcomes using Pearson or Spearman correlations, depending 
on the distribution of the data. Further, we will use segment ed (joint -point) regression to 
estimate if specific thresholds exist that mark in individual subjects where HRSD starts 
improving (decreases) and other outcomes start to improve (increase) to help us understand 
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421418].  
All efforts will be taken to minimize dropouts. If dropouts occur, we will attempt to 
determine the reason for dropout. If the dropouts occur at random, the mixed effects model 
can account for the missing data. However, if the dropouts are found to be trea tment related, 
they will be treated as non -ignorable missing data and appropriate missing data methods will 
be applied and multiple imputations considered.  
Sample size determination and Statistical Approach: A total of [ADDRESS_421419]-stroke subjects 
will be recruited.   For Aim 1, 32 subjects with PSD will participate in either POWER training 
or control intervention (n=16 per group).  These analyses will rely on longitudinal measures 
and we assume (based on experience with this int ervention) that no more than 15% will fail 
to complete all assessments.  This is an extremely conservative approach in that none of the 
subjects in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_340554].  Wi th 16 subjects enrolled per group and 
a 15% attrition rate over time (resulting in complete data on 13 subjects per group), we would 
have at least 80% power to detect a minimum difference in the change in HRSD from 
baseline to the end of the study of 2.94 (change in pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299] = 6.6) with a s.d. of 5.3 (at 5% 
significance level). Since this is a longitudinal study, we also incorporated an autocorrelation 
(AR(1)) of 0.[ADDRESS_421420] size of 1.19 (95% CI 0.98 to 1.36) for improvement 
in depression severity.  To detect this effect we will have more than 90% power. For Aim 2, 
with basel ine data from n=[ADDRESS_421421] 80% power to detect a minimum 
difference (pre -post) of 0.13 m/s for SSWS (s.d. = 0.2 m/s) and 17.88 ft/lb for muscle 
strength (s.d=31.9 ft/lb) using a longitudinal approach with an autocorrelation (AR (1)) of 
0.[ADDRESS_421422] for covariates such as depressi on level.  
13.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
 
Confidentiality : All records regarding participation in this study will be kept in locked file cabinets 
in the appropriate laboratories and/or offices and stored on password -protected computers/servers 
in the offices and laboratories of the PI’s research team. There will  be no direct link to participant 
identifying information (other than subject code) without access to a password -protected computer 
containing the identifying information linking information to a given subject. Access to linked 
identifiers is limited to re search personnel intimately involved with the human subjects. All data and 
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421423] code. The results of the study may be 
published for scientific purposes; however, subjects’ identiti es will not be revealed and data will not 
be traceable to any individuals in any resultant publications. The information gathered during this 
study will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371].  
Adverse events : An adverse event will be defined as any expected or unexpected harmful event 
observed in subjects enrolled in the approved project.  Adverse events do not necessarily have a 
causal relationship with aspects of the treatment or be related to study procedur es. A serious adverse 
event is any event that results in death, a life -threatening situation, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_40026], persistent or significant disability/incapacity or a congenital anomaly/birth defect or 
requires medical interventio n to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  Serious adverse events 
require prompt reporting to the sponsor and the IRB.  Important medical events that may not result 
in death, be life -threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340555], based on appropriate medical judgment of the study physician, they could jeopardize the 
patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes in this 
definition. The data and safety monitoring plan for this study will include subject monitoring for 
adverse events, review of these events by [CONTACT_3476], study physician and IRB.  
Subject monitoring . At each study visit, subject voluntary reporting of potential adverse events will 
be encouraged and events of interest will elicit specific follow -up to include: falls, orthopedic 
injuries and new or exacerbating pain. During training, safety monitoring wi ll include HR, blood 
pressure, and continuous observation for other signs or symptoms of cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_5448], 
worsening neurologic impairments or orthopedic injury.  In addition, any adverse responses to TMS 
will be closely monitored.  Adverse events will be followed until resolution determined by a 
physician according to type, severity and need for treatment.  Any causal relationship with the 
intervention or impact on the study intervention, whether anticipated or not will b e specifically 
documented.  
Data Safety & Monitoring Plan:  
Trial Management : The proposed study will be managed through the Department of Health Sciences 
& research at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC). All data will be collected and 
tracked using only the assigned study ID of each participant and the cross -walk linking the study ID 
to each participant’s personal identifying data will be kept confidentia l and locked in a secured 
location.  All study data will be collected by [CONTACT_212884] (research staff, PIs, Co -Is). 
Data will be collect ed using standardized paper and electronic forms and will be securely transferred 
to the data entry location. Research staff will transcribe any paper data into a REDCap data capture 
system (Research Electronic Data Capture), a secure, web -based application designed exclusively 
to support data capture for research studies. R EDCap provides: 1) an intuitive interface for data 
entry (with data validation); 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) 
automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages 
(SAS/STAT and SPSS); 4) procedures for importing data from external sources; and 5) advanced 
features, such as branching logic and calculated fields. These procedures are effective in minimizing 
data e ntry errors (e.g., missing or errant data).  
Data Quality Assurance : Validity and data integrity will be checked on an ongoing basis through 
the use of data audits. The study statistician (Ramakrishnan) will supervise quarterly data quality 
assessments (i.e., examination of the outcomes database(s) for missing data, unexp ected 
distributions or responses, and outliers) performed by [CONTACT_1269]. Accuracy and 
completeness of the data collected will be ensured by [CONTACT_13452] -weekly review. A 10% random sample of 
the primary source document will be cro ss-checked with the database on a quarterly basis. If 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 17 of 24  inaccuracies exceed 2%, then a second 10% will be randomly chosen for audit. Should data 
discrepancies be discovered, they will be resolved using original source documents. The REDCap 
system does not accept outliers, illogical response patterns, etc. The P I will have bi -weekly meetings 
with the research staff to discuss qualitative comments received during treatments and data 
collection sessions as well as any problems in data collection or entry. The statistician will 
periodically examine the database to l ook for irregularities. Initial data analyses will examine 
distributions of variable scores and comparability of baseline characteristics across conditions in 
case analyses need to be adjusted for these.  
All serious adverse events will be reported to the MUSC Institutional Review Board (IRB) within 
24 hrs. Follow -up of all serious adverse events will be reported as well. Based on our previous 
studies involving exercise and/or TMS in individuals post -stroke , we anticipate the serious adverse 
event rate to be extremely low.  
Adverse Event Monitoring and Trial Safety : The proposed methodologies are all non -invasive and, 
as such, involve minimal physical risk to participants. However, adverse events will be monitored 
throughout the study and all events will be followed to resolution or stabilization. Adverse events 
will be coded on a weekly basis and the research staff will prepare a summary of all adverse events. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_340556] (or before if more urgent). Serious adverse 
events are defined a s events, related or unrelated, that require or prolong hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340557], death, disability, cancer, overdose, development of drug dependency or abuse, 
or any other life -threatening event. The Institutional Review Board (IRB)  of the Medical University 
of South Carolina (MUSC) will be immediately informed of any serious adverse events as soon as 
the PIs, Co -Is, or study staff are made aware of it and a written report will be filed within 72 hours. 
The research staff will be ins tructed not to reveal whether a person is a participant in the study and 
will report to the PIs any outside requests for information about a participant or any breaches in 
confidentiality. All requests by [CONTACT_4317]’ physicians and other medical provider s will be referred 
directly to the PIs.  
Data Safety & Monitoring and Study Implementation : The PI (Chris Gregory, Ph.D., P.T) will be 
responsible for monitoring the trial. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_340558]. Specifically, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340559] . 
 
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects (if applicable)  
 
Participation in this study is completely voluntary  and participants may decide to  stop taking part 
in this study at any time. In addition, there may be circumstances where t he investigators and/or 
the sponsor may stop your participation in this study at any time if they decide it is in the best 
interest  of the participant .  Examples of such circumstances include those that represent a 
perceived health risk to the individual (e.g., chronic elevation in resting blood pressure or 
significant unexplained incre ase in depressive symptoms). If such a circumstance does occur, 
participants will be notified by [CONTACT_340576] -
up will be provided to the individual.  If the decision if made for a participant to withdraw  
(whether by [CONTACT_340577]) no further data will be collected.  However, data 
collected to date will still be analyzed using intent -to-treat analyses.  
 
 
Version 8; 8/23/[ADDRESS_421424] at any time without prejudice. Minimization of risk will be 
accomplished by [CONTACT_340578]. We will follow the American College of Sports Medicine criteria for 
terminating an in patient exercise session which includes: subject complaints of light -
headedness, confusion, or dyspnea; on set of angina; excessive blood pressure changes 
(systolic BP greater than 220 mmHg, diastolic BP greater than 110 mmHg); and 
inappropriate bradycardia (drop in heart rate >10 beats per minute).  
At any point during the study, should a participant complete the HRSD and answer questions 
indicating very severe depression (>22) or answer any questions on the HRSD or PHQ -[ADDRESS_421425] ([CONTACT_95052] or one of his colleagues) will be 
available during all depression assessments if further evaluatio n is necessary. In the event of 
an incident during treatment or training that a clinician is not immediately available, the 
participant will be escorted to the emergency department for further evaluation.  
 
16.[ADDRESS_421426] on 
rehabilitation may ultimately lead to a better understanding of neuroplasticity and the extent 
to which training restores psychological and locomotor function. Given th e minimal risks 
involved and the potential to add to the limited base of scientific knowledge describing this 
population, the potential risks are reasonable  
17.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
None of the individual data collected  as part of this study will be shared .  However, 
aggregate data generated for the purpose of scientific publication will be made available to 
participants once the final data analyses are completed.   
 
 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 19 of 24  18.0 Drugs or Devices (if applicable)  
 N/A 
 
  
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 20 of 24   
References  
1. Lokk J, Delbari A. (2010). Management of depression in elderly stroke patients. Neuropsychiatric 
disease and treatment ;6:[ADDRESS_421427] R. (2009). Poststroke depression and functional outcome: a 
critical review of literature. Heart & lung : the journal of critical care. Mar-Apr;38(2):151 -162. 
3. Hackett ML, Yapa C, Parag V, Anderson CS. (2005). Frequency of depression after stroke: a systematic 
review of observational studies. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. Jun;36(6):1330 -1340.  
4. Jia H, Damush TM, Qin H, Ried LD, Wang X, Young LJ, Williams LS. (2006). The impact of post -
stroke depression on healthcare use by [CONTACT_340579]. Stroke. Nov; 37(11):2796 -801. 
5. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House AO. (2004). Interventions for treating depression after stroke. 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online). (3):CD003437.  
6. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House AO, Xia J. (2009). Interventions for Treating Depression After 
Stroke. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. May 14.  
7. Paolucci S, Antonucci G, Pratesi L, Traballesi M, Grasso MG, Lubich S. (1999). Poststroke depression 
and its role in rehabilitation of inpatients. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. Sep 
80(9):985 -990. 
8. Duncan PW, Sullivan KJ, Behrman AL, et al (2007). Protocol for the Locomotor Experience Applied 
Post-stroke (LEAPS) trial: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Neurol; [ADDRESS_421428] CJ, Nelsen MA, Lewthwaite R, Cen SY, Azen SP; 
Interdisciplinary Comprehensive Arm Rehabilitation Evaluation (ICARE) Investigative Team. (2016). 
Effect of a Task -Oriented Rehabilitation Program on Upper Extremity Rec overy Following Motor 
Stroke: The ICARE Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Feb 9; 315(6):571 -81. 
10. Wolf SL, Winstein CJ, Miller JP, Taub E, Uswatte G, Morris D, Giuliani C, Light KE, Nichols -Larsen 
D; EXCITE Investigators. (2006). Effect of constraint -induced movement therapy on upper extremity 
function 3 to 9 months after stroke: the EXCITE randomized clinical trial. JAMA. Nov 1;296(17):2095 -
104. 
11. Singh NA, Stavrinos TM, Scarbek Y, Galambos G, Liber C, Fiatarone Singh MA. (2005). A randomized 
controlled trial of high versus low intensity weight training versus general practitioner care for clinical 
depression in older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci M ed Sci.  
12. Aidar FJ, de Matos DG, de Oliveira RJ, Carneiro AL, Cabral BG, Dantas PM, Reis VM. (2014). 
Relationship between Depression and Strength Training in Survivors of the Ischemic Stroke. J Hum 
Kinet. Nov 12;43:7 -15. 
13. Morgan P, Embry A, Perry L, Holthaus K, Gregory CM. (2015). Feasibility of lower -limb muscle power 
training to enhance locomotor function poststroke. J Rehabil Res Dev.;52(1):77 -84. 
14. S Aaron, J Hunnicutt, AE Embry, MG Bowden and CM Gregory. POWER Training in Chronic Stroke 
Individuals: Differences between Responders and Non -responders. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_70983]. 
[ADDRESS_421429];24(7):[ADDRESS_421430] -stroke. Stroke Research & Treatment . 2016; PMID: 
27493828  
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 21 of 24  16. Player MJ, Taylor JL, Weickert CS, Alonzo A, Sachdev P, Martin D, Mitchell PB, Loo CK. (2013). 
Neuroplasticity in depressed individuals compared with healthy controls. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
Oct; 38(11):2101 -8. 
17. Player MJ, Taylor JL, Weickert CS, Alonzo A, Sachdev PS, Martin D, Mitchell PB, Loo CK.  (2014). 
Increase in PAS -induced neuroplasticity after a treatment course of transcranial direct current 
stimulation for depression. J Affect Disord; 167:140 -7. 
18. Gresham GE, Kelly -Hayes M, Wolf PA, Beiser AS, Kase CS, D'Agostino RB. (1998). Survival and 
functional status [ADDRESS_421431] stroke: the Framingham Study. Stroke; a journal of cerebral 
circulation. Apr;29(4):793 -797. 
19. Jorgensen HS, Nakayama H, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. (1995). Recovery of walking function in stroke 
patients: the Copenhagen Stroke Study. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. Jan;76(1):27 -
32. 
20. Perry J, Garrett M, Gronley JK, Mulroy SJ. (1995). Classification of walking handicap in the stroke 
population. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. Jun;26(6):982 -989. 
21. Bohannon RW, Horton MG, Wikholm JB. (1991). Importance of four variables of walking to patients 
with stroke. International journal of rehabilitation research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur 
Rehabilitationsforschung. Revue internationale de recherches de readaptation. ;14(3):[ADDRESS_421432] SR, Close JC, Reppermund S, Kochan NA, Sachdev P, Brodaty H, Delbaere K. (2015). 
Depressive symptoms increase fall risk in older people, independent of antidepressant use, and reduced 
executive and physical functioning. Arch Gerontol Geriatr . Jan-Feb;60(1):[ADDRESS_421433] SR, Delbaere K, Close JC. (2013). Depressive 
symptomatology as a risk factor for falls in older people: systematic review and meta -analysis. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. May;61(5):694 -706. 
24. National Institute on Aging (1999). Exercise: A Guide From the National Institute on Aging. Bethesda, 
MD: National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health.  
25. Teixeira -Salmela LF, Olney SJ, Nadeau S, Brouwer B (1999). Muscle strengthening and physical 
conditioning to reduce impairment and disability in chronic stroke survivors. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
Oct;80(10):1211 -8. 
26. Lee MJ, Kilbreath SL, Singh MF, Zeman B, Davis GM (2010). Effect of progressive resistance training 
on muscle performance after chronic stroke. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Jan;42(1):23 -34. 
27. O’Connor PJ, Herring MP, Caravalho A.  (2010). Mental health benefits of strength training in adults.  
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 4(5); 377 -396. 
28. Martin DM, Alonzo A, Ho KA, et al. (2012). Continuation transcranial direct current stimulation for 
the prevention of relapse in major depression. Journal of affective disorders. Nov 9.  
29. Normann C, Schmitz D, Furmaier A, Doing C, Bach M. (2007). Long -term plasticity of visually evoked 
potentials in humans is altered in major depression. Biological psychiatry ;62(5):373 -380. 
30. Nissen C, Holz J, Blechert J, et al. (2010). Learning as a model for neural plasticity in major depression. 
Biological psychiatry. Sep 15;68(6):544 -552. 
31. Stefan K, Kunesch E, Cohen LG, Benecke R, Classen J. Induction of plasticity in the human motor 
cortex by [CONTACT_340580]. Brain : a journal of neurology. Mar 2000;123 Pt 3:572 -584. 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 22 of 24  32. Cooke SF, Bliss TV. Plasticity in the human central nervous system. Brain : a journal of neurology. Jul 
2006;129(Pt 7):[ADDRESS_421434] stimulation. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of 
the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiolog y. Nov 2012;123(11):[ADDRESS_421435] for the Design and 
Interpretation of Randomized Controlled Trials. Innovations in Clinical Neuroscience . 2013;10([ADDRESS_421436] A):4S -19S. PMID 23882433  
35. Bowden MG, Behrman AL, Neptune RR, Gregory CM, Kautz SA. (2013). Locomotor rehabilitation of 
individuals with chronic stroke: difference between responders and non -responders. Archives of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation. 94(5); 856 -62. 
36. Ramasubbu R, Robinson RG, Flint AJ, Kosier T, Price TR. (1998). Functional impairment associated 
with acute poststroke depression: the Stroke Data Bank Study. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci.  
37. George MS, Lisanby [INVESTIGATOR_68991], Avery D, et al. (2010). Daily left prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation 
therapy for major depressive disorder: a sham -controlled randomized trial. Archives of general 
psychiatry. May;67(5):507 -516. 
38. de Vries PM, de Jong BM, Bohning DE, Walker JA, George MS, Leenders KL. (2009). Changes in 
cerebral activations during movement execution and imagery after parietal cortex TMS interleaved with 
3T MRI. Brain research. Aug 18;1285:[ADDRESS_421437], 
George MS, Sackeim HA, Lisanby [INVESTIGATOR_68991]. (2012). Long -term efficacy of repeated daily prefrontal 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in treatment -resistant depression. De press Anxiety. 
Oct;29(10):[ADDRESS_421438], Sackeim HA, George MS, Nahas Z. (2013). Prefrontal rTMS for treating 
depression: location and intensity results from the OPT -TMS multi -site c linical trial. Brain Stimul. 
Mar;6(2):108 -17. 
41. Trajković G, Starčević V, Latas M, Leštarević M, Ille T, Bukumirić Z, Marinković J. Reliability of the 
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression: a meta -analysis over a period of 49 years. Psychiatry Res. 2011 
Aug 30;189(1):[ADDRESS_421439] -Cook A, Woollacott M (2001). Motor Control: Theory and Practical Applications. 
Philadelphia: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4603].  
43. Mudge S, Stott NS, Walt SE (2007). Criterion validity of the StepWatch Activity Monitor as a measure 
of walking activity in patients after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; 88:[ADDRESS_421440] S, Brooks D, Lacasse Y, Thomas S (2001). A qualitative systematic overview of the 
measurement properties of functional walk tests used in the cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_1798]. Chest; 119:256 -
70. 
45. Wade D (1992). Measurement in neurological rehabilitation. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford Univ Press.  
46. Rossier P, Wade DT (2001). Validity and reliability comparison of 4 mobility measures in patients 
presenting with neurologic impairment. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; 82:9 -13. 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 23 of 24  47. Borckardt, J. J., Nahas, Z., Koola, J., & George, M. S. (2006). Estimating resting motor thresholds in 
transcranial magnetic stimulation research and practice: A computer simulation evaluation of best 
methods.  The Journal of ECT, 22 (3), 169 -175. 
48. Tung FL, Yang YR, Lee CC, Wang RY (2010). Balance outcomes after additional sit -to-stand training 
in subjects with stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil.; 24:533 -42.  
49. Guadagnoli MA, Lee TD (2004). Challenge point: a framework for conceptualizing the effects of 
various practice conditions in motor learning. J Mot Behav; 36:212 -24. 
50. Fielding RA, LeBrasseur NK, Cuoco A et al (2002). High velocity power training increases skeletal 
muscle strength and power in community -dwelling older women. J Am Geriatr Soc; 50: 655 –662. 
51. Bean J, Kiely DK, Herman S et al (2002). The relationship between leg power and physical performance 
in mobility limited elders. J Am Geriatr Soc; 50: 461 –467. 
52. Bean JF, Leveille SG, Kiely DK, Bandinelli S, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L (2003). A comparison of leg 
power and leg strength within the InCHIANTI Study: which influences mobility more? J Gerontol A 
Biol Sci Med Sci; 58A(8):728 -733. 
53. McGowan CP, Neptune RR, Kram R (2008). Independent effects of weight and mass on plantar flexor 
activity during walking: implications for their contributions to body support and forward propulsion. J 
Appl Physiol. Aug; 105(2):486 -94.  
54. Luft AR, Macko RF, Forrester LW, et al. (2008). Treadmill exercise activates subcortical neural 
networks and improves walking after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. Dec;39(12):3341 -
3350.  
55. Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, Scalf P, McAuley E, Cohen NJ, Webb A, Jerome GJ, Marquez 
DX, Elavsky S. (2004). Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. Mar 2; 101(9):[ADDRESS_421441] ed. (1990) Oxford: Butterworth 
Heinemann.  
57. Flansbjer UB, Miller M, Downham D, Lexell J (2008). Progressive resistance training after stroke: 
effects on muscle strength, muscle tone, gait performance and perceived participation. J Rehabil Med.; 
40(1):42 –48. 
58. Moreland JD, Goldsmith CH, Huijbregts MP, et al (2003). Progressive resistance strengthening 
exercises after stroke: a single -blind randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.; 
84(10):1433 –1440.  
59. Sharp SA, Brouwer BJ (1997). Isokinetic strength training of the hemiparetic knee: effects on function 
and spasticity. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.; 78(11):1231 –1236.  
60. Beloosesky Y, Streifler JY, Burstin A, Grinblat J (1995). The importance of brain infarct size and 
location in predicting outcome after stroke. Age Ageing. Nov; 24(6):515 -518. 
61. van Everdingen KJ, van der Grond J, Kappelle LJ, Ramos LM, Mali WP (1998). Diffusion -weighted 
magnetic resonance imaging in acute stroke. Stroke; 29(9):1783 -1790.  
62. Hatakenaka M, Miyai I, Sakoda S, Yanagihara T (2007). Proximal paresis of the upper extremity in 
patients with stroke. Neurology. Jul; 69(4):348 -355. 
Version 8; 8/23/2022 
 Page 24 of 24  63. Shelton FN, Reding MJ (2001). Effect of lesion location on upper limb motor recovery after stroke. 
Stroke. Jan.; 32(1):107 -112. 
64. Chen CL, Tang FT, Chen HC, Chung CY, Wong MK (2000). Brain lesion size and location: effects on 
motor recovery and functional outcome in stroke patients. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. Apr;81(4):447 -452. 
65. Yamada K, Ito H, Nakamura H, et al (2004). Stroke patients' evolving symptoms assessed by 
[CONTACT_340581]. J Magn Reson Imaging. 20(6):923 -929. 
66. Konishi J, Yamada K, Kizu O, et al (2005). MR tractography for the evaluation of functional recovery 
from lenticulostriate infarcts. Neurology. Jan; 64(1):108 -113. 
67. Dromerick AW, Reding MJ (1995). Functional outcome for patients with hemiparesis, 
hemihypesthesia, and hemianopsia. Does lesion location matter? Stroke. Nov; 26(11):2023 -2026.  
68. Nelles M, Gieseke J, Flacke S, Lachenmayer L, Schild HH, Urbach H (2008). Diffusion tensor 
pyramidal tractography in patients with anterior choroidal artery infarcts. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol; 
29(3):488 -493. 
69. Pantano P, Formisano R, Ricci M, et al (1996). Motor recovery after stroke. Morphological and 
functional brain alterations. Brain; 119 (Pt 6):1849 -1857.  
70. Nepveu JF, Thiel A, Tang A, Fung J, Lundbye -Jensen J, Boyd LA, Roig M. (2017) A Single Bout of 
High -Intensity Interval Training Improves Motor Skill Retention in Individuals With Stroke. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair. Aug;31(8):726 -735. 
71. Duncan PW, Wallace D, Studenski S, Lai SM, Johnson D (2001). Conceptualization of a new stroke -
specific outcome measure: the stroke impact scale. Top Stroke Rehabil; 8:19 -33. 
72. Duncan PW, Bode RK, Min Lai S, Perera S (2003). Rasch analysis of a new stroke -specific outcome 
scale: the Stroke Impact Scale. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; 84:950 -63. 
73. Duncan PW, Lai SM, Bode RK, Perera S, DeRosa J (2003). Stroke Impact Scale -16: A brief assessment 
of physical function. Neurology; 60:291 -6. 
74. Mahler DA, Froelicher VF, Miller NH (1995). The American College of Sports Medicine's Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 5th edition. Philadelphia: Williams & Wilkins.  
75. Ross RE, VanDerwerker CJ, Newton JH, George MS, Short EB, Sahlem GL, Manett AJ, Fox JB, 
Gregory CM.  Simultaneous aerobic exercise and rTMS: Feasibility of combining therapeutic 
modalities to treat depression. Brain Stimul. [ADDRESS_421442] 31.  
76. VanDerwerker CJ, Ross RE, Stimpson KH, Embry AE, Aaron SE, Cence B, George MS, Gregory CM. 
Combining therapeutic approaches: rTMS and aerobic exercise in post -stroke depression: a case series. 
Top Stroke Rehabil. [ADDRESS_421443] 6:1 -7. 
77. Samii A, Wassermann EM, Ikoma K, Mercuri B, George MS, O'Fallon A, Dale JK, Straus SE, Hallett 
M. Decreased postexercise facilitation of motor evoked potentials in patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome or depression. Neurology. 1996 Dec;47(6):[ADDRESS_421444], Ricci R, Funke FW, Ramsey P, Kelley W, Carroll JS, Ramsey D, Borckardt JJ, Johnson 
K, George MS. Lower limb immobilization is associated with increased corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_183862]. Exp 
Brain Res. 2007 Aug;181(2):213 -20. 
 