 
A Relational Research Recruitment and Engagement 
Intervention for Cognitive Aging Research  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
October 31, 2023 
 
 
 
4.1. Background/ Significance 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) are a major public health priority and remain 
the only of the top [ADDRESS_1091462], the condition also has tremendous societal consequences due to the heavy financial costs of the 
condition and stress/burden associated with caregiving –  most of which are shouldered by 
[CONTACT_791667] (i.e. family, unpaid/nonprofessional) caregivers. Estimates of ADRD diagnoses are 
projected to rise d ramatically in the coming decades, highlighting the importance of research 
aimed at not only better understanding disease risk and protective factors –  but also identifying 
best approaches to supporting people with ADRD and their caregivers.  
 
Our ability to address these needs is currently hampered by [CONTACT_791668] “Alzheimer’s recruitment crisis.” There is currently a need to screen 700,[ADDRESS_1091463] is challenging for many reasons – including stigma related to the condition, public 
misconceptions regarding brain health and ADRD, challenges with informed consent, and 
difficulty identifying study participants as 50% of ADRD is not detected or diagnosed.[ADDRESS_1091464] 
conditions and late -life cognitive decline occur decades (often beginning around 40 years of age) 
before clinical symptoms are observable, there is widespread recognition of the need for comprehensive inclusion of both adults and older adults in what is referred to as cognitive aging 
research which spans the entire pre -clinical to late -stage disease continuum .
[ADDRESS_1091465] disproportionately impacts individuals from historically 
underrepresented and disadvantaged backgrounds –  including racial and ethnic minorities and 
individuals from low socioeconomic backgrounds .5,[ADDRESS_1091466] diagnosis, time to diagnosis, response to treatment, and mortality7,8—and are 
at higher risk for many other health conditions that serve as independent ADRD risk factors (i.e. 
cardiometabolic conditions). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_791662], these groups are significantly 
underrepresented in ADRD and cognitive aging resear ch.9 Reasons for low rates of inclusion of 
these populations in AD research are multifaceted and include stringent inclusion/exclusion 
criteria of some studies, and mistrust due to discrimination and historical mistreatment of research 
participants .10,11 Emerging research suggests that social and economic barriers also serve as 
major barriers to research participation. Individuals from under -represented backgrounds are 
disproportionately more likely to experience these barriers including time scarcity challenges due 
to multiple jobs (lack of free time), lack of respi[INVESTIGATOR_791663] (due to social or financial 
circumstances), and lack of transportation .11,[ADDRESS_1091467] rate in the US. Consequently, absent more advanced and 
 
successful research recruitment and retention strategies and programs that proactively tackle the 
fundamental mechanisms of disparities in research participation– local, regional, and national 
goals to address the many health and societal challenges posed by [CONTACT_791669].  
 
4.2. Study Objectives  
The Brain Health Community Registry will identify adults over age [ADDRESS_1091468] caregivers that 
may be interested in receiving information about current or future research opportunities related 
to brain health and/or caregiving, and will proactively employ strategies to reduce fundamental 
mechanisms that contribute to disparities in research participation.  
 Through the Brain Health Community Registry, participants: (1) receive information about research studies they may be eligible to participate in and (2) receive information about relevant 
resources and services through comprehensive retention strategies (i.e. wraparound services) in 
an effort to eliminate barriers to research participation that result from unmet needs. The Brain 
Health Community Registry is not time limited and will remain active indefinitely. The long- term 
goals of the Registry are to facilitate connections to research opportunities and reduce barriers to research participation through comprehensive retention strategies, and to establish a network of 
participants and caregivers who may be able to participate in future research studies.  
 
4.3. Methods  
 ELIGIBILITY  
The Brain Health Community Registry will enroll individuals in 3 categories: (1) Caregivers to 
people with ADRD who are 18 years or older, (2) Adults ages 40 and over interested in brain 
health and (3) Adults ages [ADDRESS_1091469],  
 
Inclusion Criteria  for Caregiver Participants Ages 18+  
• English -speaking  
• Has had previous or current contact [CONTACT_4490] a person with ADRD at least monthly (can be 
phone/virtual or in- person contact) and provides unpaid support to the individual which 
can be health, financial, social, or logistical in nature  
• Interested in learning about research opportunities related to aging and brain health, 
particularly related to care for people living with ADRD  
 
Inclusion Criteria for Participants Ages 40+ Not Experiencing Changes in Memory Interested in 
Brain Health  
• English -speaking  
• Interested in learning about research opportunities related to aging, brain health and 
caregiving 
 
Inclusion Criteria for Participants Ages 40+ Experiencing Changes in Memory Interested in 
Brain Health  
• English -speaking 
• Interested in learning about research opportunities related to aging, brain health and 
caregiving 
• If evidence of a lack of decision- making capacity is present, presence and consent from 
a legally authorized representative (LAR) in addition to assent from the participant with 
cognitive challenges (further detail regarding informed consent, assent, and LARs is 
noted in Step 3).  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for Caregiver Participants Ages 18+  
 
• Frequency of contact [CONTACT_791670]  
• Nature of contact [CONTACT_791671], or 
caregiver is paid for supports  
• Person they are providing care for is not experiencing any changes in memory  
• Under 18 years of age  
• Does not speak English 
 
Exclusion Criteria for Participants Ages 40+ Not Experiencing Changes in Memory Interested in 
Brain Health  
• Is not interested in learning about research opportunities related to aging and brain 
health 
• Under than 40 years of age 
Does not speak English  
 
Exclusion Criteria for Participants Ages 40+ Experiencing Changes in Memory Interested in 
Brain Health  
• Is not interested in learning about research opportunities related to aging and brain 
health 
• Under 40 years of age  
• Evidence of a lack of decision- making capacity and LAR cannot be found or contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]  
• Does not speak English 
 RECRUITMENT PROCEDURES  Information about the study, eligibility for participation, and how to get involved will be 
distributed through community organizations’ regularly scheduled newsletters (online or print) 
and/or posted flyers. The study team members will follow organizational guidelines for 
submission and a pre- written advertisement will be submitted to agencies for publication.   
 
Newspaper, radio and social media advertisements will contain Information about the study, 
eligibility for details on how interested participants can contact [CONTACT_214297].  
 
When making first contact  [CONTACT_791672],  study  team  members  will explain the study  
and assess interest  and eligibility  based upon the inclusion  category  the participant  best aligns  
with (e.g. Adult  over the age of 40, or Caregiver  over the age of 18).  
 
Contact  [CONTACT_791673]-person  or over the phone,  or through  a secure online REDCap  
survey.  All formal  capacity  to consent  assessments  and contact  [CONTACT_791674].   For caregivers,  there  will simply  be two questions  on 1) status  as caregiver  
of someone with a dementia diagnosis,  and 2) nature  and frequency  of contact  [CONTACT_791675][INVESTIGATOR_841],  in addition to the requirements  on age and ability  to speak  English.  Throughout  all 
steps  of over the phone and in person  interviews, lack of decision- making capacity  will be 
determined by [CONTACT_791676].  For the online survey, participants  will be asked if they are experiencing 
memory  changes.  If they select  yes, they will be asked if these  changes  affect  their daily life. If 
they select  yes to both questions,  they will be redirected to complete  the remainder  of the 
survey  over the phone or in person,  so that the research team  may complete an accurate  formal  
capacity  screen.    
 
CONSENT PROCEDURES  
Consistent with best practice for obtaining informed consent, study team members regularly 
check for questions and understanding of study details throughout the consent process. If 
 
during initial and later contact, a potential participant expresses memory concerns or 
demonstrates challenges remembering key study details, the study team members will complete 
a formal capacity assessment.  Formal capacity assessment will be triggered by [CONTACT_791677], observed challenges following the consent process, 
and/or demonstrated lack of recollection or comprehension of key study details. In the formal 
capacity assessment process, study team members first explain the purpose of a formal 
capacity assessment to interested participants and their family members as a tool to check 
whether participants can independently and safely weigh benefits and risks of research or 
whether they may need support from someone they trust. A question gauging presence of 
concerns about memory or cognition that impact daily life is built into the online eligibility, 
informed consent & intake tool. If the potential participant indicates they are experiencing 
changes in memory or cognition that impact daily life, the online process will be stopped and a 
study team member will contact [CONTACT_272433] a formal capacity assessment.  
 
Formal capacity assessment will follow the Evaluation to Consent measure – a widely used 
reliable/valid procedure designed for this purpose that study team members have applied to 
previous research. The study team member will clearly explain the study and will use the teach -
back method to confirm understanding of the Registry procedures. This method utilizes a series 
of open -ended questions throughout the process to confirm that the participant understands the 
Registry and their involvement. These questions include:  
1. What is the potential risk of your participation?  
2. What will happen in this study?  
3. What if you don't want to continue the intake interview?  
4. What if you experience discomfort during the intake interview?  
 
If the participant demonstrates understanding of the Registry and their voluntary rights and risk 
regarding participation, and is interested in participating, a study team member will perform 
informed consent procedures as outlined in this protocol. If the individual is interested in 
participating but does not demonstrate capacity to consent, the study team member will 
determine whether a LAR who meets criteria listed below is present, following the order for 
LARs as outlined. The study team member will enroll the participant by [CONTACT_791678].  
 
If the individual is interested in participating but does not demonstrate capacity to consent and 
has no LAR, or the LAR cannot be identified, the study team member will thank them for their 
time and interest, end the recruitment process, and destroy any identifiable information about 
the person. In addition, the study team member will provide resources for the interested 
participant on LARs and ensure they have the study team member’s contact [CONTACT_791679]- up questions.  Persons without decision- making capacity will be as involved in the consent 
process as possible through evaluation of assent by [CONTACT_65685].  A participant's 
preference not to participate in the study will operate as a veto to their participation, even if their 
representative consents to the research. 
 
Study  team  members  will make  contact  [CONTACT_791680] 
(LAR)  according to the criteria  and hierarchy  detailed below,  in accordance  with institutional  
policy  and state  law. If the study  team  members  feel it is necessary  to deviate from the criteria  
and hierarchy  below  they will consult  with UW Legal  Counsel  prior to enrollment.   
 1) A research power  of attorney  may consent  to a potential  participant's  participation in 
research,  if the agent’s  decision  is not inconsistent  with the wishes  and preferences  of the 
potential  participant  expressed in the power  of attorney  instrument.  
 
2) A court -appointed  guardian of the person  may consent  to a ward’s  participation in research  
if the court  order  includes  the power  to consent  to research.  NOTE:  A guardian of the estate  
or guardian ad litem  cannot  provide surrogate  consent.  
3) A power  of attorney  for healthcare may consent  to a potential  participant's  participation in 
research,  if the agent’s  decision  is not inconsistent  with the wishes  and preferences  of the 
potential  participant  expressed in the power  of attorney  for health  care instrument.  
4) If the potential  participant  has no research power  of attorney,  guardian,  or healthcare power  
of attorney,  then the potential  participant's  “next  of kin” may consent  on behalf  of the 
potential  participant.  
 
"Next  of kin” can provide surrogate consent  in the following  order:  the spouse or registered  
domestic  partner,  adult  child,  parent,  adult  sibling,  grandparent,  adult  grandchild,  or a close  
friend of the potential  participant.”  The study  team  members  will again confirm  the inclusion  
category  the participant  best aligns  with (e.g. Adult  over the age of 40 not experiencing changes  
in memory,  Adult  over the age of 40 experiencing  changes  in memory,  or Caregiver  over the 
age of 18) and conduct  informed consent  with HIPAA authorization.   Signatures  have been 
waived  for both the informed consent  and HIPAA authorization.  
 Consent  procedures  will occur  before  any study  procedures,  like intake,  happen.  Consent  
procedures  conducted in person  or over the phone will occur  in a private  location of the person's  
choice,  over the phone  or by [CONTACT_102949],  UW-approved videoconferencing platform  (WebEx)  in a 
private location.   Consent  obtained through the online  survey  is completed within  the secure  
REDCap  survey.  The informed  consent  document  within  the REDCap  survey reminds  
participants  of the importance of protecting personal  information and encourages  participants  to 
complete  the survey in a private location  if possible.  Participants  will receive a copy  of the 
informed  consent  document  for their records,  sent to their preferred contact  [INVESTIGATOR_12183].  The study  
has a waiver  of consent  with the IRB. After  reviewing  the informed  consent  document,  
participants  will be asked  to indicate whether  or not they agree to participate in the study.   
 
We will provide potential  participants  who decline to participate  with the option to speak  with the 
research  team  about  their decision not to participate.  Individuals  who decide not to participate 
will be given the study  team’s  phone  number  as well as email  address.  If the individual  reaches  
out to the study  team,  the study  team  will answer  any questions  and the information given  by 
[CONTACT_791681],  barriers  to 
participation in the registry,  and potential  improvements.  Contact  [CONTACT_791682].   
 
INTAKE  PROCESS 
For participants  completing enrollment  over the phone or in person:  Following  informed  consent,  
Registry  participants  will complete  an intake  visit. During  the intake visit, participants  will provide 
demographic  information  as well as information  necessary  for identifying potential  research  
studies  participants  may be eligible  for and successfully engaging retention strategies  through 
identification of potentially  relevant  resources.  Specifically,  information  pertaining to participant’s  
health,  safety,  financial,  and caregiving situation will be collected.  Participants  will also be given  
the opportunity  to opt in/out  of a semi -annual  newsletter  or similar  informational  flyer provided  
by [CONTACT_791683].  They  may select  to have  the newsletter  sent via e-mail or 
postal  mail.  Participants  will be informed  that deciding whether  or not to receive  in the 
newsletter  does  not impact  their participation  in the Brain  Health  Community  in any way 
 
 
For participants  completing enrollment  online:  Following informed consent,  participants  will be 
directed to two questionnaires.  In these  questionnaires,  participants  will provide demographic  
information as well as information necessary  for identifying potential  research studies  
participants  may be eligible  for and successfully engaging retention strategies  through  
identification of potentially  relevant  resources.  Specifically,  information  pertaining to participant’s  
health,  safety,  financial,  and caregiving situation will be collected.  Participants  will also be given  
the opportunity  to opt in/out  of a semi -annual  newsletter  or similar  informational  flyer provided  
by [CONTACT_791683].  They  may select  to have  the newsletter  sent via e-mail or 
postal  mail.  Participants  will be informed  that deciding whether  or not to receive  the newsletter  
does  not impact  their participation in the Brain  Health  Community  in any way. 
 
The intake visit will take 45-[ADDRESS_1091470] after informed  
consent  or scheduled at a later time,  depending on the participant’s  preference.  For participants  
completing the survey  online,  they will have an option to save  and return  later to the survey,  
allowing  them  to complete enrollment  in multiple  sessions  if they wish.  In-person visits  will occur  
in a private  location  convenient  to the individual,  including their home,  a private room  in a 
community  center  or library,  or the patient’s  room  in a community -based or acute  care facility.  
Phone calls will take place from a private room  
For participants  with a LAR,  intake  meetings  will take place  with the LAR,  or a proxy  informant  
(as the LAR is sometimes  court  appointed and may not always  be the individual  with the most  
detailed,  relevant  information about  the person with dementia)  as designated by [CONTACT_55639].  For in 
person and phone enrollment,  prior to meeting the participant,  the researcher  will ensure they 
have the necessary  materials —including the intake  intro script,  intake  form,  and thank -you card 
with $10. These materials  will be in the study  binder.   
 
The study  team  member  conducting the intake  visit will greet  the participant,  introducing  
themselves  and thanking  them  for their time and interest.  The study  team  member  will remind  
participants  the purpose of the Registry  and that participation is voluntary.  The study  team  
member  will ask participant  if they have  any questions.  The study  team  member  will explain the 
purpose of the intake  form,  answers  questions  as needed,  and provide necessary  breaks  during 
completion of intake  visit. The intake  form will be completed  by [CONTACT_791684].  
 For online enrollment,  all information  participants  will need to complete enrollment  is built in to 
the secure  online REDCap  survey.  Participants  will select  how they would  like to receive their 
payment  at the end of the survey.  The research  team’s  contact  [CONTACT_791685],  or would  prefer  to complete enrollment  in 
person or over the phone instead.   
 
RETENTION STRATEGIES  
If any potential  barriers  to participation in the Registry  or subsequent  research  studies  are 
identified during the intake  visit (e.g. lack of respi[INVESTIGATOR_116513],  lack of reliable  transportation,  housing 
or food insecurity  concerns),  researchers  will offer Registry  participants  (or their LAR)  a list of 
potential  resources  and services based on their identified unmet  needs  (includes  contact  
[CONTACT_3031],  eligibility  requirements,  steps  for getting connected).  During  the intake process,  
situations  may arise  where  participants  (or their LAR)  need to gather  personal  information 
before  being provided  with a list of relevant  resources.  For example,  information about  
insurance eligibility  may affect  which  types  of community  support  groups  or respi[INVESTIGATOR_791664].  In these instances,  the researcher  will arrange follow up with 
participants  via phone  as needed until connection  to appropriate  resources  and services  are 
 
made.  All contact  [CONTACT_791686] a time and frequency  desired  by [CONTACT_791687].  
 
Participants  will be offered  an additional  follow- up call following  connection to resources  and 
services.  This follow- up call is optional.  The purpose of this call is to help identify  “real time”  
barriers  the participants  encounter  and sufficiency  of services.  Participants  who have  opted  in 
for the Brain  Health  Community  newsletter  will receive periodic  information  classes or events  of 
interest,  information related to brain health,  and additional  ongoing studies.  Some  participants  
may not be interested  in engaging in retention activities,  as they may feel they do not have  
unmet  needs  or would  like to use other  mechanisms  to address  their needs.  In these  situations,  
participants  that are not interested in receiving information and/or  support  connecting to 
supports  and services  can opt out and/or  deny  with no effect on their participation in the 
Registry.   
 
ANNUAL  UPDATE  VISIT  
Researchers  will contact  [CONTACT_791688]  [ADDRESS_1091471]  the necessary  materials —including 
the annual  intake  intro script,  annual  intake  form,  and thank -you card with $5. These  materials  
will be in the study  binder.   
 These visits,  calls,  or online questionnaires  will last approximately  20-30 minutes  and will ask 
participants  to: a) update  their contact  [CONTACT_3031],  b) complete  brief annual  update interview to 
identify  any significant  changes,  c) provide feedback  on any research  studies  they participated  
in that they would  like to share with the study  team  member,  d) provide feedback  on the 
usefulness  of retention efforts  including any resources  or services  engaged and their utility,  and 
e) share  general  feedback  on the Registry.  This information will be used  to facilitate  continual  
improvement  in cultivating  useful  resources,  processes  for engaging referring  participants  to 
research  studies  and the Registry  itself.  Resource  and service  needs  will be reassessed  on a 
yearly  basis  or if a participant  demonstrates  or expresses  problems  with participating in the 
Registry  or subsequent  studies  due to unmet  needs.  Standard  study  team  member  procedures  
for working  with a LAR and/or  triggering and completing capacity  assessment  will apply  during 
the annual  update visit.  
 
TERMINATING  PARTICIPATION  
Participation in the Registry  and retention strategies  is voluntary;  participants  may choose to 
terminate their participation at any time by [CONTACT_791689].  Upon receiving 
a request,  the Registry  staff will unenroll  the participant  from the Registry  within  [ADDRESS_1091472]  the participants’  alternative  contact  [CONTACT_791690],  if participants  
listed  an emergency  contact.  If no contact  [CONTACT_58661],  the study  team  will contact  [CONTACT_791691]  (if listed)  at one year from the missed  annual  update and a final contact  
[CONTACT_791692].  The study  team  will unenroll  the participant  from 
the Registry  after two years  of no contact  [CONTACT_6635].  The study  team  members  will 
review  death  records  to determine whether  the reason for unenrollment  is death.  It will be the 
study  team  member’s  responsibility  to periodically  evaluate  and update their participant  pools  
 
and manage  the data they have collected from unenrolled participants.  Prior  data from 
unenrolled participants  may be retained indefinitely  as indicated  in the informed  consent  to allow 
the study  team  members  to analyze Registry  procedures.   
 
SPECIAL  PROCEDURES  TO MINIMIZE  STUDY  RISKS  
To minimize  risk of stress  or burden  during intake and annual  update procedures,  participants  
will be informed  and reminded that they may take a break  at any time,  and may choose to end 
any assessment  at any time.  They  may opt out of answering questions  that are upsetting.  
Resources  will be provided as needed.  Study  team  members  are trained to evaluate participant  
stress  during interviews  and assessments,  and will address  challenges  as they occur. The 
informed  consent  process  will be conducted  in a private location.  Subsequent  contact  [CONTACT_791693] a private  
location.  
 USE OF THE REGISTRY   
Individuals requesting use of the Registry, for the purposes of recruiting Registry participants into a research study, should demonstrate adequate preparation and training in the conduct of 
Human Subjects Research and must hold Principal Investigator [CONTACT_41900], or its equivalent, at an academic, community or health- systems institution.  Individuals requesting use of the Registry 
must provide documentation of their study’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval along with their IRB -approved protocol and documentation of human subjects training for any study 
team members who will collaborate on study contacts. This information will be stored by [CONTACT_791694].  
 
Any member of the study team that will have direct contact [CONTACT_791695] -Madison Office of Talent Management, or if external t o UW -Madison, 
the equivalent HIPAA and human subjects training. This training must be completed every three 
years. In order to access the Registry, the study team requires a consultation with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_791665]. During the meeting 
researchers can expect feedback on recruitment and stakeholder engagement plans as well as 
research materials. This will be a chance for researchers to apply the training described above.  
 
SHARING PARTICIPANT  EXPERIENCES  
As part of the Annual  Update,  the study  team  members  will solicit  feedback  from participants  
regarding research projects  in which  they enrolled.  This feedback  will be presented  to the PIs of 
studies  using the Registry  in an aggregated,  de-identified  fashion by [CONTACT_791696].  This feedback  will also be part of the general  close- out 
procedure  by [CONTACT_2362],  which  is a meeting between the PI [INVESTIGATOR_791666]. 
 
[ADDRESS_1091473]  descriptive statistics to detail  feasibility  of the BHC Registry  including statistics 
regarding:   
• refusal  rate and reason  (%, n) 
• enrollment  rate, stratified  by [CONTACT_791697]  (%, n) 
• retention rate (%, n) 
• attrition  rate (%, n) 
 
4.5. Data  Protection,  Storage,  And Sharing  
Paper  study  materials  will be stored  under  double lock and key Paper  intake and retention 
strategy  materials  will be stored  in a locked  filing cabinet  located  within  the study  team  
member’s  locked  office.  Only persons  directly  involved in the research  evaluation will have 
access to these  materials.  This study  waives  signed informed consent,  and therefore  paper  
informed  consent  documents  are not stored.  
 
Electronic  data will be stored and accessed on secure servers  (REDCap,  Department  of 
Medicine secure  folders,  and SecureBox)  During  recruitment,  contact  [CONTACT_791698]’s  instance of REDCap  and 
on the Department  of Medicine  secure folders.  Contact  [CONTACT_791699] a 
potential  participant  denies  interest,  does  not meet  eligibility  criteria,  or is lost to follow- up.  Data  
for enrolled participants  will also be stored  securely  on the Department  of Medicine’s  instance of 
REDCap  and the Department  of Medicine secure  folders  and linked  to their intake,  retention,  
and annual  update  data to as the purpose  of the Registry  is to facilitate  matching participants  
with research opportunities  and resources.  Contact  [CONTACT_791700] a Department  of Medicine  secure folder  or on a SecureBox  folder,  
specific  to that participating study.  
 
All el ectronic  data will be safeguarded through  storage on REDCap,  SecureBox,  and the 
Department  of Medicine secure folders  which  are hosted on secure servers  which  are 
maintained in locked,  secure,  limited -access  server  storage  rooms. The servers  are secured 
with robust  firewalls  that are maintained by [CONTACT_77504]-Madison School  of Medicine  and Public  Health  
network  staff.  Access to the servers and REDCap  will be restricted  to team  members  with 
special  training on data safety.  Access is audited every  [ADDRESS_1091474] -specific  
individuals  (need- to-know).  Access to contact  [CONTACT_791701],  their IRB protocol,  and each  individual’s  human subjects  
training.  The datasets  used for anal ysis  of Brain  Health  Community  Registry  accrual,  retention,  
etc. will be deidentified and aggregated.  Data  will be reported  as group data so that no 
individual  could ever be identified.  
  
 
4.6. References  
 
1. Barnes LL, Bennett DA. Alzheimer’s Disease In African Americans: Risk Factors And 
Challenges For The Future. Health affairs (Project Hope). 2014;33(4):580 -586. 
 
2. Department of Health and Human Services. National Plan to Address Alzheimer's Disease: 
2017 Update. Washington (DC)2017.  
 
3. Lang L, Clifford A, Wei L, et al. Prevalence and determinants of undetected dementia in the 
community: a systematic literature review and a meta -analysis. BMJ Open.  
2017;7(2):e011146. Published 2017 Feb 3. doi:10.1136/bmjopen- 2016- 011146 
 
4. Koscik RL, Berman SE, Clark LR, Mueller KD, Okonkwo OC, Gleason CE, Hermann BP, 
Sager MA, Johnson SC. Intraindividual Cognitive Variability in Middle Age Predicts 
Cognitive Impairment 8 -10 Years Later: Results from the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer's 
Prevention. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society . In Press.  
 
5. Mayeda ER, Glymour MM, Quesenberry CP, Whitmer RA. Inequalities in dementia 
incidence between six racial and ethnic groups over 14 years. Alzheimers Dement. 
2016;12(3):216 -224. 
 
6. Marden JR, Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ, Kawachi I, Glymour MM. Contribution of Socioeconomic 
Status at 3 Life -Course Periods to Late -Life Memory Function and Decline: Early and Late 
Predictors of Dementia Risk. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  2017;186(7):805 -814. doi:10.1093/aje/kwx155  
 
7. Mayeda ER, Glymour MM, Quesenberry CP, Johnson JK, Pérez -Stable EJ, Whitmer RA. 
Survival after dementia diagnosis in five racial/ethnic groups. Alzheimers Dement.  
2017;13(7):761 -769. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2016.12.008 
 
8. Chen C, Zissimopoulos JM. Racial and ethnic differences in trends in dementia prevalence and risk factors in the [LOCATION_002]. Alzheimers Dement (N Y).  2018;4:510- 520. Published 
[ADDRESS_1091475] 5. doi:10.1016/j.trci.2018.08.[ADDRESS_1091476]. 2002;[ADDRESS_1091477] 
2:S82- S85. doi:10.1097/00002093- 200200002- [ADDRESS_1091478] EL, Gwyther LP, Edmonds HL. Challenges and opportunities: recruitment and 
retention of African Americans for Alzheimer disease research: lessons learned. Alzheimer 
Dis Assoc Disord. 2010;[ADDRESS_1091479](0):S19- S23. doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181f12432  
 
11. Williams JW, Plassman BL, Burke J, Benjamin S. Preventing Alzheimer's disease and 
cognitive decline. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep). 2010;(193):1 -727 
 
12. Gelman CR. Learning from recruitment challenges: barriers to diagnosis, treatment, and research participation for Latinos with symptoms of Alzheimer's disease.  J Gerontol Soc 
Work . 2010;53(1):94 -113. doi:10.1080/01634370903361847 