¡Caminamos!: A Location-Based Smartphone App for Latina Women to Connect with Nearby 
[CONTACT_696288]
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
August 2018
2. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 Latino women are a growing and influential segment of the population,1 yet health disparities for Latinas 
remain high.2-4 Latinas are more likely than their non -Hispanic White counterparts to be overweight, 
diagnosed with diabetes, and physically inactive.1,5,6 These disparities are amplified when poverty is presen t, 
and Latinas are nearly 3 times more likely to live below the poverty threshold than non-Hispanic White 
females.1 Interventions that target improving health and  ameliorating chronic diseases among Latinas are of 
high public health significance . Regular physical activity (PA)7-9 promotes physical and emotional well -being 
(e.g., lower risk of heart disease and diabetes, wei ght management, improved quality of life, etc.),7,8,10 -17 yet PA 
interventions for Latinas remain limited.18 The available research suggests th at community -focused walking 
interventions produce improvements in PA and are well -received by [CONTACT_347128]19-25 especially when culturally 
important factors (e.g., community -based, social engagement, safety concerns) a re addressed.18,26 -28 
 Physical and social environments play a role in an individual’s PA behaviors.29-31 Common barriers reported 
by [CONTACT_696289] (e.g., neighborhood safety, access to facilities that 
enable PA).17,[ADDRESS_944719] socially and increase PA. Research suggests that Latinos respond favorably to technology -based 
health interventions.48-52 With over 80% of Latinos accessing the I nternet via their smartphone,53 interventions 
that can address Latinos’ preferences regarding their physical and social environments while ut ilizing a 
preferred technology source (i.e., smartphone) could prove highly successful.  
 One smartphone feature that offers great potential for positive health outcomes is location -based services 
(LBS). LBS are a technology quickly growing in popularity f or smartphone apps that uses geographic 
positioning to help users connect in real time to their surrounding environment and to other users. In doing so, 
it provides users with real -time, user -specific information. Ninety percent (90%) of adult smartphone u sers 
utilize LBS to gather information,54 yet the application of  LBS to increase PA remains untested.   
In Phase I, the feasibility of the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  (translated - ‘Let’s walk together!’)  app using LBS was 
established in six ways: (1) feedback from an Expert Advisory Board (EAB) on app development; (2) feedback  
from Latina community leaders on the app through a Community Advisory Board (CAB) ; (3) an online survey 
of a national sample of Latinas on their smartphone usage including their app use for health promotion, and 
interest in social networking and LBS techn ology features for PA; (4) iterative focus groups with Latinas age 
18-45 years to guide development of app content, design, and aesthetics to develop a functioning prototype; (5) 
field usability testing  of the prototype app with Latinas tested the app’s ac curacy to establish users’ location, 
ability to connect users through the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  system, and users’ satisfaction with and use of the 
app; and (6) a  full-scale specifications document was prepared  to guide Phase II development.  
 In Phase II of this SBIR research, the following Specific Aims  will be achieved:  
 
1. To develop a full -scale, fully programmed ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app that aims to improve physical 
activity among Latinas by [CONTACT_696290], using user location and preferences through location -based 
services (LBS).  
2. To determine whether the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app can be (a) translated and adapted to a new 
community environment and (b) test the performance,  usage, and usability of the full -scale, fully -
programmed ¡Caminemos Juntas!   app.  
3. To evaluate whether ¡Caminemos Juntas!  increases physical activity, social support for exercise, and 
quality of life (QOL) in Latinas.             
 
¡Caminemos Juntas! will be  tested in a 12 -week randomized comparative -effectiveness controlled trial with 
200 Latinas between the ages of 18 -55 years in the Denver, CO and San Jose, CA areas. Latinas will be 
randomized to either the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app or to a comparator app ( World Walking ). Phase II will be 
led by [CONTACT_696291], Inc. (KB) in collaboration with Stanford 
University. [CONTACT_696329] (PI) at KB and [CONTACT_583622] [CONTACT_20249] (Co -I) at Stanford University successfully 
collaborated in Pha se I. [CONTACT_14823] is an expert in technology -based interventions for diet and PA promotion 
and [CONTACT_8675] is an expert in PA promotion with Latinos. The project will continue to be guided by [CONTACT_696292] (Drs. Elva Arredondo, [CONTACT_696330],  and [CONTACT_696331]), and a Community 
Advisory Board consisting of Latina community leaders.  
 KB has experience in developi[INVESTIGATOR_696260]/STTR projects.   There are no currently available products that use 
geo-location technology dedicated to walking with a soci al emphasis, for any population. Thus, 
commercialization potential for ¡Caminemos Juntas!  is high.  
 
3.  RESEARCH STRATEGY  
3A. Significance  
3A.1. This project is significant due to its focus on ameliorating health disparities among 
Latinas through physical  activity.   Health disparities exist with high prevalence among minorities and 
the socioeconomically disadvantaged.[ADDRESS_944720] th e Latina  population will increase from 16.4% to 25.7% by 2050.[ADDRESS_944721] 
important health disparities an d inequalities targeted for public health intervention involve Latinas.2,3 Over 
75% of Latinas are overweight or obese compared to 60% of White women5 and Latinas are 17  times  more 
likely to die from diabetes than their White counterparts .1 Only 9.5%6 of Latinas m eet federal physical activity 
(PA) guidel ines55 and only 6.3% of Latinas below federal poverty level s6,[ADDRESS_944722] prevalent type of 
intervention , with  78.6% demonstrat ing PA improvement.18,23 -25,27,62,65 ,66,68 -70 Considerations in tailoring 
interventions to  Latino population s include finding innovative, community -based strategies to recruit and 
retain individuals65 such as incorporating community collaboration into the intervention to improve program 
reach , show ing community buy -in, and using existing community resources.26-28 In addition to utilizing 
community factors when tailor ing a  PA intervention for Latinos, incorporating social support  is crucial, 
especially for Latinas.71 The link between social env ironment and health is widely recognized  .29,72 -76 Social 
support (i.e., the extent to which a person is connected to others)  has been strongly correlated with individuals’ 
PA behaviors ,29-31,[ADDRESS_944723] not focused on addressing the factors which may increase access  to PA programs . Barriers 
reported by [CONTACT_696293], but common themes relate to time constraints (e.g., multiple role responsibilities) 
and built environment and access concerns (e.g., neighborhood safety, access to PA facilities).17,32 -46,81 -89   Key 
motivators for PA among Latinos include the physical and psychological benefit s and a desire to be healthy for 
the family.67 Therefore, a PA intervention for Latinas that addresses the key factors for initiating PA (e.g., one 
that addresses time manage ment and safety concerns), as well as factors which are crucial during PA 
engagement (e.g., social support driven; community -based) , should  prove highly beneficial for promoting PA.  
 
3A.2. Use of well -established theories elevates significance. A socio -ecological framework will be 
used which takes into account multiple levels of influence (e.g., built environment at community and societal 
levels; personal attitudes and experiences) on an individual’s health behaviors and decision -making.90,91  This 
framework helps to understand factors affecting behavior and provides guidance for developi[INVESTIGATOR_696261]. The socio -ecological framework emphasizes multiple levels of influence (e.g., 
individual, i nterpersonal, community, etc.) and is consistent with multiple behavior change theories which can 
be used to drive the behavioral content development.[ADDRESS_944724] ¡Caminemos  
Juntas ! development: (1) User -centered Design Theory (UCD)90,93 and (2) Social Cognitive Theory (SCT).94 
Both of these theories will be guided by [CONTACT_696294] -ecological framework. UCD will be t he technology 
development theory used to build the ¡Caminemos Juntas ! app. UCD solicits user input through iterative 
cycles. Adjustments are made based on feedback,[ADDRESS_944725] constructs  that w ill be addressed by94,108  ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! by [CONTACT_696295]/social 
support engagement to increase walking behavior  that connect s Latinas  who are previously “un connected”. 
Social support is a strong factor for increasing PA levels for Latinas, and ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! will develop this 
construct to impact other key SCT constructs such as increasing self -efficacy and self -regulatory behavior, and 
goal expectation (e .g., personalized walking goals).109,110   
 
3A.3. ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! is significant, because it will address key factors to initiating and 
engaging in physical activity using location -based decision support technolo gy. Ninety -five 
percent of Americans own a cellphone, 77% of which are smartphone users.111 Latinos  are more likely than their 
White counterparts to possess a smartphone  and to go online using a mobile device .112,113  Over 80% of Latinos 
report accessing the in ternet via a mobile device (94% for those 18 -29 years old and 89% for those 30 -49 years 
old53). Smartphone features create enormous potential for health interventions, because they: (1) are comp act, 
portable, normally “on”, and readily available to the user; (2) allow “24/7” on -demand online access; and (3) 
are affordable  and user -friendly, and offer advanced functionality.114-121 A smartphone feature tha t offers great 
potential health promotion benefit is location -based services (LBS). LBS is an information service that uses the 
geographical position of the mobile device to guide the user on a number of services (e.g., identifying the 
location of a place,  whereabouts of a friend, tracking of behaviors , mobile commerce, etc.) in relation to where 
the user is located. LBS is commonly  used by [CONTACT_696296] 90% employ ing LBS functionality to get 
directions or other information .54 
 The application of LBS to promote PA is unstudied. There are no studies of LBS -focuse d smartphone 
interventions to promote PA specifically to Latinos. There are ongoing NIH studies using smartphones for 
weight reduction  and/or PA (e.g., HL 129012 ; NR014911;  DP004995122; HL075451123). However, these studies 
are not  in combination (1) examining PA as the main outcome; (2) us ing LBS; or (3) targeting Latina s.  
   
3B. Innov ation  
 ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! is a highly significant and innovative project. (1) ¡Camine mos  Juntas ! will be the first 
smartphone app that uses location -based social networking to promote PA promotion . The increased 
pervasiveness of cellphone ownership among U .S. adults and the growing us e of smartphone technology are a 
successful and cost -efficient method for reaching target populations.124 Nearly all smartphone users ( 90%) 
request “just in time” (i.e., LBS) information via their smartphone with 41% using their phones’ LBS to meet up 
with ot hers.54,125  Ninety percent  of smartphone owners use their phones to get real -time, location -based 
information.54 ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! uses LBS technology, thus giving it the potential to reach a large 
population and connect people in real -time conditions. LBS could  be a useful de livery technique to provide 
users with individualized, time -specific health information. ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! combines LBS with the goal 
of health behavior improvement among a population (i.e., Latinas) known to use mobile phones more than any 
other U.S. rac ial or ethnic group; and (2) ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! will improve upon previous PA interventions 
with Latinas by [CONTACT_696297].  
The app will reduce barriers such as time management and safety concerns as well as increase social support 
and community -engagement (crucial factors affecting Latina PA promotion) by [CONTACT_696298] -time and provide safe walking locations near the app users via LBS technol ogy.  
 
3B.1. Market Potential. Latinos are a strong influence on the U.S. economy with a buying power of $1.2 
trillion.126-128 The Latina population is growing, and 86% drive the ir household purchasing decisions.  [ADDRESS_944726].130 Yet, a large gap between Latino engagement and bra nd support through apps 
exists.131 Latinos desire apps that are culturally tailored (e.g., bilingual, social in nature), yet this demand is 
unmet.131,132  ¡Caminemos  Juntas ! will have strong commercial v iability . It will (1) be delivered on a platform 
that Latinas would likely use and (2) it addresses a deficiency in health -related apps using features they value.  
During Phase I, KB was selected for  a technology NICHE Analysis as an awardee of the NIH’s S BIR/STTR 
Niche Assessment Program. This program is designed to help small businesses with their commercialization 
efforts by [CONTACT_696299] . The market analysis is an 
objective evaluation conducted by [CONTACT_696300] & Technology, Inc. on behalf of the NIH. This independent 
review included  an Android Market, Apple AppStore, and patent search and revealed that there is no product 
that is a true geo -location technology dedicated to walking with a social emphasis, for any population . Thus, 
¡Caminemos Juntas!  is a first -in-class geo -local social networking service for physical activity . The fact that it is 
focused on the Latina population make s it even more unique. The report confirmed the viability and need for 
an app that guides Latinas in walking promotion and for its commercialization potential .  
 Multiple sales and marketing models could be employed in Phase III such as : (1) selling ¡Caminemos  
Juntas ! through app stores; offering a free app supported by [CONTACT_209012], user -purchased subscriptions or in -
app purchases; (2) selling ad -space and online games to businesses or having businesses purchase “pref erred 
status” on the app; (3) exploring potential partnerships with companies that are increas ing their brand 
outreach to Lat inas (e.g., cosmetics, clothing ); (4) generating r evenue by [CONTACT_696301], 
businesses, or health organizati ons; (5) partnering with local and state -level entities interested in public health 
improvement campaigns; and (6) partnering with Latino community organizations and non -profits that do not 
have the expertise to create their own app.  
 
3C. Approach  
3C.1. Phase II Project Overview. The Phase II project will be conducted over 24 months . The ¡Caminemos 
Juntas! app will be fully developed in Months 1 -9 and evaluated for disseminability (i.e., can LBS database 
procedures  and LBS functionality from Phase I be tr anslated to a new geographical location) and behavior 
change  (i.e., increased PA)  in Months 10 -24 among a sample of Latinas aged 18 -55 years (upper age limit was 
increased per Phase I feedback from EAB, CAB, and study participants). ¡Caminemos  Juntas ! will be a stand -
alone app that provides person -specific, location -based feedback to help  users connect with Latinas in 
neighborhood -specific geographic areas to promote increased walking behavior. Using the user -centered 
design (UCD) approach from Phase I, foc us groups and usability testing conducted in Colorado and [LOCATION_004]  
will guide final app development. A  comparative -
effectiveness trial136 will enroll and randomize Latino 
women  in a randomized pretest -posttest co ntrolled 
design. Particip ants will be recruited from Denver, CO 
and San Jose, CA and randomized individually to either  
the ¡Caminemos  Juntas ! app (experimental condition) or 
the World Walking  app ( comparison  condition). All 
participants will use the apps f or [ADDRESS_944727] -
treatment. Participants (n= 200; n=100 per site ) will 
complete baseline, 6 -week, and 12 -week assessments.   
 
3C.2. Investigative Team. Klein Buendel, Inc. (KB).  This project will  be led by [CONTACT_490182], Ph.D. [CONTACT_490209]  is a Senior Scientist and licensed psychologist . She studies  technological approaches (websites, apps, 
telehealth, and interactive media) to deliver weight and diabetes management, and promote PA to health 
disparat e populations in real -world settings. She has served as a PI [INVESTIGATOR_12749] -I on several NIH - and state -funded 
grants, and is currently PI [INVESTIGATOR_696262].  KB has conducted successful health behavior research using 
technology -based approaches,122,137 -139 and has extensive experience with formative research production, 
prototype testing, and full development for web, smartphone, tablet, and smart television projects , employing 
an iterative, user -centered design process i n which researchers and media developers produce interventions 
based on extensive user feedback. [CONTACT_696332], KB’s Programming Manager, will lead the programming of 
the app. [CONTACT_238925] , KB’s Biostatistical Manager,  will lead the work by [CONTACT_238864]’s data team wit h supervision from [CONTACT_696333], the project biostatistician.   
 Stanford University.  [CONTACT_583622] [CONTACT_696302] -I and site PI [INVESTIGATOR_696263]. She is Professor 
of Health Research and Policy (Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]) and of Medicine (Stanford Prevention Research Center) . [CONTACT_311753]'s studies  using state -of-the-art communication technologies and community -based participatory research 
perspectives to address health disparities among disadvantaged populations. She has extensive experience in 
PA promotion among  Latinos and PA engagement through technology . Drs. Myers and King collaborated on 
the Phase I project and have previously work ed together on successful PA promotion multi -site trial s.140,141     
 
3C.3. Description of ¡Caminemos Juntas! app .  
The goal of ¡Caminemos Juntas! is to connect Latinas with one another near their neighborhood to 
encourage increased PA partnerships (e.g., walking). Connections between registered app users will be 
accomplished through push/pul l technology. Push/pull technology describes a style of internet and LBS -based 
communication where an information transmission request (e.g., “I am interested in going for a walk…is 
anyone else?”) can be initiated by [CONTACT_696303] (i.e., “pull”) or by [CONTACT_941] a pp (i.e., “push”; e.g., a notification sent to 
an app user indicating that someone would like to walk). Women who are interested in going for a walk can 
send a request to all other registered app users through the ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! app. Women who receive a 
push notification can decline or accept the request . Using LBS, ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! identifies  each assenting 
user’s location and , using LBS algorithms , triangulate s each user to one another. Next, using publicly -available 
geographic information systems ( GIS) and LBS data sources,142-144 the app determine s the location of nearby 
[CONTACT_696304] (e.g., parks, recreation centers, etc.) that are the best proximal match for the identified users. 
Users are sent a push noti fication and map of the PA location. The app request s the user to confirm or decline 
meeting at this location and send s a meeting location and time confirmation. Using LBS, the app is able to 
determine whether the user arrived at the designated location. A t the user’s preferred contact [CONTACT_5586], the app 
send s a push notification asking the user to answer four questions: (1) Did you meet a ¡Camin emos  Juntas ! 
partner?; (2) Did you walk today?; (3) How long did you walk?; and (4) Did you find the location safe?  
The app gather s user profile information, PA preferences, and walking goals. Time - and location -specific 
notifications are the  app’s foundation , connect ing users and influencing theoretical constructs (e.g., conscious 
raising, social support) to increase PA . Benefits of using a mobile app  include an instantly available source of 

social support once a user create s an account, convenience and ease of use, and geographically -relevant 
information tailored to the user. To ensure users’ privacy and safety, the app  serve s as the “gatekeeper :” Users 
cannot be located by [CONTACT_696305]. All participants will be fully informed of these privacy policies . 
 3C.3.1. Description of ¡Caminemos Junt as! App Development (Specific Aim 1). Table [ADDRESS_944728]: (1) Fitbit device integration; (2) Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696264]; and (3) Social m edia 
(Facebook and Instagram) integration  were identified as top priorities . Development will be guided by [CONTACT_689497] I specifications document using KB’s  iterative design approach .   
3C.3.1a. App architecture. ¡Caminemos Juntas!  will be built on a full sta ck Webview using 
HTML5/Javascript/CSS technologies and Ionic, Cordova, and Angular.js frameworks. KB will utilize Ionic 3.[ADDRESS_944729] user data. UI -Router will control the user's navigation/views. Angular -
Translate will manage both English and Spanish translations of the UI.  The Moment.js library will manipulate 
various types of dates and times. Ionic uses Cordova framework to port ¡Caminemos Juntas!  to the Android 
and iOS  platforms. Backend data collection will use Microsoft SQL Server with ASP .NET as the business 
layer.  KB will use Node.js and Express.js to build the backend management of communication with Ionic -Cloud 
servi ces and send out notifications to users.  Data will be retrieved and stored on a remote server provided at 
KB following standardized infrastructure profiles and security protocols .  
3C.3.1b. Database for ¡Caminemos Juntas! .  In Phase I, the feasibility of developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a database, 
cross -referenced between person -specific location and LBS of exercise  locations  to determine the accuracy of 
current mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696265] a 2-mile radius of the user  was established. In Phase I 
possible exercis e meeting locations were limited to p arks, trails, schools, recreation centers, and malls. Using 
the development procedures from Phase I, we will replicate the LBS database in the San Jose area. In Phase I, 
data on exercise venue attributes were obtained u sing established mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696266] -based 
sources (e.g., Yellow Pages, Open Data Catalog on the City and County of Denver website , etc.) and were 
entered via an online form into a structured Relational Database Management System (RDMS). The RD MS 
allows the program to access facility information via the standard Structured Query Language (SQL). The app 
uses parameters (i.e., user location and preferences for exercise venues ) to build an SQL query and return the 
top facilities matching these crit eria and location. The query results are formatted using eXtensible Markup 
Language (XML). During Phase II ( Specific Aim 2 ), KB will translate these database procedures to another 
location outside of the Denver area , i.e., San Jose, CA , which is crucial to  the future marketability of the 
¡Caminemos Juntas!  app. This will demonstrate it is feasib le to adapt  the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  database 
procedures in various locations across the U.S.  
3C.3.1c. Development of new  components. Phase I focus group s and usabili ty testing participants 
expressed a consistent and decided interest in optimizing the existing  app features first and then including new 
app features. Fitbit integration and mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696267] , so the 
investi gative team will focus on refining the Phase I app to fully develop the Create -a-Walk and Join -a-Walk 
components through comprehensive back -end and front -end (i.e., “look and feel” for user) programming. New 
features to be prioritized are (1) Fitbit device  integration  (2) Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696264] ; 
and (3) Social media (Facebook and Instagram) integration . (1) Fitbit 
integration:  Phase I participants who owned a wearable PA tracker suggested 
that being able to connect their tracker to ¡Caminemos Juntas!  would be an 
important app feature. Approximately  1 in 10 adults own a wearable health 
tracker (e.g., Fitbit, Apple Watch) and 54% are women.145 Fitbit® is one of the 
most common wireless PA trackers in the consumer market and can record the 
number of steps taken per d ay for self -monitoring purposes. Fitbit® can 
accurately measure step counts when compared to observed step counts and 
step counts from pedometers.146,147  Using existing application programming 
interface (API) algor ithms already in place between KB and Fitbit®, exercise  
data (steps/day) will be automatically and wirelessly sent from Fitbit® to the KB 
server which will then connect the Fitbit® data to the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app 
for display. For the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  users who do not own a Fitbit®, step 
estimates will be calculated using the LBS distance tracking feature (map of 
distance walked). (2) Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_696264]:  Smartphones can track and map 
physical activity using LBS. The app will track the walking route, time , and 
distance using the phone’s on-going GPS service  while on the ¡Caminemos 
Juntas!  walk. The app will map that walk and display it in the app for the user 
to share with connected friends (via the app or social media outlet) or to keep 
private . (3) Socia l media integration:  Over 80% of adults who are online use at least one of five social media 

sites – Facebook, Instagram, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_412220], LinkedIn and Twitter. Facebook is the most widely used regardless of 
race or ethnicity , with 79% of adult  Internet users re porting  they use the site.148,[ADDRESS_944730] frequently and ability to share input from their app to their social media profiles was an important 
feature. KB will used Facebook’s  “sharing” API [INVESTIGATOR_696268] ¡Caminemos Juntas!  users ’ 
Facebook and/or Instagram page s.151 Sharing is triggered when the user  clicks a social plugin (e.g., “ Share ” or 
“Send ” button ). There a number of sharing interfaces from Facebook/Instagram that have open -access API. 
The type of API [INVESTIGATOR_696269] l depend of the end -user experiences chosen in formative  researc h.  
  3C.3.1d. Formative research for app components.  In the research team’s experience, it is essential 
to obtain qualitative data to inform app content.  In Phase I, we conducted focus group s to determine the key 
elements and features of the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app and test a prototype. We will do the same in Phase II for 
the new app components/features. F ocus group  members will be asked about the new app features added in 
Phase II ( see Table 1) and provide input on additional features of interest. They will be asked their 
perceptions, ease of use, and interest in using an app to improve their walking  habits. F ocus group testing will 
occur  in two stages; the first stage in Denver and the second  stage in San Jose . For both stages, r ecruitment will 
use existing research participant databases, newspapers, and online and social media ads . Active informed 
consent must be given, and all procedures will be approved by [CONTACT_696306].  In Stage  1, Latinas  
will be recruited from the Denver area ( see Table 3) and KB staff will conduct the focus group s. Sixteen 
participants (n=16) will be recruited across two rounds (n=8 per round ). The Denver -based group s will obtain  
qualitative feedback on the new app features prior to formative research with the [LOCATION_004]  population ( San 
Jose community) . In Stage [ADDRESS_944731]. Kin g’s 
research team  will conduct the San Jose focus groups 
(n=16 FG participants; 8 per round x 2 rounds).  
 All focus group  discussions will be recorded, 
transcribed, and stored  securely on KB’s server.  They will be analyzed using Atlas.ti© qualitative data  coding 
software.  An iterative process of summarizing data will be used to achieve saturation, and a  thematic content 
analysis approach will be used to analyze the data . All focus group p articipants will be compensated $ [ADDRESS_944732] ers in Denver (Stage 1) and 
San Jose  (Stage 2). At least 10 users are needed to capture 95% of errors152-154; therefore , we will capture and 
remedy a large number of errors that would impact succes sfully implementi ng the RCT (n=2 00).   
Stage 1:  The Denver usability testing will consist of 2 rounds with 8 participants per round (n= 16). For each 
round, test scenarios will mimic real -world use of the app. In the first round, basic functionality  will be tested , 
using fin dings to recommend immediate im provements to  app design. In Round [ADDRESS_944733] (i.e., beta test) of the fully -programme d app will be conducted in the Denver area with Latinas  (n=20) who 
will use the app for [ADDRESS_944734] the LBS , using the Phase I protocol . Participants  will receive a one -on-one 
orientation , downloading the app onto their device and completing an app tut orial. Participants will return for 
an individual exit interview. They will rate their satisfaction with the app ’s design, appeal, and functionality, 

and complete the System Usability Scale (SUS),133 a validated tool for assessing the usability  of technology -
based products.134,135  After field usability is complete, KB will validate the fixes and identify any remaining 
problems that will be corrected before the app is made available to users at the San Jose  site.  
Stage 2:  The San Jose  lab usability testing will have  two rounds with 8 participants per round (n=16), and 
utilize the same methods as in Denver. After Round 2, a [ADDRESS_944735].  
Recruitment and Compensation:  Inclusion criteria for usability testing (lab and field) participants will be 
the same as the Denver a nd San Jose  focus groups  (see Table 3). Lab usability testers (n= 16 in Denver; n=16 
in San Jose ) will be compensated $ 25 for 1 hour of their time. Field usability testers in Denver (n=20) and San 
Jose (n=20) will be compensated $ [ADDRESS_944736]  IRBs.  
Usability outcomes:  Field usability testing interviews will be recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using 
Atlas.ti© software. Emerging codes will be assigned to phrases and text passages that categorize views, themes, 
and opi[INVESTIGATOR_6153]. The qualitative analysis will rely on constant compara tive analysis (based on grounded theory 
methodology),[ADDRESS_944737] > 10% of app 
users158,159  with a 95% chance of detection (log(1 -.95)/log(1 -.10)), 28 usa bility testers are needed. The SUS 
measure will serve as the primary usability outcome. Additional usability testing outcomes will include app 
usage data (e.g., log -ins, walks created , etc.). Frequency of responses and proportions and means will be 
calcula ted and compared on demographics , using chi -square, t -tests, and correlations, with 2 -tailed p=0.05.   
 
3C.4. Experimental Design (Specific Aim 3).  The ¡Caminemos Juntas!  
app will be evaluated in a randomized two -arm, comparative -effectiveness  
pre-post des ign. ¡Caminemos Juntas!   will be compare d to a free and readily 
available comparison  app ( World Walking , selected because of its  primary 
focus on walking ) over 12 weeks. Individuals will be randomized to one  of 
two experimental conditions , using  a customiz ed computer program written 
by [CONTACT_238864] ’s biostatistician, [CONTACT_346221]. We will recruit a total of 200 
community -dwelling Latinas; 100 from the Denver area and 100 from the 
San Jose area . The primary outcome is change in PA (as measured by [CONTACT_696307]  [CHAMPS]160) 
relative to baseline. PA was chosen as the primary outcome because Phase I 
participants strongly expressed that improving their PA level was the main 
reason why  they would use the app.  
 
3C.5. Target Population. There are two target populations: community -dwelling Latinas  in (1) the Denver 
area and (2) San Jose, CA  area . Two locations were chosen because: (1) the Phase I functional prototype was 
developed and fie ld tested in Denver  so testing the full y-develo ped app  in the same location save s costs and 
allows  iterative changes to the app to be made quickly, and (2) testing the fully -developed app in a second, 
remote location (a) allows the research team to test th e fidelity of the LBS -database development protocol  in a 
new location, which provides valuable insight on database development for Phase III, and (b) tests the app with 
a differ ent demographic makeup of U.S. Latinas.   
  
3C.6. Trial Conduct.  
 3C.6.1. Recr uitment and Visit Procedures.  
Recruitment and Screening:  Potential study participants will be recruited primarily through mass mailings, 
newspaper and social media ads, and existing research participant databases. Interested participants will be 
sent an e mail describing the study and a link to a screening survey administered on KB’s secure server  that 
assess es inclusion and exclusion criteria (see  Table 3), demographic characteristics, and physical activity 
readiness measured by [CONTACT_696308] (PAR -Q).161 Prior to enrollment in 
exercise RCTs, participants’ level of risk regarding their ability to safely participate in and increase their level of 
PA should  be assessed .162,163  The PAR -Q is commonly used for this pu rpose and can identify individuals who 
can safely participate in PA without obtaining medical clearance.163 The online  screen er will take about 5 
minutes. Participants will receive an email to inform them of their eligibility  status . Eligible participants will be 
scheduled for an orientation and  baseline assessment visit; a reminder email and text  message  will be sent 3 
days prior to the assessment date (similar reminder s will be sent for 6 - and 12 -week visits).  
 Orientation and baseline /pre -test assessment:   Participants will attend a one -on-one orientation and 
baseline assessment session. Participants will have the study explained and provide written consent. They will 
complete five online surveys using a tablet  computer , which should take about [ADDRESS_944738] ed with downloading the appropriate app , provide d instructions on how to use the 
app ( ¡Caminemos Juntas!  or World Walking ), and encourage d to use the app daily.  
 6-week interim assessment:  Participants will complete interim assessments of initial changes. An invitation 
email and text message s containing a link to the in terim surveys along with their unique password (PIN 
number)  will be sent . Participants  will complete the web -based surveys using either their computer or 
smartphone ; no in-person meeting will be required. Participants who do not complete the surveys within  3 
days will receive an email and text reminder (and 3 more reminders at 3 -day intervals if still not completing it).  
 12-week  post-test assessment:  Participants will complete an in -person post -test assessment. They  will meet 
individually with a study sta ff to complete the online surveys on a study tablet and a brief post -test interview.  
 3C.6.2. Outcomes: Baseline , Interim, 
and Post -test Measures. The baseline , 6-
week interim, and [ADDRESS_944739] surveys 
will use validated scales to measure the 
primar y outcome – physical activity  - and 
secondary outcomes of social and 
environmental support  and quality of life 
(QOL) . Surveys should take 30 -45 minutes to 
complete. See Table 4 for schedule of 
measurements . 
Physical Activity:    
The Community Healthy Activi ties Model Program for Seniors (CHAMPS160) is a 41 -item PA questionnaire 
that measures self -reported minutes -per-week of PA calculated as total weekly caloric expenditure in all PA. It 
was developed for underactive  populations and validated among older adults.160 However, CHAMPS has been 
used with younger and racially/ethnically diverse populations ; it is  sensitive to change specifically in Latino 
and other populations inclu ding ones younger than senior age .164-167 The CHAMPS asks about activities 
undertaken for exercise, daily activities that are physical in nature, and physically active recreational activities 
during “a typi[INVESTIGATOR_696270] 4 weeks.” CHAMPS has strong psychometric properties ,160,168  including 
validation in Spanish and sensitivity to change.169-171 
Social and Environment Support:  
 Neighborhood Environment Walkability Scale -Abbreviated (NEWS -A)172: The 54 -item NEWS -A assesses 
residents' perception of neighborhood design feature s related to PA, including residential density, land use 
mix, street connectivity, infrastructure for walking/cycling, neighborhood aesthetics, traffic and crime safety, 
and neighborhood satisfaction. It is a validated measure of neighborhood walkability w ith adequate levels of 
factorial and criterion validity,172,173  and has been used with Latino populations.174  
Social Support for Exercis e Survey175:  This 13 -item self -report measure assesses perceived receipt of social 
support fo r exercise , i.e., how often their friends or family members (separately rated) encouraged their 
exercise behaviors during the previous 3 month . It yield s two separate scores for friends - and family -
encouragement  (score range=[ADDRESS_944740] ing higher 
encouragement ). This measure has good psychometric properties and has been  used  with Latino 
populations.176-178  
Quality of Life (QOL):179 The 12 -Item Short Form Health Survey (SF -12) measures functional health and 
well-being (i.e., health -related quality of life; HRQOL). The SF -12, an abbreviate d version of the SF -36, covers 
the same 8 health domains, and produces a  physical and mental component summary score (PCS; MCS). The 
SF-12 is often used in population studies including those focused on Latinos180-182 and has been found to be a 
reliable and valid measure of HRQOL.179,183  Higher scores indicate better physical and emotional well -being.183   
Environmental Supports for Physical Activity Questionnaire  – Social and Physical Environment 
Survey184: This questionnaire assesses neighborhood physical and social environments , i.e., neighborhood 
safety, access to recreation and shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_696271], and conditions of neighborhood and facilities. It was 
tested for reliability and validi ty among 1200 adults, and has shown good psychometric s properties in other 
studies.173,185 -187 
¡Caminemos Juntas ! only measures:  
Accelerometry and App Usage:  Better understanding of the feasibility, accuracy, and a dded value of 
accelerometry will inform commercialization efforts. Fitbit® devices will monitor PA for participants who own 
that device. The Fitbit® will automatically record  daily step data in the ¡Caminemos Juntas ! app and progress 
towards the steps/day goal will be graphically presented on the app , using a color -coded graph automatically 
sent to the participant ’s phone . For participants who do not own a Fitbit®, the phone’s built -in GPS will record 
the route walked. Data on the time spent during the walk  plus the distance derived from the GPS and the 
walking pace provided by [CONTACT_696309]. ¡Caminemos Juntas!  
participants  will also enter other exercise activities (non -Caminemos  walks)  (minutes/day) using the app . 
User -entered data will be compared to PA data gathered using the Fitbit® or LBS distance tracking feature.  

 App usage will be measured by [CONTACT_696310] 
¡Caminemos Juntas!  app. The server will record the number of times (date and time) the app connects to the 
server and users use various app features (number of uses, initiating walks, accepting walks, app tools used, 
etc.). Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) will be utilized to evaluate the app’s ease o f use. EMA ’s  
repeated sampling of experiences and behaviors in real time  at random intervals  should  minimize recall bias 
and increase ecological validity ,188-[ADDRESS_944741] and likability of the 
¡Caminemos Juntas!  app.  Participants randomized to that condition will be sent  “push notifications” via the 
app once a week at various times of day that ask them to rate their opi[INVESTIGATOR_696272]. Users will also evaluate 
the app on the System Usability Scale at the [ADDRESS_944742].134  
 3C.6.3. ¡Caminemos Juntas!  Intervention (n=1 00). A description of the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app 
was pro vided in Section 3C.4.  Participants will download the app following the procedures outlined in 
Section 3C.7.[ADDRESS_944743] staff will provide ¡Caminemos Juntas!   users a one -one-orientation to the app and 
how to use its unique features. Daily alerts and notif ications will engage users in daily use of the app and 
provide up -to-date information on users’ progress. Participant responses will also be used to evaluate 
additional or on -going support of users’ needs (e.g., increase/ decrease prompts based on user pre ferences, 
tailored messages around a set goal, etc.). To protect privacy and to ensure that the participant is the person 
completing the app activities, KB will uniquely identify the user’s smartphone based off the device’s “hardware 
footprint”. The app wi ll upload all app activity data to the KB secured web server database.  
 3C.6.4. World Walking  App  Comparison Group (n=1 00). World Walking  
(www.worldwalking.org) is an app available for free on both iOS and Android platforms.196 It allows users to 
track walking steps using the phone’s LBS features , display walks on a virtual  route, create virtual walki ng 
groups (you and other users can have shared goals for walking a certain distance such as walking the Great 
Wall of China), chat with virtual group members, earn badges for meeting goals , connect to Fitbit, and receive 
push notifications . There are a num ber of similarities between to the two apps ; participants will be able to track 
their walking, have a reward -based  system for meeting goals, map their walks, use Fitbit, and have a s ocial 
network component. The app encourages social interaction by [CONTACT_696311], working 
together to meet distance targets.  
However, while there are similarities between the two apps , World Walking will not  allow for real-time , in-
person  social connection (meeting other women in -person and walking locally), or connection to social media.    
 Selecting the best comparison  condition is a  critical question when designing a RCT.197  We considered a 
number of possible control co nditions (e.g., no treatment control, waitlist control, etc.). Initially, we considered 
a 3-arm design ( Caminemos  vs. World Walking  vs. No treatment) but rejected it due to resource demands, 
need for more programming, and large sample size to obtain suffic ient power. The purpose of a Phase II grant 
is to continue the research and development efforts initiated in Phase I  and prepare for commercialization 
objectives resulting from the Phase I  and II activities. Our primary goal is to determine if the ¡Caminem os 
Juntas!   app is more effective at improving PA behavior compared to other products available in the market. 
Therefore, we decided to choose an active control app that was: (a) readily available ; (b) had features similar to 
the ¡Caminemos Juntas!   app; and (c) had scientific merit.  O ur study design choice was a comparative 
effectiveness trial so choosing an existing app with similar features (i.e., a potential market competitor) was 
paramount. It was this high level of similarities that made World Walkin g a reasonable comparator.   
    3C.6.5. Adherence, Dropouts, and Participant Compensation.  
Retention, Tracking, and Attrition:  Although participants can withdraw at any time, steps  will be used to 
minimize dropouts to ensure high internal validity. Partic ipant progression will be tracked . Staff will use 
behavioral reinforcement strategies known to be effective in the behavior change literature198-[ADDRESS_944744] about problems, providing a strong foundation for 
problem -solving.  While drop -out rates vary in community walking program for Latinos, we conservatively 
planned for 20% attrition.201 Our Phase I attrition was 10%. We assume equal adherence across the two 
treatment groups, because we have no data to predict otherwise . Our method of tracking and multiple contacts 
will help  us retain some of these participants for inte nt-to-treat purposes, despi[INVESTIGATOR_490157]. 
Participants will provide contact [CONTACT_696312]. If they do not respond to email/text reminders, we wi ll follow -up by 
[CONTACT_648]. Finally, we will create a dummy coded variable for each respondent where 1=completers and 2= drop 
outs and test for associations with key variables in our analytic models. If bias is identified, we will control for it 
by [CONTACT_490193]  a covariate.  
 Compensation:  All participants (n=200) will be compensated  to incentivize and improve study retention . A 
$[ADDRESS_944745] will be given for completing all study assessments (baseline, 6 -week, and 12 -week).  
 App Use:   Implementation of technol ogy-based interventions can be challenging due to participants 
forgetting, fatiguing, or believing they have learned all they need to know. In order to bolster compliance with 
using either of the assigned app, weekly reminders to use the app will be sent t o participants by [CONTACT_20815].  
  3C.6.6. Safety Considerations. Participant safety is a priority. This study will include a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan (DSMP) plus IRB approvals. The team will monitor progress, discuss concerns, problem -
solve, and tak e corrective actions. [CONTACT_14823] (PI) is a licensed psychologist in Colorado (#3630) and Louisiana 
(#1197) and will assemble a group of experts including at least one licensed mental health professional and one 
biostatistician. Participants who express dist ress will be referred to local community centers which provide 
health and mental wellness outreach. Based on our experience and demonstrated ability to conduct this type of 
research, we are confident we can achieve safe intervention delivery .  
 
3C.7. Data Collection, Management, and Security. KB has used o nline data collection successfully in a 
number of studies. S tudy consents and pretests and post tests will be collected online via a tablet computer. Six -
week assessments will be collected online over parti cipants’ personal smartphone s or computer device s. 
Surveys will be programmed using QuestionPro software  on KB’s secure web server  to ensure a structure d 
approach and reduce errors/ missing values . All procedures will be approved by [CONTACT_696313] .  
KB has considerable experience maintaining large databases and ensuring high -quality data . [CONTACT_346222], 
KB’s Biostatistical Manager, will supervise data management.  All data will be uploaded in real -time using KB’s 
secured network ; data will be de -identif ied and stored in KB’s secured database. E stablished KB protocols for 
quality assurance (valid ranges; internal consistency checks, etc.)  will ensure high quality data. The KB data 
team will compi[INVESTIGATOR_185149]. Survey and app usage data will be link ed. Missing data should be limited 
since data is recorded electronically. Staff will identify missing responses and check that entries were not 
intentionally skipped. Analyses will be done on data collected. While unlikely, data may not be missing at 
rando m (NMAR). KB will assign all lost responses to extreme category and perform multiple imputation 
procedures that can handle various amounts of missing data and use covariates and propensity scores.  
Data security:  KB’s server farm has [ADDRESS_944746] drives that operate off a hardware 
RAID5 system, connected to a local area network (LAN) running the Windows [ADDRESS_944747] em 
and to the Internet through a 20-megaby[CONTACT_696314]. KB programmers monitor and maintain all 
programs and databases. Sensitive information is protected by a hardware firewall (Cisco ASA 5505) and each 
server has its own native Windows security so ftware. All KB servers are connected via [ADDRESS_944748] the loss of data.  
 
3C.8. Statistical Power Calculations and Analysis.   
Sample size:   We expect results similar to those previously revealed in a study by [CONTACT_15957]-I, [CONTACT_8675].202 In that 
study , participants in a peer mentor arm reported an average increase of moderate -to-vigorous physical activity 
of 216.2 minutes /week  (SD = 355.7) from baseline to 12 months compared to a 178.0  minutes/week (SD = 
234.9) increase among those  in the comparison arm. The comparison ar m increased an average of 71.5 
minutes /week ( SD = 179 .1) from baseline to 12 months. Comparing the two arms, with a change of 71.5  
minutes /week , shows sample sizes of 81 and 81 achieve 90% power to reject the null hypothesis of equal means 
when the populat ion mean difference is 144.[ADDRESS_944749] deviations of 355.7 for peer mentor arm and 179.1 
for the comparison arm, and with a significance level (alpha) of 0.[ADDRESS_944750]. Adjusting for a conservative level of d ropout at 20% allows for [ADDRESS_944751] deviation, the 
sample size necessary to achieve 90% power only increases to 82 per group, despi[INVESTIGATOR_226308] e lowered difference.  
Analyses:  
 There 3 specific aims that will be evaluated. The analyses for Aims 1 and 2 are heavily descriptive in nature. 
Means (standard deviations), medians (Interquartile range), distributions, frequencies and percentiles, etc. wil l 
be used to characterize the outcome measures.  
Aim 1  will be assessed by [CONTACT_696315]/matches for walking (creating and/or 
joining a walk). We believe that at least 70% of the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  intervention  group will establish at  
least one  connection and participate in at least one walk  (e.g., 78% of users in Phase I created at least one 
walk) . The distribution of number of connections and walks completed will be examined. We will test whether 
there is a difference between the gro ups in connections that occur red using a chi  square test and will further 
test a single proportion that the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  group will have significantly more than 70% active 
participation as evidenced by [CONTACT_696316] [ADDRESS_944752] development and will evaluate whether  ¡Caminemos Juntas!  increases p hysical 
activity, social support,  and quality of life (QOL) in Latinas.  Three hypotheses for the comparative -effectiveness 
trial will be examined :  
 H1: Latinas randomized to the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app will report greater improvements in their physical 
activity compared to Latinas randomi zed to the c omparison  app ( World Walking  app) at [ADDRESS_944753].  
 H2: Latinas randomized to the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app will report greater increases in their social support 
for exercise compared to Latinas randomized to the comparison app at [ADDRESS_944754].  
H3: Latin as randomized to the ¡Caminemos Juntas!   app will report greater improvements in their quality 
of life (QOL) compared to Latinas randomized to the comparison app at [ADDRESS_944755].  
Additional secondary analyses will (1) evaluate imme diate changes in the PA, social and environmental 
support, and QOL measures at 6 weeks; (2) assess mediators at 6 -weeks for a mediational analysis on 12 -week 
outcomes; and (3) evaluate app usage data (e.g., number of log -ins, number of “check -ins”, EMA res ponses for 
likability and satisfaction with the app).  
 Tests will be performed as per the design using simple t -tests followed by [CONTACT_696317] (rather than change from baseline). Multivariate a nalyses will be 
conducted to assess the simultaneous direction of changes in the components between the treatment arms.  We 
will test the outcomes simultaneously and examine the correlation amongst them within treatment arms.  
Hotelling’s T2 will be used to  test the overall mean vector of responses. This analysis will utilize the pre - and 
post -measures, but additional analyses will be conducted using generalized least squares regression (PROC 
MIXED in SAS ver 9.3 or higher) to account for missing data (drop outs between 6 weeks and 12 weeks).  
 Characteristics of dropouts and/or noncompliant individuals (those who do not walk and/or form any 
connections) will be intensively examined to shed light on potential weaknesses of the app (differential dropout 
overal l or within certain subgroups). The evaluation of the app will include its impact using the pre -post data. 
As noted, examination of the correlation matrices along with the mean changes will inform whether the 
variables appear to move similarly in both grou ps. Thus, one might argue that it is not necessarily the best 
control choice since we would then be measuring the intensity of intervention. Alternatively,  very different 
correlation structures will inform us about how the interventions are working and may  provide information on 
appropriate controls and or strengths and weaknesses.  
 Utilization data will be examined to understand the acceptability and intensity of interactions with the 
apps. The penetration of the apps into this minority at -risk population  is very important in potentially 
understanding, not only market share, but also potential impact. Complier average causal effect models203 will 
be used to exa mine the intensity of the intervention app’s utilization.  Mediation models using the latest 
bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_63980]204,[ADDRESS_944756] them. Potential study lim itations are: ( 1) difficulty recruiting; (2) sample homogeneity; 
and (3) sources of bias (measurement; demand effects). We have tried to reduce these. We will work closely 
with the CAB to maximize our potential to recruit Latinas. While the study will only  be conducted with Latinas 
residing in Denver and San Jose ; studies suggest that poor PA  habits are common among Latinas  implying that 
the sample will represent the target  population rather than just the Denver and San Jose  population s. 
Outcomes are self -reported and open to bias;  however,  the use of validated measures is a strength.  
 
5.  PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
5A. Risks to Subjects  
5A1. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics.   For this research, the subject population will 
include:  
 Focus Gro ups Participants (n=32) .  This subject population will include Latino female adults, ages 18 to 55, 
from Denver, CO (n=16) and San Jose, CA (n=16). The Denver -based focus groups will allow for the initial 
development and qualitative feedback on the new app  features prior to formative research with the [LOCATION_004] 
population (San Jose community). An iterative process of summarizing data will be used to achieve saturation 
and a thematic content analysis approach will be used to analyze the data. Eligibility cr iteria will be a) the 
ability to read and speak English or Spanish, b) female, c) consenting to inclusion in the study, and d) self -
identify as Hispanic/Latina. Exclusion criteria include a) being less than 18 years of age, b) being over 55 years 
of age; a nd c) unable to speak or read English or Spanish.  
 Lab Usability Testing Participants (n=32) . This subject population will include Latino female adults, ages 
18 to 55, from Denver (n=16) and San Jose (n=16) who will validate the design approach and identi fy usability 
problems. This will be a two -staged approach with usability testers in Denver (Stage 1) and San Jose (Stage 2). 
The lab usability testing will consist of two rounds with eight participants per round (n=16). For each round of 
lab usability test ing, the test scenarios will be written to mimic real -world use of the app. In the first round, we 
will test basic functionality, using findings to recommend immediate improvements to design. In Round 2, we 
will test enhanced functionality to identify and correct usability problems before the app is complete. Eligibility 
criteria will be a) the ability to read and speak English or Spanish, b) female, c) consenting to inclusion in the 
study, and d) self -identify as Hispanic/Latina. Exclusion criteria include  a) being less than 18 years of age, b) 
being over 55 years of age; and c) unable to speak or read English or Spanish.   
 Field Usability Testing (Beta Testing) Participants (n=40) . This subject population will include Latino 
female adults, ages 18 to 55, f rom Denver (n=20) and San Jose (n=20). This subject population will test the 
final prototype. The field usability test (i.e., beta test) of the fully programmed app will be conducted with 
Latinas who will use the app for two weeks to test the location -base d services (LBS). Field usability participants 
will receive a one -on-one orientation which will include downloading the app onto their device and an app 
tutorial. After completing the field usability testing, participants will return for an individual exit  interview. 
They will rate their satisfaction with the app with regards to design, appeal, and functionality, and complete the 
System Usability Scale (SUS),[ADDRESS_944757] be 
corrected before the app is made available to user s at the San Jose site. Usability outcomes will guide finalizing 
the app prior to launching the randomized control trial. Eligibility criteria will be a) the ability to read and 
speak English or Spanish, b) female, c) consenting to inclusion in the study, and d) self -identify as 
Hispanic/Latina. Exclusion criteria include a) being less than 18 years of age, b) being over 55 years of age; c) 
unable to speak or read English or Spanish; d) self -reported pregnancy; and e) responding “yes” to any item of 
the PAR -Q (Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire) .   
 Randomized Controlled Trial Participants (n=200) .  This subject population will include Latino female 
adults, ages 18 to 55, from Denver (n=100) and San Jose (n=100).  The app will be evaluated in a random ized 
two-arm, comparative -effectiveness pre -post design. ¡Caminemos Juntas!  will be compared to a free and 
readily available comparison app ( World Walking ) over [ADDRESS_944758] survey.  The surveys will use validated scales to measure the 
primary outcomes. Eligibility criteria will be a) the ability to read and speak English or Spanish, b) female, c) 
consenting to inclusion in the study, and d) self -identify as Hispanic/Lat ina. Exclusion criteria include a) being 
less than 18 years of age, b) being over 55 years of age; c) unable to speak or read English or Spanish; d) self -
reported pregnancy; e) responding “yes” to any item of the PAR -Q (Physical Activity Readiness Question naire) .  
 
5A2. Sources of Research Materials.  Data from the focus groups, lab and field usability testing, and 
randomized trial will be collected in the form of handwritten notes, audio tapes, computer files, transcriptions, 
and questionnaires. Discussion s will be recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using Atlas.ti© software. Data will 
be gathered from surveys used in the randomized trial.  Data will be obtained specifically for research purposes 
and will be kept confidential with access limited to the Prin cipal Investigator and specific project staff. All data 
will be kept in locked files.  
 
5A3. Potential Risks.  There are minimal risks associated with participation in this study . Participants may be 
hesitant or uncomfortable discussing their opi[INVESTIGATOR_696273] ¡Caminemos Juntas! app.  In addition, 
participants may not feel comfortable responding to questions about their opi[INVESTIGATOR_696274], ease of 
understanding, navigation, and functionality of the app. For participants in the field usability test an d 
randomized trial, the potential risks involved in this project include psychological and/or medical 
complications resulting from increasing exercise (e.g., sore muscles, etc.). There is the possibility of adverse 
events ranging from minor musculoskeletal  problems to, in very rare cases, cardiovascular events.  
Occasionally study participants experience minor orthopedic problems, but most are self -correcting with rest 
and standard first aid.  The risk should be low in this study.  Fatal events during exerc ise are extremely rare. 
We have conducted numerous exercise training studies and have never had a serious adverse event. There are 
no anticipated risks from completing the self -report questionnaires.  If signs of minor stress or fatigue are 
apparent, parti cipants will be given time to take a break from completing the questionnaires.  It is estimated 
that the questionnaires will take [ADDRESS_944759] (WIRB; DHHS IRB Reg. No. IRB00000533) and Stanford’s Institutional Review 
Board (IORG0000208) . All consenting procedures will be IRB -approved.  The IRBs will review and approve 
subject materials (including recruitment advertisements, letters, consent forms, survey instruments) and data 
management procedures prior to study implementation.  
 We will recruit participants primarily through mass  mailings, newspaper and social media ads, and existing 
research participant databases. For the randomized trial, w e will recruit a total of 200 currently community -
dwelling Latinas; [ADDRESS_944760] the participants at 
risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the participants' financial standing, employability, or 
reputation. All data coding, data entry, analysis  and reporting activities will be conducted by [CONTACT_696318]. 
Focus group and lab and field usability testing participants will read and sign IRB -approved consent forms.  
Randomized trial participants will consent online. Participants will be informed th at they have a right to 
withdraw from the study at any time. No additional data will be collected from participants who decide to 
withdraw; however, the information collected prior to withdrawal will remain in the study.  
IRB-approved surveys and discussion s will be carried out under the supervision of senior project staff.  
 
5B2. Protection Against Risk.  To minimize potential psychological risk, all focus group and usability 
testing facilitators will establish ground rules for discussion that includes an op en, non -evaluative exchange of 
comments and ideas.  All surveys and data collection forms will be approved by [CONTACT_696319]. Participants will be told that they do not have to answer any questions 
which m ake them uncomfortable and can terminate their participation at any time they wish.   
 Notes, surveys, audiotapes, and data will be accessible only by [CONTACT_2710].  Responses to survey 
questions would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of cri minal or civil liability or be damaging to the 
subjects' financial standing, employability, or reputation.  No clinical data will be captured.  The data collected 
on this project will be obtained with the "use of educational tests, survey questions, [and] i nterview 
procedures."  
 In Phase I, we provided participants with safety tips and a resource guide based on information from 
National Cyber Security Alliance (www.staysafeonline.org) and National Crime Prevention Council 
(http://www.ncpc.org/topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/internet -safety/social -networking -safety). In addition to these safeguards, we 
worked closely with our Community Advisory Board (CAB) and Expert Advisory Board (EAB) to determine 
best approaches for maintaining the personal and Internet safety of our participants.  For Phase II, we will 
utilize these same practices, but will also include multiple ID verification approaches and a security expert. 
Additionally, we will work with our CAB and security consultant to maintain rigorous standards for safety that 
are also ag reeable to our users. Specifically, KB’s Programming Manager will lead the app programming, will 
complete his certification in ethical hacking (CEH) which will allow him to assess for weaknesses and 
vulnerabilities in the app. His certification should be c ompleted by [CONTACT_696320] 2018. [CONTACT_696334] 
(President, Litchfield County Computer, LLC) will serve as a consultant and provide independent expertise on 
app security. [CONTACT_696335] has a BBA in Management Information Systems with a concentration in Computer 
Security and is an app security expert. In addition, KB’s IT Manager will be responsible for data security. He is 
certified with Window Servers, is a Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer (MCSE), and has continuously 
received an A+ rating for Network securit y in independent audits.  
 To ensure safety, all participants will be required to complete multiple ID verification approaches that 
are currently standard practice in other consumer areas (e.g., Airbnb). All participants will be fully informed of 
these priv acy policies.  Participants will submit a copy of their photo ID (front and back) to the study team. The 
study team will complete two verifications with the submitted ID: (1) the photo ID will be encrypted (ensuring 
privacy), submitted to the IDscan app ( www.idscan.com ), and a report will be delivered to the study team; and 
(2) the name [CONTACT_613623] a publicly available, free website ( www.checkingrecords.com ) which accesses 
public record information, a social networking summary, a general online loo kup, court and driving records. 
The study team will vet the information obtained from the ID verification for any potential concerns. If 
concerns arise, the study team will discuss with the participant the options for study discontinuation or 
continuation.  All information obtained during the ID verification process will be confidential and not shared on 
the app. Participants will be required to consent to the ID verification. ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app participants 
will be required to provide a profile pi[INVESTIGATOR_696275] (it can be different than their issued 
photo ID). The study team will confirm that the profile pi[INVESTIGATOR_696276].  
 
With regards to walking environment, the database for meeting  locations will be derived in a similar 
manner as Phase I. Our CAB and Phase I participants rated all of the walking locations as safe. Similarly, for 
Phase II, exercise locations will be limited to parks, trails, schools, recreation centers, and malls (ve nues that 
are public and well -lit). To ensure users’ privacy and safety, the app will serve as the “gatekeeper”. Users cannot 
be located by [CONTACT_696321], cannot set up a meeting time that is outside the app’s allowable 
walking hours, and  cannot set up meetings to walk with an unauthorized user. Also, users cannot change a 
meeting location unless the new meeting location is in the database. Any changes or deviations that are made 
are tracked by [CONTACT_9426]. All users will be asked to rate thei r opi[INVESTIGATOR_696277], its safety, and 
whether they agree to use the location again. If a user prefers to not use a location, that location option will be 
removed from their available list of locations. If a location consistently receives poor ratings, it will be removed 
from the database as an available location option. Throughout the project, we will work closely with our CAB 
and security consultant to maintain rigorous standards for safety that are also agreeable to our users.  
Data will be de -identified before being submitted for analysis. All notes and printed data collection 
forms and questionnaires will be stored in locked cabinets at KB offices; all electronic data files will be stored 
on KB’s secure network servers behind computer firewal ls, with routine backup. All identifiers will be stored in 
secure files and behind computer firewalls and results will be shared in aggregate form only. All human 
subjects participating in this project will be 18 years and older.    
To minimize the risk to participant data privacy and protection through the internet, KB programmers 
will monitor and maintain all programs and databases and use an established protocol for participant cyber 
safety and security. KB is HIPAA complaint and maintains vigorous tec hnical safeguards which are built into 
KB’s IT system to protect information and to control access to it .  All participant information will be protected 
using [ADDRESS_944761] travel through KB’s CISCO ASA 5505 firewall 
using ASA software version 9.0(2) encrypted 3DES -AES. Traffic then moves to KB’s web server. This server is a 
Dell Power Edge T -[ADDRESS_944762] system 
using Windows HyperV Operating System. The v irtual web server uses Windows 2008 IIS Web server 
software. User click stream data is collected using Webtrends, and is saved to our SQL server. Enrollment data 
is transferred to our SQL server (Windows Server 2008) which uses MS SQL server [ADDRESS_944763] system 
using Windows HyperV OS. This server runs Question Pro Survey software. Data from each  survey is collected 
and saved to the SQL server mentioned above. All network traffic is sent from the CISCO firewall to a Syslog 
server using Manage Engine Firewall Analyzer 7 software. Login and network activity is required and 
monitored by [CONTACT_696322]. Servers are kept in a locked room on site. All files are 
secured locally using MS NTFS. All traffic between servers and PCs on the LAN are digitally signed 
communications. Each local machine has a built -in operating system firewall. Data from the Question Pro 
surveys are exported for data analysis by [CONTACT_184287]’s firewall. Access to this 
exported data by [CONTACT_238897] (FTP) protected by [CONTACT_184289] 
(SSL). SQL databases are protected by [CONTACT_184290] -in security of MS Active Directory. Data is backed up using a 
Quantum SuperLoader 3 tape library using LT04 tapes that contain 800 GB/1.6 TB of info (depending on 
compression used). The device holds [ADDRESS_944764] Friday of each month, and are full b ackups of 
all data. These monthly tapes are stored in a secure offsite facility and are never recycled.  
 With regards to app security on personal devices, Apple (e.g., iOS programmed apps) completes a full 
security review of any app installed on a phone in cluding beta/testing apps through their App Transport 
Security (ATS).206  KB App programming will include all key developer -related features to ensure ATS 
security.207  Google Play (A ndroid programming) does not conduct a similar security check; however, KB has 
extensive experience with developi[INVESTIGATOR_696278] ( SSL/TLS: Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Security Layer ) and has never experienced a 
data breach. All usability testers will be informed that information being sent to and from their device will 
remain encrypted and password protected, and at any time they are allowed to opt -out and uninstall the app.  
  
5C. Poten tial Benefits of the Proposed Research to Participants and Others   
 Potential benefits will be the knowledge that one has helped to develop and test a smartphone app that uses 
location -based social networking  to connect Latinas in neighborhood -specific geo graphic areas to promote 
increased walking behavior.   Also, we believe that field usability testing participants and randomized trial 
participants will benefit from an increase in physical activity. In addition, participants will be compensated as 
follows:  $25 for participation in the focus group and lab usability testing; $50 for participation in the field 
usability testing, and $100 for completing all study assessments (baseline, 6 -week, and 12 -week) in the 
randomized trial.  
 A description of this study will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This 
website will not include information that can identify the participant. At most, the website will include a 
summary of the results. This website can be searched at any time.  
 
5D. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained    
 The ¡Caminemos Juntas!   app will be the first smartphone app that uses location -based social networking 
to promote physical activity (PA), and the only app of its kind targeted to Latinas. ¡Caminemos Juntas!   will 
also expand upon what is known to be successful in Latina PA engagement (e.g., community -oriented, social 
support) while simultaneously addressing key barriers to PA (e.g., safety concerns).   
 
5E. Multi -site Collaboration  
 The proposed research inv olving human subjects will be conducted by [CONTACT_346205], Inc. (FWA No. 
00003715) and Stanford University, School of Medicine, The Stanford Prevention Research Center (FWA No. 
00000935).   
 
5G. Training in the Ethical Conduct of Research with Human Subjects  
 The Principal Investigator, Co -Investigator, and study personnel have completed the required training in 
the Ethical Conduct of Research with Human Subjects. Necessary documentation will be provided to NIH prior 
to funds being awarded.  
 
6. Data and Safet y Monitoring Plan  
 A data safety and monitoring plan will be implemented for this project, following well -established 
procedures. We will not set up an independent Data Safety and Monitoring Board because this study is low 
risk, does not include use of th erapeutics, and psychological risk is not anticipated.  
 Study progress will be monitored monthly by [CONTACT_079], Project Coordinator, and Project 
Biostatistician.  All critical events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigator to ensure that our methods 
have not been intrusive or disruptive. The data management staff will examine the quality of data input 
throughout the data collection period following standard quality control and assurance procedures (e.g., double 
entry of hard -copy code d data; detection and estimates of keystroke errors, identification of systematic 
mistakes in coding or responses; range checks). Also, analyses of the data will be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Cutter and 
[CONTACT_238925] at the conclusion of the data collection period to asse ss distributional assumptions and the success of 
randomization. By [CONTACT_696323], Project Biostatistician and data management staff monitor 
the data, the PI’s conflict of interest is reduced.  
 The Project Biostatistician and data manageme nt staff will attend regular project meetings with the PI, Co -
Investigator, Project Coordinator, and other project staff and routinely report on the quality of the data and 
other outcomes of this monitoring process. Compliance with data collection protocol s will be monitored 
throughout data collection by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_427131].  
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigator are responsible for reporting all adverse events to the IRBs. Only Grade 1 events 
are expected on this trial. Thus, adverse events will be report ed annually, as required by [CONTACT_32119]. This report will 
be reviewed by [CONTACT_238864]’s, and Stanford’s IRB. Any action taken by [CONTACT_696324] a 
temporary or permanent suspension of the trial will be communicated immediately by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_696279].  
 
7. INCLUSION  OF MINORITIES  
 Since the ¡Caminemos Juntas!  app being developed for Latino female adults, a ll (100%) of the participants 
will be Hispanic. See Targeted Enrollment Table.  
 
8. INCLUSION OF CHILDREN  
Children under [ADDRESS_944765] sheet: the state of Latinas in the [LOCATION_002]. November 7, 2013(Race and Ethnicity). 
http://www.americanprogre ss.org/issues/race/report/2013/11/07/[ZIP_CODE]/fact -sheet -the-state -of-
latinas -in-the-united -states/ . Accessed September 1, 2017.  
2. National Center for Health Statistics. Fast stats: health of Hispanic or Latino population. Centers for 
Disease Control and Pre vention. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/hispanic -health.htm .  
Updated May 3, 2017. Accessed August 31, 2017.  
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC health disparities and inequalities report - United 
States, 2013. MMWR. Morbidit y and Mortality Weekly Report. 2013;62(Suppl 3):1 -189. 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/other/su6203.pdf .  Accessed August 19, 2017 . 
4. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies; National Academies Press. Progress in Preventing 
Childhood Obesity: How Do W e Measure Up? Washington, D.C.; 2006.  
5. Adams PF, Kirzinger WK, Martinez ME; National Center for Health Statistics. Summary Health 
Statistics for the U.S. Population: National Health Interview Survey, 2012. Available at: 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series /sr_10/sr10_259.pdf .  Published D ecember 2013.  Accessed 
August 28, 2017 . 
6. [LOCATION_002] Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources, Services Administration, 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. W omen's health 
[LOCATION_003] 2011. Available at: http://www.mchb.hrsa.gov/whusa11/hstat/hshb/pages/201pa.html . 2011.  
Accessed August 31, 2017 . 
7. Warburton DER, Nicol CW, Bredin SSD. Health benefits of physical activity: the evidence. Canadian 
Medical Association Jou rnal. 2006;174(6):801 -809.  
8. Federal Interagency Forum on Aging -Related Statistics; U.S. Government Printing Office. Older 
Americans 2012: key indicators of well -being. Available at: http://www.agingstats.gov . 2012.  Accessed 
September 5, 2017.  
9. Bishop -Bailey D. Mechanisms governing the health and performance benefits of exercise. British 
Journal of Pharmacology. 2013;170(6):1153 -1166. PM:24033098.  
10. Fisher KJ, Li F. A community -based walking trial to improve neighborhood quality of life in older 
adults : a multilevel analysis. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2004;28(3):186 -194.  
11. Lee RE, Goldberg JH, Sallis JF, Hickmann SA, Castro CM, Chen AH. A prospective analysis of the 
relationship between walking and mood in sedentary ethnic minority women. Women & health. 
2001;32(4):1 -15. 
12. Division of Nutrition Physical Activity and Obesity, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion. Physical activity and health. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available 
at: https://www.cdc .gov/physicalactivity/basics/pa -health/index.htm .  Updated June 4, 2015. Accessed 
August 31, 2017.  
13. Brown DW, Balluz LS, Heath GW, et al. Associations between recommended levels of physical activity 
and health -related quality of life findings from the 2 001 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
(BRFSS) survey. Preventive Medicine. 2003;37(5):[ADDRESS_944766] cancer patients: effects on quali ty of life. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2007;25(28):[ADDRESS_944767]. Psychosocial and perceived 
environmental correlates of physical activity in rural and older African American and white women. The 
Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2003;58(6):329 -337.  
16. Conn VS, Phillips LJ, Ruppar TM, Chase JA. Physical activity interventions with healthy minority 
adults: meta -analysis of behavior and health outcome s. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and 
Underserved. 2012;23(1):59.  
17. Juarbe T, Turok XP, Perez -Stable EJ. Perceived benefits and barriers to physical activity among older 
Latina women. Western Journal of Nursing Research. 2002;24(8):868 -886.  
18. Icke s MJ, Sharma M. A systematic review of physical activity interventions in Hispanic adults. Journal 
of Environmental and Public Health. 2012 (2012);1 -16. 
19. Lee C, Ory MG, Yoon J, Forjuoh SN. Neighborhood walking among overweight and obese adults: age 
varia tions in barriers and motivators. Journal of Community Health. 2013;38(1):12 -22. 
20. Wilbur J, Chandler PJ, Dancy B, Lee H. Correlates of physical activity in urban Midwestern Latinas. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2003;25(3):69 -76. 
21. Gallant MP. The influence of social support on chronic illness self -management: a review and directions 
for research. Health Education & Behavior. 2003;30(2):170 -195. 
22. Evenson KR, Sarmiento OL, Tawney KW, Macon ML, Ammerman AS. Personal, social, and 
environment al correlates of physical activity in North Carolina Latina immigrants. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine. 2003;25(3):77 -85. 
23. Pekmezi DW, Neighbors CJ, Lee CS, et al. A culturally adapted physical activity intervention for 
Latinas: a randomized co ntrolled trial. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2009;37(6):495 -500.  
24. Castro CM, Sallis JF, Hickmann SA, Lee RE, Chen AH. A prospective study of psychosocial correlates of 
physical activity for ethnic minority women. Psychology & Health. 1999;14 (2):277 -293.  
25. Avila P, Hovell MF. Physical activity training for weight loss in Latinas: a controlled trial. International 
Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders. 1994;18(7):476 -482.  
26. Olvera N, Bush JA, Sharma SV, Knox BB, Scherer RL, But te NF. BOUNCE: A community -based 
mother -daughter healthy lifestyle intervention for low -income Latino families. Obesity. 
2010;18(S1):S102 -S104.  
27. Leeman -Castillo B, Beaty B, Raghunath S, Steiner J, Bull S. LUCHAR: using computer technology to 
battle hear t disease among Latinos. American Journal of Public Health. 2010;100(2):272.  
28. Yan T, Wilber KH, Aguirre R, Trejo L. Do sedentary older adults benefit from community -based 
exercise? Results from the Active Start program. The Gerontologist. 2009;49(6):847 -855.  
29. Eyler AA, Brownson RC, Donatelle RJ, King aC, Brown D, Sallis JF. Physical activity social support and 
middle - and older -aged minority women: results from a US survey. Social Science & Medicine. 
1999;49(6):781 -789.  
30. McNeill LH, Kreuter MW, Su bramanian SV. Social environment and physical activity: a review of 
concepts and evidence. Social Science & Medicine. 2006;63(4):1011 -1022.  
31. Stahl T, Rutten a, Nutbeam D, et al. The importance of the social environment for physically active 
lifestyle --results from an international study. Social Science & Medicine. 2001;52(1):1 -10.  
32. Araya R, Dunstan F, Playle R, Thomas H, Palmer S, Lewis G. Perceptions of social capi[INVESTIGATOR_696280]. Social Science & Medicine. 2006;62(12 ):3072 -3083.  
33. Bermudez -Millan A, Damio G, Cruz J, et al. Stress and the social determinants of maternal health 
among Puerto Rican women: a CBPR approach. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved. 
2013;22(4):1315 -1330.  
34. Booth KM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_696281], Poston WSC. Obesity and the built environment. Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association. 2005;105(5):110 -117. 
35. Brown BB, Yamada I, Smith KR, Zick CD, Kowaleski -Jones L, Fan JX. Mixed land use and walkability: 
variations in land use measures and relationships with BMI, overweight, and obesity. Health & Place. 
2009;15(4):[ADDRESS_944768] JL, et al. The relationship of built environment to perceived social 
support and psychological distress in Hispanic elders: the role of " eyes on the street". The Journals of 
Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2009;64(2):[ADDRESS_944769]. Space, race, and poverty: spatial 
inequalities in walkable ne ighborhood amenities? Demographic Research. 2012;26(17):409 -448.  
38. Houston D, Basolo V, Yang D. Walkability, transit access, and traffic exposure for low -income residents 
with subsidized housing. American Journal of Public Health. 2013;103(April):1 -7. 
39. Li F, Harmer P, Cardinal BJ, Bosworth M, Johnson -Shelton D. Obesity and the built environment: does 
the density of neighborhood fast -food outlets matter? American Journal of Health Promotion. 
2009;23(3):203 -209.  
40. Lovasi GS, Jacobson JS, Quinn JW, Neck erman KM, shby -Thompson MN, Rundle A. Is the 
environment near home and school associated with physical activity and adiposity of urban preschool 
children? Journal of Urban Health. 2011;88(6):1143 -1157.  
41. Lovasi GS, Hutson M, Guerra M, Neckerman KM. Buil t environments and obesity in disadvantaged 
populations. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_37082]. 2009;31(4):7 -20.  
42. Neckerman KM, Bader MDM, Richards C, et al. Disparities in the food environments of [LOCATION_001] City 
public schools. American Journal of Preventive Medicine.  2010;39(3):195 -202.  
43. Rutt CD, Coleman KJ. Examining the relationships among built environment, physical activity, and 
body mass index in El Paso, TX. Preventive Medicine. 2005;40(6):831 -841.  
44. Saelens BE, Handy SL. Built environment correlates of wa lking: a review. Medicine and Science in 
Sports and Exercise. 2008;40([ADDRESS_944770]):S550.  
45. Singh GK, Siahpush M, Kogan MD. Neighborhood socioeconomic conditions, built environments, and 
childhood obesity. Health Affairs. 2010;29(3):503 -512. 
46. Terre L. Prom oting physical activity in minority populations. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 
2009;3(3):195 -197.  
47. Anderson ES, Wojcik JR, Winett RA, Williams DM. Social -cognitive determinants of physical activity: 
the influence of social support, self -effic acy, outcome expectations, and self -regulation among 
participants in a church -based health promotion study. Health Psychology: Official Journal of the 
Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. 2006;25(4):510.  
48. Price M, Williams on D, McCandless R, et al. Hispanic migrant farm workers' attitudes toward mobile 
phone -based telehealth for management of chronic health conditions. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research. 2013;15(4).  
49. Vyas AN, Landry M, Schnider M, Rojas AM, Wood SF. Pu blic health interventions: reaching Latino 
adolescents via short message service and social media. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 
2012;14(4).  
50. Baig AA, Wilkes AE, Davis AM, et al. The use of quality improvement and health information 
technology a pproaches to improve diabetes outcomes in African American and Hispanic patients. 
Medical Care Research and Review. 2010.  
51. Ginossar T, Nelson S. Reducing the health and digital divides: A model for using community -based 
participatory research approach t o E-health interventions in low -income Hispanic communities. 
Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication. 2010;15(4):530 -551. 
52. Montague E, Perchonok J. Health and wellness technology use by [CONTACT_696325]: systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2012;14(3).  
53. Brown A, Gustavo L, Lopez MH. Digitaql Divide Narrows for Latinos as More Spanish Speakers and 
Immigrants Go Online.  Published July 2016.  
54. Anderson M. More Americans using smartphones for getting dire ctions, streaming TV. Fact Tank. Pew 
Research Center. Available at: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2016/01/29/us -smartphone -
use/ . Published  2016.  Updated July 29, 2017 . Accessed September 1, 2017.  
55. Reiner M, Niermann C, Jekauc D, Woll A. Long -term health benefits of physical activity --a systematic 
review of longitudinal studies. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:813. PM:24010994.  
56. Williams PT. Walking and running produce similar reductions in cause -specific disease mortality in 
hypertensives. Hyperten sion. 2013;62(3):485 -491.  
57. Williams PT, Thompson PD. Walking versus running for hypertension, cholesterol, and diabetes 
mellitus risk reduction. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology. 2013;33(5):1085 -1091.  
58. Manson JE, Hu FB, Rich -Edwards  JW, et al. A prospective study of walking as compared with vigorous 
exercise in the prevention of coronary heart disease in women. New England Journal of Medicine. 
1999;341(9):650 -658.  
59. Lee IM, Buchner DM. The importance of walking to public health. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise. 2008;40([ADDRESS_944771]):S512 -S518.  
60. Staten LK, Gregory -Mercado KY, Ranger -Moore J, et al. Provider counseling, health education, and 
community health workers: the Arizona WISEWOMAN project. Journal of Women's Health. 
2004;13(5):547 -556.  
61. Carlos P, II, Walker S, Haddock CK, et al. Evaluation of a culturally appropriate intervention to increase 
physical activity. American Journal of Health Behavior. 2001;25(4):[ADDRESS_944772]. Journal of 
Women's Health. 2010;19(6):1129 -1138.  
63. Albright CL, Pruitt L, Castro C, Gonzalez A, Woo S, King AC. M odifying physical activity in a 
multiethnic sample of low -income women: one -year results from the IMPACT (Increasing Motivation 
for Physical ACTivity) project. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2005;30(3):191 -200.  
64. Chen AH, Sallis JF, Castro CM, et al. A h ome -based behavioral intervention to promote walking in 
sedentary ethnic minority women: Project WALK. Women's health (Hillsdale, NJ). 1997;4(1):19 -39. 
65. Mier N, Medina AA, Ory MG. Mexican Americans with type 2 diabetes: perspectives on definitions, 
moti vators, and programs of physical activity. Preventing Chronic Disease. 2007;4(2).  
66. Martyn -Nemeth PA, Vitale GA, Cowger DR. A culturally focused exercise program in Hispanic adults 
with type 2 diabetes a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. The Diabetes Educator. 2010;36(2):258 -267.  
67. Hovell MF, Mulvihill MM, Buono MJ, et al. Culturally tailored aerobic exercise intervention for low -
income Latinas. American Journal of Health Promotion. 2008;22(3):155 -163.  
68. Keele -Smith R, Leon T. Evaluation of individually tailored intervent ions on exercise adherence. 
Western Journal of Nursing Research. 2003;25(6):623 -640.  
69. Marquez DX, McAuley E. Social cognitive correlates of leisure time physical activity among Latinos. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 2006;29(3):281 -289.  
70. Emmons KM.  Health behaviors in a social context. In: Berkman, LF, Kawachi, I, eds. Social 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] : Oxford University Press; 2000:242 -266.  
71. Yen IH, Syme SL. The social environment and health: a discussion of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_696282]. 
Annual Review of Publ ic Health. 1999;20(1):[ADDRESS_944773] T. Race/ethnicity, the social environment, and health. Social Science & 
Medicine. 1996;43(1):83 -91. 
73. Christian H, Giles -Corti B, Knuiman M, Timperio A, Foster S. The influence of the built env ironment, 
social environment and health behaviors on body mass index. Results from RESIDE. Preventive 
Medicine. 2011;53(1):57 -60. 
74.  ; [LOCATION_002] Department of Health and Human Services. 2012 Environmental Justice Strategy and 
Implementation Plan. Ava ilable at: http://www.hhs.gov/environmentaljustice/strategy.pdf .  Published 
February 2012.  Accessed August 14, [ADDRESS_944774]: identifying factors related 
to the promotion of physical activi ty among Mexican Americans with diabetes. American Journal of 
Health Promotion. 2009;23(6):396 -402.  
76. Bopp M, Fallon EA, Marquez DX. A faith -based physical activity intervention for Latinos: outcomes and 
lessons. American Journal of Health Promotion. 2011;25(3):168 -171. 
77. Grass K, Tello P, He G. Physical activity training for weight loss in Latinas: a controlled trial. Journal of 
Health Education. 1999;30(supplement 2):S13 -S17. 
78. Keller CS, Cantue A. Camina por salud: walking in Mexican -American women . Applied Nursing 
Research. 2008;21(2):110 -113. 
79. Chaix B, Simon C, Charreire HA, et al. The environmental correlates of overall and neighborhood based 
recreational walking (a cross -sectional analysis of the RECORD Study). International Journal of 
Behavi oral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2014;11(1):20 -20.  
80. Ewing R, Schmid T, Killingsworth R, Zlot A, Raudenbush S. Relationship between urban sprawl and 
physical activity, obesity, and morbidity. American Journal of Health Promotion. 2003;18(1):47 -57. 
81. Frank LD, Andresen MA, Schmid TL. Obesity relationships with community design, physical activity, 
and time spent in cars. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2004;27(2):87 -96. 
82. Freeman L, Neckerman K, Schwartz -Soicher O, et al. Neighborhood wal kability and active travel 
(walking and cycling) in [LOCATION_001] City. Journal of Urban Health. 2012;90(4):575 -585.  
83. Grieser M, Vu MB, Bedimo -Rung AL, et al. Physical activity attitudes, preferences, and practices in 
African American, Hispanic, and Caucasi an girls. Health Education & Behavior. 2006;33(1):40 -51.  
84. Handy SL, Boarnet MG, Ewing R, Killingsworth RE. How the built environment affects physical 
activity: views from urban planning. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2002;23(2S):[ADDRESS_944775] health? Results from a Danish survey on the use of green 
areas and health indicators. Health & Place. 2007;13(4):839 -850.  
86. Pouliou T, Elliott SJ. Health & place individual and socio -environmental determinants of overweight 
and obesity in urban Canada. Health & Place. 2010;16(2):[ADDRESS_944776] U -Turn: increasing active transportation in Jackson, 
Michigan. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2009;37(6):S329 -S335.  
88. Cleland VJ, Ball K, Crawford D. Is a perceived supportive physical environment important for self -
reported leisure time physical activity among socioeconomically disadvantaged women with poor 
psychosocial characteristics? An observational study. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:280 -280.  
89. Fitzgibbon ML, Kong A, Tussing -Humphreys L. Understanding population health from multi -level and 
community -based models. In: Riekert, KA, Ockene, JK, Pbert, L, eds. The Handbook of Health 
Behavior Change.  Vol 4th. [LOCATION_001], NY : Springer Publishing Company, LLC; 2014:27 -46. 
90. Abras C, Maloney -Krichmar D, Preece J. User -centered design.  In: Bainbridge, W, ed. Encyclopedia of 
Human -Computer Interaction.  Vol 37. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2004:445 -456.  
91. Norman DA, Drap er SW. User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human -Computer 
Interaction.  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.; 1986.  
92. Glanz K. Social and behavioral theories. e-Source: Behavioral and Social Sciences Research : Office of 
Behavioral & Social Sciences Reserach  
National Institutes of Health.  Available at: http://www.esourceresearch.org/tabid/724/default.aspx .  Accessed 
September 1, 2017.  
93. Nicholson S. A user -centered theoretical framework for meaningful gamification. Paper presented  at: 
Games+Learning+Society 8.0; June 2012; Madison, WI.  
http://scottnicholson.com/pubs/meaningfulframework.pdf .  Accessed August 31, 2017 .  
94. Bandura A. Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control.  [LOCATION_001]: Freeman; 1997.  
95. Mazzara ML; IBM. Application o f theory: minimalism and user centered design. Available at: 
http://www.gotomedia.com/goto/web2expo/workshop/resources/minimialism_ucd.pdf . 2001.  
Accessed August 25, 2017 . 
96. Pagulayan RJ, Keeker K, Wixon D, Romero RL, Fuller T. User -centered design in g ames. In: Sears, A, 
Jacko, JA, eds. Human -Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies and 
Emerging Applications . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associaties, Inc.; 2003:883 -906.  
97. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A  Social Cognitive Theory.  Englewood Cliffs 
NJ: Prentice Hall; 1986.  
98. Culos -Reed N, Gyurcsik N, Brawley L. Using theories of motivated behavior to understand physical 
activity. In: Singer, RN, Hausenblas, HA, Janelle, CM, eds. Handbook of Sport Psycholog y. [LOCATION_001], 
NY: John Wiley & Sons; 2001:695 -717. 
99. Sherwood NE, Jeffery RW. The behavioral determinants of exercise: implications for physical activity 
interventions. Annual Review of Nutrition. 2000;20:21 -44. 
100.  Humpel N, Owen N, Leslie E. Environmen tal factors associated with adults' participation in physical 
activity: a review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2002;22(3):188 -199.  
101. Sharma M. Physical activity interventions in Hispanic American girls and women. Obesity reviews : an 
offici al journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity. 2008;9(6):560 -571.  
102.  Eyler AA, Brownson RC, Bacak SJ, Housemann RA. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_696283]. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercis e. 2003;35(9):1529 -1536.  
103.  McAuley E, Jerome GJ, Elavsky S, Marquez DX, Ramsey SN. Predicting long -term maintenance of 
physical activity in older adults. Preventive Medicine. 2003;37(2):110 -118. 
104.  Svetkey LP, Stevens VJ, Brantley PJ, et al. Compariso n of strategies for sustaining weight loss. Journal 
of the American Medical Association. 2008;299(10):1139 -1148.  
105.  Collins C, Morgan P, Jones P, et al. Evaluation of a commercial web -based weight loss and weight loss 
maintenance program in overweight an d obese adults: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Public 
Health. 2010;10(1):669.  
106.  Riley W, Rivera D, Atienza A, Nilsen W, Allison S, Mermelstein R. Health behavior models in the age of 
mobile interventions: are our theories up to the task? Translation al Behavioral Medicine. 2011;1(1):53 -
71.  
107. Atienza AA, King AC, Oliveira BM, Ahn DK, Gardner CD. Using hand -held computer technologies to 
improve dietary intake. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2008;34(6):514 -518.  
108.  Clark NM, Janevic MR. In dividual theories. In: Riekert, KA, Ockene, JK, Pbert, L, eds. The Handbook 
of Health Behavior Change.  Vol 4. [LOCATION_001], NY: Springer Publishing Company, LLC; 2014:3 -26. 
109.  Anderson ES, Winett RA, Wojcik JR, Williams DM. Social cognitive mediators of chan ge in a group 
randomized nutrition and physical activity intervention social support, self -efficacy, outcome 
expectations and self -regulation in the Guide -to-Health Trial. Journal of Health Psychology. 
2010;15(1):21 -32. 
110. Burton NW, Oldenburg B, Sallis JF, Turrell G. Measuring psychological, social, and environmental 
influences on leisure time physical activity among adults. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Public Health. 2007;31(1):[ADDRESS_944777] sheet. Pew Research Center. Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheet/mobile/ . 
Published 2017.  Updated January 12. Accessed September 1, 2017.  
112. Lopez MH, Gonzalez -Barrera A, Patten E. Closing the digital divide : Latinos and technology adoption. 
Pew Research Center, Pew Hispanic Cent er. Available at: 
http://www.pewhispanic.org/files/2013/03/Latinos_Social_Media_and_Mobile_Tech_03 -
2013_final.pdf . Published 2013.  Accessed September 1, 2017.  
113. Smith A. Smartphone ownership [ADDRESS_944778]. Available at: 
http ://www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/05/smartphone -ownership -2013/ . Published 2013.  Accessed 
August 31, 2017.  
114. Klasnja P, Pratt W. Healthcare in the pocket: mappi[INVESTIGATOR_152292] -phone health interventions. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2012;45(1) :184 -198.  
115. Boulos MN, Wheeler S, Tavares C, Jones R. How smartphones are changing the face of mobile and 
participatory healthcare: an overview, with example from eCAALYX. Biomedical Engineering. 
2011;10:24.  
116. Bonito J, Burgoon JK, Ramirez Jr A. Pa rticipation and decision -making: the role of interactivity in 
communication processes and outcomes. Paper presented at: Annual meeting of the National 
Communication Association2002; Seattle, WA.  
117. Burgoon JK, Bonito JA, Ramirez A, Kam K, Dunbar N, Fisc her J. Testing the interactivity principle: 
effects of mediation, propi[INVESTIGATOR_696284], and verbal and nonverbal modalities in interpersonal interaction. The 
Journal of Communication. 2002;52:657 -677.  
118. Rafaeli S. Interactivity: from new media to communication. Sage Annual Review of Communication 
Research: Advancing Communication Science. 1988;16(CA):[ADDRESS_944779] of interactivity on predicted outcome values I: the role of richness 
and mediation in socially -oriented computer -mediated interactions. Paper presented at: Annual 
meeting of the National Communication Association2001; Atlanta, GA.  
120.  Klasnja P, Consolvo S, McDonald DW, Landay JA, Pratt W. Using mobile & personal sensing 
technologies to support health behavior chang e in everyday life: lessons learned. Paper presented at: 
AMIA Annual Symposium; November 14 -18 2009; San Francisco, CA.   
121.  conScore. 2012 Mobile Future in Focus.  Published Feb 23 2012.  
122.  Myers VH, Fluharty L, Burris S. Healthy Detours: a location -based services app to promote healthy 
choices among college students. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2015;49(Suppl 1):S190.  
123. Pellegrini CA, Duncan JM, Moller AC, et al. A smartphone -supported weight loss program: design of 
the ENGAGED randomized contro lled trial. BMC Public Health. 2012;12(1):1041. PM:23194256.  
124.  Pew Research Internet Project. Mobile technology fact sheet. Pew Research Internet Project. Available 
at: http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheets/mobile -technology -fact-sheet/ . Published [ADDRESS_944780] 29, 2017.  
125. Rainie L, Fox S; PewResearch Internet Project. Just -in-time information through mobile connections. 
Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/05/07/just -in-time -information -through -mobile -
connections/ . 2012.  Accessed Au gust 31, 2017.  
126.  Nielsen Wire. Latinas are a driving force behind Hispanic purchasing power in the U.S. Nielsen 
Newswire. Available at: http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2013/latinas -are-a-driving -
force -behind -hispanic -purchasing -power -in-.html . Published 2013.  Accessed August 30, 2017.  
127. Ramirez R. Minorities purchasing power grows beyond cyber Monday. National Journal. 2012. 
http://www.nationaljournal.com/thenextamerica/economy/minorities -purchasing -power -grows -
beyond -cyber -monday -[ADDRESS_944781] 29, 2017 . 
128.  Waldman M. Hispanic consumer market in the U.S. is larger than the entire economies of all but 13 
countries in the world, according to annual UGA Selig Center Multicultural Economy study. UGA Terry 
College of Business Web s ite. Available at: http://www.terry.uga.edu/news/releases/hispanic -
consumer -market -in-the-u.s.-is-larger -than -the-entire -economies -of. Published 2012.  Accessed 
September 1, 2017.  
129.  Nielsen. Latina power shift. Available at: 
http://www.fronterasdesk.org/ sites/default/files/field/docs/2013/08/Nielsen_Latina_Report_2013_.
pdf. 2013.  Accessed August 29, 2017 . 
130.  Llopis G. Telecom industry depends on the Hispanic market for future growth of wireless technology 
and mobile apps. Forbes. July 29, 2013. 
http:// www.forbes.com/sites/glennllopis/2013/07/29/telecom -industry -depends -on-the-hispanic -
market -for-future -growth -of-wireless -technology -and-mobile -apps/ . Accessed May 7, 2017 . 
131. Farrell J. Why aren't brands making more apps for the Hispanic market? Adverti sing Age Web site. 
Available at: http://adage.com/article/the -big-tent/mobile -hispanic -market -a-priority -top-
brands/243455/ . Publish ed 2013. Accessed April 22, 2017 . 
132. Lardinois F. Study: Hispanic smartphone owners want mobile shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_696285] . TechCrunch. 
2012. http://techcrunch.com/2012/04/10/study -hispanic -smartphone -owners -want -mobile -shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] -
apps -to-be-social/ .  Accessed August 29, 2017 . 
133. Brooke J. SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale. In: Jordan, PW, Thomas, B, Weerdmeester, BA, 
McClelland, IL, eds. Usability Evaluation in Industry . London: Taylor & Francis; 1996:189 -194.  
134. Bangor A, Kortum P, Miller J. Determining what individual SUS scores mean: adding an adjective 
rating scale. Journal of Usability Studies. 2009;4(3):114 -123. 
135. Bangor A, Kortum PT, Miller JT. An empi[INVESTIGATOR_37085]. International 
Journal of Human -Computer Interaction. 2008;24(6):574 -594.  
136.  Fiore LD, Lavori PW. Integrating randomized comparative effectiveness research with p atient care. The 
New England Journal of Medicine. 2016;374(22):2152 -2158.  
137. Buller DB, Borland R, Bettinghaus EP, Shane JH, Zimmerman MA. Randomized trial of a smartphone 
mobile application compared to text messaging to support smoking cessation. Teleme dicine Journal 
and eHealth. 2014;20(3):206 -214.  
138.  Breitenstein SM, Shane J, Julion W, Gross D. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_696286]: adapting an evidence -based parent 
training program for digital delivery in primary care settings. Worldviews on Evidence -Based Nursing. 
2015;12(1):31 -40. 
139.  Beach WA, Buller MK, Dozier DM, Buller DB, Gutzmer K. The Conversations about Cancer (CAC) 
project: assessing feasibility and audience impacts from viewing the cancer play. Health 
Communication. 2014;29(5):462 -472.  
140.  Myers VH, Flu harty L, Fultineer C, Strickfaden SM. Caminemos juntas: a location -based smartphone 
app for Latinas to connect with nearby [CONTACT_696326]. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2017;51(Suppl 
1):S762.  
141. Pahor M, Guralnik JM, Ambrosius WT, et al. Effect of str uctured physical activity on prevention of 
major mobility disability in older adults: the LIFE study randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2014;311(23):2387 -2396.  
142.  [LOCATION_002] Department of Agriculture. Food access research atlas. Available at: 
http://www .ers.usda.gov/data -products/food -access -research -atlas.aspx . Accessed June 15, 2017 . 
143. [LOCATION_002] Department of Agriculture. Food environment atlas. Available at: 
http://www.ers.usda.gov/data -products/food -environment -atlas.aspx . Accessed June 15, 20 17. 
144.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Children's 
food environment state indicator report, 2011. Available at: 
http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/downloads/childrensfoodenvironment.pdf . 2011.  Accessed June  15, 2017 . 
145. The demographic divide: fitness trackers and smartwatches attracting very different segments of the 
market, according to he NPD Group [press release]. Las Vegas, NV: The NPD Group, January 6.  
146.  Takacs J, Pollock CL, Guenther JR, Bahar M,  Napi[INVESTIGATOR_3694] C, Hunt MA. Validation of the Fitbit One activity 
monitor device during treadmill walking. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport. 2014;17(5):496 -
500.  
147. Fulk GD, Combs SA, Danks KA, Nirider CD, Raja B, Reisman DS. Accuracy of 2 activity monito rs in 
detecting steps in people with stroke and traumatic brain injury. Physical Therapy. 2014;94(2):222 -
229.  
148.  Duggan M, Ellison NB, Lampe C, Lenhart A, Madden M. Social Media Update 2014: Demographics of 
Key Social Networking Platforms.  Published Jan uary [ADDRESS_944782] Tank. Pew Research Center. 
Available at: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2015/02/03/social -media -preferences -vary -by-
race -and-ethnicity/ . Published 2015.  Updated February 3, 2015. Accessed September 1, 2017.  
151. Sharing on Facebook from apps and websites. Facebook. Available at: 
https://developers.facebook.com/products/sh aring/ . Accessed September 1, 2017.  
152. Faulkner L. Beyond the five -user assumption: benefits of increased sample sizes in usability testing. 
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers. 2003;35(3).  
153. Macefield R. How to specify the participant  group size for usability studies: a practitioner's guide. 
Journal of Usability Studies. 2009;5(1).  
154. Turner CW, Lewis JR, Nielsen J. Determining usability test sample size. In: Karwowski, W, ed. 
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factor s. Vol 2nd. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 
2006:3084 -3088.  
155. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The Discovery of Grounded Field Theory.  Hawthorne, NY: Aldine De Gruyter; 
1967.  
156. Colaizzi PF. Psychological research as the phenomenologist views it. In: Valle, RS, King , M, eds. 
Existential -Phenomenological Alternatives for Psychology.  Vol 6. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 
1978.  
157. Giorgi A. Phenomenology and Psychological Research.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA: Duquesne University Press; 
1985.  
158.  Sauro J, Lewis JR. Quantifyin g the User Experience: Practical Statistics for User Research.  Morgan 
Kaufmann; 2012.  
159. Sauro J. A Practical Guide to Measuring Usability: [ADDRESS_944783] Common Questions About 
Quantifying the Usability of Websites and Software.  CreateSpace Inde pendent Publishing Platform; 
2010.  
160.  Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, Haskell WL, Gillis D, Ritter PL. CHAMPS physical activity 
questionnaire for older adults: outcomes for interventions. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise. 2001;33(7):1126 -1141. PM:11445760.  
161. PAR -Q & you: a questionnaire for people aged 15 to 69. Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology; 2002.  
Available at: http://www.csep.ca/cmfiles/publications/parq/par -q.pdf .  Accessed September 1, 2017.  
162.  Whitfield GP, Pettee Gabriel K K, Rahbar MH, Kohl HW, 3rd. Application of the American Heart 
Association/American College of Sports Medicine Adult Preparticipation Screening Checklist to a 
nationally representative sample of US adults aged >=40 years from the National Health and Nutriti on 
Examination Survey 2001 to 2004. Circulation. 2014;129(10):1113 -1120.  
163.  Warburton DE, Gledhill N, Jamnik VK, et al. Evidence -based risk assessment and recommendations for 
physical activity clearance: Consensus Document 2011. Applied Physiology, Nutri tion, and 
Metabolism. 2011;[ADDRESS_944784] 1:S266 -298.  
164.  Salinas JJ, Hilfinger Messias DK, Morales -Campos D, Parra -Medina D. English language proficiency 
and physical activity among Mexican -origin women in south [LOCATION_007] and South Carolina. Journal of 
Health Care  for the Poor and Underserved. 2014;25(1):357 -375.  
165. Fortier MS, Kowal J, Lemyre L, Orpana HM. Intentions and actual physical activity behavior change in 
a community -based sample of middle -aged women: contributions from the theory of planned behavior 
and self -determination theory. International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology. 2009;7(1):46 -
67. 
166.  Cleland CL, Tully MA, Kee F, Cupples ME. The effectiveness of physical activity interventions in socio -
economically disadvantaged communities: a sys tematic review. Preventive Medicine. 2012;54(6):371 -
380.  
167. Resnicow K, McCarty F, Blissett D, Wang T, Heitzler C, Lee RE. Validity of a modified CHAMPS 
physical activity questionnaire among African -Americans. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise.  2003;35(9):1537 -1545. PM:12972874.  
168.  Harada ND, Chiu V, King AC, Stewart AL. An evaluation of three self -report physical activity 
instruments for older adults. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2001;33(6):962 -970. 
PM:11404662.  
169.  King AC, Pruitt LA, Phillips W, Oka R, Rodenburg A, Haskell WL. Comparative effects of two physical 
activity programs on measured and perceived physical functioning and other health -related quality of 
life outcomes in older adults. Journal of Gerontology. 2000;55(2 ):M74 -83. 
170. Stewart AL, Mills KM, Sepsis PG, et al. Evaluation of CHAMPS, a physical activity promotion program 
for older adults. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 1997;19(4):353 -361. 
171. Stewart AL, Verboncoeur CJ, McLellan BY, et al. Physical activity o utcomes of CHAMPS II: a physical 
activity promotion program for older adults. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences 
and Medical Sciences. 2001;56(8):M465 -470.  
172. Cerin E, Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Frank LD. Neighborhood Environment Walk ability Scale: validity and 
development of a short form. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2006;38(9):1682 -1691. doi: 
10.1249/01.mss.[PHONE_14480].[ZIP_CODE].4d.  
173. Brownson RC, Chang JJ, Eyler AA, et al. Measuring the environment for friendliness tow ard physical 
activity: a comparison of the reliability of 3 questionnaires. American Journal of Public Health. 
2004;94(3):473 -483.  
174. Jáuregui A, Salvo D, Lamadrid -Figueroa H, Hernández B, Rivera -Dommarco JA, Pratt M. Perceived 
and objective measures of neighborhood environment for physical activity among Mexican adults, 2011. 
Preventing Chronic Disease. 2016;13:E76. doi: 10.5888/pcd13.160009.  
175. Sallis JF, Grossman RM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_163313], Patterson TL, Nader PR. The development of scales to measure 
social supp ort for diet and exercise behaviors. Preventive Medicine. 1987;16(6):825 -836.  
176. Marquez B, Dunsiger SI, Pekmezi D, Larsen BA, Marcus BH. Social support and physical activity 
change in Latinas: Results from the Seamos Saludables trial. Health Psychology.  2016;35(12):1392 -
1401. doi: 10.1037/hea0000421.  
177. Ramirez M, Wu S. Phone messaging to prompt physical activity and social support among low -income 
Latino patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. JMIR Diabetes. 2017;2(1):e8. doi: 
10.2196 /diabetes.7063.  
178. Hartman SJ, Dunsiger SI, Bock BC, et al. Physical activity maintenance among Spanish -speaking 
Latinas in a randomized controlled trial of an Internet -based intervention. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine. 2017;40(3):392 -402. doi: 10.1007/ s10865 -016-9800 -4. 
179. Ware Jr JE, Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12 -item short -form health survey: construction of scales and 
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical Care. 1996;34(3):220 -233.  
180.  Perreira KM, Gotman N, Isasi CR, et al. Mental h ealth and exposure to the [LOCATION_002]: key correlates 
from the Hispanic community health study of Latinos. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases. 
2015;203(9):670 -678. doi: 10.1097/nmd.0000000000000350.  
181. Wanat KA, Kovarik CL, Shuman S, Whitaker R C, Foster GD, O'Brien MJ. The association between 
obesity and health -related quality of life among urban Latinos. Ethnicity & Disease. 2014;24(1):14 -18. 
182.  Palta P, McMurray RG, Gouskova NA, et al. Self -reported and accelerometer -measured physical activi ty 
by [CONTACT_696327]/Latino adults: HCHS/SOL. Preventive Medicine Reports. 
2015;2:824 -828. doi: 10.1016/j.pmedr.2015.09.006.  
183.  Gandek B, Ware JE, Aaronson NK, et al. Cross -validation of item selection and scoring for the SF -12 
Health Sur vey in nine countries: results from the IQOLA Project. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 
1998;51(11):1171 -1178.  
184.  SIP 4 -99 Research Group. Environmental Supports for Physical Activity Questionnaire. Available at: 
http://prevention.sph.sc.edu/tools/docs/ Env_Supports_for_PA.pdf . Published 2002, October. 
Accessed September 5, 2017.  
185.  Kirtland KA, Porter DE, Addy CL, et al. Environmental measures of physical activity supports: 
perception versus reality. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2003;24(4): 323-331. 
186.  Addy CL, Wilson DK, Kirtland KA, Ainsworth BE, Sharpe P, Kimsey D. Associations of perceived social 
and physical environmental supports with physical activity and walking behavior. American Journal of 
Public Health. 2004;94(3):[ADDRESS_944785], Jr., Strath SJ, et al. Comparison of three methods for measuring the time 
spent in physical activity. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2000;32([ADDRESS_944786]):S457 -S464.  
188.  Runyan JD, Steenbergh TA, Bainbridge C, Daugherty D A, Oke L, Fry BN. A smartphone ecological 
momentary assessment/intervention "app" for collecting real -time data and promoting self -awareness. 
PLOS ONE. 2013;8(8):e71325.  
189.  Shiffman S, Stone AA, Hufford MR. Ecological momentary assessment. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology. 2008;4:1 -32. 
190.  Heron KE, Smyth JM. Ecological momentary interventions: Incorporating mobile technology into 
psychosocial and health behavior treatments. British Journal of Health Psychology. 2011;15(Pt 1):1 -39. 
191. Dunton GF, Wh alen CK, Jamner LD, Henker B, Floro JN. Using ecologic momentary assessment to 
measure physical activity during adolescence. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 
2005;29(4):281 -287.  
192.  Dunton GF, Atienza A. The need for time -intensive information in  healthful eating and physical activity 
research: a timely topic. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 2009;109(1):30 -35.  
193.  Dunton GF, Dzubur E, Kawabata K, Yanez B, Bo B, Intille S. Development of a smartphone application 
to measure physical activity using sensor -assisted self -report. Frontiers in Public Health. 
2014;2(February):12 -12.  
194.  Marszalek J, Morgulec -Adamowicz N, Rutkowska I, Kosmol A. Using ecological momentary assessment 
to evaluate current physical activity. BioMed Research Int ernational. 2014;2014:[ADDRESS_944787], stress, and 
binge - purge behaviors: day of week and time of day effects in the natural environment. International 
Journal of  Eating Disorders. 2009;42(5):429 -436.  
196.  World Walking home page. Papertank. Available at: https://worldwalking.org/ . Accessed September 5, 
2017.  
197. Leon AC, Solomon DA. Toward rapproachment in the placebo control debate. A calculated compromise 
of po wer. Evaluation & the Health Professions. 2003;26(4):[ADDRESS_944788] PJ, Needham DM. Systematic review identifies 
number of strategies important for retaining study participants. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] . 
2007;60(8):757 -765. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2006.11.023.  
199.  Coday M, Boutin -Foster C, Goldman Sher T, et al. Strategies for retaining study participants in 
behavioral intervention trials: retention experiences of the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Ann als 
of Behavioral Medicine. 2005;[ADDRESS_944789]:55 -65. doi: 10.1207/s15324796abm2902s_9.  
200.  Nicholson LM, Schwirian PM, Groner JA. Recruitment and retention strategies in clinical studies with 
low-income and minority populations: Progress from 2004 -2014. Conte mporary Clinical Trials. 
2015;45(Pt A):34 -40. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2015.07.008.  
201.  Schulz AJ, Israel BA, Mentz GB, et al. Effectiveness of a walking group intervention to promote physical 
activity and cardiovascular health in predominantly non -Hispanic Bla ck and Hispanic urban 
neighborhoods: Findings from the Walk Your Heart to Health Intervention. Health Education & 
Behavior 2015;42(3):380 -392. doi: 10.1177/1090198114560015.  
202.  Castro CM, Pruitt LA, Buman MP, King AC. Physical activity program delivery by [CONTACT_696328]: the TEAM randomized trial. Health Psychology. 2011;30(3):285 -294. doi: 
10.1037/a0021980.  
203.  Tucker JA, Roth DL, Huang J, Crawford MS, Simpson CA. Effects of interactive voice response self -
monitoring on natural resolut ion of drinking problems: utilization and behavioral economic factors. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs. 2012;73(4):686.  
204.  Fritz MS, MacKinnon DP. Required sample size to detect the mediated effect. Psychological Science. 
2007;18(3):233 -239. PM:[ADDRESS_944790]: distribution of the 
product and resampling methods. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2004;39(1):99. PM:20157642.  
206.  Jacobs B. Apple tightens security with ap p transport security. Tuts+. July 17, 2015. 
http://code.tutsplus.com/articles/apple -tightens -security -with -app-transport -security --cms-[ZIP_CODE] . 
Accessed July 20, 2017 . 
207.  What's new in iOS: iOS 9.0. iOS Developer Library - Prerelease. 2015(July 20). 
https: //developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/ios/releasenotes/General/WhatsNewIniOS/Articles/i
OS9.html . Accessed July 20, 2017 . 
208.  Gándara P, The White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanics. Fulfilling America's 
Future: Latinas In The U.S. , 2015. 2015.  
209.  Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee R; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
Physical activity guidelines for americans. Available at: http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/report/ . 
2008.  
210.  Brown A, Lopez G, Lopez MH.  Digital Divide Narrows for Latinos as More Spanish Speakers and 
Immigrants Go Online.  Published July 20 2016.  
211. Araya R, Rojas G, Fritsch R, Frank R, Lewis G. Inequities in mental health care after health care system 
reform in chile. American Journal of Public Health. 2006;96(1):109 -113. PM:[ADDRESS_944791] AV, Villarreal EK, Alen M, Ory MG. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_696287] -
American women living in colonias at the border. American Journal of Health Promotion. 
2011;25(3):172 -175. 
213.  ; Cisco. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2011 -2016. 
Available at: 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c1
1-520862.html .  Publishe d Feb [ADDRESS_944792] -
year college students: implications for sleep and other behaviors. Journal of American College Health. 
2000;49(3):[ADDRESS_944793] insurance companies for Latinos. Latino Leaders. 2017(March -April). 
http://www.latinoleaders.com/March -April -2017/Best -Insurance -Companies -for-Latinos/ . Accessed 
September 5, 2017.  
216.  Koebnick C, Langer -Gould AM, Gould MK, et al. Sociodemographic characteristics of members of a 
large, integrated health care system: comparison with US Census Bureau data. The Permanente 
Journal. 2012;16(3):37 -41. 
217. Dyton J. Healt care, united. Hispanic Executive. July 1, 2015. 
http://hispanicexecutive.com/2015/uni tedhealth -group/S . Accessed September 5, 2017.  
218.  Latina Style 50. Latina Style, Inc. Available at: http://latina50.latinastyle.com/ . Accessed September 5, 
2017.  
219.  Awards & Recognitions. Comcast. Available at: http://corporate.comcast.com/news -
informa tion/awards -and-recognition . Published 2017. Accessed September 5, 2017.  
220.  Workforce achieving results. Sodexo. Available at: 
http://sodexoinsights.com/diversityandinclusion2016/achieveing -results.html . Published 2016. 
Accessed September 5, 2017.  
221.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Fact Sheet, 2011. 2011.  
222.  American Heart Association. Heart disease in Hispanic women. American Heart Association. Available 
at: https://www.goredforwomen.org/about -heart -disease/facts_about_h eart_disease_in_women -sub-
category/hispanic -women/ . Accessed September 5, 2017.  
223.  Joe R. Digital hones brands' value -added services. DMN. 2013. http://www.dmnews.com/mobile -
marketing/digital -hones -brands -value -added -services/article/286450/ . Accessed Se ptember 5, 2017.  
224.  Dev R. Patent protection of mobile [smartphone] applications - Android, Apple, Microsoft & Blackberry 
apps. Rahul Dev's Website.  http://www.advocaterahuldev.com/patent -protection -mobile -smartphone -
applications -apps/ .  Accessed August 31, [ADDRESS_944794]: a massive review of pricing and other budget considerations. Savvy Apps 
Blog.  Vol 2017. Washington, D.C.: Savvy Apps; 2015.  Available at: https://savvyapps.com/blog/how -
much -does -app-cost-massive -review -pricing -budget -considerations .  Accessed September 5 , 2017 . 
226.  Bass's Basement Research Institute. The Bass Model. Available at: 
http://www.bassbasement.org/BassModel/Default.aspx . Accessed September 5, 2017.  
 