Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 1 of 20 STUDY PROTOCOL:  
Testing Tele- Savvy, an On -line Psychoeducation Program for Dementia Family Caregivers  
Short Title: Testing Tele- Savvy 
Dual PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_48384]: Patricia Griffiths  
School of Medicine  
Co-I: Melinda Higgins  
Co-I: Gle nna Brewster  
Co-I: Joe Nocera  
 
National Institute of Aging (NIA)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol version date: December  9, 2019  
 
 
AIMS. The backdrop for this application is our well -understood national reliance on family members to provide 
virtually all community -based care for 5.3 million persons living with Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, 
a population that will likely triple in the next [ADDRESS_50898] to prevent and cure 
dementing illnesses like Alzheimer’s, the country will continue to face an urgent need to find ways to su stain 
and bolster the capacity of these family caregivers to manage the multiple daily care challenges they face and 
to preserve their well -being while doing so. Without family caregivers, the burden of care could well overwhelm 
the formal components of our care system. This application seeks support for a randomized trial to test a 
program designed to meet this critical need. We seek to test Tele- Savvy, an internet -based program based on 
the widely disseminated, in- person Savvy Caregiver psychoeduc ation pr ogram,2 one of the effective, evidence - 
based programs identified in PAR - 15-348 (Research on Informal and Formal Caregiving for Alzheimer’s 
Disease) to which this application is addressed. Delivered in scheduled videoconferences and independently 
viewed on -line video lessons, Tele- Savvy aims to develop/enhance caregivers’ skills and caregiving mastery, 
reduce adverse effects of caregiving, and improve the quality of the lives of caregivers and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_48385]- Savvy to its evidence- based platform, demonstrate benefits for 
caregivers, illustrate the program’s national reach, and support our readiness for the proposed larger trial.  
 A number of psychoeducation programs for caregivers, including our own S avvy Car egiver program, have 
been effective in relieving distress, increasing self -efficacy, managing caregiving challenges, and enabling 
caregivers to sustain care over longer periods of time.
3-6 However, many Alzheimer’s caregivers cannot take 
part in these programs because virtually all such programs require caregivers to arrange care for the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48386]. These are obstacles in rural or remote areas where transportation issues further restrict car egivers’  already limited access to caregiver programs, but they 
are no less a problem in inner cities and suburbs. These obstacles highlight a substantial challenge to our ability to rely on caregivers as a continuing care resource for persons living with Alzheime r’s disease: we need 
theory -driven psychoeducation programs that can be made readily available to caregivers who may not be able 
to attend in- person programs.  
 Tele- Savvy extends the growing use of distance means for program delivery. Over the pas t 15 years, 
telephone, videophone, and internet/web -based platforms have been used to deliver prevention, patient 
education, disease self -management, and caregiver education programs through a variety of methods for a 
variety of conditions.
7-14 Distance methods fo r dementia caregiver education include: stand- alone, individually 
accessed material designed for self -study with no peer or expert contact;15-[ADDRESS_50899];18-23 web-based one- on-one client -expert  interac tion, with or without ancillary 
asynchronous teaching/ learning material; and combinations of these modalities coupled with a variety of group interactions. The evidence for the positive effect of such programs on Alzheimer’s caregiver well -being i s 
beginning to accumulate.
24 Tele- Savvy represents a unique advance. Over six weeks, through weekly 
scheduled group videoconferences and daily email -delivered asynchronously viewed video lessons, it 
simulates the intense, interactive in- person six -week group exper ience of the Savvy Caregiver program. It is, 
virtually, an in -person psychoeducation program at a distance.  
 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 2 of 20 We seek to make an effective psychoeducation program widely available to family caregivers of persons living 
with Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. Taking advantage of the growing use of and familiarity with the 
internet by [CONTACT_48431], the project will advance us toward that goal. We will test the program in an established context of collaboration among the Outreach, Recruitm ent, and Education Cores of four NIA -
supported Alzheimer’s Disease Centers (ADC). We will employ a wait -list randomized design in which 1 8 
blocks of 15  caregivers each will be assigned either to immediate Tele- Savvy participation groups or to 
atten tion control or usual care groups that are invited to participate in Tele- Savvy six months after baseline 
data collection (total n=2 70). We will pursue 3 aims ::  
 Aim 1.  Establish the effectiveness of Tele -Savvy in reducing or retarding the affective impact (burden, 
depression, anxiety) on caregivers associated with dementia family caregiving  
Aim 2.  Establish the effectiveness of Tele -Savvy in promoting the quality of life of persons with Alzheimer’s 
(agitation; Quality of Life; affect) whos e caregivers are trained by [CONTACT_48432]- Savvy  
Aim 3. (a) Establish the effectiveness of Tele- Savvy in enhancing caregiver mastery and (b) test the mediating 
effect of mastery and enactment on Aim 1 & 2 outcomes  
 We also propose, as an Exploratory Aim, to examine the comparability of t he program’s efficacy across three 
racial/ethnic groups (African Americans, Caucasians, and Latino/Hispanics).  
 
Significance and Innovation .   
The Landscape.  Dementing conditions, including the most prevalent of these, Alzheimer’s disease, pose a 
large and growing problem nationally and worldwide.  Unless dramatic breakthroughs occur, the current 
population of 5.[ADDRESS_50900] 14 million by 2050.
1 These 
persons  are distributed across the landscape, in inner cities, in suburban areas, and in rural America; there is 
even some evidence that the current and future prevalence of Alzheimer’s in rural areas is disproportionate to the rural population’s share of the ove rall population.
2-[ADDRESS_50901] of 
care in 2015 will be $216 Billion; by 2050, it could exceed $1 Trillion.1   
 
Alzheimer’s Famil y Caregivers. Persons living with Alzheimer’s disease and related illnesses spend most of 
the course of their illness in the community and receive most of t heir care from informal –  usually family –  
caregivers.5 Currently, about 15 million adults annually provide 17.9 billion hours of family care for community -
dwelling persons living with Alzheim er’s and other illnesses (PLWA); this represents approximately 85% of the 
care they receive and it i s estimated to be the equivalent of $218 Billion in paid care.1,30  As well as the more 
“domestic” work of maintaining a household and attending to the safe ty of the person, Alzheimer’s family 
caregiving entails chronic care management, a role typi[INVESTIGATOR_48387]. Alzheimer’s family caregivers are responsible, for example, for medication management; behavior guidance and management; medical, legal and financial case management; treatment monitoring and 
provisio n; activity design and delivery; ADL assistance.  Moreover, since most PLWA are ≥ [ADDRESS_50902] one other chronic illness; this adds to the caregiving role.  Few caregivers are trained for this work . 
 
The condition of family caregivers is well documented.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_48388], caregivers pay a toll for the services they render.  The chronic stress of their role places them at 
greater risk for morbidity and mortality than peers who are not car egivers.31-33 The adverse effects on their 
psychological and physical well -being are extensive; there is well -established compromise to their immune 
systems.6 Economic strains (from loss of job productivity and out -of-pocket expenses), social isolation, and 
family conflicts and tensions fu rther raise the toll of caregiving.35-[ADDRESS_50903] their own care, increasing their own risk of morbidity, co -morbidity, and early 
mortality.38 Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are the strongest predictors of 
negative caregiver outcomes and are consistently linked to negative outcomes for the person living with dementia (PLWA).
39-43   Deployment of effective caregiving strategies appears to buffer caregivers’ stress.[ADDRESS_50904] demonstrated 
some positive benefit for caregivers’ overall well -being.4-6,45,[ADDRESS_50905] ery-building and/or on improving 
enacted copi[INVESTIGATOR_48389] (e.g., managing BP SD)5,[ADDRESS_50906] been 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 3 of 20 singled out as particularly effective (like REACH,50 the NYU model,51 and the Savvy Caregiver2), and these 
have been designated as evidence- based by [CONTACT_48433].[ADDRESS_50907] spread, and the evidence- based designation facilitates f ederal support for their wider use.    
Challenges and Solutions.  Access to beneficial programs is problematic.  Although rural caregiving has 
been singled out as presenting particular problems for access,53-60 the issue of access is endemic.  Whether 
caregivers live in rural areas far distant from program sites or in inner cities –  or in suburbs – they all face the 
same issues.[ADDRESS_50908] to travel to programs, so transpor tation is an issue.  Distance in miles can be a 
barrier in rural areas, but distance in time on public transportation can be a barrier in urban areas –  even if the 
program site is only a few miles away.  Time is a problem in other ways.  Most in- person programs  involve 90-
180 minute sessions; add in travel time, and it may mean the caregiver has to commit a half day to 
participating.  Finally, and perhaps most importantly: what is the caregiver to do about the person for whom 
s/he provides care?  Arranging –  and often paying for –  care is a real and substantial barrier to participation.  
 
Technology – in particular, the internet –  offers a possible solution to the problem of caregivers’ restricted 
access to beneficial programs.  The internet is no longer a s carce , rarely -available or difficult -to-use 
technology, and its use among middle- aged and older persons –  the typi[INVESTIGATOR_48390] – 
continues to rise.  In 2009 internet use in this group was 59%; most recently, it is 79 -89%.62,62   While there is 
not, as yet, universal access, this trend of increasing availability and use is especially true for Alzheimer’s 
caregivers.63,63  The internet is a major source of information for Alzheimer’s caregivers; moreove r, there 
appears to be an association between internet use and enhanced caregiving self -efficacy.[ADDRESS_50909] been employed to  
provide information and education to dementia family caregivers, but reviews lament the dearth of randomized 
trials (RCT).[ADDRESS_50910] with experts, generally through messaging or email.15-17  
Others linked on -line line asynchronous video educational material with  one-on-one interaction (PRN or 
scheduled) with a coach/counselor through messaging or email.18-[ADDRESS_50911] been no efforts to date to simulate, through distance means, the 
dynamic and temporal intensity of an in- person evidence- based psychoeducation program for Alzheimer’s 
family caregivers. Tele- Savvy is such a program. It combines asynchronous self -instruction and synchronous 
group coaching, teaching and interaction and does so over the same (six week) time period occupi[INVESTIGATOR_48391]- based platform, the Savvy Caregiver  program.  Tele- Savvy has the capacit y to add a new dimension 
to telemedicine; it can enable newly emerging Alzheimer’s care delivery models embedded, for instance, in 
accountable care organizations or medical homes, to promote practice change by [CONTACT_48434] y and more 
effectively (and accessibl y) partnering with caregivers to enhance the performance of these delivery models, to 
improve home -provided care, and to preserve the well -being of patients and caregivers.    
 
Preliminary Work.  The work we propose res ts on the solid foundation of the project team’s experience with 
Alzheimer’s caregivers and the demonstrated performance of the program’s evidence- based platform, the 
Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP). Our prior work testifies to our ability to succeed at a pr oject of this scope.  
Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_48392] -Savvy at the Atlanta VA and Emory’s Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center provides 
promising preliminary results to support further testing of Tele- Savvy.   
 
The Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP) .  As depi[INVESTIGATOR_48393], SCP is a 12- hour structured program  offered in -  
person by [CONTACT_660], over six 
weeks in 2- hour group sessions. The SCP 
curriculum envisions the caregiving role as one demanding skill and knowledge, 
an outlook that could be considered 
clinical in nature.  Alzheimer’s caregivers Week  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_48394]-Management 
Behaviors  
1  Introduction to dementing illnesses  
 Cognitive losses and caregiving strategies   
 
 Improved knowl edge 
and understanding of  
2  Stages of dementia  
 The role of confusion in dementia  
 Caregivers’ feelings and self -care 
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50912] the PLWA with routine tasks.  
Choosing and carrying out an effective 
guidance strategy is a sophisticated task, and it is repeated multiple times each day. 
This involves understanding the person’s 
capacities and gauging the degree and 
kind of as sistance that will be effective 
while also attending to the person’s 
emotional  well-being, maintaining a  3  Tailoring tasks and activities to fit with stages 
of dementia  dementia and 
caregiving role  
 
 Acquisition, 
development, and enactment of effective 
caregiving strategies  
 
• Engagement in self -
care activities  [ADDRESS_50913] days that are relatively pleasant. 
Such guidance combines the acumen of a number of disciplines (e.g., nursing and occupational therapy).  SCP 
uses strategies and techniques from nursing,72-76 psychology,43,77 -79 and occupational therapy80-83 to provide 
insight into Alzheimer’s and its effects and to suggest ways of succeeding in the work of caregiving. Guided imagery helps participants appreciate the way in which dementing disorders produce confusion and how 
confusion prompts eruptive responses.  Group exercises elicit participants’ feelings about caregiving and about 
strategies they have deployed to guide everyday tas ks. 
 SCP seeks to promote caregivers’ appreciation for the scope of their own work; increase their skills and 
knowledge for caregiving; strengthen and appreciate their growing mastery in the role; adopt a more strategic 
(“clinical”) outlook about their ca regiving; develop more 
effective strategies for caregiving; and improve their 
skills for self -care.  SCP dr aws on a broad chronic 
condition management framework84,85 that is aligned 
with social cognitive theory86,87 and the stress process 
model.44,88 -90 Within  this framework (s ee Figure, right), 
caregiving stress constitutes a basic threat  to the well -
being of the dyad.  To affect primary appraisal , the SCP 
curriculum provides information about the progressive dementia- produced losses in thinking, emotional and 
behavioral control, and the ability to perform everyday tasks and about the impact of caregiving on caregivers.  
Instruction, practice, and coaching allow for the 
application of Bandura’s principles (successful demonstration of a desired behavior; observation of the 
perfor mance of a desired behavior by a peer; and 
advocacy of a desired behavior by a respected authority
86) to strengthen caregiving mastery ( secondary 
appraisal ), and promote development and enactment  of a repertoire of  self-derived successful caregiving and 
self-care/self -management copi[INVESTIGATOR_610]. Debriefing offers the opportunity to report succes sful enactment of 
these behaviors. Gains in knowledge and skill, improvements in mastery, and deployment of effective caregiving strategies contribute to caregiver and care- recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48395] -being (less distress; better quality of life for both; 
reduced BPSD). In sum: How the threats of caregiving are managed has an effect on the outcomes of the overall process (caregiver affect  and PLWA quality of life), as mediated by [CONTACT_48435].   
 
Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP) Development and Testing . SCP is a fully manualized version of two NINR -
supported wait -list control trials of group psychoeducation programs provided in- person to family caregivers of 
PLWA ( Minnesota Family Workshop  (MFW: NR002971; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_48396]; co- I: Hepburn) and Partners in 
Caregiving (PIC: NR04 517; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_48397])). Both trials reported statistically significant improvements (with 
moderate effects) in caregiver burden, depression and anxiety and caregiver mastery.91-92  SCP was 
developed to enable community organizations to provide this psychoeducation program to caregivers. We 
tested SCP efficacy in an Alzheimer’s Association- supported wait- list control trial (IIRG- 023946). At baseline 
and 5 months after enrollment, intervention subjects showed significant improvements on measures of distress (p=0.022), mastery (p=0.018), and caregiving competency (p=0.000) while control participants did not.  When 
compared with each other over time, the intervention group differed significantly (and in positive ways) from the 
control caregivers on the measures of distress (p=0.030), mastery (p=0.019), and loss of self to the caregiving role (p=0.042). Formative evaluation data confirmed the utility and usability of program materials.
2,93   
 

Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 5 of 20 Savvy as a Widely Disseminated Program .  Savvy has been adopted by a wide variety of local, regional and 
statewide agencies in more than a dozen states (some through the federally -supported Alzheimer’s Disease 
Supportive Services Program). State- based evaluation results mirror those of the SCP  trial. Maine’s SCP 
participants showed improved competence, mastery, and personal gain ( p < 0.05) and a reduction in 
depressive symptoms and negative reactions to their person’s behavior ( p < 0.05) at 5 and 12 months.94  
[LOCATION_004] reports similar improvements in caregiver well -being in a racially/ethnically diverse caregiver 
population.95  Progra m materials (trainer’s and caregiver’s manuals, the train- the-trainer programs, program 
fidelity monitoring capacity) support its continued implementation.  
Many sponsors have found ways to support the program’s 
Maintenance. SCP now has “defined status” in  Michigan, making its 
provision eligible for federal reimbursement – a major step for SCP 
sustainability that can serve as a model for other states. 
 
Tele- Savvy.   Tele- Savvy engages groups of (on average) six 
dementia family caregivers in a program that extends over 43 days 
(see figure below).  The program begins with a scheduled 75- minute 
group videoconference led by [CONTACT_48436]; similar group videoconferences then take place each of the next six weeks (i.e., seven video- conferences).  In between the video- conferences, 
caregivers receive daily emails with links to 5 -20 minute on -line video lessons that they can watch on their own 
schedule and as often as they wish  (there are 36 unique video lessons; the Tele-Savvy story board (Appendix 
A) delineates the content of these video lessons).  The curriculum includes all of the elements of SCP plus material from an advanced program (SCP -II)
96 and from Co- PI [INVESTIGATOR_48398]’ caregiver self -care projects (see 
below).  The videoconferences incorporate the coaching/debriefing feature of SCP to allow caregivers to report 
enactment of learned and self -developed management strategy behaviors into their own caregiving.  The 
videoconferences include talks and exercises and also allow caregivers to raise questions.  Each daily video presents a teaching point linked to the overall curriculum. All follow the same format: experts provide 
instruction about a topic, and the lesson is carried forward by [CONTACT_48437], scripted talks by [CONTACT_48438] a fictional family caring for a father living with Alzheimer’s demonstrates – at various 
stages of the illness – effective caregiving techniques linked to the day’s teaching points.  
 
Tele- Savvy Fidelity with Savvy Caregiver .  We asked six SCP experts (two of the original authors and four 
master trainers) to assess the extent to which Tele- Savvy accurately and faithfully embodied SCP.  Mat erials 
detailing the curriculum and delivery strategy and links to several of the daily video lessons familiarized the experts with the program.  We asked the experts to compare Tele -Savvy with SCP across ten dimensions 
(fidelity to theory; curriculum; time; concept development; teaching images; group interaction; caregiver interaction; design; use of homework; materials) and to rate the extent to which Tele- Savvy was equivalent to, 
improved on, or fell short of the original on each dimension. Reviewers saw  Tele- Savvy as equal to or an 
improvement on SCP on all but one of the individual dimensions; these “improved” ratings appear to derive from the additions we made.  Several reviewers questioned whether a distance format could enable 
meaningful “connectedness” or interaction among the participants. We paid special attention to the issue of 
connectedness in the formative evaluation we conducted in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602].  
 
Preliminary Effectiveness.  Caregivers participating in pi[INVESTIGATOR_48399] t he Emory ADRC 
were asked to complete questionnaires prior to and within two weeks of completing the Tele- Savvy program.  
The battery included the 12- item Zarit Burden Inventory -Short Form,97 the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_48400] (CES -D 10),98 the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STA -I),99 several sub- scales from 
Pearlin’s Mastery scale,[ADDRESS_50914] (RMBPC).101  Following 
the program, we also asked them to respond to evaluative statements such as “I believe I am more knowledgeable as a caregiver.”  Other items elicited caregivers’ perceptions of the quality (0- low to 10 -high) of 
the overall program and its i ndividual components (manual, videos, group classes, self -care sessions). We 
also sought suggestions for program improvements.  
 
In all, 58 caregivers completed both the VA pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (22) and the ADRC pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (36).  Combined results indicate 
significant reductions in BPSD and caregiver upset with symptoms (p=0.012), reduced caregiver burden 
(p=0.003) and depression (p=0.007) and increased caregiver competence (Mastery) (p=0.001). Significant effects sizes were medium (low of .40 for burden and high of .55 for BPSD  upset).  Participants who used their 

Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 6 of 20 own computers and home internet (as in the proposed trial) encountered no technical difficulties, and only 2 
experienced bandwidth problems that interfered with video participation in the videoconfe rences (audio was 
fine).  Most caregivers (all but one “neutral”) ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the program provided useful 
strategies and the content was personally meaningful to them and their situation.  There were no ratings of 
‘disagree’ or ‘strongly disagree’ with statements about feeling more knowledgeable, confident and skillful. 
Caregivers gave high ratings to the quality of each program component, including a high of 9.7 +.7 for the daily 
video class modules. Over 90% gave a rating of 9 or 10 to the program overall, manual, group classes and 
daily video classes. The median viewing of daily modules was ~80%.  
 
Formative interviews with 19 ADRC trial participants sought their assessments of the program, including their 
experiences of “connectednes s” (the expert revie wers’ concern) and of the delivery technology. All provided 
positive assessments for the overall program (all indicated they would recommend it to others). Almost all 
reported clear benefits: improved caregiver skills (strategies, asses sment abilities, pat ience) and/or an 
enhanced self -care focus (methods and permission to engage in self -care).  Almost all felt connected both to 
the other caregiver participants and to the facilitators.  More than 3/4ths indicated a preference for the on- line 
format and woul d chose it over an in- person format.  They recommended improvements in the materials, and 
some whose PLWA were late in their illnesses or in the MCI stage recommended targeting the program to 
caregivers whose care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48401].  These recommendations 
are reflected in our proposed materials refinements and subject targeting criteria.  
 
VA Tele -Rehabilitation and Caregiving.   Co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_48402] -supported studies using distance 
means to assess, pres cribe and train caregiving dyads on the use of assistive technology for activities of daily 
living within the home environment  (CG ASSIST -D7873- R (Hepburn, Co- I)) and to decrease stress in care 
dyads engaged in self -managing the stress of one or more chronic conditions ( SLEEP- E Dyads study E7249W  
(Hepburn Co -I/Mentor)).  The studies have produced a library of video assets (i.e., guided meditations (GM), 
therapeutic breathing exercises) used to promote caregiver healthy behavior and well -being. Viewers (N=41) 
provided very positive ratings of four guided meditation videos (emotion recycling; inner sanctuary; breathing; 
and Metta meditation). Over 92% enjoyed the sessions and more than 83% agreed they felt more relaxed after each.
102-[ADDRESS_50915]. The Emory ADRC research registry 
(~500) i s composed of ~30% African American participants.  The Oregon Health Science University ADC clinic 
last year served 648 unique patients, 47% of whom lived in rural areas.  The OHSU ADC collaborates with its 
medical system’s telemedicine and rural primary c are practice -based research network. Co -I Boise’s work 
related to dementia and caregiving has explored barriers to assessment, caregiver attitudes to care, 
implementation of psychoeducation programs, and the use of distance technology in care.
104-107 The Rush 
Alzheimer's Disease Center (RADC) offers patient care services at the Rush Memory Clinic, including 
neurological and psychological evaluations and consultation with Alzheimer’s specialists.  Through support as 
a State of Illinois Alzheimer’s Dise ase Assistance Center, the RADC manages the Rush Memory Clinic Data 
and Specimen Repository to link patients and their families to research opportunities. Approximately 1/3 of pre -
consented Alzheimer’s -diagnosed patients with MMSE ≥ 13 and with family caregivers are African American 
and 2/3 are Caucasian.  The Rush ADC Latino Core builds on established community links to promote 
research engagement by [CONTACT_48439]/Hispanic heritage who are living wi th Alzheimer’s disease and their 
family caregivers. The Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center at Northwestern University specializes in the care and scientific study of neurological diseases that interfere with cognition and behavior.  
The cli nical core has a registry of over 300 patients and the Northwestern Neurobehavior and Memory Clinic’s 
multidisciplinary team sees over 500 new patients each year with a heterogeneity of dementia disorders, as 
well as Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with L ewy bodies.  The patient population is local to the Chicago 
area but a significant number, particularly those with a primary progressive aphasia, come from across the country.  The majority (88%) of patients with caregivers are Caucasian.  
 
Monthly  team vid eoconferences will be conducted to discuss project progress, recruitment, data 
collection and analysis, and other issues.  The Emory coordinating team will meet weekly. The site co-
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50916]. Hepburn will also meet annually at the ADC Directors’  meeting. Additional Data Safety 
Monitoring Board comm ittee meetings will be held mid- year in years [ADDRESS_50917] month 9 (see 
project timeline). We expect to enroll, on average, four cohorts per quarter through project year 2 1/2. 
Recruitment of every 2 cohorts ( 30 participants total) is scheduled to take place every 6 weeks.   We will use a 
three -arm design  with participan ts random ly assigned on a  2:2:1 ratio to immediate participation in the Tele-
Savvy intervention (N=108), immediate participation in an attention control condition (Healthy Living) (N=108), 
and a usual care condition (N -54). There will be  five data -collection points evenly spaced a cross 12 months.   
Those in each cohort’s intervention condition will take part in Tele -Savvy immediately following baseline data 
collection.  Those in the attention control and usual care conditions will take part in Tele- Savvy aft er a delay of 
6 months  (following the 6 -month data collection point . Below, we describe the preparation activities in which we 
will engage (facilitator training and material revisions) and then describe the trial itself.  Four NIA-supported 
Alzheimer’s Dise ase (Research) Centers  will collaborate in recruitment, and Emory University will serve as the 
coordinating center.  Emory will be responsible for randomization of subjects (recruits from all sites will be pooled together for randomization), for delivery a nd fidelity monitoring of  the intervention and attention control 
condition, and for all data gathering and analysis.   
 Please see the added document for Amendment 8.  
  Project Timeline, by [CONTACT_48440] [ADDRESS_50918] Activities  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Staffing; Training; Finalizing                  
DSMB scheduled meetings        X     X      X      X    X 
Enroll 18 cohorts ( 15 each) + Acquisition  30 60 
 90 
 120 
 150  180 
 210 
 240 
 270      
Data Collection                  
Data Cleaning and Analys is                  
Dissemination                  
 
 
Preparation.  
Attention Control Condition Materials Preparation.  The attention control condition (see below) will involve the 
distribution of video and text materials on exercise and nutrition.  These a re largely be materials from the NIA 
Go4Life program.  [CONTACT_48466] has  led the effort of selecting and sequencing the  materials and has work ed with 
Drs. Griffiths and Hepburn and the Project Director to format them into an internet -delivered program.  
Finali zation of these materials (curriculum development and mappi[INVESTIGATOR_48403], individual, and 
asynchronous elemen ts) has occurred during the preparatory phase of this study. Go4Life content is well -
developed and is pertinent to caregivers, however, it does not address caregiving issues the way Tele- Savvy 
Program does. Go4Life provides a motivational framework for a healthier lifesty le, methods to track 
commitment and improvement, and more than 60 tip sheets on activities, nutrition, health benefits and s afety 
around which daily video modules will be built. Additionally, videoconferences will be developed to incorporate 
on-line group interaction for attention- control participants to match the time in videoconferences (but not the 
content) among Tele- Savvy participants.  
 
Facilitator Training. Persons from a variety of backgrounds (nursing, social work, education, etc.) who have 
experience leading the in -person Savvy Caregiver program will  facilitate the synchronous group components of 
the Tele- Savvy program . We will compi[INVESTIGATOR_5829] a facilitator’s manual, based on the material from the Savvy 
Caregiver’s trainer’s manual (see Appendix B) used in the Tele- Savvy pi[INVESTIGATOR_48404]- Savvy syllabus that 
delineates the content of the synchronous group videoconferences (Appendix A).  The manual will provide clear educational objectives, a time- linked agenda, and descriptions of (and supporting material for) the talks 
and exercises conducted in each session.  A training program ([CONTACT_48467]’s Savvy Caregiver train -the-trainer  
program modified for Tele- Savvy) will be used. The training will engage facilitators in practicing the methods 
and material covered in the videoconferences, and will help facilitators to tailor to the videoconference format 
the coaching skills essential t o facilitating the development of caregiver self -efficacy. It will also focus on the 
development and maintenance of “connectedness;”  in this on- line environment, the facilitator can rely less on 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 8 of 20 non-verbal cues and has to employ a more directive style to m anage group dynamics, such as “calling on” 
individuals to report on their home activities or to determine if they have questions. On e or more f acilitators will 
be trained to conduct the videoconference component of the “Healthy Living” attention control condition.  Drs. 
Nocera and Griffiths will develop and conduct the training program for the attention control facilitator(s).  As part 
of training, each facilitator will lead, as appropriate, a dry run  of Tele- Savvy and the Healthy Living program s. 
The lead investigators will observe these dry runs , providing coaching and additional training, as needed.  
Former participants of the in- person Savvy Caregiver program will be invited to participate.  
 
Facilitators will be assigned to lead cohort -based Tele- Savvy gro ups based on their time availability ; the leader 
will be consistent across the seven sessions of the cohort’s participation.  No facilitator will ever lead more than 
two groups at a time.  Over the course of the project, the investigators and the Project C oordinator will monitor 
Tele- Savvy a nd Healthy Living fidelity by [CONTACT_48441] ≥ [ADDRESS_50919]. Fidelity will evidenced by ≥ 80% adherence to a group session compliance 
checkli st. (Appendix D)  Compliance ratings < 80% and median caregiver ratings for session quality of < [ADDRESS_50920] PRN remedial training and observe/participate 
in the next two sessions or until ratings adherence is ac hieved and maintained.   
 Facilitators will be hired part -time or as consultants  as a way to demonstrate that fidelity to the Tele- Savvy 
Program curriculum can be maintained across interventionists. Additionally, working with part -time fa cilitators 
in this  study will provide evidence on the feasibility of similar employment of facilitators in other settings, such 
that Tele- Savvy may be administered by [CONTACT_48442] (e.g., social workers) as a part of 
their preexistent  job description r ather than their sole responsibility . Such incorporation of Tele- Savvy 
administration into the whole job description is more likely to make Tele- Savvy adoptable in a variety of 
settings rather than reliance on full -time facilitators.  
 
Materials Finalizatio n. Tele -Savvy is ready for testing.  Our preliminary work has established the [ADDRESS_50921] content in the 
daily videos to include minority experts and actors for case examples. A course syllabus will be provided to 
participants to allow them to see the course as a whole and to link specific parts of the curriculum to the 
Caregiver Manual (Appendix C). Note page copi[INVESTIGATOR_48405] t he videoconferences and 
daily lessons will be provided.  The guides to the use of the interactive communication technology used in the 
program will be upgraded, based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_48406]. Materials from the NIA website for Go4Life has 
been adapted for  use in the attent ion control condition (see below). We will be placing the Tele- Savvy and 
attention control material on two commercially available platforms (Vidyo and Canvas ) for which Emory has 
licenses and provides technical assistance. Both require li ttle technical know -how by [CONTACT_8333]; both are accessed 
by [CONTACT_48443].  
 
Randomized Trial . 
Subjects. Participants will be informal caregivers (family/friends) of persons living with Alzheimer’s  disease or 
another dementia. Participants must be providing at least 4 hours per day unpaid assistance, on average, for a 
person in the early -middle stage of illness ( Clinical Dementia Rating of ≥ 1 by [CONTACT_48444]) who is community -
dwelling and for whom there is no established plan for i nstitutionalization in the next six months.  Caregiver may 
or may not reside with their care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], but care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48407], nursing home, or another institutional setting.   The participant m ust not be involved in another 
caregiver training study and must not have participated in in- person Savvy Caregiver Program or Tele- Savvy 
previously. Each participant  must have access to a computer  or a mobile device with adequate internet 
connection, micr ophone, and speakers (to be able to participate in teleconferences)  and be able to use email 
(this was not a serious barrier in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]).  Participants must be able to read, speak and understand 
English and have no uncorrectable vision or hearing deficits that might impede participation.  Questions posed 
after explaining the project during eligibility determination and the consent process will be used to gauge 
caregivers’ cognitive ability to take part in the project. W ebcams will be m ailed to tho se caregivers who do not 
have them for the duration of the entire program and caregivers will be asked to mail webcams back after 
participation in Tele -Savvy .  
 
Power Analysis and Sample Size Determination Several considerations enter into sample size 
determination: (1) our wish to accommodate as many caregivers as feasible given time/resources; (2) our 
experience and prior results from SCP trials; (3) sample and effect sizes/attrition rates in recent dementia CG 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 9 of 20 meta -analyses. With a final expected sample size of 215 (86, 86, 54 in Tele -Savvy (TS), attention control (AC), 
and usual care (UC) group s respectively), for the primary intervention test (group- by-time effect) comparing the 
outcomes of the three group changes from T1 to T2 to T3 ( 3-by-3 repeated measures design of t hree groups 
measured at three time points), at 80% power and 5% significance level, small -to-moderate effect sizes, 
Cohen’s f = 0.21- 0.24 may be detected for the main effects for group, time and group- by-time interaction 
effec ts (given moderate correlation between measurement pairs of r =0.3-0.5) (power analysis using PASS 14 
Power Analysis and Sample Size Software (2015). NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, Ut ah, [LOCATION_003], 
ncss.com/software/pass). After adjusting for any potential group differenc es, the overall intervention effect of 
the Tele- Savvy program for the combined T1- to-T3 pre -post effects for the immediate Tele- Savvy group plus 
the T3 -to-T5 pre- post effects  from the  AC and UC groups will yield a total estimated [ADDRESS_50922] size of d =0.19 at 80% power and 5% significance level. With the pooled 
sample, we will be able to also test the mediating effects of mastery and  self-efficacy on the Tele- Savvy 
program for the caregiver outcomes. As s hown by [CONTACT_48445] (2007), sample sizes of 148- 196 were 
adequate to achieve 80% power to detect small -to-moderate effect sizes for the indirect effect of the 
independent vari able on the dependent variable through the mediating variable considering both the Sobel test 
as well as percentile and bias -corrected bootstrapped approaches.[ADDRESS_50923] 
to missing data we will enroll 2 70 CGs (108 for TS and AC groups and 54 for UC grou p) per consideration 1 
above (maximize accommodation)  allowing for an expected 20% attrition. For the exploratory aim comparing 
the program’s efficacy across the 3 ethnicity groups, with an expected final sample size of 215 subjects and 
proportions of appr oximately 65% Caucasian, 20% African American, 15% Hispanic, at 80% and 5% level of 
significance, we will be able to detect moderate effect sizes Cohen’s f=0. 19-0.23 (for 3 -group by 2-time point 
RM-ANOVA for group, time and group -by-time effects ).   
 
Recru itment and Consent .  To the e xtent possible, all sites will use existing research registries of PLW D and 
established community partnerships (e.g., with local Alzheimer’s Association chapters or other community agencies) to identify caregivers who might be interested in the study. All study sites have robust recruiting 
networks and strong recruiting track  records; we expect a diverse participant group with 25- 40% minority 
(African American and Latino/Hispanic) participation. All of the ADCs have extensive outreach capacity, so we 
expect candidates will be identified at a distance from, as well as close to the Centers; this was the case in the 
Tele- Savvy pi[INVESTIGATOR_48408], 
Minnesota, and Maine.  We will employ the same enrollment and consent procedures as in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_48409].  
Caregivers wi ll be informed about the study by [CONTACT_48446] [INVESTIGATOR_1660], through referral, by [CONTACT_48447].  If interested, the person will be screened for el igibility by [CONTACT_48448] (by [CONTACT_48449] y).   Those eligible and still interested will be engaged in the consent 
process by [CONTACT_48448]; the process will occur through a documented phone or video consent process.   
 
Computer Set -up and Research Interviews . Cohorts will be composed of consented i ndividuals from the 
study sites (i.e., the cohorts are not site -specific). Once a consented caregiver cohort has been identified, an 
Emory research speciali st (termed a “navigator”) will establish a time for a phone call to take him/her through 
the relativ ely straightforward steps of using email to follow URL links that open Vidyo, the videoconferencing 
application to be used in the project.  Following this and while the navigator and participant are still on the phone, the navigator will send a test email to initiate a Vidyo conference with the person.  [If we have had to 
send a webcam, the navigator will help the participant to install it.]   During the videoconference, the navigator 
will guide the participant through practice in the use of the basic videoconference operations: accepting an 
incoming conference invitation; muting and unmuting the microphone; muting and unmuting the video camera; 
using the chat  function; and ending the conference. At the end of this call, the navigator will schedule a time for 
a data collection call (done in person on Vidyo).  These procedures were effective in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
 
A second Emory research specialist will make the data c ollection call, providing another opportunity to practice 
using Vidyo.  All data collection will be done by a project research specialist at Emory, trained and supervised 
by [CONTACT_48450]- PIs.  This specialist will have no other contact [CONTACT_48451].  For each instrumen t (or portion of each instrument), the 
interviewer will show the response options for the particular scale on the screen, so that the respondent does 
not have to keep those in mind (slides can be projected on the Vidyo platform).  We used this procedure in the 
ADRC pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080]; it worked well and sped up the time of the interviews. Based on experience with the Tele-Savvy pi[INVESTIGATOR_48409], the research interview confe rence takes 40- 60 minutes; it can extend over two calls, if necessary.  
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 10 of 20 All patient records will be kept in a locked file cabinet in the research office at the School of Nursing (i.e. 
Wesley Woods) and will be accessible only to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_44200] . 
 
Subject Randomization, Coordination, and Retention .  Once a cohort of 15 consented subjects has 
been consented and interviewed, the study statistician (Higgins) will use a block randomization scheme to assign equal numbers of members of the cohort to immediate Tele-Savvy or attention control  or usual care wait -list 
participation. As the figure to the right illustrates, the three  
groups will each, over [ADDRESS_50924] -baseline 
Navigators will inform subjects of group assignment and will 
establish a schedule for participation.  For immediate Tele-Savvy participants, start time and time of day for the videoconferences 
will be set . For those in attention control,  start time and time of 
day for the videoconferences will be set likewise.  For those in the usual care condition, an individual schedule 
of “empathic calls” will be established. Videoconferences for both Tele- Savvy and attention control will be 
offered on weekdays (during business hours and evenings) and on weekends to facilitate participation for 
caregivers who may not be able to join videoconferences on weekdays. Caregivers who might be best served 
by a Saturday or an evening program will be placed into a block and randomly  assigned to Tele- Savvy or 
attention control conditions. Caregivers for whom weekday participation is non- problematic will be allocated to 
conditions as described above.  
After navigators inform caregivers about their condition assignment and establish a schedule for 
participation for those in immediate Tele- Savvy and attention control groups , navigators will conduct individual 
videoconferences to introduce them to Canvas , a widely used course management platform that will house the 
daily video lessons.  Ca nvas  allows participants to view video lessons at their own convenience and as often 
as they wish, but it does not allow them to disseminate them.  It allows us to track individual use, so we can monitor the “dose” of each participant’s viewing.   Navigator s will teach caregivers how to login and access 
materials in Canvas and will provide navigators’ contact [CONTACT_3031], reinforcing that caregivers should contact [CONTACT_48452]. Canvas also allows us to post evaluation questionnaires. The videoconference will provide participants with another opportunity to practice with Vidyo and to practice 
opening the lessons (during their participation in Tele- Savvy, navigators will send emails to remind them to 
access the lessons).  The procedure for orienting participants to Canvas will be provided to usual care group 
participants following the 6- month data collection point and prior to their entry to the Tele- Savvy program. In an 
effort to keep them engaged in the study, regardless of group assignment, all subjects will receive a monthly 
study newsletter that will provide information about practices to promote healthy living drawn from NIA’s 
Go4Life program.  The e -newsletters will be sent by [CONTACT_48453].  
 
Immediate Participation Group Procedures. Pr ior to the first group videoconference, Tele- Savvy hard 
materials (caregiver manual; workbook; journal; resource list) will be mailed to participants.  Two days prior to the initial group videoconference (welcoming call), an email will be sent to participants asking them to view the 
orientation video lesson – the first lesson in the Canvas  site.  The initial group videoconference will begin a [ADDRESS_50925] approximately 75 minutes, and follow a fixed agenda and syllabus (see Appendix 
A).  Vidyo allows all o f the participants to see one another (they are also identified on the screen only by [CONTACT_48454]); whoever is speaking is seen in the full -screen.  Vidyo allows participants to ask questions directly 
or through a chat function.  As with Savvy, an important function of the group meetings – following the 
introductory session – is to allow participants to demonstrate (or witness) successful implementation of 
effective caregiving strategies and to ask questions about the material presented during the week’s daily videos or during the conference itself.  The course syllabus and standardized slide decks structure each class 
in 15- 20 minute increments: (1) Facilitators greet and check in with each of the CGs; (2) coaching and 
debriefing (e.g., hearing how (after the first week) CGs did with the homework, answering questions and/or 

Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 11 of 20 responding to feedback about the week’s material; (3) review of key points and concepts from the week’s video 
sessions and introduction of new material (lecture, video vignettes and /or exercise; (4) reports  of self -care 
activities (5) provision of homework assignments and adjournment.  A project navigator will initiate and monitor each videoconference.  The navigator will keep attendance records and troubleshoot the conferences, 
providing real -time assistanc e, should any participant need it; assistance is also logged.  
 
All daily video lessons will be posted on the Canvas site, and participants will receive weekly email reminders 
to view them , at their convenience. Specifically, video s will be posted , by [CONTACT_5875] , in the order they are listed in 
the syllabus (e.g., video 1 on day 1, then video 2 on day 2 ).  Caregivers are not under pressure to “keep up” 
with daily viewing; the program allows participants to view the videos when they are able and as often as they 
wish. Each daily lesson follows the same pattern: (1) Greeting by [CONTACT_48455] (2) Slide presentation of educational 
content (3) caregiving vignettes (a telenovela- type portrayal of a wife and daughter helpi[INVESTIGATOR_48410] 
a husband living with dementia; t he vignettes were written and directed by [CONTACT_24478]- Is and played by [CONTACT_48456]) or guest lecture (4) Recap of key points. The video lessons are 6 -20 minutes in 
length, and they will remain available to participant s for two weeks after pro gram’s end.   
 
Wait List Attention Control Group Condition and Participation .  The attention control condition consist s of 
video and text materials on exercise, diet, and healthy living drawn from the NIA Go4Life program.  While 
these materials provide important and beneficial information, we believe they will not affect our postulated key 
mediators (mood, mastery and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48411]). They will provide equal attention, but should not 
confound the trial.  The same num ber of brief modules as e mployed in Tele- Savvy (36) will be provided over 
the course of six weeks ; videos will emerge on Canvas site weekly  in a manner similar to the Tele- Savvy 
condition described above.  Likewise, navigator will send attention control par ticipants weekly reminder e -mails 
to log into Canvas and view daily videos.   All attention -control participants will convene weekly for a 
videoconference that will mirror Tele- Savvy videoconference in for mat and length but will differ in content. 
Specific ally, attention control videoconferences will not contain any information on caregiving strategies, but 
rather will center on the application of healthy living strategies. A standard structure of each videoconference will be employed by [CONTACT_48457]- control f acilitators: (1) Facilitators greet and check in with each of the caregivers; 
(2) coaching and debriefing (e.g., hearing how (after the first week) caregivers did with the homework, answering questions and /or responding to feedback about the week’s material; (3) review of key points and 
concepts from the week’s video sessions and introduction of new material; (4) reports on any activities that 
caregivers may have implemented based on the Go4Life materials; (5) provision of homework assignments 
and adjournment.   
 
Usual Care . Those randomized to this group will be encouraged to continue to receive care for the person 
living with dementia through whatever arrangement had been in place. Since this group will represent a sort of 
natural history of caregiving, we will not, with o ne exception, ask them to restrict any activity they might 
undertake to seek care for the person or information for themselves.  The exception we will request is that, during the 6- month period, they not enroll in an extended caregiver educ ation program.  If, in the course of 
these 6 months, they participate in support groups, visit education web sites, attend informational seminars 
and/or consult with their health care providers, that will be fine.  These are all part of the natural history . 
 
Approximately  four months after initial data collection, attention -control and usual care participant s will be 
contact[CONTACT_48458]- Savvy which will begin 6 months after their baseline 
assessment .  Their Tele- Savvy experienc e will be exactl y the same as that described above ( Immediate 
Participation Group Procedures).  These participants will be offered the opportunity of another practice 
session with Vidyo and Canvas prior to the beginning of Tele- Savvy.    
 
Category  Instrumen t Instrument Description  Psychometrics  
Baseline Only  
PLWA Cognitive 
Status  Informant Questionnaire 
on Cognitive Decline in 
the Elderly ( IQCODE ),  A 16-item rating scale (can be informant 
completed) not contaminated by [CONTACT_48459]; predicts dementia dx as 
well or better than the MMSE. 109-110 
Demographic 
Information  Demographic sheet 
Caregiving History  SES, PLWA information, length of 
caregiving, co -residence with recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841].  Study-developed form (Baseline 
only)  
 
PLWA ADLs  Lawton ADL/IADL scale  13-item scale elicits caregiver assessment 
of PLWA ADL and IADL functioning  Interrater reliability betw een .87 -
.[ZIP_CODE]  
[Caregiver Vars]  
Appraisal: Stress  Perceived Stress  
Scale  14-item Likert -type questionnaire; higher 
scores reflect higher perceived stress  Internal consistency ranges 
reported  at 0.84 or higher.112 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 12 of 20  
Data Collection.   Data  will be collected at baseline and at four subsequent points (months 3 , 6, 9, and 12 ). 
Each data collection event will follow the same procedure used with the baseline interviews.  The Navigator will 
establish the appointment for the Vidyo interview, and t he research specialist, blinded to condition, will conduct 
the interview.  The data collection schedule allows for a direct comparison of outcome measures between groups (at 3 and 9 months); it allows for an examination of prolonged effects (at 9  and 12 months) in the 
immediate participation group; and it allows for pooling of data across both groups to examine the mediating effects of mastery on distal outcomes in caregivers and PLW D and to compare effects across racial/ethnic 
groups . Qualitative evalu ation interview s will occur at T2 and T 3 for a sub- sample of immediate and T4 and T 5 
for a sub -sample of attention control subjects.  
 
III. G. Variables and Measures.  The table above  delineates the battery of standardized instruments we will 
employ; these have well- established psychometric properties (reliability, validity), are used extensively with 
dementia caregivers, and have been used previously in the Savvy Caregiver trials.  
 
As depi[INVESTIGATOR_48412] , there is a link between our theoretical model and the measures used to test it.  
Most data will be gathered through the regular interviews, some data will be obtained from self -reported 
evaluations that caregivers will complete through forms posted on the Canvas site (for example, through logs 
on the C anvas  site in which caregivers report caregiving behaviors they have enacted). After each program, 
caregivers will be asked, in phone or Vidyo interviews conducted by [CONTACT_48460], to evaluate the program, indicating what they did/did not like, w hat did/did not work, how the intervention was helpful or not, 
and how they would change it. Blackboard will allow us to monitor adherence, dosage and intensity of the Depression  Center for 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_48413] -Depression  A 20 item Likert scale scored 0 -3 with 
somatic and psychological subscales  Alpha=.85 for general population; 
validity well -established98 
Anxiety  State -Trait Anxiety 
Inventory  A 20-item 4 -point Likert scale is sensitive to 
changes in transitory anxiety  STAI state sensitive reliability 
reported  at .9499 
Burden  the Zarit Burden 
Inventory (ZBI),  A 22-item 4 -point Likert scale, widely used 
in caregiving studies  Used in multiple studies with well -
established validity113 
Dyadic 
Relationship  Dyadic Relationship 
Scale  11-item scale assesses dyadic strain and 
dyadic interaction perceived by [CONTACT_48461] = .84 and .[ZIP_CODE] 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_48414]  A 42-item scale with 4 -point Likert 
responses identifies emotion-  and problem -
focused copi[INVESTIGATOR_48415] -
established validity115  
Caregiver Mastery  Pearlin Mastery, Loss, 
and Competence  6 brief (3 -6 item) Likert scales assessing 
mastery and loss dimensions  Alpha coefficients from .[ADDRESS_50926]  Positive Appraisal of 
Care Scale: 
Consequential Gain  6-item subscale prov iding caregiver self -
rating of benefits and positive experiences 
of caregiving  Cronbach’s alpha 0.[ADDRESS_50927] 
reliability 0.86 (p<0.01).117 
Caregiver Self-
Care  Mindful Self -Care Scale 
Sub-scales  Sub-scales related to supportive 
relationships (5 items); self -compassion 
and purpose (6); mindful relaxation (6); 
clinical (6); and general (3) [26 items total]  Cronbach’s alpha 0.89 for the total 
33-item scale  (excluding sub-
scales Clinical and General); 0.83 
for Self -Compassion and Purpose 
sub-scale; 0.[ADDRESS_50928] reliability 0.[ZIP_CODE] 
[PLWA Variables]  
Quality of Life  Quality of Life Scale in 
Alzheimer’s Disease  Assesses QOL in 13 domains on a 1 -4 
point Likert scale. Used as a self -report 
and surrogate -report instrument  Good internal consistency (Cohen’s 
α=.86) and inter -rater reliability 
(Cohen’s  Κ>.70) .[ADDRESS_50929] correlations between 
total symptom and distress scores in15 subjects were 0.80 and 0.94, 
respectively (P<  
0.0001 for both.121 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 13 of 20 interventi on.  We will be able to track, for each participant, which daily videos were viewed, when they were 
viewed and in what pattern (e.g., daily or in a batch), and how often.  Attendance in the videoconferences will 
be recorded. We will also document any indic ations – through participant complaints or the Navigator’s log – of 
participant burden (e.g., complaints voiced during interviews or need to split interviews over multiple sessions) and reports of barriers to participation (e.g., CGs unable to join call, quality of audio/video).   
 
Data Management and Analysis Plan   Data will 
be entered at the time of each interview directly into 
the dedicated project tablet computer and saved on 
Emory’s secure REDCAP platform.  All data entry 
screens are set up in REDCAP and, where possible, 
include data delimiters (i.e., skip patterns, valid 
range limits) to ensure correctness and minimize 
missing data.  Data will be exported into SPSS 
weekly and syntax run for cleaning, further data 
verification and file concatenation.  
 
Data integrity checks.   After each cohort data-
gathering point, all data will be merged in SPSS for scale computation, aggregation, and inferential analysis.  In preliminary analyses, descriptive 
statistics and frequency distributions will be 
examined to identify outliers and ensure integrity of 
merged files.  For all multi -item s cales, internal consistency will be examined using Cronbach’s alpha and 
associated statistics (e.g., item -total correlations, alpha if item deleted).  Formal test -retest/inter -rater reliability 
coefficients will be computed as dat a are concatenated.  
 
Anal ytic approach .  Preliminary analyses will examine baseline differences among completers and non-
completers and by [CONTACT_30157] (immediate/attention control/usual care) as a randomization check using means/SDs/Inter -quartile range and t -tests for continuous variables and counts/percentages and N- Par/Chi -
Square tests for categorical variables. The association of predisposing factors (demographics, CG history, 
relationship and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48416]) with baseline data as well as change in outcomes over time 
will be examined using goodness of fit, variance analysis, or correlational techniques depending upon measurement characteristics of variables involved.  Where significant baseline associations are detected, 
these potential confounders  will be contr olled in subsequent tests of major hypotheses through use of 
covariates/model adjustments.  
 
Aims 1, 2 and 3 (a) . Our primary aims are concerned with assessing the effect of the Tele -Savvy program for 
reducing or retarding the burden, depression, and anxiety of Alzheimer’s family caregiving, promoting the quality of life of persons with Alzheimer’s (BPSD, agitation;  Quality of Life; affect), and enhancing caregiver 
mastery. We will employ multi- level mixed effects models (MLM) with random (participant) and fixed (cohort) 
effects to test linear (and non- linear) trajectories of change for the intervention groups and model group X time 
and group*time interactions. To compare the Tele- Savvy intervention to the attention control and usual care  
groups, the first [ADDRESS_50930] follow- up time point (T1 -to-
T2-toT3 for the immediate group and T3 -to-T4-to-T5 for the attention control and usual care groups 
respectively). These combined time points will be referred to as cT1, cT2, cT3. If there are significant 
differences between or among  the 3 groups at the time point immediately prior to receipt of the  intervention 
(cT1), these “baseline” effects will be included and adjusted for in the final model. Overall time effects will be 
assessed as well as planned post hoc comparisons for immediate effects (cT1 to cT2), longer term effect (cT1 
to cT3) and sustained effects (cT2 to cT3). Sidak Type- I error rate adjustment (which has higher power than 
Bonferroni) will be applied for the multiple pairwise time point comparisons.122 Additionally, longer term 
sustained effects will be captured for the immediate Tele-Savvy group using the additional follow- up times at 
T4 and T5 for this group. The proposed study design has the advantage of capturing 3 “baseline” time points 
for the wait -list attention control and usual care groups which will provide an excellent opportunity to evaluate 
what if any potential “placebo” effects there may be from being enrolled in this type  of study.123 These initial 

Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 14 of 20 data captured at T1- T2-T3 for the delay group will also be used to evaluate any potential decline occurring 
during this time period. All model assumptions will be tested; grand mean centering used to help combat multi -
collinearity between variables; and standard diagnostic tests and influence statistics used t o test the 
distributions of the residuals. MLM models utilize all available data for all participants at each time point and 
have the advantage of adjusting for the missing data over time, where repeated measures ANOVAs do not. 
Further covariate predictors  of missingness over time will be included to additionally adjust for these 
confounders124 To aid i n final interpretation we will include the 95% confidence intervals around means by 
[CONTACT_48462]. SPSS v.22 will be used for all analyses at the 5% significance level .122 
 
Aim 3(b) . To test the mediating effect of mastery on Aim 1 & [ADDRESS_50931] through bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The focus will 
be on both the immediate (T2 for immediate Tele- Savvy group and T4 for attention control  and usual care 
groups pooled together) and sustained (T3 for immediate Tele -Savvy group and T5 for attent ion control and 
usual care  groups  pooled together) effects of Tele- Savvy on the mediating measure of mastery on the Aim [ADDRESS_50932]/mediation effects will also be tested and evaluated using 
structural equation modeling via AMOS v.22.[ADDRESS_50933] whether the program had similar or different 
effects across racial/ethnic groups (African Ameri can, Caucasian, and Latino/Hispanic).  We plan to use the 
ANCOVA technique to conduct this analysis, using rac e/ethnicity as the covariate of interest.  We expect to 
conduct a similar analysis to examine differences in impact on rural versus urban caregive rs.  As our 
enrollment table indicates, we expect a 20:65:15 African American:Caucasian:Latino subject distribution. The 
qualitative interviews of participants will enable us to explore the extent to which Tele- Savvy meets caregivers’ 
needs, regardless of race/ethnicity and whether, and, if so, how, it might need to be adjusted to better address 
the caregiving sit uations of particular groups.  
 
We will use the technique of constant comparison127 to analyze the qualitative evaluation data gathered from 
Tele- Savvy participants (at a point four -months after participation).  Co- PI [INVESTIGATOR_48417], identifying codes that indicate unique observations  expressed by [CONTACT_48463][INVESTIGATOR_48418].  They will compare codes and themes to arrive at mutually agreed upon revisions/refinements in 
the developi[INVESTIGATOR_48419] ([CONTACT_48468] will adjudi cate any unresolvable disagreements) and then apply 
the scheme to transcripts over the course of the project.  As significant new themes are identified, previously 
coded transcripts will be re- read, applying the revised scheme.  
 
Limitations and Challenges. Our decision to limit participation to caregivers with computers and internet 
access is based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_48420]. In the ADRC pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we required participants to have their own 
computers and internet connection; we encountered very few problems.  Access is not universal among 
caregivers, so results will not generalize to all caregivers, but, as noted, internet use in the target age groups 
(middle -aged and older) continues to rise.128 We will employ easy -to-use platforms (Vidyo and Canvas ) for 
Tele- Savvy and attention c ontrol conditions; both platforms are accessed by a simple click on an email -
supplied link.  Navigators can train caregivers to use Canvas and technical assistance of navigators will be 
provided (via phone and e- mail).  A navigator will monitor all Tele- Savv y videoconferences to address any 
technical problems that might arise.  We plan to conduct the videoconferences during weekday working hours; 
this may be a barrier for some eligible caregivers.  To address this, we will schedule an occasional program on 
a weekend or in the evening. While recruitment is always a reasonable concern, our experience with the pi[INVESTIGATOR_48421]; operati ng with very little support, we were easily able to recruit [ADDRESS_50934] as strong as that at Emor y. There were very few dropouts in the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_48422] (<10%); we have used a 25% attr ition rate to be 
conservative in our estimates for our recruitment target.  
 
 
 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 15 of 20 References  
 
 
1. Alzheimer's A. 2016 Alzh eimer's disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 2016;12(4):459 -509. 
2. Hepburn K, Lewis M, Tornatore J, Sherman CW, Bremer KL. The Savvy Caregiver program: the demonstrated effectiveness of a transportable dementia caregiver psychoeducation program. J 
Gerontol Nurs. 2007;33(3):30 -36. 
3. Gallagher -Thompson D, Coon DW. Evidence- based psychological treatments for distr ess in family 
caregivers of older adults. Psychol Aging. 2007;22(1):37- 51. 
4. Martin -Carrasco M, Ballesteros -Rodriguez J, Dominguez -Panchon AI, Munoz -Hermoso P, Gonzalez -
Fraile E. Interventions for caregivers of patients with dementia. Actas Esp Psiquiatr.  2014;42(6):300-
314. 
5. Sorensen S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Duberstein P. How effective are interventions with caregivers? An updated 
meta -analysis. Gerontologist. 2002;42(3):356- 372. 
6. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Sorensen S. Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_48423]: which interv entions work and 
how large are their effects? Int Psychogeriatr. 2006;18(4):577 -595. 
7. Czaja SJ, Loewenstein D, Schulz R, Nair SN, Perdom o D. A videophone psychosocial intervention for 
dementia caregivers. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;21(11):1071 -1081.  
8. Finkel S, Czaja SJ, Schulz R, Martinovich Z, Harris C, Pezzuto D. E -care: a telecommunications 
technology intervention for family caregi vers of dementia patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2007;15(5):443 -448. 
9. Glueckauf RL, Davis WS, Willis F, et al. Telephone- based, cognitive- behavioral therapy for African 
American dementia caregivers with depression: initial findings. Rehabil Psychol. 2 012;57(2):[ADDRESS_50935]. Evaluation of a telephone- based support group intervention for female caregivers of 
community -dwelling individuals with dementia. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2006;21(6):391-
397. 
11. Griffiths L, Blignault I, Yellowlees P. Telemedicine as a means of delivering cognitive- behavioural 
therapy to rural and remote mental health c lients. J Telemed Telecare. 2006;12(3):[ADDRESS_50936] of telecare manage ment on pain and depression in patients 
with cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2010;304(2):163 -171. 
13. Luptak M, Dailey N, Juretic M, et al. The Care Coordination Home Telehealth (CCHT) rural 
demonstration project: a symptom -based approach for serving older veterans in remote geographical 
settings. Rural Remote Health. 2010;10(2):1375.  
14. Taylor DM, Cameron JI, Walsh L, et al. Exploring the feasibility of videoconference delivery of a self -
management program to rural participants with stroke. Telemed J E Health. 2009;15(7):[ADDRESS_50937]. 2005;45(6):793- 801. 
16. Kajiyama B, Thompson LW, Eto- Iwase T, et al. Expl oring the effectiveness of an internet -based 
program for reducing caregiver distress using the iCare Stress Management e -Training Program. Agin g 
Ment Health. 2013;17(5):544- 554. 
17. Lewis ML, Hobday JV, Hepburn KW. Internet -based program for dementia caregivers. Am J Alzheimers 
Dis Other Demen. 2010;25(8):674- 679. 
18. Cristancho- Lacroix V, Wrobel J, Cantegreil -Kallen I, Dub T, Rouquette A, Rigaud AS. A web -based 
psychoeducational program for informal caregivers of patients with Alzheimer's disease: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_48424]. J Med Internet Res. 2015;17(5):e117.  
19. Ducharme FC, Levesque LL, Lachance LM, et al. "Learning to become a famil y caregiver" efficacy of 
an intervention program for caregivers following diagnosis of dementia in a relative. Gerontologist. 
2011;51(4):484 -494. 
20. Hayden LJ, Glynn SM, Hahn TJ, Randall F, Randolph E. The use of Internet technology for psychoeducation and support with dementia caregivers. Psy chol Serv. 2012;9(2):215 -218. 
21. Lai CK, Wong LF, Liu KH, Lui W, Chan MF, Yap LS. Online and onsite training for family caregivers of 
people with dementia: results from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;28(1):107 -108. 
22. Liddle J, Smith- Conwa y ER, Baker R, et al. Memory and communication support strategies in 
dementia: effect of a training program for informal caregivers. Int Psychogeriatr. 2012;24(12):1927 -
1942.  
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50938] JD, et al. Video- based copi[INVESTIGATOR_48425] -being in Alzheimer's disease family caregivers. Psychosom 
Med. 2010;72(9):897- 904. 
24. Boots LM, de Vugt ME, van Knippenberg RJ, Kempen GI, Verhey FR. A systematic review of Internet -
based s upportive interventions for caregivers of patients with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2014;29(4):331 -344. 
25. Abner EL, Jicha GA, Christian WJ, Schreurs BG. Rural -Urban Differences in Alzheimer's Disease and 
Related Disorders Diagnostic Prevalence in Kentucky and West Virginia. J Rural Health. 
2016;32(3):314 -320. 
26. Morgan DG, Semchuk KM, Stewart NJ, D'Arcy C. Rural families caring for a relative with dementia: 
barriers to use of formal services. Soc Sci Med. 20 02;55(7):1129 -1142.  
27. Morgan DG, Stew art NJ, Crossley M, et al. Dementia care in rural and remote areas: the first year of a 
CIHR new emerging team. Can J Nurs Res. 2005;37(1):177 -182. 
28. Singh GK, Siahpush M. Widening rural -urban disparities in life ex pectancy, U.S., 1969 -2009. Am J Prev 
Med. 2014;46(2):e19- 29. 
29. Zhu CW, Scarmeas N, Torgan R, et al. Clinical characteristics and longitudinal changes of informal cost 
of Alzheimer's disease in the community. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54(10):1596- 1602.  
30. Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary costs of dementia in the United 
States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(14):1326 -1334.  
31. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Sorensen S. Associations of stressors and uplifts of caregiving with caregiver burden and 
depressi ve mood: a meta- analysis. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2003;58(2):P112- 128. 
32. Schulz R, Beach SR. Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: the Caregiver Health Effects Study. JAMA. 1999;282(23):2215- 2219.  
33. Schulz R, Sherwood PR. Physical and mental health effects of family caregiving. Am J Nurs. 
2008;108([ADDRESS_50939]):23 -27; quiz 27.  
34. Kiecolt -Glaser JK, Dura JR, Speicher CE, Trask OJ, Glaser R. Spousal caregivers of dementia victims: 
longitudinal changes in immunity and health. Psychosom Med. 1991 ;53(4):345- 362. 
35. Covinsky KE, Eng C,  Lui LY, et al. Reduced employment in caregivers of frail elders: impact of 
ethnicity, patient clinical characteristics, and caregiver characteristics. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2001;56(11):M707- 713. 
36. Gaugler JE, Zarit SH, Pearlin LI. Caregiving and institutionalization: perceptions of family conflict and 
socioemotional support. Int J Aging Hum Dev. 1999;49(1):[ADDRESS_50940]. 2006;21(3):170 -174. 
38. Foley KL, Tung HJ, Mutran EJ. Self -gain and self -loss among African American and white caregivers. J 
Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2002;57(1):S14 -22. 
39. Bass DM,  Judge KS, Snow AL, et al. Caregiver outcomes of partners in dementia care: effect of a care 
coordination program for veterans with dementia and their family members and friends. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61(8):1377 -1386.  
40. Hebert R, Dubois MF, Wolf son C, C hambers L, Cohen C. Factors associated with long- term 
institutionalization of older people with dementia: data from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56(11):M693- 699. 
41. Molloy DW, Bedard M, Pedlar D, Lever JA. In stitutionalization in cognitively -impaired inviduals. Clinical 
Gerontologist. 1999;20(2):3- 22. 
42. Noelker LS. Incontinence in elderly cared for by [CONTACT_5569]. Gerontologist. 1987;27(2):194 -200. 
43. Teri L, Logsdon RG, Uomoto J, McCurry SM. Behavioral treatment of depression in dementia patients: a controlled clinical trial. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 1997;52(4):P159- 166. 
44. Folkman S, Lazarus RS. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_25415] a mediator of emotion. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1988;54(3):466 -475. 
45. Gallagher -Thompson D, Steffen AM. Comparative effects of cognitive -behavioral and brief 
psychodynamic psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_48426]. J Consult Clin Psychol. 
1994;62(3):543 -549. 
46. Cooper C, Balamurali TB, Selwood A, Livingston G. A systematic review of interv ention s tudies about 
anxiety in caregivers of people with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007;22(3):181 -188. 
47. Zarit SH, Femia EE. A future for family care and dementia intervention research? Challenges and 
strategies. Aging Ment Health. 2008;12(1): 5-13. 
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50941] caregivers to support people with 
dementia living in the community: a systematic review. Int J Evid Based Healthc. 2008;6(2):137- 172. 
49. Gitlin LN, Hodgson N. Caregivers as t herapeut ic agents in dementia care: The evidence -base for 
interventions supporting their role. In: Gaugler JE, Kane RL, eds. Family caregiving in the new normal . 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, Inc.; 2015:305 -356. 
50. Belle SH, Burgio L, Burns R, et al. Enhanc ing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different 
ethnic or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145(10):727 -738. 
51. Mittelman MS, Roth DL, Haley WE, Zarit SH. Effects of a caregiver intervention on negative caregiver appraisals of behavior problems in patients with Alzheimer's disease: results of a randomized trial. J 
Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2004;59(1):P27 -34. 
52. Department of Health and Human Services. Justification of estimates for appropriations commi ttees. 
Washington, DC2015.  
53. Bedard M, Koivuranta A, Stuckey A. Health impact on caregivers of providing informal care to a cognitively impaired older adult: rural versus urban settings. Can J Rural Med. 2004;9(1):15- 23. 
54. Chwalisz K, Clancy Dollinger SM, O'Ne il Zerth E, Tamkin VL. Education, training, and support for rural 
caregivers. In: Talley RC, Chwalisz K, Buckwalter KC, eds. Rural caregiving in the [LOCATION_002]: 
Research, practice, policy . [LOCATION_001], NY: Springer; 2011.  
55. Davis LL, Gilliss CL, Harper M S. Family caregiving: implications for rural practice, policy, education, 
and research. In: Talley RC, Chwalisz K, Buckwalter KC, eds. Rural caregiving in the [LOCATION_002]: 
Research, Practice, Policy . [LOCATION_001], NY: Springer; 2011.  
56. Glymour MM, Koshelev a A, Wadley VG, Weiss C, Manly JJ. Geographic distribution of dementia 
mortality: elevated mortality rates for black and white Americans by [CONTACT_48464]. Alzheimer Dis Assoc 
Disord. 2011;25(3):196 -202. 
57. Innes A, Morgan D, Kosteniuk J. Dementia care in  rural and remote settings: a systematic review of 
informal/family caregiving. Maturitas. 2011;68(1):34- 46. 
58. The National Advisory Committee on Rural Health and Human Services. The 2008 report to the 
Secretary: rural health and human services is sues. 2008.  
59. Rocca WA, Petersen RC, Knopman DS, et al. Trends in the incidence and prevalence of Alzheimer's 
disease, dementia, and cognitive impairment in the [LOCATION_002]. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7(1):80-
93. 
60. Russ TC, Batty GD, Hearnshaw GF, Fenton C, Sta rr JM. Geographical variation in dementia: 
systematic review with meta -analysis. Int J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2012;41(4):1012 -1032.  
61. Black BS, Johnston D, Rabins PV, Morrison A, Lyketsos C, Samus QM. Unmet needs of community -
residing persons with dementia and their  informal caregivers: findings from the maximizing 
independence at home study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61(12):2087 -2095.  
62. Fox S, Brenner J. Family caregivers online. 2012.  
63. Kim H. Understanding Internet Use Among Dementia Caregivers: Results of Secondary Data Analysis Using the US Caregiver Survey Data. Interact J Med Res. 2015;4(1):e1.  
64. Stellefson M, Chaney B, Barry AE , et al. Web 2.0 chronic disease self -management for older adults: a 
systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2013;15(2):e35.  
65. Erickson J, Johnson GM. Internet use and psychological wellness during late adulthood. Can J Aging. 
2011;30(2):197 -209. 
66. Glue ckauf RL, Ketterson TU, Loomis JS, Dages P. Online support and education for dementia 
caregivers: overview, utilization, and initial  program evaluation. Telemed J E Health. 2004;10(2):223-
232. 
67. Mahoney DF, Tarlow BJ, Jones RN. Effects of an automated telephone support system on caregiver 
burden and anxiety: findings from the REACH for TLC intervention study. Gerontologist. 
2003;43(4 ):556 -567. 
68. Blom MM, Zarit SH, Groot Zwaaftink RB, Cuijpers P,  Pot AM. Effectiveness of an Internet intervention 
for family caregivers of people with dementia: results of a randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 
2015;10(2):e0116622.  
69. Kwok T, Au A, Wo ng B, Ip I, Mak V, Ho F. Effectiveness of online cognitive behavi oral therapy on family 
caregivers of people with dementia. Clin Interv Aging. 2014;9:631- 636. 
70. Marziali E, Garcia LJ. Dementia caregivers' responses to 2 Internet -based intervention programs. Am J 
Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2011;26(1):36- 43. 
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50942]. Health So c Care Community. 2008;16(1):75 -85. 
72. Algase DL, Beattie ER, Antonakos C, Beel -Bates CA, Yao L. Wandering and the physical environment. 
Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2010;25(4):340- 346. 
73. Beck CK, Vogelpohl TS, Rasin JH, et al. Effects of behavioral  interventions on disruptive behavior and 
affect in demented nurs ing home residents. Nurs Res. 2002;51(4):219- 228. 
74. Buckwalter KC, Gerdner L, Kohout F, et al. A nursing intervention to decrease depression in family 
caregivers of persons with dementia. A rch Psychiatr Nurs. 1999;13(2):80 -88. 
75. Harvath TA, Patsdaughter CA, Bumbalo JA, McCann MK. Dementia- related behaviors in Alzheimer's 
disease and AIDS. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv. 1995;33(1):35 -39. 
76. Kovach CR, Noonan PE, Schlidt AM, Wells T. A model of consequences of need -driven, dementia -
compromised behavi or. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2005;37(2):134- 140; discussion 140.  
77. Burgio L, Stevens A, Guy D, Roth DL, Haley WE. Impact of two psychosocial interventions on white 
and African American family caregivers of individuals with dementia. Gerontologist. 2003;43(4):568 -
579. 
78. Coon DW, Thompson L, Steffen A, Sorocco K, Gallagher -Thompson D. Anger and depression 
management: psychoeducational skill training interventions for women caregivers of a relative with 
dementia. Gerontologist. 2003;43(5):678- 689. 
79. Gallagher -Thompson D, DeVries HM. "Copi[INVESTIGATOR_48427]" classes: development and preliminary 
outcomes with women who care for relatives with dementia. Gerontologist. 1994;34(4):548- 552. 
80. Allen CK . Occupational therapy: functional assessment of the severity of mental disorders. Hosp 
Community Psychiatry. 1988;39(2):[ADDRESS_50943], Kales HC, Lyketsos CG. Nonpharmacologic management of behavioral symptoms in 
dementia. JAMA. 2012;308(19):2020- 2029.  
82. Gitlin LN, Winter L, Burke J, Chernett N, Dennis MP, Ha uck WW. Tailored activities to manage 
neuropsychiatric behaviors in persons with dementia and reduce caregiver burden: a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008;16(3):[ADDRESS_50944], Winter L, Corcoran M, Dennis MP, Schinfeld S, Hauck  WW. Effects of the home 
environmental skill -building program on the caregiver -care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48428]: 6- month outcomes from the 
Philadelphia REACH Initiative. Gerontologist. 2003;43(4):532 -546. 
84. Anderson RA, Bailey DE, Jr., Wu B, et al. Adaptive leadershi p framework for chronic illness: framing a 
research agenda for transforming care delivery. ANS Adv Nurs Sci. 2015;38(2):83- 95. 
85. Ryan P, Sawin KJ. The Individual and Family Self -Management Theory: background and perspectives 
on context, process, and outc omes. Nurs Outlook. 2009;57(4):217 -225 e216.  
86. Bandura A. Self -efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychol Rev. 1977;84(2):191-
215. 
87. Bandura A. Human agency in social cognitive theory. Am Psychol. 1989;44(9):1175- 1184.  
88. Folkman S, Lazarus RS, Gruen RJ, DeLongis A. Appraisal, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], health status, and psychological 
symptoms. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1986;50(3):571 -579. 
89. Folkman S. Personal control and stress and copi [INVESTIGATOR_48429]: a theoretical analysis. J Pers Soc 
Psychol. 1984;46(4):839 -852. 
90. Pearlin LI, Schooler C. The structure of copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. J Health Soc Behav. 1978;19(1):2- 21. 
91. Hepburn KW, Lewis M, Nelson Kirk L, et al. Partners in caregiving. Clinical Gerontologist. 
2006;29(1):53 -69. 
92. Ostwald SK, Hepburn KW, Caron W, Bur ns T, Mantell R. Reducing caregiver burden: a randomized 
psychoeducational intervention for caregivers of persons with dementia. Gerontologist. 1999;39(3):299-
309. 
93. Hepburn KW, Lewis M, Sherman CW, Tornatore J. The savvy caregiver program: developi[INVESTIGATOR_14632] a transportable dementia family caregiver training program. Gerontologist. 2003;43(6):[ADDRESS_50945]: translating an 
evidence- based dementia family caregiver program w ithin the RE -AIM Framework. J Gerontol Soc 
Work. 2014;57(6 -7):640- 661. 
Version Date: 12. 09.2019  Page 19 of 20 95. Kally Z, Cote SD, Gonzalez J, et al. The Savvy Caregiver Program: impact of an evidence- based 
intervention on the well- being of ethnically diverse caregivers. J Gerontol Soc Work. 2014;57(6- 7):681 -
693. 
96. Samia LW, Hepburn K, Nichols L. "Flying by [CONTACT_48465]": what dementia family caregivers 
want in an advanced caregiver training program. Res Nurs Health. 2012;35(6):598- 609. 
97. Bedard M, Molloy DW, Squire L, Dubois S, Lever JA, O'Donnell M. The Zarit Burden Interview: a new 
short version and sc reening version. Gerontologist. 2001;41(5):652- 657. 
98. Radloff S. The CES -D Scale: A self -report depression scale f or research in the general population. 
Applied Psychological Measurement. 1977(1):385- 401. 
99. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_33594], Vagg PR. Psychometric propert ies of the STAI: a reply to Ramanaiah, Franzen, and 
Schill. J Pers Assess. 1984;48(1):95 -97. 
100. Pearlin LI, Mullan JT, Semple SJ, Skaff MM. Caregiving and the stress process: an overview of 
concepts and their measures. Gerontologist. 1990;30(5):583 -594. 
101. Teri L, Truax P, Logsdon R, Uomoto J, Zarit S, Vitaliano PP. Assessment of behavioral problems in 
dementia: the  revised memory and behavior problems checklist. Psychol Aging. 1992;7(4):622- 631. 
102. Griffiths PC, Sanford JA. ADL task performance in mobility impaired older dyads: preliminary data from the CG ASSIST pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. Assistive Technology: From Research to Pract ice: AATE. 2013;33:446.  
103. Sanford JA, Griffiths PC. Using remote tele -video technology to provide in- home AT assessment and 
training to m obility -impaired elders and their caregivers. Assistive Technology: From Research to 
Practice. 2013;33:741 -747. 
104. Boise L, Eckstrom E, Fagnan L, et al. The rural older adult memory (ROAM) study: a practice -based 
intervention to improve dementia screening and diagnosis. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010;23(4):486 -498. 
105. Boise L, Neal MB, Kaye J. Dementia assessment in prima ry care: results from a study in three 
managed care systems. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2004;59(6):M621 -626. 
106. Connell CM, Boise L, Stuckey JC, Holmes SB, Hudson ML. Attitudes toward the diagnosi s and 
disclosure of dementia among family caregivers a nd primary care physicians. Gerontologist. 
2004;44(4):500 -507. 
107. Galvin JE, Meuser TM, Morris JC. Improving physician awareness of Alzheimer disease and enhancing 
recruitment: the Clinician Partners Program. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2012;26(1):[ADDRESS_50946]. Psychol Sci. 2007;18(3):233 -239. 
109. Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderl y (IQCODE): 
socio -demographic correlates, reliability,  validity and some norms. Psychol Med. 1989;19(4):1015 -
1022.  
110. Jorm AF, Scott R, Cullen JS, MacKinnon AJ. Performance of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) as a screening test for dementia. Psychol Med. 1991;21(3):785- 790. 
111. Lawton MP, Brody EM. Assessment of older people: self -maintaining and instrumental activities of daily 
living. Gerontologist. 1969;9(3):179 -186. 
112. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A gl obal measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983;24(4):385 -396. 
113. Zarit SH, Reever KE, Bach- Peterson J. Relatives of the impaired elderly: correlates of feelings of 
burden. Gerontologist. 1980;20(6):649 -655. 
114. Sebern MD, Whitlatch CJ. Dyadi c relationship scale: a measure of the impact of the p rovision and 
receipt of family care. Gerontologist. 2007;47(6):741- 751. 
115. Vitaliano PP, Russo J, Carr JE, Maiuro RD, Becker J. The Ways of Copi[INVESTIGATOR_48430]: Revision and Psychometric Properties. Multivariate Behav Res. 1985;20(1):3 -26. 
116. Farran CJ, Fogg LG, McCann JJ, Etkin C, Dong X, Barnes LL. Assessing family caregiver skill in managing behavioral symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. Aging Ment Health. 2011;15(4):[ADDRESS_50947]. 2001;15(2):113 -135; 
discussion 137- 141. 
118. Cook -Cottone CP, Guyker W. The Mindful Self -Care Scale: m indful self -care as a tool to promote 
physical, emotional, and cognitive well -being. 2016, manuscript in preparation.  
119. Lorig K, Stewart A, Ritter P, Gonzalez V, Laurent D, Lynch J. Outcome measures for health education 
and other health care interventions.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1996.  
Version Date: 12. 09.[ADDRESS_50948]? The validity and 
reliability of the Quality of Life -Alzheimer's Disease (QoL- AD) scale. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
2003;17(4):201 -208. 
121. Kaufer DI, Cummings JL, Ketchel P, et al. Validation of the NPI -Q, a brief clinical form of the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2000;12(2):233- 239. 
122. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows  [computer program]. Vers ion 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp; 2013.  
123. Benedetti F. Placebo effects: understanding the mechanisms in health and disease.  Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; 2014.  
124. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Longitudinal data analysis.  John Wiley & Sons; 2006.  
125. Hayes AF. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression- based 
approach.  [LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford Press; 2013.  
126. Arbuckle J. AMOS. [LOCATION_001], NY: IBM Corporation; 2013.  
127. Lincoln YS, Guba EG. Naturalistic inquiry.  Sage; 1985.  
128. Smith A. Older adults and technology use. 2014; http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/04/03/older -adults -
and-technology -use/.  
 