Page 1 of 28 SCOR Grant:  
Project I  
 
Sex Differences and Progesterone:   
Association with Impulsivity and Smoking Cessation  
 
“Hormones & Smoking Cessation”  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_54278] S. Allen, M.D., Ph.D.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
 
 
Version:  
14.0 
 
 
Date:  
January 24, 2017   
Page 2 of 28 A.  SPECIFIC AIMS  
Cigarette smoking persists as the leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality ( Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), 2010 ). Although there have been many advancements in smoking cessation 
interventions, the maj ority of smokers relapse soon after a quit attempt ( CDC, 2010; Benowitz, 2009 ). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_54279] a smoking -related disease,  females  are at a higher risk for smoking relapse 
compared to males  (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  (USDHHS), 2001; Perkins & Scott, 
2008 ). While the specific causal mechanisms associated with the sex difference in relapse rates remain 
unknown, increasing evidence suggests sex hormones may drive this disparity.  
Overall, research to date indicates that estrogen is associated with the facilitation of drug -abuse behaviors, 
whereas progesterone is associated with reduction of these behaviors (Carroll & Anker, 2010; Lynch & 
Sofuoglu, 2010).  While the clinical literat ure is mixed, o ur work offers additional support for this theory as the 
luteal phase (high progesterone) of the female menstrual cycle appears to be  associated with decreased 
smoking -related s ymptomatology (Allen et al 2009b ) and improved smoking cessation  outcomes (Allen et al 
2008; Allen et al 2009c)  relative to the follicular phase (low progesterone) .   
Cigarette smokers appear to  be more impulsive than non -smokers (Bic kel et al 1999 ), and higher levels of 
impulsivity are associated with increased risk f or smoking relapse (Doran et al 2004 ).  Sex differences have 
been observed in this association such that females  are more susceptible to the effects of impulsivity on 
smoking (Nieva et al 2011).  Preliminary evidence suggests  sex hormones may play a role a s females  who 
have recently quit smoking have less impulsive behavior while in the luteal phase than  in the follicular phase 
(Allen et al 2009a ). Further, w ithin the animal literature, delivery of exogenous progesterone has been shown 
to decrease  impulsive  behavior (Llaneza & Frye, 2009).  
Taken together, these data suggest that progesterone may improve smoking cessation outcomes perhaps by 
[CONTACT_54296].  However, the clinical literature on this topic is lacking. Therefore, in Project I  we 
are proposing a double -blind randomized control led trial to assess the role of exogenous progesterone on 
impulsivity and smokin g cessation in a sample of  males and females who are motivated to quit smoking.  
Subjects  (n=200)  will be stratified by s ex and then  randomly assigned to active p rogesterone (PRO ; n=50 
males and 50 females ) or placebo (PBO; n=50 males and 50 females)  to address the following specific aim:   
Aim 1 : Investigate sex differences in the effect of exogenous PRO compared to placebo on impulsivity 
and smoking cessation   
Hypothesis 1 : For both males and females, a lower proportion of subject s randomized to PRO will 
relapse  by 4 weeks after quit date compared to those randomized to PBO.  
Hypothesis 2 : For both males and females, subject s randomized to PRO will have more days to relapse  
compared to those randomized to PBO.  
Hypothesis 3: There will be a sex difference in smoking relapse such that females, regardless of 
randomization assignment, will have fewer days to relapse compared to males . 
Hypothesis 4: Impulsivity will be a stronger relapse predictor in females than males.  
Hypothesis 5: Among those with higher levels of serum PRO the influence  of impulsivity on smoking 
relapse will be dampened.  
Given that less than three percent of those  who attempt to quit smoking remain abstinent six months later 
(Benowitz, 2009 ), there is an urgent need to gain a better understanding of the dynamic process involved in 
smoking cessation. This project will provide new knowledge regarding the possible pro tective role of 
progesterone against smoking relapse i n males  and females .  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 B. RESEARCH STRATEGY   
 
B.1. SIGNIFICANCE  
Cigarette smoking continues to be the number one cause of preventable morbidity and mortality in the United 
States ( CDC, 2010 ). Compared to males, females are at an increased risk for development and maintenance 
of nicotine addiction ( USDHHS, 2001 ). Preclinical and clinical studies have offered evidence to explain these 
observed sex differences, suggesting that sex hormones may mod ulate the reward system and related nicotine 
response ( Lynch & Sofuoglu, 2010 ). Specifically, high levels of estrogen are associated with a heightened 
response to nicotine; whereas, high levels of progesterone are associated with a blunted response ( Carrol l & 
Anker, 2010; Lynch & Sofuoglu, 2010 ). Further, within the animal literature the administration of progesterone 
has been shown to be associated with reduced reinforcing effects of drugs, as well as a decrease in self -
administration and drug -seeking beha vior ( Carroll & Anker, 2010 ).  
Recent studies suggest that progesterone may play a key role  in the observed sex differences in addictive 
behaviors . A review by [CONTACT_54297] & Sofuoglu (2010) concluded  that progesterone (PRO) may counter the 
enhanced vulnerability  in females by [CONTACT_54298]’s reinforcing effects. Other 
clinical research on smoking cessation by [CONTACT_54299] (low PRO) 
may be associated with more favorable outcomes when paired with nicotine replacement therapy ( Franklin et 
al 2007; Carpenter et al 2008); whereas the luteal phase (high PRO) may be associated with more favorable  
outcomes when either no medication or non -nicotine medications (i.e. bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]) are used ( Allen et al 2 008; 
Mazure et al 2011).  However, the specific mechanisms as to how PRO may assist with smoking cessation 
efforts remain unknown. Given that PRO has been shown to reduce impulsive behaviors in animals (Llaneza 
and Frye, 2009 ) one theory is that PRO blunts impulsivity in humans and, therefore, protects against smoking 
relapse.  
Further clinical research has focused on association of various personality traits, primarily impulsivity.  
Impulsivity has four factors including a lack of premeditation regarding the consequences of behavior, lack of 
perseverance when tasks are boring or aversive, sensation seeking and urgency, and the tendency to behave 
impulsively while experiencing negative affect (Doran et al 2009).  Sex differences  in the association between 
impuls ivity and smoking behavior have been observed. For example, one recent study observed that high 
levels of impulsivity were associated with increased nicotine use in females, but not males (Stoltenberg et al 
2008 ). A second study observed a positive associa tion between two factors of impulsivity – sensation seeking 
and general activity – and number of cigarettes smoked per day in females, but not males (Nieva et al 2011).  
The role of sex hormones in these associations is unclear; however, taken together this  offers evidence for a 
possible interaction between PRO,  impulsivity and smoking behavior .  
This SCOR application proposes robust comparisons of hormonal influences in clinical and preclinical studies. 
Here, in Project I, we propose direct and additive con ditions. Specifically, we will assess the effects of PRO, 
compared to placebo (PBO), as well as the sex differences on impulsivity and smoking cessation outcomes in 
females and males who are motivated to quit smoking using a [ADDRESS_58396] , these data will directly address (a) the role 
of PRO on smoking cessation outcomes, (b) the role of s ex differences on smoking cessation outcomes, (c) 
the role of impulsivity on smoking cessation outcomes, and (d) interactions of sex, PRO and impulsivity on 
smoking cessation outcomes. Fourth , while Project I will focus solely on nicotine and PRO effects o n nicotine, 
Project II, using similar design features, will focus on cocaine with co -morbid nicotine use in humans and the 
combined effects of PRO and atomoxetine . Project III will conduct parallel preclinical studies to both projects. 
Therefore, the compl ete data set will provide unique and significant insights into sex differences as well as, 
translational data . Finally , the combined expertise of the assembled named investigators is unique and greatly 
enhances the probability that the work will be complet ed as proposed and that significant findings will be 
forthcoming.  
 
Page 4 of 28 
 
B.2. PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
B.2.1. Impulsivity Varies by [CONTACT_54300] . Goal : This cross -over study 
aimed to measure differences in nicotine response between follicular (F) and luteal (L) menstrual phases  in a 
sample (n=20) of female smokers between 
the ages of 18 and 40 . Results : After 
exposure to nicotine nasal spray, subject s in 
the F phase became significantly more 
impulsive on the Immediate Memory Task 
computer program (Doughtery et al 2002) 
compared to subject s in the L phase ( Figure 
1). Relevance : Sex hormones appear to 
impact the level of impulsivity, such that high 
levels of progesterone are associated with 
less impulsivity after exposure to nicotine. T he 
association between progesterone and 
impulsivity may be associated with risk for 
relapse.   
B.2.2: Smoking Satisfaction & Enjoyment Vary by [CONTACT_54301].  Goal:  
The purpose of this cross -sectional study was to investigate the difference s in reinforcing effects (mCEQ ) 24 of 
smoking by [CONTACT_54302] a sample of female subjects (n=39) who were 
classified into four groups: no depressive sympt oms follicular phase (NDS -F), no depressive symptoms luteal 
phase (NDS -L), depressive symptoms follicular 
phase (DS -F) and depressive symptoms luteal 
phase (DS -L). Results:  Smoking Satisfaction 
varied by [CONTACT_54303] (F -NDS: 5.2±0.5; L -NDS: 
3.4±0.5; F -SDS: 4.5±0.4; L -SDS: 4.8±0.3; 
p=0.016; Figure 2) and a similar trend was 
observed within the  Enjoyment subscale (F -NDS: 
4.4±0.6; L -NDS: 1.7±0.6; F -SDS: 3.6±0.5; L -SDS: 
2.9±0.5; p=0.089).  Relevance : Among those 
without depressive symptoms, sex hormones 
appear to impact the level of reinforcing effects of 
smoking, such that high levels of progesterone 
are associated with less smoking satisfaction and 
less enjoyment.   
B.2.3. Pharmacokinetics of Nicotine varies  by [CONTACT_54304].  Goal : This cross -over study 
aimed to measure menstrual phase 
differences in pharmacokinetics after 
exposure to nicotine nasal spray within a 
sample of abstinent female smokers with 
regular menstrual  cycles who either had 
depressive symptoms (n=23) or did not 
(n=24).  Results : There was a significant 
interaction between depressive symptoms 
status and menstrual phase such that those 
without depressive symptoms had a 
significant menstrual phase differenc e in their 
maximum nicotine concentration levels 
(p=0.020; Figure 3 ). Relevance:  In women 
without depressive symptoms  high 
Page 5 of 28 
progesterone levels are associated with lower nicotine response; this may be associated with risk for relapse .  
B.2.4. Changes in Est radiol/Progesterone (E2/P) Ratio are  Associated with Changes in Craving.  Goal : 
This cross -over study aimed to assess the influence of the E2/P ratio on smoking -related symptoms of 
withdrawal (MNWS), smoking urges (Brief -QSU), and reinforcing effects of smoking (mCEQ) using a within 
subject analysis in a sample of female smokers (n=50) with regular menstrual cycles between the ages of 18 
and 40.  Results : During ad libitum smoking, an increase in the E2/P ratio was associated with an increase in 
craving on  two independent items of measurement: mCEQ ( t=2.38, p=0.02 ) and MNWS (t=1.92, p=0.06). 
Relevance : Changes in sex hormone levels are associated with changes in craving for cigarettes.   
 
B.3. INNOVATION  
This project offers the following two highly innovativ e features. First, directly comparing PRO effects on 
impulsivity, as well as smoking cessation and relapse in females and males is highly innovative. Second , 
chronic use of PRO as a smoking cessation aid has not yet been investigated. Overall, the high level of 
innovation stems from (a) reliance on previously obtained data from human and animal studies  by [CONTACT_54305],  (b) the translational stra tegies of furthering direct comparisons in the proposed clinical 
and preclinical research , (c) combining extant data to address a unique series of questions regarding 
determinants and modulators of drug cessation , and (d) use of rigorous multidisciplinary methods (such as 
thorough neurocognitive assessment of impulsivity, and detailed hormone and menstrual cycle measurement ) 
to implement the projects and answer the questions posed.   
 
B.4. APPROACH  
The two clinical projects - Projects I (Allen) and II (Speck er) - will use parallel methods and measures, 
deviating only as appropriate for the differences in the populations. The details are described below.  
 
B.4.1. Study Design  
This double -blind, clinical trial (Figure 4) will prescreen an estimated 600 potential subjects, consent  and 
evaluate approximately 300 potential subjects and ultimately enroll 250 subjects to ensure 200 subjects 
provide a primary relapse outcome measure at four weeks after quit date. Subjects will be stratified by [CONTACT_54306] (n=100 per group / 50% female): Progesterone (PRO) or Placebo (PBO). 
Telephone screening  and visit 
invitation (20 minutes) leads to  the 
consent process and in -person 
screening including medical -
psychiatric evaluation  for 
inclusion/ exclusion (two visits, two 
hours each), then randomization  and 
medication induction (seven days), 
stable medication (70 days) with 
medication reduction and final 
evaluation for secondary outcomes 
(over the last seven days). These 
procedures will be conduct ed as 
described below.  
 
B.4.2. Setting, Recruitment, Subjects  
Setting : This project will be conducted at the Delaware Clinical Research Unit (DCRU). The DCRU  has both 
inpatient and outpatient resources for the spectrum of biomedical research including special capabilities that 
were developed for study of substance use disorders . The Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute (CTSI), 
runs the DCRU and functi ons parallel and support the activities of the NIH funded CTSA, which it predated. 
Page 6 of 28 The DCRU includes: reception area, examination rooms, meeting rooms, clinical interview rooms, testing 
rooms for computer based performance tasks, a wet lab for handling blo ods and other specimens, freezers (to 
-80°C), all essential staff offices, each with multiple telephone and computer lines through the University of 
Minnesota servers, a locked limited access protocol, equipment and medication rooms, as well as secure 
cabinets for study files and essential supply and support areas and services.  
Recruitment : To meet recruitment goals,  we aim to enroll a total of 250  subjects (~[ADDRESS_58397] s/month) to ensure 
a final sample size of [ADDRESS_58398] advertised on Facebook 
resulting in 6,483 clicks to our website, an estimated 180 phone calls to our clinic and an enrollment of 29 
subjects (~4 subjects/month). We regularly use  television, radio, mailings, and other internet sources to identify 
study subjects with similar success.  Using all of these methods, we have successfully enrolled ~8 
subjects/month over the past year in our two ongoing tobacco use research studies.  
Subje cts and Eligibility:  Females 18-50 years of age with regular menstrual cycles and males, 18 -60 years of 
age, (n=300; 50% females) will be enrolled who are current smokers and are motivated to quit smoking.   
Inclusion Criteria : • Male 18 to 60 years old or female between 18 and 50 years old; •Self-report smoking ≥ 5 
cigarettes/day for at least the past year; • Motivated to quit smoking (self -report ≥ 7 on 10 -point Likert -type 
scale) ; • In stable physical/mental healt h; • Self report of regular menstrual cycles (female only) • Willing to use 
double -barrier contraception  method  if sexually active and not surgically sterilized ; • English  fluency; • 
Understand the study procedures and able to provide informed consent; •Abilit y to participate fully in research 
elements for the duration of the trial.  
Exclusion criteria : • Curren t use of other types of tobacco, nicotine  replacement therapy, or smoking cessation 
medications; • Current or recent (< 3 months) breastfeeding (females only),  • Current or planned pregnancy 
within the next three months (females only); • DSM -IV diagnoses for psychotic diso rders , bipolar disorder, 
ADHD , major depressive disorder  within the last 3 months, • Substance dependence within the last 3 months 
with the exception s of nicotine dependence  and non -daily use of marijuana .; •Unstable psychotropic 
medications  (< 3 months) ; • Current use of exogenous hormones , finasteroid (propecia) , efav irenz, red clover , 
ketoconazole and other drugs that are CYP3A4 inhibit ors; •Conditions contraindicated to progesterone 
treatment  (including, but not limited to, thrombophlebitis, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, clotting or 
bleeding disorders, heart disease, diabetes, history of stroke, allergy to peanuts,  hypersensi tive to 
progesterone  and liver dysfunction) . 
 
B.4.3. Visit Sequence & Procedures  
Screening Visits (Visits 1 and 2) : Initial screening procedures for Project I and II will be identical except  for drug 
use related criteria, te sting and evaluation. Candidates completing the consent process will be screened in a 
two-visit process. For males, this two -visit process will be scheduled within two weeks of completion of the 
phone interview. For females, this two -visit process will be completed during the f ollicular phase of their 
menstrual cycle to avoid any potential menstrual phase effects on smoking behavior or mood measures, as 
well as to limit wait time for initial  study procedures (details below). Therefore, after the phone screen females 
will be told  to call with the first day of their next period, and then the two -part screening visits will be scheduled 
during days 1 -7 (where Day 1 is the onset of menses) of the menstrual cycle. We have used this procedure 
with success in our ongoing trial on menstru al phase and depressive symptoms.  
At the first of two screening visits (Screening Visit 1), t he study will be described in detail to candidates by [CONTACT_33662], and informed consent will be obtained. Subjects agreeing to participate will undergo 
medical, psychiatric and other evaluation to determine eligibility. The medical evaluation will include: brief 
physical exam  (height, weight, blood pressure, heart rate, and medical history interview) , audiotaped 
psychiatric interview,  carbon monox ide level and a blood draw  (for measurement of serum hormone levels  and 
liver function via ALT and AST measurement ) and a urine pregnancy test  (females only) . Trained staff will 
conduct all interviews  including the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID; First, 1995)  and instrument 
admin istration with audiotapes reviewed regularly to sustain fidelity. Self-report instruments measuring 
Page 7 of 28 
impulsivity, personality characteristics, stress, caffeine use, smoking withdrawal  and behavior will be 
completed. At the second screening visit (Screening Visit 2; scheduled within three days of the first screening 
visit), b aseline impulsivity  tasks will be completed. F emales will then be provided with urine luteinizing hormone 
(LH) testing  kits with instructions for daily use. The quit date will be set base d on LH testing results (details 
below). The investigators will review the data to determine eligibility. Subjects meeting eligibility criteria will be 
given instructions on when to come back for their Baseline Visit (details below).  
Quit Date Assignment:  This procedure will be identical to Project II and is described in detail here (Table 1). 
For female subjects  the quit date w ill be assigned during the luteal phase. We have selected the luteal phase 
(typi[INVESTIGATOR_54280] 14 days of the menstrual cycle; Yee  et al 1999) for quit date given that our prior work has 
demonstrated that this menstrual phase is associated with improved smoking cessation outcomes (Allen et al 
2008). Therefore, using identical techniques from our prior work (Allen et al 2008) the quit  date will be set as 
follows: First, to determine date of ovulation, female subjects will use LH tests.  Several studies by [CONTACT_54307] (e.g. Allen et al 1999, 
Allen et al 2000, A llen et al 2008, Grinsted et al 1989, Luciano et al 1990) . Using the First Response urine 
testing kit (Carter Products), subjects will determine their LH peak with daily urine testing during specific  days 
of the cycle (See Appendix A for instructions). The testing will be done for ten consecutive days starting on Day 
8-12 (depending on cycle length). Although the surge may last up to three days, the first day of the surge is 
most important, because it predicts 
ovulation [ADDRESS_58399] will be labeled anovulatory and 
dropped for ineligibility (estimated < 5% 
occurrence ). Second , once ovulation is 
detected, the baseline appointment  and quit 
date will be scheduled. The baseline 
appointment will occur within three days of 
ovulation . Quit date will be set for seven 
days after the baseline appointment  (i.e. 
seven to ten days  after ovulation) .   
Since this entails a delay of variable 
duration  from Screening Visit 2 to Baseline 
Visit (thus impacting timing of  medication initiation ) across female subjects, each male subject  will be matched 
to a female subject for a similar delay  so that, across the male and female groups, study procedures will be 
follow a similar chronology.  
Baseline Visit  (Visit 3) : When the LH surge occurs female subjects  will be instructed to come into the clinic 
within  three days for their baseline visit and to start medication. Male subjects will be instructed to come into 
the clinic according to their assigned delay  (per list generated by [CONTACT_54308]) . This visit will occur 
seven days prior to quit date. At  this visit, subjects will be randomized to PRO or PBO within strata defined by 
[CONTACT_4321]. The Statistical Analysis Core (SAC) will generate the randomization tables (one for each sex), and the 
Clinical Trials Research Pharmacy will use it to determine randomiza tion assignment. Randomization 
assignment will be stored in a secure file in a secure location at the Clinical Trials Research Pharmacy, to be 
shared only with the SAC. All other project staff including PI [INVESTIGATOR_32528], as well as the participant,  
will remain blinded to the randomization assignment.   
At the baseline visit subjects will provide a blood sample (for hormone assessment), breath sample (to confirm 
smoking status via carbon monoxide breathalyzer), have their vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, weight) 
measured, be informed of their quit date, and receive brief  behavioral counseling to prepare for their quit date. 
At the end of this visit subjects will be paid for their time and given study medication along with instructions for 
takin g the medication (beginning at 8PM that day), as well as a clinic visit schedule for the remaining clinic 
visits. This visit will take approximately one hour to complete.  
Page 8 of 28 Weeks 0 -12 (Visits 4 -16): The Week 0 clinic visit will occur on the assigned quit dat e. Subjects will attend clinic 
visits on a weekly basis thereafter for twelve weeks. At weeks 0 -4, week 8 and week 12 blood samples 
(hormone measurement) will be collected. Urine samples will be collected at all visits from all participants  
(pregnancy test s for females; and visual inspection of urine color to confirm compliance with taking study 
medication via riboflavin filler ). At weeks 0 -4, week 8 and week 12 urine will be saved for biochemical 
confirmation of smoking status via nicotine/cotinine levels.  Subject s will also complete several forms  and 
questionnaires (described below). Subjects will  also return the medicatio n bottle and unused medication, be 
given a new two -week supply and adverse events will be assessed . At Week 11, study medication will be  
discontinued.  Finally, subjects will receive brief smoking cessation behavioral counseling (Appendix A). At the 
end of each visit subjects will be paid for their time. These visits will take approximately 30 -45 minutes to 
complete.   
Study Adherence : To encourage compliance the following will occur: (1) at the Baseline Visit, subjects will be 
given a schedule of all remaining appointments ; (2) at each visit the subjects  will be given an appointment 
reminder card for  the next visit ; (3) reminder calls , texts  and/or emails (per subject’s preference) will be placed 
or sent  the day before each visit; (4) subject s will be routinely reminded that regardless of their smoking status 
their data are  valuable and  important; and (5) regardless of smoking status, su bject s will be compensated at 
each visit (described in the following).  If a subject misses a visit, study staff  will try to reach him/her by [CONTACT_54309] . If that does not work, staff will contact [CONTACT_423] ’s 
designated  ‘contact [CONTACT_9702]’ (i.e., someone who does not live with the subject  but knows how to get in touch ). If 
a subject does not attend any visits after the screening visits , he/she will be labeled as a “ drop” and replaced.  If 
the subject  discontinues from the study after randomization but before the final follow -up visit,  he/she will be  
labeled an “ incomplete ” but not replaced.  If a subject  does not quit on their assigned quit date or relapses  later,  
she/he will be encouraged to stay in the study and m ake another quit att empt; such that we will follow them for 
three  months regardless of smoking status.  Subjects who complete the four week follow -up period after quit 
date, regardless of smoking status, will be labeled a “ completer ” for the primary outcome  and not replaced. Our 
sample size goal to sufficiently power the primary outcome is for [ADDRESS_58400] Compensation  
Subjects  will receive compensation at each study visit for the ir time and effort. Subjects  will be compensated  
$25 for Screening Visit 1 and $ 25 for Screening V isit 2.  For each visit  thereafter, they will be compensated  $10 
for their time and comp leting study procedures plus $ 10 to cover transportation costs  (Total=$ 20). The subject  
will also be eligible for study bonuses : $100 for missing fewer than three follow -up clinic visits and a $30 bonus 
for attending the  Week 4 , 8 and 12 clinic visit s.  At Screening Visit 2, Week 4, Week 8, and Week 12 subjects  
will also be compensated for their performance on the BART computer task.  The amount of compensation 
depends on their performance.  It is estimated that subjects  will receive between $10 and $50  each time they 
complete the task  (average estimated payment=$35  each time ). Therefore,  subject s will receive approximat ely 
$660 ($25 Screening V isits x 2 visits  + $20 follow -up visits x 14 visits + $ 190 in bonus payments + an average 
of $140 in BART payments ).  
 
B.4.5. Study Medication   
Subjects will be stratified by [CONTACT_54310], as described above.  All 
medication (active and placebo) will be prepared by t he University of Minnesota Clinical Trials Research 
Pharmacy , which is a  specialized facility that prepares medication clinical trials including our ongoing research. 
The re search p harmacist (D Luke Pharm D) will provide medications . There is oversight and monitoring wi th 
regular audits b y local regulatory boards including the IRB. This study requires double -blind procedures, 
therefore p rogesterone will be over encapsulated and be id entical to the placebo capsules.  To prevent against 
the possibility of missed medication in the event of a missed clinic visits, subjects will receive a two  week 
supply  (to ensure no medication is missed in the event of an unexpected miss clinic visit due to illness or 
transportation issues, for example)  of study medication  from study staff  at each clinic v isit beginning with the 
Baseline V isit. Medications will be discontinued at the Week 11 clinic visit.  
Page 9 of 28 
Progesterone : The 
progesterone will be 
given in th e form of 
an active or placebo 
micronized natural 
progesterone ( generic 
Prometrium). All 
subjects will take 200 
mg twice daily 
(approximately 8am 
and 8pm) for twelve 
weeks starting seven 
days prior to the 
assigned quit date. 
The dosage was 
selected to ensure 
that serum 
progesterone levels 
will be consistent with 
those observed in the 
natural Luteal phase 
of the menstrual cycle 
(6-14 ng/mL) since that phase has been shown to be favorable for smoking cessation ( Allen et al 2008 ). We 
expect the following s erum progesterone levels by [CONTACT_19313] ( Figure 5 ): (1) females + PRO 9 -13 ng/mL; (2) males 
+ PRO 6 -7 ng/mL; (3) females + PBO, varies by [CONTACT_54311] 1 -14 ng/mL; and (4) males + PBO 0 -1 
ng/mL ( Goletiani et al 2007; Reed et al 2010; Yen et al 1999). Deli very of exogenous progesterone has been 
successfully used in prior research with a shorter duration of use (i.e. < 1 month) and is generally well tolerated  
(Sofouglu et al 2001; Sofouglu, et al 2004; Goletaini et al 2007; Reed et al 2010). The most common adverse 
effect in males and females is sedation. Less common effects include breakthrough bleeding  (females) , 
nausea  (females and males)  and breast tenderness  (females)  (de Lignieres, 1999; Goletaini et al 2007).  While  
it is possible that progestins may co ntribute to risk for thromboembolism, we will be using natural micronized 
progesterone instead of synthetic progestins. Natural micronized progesterone is not known to be associated 
with thromboembolic risk (PDR, 2002; Goletaini et al 2007), and consequent ly is a safer choice. Micronized 
progesterone is not a form of birth control. Therefore, all female subjects will be educated on the importance of 
using a double -barrier method to protect against pregnancy.  
Adverse Effects : If a subject is unable to toler ate these side effects of the study medication, those subjects will 
have the dosage decreased to [ADDRESS_58401] self -report of symptoms and adv ise a dose reduction if needed.  
 
B.4.6. Study Measures  
Prevalence of Relapse (Primary Outcome) and Days to R elapse  (Secondary Outcomes):  We will assess 
smoking status using three  methods ( one based on self -report and two  based on  biochemical confirmations).  
First, at each clinic visit the TimeLine FollowBack (TLFB) method will be completed.  The TLFB is  a validated 
retrospective data capture technique ( Sobell et al 1996 ). Marijuana users will complete an additional TLFB for 
marijua na use. Second , the first biochemical confirmation is expi[INVESTIGATOR_33552] (CO) measurement.  
The CO levels will be collected to each visit.  Expi[INVESTIGATOR_54281] 90% 
(Jarvis et al 1987 ). Subject s will exhale int o a CO monitoring device (Bedfont Scientific Limited Company), 
calibrated weekly to verify accuracy.  For sample collection, subject s blow into a breathalyzer and analysis 
occurs immediately.  CO levels > [ADDRESS_58402] has a sensitivity of 96 -97% and a 
specificity of 90-100% ( Jarvis et al 1987 ). A cotinine level of less than 15 ng/mL is indicative of abstinence 
(half-life of cotinine is 19 -30 hours).  Samples will be analyzed in batches at the Minneapolis Medical Research 
Page 10 of 28 Foundatio n Division of Toxicology using gas chromatography (Hew lett-Packard) in Year 5 . The use of two 
different forms of biochemical confirmation of smoking status will eliminate potential false -positives that occur 
with using only one of these items.   
Days to rel apse will be defined using continuous abstinence (CA) , prolonged abstinence (PA) and point 
prevalence (PP) definitions  (Hughes et al 2003) . CA, a traditional measure, defines a single puff off a cigarette 
as relapse . The more liberal PA measure reflects su stained abstinence and defines relapse as seven  
consecutive slips (i.e., a puff or more) without a [ADDRESS_58403] 
day of a slip . The CA and PA smoking outcome s will ranging from 0 ( i.e. smoking on quit date ) to 90 (i.e. not 
smoking at the end of the study).  PP is a binary outcome of smoking relapse and is defined as a single puff off 
a cigarette during the seven days prior to a pre -specified time point of interest – Week 4 and Week 12. Week 4 
prevalence of r elapse is our primary outcome; week 12 prevalence of relapse is a secondary outcome. Self -
report and biochemical measures will be combined to determine CA, PA, and PP.  
Impulsivity Measures (Secondary Outcome ): This P50 will examine “impulsivity” correlates broadly  in rodents 
and humans across two substance use disorders (nicotine, cocaine -nicotine). Here we operationalize 
determination of impulsivity with several instruments.  
Subjects will complete three self -report measures  that have been comput erized at each clinic visit beginning at 
Screening Visit 2.  These measures will assess the characteristics of impulsivity, inhibition, planfulness, and 
cognitive impairments, key areas of focus in this grant.   
 Behavioral Inhibition/Activation scales (BIS/B AS): These short 20 items forms commonly used scales to 
study externalizing tendencies (Carver and White, 1994) . Investigators in Project II have used this 
instrument with success .  
 Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS) : This item contains 30 item se lf-report measure self -control (Patton et 
al 1995) . Doran and colleagues (2004) demonstrated that imp ulsivity, as measured with this item , was a 
predictor of smoking relapse .  
 Brief Self Control Scale  (BSCS) : This item consists of 13 questions rated on a 4 -point scale from “very 
true” to “very false” on items reflecting the ability to control problematic behaviors (Tangney et al  2004) .  
The Impulsivity Tasks  represent two forms of impulsivity, 1) impaired cognitive inhibitory mechanisms, and 2) 
deficits in motor inhibitory mechanisms. “Delay discounting” entails higher -level cognitive inhibitory  processes  
that may characterize the behavior of  individuals who are drug dependent (Bickel and Marsch , 2001) tobacco 
users ( Baker et al. 2003 ), cocaine users ( Monterosso  et al,  2001 ), other drug use rs (e.g. Vuchinich and 
Simpson, 1998 ; Kollins , 2003) and pathological gamblers (Dixon et al , 2003).   The following items will be 
completed at Screening Visit 2, Week 4, Week 8 and Week 12:  
 Delay Discounting Task : Developed  by [CONTACT_54312] (Richards et al, 1999) , delay  discounting 
refers to the reduction in value  of a reward over time relative to its immediate worth.  One’s discount rate,  
also known as a time preference, is a measurable individual difference and involves a series of choices 
(e.g. Petry and Casarella, 1999) : one op tion is an immediate payment (e.g. $1); the second option is a 
larger payment (e.g. $50) after a delay (e.g. 6 hours to 25 years).  Titrating the payment amounts at each 
delay interval allows the identification of points of indifference (the point at which  the subject  switches 
from choosing the immediate to the larger reward at a given delay interval).  We additionally included a 
probability discounting condition to measure risk aversion in addition to time preference (Richards e t al, 
1999) . 
 GoStop Task : This task measures response inhibition.   A series of five -digit numbers are presented on a 
computer monitor at a rate of 500ms for ever two seconds.  Subject s are instructed to click the mouse 
button when the number they see is identical to the previous number.  Half of the numbers change color 
from black to red at 50, 150, 250 and 350.  Subjects are instructed to respond to the matching number 
only when the displayed number is black.  The primary outcome of this task is the percent  of inhibition 
failures for the 150ms delay (Dougherty et al 2008).  This item has been successfully used to assess 
tobacco dependence and smoking behavior (Billieux et al 2010).  
 Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART):  This tas k, with 15 replications/session, is  a measure of risk -taking. 
It involves displaying a small balloon on a computer screen.  Each “pump” to inflate the balloon 
accumulates  five cents , with each pump potentially breaking the balloon . The average pumps to the 
Page [ADDRESS_58404] s will receive the actual amount of money 
accrued on this task.  The primary outcome on this task was the number of exploded balloons divided by 
[CONTACT_54313] (Lejuez et al, 2002).  
 Immediate Memory Task / Delayed Memory Task  (IMT/DMT):  This task is a continuous performance task 
that has two phases. First, the IMT displays a series of five -digit numbers in on a computer monitor for 
[ADDRESS_58405] to remember a five -digit number and compare it 
to another that is presented 3.5 seconds later. During the 3.5 interval subjects are presented with a 
distracter ([ZIP_CODE]) and told to ignore it. The prima ry outcome of this task is the IMT/DMT ratio which is 
defined as the proportion of commission errors to correct detections (Mathias et al 2002).  This item is 
included  as it we have used it in prior studies to identify menstrual phase differences in impulsi vity and 
attention (see Preliminary Studies B .2.1.), and therefore is expected to be sensitive to the group 
differences in sex and progesterone.  
Our recently completed P20 studies indicate great er impulsivity as measured by [CONTACT_54314]. Here comparisons will be made across the sm oking 
only subjects in Project I , the cocai ne+smoking subjects in Project II , and results  of the animal models (Project 
III). The composite measure s of impulsivity will include: 1) Self -report measures (BIS, BSCS),  2) Inability to 
delay gratification (delay discounting) , 3) Inability to inhibit  a prepotent motor response (GoStop  task) , 4) 
Inability to make choice to stop when reward becomes unlikely (BART) , and  5) Immediate memory/delayed 
memory assessing cognitive processes (IMT/DMT).  
Independent Measures (sex, randomization and serum progesterone):  Sex will be collected via self -report on 
the Demographics form completed at Screening Visit 1. Randomi zation , assignment (PRO vs. PBO) will be 
known as of the Baseline Visit to the SAC and Clinical Trials Research Pharmacy, but not will be unblended to 
other staff or participants until after completion of all measurements.  Participants will be informed on their 
randomization assignment in a letter mailed within six months of the study’s completion; this letter will also 
briefly summarize the study’s findings. Measurement of serum progesterone  will be measured by [CONTACT_54315] a 
blood sample at clinic visit s 0-4, 8 and 12 . Blood  (20 cc) will be drawn then centrifuged . The serum stored at -
20°C in sealed storage tubes to prevent evaporation . Approximately two mL of serum will be analyzed by [CONTACT_54316] s ample using chemiluminescence. The remaining serum 
(approximately two to four mL) will be used for estradiol measurement (described below) and/or stored as 
back -up to be used in the event that problems occur during analyses.  
Other Covariates : Information on potential covariates is collected  at the clinic  visits, including:  
 Smoking Behavior : Specifically, number of cigarettes smoked per day during ad libitum smoking, self-
reported number of past quit attempts, past longest quit attempt, motivation to quit smoking, and social 
influences such as partner smoking . This item will be completed at Screening Visit 1 only.   
 Fagerstr öm Test for Nicotine Dependence  (FTND; Heather ton et al 1991 ): This item  will be administered 
during the first screening session to assess level of nicotine dependence. The FTND is a 6 -item self -
report measure derived from the Fagerström Tolerance Questionnaire.  This item will be completed at 
Screenin g Visit 1 only.   
 Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Scale  (MNWS; Hughes & Hatsukami , 1998):  This item includes 
measurement of : irritability, anger, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, restlessness, depressed or sad mood, 
and hunger. MNWS scores are calculated wi thout the item of craving. We have changed the wording of 
the craving item to ’desire to smoke,’ and its mean scores are analyzed separately in light of evidence 
suggesting distinct patterns of craving from other withdrawal symptoms (Hughes & Hatsukami 1998) . 
This item will only be completed once during the screening process.  This item will be completed at 
Screening Visit 1.  This item will be completed at each clinic visit  thereafter .   
 Questionnaire for Smoking Urges  (QSU -brief;  Cox et al. 2001) : This item is the shortened version of the 
QSU (Tiffany & Drobes , 1991)  and will assess smoking urges. It includes [ADDRESS_58406] with an urgent  desire to smoke (Cox et al,  2001) . This item will only be completed once  
during the screening process. This  item will be completed at Screening Visit 1 . This item will be 
Page 12 of 28 completed at each clinic visit thereafter .   
 Profile of Mood States  (POMS; McNair et al , 1971 ): On this 72 -item form subjects use a 5 -point Likert -
type scale, to indicate 10 subscales (Evans et al 1998) including positive mood, arousal, vigor, elation, 
friendly, fatigue, tension -anxiety, depression -dejection, confusion, and anger -hostility.   This item will only 
be completed once  during the screening process. This item will be completed at Scre ening Visit 1 . This 
item will be completed at each clinic visit thereafter .   
 Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II, Beck et al , 1996):  This is the  most commonly used screening 
measure for adults and will be used to assess depressive symptoms.  This item wil l only be completed 
once during the screening process.  This item will be completed at Screening Visit 1 . This item will be 
completed at each clinic visit thereafter .   
 Perceived Stress Scale  (PSS; Roberti et al, 2006 ): This ten item questionnaire will mea sure perceived 
stress. The items are rated on a 5 -point scale, ranging from 0 (never) to 4 (very often), and they focus on 
events during the last week. The scale has adequate reliability and validity.  This item will only be 
completed once  during the scree ning process. This item will be completed at Screening Visit 1 . This item 
will be completed at each clinic visit thereafter .   
 Life Event Occurrence Survey (LE OS; McKee et al, 2005):  This item will assess and account for the 
presence of current or recent significant life events. This measure includes 38 yes/no questions 
assessing various events that may have happened in the last six months including aspects of work, social 
life, family  and finances. The measure includes instructions on how to rate the level of disruption the 
event caused in the subjects life from none  too severe  disruption . This measure will be administered at 
screening visit 1 and the final visit W12.    
 Columbia -Suici de Severity Rating Scale:  This questionnaire (C -SSRS; Posner et al, 2009) will be 
completed at each clinic visit to assess suicidal ideation, given this is listed as an SAE on the Prometrium 
label.  If any item of suicidality is endorsed referrals to the appropriate mental health care will be made.     
 Sociodemographic Variables : At the first screening visit we will collect information on age, race/ethnicity, 
education, income and other related variables. This item will be completed at Screening Visit 1 on ly. 
 Serum Estradiol : At Screening Visit [ADDRESS_58407] Medical Laboratories using 
chemiluminescence . 
 Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire  (LTEQ): This questionnaire has four -items to assess strenuous, 
moderate and mild exercise completed during leisure time and has high reliability (r=0.83, 0.85; Gordin & 
Shepard, 1985).   
 Caffeine Use:  Caffeine use will be collected via self -report at eac h clinic visit using the TimeLine 
FollowBack methods in which participants will report the total number of ounces of caffeinated beverages 
drank per day for each day.  
 Marijuana  Use:  Marijuana  use will be collected via self -report at each clinic visit usin g the TimeLine 
FollowBack methods in which participants will report number of days marijuana was used since the last 
clinic visit.  
 Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE):   Participants will complete this form at the SC2 visit.  
 Debriefing Questionnaire:   At end of study participation or Week 12, whichever is later, participants will 
complete a questionnaire to indicate which study medication (active or placebo) they thought they were 
on.  
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] : This survey is a part of the SCOR Core Battery and will be used to 
facilitate collaboration across SCORs in the future. To be completed at SC2 visit  
 Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms : To be completed at SC2 visit  
 Anxiety : This survey is a part of the SCOR Core Battery and will be used  to facilitate collaboration across 
SCORs in the future. To be completed at SC2 visit  
Page 13 of 28  Quality of Life : This survey is a part of the SCOR Core Battery and will be used to facilitate collaboration 
across SCORs in the future. To be completed at SC2 visit  
 Body  Map: This survey is a part of the SCOR Core Battery and will be used to facilitate collaboration 
across SCORs in the future. To be completed at SC2 visit  
 
B.4.7. Sample Size & Power Analysis   
We expect an approximate drop -out rate of 25% based on our current, more burdensome protocol within a 
sample of [ADDRESS_58408] 100 per sex group  to complete the 4 week follow -up for the primary outcome. Participant s will 
be randomized 1:1 to PRO or placebo, separately by [CONTACT_54317], as described above.  In our earlier work (Allen 
et al, 2008), the luteal quit group had a prevalence of 66% relapse at 30 days; this estimates the placebo group 
relapse rate for our propos ed study. Based on a two-tailed Pearson chi -square test with alpha=0.[ADDRESS_58409]  80% power to detec t an odds ratio of 3.5 
or higher for comparing smoking relapse prevalence in the placebo group to smoking relapse prevalence in the 
PRO group. We observed an odds ratio  of 3.2 for follicular quit group relapse compared to luteal quit group 
relapse (Allen et al, 2008). Since our PRO group will receive substantially more progesterone than the ty pi[INVESTIGATOR_54282], it is reasonable to expect a slightly larger odds ratio for PRO compared to placebo.  Since 
the difference in progesterone levels between the male PRO group and the male PBO group will be larger than 
the difference between the fe male PRO group and the female PBO group (see Figure 5), we expect a larger 
odds ratio (hence higher power) for the male treatment comparison.  
 
B.4.8. Statistical Analysis   
Randomization scheme : Our power calculation for the primary outcome specifies [ADDRESS_58410] approximately 25% drop -out before determination of the primary endpoint, we will over -enroll, 
approximately 125 of each sex. Thus we will build randomizatio n tables for up to 150 male and 150 female 
potential enrollees. Each sex group will be randomized 1:[ADDRESS_58411] treatment balance maintained within sex group consistently across the 
enrollment period. Block sizes of 4 and 6 will be used in a 1:1 ratio.  
Primary outcome analyse s: This addresses Hypothesis 1. Our primary outcome is the binary indicator of 
relapsed yes/no at the week [ADDRESS_58412] will be considered statistically significant if the p -value is <0.025. All persons randomized and 
with a measured primary outcome at the week 4 v isit will be included in this analysis, regardless of whether or 
not they ever took any of their assigned treatment (intent -to-treat analysis); persons with missed visits are 
discussed below. While we expect baseline covariates to be balanced across treatm ent groups due to the 
randomization, an adjusted assessment of the treatment effect will then be carried out by a logistic regression 
including the randomized treatment assignment and pre -specified adjusting covariates such as age, baseline 
progesterone, e stradiol, baseline impulsivity measures, etc. This pre -specified list will be determined by [CONTACT_54318], prior to the first study enrollment. We expect these analyses 
to be somewhat conservative, since they do not  explicitly account for the randomized permuted blocking (Matts 
and Lachin, 1988). An analysis that accounts for the blocking (such as a stratified Mantel -Haenzel test) cannot 
be generalized to include the adjustment for impulsivity measures, for example, which are a focus of this 
proposal.  
Safety analyses: Adverse events will be quantified separately by [CONTACT_54319]’s exact test (for binary events) or with chi -square test (for counts of events 
or event rates).  
Secondary outcome analyse s: These address Hypothesis 2. Our secondary outcomes include the binary 
indicator of relapsed yes/no at the week [ADDRESS_58413] comparing treatments (unadjusted) and Cox proportional hazards analysis (adjusted 
for other characteristics), both of which allow for loss -to-follow up via right censoring (Therneau and Grambsch, 
2000), separately for the CA and PA definitions. Adjusting variables will be selected as described for the 
primary outcome. The proportional hazards assumption on the treatment effect will be examined and tested 
(Lin, Wei, and Ying, 1993; Grambsch and Therneau, 1994).  
Other  analyses : To address Hypothesis 3, we will pool the male and female data and test for an interaction 
between sex and treatment assignment in an adjusted Cox regression for the days to relapse o utcomes. To 
address Hypothesis 4, we will test a baseline impulsivity by [CONTACT_54320]. To address Hypothesis 5, we 
will test a baseline impul sivity by [CONTACT_54321]. While this study was designed 
to be powered for Hypothesis 1, rather than for these compariso ns, these will be used to generate preliminary 
data and hypotheses for future research on sex differences in addiction treatment and impulsivity.  
Handling missing outcomes : For persons who do not attend a week [ADDRESS_58414]  by [CONTACT_54322]/or email a self -reported recall of smoking status as of week 4; outcomes collected in this way will be 
denoted separately in the study database. The primary outcome analysis will be carried out once excluding 
these persons, once including those for whom we were able to obtain a self -reported recall outcome, and once 
where we conservatively assume all these persons relapsed as of their wee k 4 visit. Since ‘missing at random’ 
is a strong statistical assumption to make in the primary outcome analysis, we will also carry out descriptive 
analyses to see whether persons missing their week 4 visit differed in their baseline characteristics or 
treatment assignment from persons not missing their week 4 visit.  
 
B.4.9. Existing Challenges & Barriers  
To test our study hypothesis in females, it is critical to produce and maintain serum progesterone levels 
consistent with those observed in the Luteal pha se (6 -14 ng/mL; Yee et al, 1999). To do this, we considered 
many different options for the delivery of exogenous hormones . First, we decided not to use combined 
synthetic progestin -estradiol hormonal contraceptive pi[INVESTIGATOR_54283] (exogenous estradiol; Goletiani et al 2007 ). Second, we also 
considered using synthetic progestin -only hormonal contraceptive pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]. However, as we have observed in our 
current study, they also do n ot result in levels of serum progesterone consistent with the Luteal phase. Further, 
synthetic progestin has more risks associated it with it than natural progesterone (Goletiani et al 2007). Next, 
delivery of progesterone via intravaginal or rectal suppos itory, or intramuscular injection was eliminated 
because the serum progesterone levels would still be substantially lower than those typi[INVESTIGATOR_54284]. 
Therefore, using natural micronized progesterone ( generic Prometrium) is the best way to ensure se rum 
progesterone levels remain consistent with levels observed during the Luteal phase. Since the half -life of 
natural progesterone is short, twice daily dosing is necessary. While there may be a question of subject 
compliance with taking two oral doses pe r day, we will confirm compliance via the assessment of serum 
progesterone levels at all study visits postpartum. Natural progesterone is also the easiest way to administer 
supplemental progesterone for male participants and has been successfully done in o ther studies ( Goletaini et 
al 2007 ). On a related note, a second challenge is estrogen . Estrogen fluctuates naturally during the menstrual 
cycle (Yee et al 1999), and has also been shown to be associated with the facilitation of drug abuse behaviors 
(Carro ll & Anker, 2010 ). While it is impossible to remove estrogen from our sample population, we will measure 
it (via blood samples to measures serum estradiol levels) and consider it in our analyses.  
 
B.4.10. Timeline  
The study timeline is 
displayed in Table  2.  
 
B.4.11. Future Directions  
Page [ADDRESS_58415] a similar study in a time associated with increased risk for smoking relapse for both men 
and women – the postpartum period.  
  
Page 16 of 28 C.  Inclusion of Children.   
Children (under 18 years old) are not included since  young age is associated with menstrual  cycle irregularities 
(e.g., anovulation) .  Further, since this study requires the continuous  (or a recent history) of regular  use of 
cigare ttes, it is unlikely adolescents will meet this criterion .  Young men and women (e.g., aged 18 -20 years) 
will be recruited for participation in our study.  The trial site is at the University of Minnesota, which has a large 
undergraduate population. Campus  media will be also used to recruit young men and women.  We will also 
target venues and institutions frequented by [CONTACT_54323] -college men and women (bars, festivals, coffee shops, 
and community events) to ensure the sociodemographic diversity of the younge st component of our participant  
sample.  
 
 
 
D.  Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
This study will be recruiting  both men and  women because the research question addresse d is designed to 
assess sex differences .  We are looking spe cifically at the effects of  a female sex hormone (progesterone) on 
smoking cessation in men and women who are motivated to quit smoking .  The study will use participant s 
recruited from the greater metropolitan area of Minneapolis and St. Paul , via mass media advertisements .  The 
Twin Cities metropolitan area has a sufficiently large female smoking population to ensure an adequate 
sample.  We have been successful in recruiting similar numbers of women in similar periods of time in previous 
studies.  Estimates indicate that as of [ADDRESS_58416]. Paul, Minnesota Twin Cities metro area  
included approximately 50.5% female and 20.2 % of the population  in the racial minority groups  (Black= 11.0%, 
Asian = 5.8%, American Indian = 1.2%, other = 4.0 %) and t he Hispanic p opulation is 6 .4%.   If minority women 
do not respond to the advertisements, we will make special efforts to solicit their participation by [CONTACT_54324] (such as the Southside Pride, Phillips/  
Powderhorn, and  Riverside Editions); by [CONTACT_54325] 
(e.g., Community University Healthcare Center, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_54285]); and by [CONTACT_54326], health 
centers, and community centers with high minority p articipation and disseminating information regarding the 
study opportunity; and once we have garnered initial contact [CONTACT_46144] s we receive multiples word of 
mouth referrals.  Our current study has been successful in recruiting a diverse sample in t hat of the 163 
participants enrolled to date 49% are White, 33% are Black, 8% are more than one race and 10% are other.  
  
Page 17 of 28 
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan (DSMP): [ADDRESS_58417] 1 – Sex Differences and Progesterone:  
Association with impulsivity  and smoking cessation  
 
Summary  
This is one of two clinical trials for the SCOR entitled: Sex Differences and Progesterone Effects on Impulsivity, 
Smoking, & Cocaine Abuse.  The DSMP is described below. Organization and implementation of the Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board functions will be administered by [CONTACT_54327] (B) of the P50 (Grabowski, Director). This will be 
undertaken in close coordination with the Principal Investigators of the two clinical Projects (Drs. Allen and Specker) 
and the overall SCOR Director ([CONTACT_25276]), co -Director ([CONTACT_54350]) and study staff members.   
A1. Study Design and Implementation  
This is a 12 -week, two arm (progesterone -PRO - versus 
placebo -PBO), prospective, parallel groups, 
randomized placebo -controlled trial examining effects 
of PRO, compared to placebo (PBO), as well as sex 
differences on impulsivity and smoking cessation 
outcomes in females and males who are motivated to 
quit smoki ng. 
Outcome Measures  
The primary focus and outcome measure will be 
prevalence of smoking relapse at Week 4 using point 
prevalence definition of abstinence.  This will be 
measured via self -report, carbon monoxide 
breathalyzer, and urinary cotinine.  Secondary outcome measures include days to relapse (also measured by [CONTACT_6270] -
report, carbon monoxide breathalyzer, and urinary cotinine using continuous abstinence and prolonged abstinence 
definitions) and impulsivity measures (self -report questionnaires incl uding Behavioral Inhibition / Activity Scales, 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale, and Brief Self Control Scale; and computer tasks including Delay Discounting, GoStop 
Task, Balloon Analogue Risk Task, and Immediate/Delayed Memory Task).  
Setting, Recruitment, Sub jects  
Setting : This project will be conducted at the Delaware Clinical Research Unit (DCRU). The DCRU has both inpatient 
and outpatient resources for the spectrum of biomedical research including special capabilities that were developed 
for study of substa nce use disorders. The Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute (CTSI), runs the DCRU and 
functions parallel and support the activities of the NIH funded CTSA, which predated it. The DCRU includes: reception 
area, examination rooms, meeting rooms, cli nical interview rooms, testing rooms for computer based performance 
tasks, a wet lab for handling bloods and other specimens, freezers (to -80°C), all essential staff offices, each with 
multiple telephone and computer lines through the University of Minnes ota servers, a locked limited access protocol, 
equipment and medication rooms, as well as secure cabinets for study files and essential supply and support areas 
and services.  
Recruitment : To meet recruitment goals, we will enroll a total of 250 subjects (~ 6 subjects/month) to ensure a final 
sample size of [ADDRESS_58418] advertised on Facebook resulting in 6,483 clicks to our 
website, an estimated 1 80 phone calls to our clinic and an enrollment of 29 subjects (~4 subjects/month). We regularly 
use television, radio, mailings, and other internet sources to identify study subjects with similar success.  Using all of 
these methods, we have successfully e nrolled ~8 subjects/month over the past year in our two ongoing tobacco use 
research studies. Additional advertising and the unique character of this study will further assure an ample sample.  
Subjects and Eligibility Criteria  
Two hundred and fifty subjects, 50% female, will be consented to achieve the final sample of 200 subjects (50% 
female). The inclusion and exclusion criteria are:  
Page 18 of 28 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Male s between 18 and 60 or female s between 18 and 50 years of age;  
2. Self-reporting smoking ≥ 5 cig arettes/day for at least the past year;  
3. Motivated to quit smoking (self -report ≥ 7 on 10 -point Likert -type scale) ;  
4. Stable physical/mental health;  
5. Self report of regular menstrual cycles (female only) ;  
6. Willing to use a double -barrier contraception metho d if sexually active and not surgically sterilized;   
7. English fluency;  
8. Understanding the study procedures and able to provide informed consent;  
9. Ability to participate fully in research elements for the duration of the trial.  
Exclusion Criteria  
1) Current use of other types of tobacco, nicotine replacement therapy, or smoking cessation medications;  
2) Current or recent (< 3 months) breastfeeding (females only),  
3) Current or planned pregnancy within the next three months (females only);  
4) DSM -IV diagnose s for, bipolar disorder, ADHD, or major depressive disorder  within the last 3 month.  
5)  Substance dependence within the last 3 month with the except ion of  nicotine dependence  and non -daily use 
of marijuana.  
6) Use of psychotropic medications;  
7) Current use of exogenous hormones, finasteroid (propecia), efavirenz, red clover, ketoconazole and other 
drugs that are CYP3A4 inhibitors   
8) Conditions contraindicated to progesterone treatment  (including, but not limited to, thrombophlebitis, deep vein 
thrombosis, pulmona ry embolus, clotting or bleeding disorders, heart disease, diabetes, history of stroke, allergy to 
peanuts, hypersensitive to progesterone and liver dysfunction).  
Screening and Visit Procedures  
The first clinic visit (i.e. Screening Visit 1) will occur wit hin seven days of the onset of menses in females and within 
two weeks of the telephone interview for males. A brief description of the study will be provided to determine if the 
subject wishes to proceed with the informed consent process. If agreeable, the  informed consent process will be 
initiated with the candidate subject. Responses will be provided to all candidate subject queries. If the subject agrees 
to participate, she or he will sign the consent, be provided with a copy of the signed document, and screening will be 
initiated. Screening will determine final eligibility as determined by [CONTACT_54328]. Screening will include a general medical examination including history, measurements of height, weight,  
blood pressure, heart rate, and expi[INVESTIGATOR_54286].  Female subjects will provide a urine 
sample that will be used for a pregnancy test. A blood sample will be obtained to assess serum hormone levels and 
and a psychiatric interview w ill be completed by [CONTACT_3665].  Subjects will complete forms to measure smoking -
related symptomatology, mood, and potential confounders (i.e. age, education, partner smoking, motivation to quit 
smoking, level of nicotine dependence).   At the end  of this visit subjects will schedule their next visit and receive 
compensation for their time.  
The second visit (i.e. Screening Visit 2), completed within three days of Screening Visit 1, will include a series of 
computer tasks to measure impulsivity, fol lowed by [CONTACT_54329].  
A Baseline Visit will occur seven days prior to the subjects assigned quit date.  Females will have their assigned quit 
date set seven to nine days after ovulation.  Ovulation will be d etermined through the use of urine ovulation tests that 
female subjects will use daily for ten days in a row.  Males will have their assigned quit date  matched to a female 
subject for a similar delay and procedure completion.  At this visit subjects’ weight , blood pressure, heart rate, and 
carbon monoxide level will be measured.  They will also provide urine and blood samples (20cc) for later 
measurement of nicotine exposure (specifically nicotine and cotinine) and hormone levels (specifically progesterone 
and estradiol), respectively.  At this visit subjects will receive their study medication and be provided 
regimen/administration instructions.  They will also receive brief smoking cessation behavioral counseling, be 
compensated for their time, and receive a schedule of all follow -up visits.   
At the follow -up visits (weekly visits, Week 0 - Week 12) all subjects will have their weight, blood pressure, heart rate 
and expi[INVESTIGATOR_54287].  The subjects will provide urine (nicotine, cotinine)  at all visits  and blood 
(progesterone, estradiol) samples at visit s 0-4, 8 and 12  and complete several forms to measure smoking -related 
symptomatology, mood, and related items.  The study nurse will assess their adverse events.  At the end of each visit 
subjec ts will receive additional behavioral counseling, additional study medication and be compensated for their time.  
Page 19 of 28 
Subjects could earn up to $480 for their study participation ($25 for screening visit x 2 screening visits + $20 for 
baseline visit + $20 for f ollow -up clinic visits x 13 visits + $75 bonus for missing less than three visits + $75 for 
completing the study).   
Power Analysis and Sample Size  
We expect an approximate drop -out rate of 25% based on our current more burdensome protocol within a sample of 
18-[ADDRESS_58419] 
100 per sex group to complete  the 4 week follow -up for the primary outcome. Participants will be randomized 1:1 to 
PRO or placebo, separately by [CONTACT_54317], as described above. In our earlier work (Allen et al, 2008), the luteal quit 
group had a prevalence of 66% relapse at 30 days; th is estimates the placebo group relapse rate for our proposed 
study. Based on a two -tailed Pearson chi -square test with alpha=0.[ADDRESS_58420] 80% power to detect an odds ratio of 3.5 or highe r for comparing smoking relapse 
prevalence in the placebo group to smoking relapse prevalence in the PRO group. We observed an odds ratio  of 3.2 
for follicular quit group relapse compared to luteal quit group relapse (Allen et al, 2008). Since our PRO grou p will 
receive substantially more progesterone than during the typi[INVESTIGATOR_54288], it is reasonable to expect a 
slightly larger odds ratio for PRO compared to placebo. Since the difference in progesterone levels between the male 
PRO group and the  male PBO group will be larger than the difference between the female PRO group and the female 
PBO group, we expect a larger odds ratio (hence higher power) for the male treatment comparison.  
B. TRIAL MANAGEMENT  
Enrolling Clinics and Data Collection 
Center s.  All study subject enrollment and 
data collection will be done at the Delaware 
Clinical Research Unit at the University of 
Minnesota.  
Projected Timetable.   The projected 
timetable is displayed in Table 1.  
Target Population Distribution.   This study will be recruiting both men (n=100) and women (n=100) because the 
research question addressed is designed to assess sex differences.  Specifically, the effects of a female sex hormone 
(progesterone) on smoking cessation in men and women who ar e motivated to quit smoking will be examined.  Study 
participants will be recruited from the greater metropolitan area of Minneapolis and St. Paul, via mass media 
advertisements.  Estimates indicate that as of [ADDRESS_58421]. Paul, Minnesota T win Cities metro area 
included approximately 50.5% female and 20.2% of the population in the racial minority groups (Black= 11.0%, Asian 
= 5.8%, American Indian = 1.2%, other = 4.0%) and the Hispanic population is 6.4%.  In the absence of minority 
populati on response to advertisements, additional targeted strategies will be implemented to solicit their participation.  
These efforts are effective; for example, our current study has been successful in recruiting a diverse sample: 49% are 
White, 33% are Black,  8% are more than one race and 10% are other.  
Page 20 of 28 Enrollment Table  
 
C. DATA MANAGEMENT AND ANALYSIS  
Data Acquisition and Transmission.  Data collection at study visits will take the form of subjective measures (forms), 
blood and urine samples, and will be identified with a three -digit identification number.  Samples will be collected and 
stored with the subject ID code only.  The coordinat or will keep the code that links the subject ID with the identity of 
the subject in a database protected by [CONTACT_1192] -levels of security stored it separately from the data.   
Data Entry Methods .  All self -report data collection items throughout the study will be  self-administered per direction of 
study staff via a computer program (REDCap; http://project -redcap.org/ ) to improve the quality of data (by [CONTACT_54330], illegible data, etc) and limit the time spent o n data entry and cleaning.  Any data not entered directly into 
a computer system (i.e. height, weight, blood pressure) will be double entered on our password protected server by 
[CONTACT_54331].  The study 
coordinator will be available to monitor the data and correct any discrepancies based on source documents.   
Data Analysis Plan .  Addressing Hypothesis 1: Our primary outcome is the binary indicator of relapsed yes/no at th e 
week [ADDRESS_58422] will be considered 
statistically significa nt if the p -value is <0.025. All persons randomized and with a measured primary outcome at the 
week 4 visit will be included in this analysis, regardless of whether or not they ever took any of their assigned 
treatment (intent -to-treat analysis); persons w ith missed visits are discussed below. While we expect baseline 
covariates to be balanced across treatment groups due to the randomization, an adjusted assessment of the 
treatment effect will then be carried out by a logistic regression including the rando mized treatment assignment and 
pre-specified adjusting covariates such as age, baseline progesterone, estradiol, baseline impulsivity measures, etc. 
This pre -specified list will be determined by [CONTACT_54332], prior  to the first study 
enrollment. We expect these analyses to be somewhat conservative, since they do not explicitly account for the 
randomized permuted blocking (Matts and Lachin, 1988). An analysis that accounts for the blocking (such as a 
stratified Mante l-Haenzel test) cannot be generalized to include the adjustment for impulsivity measures, for example, 
which are a focus of this proposal.  
Hypotheses:  

Page 21 of 28  
Addressing Hypothesis 2: Our secondary outcomes include the binary indicator of relapsed yes/no at the week [ADDRESS_58423] comparing 
treatments (unadjusted) and  Cox proportional hazards analysis (adjusted for other characteristics), both of which allow 
for loss -to-follow up via right censoring (Therneau and Grambsch, 2000), separately for the CA and PA definitions. 
Adjusting variables will be selected as describe d for the primary outcome. The proportional hazards assumption on the 
treatment effect will be examined and tested (Lin, Wei, and Ying, 1993; Grambsch and Therneau, 1994).  
To address Hypothesis 3, we will pool the male and female data and test for an inter action between sex and treatment 
assignment in an adjusted Cox regression for the days to relapse outcomes. To address Hypothesis 4, we will test a 
baseline impulsivity by [CONTACT_54333] r egressions 
for the days to relapse outcomes. To address Hypothesis 5, we will test a baseline impulsivity by [CONTACT_54334]. While this study was designed to be powered for Hypothesis 1, rather than for these comparisons, 
these will be used to generate preliminary data and hypotheses for future research on sex differences in addiction 
treatment and impulsivity.  
D. QUALITY ASSURANCE  
Data collected via computer programs (EMAs and REDCap) will be monitored by [CONTACT_54335], and any problems detected will be discussed with the PI.  The Statistics Core (Eberly, 
Director) will analy ze the data using the SAS program.  In addition, the Statistics Core will provide support in 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_54289].  Data analyses will be completed at the end of the study.  For missing data: Persons 
who do not attend a week [ADDRESS_58424] by [CONTACT_17084]/or email a self -reported recall of smoking 
status as of week 4; outcomes collected in this way will be denoted se parately in the study database. The primary 
outcome analysis will be carried out after excluding these subjects, including those for whom we were able to obtain a 
self-reported recall outcome, where we conservatively assumed all these individuals relapsed as of their week 4 visit. 
Since ‘missing at random’ is a strong statistical assumption to make in the primary outcome analysis, we will also carry 
out descriptive analyses to see whether persons missing their week [ADDRESS_58425] eristics or 
treatment assignment from persons not missing their week 4 visit.  
E, Regulatory Issues : Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Events, Collection and Reporting  
Adverse Events: An adverse event is any unwanted experience or event occurring during the c ourse of a clinical trial.  
At each visit, either a research nurse or physician will query the participant and log side effects and other treatment 
emergent events since the past visit, recording their severity (mild, moderate, severe, life -threatening), w hat action 
was taken, and whether the symptoms are continuing or resolved. The study investigators will follow all AEs to the 
point of a satisfactory resolution.  A study subject may be withdrawn from the study if the PI [INVESTIGATOR_54290].  All AEs will be assessed to determine if they meet criteria for an 
SAE.  AEs will be quantified separately by [CONTACT_54336]’s exact test (for binary e vents) or with chi -square test (for counts of events or event rates).   The event will be 
documented as to whether there is 1) no relationship between the study drug and the adverse event, 2) the adverse 
event is unlikely related to administration of the st udy drug, 3) the adverse event is possibly related to study drug 
administration, or 4) the adverse event is probably related to the administration of the study drug.  
Serious Adverse Events (SAE): A serious adverse event is defined as an outcome that is 1)  fatal or life -threatening, 2) 
significantly or permanently disabling or incapacitating, 3) requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or 4) results in  

Page 22 of 28 a congenital anomaly. SAE’s, whether or not related to study medication, will be reported to the IR B and NIDA. All 
drug related adverse events of a non -serious nature are reported to the University of Minnesota’s IRB on a quarterly 
basis.  Serious adverse events will be reported by [CONTACT_54337], and to NIDA and the FDA within the three 
days of o ur receipt of information regarding the event and written reports will be submitted within ten days.   If a subject 
either withdraws from the study or the investigator decides to discontinue a subject due to SAE, the subject will have 
appropriate follow -up medical monitoring.  Monitoring will continue until the problem requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54291], is clearly unrelated to study medication, or results in death.  
Outcome of SAEs will be periodically repor ted to NIDA.  A summary of the SAEs that occurred during the previous 
year will be included in the annual progress report to NIDA.  Finally, the PI’s will ensure that serious adverse events 
reported to NIDA via the serious adverse event tracking and report ing system at https://saetrs.nida.nih.gov/ . 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_54292] (including study modification) as agreed upon by [CONTACT_54338].  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_54293].  Appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic 
interventions will be initiated and the participant will be medically followed and kept under observation as long as 
medically ind icated. After the review of the data, the DSMB report will make recommendations about whether the trial 
should continue with or without modifications, or be terminated. Any potential conflict of interest in the Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board will be disc losed.  
F. Trial Safety  
Potential Risks and Benefits for Participants .  The potential risks for study subjects are minimal to moderate.  Medical 
histories for all subjects will be reviewed prior to entry into the study and all subjects will be under medical supervision 
while in the study.  Urine and breath samples will be obta ined and should not present risk to the subjects.  Blood 
samples will be obtained by [CONTACT_54339].  A minimal amount of blood will be collected (20cc) per collection. 
Blood drawing may result in slight discomfort, bruising, or there may be some so reness at the puncture site. In some 
cases there may be dizziness or fainting.   
Generic Prometrium, a natural progesterone, is generally well tolerated.  The most common adverse effect is sedation. 
Other less common adverse effects include menstrual irreg ularity, spotting or breakthrough bleeding, dizziness, 
cramps, nausea, fatigue, headache and breast tenderness (de Lignieres, 1999; Simon, 1995, Sofuglu, 2009) . Other 
side effects attributed to synthetic progesteron e, including depression, fluid retention, pruritus, jaundice, rash and 
thrombotic disorders, are unlikely to occur.  Recently there have been reports of increased risk of stroke, coronary 
artery disease, venous thromboembolism and breast cancer in postmeno pausal females who have been on long -term 
hormone replacement treatment with estradiol and progestin (medroxyprogesterone) combination (Anonymous, 2002; 
Grady et al., 2002; Hulley et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2002) . While some of these adverse events develop after years of 
treatment, venous thromboembolism is seen within the first year of treatment (Anonymous, 2002) . It is possible that 
progestins may contribute to thromboembolism seen during estradiol and progestin treatment and thromboembolism is 
listed in the PDR as one of the adverse events for medroxyprogesterone treatment (PDR, 2002) . In contrast to 
synthetic progestins, natural progesterone is not k nown to cause thromboembolism (PDR, 2002) . However, as a 
safety measure for these serious adverse events, we will exclude subjects with history of thrombophlebitis, deep vein 
thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, clotting or bleeding disorders, heart disease, diabetes or history of stroke. Possible 
adverse events from generic Prometrium will be assessed weekly by [CONTACT_54340] (Schulz, NP) in consultation 
with the study physicians (Allen MD, Specker MD).  If the side effects cannot be tolerated the medication dosage will 
be decreased to 200 mg daily.  
Although uncomfortable, withdrawal symptoms do not pose significant health risks.  Subjects who participate in this 
study will be asked to quit smoking on an assigned quit date.  The smoking abstinence may result in increased 
irritability, anxiety, ten sion, depression, increased hunger or drowsiness.  
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent.  Subjects will be recruited via metro mass media advertisements (television, 
radio, print, email, and internet). Those who see the mass media advertisements will contac t Tobacco Research 
Programs in response to advertisements.  Each subject interested in participating will be screened by [CONTACT_54341].  If eligible, subjects will be asked to attend a screening visit.  At this visit subjects are prov ided 
with a detailed explanation of the study purpose and procedures (including risk involved), any questions a subject may 
have will be answered, subjects will be asked questions to assess their understanding of the study, and informed 
consent will be obt ained before any study procedures are completed.  
b. Protection against Risk.  Subjects will be told the potential risks involved in this study.  Although risks to subjects in 
Page [ADDRESS_58426]. Sharon Allen (PI) will be available for emergency phone call s 24 hours/day and 
for office visits in case of problems.  Blood will be collected by [CONTACT_54342].   
During generic Prometrium administration, the first dose of the study medication will be taken at 8  PM to minimize 
possible sedation from initiation of progesterone treatment. Subjects will be warned about using caution when driving 
a motor vehicle or operating machinery. Subjects will also be warned about the side effects associated with generic 
Promet rium.  Further, although unlikely, the study physician ([CONTACT_54350], PI) will be alert to the earliest manifestations of 
thrombotic disorders including thrombophlebitis, cerebrovascular disorders, pulmonary embolism, and retinal 
thrombosis (PDR, 2002). If an y of these occur or are suspected, the study medication will be discontinued immediately 
and medical treatment will be sought.  
There may be risk to confidentiality and privacy of study data.  To minimize this risk, subjects will be assigned unique 
three -digit identification numbers.  The questionnaires and study samples will retain only the unique study number.   
These numbers will be linked to the subject’s identifier information in a database separate from assay results or other 
data collected.  The data base requires at least 2 levels of security (i.e., passwords), which will allow only authorized 
research team members to access the information.   
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Whereas no assurance can be made to an  individual subject that he/she will personally benefit from such research, 
the experience should be beneficial.  Subjects will have the opportunity to learn about their smoking behavior and 
receiving smoking cessation behavioral counseling.   Society may benefit from a better understanding of the role of 
sex and sex hormones on smoking behavior and impulsivity.  A better understanding of this relationship will help 
improve treatment strategies for nicotine dependence. The risks in relation to the potential  benefits are minimal to the 
individual research subject and virtually nonexistent to society in general.   
G. Trial Efficacy  
No interim analyses of efficacy are planned for the proposed study.  
H. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan, Board, and Administration.  
The Service Core (Grabowski, Director) of the P50 will implement the plans and organize review by [CONTACT_54343] (DSMB). The Service Core (B) will administratively overse e the DSM Plan, Board and complying 
with reporting requirements. This provides additional separate attention to, monitoring and focus on safety. The DSMB 
will meet annually and will, post meeting, provide a summary of discussion, which will be conveyed to NIDA. This report 
will include subject demographics, expected versus actual recruitment rates, summary of any quality assurance or 
regulatory issues, summary of adverse events (AEs) or serious adverse events (SAEs) which may have occurred, and 
any changes in the protocol as a result of these issues. The DSMB will receive current data and blinded data unless a 
specific request or cause to view unblinded data is evident. The final report will be complete and inclusive with the 
unblended data set.  
The Service Core Project Manager (A. Allen) will meet with the Study Coordinator (D. Babb) and PI (S. Allen) on a 
weekly basis to review the study’s progress.  Additionally, the Service Core Director (J. Grabowski) will also be 
available to identify and solve problems  in the study’s implementation, as well as advise on any adverse events 
experienced by [CONTACT_40977]. Drs. Grabowski, Allen (PI [INVESTIGATOR_54294] 1) and Specker (PI [INVESTIGATOR_54294] 2) will meet 
regularly and as needed regarding data and project safety. Additiona lly, all key personnel will meet regularly regarding 
overall progress, specific problems and problem resolution. The daily monitoring of subjects will be the coordinator’s 
responsibility.  The coordinator will also report to the Project Manager and PI [INVESTIGATOR_17174] n eeded.  
Participants will be closely monitored throughout the trial. A summary of all data, with the exception of information that 
entails breaking the blind, will be provided to the DSMB at annual meetings. SAE’s will be reported to the head of the 
DSMB wh en they have been identified and characterized. The chair of the DSMB may request a special meeting of 
the panel as needed. The Board will consist of Drs. [LOCATION_009]s Levin, [CONTACT_54351] and [CONTACT_54352]. These individuals 
will serve to monitor SCOR projects  involving human subjects.  
The group will meet on an annual basis and review data including recruitment, progress, safety, adverse events, and 
serious adverse events associated with the study. The DSMB meeting will include open, closed and executive 
Page [ADDRESS_58427] about general aspects of 
the trial. The open s ession will focus on the background of the study, the protocol, status of the study, problems with 
accrual and follow -up, baseline demographic data, compliance issues, frequency of adverse events, documentation of 
endpoints, data quality issues, flow of fo rms, data based protocol modification issues, and any other issue regarding 
the studies under review that can be discussed without reference to interim comparative results.  
Following the open session, a closed session will be held. During the closed sessio n, the chairperson ([LOCATION_009]s R 
Levin MD) will conduct the review of all issues and puts each issue to a vote. This session will be attended by [CONTACT_54344], principal investigator. During the closed session, the discuss ions will 
focus on the treatment safety, requesting and reviewing additional information if needed and updating the Board on 
actions taken related to their actions and recommendations of the previous meeting.  
Following the closed session, an executive meet ing may be held. The executive meeting will be restricted to DSMB 
members. During these sessions, the Board may discuss any sensitive issues surrounding the clinical trials under 
review.  
The Board Chairperson will prepare a draft report of the meeting alon g with minutes for inclusion in the final DSMB 
report. The report will outline and summarize discussion during the open and closed sessions of the meeting. 
Recommendations and action items will be clearly marked within the body of the report. If the DSMB c onducts an 
executive session, a statement will be included in the Minutes of the Meeting stating that an executive session was 
conducted, but content of the discussion will be retained by [CONTACT_54345]. The draft report 
shall be reviewed and edited by [CONTACT_54346].  
If deemed necessary, the DSMB can request to know whether or not the participant received active medication or 
placebo. If they believe that termination of the trial is warranted, the blind of all study participants will be broken. 
DSMB recommendations wil l be communicated to the NIDA Project Officer soon after the DSMB meetings.  
 
Affiliation and contact [CONTACT_54347]:  
[LOCATION_009]s R Levin MD, [CONTACT_3348] of Psychiatry  
Columbia University  
[LOCATION_001] Psychiatric Institu te, Unit [ADDRESS_58428]  
[LOCATION_001], NY  
Tel: [PHONE_969]  
Email: [EMAIL_1019]  
 
Scott Crow MD, [CONTACT_54353] of Psychiatry F282/2A West  
University of Minnesota  
[ADDRESS_58429]  
Minneapolis MN [ZIP_CODE]  
Tel: [PHONE_970]  
Email: [EMAIL_1020]  
 
Mehmet Sofuoglu MD  
Associate [CONTACT_3348] of Psychiatry  
Yale University  
MPSY VA/Substance Abuse  
[ADDRESS_58430] [ZIP_CODE] -1187  
Tel: 203 -937-4809  
Email: [EMAIL_1021]  
 
Page 25 of 28 F.  References  
Allen, A.M., Allen, S.S., al’Absi, M., & Hatsukami, D.K. (2009b).  Menstrual phase differences in nicotine 
response after acute smoking abstinence.  [Abstract].  College  of Problems on Drug Dependence 2009 
Annual Research Conference.  
Allen, A.M., Allen, S.S., Widenmier, J., & al’Absi, M. (2009a).  Patterns of cortisol and craving by [CONTACT_54348].  Addictive Behaviors; 34: 632 -635. [ PMID: 19409710]  
Allen, S.S., Allen, A.M., Lunos, S., & Hatsukami, D. (2009c).  Patterns of self -selected smoking cessation 
attempts and relapse by [CONTACT_54349].  Addictive Behaviors; 34: 928 -931. [ PMID: 19501984]  
Allen, S.S., Bade, T., Center, B., Finst ad, D., & Hatsukami, D.  (2008). Menstrual phase effects on smoking 
relapse.  Addiction; 103: 809 -821. [ PMID: 18412759]  
Allen, S. S., Hatsukami, D., Christianson, D., & Brown, S. (2000) Effects of transdermal nicotine on craving, 
withdrawal and premenstrua l symptomatology in short -term smoking abstinence during different phases of 
the menstrual cycle. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2, 231 -241. [PMID: 11082823]  
Allen, S. S., Hatsukami, D. K., Christianson, D., & Nelson, D. (1999) Withdrawal and pre -menstrual 
symptomatology during the menstrual cycle in short -term smoking abstinence: effects of menstrual cycle 
on smoking abstinence. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 1, 129 -142. [PMID: 11072394]  
Baker, F., Johnson, M.W., & Bickel, W.K. (2003).  Delay discounting in curr ent and never -before cigarette 
smokers: Similarities and differences across commodity, sign and magnitude.  Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology; 112: 382 -392. [PMID: 12943017 ] 
Beck, A.T., Steer, R.A., & Brown, G.K. (1996).  BDI -II, Beck depression inventory: ma nual.  2nd Edition.  
[LOCATION_011]: Harcourt Brace.   
Benowitz, N.L.  (2009). Pharmacology of Nicotine: Addiction, Smoking -Induced Disease, and Therapeutics.  
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology; 49: 57 -71. [PMID: 18834313]  
Bickel, W.K. & Marsch, L.A. (2 001).  Toward a behavioral economic understanding of drug dependence: Delay 
discounting processes.  Addiction; 96: 73 -86. [PMID: 11177521]  
Bickel, W.K., Odum, A.L., & Madden, G.J. (1999).  Impulsivity and cigarette smoking: Delay discounting in 
current, ne ver and ex -smokers.  Psychopharmacology; 146: 447 -454. [PMID: 10550495]  
Billieux, J., Gay, P., Rochat, L., Khazaal, Y., Zullino, D., & Van der Linden, M. (2010).  Lack of inhibitory control 
predicts cigarette smoking dependence: Evidence from a non -deprive d sample of light to moderate 
smokers.  Drug & Alcohol Dependence; 112: 164 -167. [PMID: 20667667]  
Carpenter, M.J., Saladin, M.E., Leinbach, A.S., LaRowe, S.D., & Upadhyaya, H.P. (2008).  Menstrual phase 
effects on smoking cessation: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_54295].  Journal of Women’s Health; 17: 293 -301. [ PMID: 
18321181]  
Carroll, M.E., & Anker, J.J. (2010).  Sex differences and ovarian hormones in animal models of drug abuse.  
Hormones and Behaviors; 58: 44 -56. [PMID: 19818789]  
Carver, C.S., & White, T.L. (1994) .  Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activiation and affective responses to 
reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology; 67: 319 -333. 
[PMID: 12745503]  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Tobacco C ontrol State Highlights, 2010.  Atlanta: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Center for 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2010. 
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/  
data_statistics/state_data/state_highlights/2010/pdfs/highlights2010.pdf   
Cox, L.S., Tiffany, S.T., & Christen, A.G. (2001).  Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (QSU -
Brief) in laboratory and clinical settings.  Nicotine & Tobacco Research; 3: 7 -16. [PMID: 11260806]  
de Lignieres, B. (1999). Oral Micronized Progesterone. Clinical Therapeutics; 21: 41 -60. [PMID: 10090424]  
Dora n, N., Cook, J., McChargue, D., & Spring, B.  (2009).  Impulsivity and cigarette craving: Differences across 
subtypes.  Psychopharmacology; 207: 365 -373. [PMID: 19756522]  
Doran, N., Spring, B., McChargue, D., Pergadia, M., & Richmond, M. (2004).  Impulsivi ty and smoking relapse.  
Nicotine & Tobacco Research; 6: 641 -647. [PMID: 15370160]  
Dougherty, D.M., Marsh, D.M., Mathias, C.W., & Steinberg, J.L. (2002).  Immediate and Delayed Memory 
Tasks: A computerized behavioral measure of memory, attention and impuls ivity.   Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments & Computers; 34: 391 -398. [ PMID: 12395555]  
Dougherty, D.M., Marsh -Richard, D.M., Hatzis, E.S., Nouvion, S.O., & Mathais, C.W. (2008).  A test of alcohol 
dose effects on multiple behavioral measures of impulsi vity.  Drug & Alcohol Dependence; 96: 111 -120. 
Page 26 of 28 [PMID: 18378098]  
Dixon, M.R., Marley, J., & Jacobs, E.A. (2003).  Delay discounting in pathological gamblers.  Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Analysis; 36: 449 -458. [PMID: 14768665]  
First, M. B., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L. , Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. ( 1995 ). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -
III-R personality disorders (SCID -II, Version 2.0): Part I: Description. Journal of Personality Disorders , 9, 
83–91.  
Franklin, T.R., Ehrman, R., Lynch, K.G., Harper, D., Sciortino, N., O’Brien, C.P., & Childress, A.R. (2007).  
Menstrual Cycle Phase at Quit Date Predicts Smoking Status in an NRT Treatment Trial: A Retrospective 
Analysis.  Journal of Women’s Health; 17: 287 -292. [ PMID: 18321180]  
Goletiani, N.V., Keith, D.R.,  Gorsky, S.J. (2007).  Progesterone: Review of Safety for Clinical Studies.  
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology; 5: 427 -444. [PMID: 17924777]  
Godin, G., Shepard, R.J. (1985).  A Simple Method to Assess Exercise Behavior in the Community. Canadian  
Journal of Applied Sport Sciences; 10: 141 -146.  
Grambsch, P. M. , & Therneau, T. M. (1994), “Proportional Hazards Tests and Diagnostics  Based on Weighted 
Residuals,” Biometrika, 81, 515 –526. 
Grinsted, J., Jacobsen, J. D., Grinsted, L., Schantz, A., Stenfo ss, H. H., & Nielsen, S. P. (1989) Prediction of 
ovulation. Fertility and Sterility 52, 388 -393. [PMID: 2776892]  
Heatherton, T. F., Kozlowski, L. T., Frecker, R. C., & Fagerstrom, K. O. (1991). The fagerstrom test for nicotine 
dependence: A revision of the  fagerstrom tolerance questionnaire. British Journal of Addiction; 86: 
1119 −1127. [ PMID: 1932883]  
Hughes, J., & Hatsukami, D. K. (1998). Errors in using tobacco withdrawal scale. Tobacco Control; 7: 92 -93. 
[PMID: 9706762]  
Hughes J. R., Keely J. P., Niaura R. S., Ossip -Klein D. J., Richmond R. L., & Swan G. E. (2003).  Measures of 
abstinence in clinical trials: issues and recommendations. Nicotine & Tobacco Research ; 5: 13–25. [PMID: 
12745503]  
Jarvis, M. J., Tunstall -Pedoe, H., Feyerabend, C., Vesey, C., and Saloojee, Y. (1987) Comparison of tests 
used to distinguish smokers from nonsmokers. American Journal of Public Health 77, 1435 -1438. [PMID: 
3661797]  
Kirschbaum, C., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7317], K.M., Hellhammer, DH.  (1993).  The ‘Trier Socia l Stress Test’ – A tool for investigating 
psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting. Neuropsychobiology; 28:76 –81. [PMID: 8255414]  
Kollins, S.H. (2003).  Delay discounting is associated with substance use in college students.  Addictive 
Behaviors; 28: 1167 -1173.  [PMID: 12834659]  
Lejuez, C.W., Read, J.P., Kahler, C.W., Richards, J.B., Ramsey, S.E., Stuart, G.L., Strong, D.R., & Brown, 
R.A. (2002).  Evaluation of a behavioral measure of risk taking: the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART).  
Journal of Experimental Psychology Applied; 8: 75 -84. 
Llaneza, D.C., & Frye, C.A. (2009).  Progestogens and estrogen influence on impulsive burying and avoidant 
freezing behavior of naturally cycling and ovariectomized rats.  Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Beha vior; 
93: 337 -342. [PMID: 19447128]  
Lin, D. Y., Wei, L. J., &  Ying, Z. (1993), “Checking the Cox Model with Cumulative Sums of  Martingale -Based 
Residuals,” Biometrika, 80, 557 –572. 
Luciano, A. A., Peluso, J., Koch, E. I., Maier, D., Kuslis, S., & Davison, E. (1990) Temporal relationship and 
reliability of the clinical, hormonal, and ultrasonographic indices of ovulation in infertile women. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology 75, 412 -416. [PMID: 2406661]  
Lynch, W.J., & Sofuoglu, M.  (2010).  Role of Progesterone in Ni cotine Addiction: Evidence from Initiation to 
Relapse.  Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology; 18: 451 -461. [PMID: 21186920]  
Mathias, C.W., Marsh, D.W., & Dougherty, D.M. (2002).  Reliability estimates for the Immediate and Delayed 
Memory Tasks.  Pe rceptual and Motor Skills; 95: 559 -569. [PMID:12434851]  
Matts JP and Lachin JM (1988). “Properties of permuted -block randomization in clinical trials,”  Control Clin ical 
Trials, 9(4), 327 -44. 
Mazure, C.M., Toll, B., McKee, S.A., Wu, R., & O’Malley, S.S. (2011).  Menstrual cycle phase at quit date and 
smoking abstinence at 6 weeks in an open -label trial of bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394].  Drug & Alcohol Dependence; 114: 68 -
72. [PMID: 20832955]  
McNair, D. M., Low, M., & Dropplemaln, F. (1971).  Manual: Profile of Mood States. S an Diego, CA: 
Educational & Industrial Testing Service.  
Page 27 of 28 Monterosso, J., Ehrman, R., Napi[INVESTIGATOR_3694], K.L, O’Brien, C.P. & Childress, A.R. (2001).  Three decision -making tasks 
in cocaine -dependent patients: Do they measure the same construct.  Addiction; 96: 1825 -1837.  
[PMID:11784475]  
Nieva, G., Valero, S., Bruguera E., Andion, O., Trasovares, M.V., Gual, A., & Casa, M. (2011).  The alternative 
five-factor model of personality, nicotine dependence and relapse after treatment for smoking cessation.  
Addictive Behavio rs: 36; 965 -971. [PMID: 21704460]  
Patton, J.H., Standford, M.S., & Barratt, E.S. (1995).  Factor structure of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale.  
Journal of Clinical Psychology; 51: 768 -774. [PMID: 8778124]  
PDR:  Physicians’ Desk Reference.  (2002). Medical Economics Company; 56th Edition.  
Perkins, K.A., & Scott, J.  (2008). Sex differences in long -term smoking cessation rates due to nicotine patch.  
Nicotine & Tobacco Research; 10: 1245 -1251. [ PMID: 18629735]  
Petry, N.M., & Casarella, T. (1999).  Excessive discounting of delayed rewards in substance abusers with 
gambling problems.  Drug & Alcohol Dependence; 56: 25 -32.  [ PMID: 10462089]  
Posner, K., Brent, D., Lucas, C., et al. (1/14/2009).  Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale. [Accessed Online 
on 10/9/201 2.] http://cssrs.columbia.edu/docs/C -SSRS_1_14_09_Baseline.pdf   
Reed, S.C., Levin, F.R., & Evans, S.M. (2010).  The effect of progesterone pretreatment on the response to 
oral D -amphetamine in women.  Hormones & Behaviors; 58: 533 -543. [ PMID: 20399212]  
Richards, J.B., Zhang, L., Mitchell, S.H., & de Wit, H. (1999).  Delay or probability discounting in a model of 
impulsive behavior: Effect of alcohol. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior; 71: 121 -143. [PMID: 
10220927]  
Roberti, J., Harrington, L., Storch, E. (2006).  Further Psychometric Support for the 10 -Item Version of the 
Perceived Stress Scale.  Journal of University Counseling; 9: 135 -147. 
Sobell, L. C., Brown, J., Leo, G.  I., & Sobell, M. B. (1996). The reliability of the Alcohol Timeline Followback 
when administered by [CONTACT_20261]. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 42, 49 -54. [PMID: 
8889403]  
Sofuoglu, M., Babb, D. A., Hatsukami, D. K. (2001).  Progesterone treatme nt during the early follicular phase of 
the menstrual cycle: effects on smoking behavior in women. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior; 
69: 299 -304. [ PMID: 11420098]  
Sofuoglu, M., Mitchell, E., & Kosten, T.R.  (2004).  Effects of progesterone treatment  on cocaine responses in 
male and female cocaine users.  Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Behavior; 78: 699 -705.  
Sofuoglu M, Mouratidis M, Mooney M. ([ZIP_CODE]).  Progesterone improves cognitive performance and attenuates 
smoking urges in abstinence smokers.  Psy choneuroendocrinology; 36: 123 -132. 
Stoltenberg, S.F., Batien, B.D., & Birgenheir, D.G. (2008).  Does gender moderate associations among 
impulsivity and health -risk behaviors?  Addictive Behaviors; 33: 252 -265.  [ PMID: 17913380]  
Tangney, J.P., Baumeister, R.F., & Boone, A.L. (2004).  High self -control predicts good adjustment, less 
pathology, better grades and interpersonal success.  Journal of Personality; 72: 271 -324 [PMID:1501606]  
Therneau, T. M. and Grambsch, P. M. (2000), Modeling Survival Data: Extend ing the Cox  Model, [LOCATION_001]: 
Springer -Verlag.  
Tiffany, S. T., & Drobes, D. J. (1991).  The development and initial validation of a questionnaire on smoking 
urges. British Journal of Addiction; 86:1467 -1476. [ PMID: 1777741]  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). (2001). Women and Smoking:  A report of the 
Surgeon General.  Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General, Rockville, Maryland. 
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/2001/complete_report/index.htm   
Vuchinich, R.E., & Simpson, C.A. (1998).  Hyperbolic temporal discounting in social drinkers and problem 
drinkers.  Experimental Clinical Psychopharmco logy; 6: 292 -305.  [PMID: 9725113]  
Yen, S. S., Jaffe, R. B., & Barbieri, R. L. (1999) Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, and 
clinical management, 4th Edition. Philadelphia, PA.  
 
Reference:  
The data safety and monitoring plan is based on the investigators experience, expertise and the template developed 
by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Ivan Montoya, NIDA/NIH.  
http://www.drugabuse.gov/funding/clinical -research/guidelines -developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] -data-safety -monitoring -plan 
 
Page 28 of 28 SCOR P1 and MJ  
 
 
Rules/Changes                        Last Updated: 9/8/16  
 
 In order to be eligible at BL, subject must be averaging 4.[ADDRESS_58431] is smoking less 
than 4.5 CPD, they will be dropped from the study and filed as “SCREEN FAIL” (1/1/15).  
 
 Week [ADDRESS_58432]’s quit date.   If this is not possible, it may be completed 
AFTER t he quit date but a protocol deviation must be made.  Week 0 cannot be completed BEFORE quit date 
(1/3/15).  
 
 Subjects are allowed to miss 2 clinic visits over the entire study to eligible for the $75 bonus at Week 12 – unless 
a cancelation was made by [CONTACT_49124] (instead of the subject) .  That absence would NOT count against the 
bonus  (1/29/15).  
 
 ALT/AST levels must not be higher than double the normal range to be enrolled at SC .  If levels are high er than 
double the normal range , the subject will be notifi ed of the results, referred to PCP for follow -up and invited 
back in [ADDRESS_58433]. Allen’s approval.  He/she  will be tested again at Week [ADDRESS_58434] not gone up, they will 
be allowed to continue in the study (1/29/15).  
 
 The last available time to start a follow -up appointment will be 5:00pm (Week 4, 8, 12 – 4:30pm)  
 
 We will only collect 2 urine samples at each visit (00 & 01) (4/7/15).  
 
 Sample s to be sent for analysis:  
Hormones   BL W4 W12  (Blood)  
Cotinine   W4 W12  (Blood)  
 
 BDI scores will be monitored weekly by [CONTACT_464].  If a subject scores ≥20 or endorsed suicidal thoughts 
(Question #9), staff will start an  AE and continue to monitor scores.  If score decreases and is <14 after three 
weeks  with no suicidal thoughts , the AE may be closed.   
 