 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
~Sun Pharma Advanced Research Company, LTD~ 
 
 
 
A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Parallel Group Trial to 
          in Subjects 
with Spasticity due to Multiple Sclerosis (MS) 
 
    
 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Version 1.0 
 
Prepared by: 
 
  
 
     
    
   
     
 
 
  
 
 
[CONTACT_305840].  Version Date  Description of Modifications  
0.[ADDRESS_374364]’s Global Impression of Severity  
SOC  System Organ Class 
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
WBC  White blood cell  
WHO DD World Health Organization  Drug Dictionary  
 
 
 
  
1. Introduction 
 
The purpose of the Statistical Analysis P lan is to provide a framework that addresses the 
protocol objectives in a statisticall y rigorous fashion with minimized bias or analytical 
deficiencies. Specifically, this plan has the following purpose:  
 To prospectively (a priori) outline the types of analyses and data presentations that 
will address the study objectives outlined in the pr otocol . 
 To explain in detail how the data will be handled and analyzed, adhering to 
commonly accepted standards and practices of statistical analysis in the 
pharmaceutical industry.  
2. Objectives 
 
The objective of this trial is               
          in 
alleviating spasticity     . 
3. Investigational Plan 
3.1. Overall Study Design and Plan 
 
This is a  double -blind,        
 a single     , in subjects with spasticity 
due to MS.            .  
Upon completion of informed consent , at the start of        
          
                
                
               
                    
               
                
           . Safety and efficacy 
assessments will be performed according to the schedule of events in Section 11.5 .   
  
          following the completion of exit 
assessments . 
3.2. Study Endpoints 
3.2.1.  Efficacy Endpoints 
 
Primary Efficacy Endpoint :   
 
         Total Modified Ashworth Score  over 
time         . The primary 
effica cy endpoint of the study      Total Modif ied Ashworth Score s 
              
          assessed on Days 23 and 
24. 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints :   
 
     spasm frequency   
     nighttime awa kening score  
     Clinical Global Impression of 
Change (CGIC) score  on     
     Subject’s Global Impression of 
Severity  (SGI S)       
3.2.2.  Safety Endpoints 
 
 Adverse events (AEs)  
 Vital signs  
 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG)  
 Laboratory tests  
  
 Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
4. General Statistical Considerations 
 
In general, continuous variables  will be summarized with descriptive statistics  (number of 
observations, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum , maximum , and 95% CI ) and 
categorical variables will be summarized with count and percentage , unless otherwise 
specified.  If there is only on e observation, the standard deviation will be displayed  as NE  
(Not Estimable) . The p -values will be two-sided and round ed to four decimal places , and a 
significance level of alpha (α) = 0.[ADDRESS_374365] pre -dose non-missing measure ment , unless specified otherwise.   
4.1. Sample Size 
 
               
               
                  
              
          
              
                  
       
                
  31 evaluable subjects in each treatment group is required to provide 90% 
power , assuming a common standard deviation  .  To account for the drop -out ra te of 
30%, a pproximately  135 subjects will be randomized in this trial.    
4.2. Randomization, Stratification, and Blinding 
 
Eligible subjects will be randomized to receive      
            
     .  
              
               
       as required for regulatory reporting 
  
purposes.               
   
4.3. Analysis Set s 
 
Two analy sis sets will be used in this study:  
 The Intent-to-Treat (ITT) population  consists of all subjects  who are 
 randomized to a treatment , who receive         
           
      . Subjects  in this population will be analyzed 
according to the treatment they were randomized to, regardless of any dosing error. 
               
               
              
            
 . 
5. Subject Disposition 
 
5.1. Disposition 
 
Subject  disposition will be listed and summarized for all enrolled subjects, by [CONTACT_305841] . The number and percentage of subjects who were screened, were randomized, 
and who are in the ITT  and Safety  populations  will be summarized.  The nu mber and 
percent of subjects who completed and who discontinued  the study  will be summarized . 
The reasons for study discontinuation will be summarized for the categories below:  
 Adverse Event  
 Major Protocol Violation   
 Lost to Follow -Up  
 Worsening of Condi tion 
  
 Other Reasons  
5.2. Protocol Deviations 
 
Protocol violations (i.e., divergences from the inclusion and exclusion criteria , received 
excluded concomitant medications, received wrong treatment or incorrect dose, and those 
who developed withdrawal criteria but  were not withdrawn ) and deviations (i.e., non -
adherence to trial procedures or schedule) will be recorded on the CRF and tracked in a 
deviation log.  Protocol violations will be  summarized in a table  for the ITT population, by 
[CONTACT_52628] . Proto col violations and deviations will be displayed in a listing.  
6. Demographics and Baseline Characteristics 
6.1. Demographics 
 
Subject demographics, including age,        sex, race and 
ethnicity, will be summarized with d escriptive statisti cs for the ITT and Safety population s, 
by [CONTACT_52628] . Listings of individual subjects’ data will also be produced.  
6.2. MS Medical History 
 
The MS medical history at screening will be summarized by     
              
              [CONTACT_305842], by [CONTACT_52628] . This information will also be presented in a data 
listing.  
 
    
 
             
              
           
          history will also be created.   
6.4. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
 
  
All inclusion/exclusion information on enrolled subjects  will be included in a by -patient 
listing.  Th e listing will include a flag indicating whether all criteria were satisfied.  For 
subjects  who did not satisfy the criteria, the criteria number will be listed with the 
deviation  
7. Treatments and Medications 
7.1. Prior and Concomitant Medications 
 
A medication will be  categorized as prior medication i f the medication end date is before 
the first dose  date.  A  medication will be  categorized as a concomitant medication  if the 
medication end date is after the first dose date or is ongoing at study completion . If the  
start or end date of a medications is missing, it will b e imputed as described in Appendix 
11.4. All prior and conc omitant medications will be cod ed to Anatomical Therapeutic 
Chemical ( ATC ) Class [ADDRESS_374366] version of the  World 
Health Organization Drug Dictionary  (WHODD) .  
The number and percentage of subjects  in the Safety population taking prior or 
concomitant medications will be summarized  by [CONTACT_305843] , by [CONTACT_52628] . In addition, t he prior medications for MS and 
spasticity , and the medication s subject s wash ed out from in order to enter the study , as well 
as neurological and anti -spasticity concomitant medications , and concomitant medications 
present at Day [ADDRESS_374367] deviaion, median, minimum and maximum at 
             , by 
[CONTACT_52628].   Counts and percentages will be provided for subjects exposed for 
       
  
Study treatment compliance  rate will be  calculat ed as the ratio of the total number of 
tablets taken to the total number of tablets assigned, where  the total number of  tablets 
taken  is (         ).   
             
                   
             
             
                 
   . A subject listing of study treatment compliance will be 
provided.  
8. Efficacy Analysis 
 
This is a pharmacodynamic study. Analysis of t he primary pharmacodynamic end point, the 
Modified Ashworth Score, is described in Section 8.1. Analyses for t he secondary 
endpoints, spasm frequency, nighttime awakening due to spasms, CGIC and SGIS are 
described in Sections 8.2.  The primary and secondary efficacy analys es will be  based on 
the ITT population.  
8.1. Primary Efficacy Analysis 
 
              
       the duration of effect, p -values will be used as a guide; 
a hierarchical approach t o the analysis of time points will be used as described below. For 
these reasons, the p -values will not be adjusted for the multiple comparisons performed.  
The baseline total Modified Ashworth Score  is defined as the total score at    . 
Statist ical si gnificance of        
           total 
Modified Ashworth Score  will be assessed. At each time point, the change from baseline 
will be com puted. A hierarchical testing procedure will be used to assess duration of effect  
separately for each dose level .          
                
  total Modified Ashworth Score  as a covariate , and the interaction between 
treatment group and baseline Modified Ashworth Score .      
                  
  
                   
                . 
This procedure will be continued until reaching a time point at which the difference 
between active and placebo is statistically significant.   
              
                
                      f 
                  
                 
              f 
                  
               
              . 
            
              
          , the 
corresponding standard error (SE), 95% Confidence Interval (CI), and the p -value 
representing  the significance  of treatment effect  will be displaye d for each timepoint  in a 
separate table.  The observed score and change from baseline will be displayed in separate 
boxplots by [CONTACT_150746].  
8.2. Secondary Efficacy Analyses 
 
           . For the  
spasm frequency  and nighttime awakening score, baseline is the measurement taken at the 
screening visit .  
8.2.1.  Spasm Frequency 
 
The     baseline spasm  will be summarized  by [CONTACT_765] .  
Statistical significance of treatment differen ce       
                
                
              
  
            . 
              
 , 95% CI, and the p -value representing  the significance  of treatment 
effect  will be displayed in a table. The change from baseline in spasm frequency will be 
displayed in  histograms  for each treatment group by [CONTACT_765] . The actual score will be listed in 
a data listing.  
8.2.2.  Night Time Awakening Score 
 
The nighttime awakening score will be summarized  in the same way as spasm frequenc y. 
                
             
         . The observed  
score s will be listed in a data listing. The change from baseline  in nighttime awakening 
score  will be displayed in histograms  for each tre atment group by [CONTACT_765] .  
8.2.3.  CGIC 
 
The CGIC at               
          
         
           
               
          . 
8.2.4.  SGIS 
 
The SGI S will be summarized in the same way as the CGIC  for the categorical outcomes 
        
         
       . 
 
9. Safety Analysis 
 
  
Safety evaluations will be based on the incidence, severity, and causality of AEs, vital 
signs, Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale C -SSRS, electrocardiogram (ECG), and 
clinical laboratory res ults. The safety analysis for female subjects will also include urine  
pregnancy results. All safety analyses will be co nducted on the Safety population . 
9.1. Adverse Events 
 
Treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) will be used for summary and analysis 
purpose s.  A TEAE is defined as : any new event that occ urred   
, a condition that existed before drug administration but increased in 
severity , or a condition that existed prior to drug treatment but increased in freque ncy of 
occurrence .  A treatment -emergent  serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as any 
treatment -emergent event that results in death, is immediately life threatening, requires 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], results in persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity, is a congenital anomaly/birth defect , or is an important 
medical event .  TEAEs will be  recorded            f 
  will be coded to System Organ Class (SOC) and Preferred Terms ( PTs) using 
the latest version  of of MedDRA ®.  
A treatment -related AE is an event that is considered possibly or probably related to study 
drug, in the judgment of the investigator .  If the AE start date is missing, it will b e imputed 
as described in Appendix 11.4 .  
The following summaries of AEs by [CONTACT_305844]:  
 Overall TE AE summary, including:  
o Incidence of subjects with one or more TEAE  
o Incidence of TEAEs by [CONTACT_305845]  
o Incidence of TEAEs by [CONTACT_49241]  
o Incidence of TEAEs by [CONTACT_198102]  
o Incidence of TEAEs by [CONTACT_305846]  
o Incid ence of treatment -emergent SAEs  

  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_3592]  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305847] s 
 TEAEs  by [CONTACT_305848]  
 Treatment -related TEAEs by [CONTACT_210716] d PT  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305849]  
 Treatment -related TEAEs by [CONTACT_305849]  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305850] 
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305851]  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305852] 
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305853] (i.e., 
medications used by 20% or more of the subjects overall)  
 TEAEs by [CONTACT_305854] s presen t on   
 TEAEs leading to treatment  discontinuation by [CONTACT_3592]  
 SAEs by [CONTACT_3592]  
 Fatal SAEs by [CONTACT_3592]  
 Treatment -related SAE s by [CONTACT_305855] l evel of summarization, a subject  will be counted only once for each AE he/she 
experiences with in that level . For the summary by [CONTACT_2073], if a subject has  more than 
one AE on different  levels, the most related AE will be counte d. For the summary by 
[CONTACT_926] , if a subject has more than one AE on different  level s, the most severe AE will be 
summarized in the table. All summaries by [CONTACT_2946]/PT will be presented in the descending 
order of frequency  in the total column (i.e., all treatme nt groups combined) . Data list ings 
will be provided for all AEs, SAEs, and AEs leading to study drug discontinuation.  
  
9.2. Clinical Laboratory Evaluations 
 
Clinical laboratory tests  performed at screening and Day 24  include the following :  
 
Hematology:  
 
 Red blood cell indices, including RBC count and hemoglobin  
 
 Total WBC count  
 
 Differential WBC count  
 
 Platelet count  
 
Serum chemistry:  
 
 Sodium  
 
 Potassium  
 
 Chloride  
 
 BUN  
 
 Creatinine  
  
A central lab oratory  will be used for chemistry and hematology test ing. Values outside the 
laboratory normal ranges (see Appendix  11.6) as well as those considered clinically 
significant by [CONTACT_305856] L (low) or  H (high). Chemistry and 
hematology results will be displayed in separate  data listings with abnormal values flagged . 
The numerical results of lab oratory  tests will be summarized separately for Chemistry and  
Hematology, including observed values, change from baseline , and shift from baseline for 
the L/H/Normal flags. For change from baseline s ummaries at   only subjects  with 
data present at both s creening    will be summarized. Due to subject dropout, this 
will generally reflect a smaller  sample than at screening. Therefore, at   an additional 
baseline mean and standard devia tion summary will be provided for those subjects present. 
The investigators will assign a rating of not clinically significant (NCS) or clinically 
significant (CS) to all laboratory values. The CS clarification requires reporting of the 
laboratory event as  an AE.  Clinically significant results will be flagged in data listings.  
  
9.3. Vital Sign Measurements 
 
Seated diastolic and systolic blood pressures and resting pulse measurements at baseline 
and each post-baseline timepoint will be summarized using descriptive  statistics. Similarly, 
change from baseline to           will also 
be summarized.  Change from baseline summaries will use subjects who have both a 
baseline and a post -baseline value present and will include an additional baseline mean and 
standard deviation summary for those subjects present. The change from baseline for vital 
sign measurements will be shown in a boxplot.  The investigators will assign a rating of 
NCS or CS to all vital sign values. The CS clarif ication requires reporting of the vital sign 
value as an AE.  Vital sign values will be displayed in a data listing with CS results flagged.  
9.4. Physical Examination 
 
Physical examinations will be performed  at screening, the beginning of   and the end 
of  . The results will be displayed in a data listing . 
9.5. Electrocardiogram 
 
ECG recording s will be collected  at screening,  ,       , 
             . ECG measurements will 
be coll ected in triplicate ,          will be calculated 
for ECG intervals (QT, PR, RR QRS, ventricular rate). The QT interval  will be corrected 
for heart rate using Fridericia’s correction  (QTcF)  and Bazett’s correction  (QTcB ). ECG 
interval s will be summarized using descriptive statistics. In addition, change from baseline  
in ECG intervals  and shift from baseline in overall ECG interpretation (Normal, Abnormal 
– NCS, Abnormal – CS) will be provided . Change from baseline summar ies will use 
subjects who have both a baseline and a post -baseline value present and will include an 
additional baseline mean and standard deviation summary for those subjects present. All 
ECG results will be displayed in a data listing and the ECG abnorma lities will be flagged 
out. 
 
9.6. C-SSRS Assessments 
 
  
The C-SSRS is assessed at screening  and   and results will be summarized  for the 
Safety Population. The suicidal ideation and suicidal behavior results will be displayed in  a 
listing. The number and per centage of subjects who answered yes to each of the five 
categories  in suicidal ideation and suicidal behavior will be summarized.   
Suicidal ideation score is defined as the maximum suicidal ideation category present for 
the assessment.                 
           .  The number and percentage of 
subjects with any decrease in suicidal ideation score      
           
              
                
  will be summarized .  
Similarly, suicidal behavior score         
              f 
            
        will be summarized.   
             
  will be constructed.  
9.7. Pregnancy Test 
 
Urine p regnancy test results for female subjects will be displayed in a listing.  
9.8. Comments 
 
Comments will be listed with the eCRF section they are associated with noted.  
 
10. References 
 
              
              
  . 
  
11. Appendices 
 
11.1. List of Tables 
 
  
      
        
      
      
        
         
         
         
 
       
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
       
 
          
 
        
 
        
  
  
        
          
           
  
            
 
           
           
            
            
          
          
          
 
          
     
        f 
       
 
         
        
 
       
        
 
          
       
 
       
         
 
          
       
  
  
 
         
 
         
 
          
 
          
    
 
 
 
11.2. List of Listings 
 
  
    
       
         
       
      
       
         
          
 
       
  
  
           
     
 
11.3.  List of Figures 
 
Number  Title  
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1          
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].2           
    
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1             
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1           
   
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1          
Figure  
[IP_ADDRESS].1          
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1            
Figure 
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1           
 
  
 
 
11.5. Schedule of Study Procedures 
 
Activities    /   Visit 
Days  
     
     
     
   
 
     
          
   
     
 Phone  call  
D  [ADDRESS_374368]  X   X                 X 
Physical examination  X   X                 X 
Clinical laboratory 
tests3 X                    X 
12-lead ECG  X X  X4     X          X
5   
Vital sign 
measurements6 X X  X     X          X   
Randomization   X                    
Study medication 
    
  
     
  X  
X 
X                  
Dosing under 
supervision  
     
  X
7                
Modified Ashworth 
score   X  X8   X    X  X  X X  X  X  
Clinical Global 
Impression of Change 
(CGIC)  X   
 X               X  
Subject Global 
Impression of Severity 
(SGIS)  X   
 X               X  
AE evaluation     X     X X          X X 
Record spasm 
frequency9  X  X                X  
Record nighttime 
awakening due to 
spasm score  X   
      X            
Record concomitant 
medication  X X  X      X          X  
Meals10     X
11a   X
11  X
11  X
11  X
11   X1
1f  X
11   
  
Activities    /   Visit 
Days  
     
     
     
   
 
     
          
   
     
 Phone  call  
D  [ADDRESS_374369] will check -out of the clinic following the     . 
2Subjects will be required to be currently receiving    prior to enrollment, and     
                  
k                  
                
f           
            
p                      
               
3Hematology: red blood cell (RBC) count, hemoglobin, total white blood cell (WBC) count, differential WBC count, 
platelet count; serum chemistry: sodium, potassium, chloride, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine. 
4Within [ADDRESS_374370]-dose 
6Within 10 minutes of 12-lead ECG 
7Dosing at time “0         
8Within 2 hours pre-dose 
9Spasm frequen cy assessment                
h                 
                   
                 
                      
p  
 
  
 
11.6  Lab Normal Ranges 
 
     
     
    
  
   
   
  
   
       
     
     
      
     
     
     
     
     
      
     
 p    
     
 f    
   f    
        
     
 f    
       
     
    
    
   
    
       
       
     
       
      
        
 