 
 
1 | P a g e  
 Esophageal cooling in radiofrequency cardiac ablation: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_505758]:  [CONTACT_505811]:  [CONTACT_505812] [CONTACT_7171]:  [PHONE_10527]  
Site(s) where study will be performed:  Riverside Medical Center  
Protocol Version Number & Date:  1.1 / March  20, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 | P a g e  
 List of Acronyms  
 
Activated Clotting Time  ACT  
Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support  ACLS  
Adverse Event  AE 
Atrioventricular  AV 
Esophageal Cooling Device  ECD  
Food and Drug Administration  FDA  
Luminal Esophageal T emperature  LET 
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_505759] (Ablation)  RF 
Serious Adverse Event  SAE  
Transesophageal Echocardiography  TEE 
Unanticipated Problem  UP 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 | P a g e  
 1. Study Summary  
 
Title  Esophageal cooling in radiofrequency cardiac ablation: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_505760] #  [ADDRESS_652582] the EnsoETM  inserted 
into the esophagus during Radiofrequency ( RF) ablation.  
Secondary Objectives  To assess the safety of the EnsoET M and efficacy of ablation 
when the EnsoETM  is used to regulate temperature  
Exploratory Objectives  To assess the EnsoETM ’s ease of use during ablation  
 
2. Introduction  
2.1. Background Information  
2.1.1.  Atrial and Ventricular Arrhythmia s 
 
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias include a broad range of atypi[INVESTIGATOR_505761].  Intervention for these 
arrhythmias include  medications and/or ablation strategies.  Of primary interest is the 
atrial  arrhythmia termed atrial fibrillation.  This type of arrhythmia involves multiple 
points of origin typi[INVESTIGATOR_505762].  The most common ablative strategy includes pulmonary v ein 
isolation which involves heating (RF ablation) or cooling of the posterior aspect of the 
left atrium which lies near the esophagus.  
 
2.1.2.  EnsoETM  Device Description  
 
The EnsoETM  is a silicone tube with three lumens that is placed in the esophagus. 
Distilled  water is circulated through the two cooling lumens, while the third lumen 
connects to wall suction and is used for standard gastric decompression. The EnsoETM  is 
composed of standard medical -grade silicone, and it is a single -use, disposable, non -
implanta ble device with an intended duration of use of [ADDRESS_652583] for classification 
of the Esophageal Cooling Devices (ECD)  named EnsoETM . This class II device is  used 
to apply a specified temperature to the endoluminal surface of the esophagus via an 
external controller. This study will be utilizing the EnsoETM , because it is designed to fit 
the Gaymar Medi -Therm III Conductive Hyper/Hypothermia SystemNaiman. Ther e are 
three contraindications for this device: (1) patients with known esophageal deformity or 
evidence of esophageal trauma, (2) patients with known ingestion of acidic or caustic 
poisons within the prior 24 hours, and (3) patients with less than 40 kg of  body 
mass.Naiman, Shanley 
 
 
 
4 | P a g e  
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Regulatory Status  
  
   The Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) identifies the EnsoETM  as: 
 
Esophageal thermal regulation device.  An esophageal thermal regulation device is a 
prescription device used to apply a specified temperatu re to the endoluminal surface of 
the esophagus via an external controller. This device may incorporate a mechanism for 
gastric decompression and suctioning. The device is used to regulate patient temperature.  
 
Indications for Use:  
 
The EnsoETM  is a thermal regulating device, intending to:  
 Connect to a Gaymar Medi -Therm III Conductive Hyper/Hypothermia System to 
control patient temperature, and  
 Provide gastric decompression and suctioning  
 
Limitations:  
 
Prescription use only: Federal ([LOCATION_003]) law restricts this device to sale by [CONTACT_35537] a 
physician.  
 
The EnsoETM  may cause or exacerbate esophageal tissue damage in patients with esophageal 
deformity or evidence of esophageal trauma, or in patients who have ingested acidic or caustic 
poison s within the prior [ADDRESS_652584] not been evaluated in patients with less than 
40 kg of body mass  
 
The EnsoETM  should only be used by [CONTACT_505782] e use of the Gaymar Medi -Therm III Conductive Hyper/Hypothermia 
System.  
 
The EnsoETM  is intended for esophageal placement. Inserting the EnsoETM  in the trachea, 
bronchi, or lungs can result in serious harm.  
 
Attachment of the EnsoETM  to unapproved or unint ended connections can result in serious 
patient harm  
 
The presence  of the EnsoETM  may interfere with other devices in the esophagus or mouth. Dual 
placement of other devices in the esophagus with the EnsoETM  in place, such as an enteral 
feeding tube, may result in patient harm.  
 
Large patients with body mass greater than 120 kg may exhibit  slower responses to intended 
temperature changes. Small patients with a body mass less than 60 kg may exhibit faster cool ing 
than anticipated, and may exhibit slower rewarming than anticipated.  
 
 
 
5 | P a g e  
 2.1.3.  Prior Clinical Studies  
 
The first case of esophageal trauma associated with left atrial posterior wall ablation for 
atrial fibrillation was reported in 2003 (Lequerica JL B. E., 2008) .  Since then there have 
been a myriad of interventions in hopes of preventing such damage.  This ranges from 
mechanical manipulation of the esophagus to esophageal cooling with various 
mechanisms including ice water lavage.  This also includes the development of a cooled 
intraesophag eal balloon with mixed results  (Berjano EJ, 2005)  (Lequerica JL B. E., 
2008)  (Lequerica JL B. E., 2008)  (Tsuchiya T, 2007)  ].  Further in -vitro evaluation of 
animals has been performed using a controlled saline circulating system (EPSac) which 
spares the esophagus  from collateral thermal injury (Arruda MS, 20 09). The novel idea of 
cooling the esophagus to prevent transmural damage has been documented as 
overwhelmingly positive.  The most notable clinical evaluation of an esophageal cooling 
mechanism was performed by [CONTACT_505783]. which included a cooled wa ter-irrigated 
intraesophageal balloon. (Tsuchiya T, 2007)  A limitation of this study included the 
inability to assess the deeper muscular layer of the esophagus for evidence of injury.  
Several limitations to the above mentione d approaches include cost, physician 
availability, displacement of the esophagus, and ability to monitor the luminal esophageal 
temperature (LET).  
 
2.2. Rationale  
 
Left atrial ablation is a standard therapy in the management of atrial fibrillation; however 
esophageal injury is a known potential consequence of this procedure.[1 -4] Delivery of the 
radiofrequency energy necessary to perform left it real ablation has the potential to cause 
injury to the nearby [CONTACT_505784], with  injuries including 
ulceration, hematoma, spasm, disorders of esophageal motility, and atrial -esophageal fistula 
(the latter representing the extreme consequence of esophageal thermal injury due to 
posterior left atrial ablation).[1, 2]  Esophageal mucosal  lesions are commonly reported with 
an incidence ranging widely from 3%to 60%, and recent observations suggest a potential 
contribution of the transesophageal echocardiogram probe to esophageal injury seen after 
catheter ablation.[5]  Although ablation of the left atrium poses the greatest risk, right atrial 
ablation also has the potential to allow esophageal damage to occur.  
 
Although luminal esophageal temperature monitoring is one proposed measure to reduce the 
incidence of esophageal injury during atria l fibrillation ablation, the success of temperature 
monitoring has varied widely.[6, 7]  It is fairly well established that effective measuring of 
the esophageal temperature depends on the position of the temperature probe relative to the 
heated cardiac ti ssue and also on good contact [CONTACT_505785].[8]  However, the 
esophagus often is mobile and shifts sideways by >2 cm in a patients undergoing catheter 
ablation for atrial fibrillation under conscious sedation.[9]  Using fairly sophisticated 
approaches (e.g., deploying an ablation catheter with thermistor tip into the esophagus [as 
both a measurement device and a deflection tool], along with position confirmation using 
intracardiac echo) appears to be the only measurement technique that offers a dequate 
protection.[6] This approach does not seem to be a technique that is routinely feasible (due to 
both the cost of equipment and the need for additional operators during the procedure).[6]  
 
 
6 | P a g e  
 Moreover, there is the suggestion that the temperature probe  used for esophageal temperature 
monitoring may contribute to a thermal effect and enhance direct tissue heating.[10]  
 
Data from animal models show that the muscular layer is disrupted and necrotic myocytes 
are seen at the border of lesions in the esophagu s even when no lesions on the epi[INVESTIGATOR_505763], suggesting that cooling the deep muscular layer of the esophagus may be needed 
to prevent esophageal injury.[11]   Prevention of esophageal injury via cooling of the 
esophagus has been investigated  with mathematical modeling, preclinical models, and in the 
clinical arena.  A finite element model in three dimensions investigating the effects of a 
cooled intra -esophageal balloon suggested that this approach could be a viable method to 
prevent thermal injury to the esophagus during intraoperative ablation of the left atrium.[12]  
Specifically, the authors found that (i) chilling the esophagus by [CONTACT_3553] a cooled balloon 
placed in the lumen minimizes the lesion in the esophageal wall compared to the cas es in 
which no balloon is used (a collapsed esophagus) and with a non -cooled balloon; (ii) the 
temperature of the cooling fluid has a more significant effect on the minimization of the 
lesion than the rate of cooling (the thermal transfer coefficient for f orced convection); and 
(iii) pre -cooling periods previous to RF ablation do not represent a significant improvement.  
Finally, the authors also suggest that the use of a cooled balloon could affect the 
transmurality of the atrial lesion, especially in the cases where the atrium is of considerable 
thickness (or in other words, in the presence of an atrium of considerable thickness, when a 
short duration and a low target temperature are programmed, the use of a cooled balloon 
could reduce the possibilities of  achieving a transmural lesion in the atrium.  
 
Subsequent study using an agar phantom -based model that was built to provide temperature 
readings at points between the esophageal lumen and the myocardium found that this method 
was able to provide effective thermal protection, although it was noted that the method could 
fail under certain unfavorable topi[INVESTIGATOR_505764].[13]  In this study, a balloon 
utilizing water temperature of 5° C flowing at a rate of [ADDRESS_652585] heat effectively.  
 
Further study by [CONTACT_505786] 5°C and 
37°C but maintained the coolant flow rate at 25 mL per minute.[14] The authors conclude  
that their results suggest that it is possible to thermally protect the esophagus (including the 
transmural region [ADDRESS_652586] from the mucosal surface) during radiofrequency cardiac 
ablation by [CONTACT_3553] a cooling balloon placed in the esophageal lumen util izing coolant 
temperature of 5°C or less and involving a precooling period of two minutes.  
 
A custom developed system utilizing temperature controlled saline or water circulating at a 
flow rate tween 50 to 300 mL per minute and a temperature of 5 to 25°C w as evaluated using 
an in vitro Lamb heart – esophagus preparation, followed by [CONTACT_505787].[15]  This custom system consisted of a 12 French probe with a distal expandable 
compliant latex sack with a diameter of up to 3 cm fully expanded . The authors found that a 
circulating water temperature of 25° C failed to spare the esophagus from thermal injury. 
However lowering the circulating temperature to 10° C or 5°C spared thermal injury 
(although expanding the balloon diameter by [CONTACT_30212] c irculating volume substantially to 
 
 
7 | P a g e  
 intentionally displace the esophagus towards the left atrium allowed the development of 
shallow esophageal injury to the external layers of the muscularis).   
 
A clinical study [16] of eight patients used a closed loop sy stem with low flow rates (25 
mL/min) and a water temperature of 4.5±3.1◦C to build upon computer modelling 
demonstrating that a cooled balloon catheter (with a diameter of 10 mm) could transmurally 
cool the esophagus. They found that without cooling, esoph ageal temperature increased from 
a baseline of 36.4°C up to 40.5°C in under 30 seconds during ablation, whereas with the 
esophageal cooling balloon, esophageal temperature decreased down to 30.2°C with the 
balloon in place, and allowed an increase in tempe rature to only 33.5°C.  The authors 
conclude that luminal esophageal temperature during the left atrial ablation was lowered by 
[CONTACT_505788] a level where no thermal damage to the esophagus 
would likely be induced.   
 
A study presented in [ADDRESS_652587] form described the use of a saline filled esophageal 
balloon to attempt esophageal protection in an animal model, and found that in four dogs, a 
saline solution of 10°C was not sufficient to prevent thermal injury.[17]  Howeve r, details of 
balloon configuration and, more importantly, coolant flow rate, were not provided, and a 
formal manuscript further describing these findings appears not to have yet been submitted.  
 
Free water instillation into the esophagus has been tried wi th varying success. A study of 100 
patients used very small volumes (5 mL) of ice water as the instilled volume, which was 
injected prior to RF energy delivery, and subsequently when esophageal temperatures 
reached 42°C.[18] The authors found that this app roach alleviated the severity of esophageal 
lesions, but did not reduce the incidence: lesions occurred in 20% of the experimental group, 
and 22% of the controls, with three moderate and seven mild in the cooled group and three 
severe, one moderate, and se ven mild in the control.   
 
Another study utilized infusion of cooled saline mixed with Gastrografin or Iopamidol, with 
slightly higher, but still limited volumes (10 – 20 mL in repeated injected aliquots with a 
temperature of approximately 10°C).[19]  A t otal of 318 patients were randomized between 
groups receiving only temperature monitoring without cooling, temperature monitoring with 
cooling when temperature exceeded 43°C, and temperature monitoring with cooling received 
when temperatures exceeded 39°C.   The percentage of patients free from any ulceration or 
erosion in each group was found to be 63.6%, 87.5%, and 95.2%, respectively, and the 
authors conclude that these findings suggest that esophageal damage can be reduced by 
[CONTACT_505789] a gastric tube when luminal temperature 
exceeds 39°C during ablation.  
 
In summary, although abundant data suggest that cooling of the esophagus during ablation 
procedures can protect against esophageal injury, no commercially available  device has yet 
been shown to perform this task.  
Our intention is to evaluate the use of an esophageal cooling catheter to protect the 
esophagus during atrial fibrillation RF ablation.  This will theoretically eliminate esophageal 
tissue damage.  As noted above, this is not a novel idea, however, there are several 
advantages that this device offers.  The most significant of which includes a large area of 
 
 
8 | P a g e  
 distribution of cooling effect throughout the length of the catheter as well as a large lumen.  
The lume n size provides more rapid thermal energy exchange thus limiting the extent of 
esophageal damage.  There are no metal parts included in this catheter, therefore, eliminating 
the concern for the device acting as a wick for energy transfer and enhanced direc t tissue 
heating.  (Deneke T, 2011)   The cooling catheter does not require advanced training for 
placement or monitoring and also acts as an oral -gastric tube during the procedure.  This 
device is also cost effective as the cool ing source is used by [CONTACT_2360][INVESTIGATOR_600] (nearly ubiquitously) 
for standard cooling blankets.  
 
2.3. Potential Risks and Benefits  
2.3.1.  Known Potential Risks  
 
The following potential risks are associated with the use of esophageal thermal regulation 
devices:  
 
 Adverse tissue re action  
 Gastric distension  
 Injury to the esophagus  
 Harmful hypo/hyperthermia  
 Injury to the trachea  
 Interference with other device in the esophagus or mouth leading to esophageal 
trauma  
  
 The following potential risks are associated with RF ablation:  
 Bleeding or infection at the puncture site(s)  
 Vascular damage from mechanical shear stress on the vessel wall from the 
catheters  
 Myocardial rupture with tamponade  
 Valvular heart damage which might cause regurgitation  
 Arrhythmia possibly requir ing pacemaker implantation  
 Venous thromboembolism  
 Stroke or heart attack  
 Pulmonary vein stenosis  
 Acute kidney injury related to dye use  during the procedure  
 Atrio -esophage al fistula  formation   
 Death in rare cases  
The following potential risks are associated with general surgery:  
 
 Adverse reaction to anesthesia  
 Hematoma or seroma at the operative site  
 Failure to improve  
 Persistent or worsened pain  
 Infection of the wound  
 
 
9 | P a g e  
  Radiation exposure  
 Wound dehiscence  
 Vascular disorders, including thrombus  
 Bronchopulmonary disorders, including emboli  
 Genitourinary disorders  
 Pneumonia  
 Hemorrhage  
 Myocardial infarction  
 Death  
 
3. Objectives and Purpose  
3.1. Primary Objective  
 
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the reduction in the occurrence and severity 
of esop hageal injury in subjects who had a cooling tube inserted into the esophagus during 
radiofrequency ablation.  
 
3.2. Secondary Objectives  
 
The secondary objective of this study is to assess the safety of the EnsoETM  and efficacy of 
ablation when the EnsoETM  is used to regulate temperature.  
 
3.3. Exploratory Objectives  
 
This study will assess the EnsoETM ’s ease of use during RF ablation.  
 
4. Study Design and Endpoints  
4.1. Description of Study Design  
 
Single -center, randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_505765]’s  EnsoETM  during RF ablation  vs. RF ablation without the EnsoETM . 
 
4.2. Study Endpoints  
4.2.1.  Primary Endpoint  
 Esophageal  mucosal damage as assessed by [CONTACT_505790]'s modified endoscopic classification scheme .    
 
 
 
10 | P a g e  
  
 
 Radiofrequency ablation of the posterior aspect of the left atrium has been shown 
to cause esophageal mucosal irritation which may be exacerbated by [CONTACT_505791]/or TEE.  We believe that cooling of the esophagus will lead to a 
reduction of esophageal  damage.  To date there are bench models that suggests 
such an esophageal sub -mucosal protection but this has not been proven in human 
studies.   
 Prov iding evidence that  a reduction in  sub-mucosal esophageal damage using th e 
ECD may be a precursor to reduction in atrial -esophageal fistula formation.   
4.2.2.  Secondary Endpoints  
 1) Safety of th e EnsoETM  placement  as measured by [CONTACT_505792]  
 We believe that cooling of the esophagus will lead to a reduction of esophageal 
damage .  The use of an EnsoETM  would replace LET monitoring during ablation 
of the posterior aspect of the left atrium.  This endpoint was chosen to prove that 
replac ing the LET monitor with a cooling catheter is a safe alternative.    
 This is of  primary importance as any evidence of esophageal damage or adverse 
events related to the use of the EnsoETM  would deter any further use of this 
approach to Pulmonary Vein Isolation ( PVI).   
 2) Altered submucosal tissue architecture as assessed by [CONTACT_505793]  
(EUS)  
 While mucosal injury may suggest significant thermal injury to related to RF 
ablation there is also concern that this injury may be more of a mechanical process 
from TEE and LET monitoring.  We aim to assess the submucosa using  EUS for 
differentiation between superficial and deep injury which may provide further 
insight  into the risk of atrio -esophageal fistula formation.  A grading scheme has 
not been developed for this type of evaluation so we will assess for individual 
changes  with pre -procedu re to post -procedure comparison.  
4.2.3.  Exploratory Endpoints  

 
 
11 | P a g e  
  Efficacy of PVI by [CONTACT_505794] 3 months  following the procedure.   
 This endpoint was  chosen  as a precursor  to future larger studies that may 
focus on efficacy to ensure that PVI with EnsoETM  is non -inferior to PVI 
with LET.  
 Does the use of an EnsoETM  prolong or sh orten the overall ablation time?  
 
5. Study Enrollment and Withdrawal  
5.1. Inclusion Criteria  
Patients mus t meet all of the inclusion criteria to be enrolled as subjects in this study.  
 
 Subject is between ages 18 – 90 years  
 Subject  has an atrial or ventricular arrhythmia requiring radiofrequency ablation on 
the posterior aspect of the heart  
 Subject  is willing and able to provide informed consent  
 Subject  is capable of adhering to the expectations of the study protocol (e.g., 
attending follow -up visit)  
 
 
5.2. Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Subject has  known esophageal deformity, or evidence of esophageal trauma , prio r 
radiation therapy involving the esophagus , or previous esophageal disease (for 
example, known esophageal varices, cirrhosis, history of esophagectomy, previous 
swallowing disorders or dysphagia, achalasia, known ingestion of acidic or caustic 
poisons wit hin the prior 24 hours etc.).  
 Subject  is incarcerated  
 Subject is pregnant or plans to become pregnant  
 Subject has a silicone allergy  
 Subject has e sophageal bleeding prior to EnsoETM  insertion  
 
5.3. Recruitment Strategy  
 
Patients will be recruited from the Principal Investigator’s clinic when the decision to 
perform RF ablation in order to treat the patient’s condition is made. The Principal 
Investigator ( PI) or designee will provid e a brief explanation of the study by [CONTACT_505795]. If the patient is interested in learning more about the study, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505766].  
 
5.4. Participant Withdrawal  
5.4.1.  Reasons for Withdrawing  
 
 Subject’s refusal to participate  
 
5.5. Participant Removal from Study  
 
 Subject has esophageal stricture or ulceration  
 
 
12 | P a g e  
  Subject death  
 Physician scheduling conflict  
 
 
6. Study Device   
6.1. Acquisition  
 
Study device is currently undergoing evaluation on -site and supply is already available on-
site, with additional available upon request via standard shippi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
 
6.2. Formulation, Appearance, Packaging, and Labeling  
 
Study device, the EnsoETM, is a non -sterile multi -lumen silicone tube placed in the 
esophagus for the purpose of cooling or warming a patient while simultaneously allowing 
gastric decompression and drainage.  Modulation and control of the patient’s temperature is 
achieved by [CONTACT_286551]. Two lumens connect to 
the external heat exchanger, while a t hird central lumen provides stomach access for 
connection to a fluid collection device with low intermittent suction for gastric 
decompression.  The EnsoETM is made of standard medical -grade silicone.  It is a single -
use, disposable, non -implantable device  with an intended duration of use of 36 hours or less.  
 
Additional details can be found in the attached Instructions for Use which are packaged along 
with the device as a package insert.   
 
6.3. Products Storage and Stability  
 
Describe the study device’s storage needs. Include:  
 
 Storage requirements : Store in a dry and clean place  
 Stability requirements: 5C to 32C, with no humidity requirement.  
 Expi[INVESTIGATOR_320] : 3-year shelf life  
 
6.4. Preparation  
 
The Manual of Procedures details the preparation of the study device and is attached to this 
protocol as an appendix.  
 
6.5. Administration  
 
Placement of the EnsoETM  
 
The external heat exchanger must be in proper operating condition and must have received 
all the required maintenance.  Failure to ensure that the heat excha nger is in proper condition 
may result in suboptimal performance.  Ensure that no contaminants are present in the heat 
exchanger water.  
 
 
13 | P a g e  
 Measure the patient for EnsoETM placement carefully before use.  Insertion of an excessive 
length of the EnsoETM into th e stomach may lead to coiling, kinking, knotting, or breakage 
of the EnsoETM.  To measure the patient for EnsoETM placement, extend the EnsoETM 
from the patient's lips to the earlobe and then from the earlobe to the tip of the xiphoid 
process (xiphisternum ).  Mark the location on the EnsoETM.  
Follow the Instructions for Use for the external heat exchanger for all device operations, 
including connections to electric wall power, patient probes, and tube set connections. 
Connect the EnsoETM (Figure 1) to the external heat exchanger in place of a b lanket or pad, 
using a Cincinnati Sub -Zero connector hose (CSZ P/N 286) with the connectors as shown in 
Figure 1.  Turn on the external heat exchanger.  
Ensure that the patient has a temperature probe  with a monitor  in use (for example, a Fole y 
catheter te mperature probe or  a rectal temperature probe).  The temperature p robe must be 
connected to the external heat exchanger, as directed in the external heat exchanger‘s 
Instruc tions for Use.  Ensure that the temperature monitor  is functioning correctly  and th at 
the temperature probe is  not damaged, expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697], or compromised in any other way.  
Select the control mode and target patient temperature on the external heat exchanger.  
Ensure that water is flowing through the EnsoETM, and that no leaks are present.  Failure to 
initiate water flow prior to insertion may hinder placement of the EnsoETM.   
Lubricate the EnsoETM generously with water soluble lubricant prior to insertion. Do NOT 
use petroleum -based products, because these may be harmful to the respi[INVESTIGATOR_4352].    
Insert the EnsoETM using gentle pressure posteriorly and downwards through th e mouth, 
past the oropharynx and into the esophagus.  Gently assist the passage of the EnsoETM with 
light pressure until the required length of tube has been inserted.  
Do not use force during insertion of the EnsoETM, because this may cause bleeding and/or  
damage to the oropharynx or other structures.  If resistance is encountered during insertion of 
the EnsoETM, immediately stop the procedure.  
Confirm placement of the EnsoETM by [CONTACT_716]:  
 injecting 5 to 20 mL of air (with a 50 or 60 ml syringe) throug h the central lumen 
while auscultating over the stomach for a “swoosh” or a “burp” indicating gastric 
placement,  
 aspi[INVESTIGATOR_505767] a syringe (using a 50 or 60 ml syringe) through the 
central lumen, and  
 confirming the location and placement o f the EnsoETM with an x -ray. 
Secure the EnsoETM with a securement device or tape in accordance with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_23155].  
Ensure the EnsoETM and tube set connections are not in contact [CONTACT_10970]’s skin.  
Direct contact [CONTACT_505796].  
For stomach decompression, connect the central lumen of the EnsoETM (Figure 1) to low -
intermittent suction using standard suction tubing (not supplied) and adaptor (not supplied).  
Always use the lowest suction setting that will e ffectively decompress the stomach.  
The central lumen of the EnsoETM is not intended for enteral feeding or for administration 
of oral medication. If the central lumen of the EnsoETM becomes blocked or clogged, 
 
 
14 | P a g e  
 standard approaches for clearing blocked gast ric tubes are recommended.  For example, 
disconnect the EnsoETM from wall suction and use a saline flush.  If the standard approaches 
are unsuccessful, it may be necessary to remove and then replace the EnsoETM.  
Monitor patient temperature using both monit ors during use. Ensure that the temperature 
monitors are reporting temperatures that are in agreement; if the discrepancy between the two 
monitors is greater than 0.5°C, discontinue treatment and investigate the cause of the 
discrepancy. Replace the temper ature probes or secondary monitor if necessary.  Ensure both 
temperature probes remain in place without accidental dislodgement during the entire course 
of patient treatment.  Monitor circulating coolant temperature and ensure that it does not fall 
below 4 °C or exceed 42°C.  
6.6. Device Specific Considerations  
 
 Device size: The device has outside diameter less than or equal to 13.3mm, with a 
wall thickness of 0.65mm±0.1mm.  
 Device model: EnsoETM  Model: ECD02  
 Dura tion of exposure: less than 36 hours  
 Frequ ency of e xposure: Single -use 
 
7. Study Procedures and Schedule   
7.1. Study Procedures/Evaluations  
7.1.1.  Study Specific Procedures  
 Study spe cific imaging with include endo scopic evaluation of the esophagus  one 
day before surgery  at the time of the pre -op Transesophageal Echocardiography 
(TEE) and again 1-day post -op.  This will include endoscopic esophageal 
intubation with visual assessment of the entire esophagus and grading of lesions.  
Coupled with this procedure will include endoscopic ultrasound asses sment of the 
esophagus at the level of the left atrium with specific attention to the sub -mucosal 
layer that separates esophagus from the cardiac tissue.   The patient will undergo 
moderate sedation during this procedure , which will accompany the TEE.   
 The ECD will be place d by [CONTACT_505797]. 
Proper positioning will be verified.  A temperature probe will be placed to verify 
the patients core temperature.  The  target temperature will be set to the core 
temperature at the beginning of the procedure.  Two minutes prior to ablation on 
the posterior wall the target temperature will be changed to the minimum 
temperature setting which will allow for maximal cooling.  Cooling will take 
place throughout the duration of posterior wall ablation .  After ablation in this 
territory is complete the target temperature will return to the patients core 
temperature.  The device will be removed at the completion of the procedure  by 
[CONTACT_505798].  
 LET monitoring will not be performed in the patients of the intervention group as 
the ECD is prohibitive.  Therefore, ice lavage of the esophagus, as detailed below, 
will not be perform ed in this group.    
7.1.2.  Standard Care Procedures  
 
 
15 | P a g e  
  Medical History will be obtained by [CONTACT_505799].  This includes a history of esophageal 
perforation or varices.  An allergy to silicone wi ll be assessed .   
 The patient’s active medication list will be reviewed as is standard protocol for 
atrial fibrillation ablation, but this is not specific to the study as there are no 
medications that would impact the use of the ECD . 
 All subjects will be on Protonix  (40mg; twice daily) immediately following 
surgery for 30 days and anticoagulation for 3 months following surgery.  
 The physical exam will be performed as is customary for the procedure.  Study 
specific exam is included as part of the airway asse ssment which is performed on 
a regular basis by [CONTACT_14091].  The oropharynx will be assessed prior to 
placement of the ECD . 
 The patient will be administered general anesthesia by [CONTACT_505800]. Two 8 -French sheat hs placed in the right femoral 
vein. A 7 - and a long 9 -French sheath will then be placed in the left femoral vein 
and a 7 -French sheath placed in the right subclavian vein. Under fluoroscopic 
guidance, a quadripolar catheter is then placed through the left  femoral venous 
sheath to the His bundle region. His -bundle electrocardiography is performed 
with measurement of intervals. A decapolar catheter with 2 -5-2 spacing is then 
placed through the right subclavian venous sheath and utilized to intubate the 
coron ary sinus for left atrial recordings. Ventricular pacing is used to demonstrate 
VA 1:[ADDRESS_652588] between 300 and 350 seconds. At this point, a  multi -pole loop 
catheter will be  placed through the sheath into the left atrium. Three -dimensional 
geometry will be  obtained of all four pulmonary veins, left atrial appendage, and 
left atrium. Then, the loop catheter will be  placed in the lef t superior vein and 
ablation will be  carried out utilizing an 8 mm distal tip large curve ablation 
catheter from [LOCATION_011] Scientific. Ablation will be  carried out with 35 watts of 
energy at 55 degree temperature on the posterior wall and 50 watts of energy and 
55 degree temperature on the anterior wall . The participants  with LET monitoring 
may require intermittent boluses of iced lavaged saline through the nasogastric 
tube when the temperature rises above 1 degree centigrade.   Next, ablation will be  
carried out of the left superior pulmonary vein until completely isolated as well as 
the carina. The loop catheter will then be placed in the left inferior pulmonary 
vein and isolation of the left inferior pulmonary vein is obtained as well. The loop 
catheter will then be placed in the right superior pulmonar y vein with isolation of 
that catheter and then brought down into the right inferior pulmonary vein with 
entrance block demonstrated from that catheter. All veins then demonstrate exit 
block with additional consolidating ablations as required . All four vei ns will be  
checked at that point . Next, Isuprel provocation  will be  initiated . Pacing will be 
 
 
16 | P a g e  
 performed to the  atrioventricular  (AV) nodal Wenckebach block rate and to the 
AV nodal effective refractory period. Then the patient is placed on 10-[ADDRESS_652589] then anterior 
septal ablation will be  carried out for complex atrial fractionated electrograms as 
well as spot ablation within the atrial appendage  or atrial appendage isolation if 
required . Should the patient develop mitral isthmus atrial flutter then an ablation 
line will be performed from the left inferior pulmonary vein to the mitral annulus 
posteriorly. Should the patient develop typi[INVESTIGATOR_169208], a cavo -tricuspid 
isthmus ( CTI) right atrial flutter  line may be performed . Other right atrial lesions 
will be targeted as required, including superior vena cava isolation if needed. 
Organized atrial tachycardias will be mapped and ablated as needed.  At the 
conclusion of the ablation , heparin is discontinued and catheter s removed .  
Sheaths are  removed once the (activated clotting time) ACT is below 180 seconds 
or following administration of pro tamine. At the conclusion of the procedure the 
intracardiac echocardiogram is used to demonstrate  no evidence for pericardial 
effusion or fluid.  
 
7.2. Radiographic Procedures/Evaluations  
7.2.1.  Esophagoscopy  
The patient will present for endos copic  evaluation the day prior to surgery .  During this 
time the patient will undergo moderate sedation with continual monitoring of vital signs.  
Following adequate sedation the proceduralist will proceed with esophageal intubation 
with visual assessment of the entire esophagus and grad ing of lesions (Zargar 
classification). Furthermore, the submucosal tissue will be assessed with EUS at the level 
of the left atrium.  This procedure will be preceded  by [CONTACT_505801].  
 
The day following the PVI the patient will undergo repeat endoscopic evaluation of the 
esophagus in the same manner as detailed above.  The proceduralist will document their 
findings including the condition of the sub -mucosal esophageal tissue as noted by [CONTACT_505802].  
 
7.3. Study Schedule  
7.3.1.  Screening /Enrollment/Baseline  (Visit 1, Day 0)  
 
Screening /Enrollment/Bas eline Visit  (Visit 1)  
 Obtain informed consent of potential participant verified by [CONTACT_505803]  
 Review medical history to determine history based on inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 Review medications history to determine eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion 
criteria  
 Obtain demographic information and tobacco use history  
 
 
17 | P a g e  
  Record vital sig ns, results of examinations, other assessments  
 Perform medical examinations needed to determine eligibility based on 
inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 Schedule EGD 1 day prior to surgery.  
 Schedule follow -up visits for patients who are eligible and available for  the 
duration of the study  
 Provide patients with instructions needed to prepare for the first study 
visit/procedure  
 
7.3.2.  Endoscopic evaluation and TEE (Visit 2)  
 
The patient will present to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_505768] (TEE).  The 
patient will be prepped for moderate conscious sedation with appropriate monitoring 
of vital signs under the care of a nurse and as directed by [CONTACT_099].  For this 
study we will add the pa tient will undergo  direct visualization of the esophageal 
mucosa as well as ultrasound assessment of the sub -mucosal tissue in the area of the 
left atrium.  The patient will be  sedated to a level of moderate conscious sedation as 
is typi[INVESTIGATOR_505769].  The endoscopic probe will be passed 
into the esophagus with appropriate imaging obtained throught the length of the 
esophagus.  Then EUS will be used to assess the submucosal tissue  
 
7.3.3.  Surgical Procedure Visit (Visit 3) 
 
Subjects will undergo the RF ablation procedure within 30 days of randomization  unless 
there is a medically valid reason to the delay the procedure. The procedure is describe 
below. Details of the  procedure are referenced in section 7.1.2 of this study pro tocol. The 
investigator’s procedure note will be included in the study files to gather endpoint and 
exploratory data.  
 
The following day the patient will undergo repeat endoscopic evaluation in the same 
fashion as the prior study with moderate sedation.  T his will include visual assessment of 
the esophagus with video imaging as well as EUS at the area of interest near the left 
atrium at the level of the pulmonary veins.  
 
7.3.4.  Follow -up Visit  (Visit 3)  
 
The first follow -up visit will occur 12 days (+ 4/-4) days after the surgery procedure.  
 
 Review medical history and medications history  
 Record vital signs  
 Adverse event assessment  
 Assess study eligibility  
 
7.3.5.  Final Study Visit  (Visit 4)   
 
 
 
18 | P a g e  
 The final study visit will occur 3 months (+ 30/-30 days) after the surgery pro cedure.  
 
 Review medical history and medications history  
 Record vital signs  
 Adverse event assessment  
 PVI Efficacy as asse ssed through placement of an event monitor  
 Assess study eligibility  
 
7.3.6.  Unscheduled Visit  
 
In addition to standard care provided during unscheduled visits, an adverse event 
assessment will be performed to determine whether an adverse event is present. Any 
adverse events will be recorded on the AE case report form.  
 
7.4. Concomitant Medications, Treatments, and Procedures  
 
All concomitant prescr iption medications taken during study participation will be recorded 
on the case report forms. For this protocol, a prescription medication is defined as a 
medication that can be prescribed only by a properly authorized/licensed clinician. 
Medications to b e reported in the CRF are concomitant prescription medications, over -the-
counter medications, and non -prescription medications.  
 
7.5. Rescue Medications, Treatments, and Procedures  
 If evidence of bleeding with placement of the ECD then the device will be remove d. 
 Surgical exploration and repair of esophageal fistula.  
 Hemodynamic support including (Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support ( ACLS ) 
protocol will be implemented as needed.  
 
8. Safety Assessment  
8.1. Specification of Safety Parameters  
 
8.1.1.  Definition of Adverse Events  (AE)  
 
Adverse event means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of an 
intervention in humans, whether or not considered intervention -related (21 CFR 312.32 
(a)). 
 
8.1.2.  Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
 
An AE is considered serious  if, in the view of the PI, it results in any of the following 
outcomes:  
 
 Death  
 Life-threatening adverse event  
 Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
 
 
19 | P a g e  
  Persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the abili ty to 
conduct normal life function  
 Congenital anomaly/birth defect  
 
Important medical events that may not fall under one of these categories may be 
considered serious when, based on upon appropriate medical judgment, they may 
jeopardize the patient or subj ect and may require medical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
 
 
8.1.3.  Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
 
OHRP considers unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others to 
include, in general, any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following:  
 
 Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given (a) the research 
procedures that are described in protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -
approved research prot ocol and informed consent; and (b) the characteristics of 
the participant population being studied;  
 Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possible related” 
means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or o utcome 
may have been caused by [CONTACT_3459]); and  
 Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm 
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously 
known or recog nized.  
 
8.2. Reporting  Procedures  
8.2.1.  Adverse Event Reporting  
 
If a subject presents with an adverse effect, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505770]. If the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_505771], or if the adverse event is 
unexpected, he must:  
 Complete and submit the adverse event report to the IRB in a timely manner (10 
working days after the investigator determines the adverse event is related to  the 
study device).  
 
8.2.2.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
 
All unanticipated adverse device effects are considered Serious Adverse Events (SAEs). 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_505772] a report of any unanticipated adverse device effect 
occurring during an investiga tion as soon as possible, but in no event later than [ADDRESS_652590].  
 
8.2.3.  Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
 
 
 
20 | P a g e  
 The study investigator shall complete an Adverse Event Report  and submit it to the RMC 
IRB as soon as possible, but in no event later than [ADDRESS_652591].  
 
8.3. Classification of an Adverse Event  
8.3.1.  Severity of Event  
 
On the Adverse Event Report , the investigator will char acterize the severity of each AE as 
mild, moderate, or severe. The investigator will use medical judgment to compare the 
report AE to similar types observed in normal clinical practice. To assess the severity of 
an AE, the following guidelines are to be fo llowed:  
 
 Mild: The AE is transient and easily tolerated by [CONTACT_423]  
 Moderate: The AE causes the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject’s 
daily activities  
 Severe:  The AE causes considerable interference with the subject’s usual 
activities; may be incapacitating and may require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
 
8.3.2.  Relationship with Study Device  
 
On the Adverse Event Report , the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505773]’s relationship with the 
study device by [CONTACT_505804]:  
 
 Definitely Related: clearly related to the research  
 Probably Related:  likely related to the research  
 Possibly Related:  may be related to the research but information not yet available 
to assess the likelihood of this 
 Probably Not Related:  doubtfully related to the research  
 Definitely Not Related:  clearly not related to the research  
 
8.3.3.  Expectedness  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_118631]. An 
AE will be considered unexpected  if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not 
consistent with the risk information described for the study device. This assessment  
 
8.4. Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 
 
What Event is Reported  When is Event Reported  By [CONTACT_505805] -threatening 
unexpected, suspected 
serious adverse reactions  Within 7 calendar days  of 
initial receipt of information  Investigator   Local/Internal IRB  
 NHLBI and/or Data 
Coordinating Center (DCC)  
  Sponsor or Designee   FDA (if IND study)  
Non -fatal, non -life-
threatening unexpected, Within 15 calendar days of 
initial receipt of information  Investigator   Local/Internal 
IRBs/Institutional Officials  
 
 
21 | P a g e  
 suspected serious adverse 
reactions   NHLBI and/or DCC  
  Sponsor or Designee   FDA (IND/Marketed 
Products)  
 All participating 
investigators  
Unanticipated adverse device 
effects  Within [ADDRESS_652592]  Investigator   Local/internal IRBs  
 NHLBI and/or DC  
  Sponsor or Designee   FDA (if IDE study)  
Unanticipated Problem that 
is not an SAE  Within 14 days  of the 
investigator becoming aware 
of the problem  Investigator   Local/internal 
IRBs/Institutional Officials  
 NHLBI and/or DCC  
All Unanticipated Problems  Within 30 days of the IRB’s  
receipt of the report of the 
UP from the investigator  IRB  OHRP  
  Investigator   IRB 
 
 
8.5. Safety Monitoring  
 
If necessary, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505774] a 
safety monitoring plan to ensure the proper conduct of monitoring study data and activities.  
 
9. Statistical Considerations  
9.1. Statistical and Analytical Plans  
 
A detailed statistical analysis plan will be developed and added to the study protocol on a 
later date.   
 
9.2. Measures to Minimize Bias  
9.2.1.  Enrollment / Randomizat ion / Masking Procedures  
 
Patients will be randomly assigned on a 1:1 ratio (ECD during RF ablation:No ECD 
device during RF ablation) one of two study groups. A random permuted block will be 
generated to decide the randomization assignments. The rationale for the use of random 
permuted block assignment is to ensure a 1:[ADDRESS_652593]’s group assignment , so as not to influen ce his/her 
evaluation of the condition of the subjects’ esophagus . It is not possible to blind the PI, as 
he will be performing the procedure. Further, the patient will be blinded to the study 
group to which he or she was assigned. Study subjects will be debriefed regarding his or 
her study assignment at the final study visit. The informed consent form will explain this 
process to subjects. The rationale for blinding subjects to their study group assign ment is 
to minimize the influence of the Placebo Effect . 
 
 
22 | P a g e  
  
10. Source Documents  
 
As part of conducting an IRB -approved study, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505775] (and when permitted by 
[CONTACT_1289], to copy) clinical records for the purposes of quality a ssurance reviews, audits, 
and evaluations of the study safety, progress, and data validity.  
 
Source data are all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other 
activities in a clinical study necessary for the reconstruction and  evaluation of the study. This 
may include, but is not limited to, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, lab notes, 
memoranda, evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, radiographic imaging, and 
other study -related documents. A case repor t form will be used to organize all the study data .  
 
11. Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  
11.1. Ethical Standard  
 
The investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with Regulations 
for Protection of Human Subjects of Research.  
 
11.2. Institu tional Review Board  
 
The protocol, informed consent form, and all participant materials will be submitted to the 
Riverside Medical Center IRB for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol and 
the consent form must be obtained before any participan t is enrolled. Any amendment to the 
protocol will require review and approval by [CONTACT_505806]. All changes to the consent form will be IRB approved and a determination will be 
made regarding whether previously con sented participants need to be re -consented.  
 
11.3. Informed Consent Process  
 
Subject participation in this research is voluntary. Subjects must give informed consent 
before they can be enrolled in this study, and the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_505776] -related activities are performed (this includes 
any screening procedures that are not considered conventional care).  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_505777]’s informed consent in accordance with State and 
Fede ral regulations and Riverside Medical Center’s Institutional Review Board policies. The 
informed consent form must be approved by [CONTACT_505807].  
 
The informed consent process will include the following steps:  
 Be conducted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_505778]  
 Avoid any undue influence or coercion of subjects to participate in the study  
 Make it clear to the subject that participation in the study is voluntary and that 
refusing to participate in the study will not result in a ny loss of benefits  
 Make no statement that the subject’s legal rights are waived by [CONTACT_114363]  
 
 
23 | P a g e  
  Use plain language that is understandable to the subject to describe all aspects of the 
study that subjects need to make an informed decision to participant  
 Provide sufficient time for the subject to consider his/her participation  
 Answer all of the subject’s questions to ensure he/she fully understands the study  
 Provide subjects with new information throughout the study, if applicable  
 Ensure the informed consen t form is signed and dated by [CONTACT_505808]’s 
IRB before use in the informed consent process.  
 
 
11.3.1.  Consent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Subjects  
 
Consent forms describing in detail the study device, study procedures, and risks are given 
to the subject and written documentation of informed consent is required before starting 
intervention. The informed consent form is submitted with this protocol.  
 
11.4. Subject and Data Confidentiality  
 
Study data will be recorded on an encrypted Excel spreadsheet, and all copi[INVESTIGATOR_505779] a cabinet only accessible to the study investigators. Study ID 
numbers will be assigned to subjects, and the Study I D will be used in lieu of the subject’s 
name [CONTACT_505810].  
 
Any publications or presentations resulting from this study will not contain any identifying 
information of subjects enrolled in this study.  
 
Study data may be audited or monitored by [CONTACT_505809].  
 
12. Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
12.1. Data Collection  and Management Responsibilities  
 
Data collection is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_156446], completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data 
recorded. All source documents should be completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure 
accurate interpretation of data. Black ink is required to ensure clarity of reproduced copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 
When making changes or corrections, cross out the original entry with a single line, and 
initial the date  on which the change was made.  
 
Clinical data (including Adverse Events, concomitant medications, and expected adverse 
reactions data) and clinical laboratory data will be entered into an Excel spreadsheet. The 
spreadsheet will include a password and will  only be accessible to authorized study 
personnel.  
 
 
 
24 | P a g e  
 12.2. Study Records Retention  
 
Study documents must be retained for a minimum of 3 years after the study has been 
formally closed (e.g., submission of a study closure report to the IRB).  
 
12.3. Protocol Deviations  
 
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol. The 
noncompliance may either be on the part of the participant, the investigator, or the study site 
staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions are to be developed by [CONTACT_941] s tudy team, or 
required by [CONTACT_1201], and implemented promptly to minimize the occurrence of future 
deviations.  
 
It is the responsibility of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_505780] [ADDRESS_652594] statement will be submitted to the Riverside Medical Center IRB to review.  
 
14. References  
 
 
1. Tzou WS, Russo AM: Luminal esophageal temperature monitoring for the prevention of 
esophageal injury during left atrial ablation: LET it be?  J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2013, 
24(9):965 -967.  
2. Nair GM, Nery PB, Redpath CJ, Lam BK, Birnie DH: Atrioesophageal fistula in the era of atrial 
fibrillation ablation: a review . Can J Cardiol 2014, 30(4):388 -395.  
3. Liu E, Shehata M, Liu T, Amorn A, Cingolani E, Kannarkat V, Chugh SS, Wang X: Prevention of 
esophageal thermal injury during radiofrequency ablation for atrial fibrillation . J Interv Card 
Electrophysiol 2012, 35(1):35 -44. 
4. Scanavacca M:  Current Atrial Fibrillation Ablation: An Alert for the Prevention and Treatment 
of Esophageal Lesions . Arquivos brasileiros de cardiologia 2016, 106(5):354 -357.  
5. Kumar S, Brown G, Sutherland F, Morgan J, Andrews D, Ling LH, Mc LA, Lee G, Robinson T, Hec k 
P et al : The transesophageal echo probe may contribute to esophageal injury after catheter 
ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation under general anesthesia: a preliminary observation . 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2015, 26(2):119 -126.  
6. Leite LR, Sant os SN, Maia H, Henz BD, Giuseppin F, Oliverira A, Zanatta AR, Peres AK, Novakoski 
C, Barreto JR  et al : Luminal esophageal temperature monitoring with a deflectable esophageal 
temperature probe and intracardiac echocardiography may reduce esophageal injury during 
atrial fibrillation ablation procedures: results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] . Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2011, 4(2):149 -156.  
 
 
25 | P a g e  
 7. Carroll BJ, Contreras -Valdes FM, Heist EK, Barrett CD, Danik SB, Ruskin JN, Mansour M: Multi -
sensor esophageal temperature probe u sed during radiofrequency ablation for atrial 
fibrillation is associated with increased intraluminal temperature detection and increased risk 
of esophageal injury compared to single -sensor probe . J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2013, 
24(9):958 -964.  
8. Hornero F, Berjano EJ: Atrial ablation and esophageal injury: comments on an experimental 
study . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2006, 132(1):212 -213; author reply 213 -214.  
9. Good E, Oral H, Lemola K, Han J, Tamirisa K, Igic P, Elmouchi D, Tschopp D, Reich S, Chugh A  et 
al: Movement of the esophagus during left atrial catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation . J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2005, 46(11):2107 -2110.  
10. Deneke T, Bunz K, Bastian A, Pasler M, Anders H, Lehmann R, Meuser W, de Groot JR, Horlitz M, 
Haberkorn R  et al : Utility of esophageal temperature monitoring during pulmonary vein 
isolation for atrial fibrillation using duty -cycled phased radiofrequency ablation . J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol 2011, 22(3):255 -261.  
11. Aupperle H, Doll N, Walther T, Kornherr P, Ullmann C, Sc hoon HA, Mohr FW: Ablation of atrial 
fibrillation and esophageal injury: effects of energy source and ablation technique . J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg 2005, 130(6):1549 -1554.  
12. Berjano EJ, Hornero F: A cooled intraesophageal balloon to prevent thermal injury  during 
endocardial surgical radiofrequency ablation of the left atrium: a finite element study . Phys 
Med Biol 2005, 50(20):N269 -279.  
13. Lequerica JL, Berjano EJ, Herrero M, Hornero F: Reliability assessment of a cooled 
intraesophageal balloon to prevent thermal injury during RF cardiac ablation: an agar 
phantom study . J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2008, 19(11):1188 -1193.  
14. Lequerica JL, Berjano EJ, Herrero M, Melecio L, Hornero F: A cooled water -irrigated 
intraesophageal balloon to prevent thermal injury during cardiac ablation: experimental study 
based on an agar phantom . Phys Med Biol 2008, 53(4):N25 -34. 
15. Arruda MS, Armaganijan L, Di Biase L, Rashidi R, Natale A: Feasibility and safety of using an 
esophageal protective system to eliminate esophageal t hermal injury: implications on atrial -
esophageal fistula following AF ablation . J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2009, 20(11):1272 -1278.  
16. Tsuchiya T, Ashikaga K, Nakagawa S, Hayashida K, Kugimiya H: Atrial fibrillation ablation with 
esophageal cooling with a  cooled water -irrigated intraesophageal balloon: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] . J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2007, 18(2):145 -150.  
17. Scanavacca MI, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_505781], Neto S, Tamaki W, Santo sR, Guirao C, Oyama H, Aielo V, Leiner A, 
Sosa E: Cooled intra -esophageal balloon to prev ent thermal injury of esophageal wall during 
radiofrequency ablation . In: ESC Congress 2007, 1 - 5 September.  vol. 28. Vienna, Austria; 2007: 
156.  
18. Kuwahara T, Takahashi A, Okubo K, Takagi K, Yamao K, Nakashima E, Kawaguchi N, Takigawa M, 
Watari Y, Sugi yama T  et al : Oesophageal cooling with ice water does not reduce the incidence 
of oesophageal lesions complicating catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: randomized 
controlled study . Europace : European pacing, arrhythmias, and cardiac electrophysiology  : 
journal of the working groups on cardiac pacing, arrhythmias, and cardiac cellular 
electrophysiology of the European Society of Cardiology 2014, 16(6):834 -839.  
19. Sohara H, Satake S, [COMPANY_005] H, Yamaguchi Y, Nagasu N: Prevalence of esophageal ulceration 
after atrial fibrillation ablation with the hot balloon ablation catheter: what is the value of 
esophageal cooling?  J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2014, 25(7):686 -692.  
 
 
 
 
 
26 | P a g e  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 