Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
Page  1 of  15 
Protocol  ID: 2019-0348  
Study  Title:  A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_224614] -Rebreathers in Patients  with  
Potential  High Risk of Airway Obstruction  during Total  Intravenous  Anesthesia (TIVA)  Procedures  
Prin
cipal Investigator: [CONTACT_224652],  MD 
Co-In
vestigator(s): Drs. Carin Hagberg,  MD and Juan Cata, MD 
Co
llaborator(s) : Drs. Jens,  Tan,  MD and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_224615], MD, Neil Bailard,  MD 
St
atistician:  Mike Hernandez, MS 
Researc
h Coordinator : Raven  Bailey, Meyyammai  Narayanan,  Abram  Escobedo  
Spons
or: The University  of [LOCATION_007]  MD Anderson Cancer  Center 
Fu
nded  By: [CONTACT_3493] & Paykel  Healthcare 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_269987]  Office Division  of Anesthesiology,  Critical  care  and Pain  Management;  FC13.2036  
Study  Size (# of patients)  A proposed  sample  size of eligible  120 patients  (60 patients  randomized  equally  between  two groups)  
Study  Design  This is a prospective  randomized  trial.  All the eligible  subjects  will be randomly  assigned  to one of two groups:  the 
Optiflow  THRIVE  group  or the standard  non-rebreather  group. 
Primary Objective  To investigate  the performance  of Optiflow
  THRIVE  relative  to Standard  Non -Rebreathers  in patients  with  high  risk 
of difficult  airway  management  undergoing  total  intravenous  anesthesia  (TIVA)  procedures.  
Secondary  Objective(s)  To describe  the epi[INVESTIGATOR_224616]  (defined  by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%)  and the epi[INVESTIGATOR_224617]:   jaw 
thrust,  chin  lift or insertion  of an airway  supporting  device,  such  as oral/nasal  airway  or supra  airway  device in order 
to recover  the level  of oxygenation  above  92%  associated  with  Optiflow
  THRIVE.  
Inclusion  Criteria  A patient  who  meets  all the following  criteria  may  be included  in the study:   
1. 18 years  of age and  older  and signed  consent  for the study  
2. Presents  with a SpO 2 ≥ 95%  while  breathing  room  air 
3. Requires  TIVA  but not tracheal  intubation during  the proposed  procedure  – PLUS, any of the following:  
Body  mass  index  (BMI)  ≥ 32 kg/m2; neck  circumference  ≥ 43 cm in a male and 41 cm in  a female patient;  has 
been  diagnosed  with moderate  to severe obstructive sleep  apnea  (OSA) by a sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_224618]/without  using  
a continuous airway  pressure  (CPAP)  device;  or, full  course  head  and neck  radiotherapy  ≤ 6 months  (The peak  
onset  time  of acute  facial  and airway  edema)  
Exclusion  Criteria  A patient  who  meets  any of the following  will be excluded  from  the study:  
1. Has a significant  pulmonary  disease  requiring  supplemental  oxygen  in daily  life (severe  pulmonary  fibrosis, 
severe COPD, etc.)  
2. Has significant  cardiac  disease (including  history  of myocardial  infarction  (MI) with concurrent  evidence  of 
ischemic myocardial  damage  at the event,  cardiomyopathy  with impaired  left ventricular  ejection  fraction  to 
less than 50%  or uncompensated  congestive heart  failure  (CHF)  
3. Cannot  tolerate  TIVA  or having  a proposed  procedure  without  TIVA  
4. Requires  endotracheal  intubation  
5. American  Society  of Anesthesiologists  (ASA) classification  5 
6. Non -English speaking  
7. Requires  an emergency  procedure  
Outcome(s)/Endpoint(s)  The primary  endpoint  is the total  length  of desaturation  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]  (ToLDE)  time  (in minutes)  during  a fixed  60-minute  
observation  window  during  TIVA  in patients  with high risk of difficult airway  management.  Desaturation  epi[INVESTIGATOR_224619]  (defined  by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%). 
Study  Procedures  
Pretreatment  Evaluation  Routine  preoperative  interview  and physical  evaluation.  No special  evaluation  required.  
On-Study  Visits Onsite  data  collection  in all the study  patients  including:  
1. FDA approved Intervention  group:  patients  receiving  Optiflow
 THRIVE 
2. Standard of Care  group:  patients  receiving  non -rebreather  mask  
 
Each  patient  will be followed  for 60 minutes  (from  induction  until  60 minutes  thereafter).    
Follow -up Visits Per standard  post -anesthesia  care  unit (PACU)  discharge  protocol  
End of Study  Visit Per standard  PACU  discharge  protocol  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  3 of  15 
Brief Analysis  Plan For Primary Objective:  
A total  of 120 eligible  patients will be randomized  in a 1:[ADDRESS_269988] deviation, 
median,  and range.  Interval  estimation  of the difference  between  study  groups in mean  ToLDE time will be computed 
with a 95%CI.   
 
With  at least  50 patients  per group,  the precision  conferred  on the bounds of a two- sided  a 95%  CI extends  0.[ADDRESS_269989] deviation  of 1.0 per  group  (nQuery  Advisor v7.0).    
 
Descriptive statistics  will be used  to summarize continuous outcomes,  and histograms  and scatter  plots  will be used 
to explore the  distributional  characteristics  and bivariate  relationships,  respectively.  Transformations  to the data  will 
be applied if appropriate.  Interval  estimates  will be computed  for continuous variables, such as the mean  number  of 
hypoxemia  (defined by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%)  epi[INVESTIGATOR_224620]-specified  time  period,  for each  study  group  (at least n = 
50) independently  using  a 2- sided  95%.  Exploratory  analyses  between  study  groups  will be conducted  using  t-tests  
(Wilcoxon  rank -sum tests) for continuous covariates  and chi-square  tests  (Fisher ’s exact  tests) for categorical  
variables. Linear  regression  will be used  to estimate  the mean  ToDLE time difference  while  adjusting  for select  
covariates  of interest.  
 
1. OBJECTIVES  
Primary:  To investigate the performance  of Optiflow
  THRIVE relative to Standard  Non -Rebreathers in 
patients  with  high  risk of difficult  airway  management  undergoing total  intravenous anesthesia (TIVA),  for the 
planning of future  clinical  studies.  
 
Secondary:  To describe the epi[INVESTIGATOR_184415]  (defined  by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%)  and the epi[INVESTIGATOR_224621]:   jaw thrust,  chin  lift or insertion of an airway  supporting  device, such  as oral/nasal  airway  or 
supra  airway  device in order to recover  the level of oxygenation  above 92%  associated  with Optiflow
  THRIVE. 
   
2. BACKGROUND  
Total  intravenous  anesthesia (TIVA),  a general anesthesia technique  typi[INVESTIGATOR_224622]/without  adjuvant  agents,  is commonly  used for the diagnostic  or brief  therapeutic 
procedures  to improve  the patient’s satisfaction.1; [ADDRESS_269990]  support with  various maneuvers  or 
use of an artificial  device  to recover adequate  oxygenation.2; 3 In addition,  epi[INVESTIGATOR_224623];  positive pressure ventilation 
with  facemask  may  be needed  at times.[ADDRESS_269991]  such  as obstructive  sleep apnea  (OSA),  mass or edema  in airway, decreasing or 
ceasing the oxygen flow delivered to the lungs  due to obstruction  of flow path  quickly  results in oxygen  
desaturation.4-[ADDRESS_269992]  and re-establishing the oxygen  flow to the lungs  to maintain  the 
adequate  oxygen  level in these  patients  imposes significant challenges  to anesthesia providers;  prolonged  
hypoxemia  may  occur  and impose significant  adverse  influences to the outcomes.7      
 
Delivering up to 70 L/min. humidified  oxygen  flow rate,  Optiflow
  THRIVE  (Fisher & Paykel  Healthcare, 
Auckland,  New  Zealand),  is proven  to provide prolonged  duration  of apneic  oxygenation  and quickly  restoring 
the oxygenation saturation  to the patient ’s baseline level when the airway  is under  control.[ADDRESS_269993]  pressure  (CPAP).[ADDRESS_269994];  therefore, preventing airway  mucosa  dry-out for a prolonged 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_269995]  
obstruction  during TIVA  remains  unclear. 
 
TIVA  is commonly  used  in the procedures  in interventional  radiology and gastrointestinal  (GI) endoscopy  
procedures.  At MDACC,  challenging airways  are often  seen in these  areas.  Obesity,  cancer  airways, s/p head  
and neck radiotherapy,  etc. increase the risk of difficult airway  management;  lengthy  procedures  increase the 
duration  of airway  management  and the positions  for procedures  may  prevent  anesthesia providers  to access  
the airways.  Therefore, the patients  undergoing  these procedures  with  TIVA  present unique chance  to 
investigate the clinical feasibility of improving the airway  safety  by [CONTACT_224642].    
 
This study  will assist  with  establishing the hypothesis  that can be objectively assessed  if an airway  managed 
with  Optiflow
  THRIVE  will reduce  the risk of intraoperative hypoxia  in patients  undergoing interventional  
radiology  and GI procedures requiring  total  intravenous  anesthesia (TIVA)  by [CONTACT_224643]. Moreover,  we can better  understand  if Optiflow
  THRIVE  
assists with  the need  to provide manual  rescue  airway  techniques (to maintain airway  patency)  while also 
decreasing the duration  and epi[INVESTIGATOR_224624].  
 
3.  STUDY  DESIGN  DESCRIPTION  
This is a prospective randomized controlled study.  Patients  will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion  to one of two 
study  groups,  the treatment  group  or control  group.  The patients  in the treatment  group  will receive oxygen  
via Optiflow
 THRIVE;  while the patients in the control  group  will receive 100%  oxygen via a non-rebreather 
facemask.  CORe  will be used to conduct the randomization,  as well as random block sizes; recommending to 
CORe  that block sizes of 2, 4, 6, and [ADDRESS_269996]  Characteristics  
 
a) Total  number  of subjects:  Due to lack of existing data  to support  a power  analysis, the estimated  
number  of study  subjects  is currently  120 eligible patients  with 60 in each  group.  Due largely to the 
variation  of caseload  daily in IR, the average  caseload  for the study  is expected no more  than  2 
cases/day.  With  the safety  profiles in the previous  reports  mentioned  above,  the failure rate or the 
subject  withdraw from  the study  is estimated no more  than  1%.  
 
All included cases will be scheduled elective procedures. Although  we expect the rate of patient 
withdrawal  to be low, we will not replace  missing slots  in the randomization  list with  the next  eligible 
patient.  Those patients  will be considered  randomized,  but unevaluable. If needed, a protocol  
amendment  will take  place to increase the total  number  of randomized patients,  only  if this turns  
out to be an issue.  
 
b) Study  subjects:  Optiflow
  is a standard  airway  device used  routinely and internationally, for high  
flow nasal  oxygen (HFNO) delivery. Multiple studies  have  demonstrated  that Optiflow
  is superior 
to the existing comparable  devices in terms  of both  oxygenation  and CO [ADDRESS_269997]  is also superior  to comparable devices during deep 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  5 of  15 
sedation or general  anesthesia (GA)  without  tracheal  intubation.  Standard  anesthetic care  will be 
provided  to all patients  with the exception  of whether  the patients  receive HFNO or oxygen via non-
rebreather face  mask.  Thus  far, the literature  has not demonstrated use in the pediatric population; 
patients  < 18 years  of age will not be included in this trial. 
 
2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
a) Inclusion Criteria : An individual  that meets  all of the following will be eligible/considered for the 
study:  
 
1) 18 years  of age and older and signed  consent for the study.  
2) Patients  with  an SpO 2 ≥ 95% while breathing room  air 
3) Patients  requiring TIVA,  but not tracheal  intubation during the proposed  procedure - PLUS, 
any of the following criteria:  
• Body  mass index (BMI) ≥ 32 kg/m2 
• Or, neck circumference ≥ 43 cm in a male and 41 cm in a female  
• Or, has been  diagnosed  with  moderate  to severe obstructive  sleep apnea  (OSA) 
with/without  using  a CPAP  device 
• Or, full course  head  and neck  radiotherapy  ≤ 6 months  (The  peak onset  time  of 
acute  facial  and airway  edema)  
 
b) Exc
lusion Criteria : An individual  that meets any of the following will not be eligible/considered for 
the study:  
 
1) Significant  pulmonary  disease  requiring supplemental  oxygen  in daily life (severe 
pulmonary  fibrosis, severe chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease, etc.)  
2) Significant  cardiac disease  (including history  of MI with  concurrent evidence of ischemic  
myocardial  damage at the event, cardiomyopathy  with  impaired  left ventricular ejection 
fraction  to less than  50% or uncompensated  congestive  heart  failure) 
3) TIVA  is contraindicate  or having  a proposed  procedure without TIVA  
4) Endotracheal  intubation  is required 
5) ASA Physical  Status  classification 5 
6) Patients  who  are non-English  speaking  
7) Emergency  procedures  
 
5. SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION,  RECRUITMENT AND  CONSENT  
 5.[ADDRESS_269998]  Identification and Recruitment  
All study  investigators, including  the Principal  Investigator  (PI), Co-Investigators  (Co-I) and/or  
collaborators of the study,  are eligible for the identification of study  candidates. The IR procedure daily 
schedule will be used  for patient selection. Once  eligibility of a study  candidate  has been identified, the 
study  coordinator  will be informed to start the patient interview and obtain  written informed consent.     
  
5.2 Consent  Process 
The study  co
 ordinator  will be responsible for the study  candidate  interview and consenting.  Informed  
written  consent will be obtained  either electronically or by [CONTACT_29160].  All signed  study  consents  will be stored  
in locked  file storage  or a MDACC encrypted/passcode secured electronic device for any electronic 
scanned  document.  
 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_269999]  tool that has been  used in clinical  routine  practice  for over a period 
of 10 years  with  no significant risk or complication  for its clinical  applications  reported  in the literature; 
In fact,  its excellent safety  profile may  be of benefit,  especially to those  who  have  obstructive  airway  
disease. In this study,  standard  application of 100%  oxygen  administration  via non- breather  facemask  
will be compared  to administration of HFNO via Optiflow
 . A structured  informed  consent for the study  
with  information mentioned  above  will be discussed  with  study  candidate  and signed  by [CONTACT_224644].  
 
5.[ADDRESS_270000] to the study  subjects.  
 
4. Payment  for Participation  
Not applicable. 
 
5.5  Return of Individual  Research Results  
Not applicable. 
 
6. SAMPLE  SIZE  JUSTIFICATION  AND  DATA  ANALYSIS   
 
6.1  Sample  Size Justification 
The primary  endpoint  is the total  length  of desaturation  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (ToLDE) time  (in minutes)  during  a fixed 
60-minute observation  window  during  TIVA  in patients  with high  risk of difficult airway  management  
undergoing interventional radiology  or GI procedures. Desaturation  epi[INVESTIGATOR_224625]  (defined by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%).  
 A total  of 120 eligible patients  will be randomized in a 1:[ADDRESS_270001] deviation,  median,  
and range. Interval  estimation of the difference between study  groups  in mean ToLDE time  will be 
computed  with  a 95%  CI.  
 
Wi
th at least 50 patients  per group,  the precision conferred  on the bounds  of a two-sided  a 95% CI 
extends  0.[ADDRESS_270002]  deviation of 1.0 per 
group  (nQuery  Advisor  v7.0).   
 
 6.2 Planned  Statistical  Analysis 
Descriptive statistics  will be used to summarize  continuous  outcomes,  and histograms  and scatter  plots  
will be used  to explore the distributional  characteristics  and bivariate  relationships,  respectively.   
Transformations  to the data  will be applied if appropriate. Interval  estimates  will be computed for 
continuous  variables, such  as the mean  number  of hypoxemia  (defined by [CONTACT_7535] 2 ≤ 92%)  epi[INVESTIGATOR_224626]-specified time  period,  for each  study  group ( at least n = 50) independently using a 2-sided 95%  
CI.   Exploratory  analyses between study  groups  will be conducted  using t- tests  (Wilcoxon rank -sum tests)  
for continuous  covariates  and chi-square  tests  (Fisher’s exact  tests)  for categorical  variables.  Linear 
regression will be used  to estimate  the mean  ToDLE time  difference while adjusting for select covariates  
of interest. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  7 of  15 
  
7. METHODS  AND  STUDY  PROCEDURES  
Patients  will b e randomized into 1 of the 2 arms  of the study,  the intervention group  and control  group,  by 
[CONTACT_224645]  (CORe)  to indicate  which  study  group  the patient  has been  assigned  to. The 
patients  in intervention group will be given 100%  oxygen  via Optiflow  THRIVE  with  a flow rate of 50 L/minute  
for a period of 3 minutes  prior to anesthetic induction  and 70 L/minute thereafter anesthetic induction  until  
the end of procedure;  and the patients in control  group  will receive 100 % oxygen at the flow rate of 8 
L/minute via a non-rebreather mask  for 3 minutes prior  to anesthetic induction and maintain the same  flow  
rate until  the end of procedure. The type  of anesthesia for both  groups  will be total  intravenous  anesthesia 
(TIVA)  without a tracheal  intubation  or super  laryngeal  airway  support. The anesthesia for both  groups  will be 
induced  with  propofol  boluses  or continuous  infusion. The dose of boluses  or the infusion  rate will be the 
decision of anesthesiologist. However, midazolam or fentanyl  is generally avoided during  the study  to avoid 
the synergetic effects  in respi[INVESTIGATOR_2341]. The quality  of anesthesia (the depth  and amnesia  effect  of 
anesthesia)  is monitored  by a BIS device with  reading between 40-60, as satisfactory.  The study  coordinator  
will be responsible to follow the study  procedures,  to ensure  the validity and integrity  of the study  protocol.  
The study  coordinator  will also be responsible for data  collection when  the 60-minute  assessment  window  for 
monitoring begins. All data  collection will take  place  prior  to, and during,  the patient’s scheduled  IR procedure. 
The 60-minute assessment  window  will begin after induction (initial Propofol  administration;  bolus),  once  
induction  has been  recorded in the patient’s electronic medical  record  via online time  stampi[INVESTIGATOR_224627],  and 
will conclude  60-minutes  after  (the recorded  time  of induction). Total  length  of desaturation  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865](s) 
(ToLDE) will be recorded by [CONTACT_14662] a stop -watch/clock.  All other  collected  data  will be recorded  via 
observation  and patient  monitoring during the procedure. The following data  will be collected  during the 
procedure  and statistically  compared between two study  groups  after  completion of data  collection (see 
Appendix  A.): 
 
1. Pa
tient’s demographic  information 
2. Patients  underline diagnosis  and ASA Physical  Status  
3. Procedure data,  name,  duration  and position 
4. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_224628] 2 ≤ 92% over the entire 
procedure  
5. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_224629],  including  jaw thrust,  or insertion of an artificial airway  device  
6. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_224630]  ≥ [ADDRESS_270003]  PACU  discharge  evaluation  (see Appendix  B.) 
 
Preoperative  care:  No active  intervention is planned  on this phase of care.  All procedures  will be provided  
according  to routine clinical care  and clinical  judgment.  
 
Intraoperative  care:  Total  intravenous  anesthesia (TIVA)  will be delivered using an intravenous  infusion  of 
propofol  according to anesthesiologist clinical  judgment. Intraoperative  hemodynamic  and temperature will 
be monitored and maintained according  to routine  clinical  care.  A BIS monitor  measures  the depth  of 
anesthesia with  reading between 40-60, as satisfactory.   
 Postoperative  care:  All patients  will be monitored  in PACU  according to routine clinical  care.  If deemed 
necessary  by [CONTACT_224646], patients  will be transferred  to the intensive care  unit.  
 8. SU
BJECT WITHDRAWALS  
Subjects  will be advised  in the written informed  consent forms  that they  have  the right to withdraw  from  the 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_270004]  in destroying the confidential patients ’ health  information  will 
be used to handle the collected  data.  
 
Subjects  may  be withdrawn  from  the study  for the following reasons (but not limited to): 
 
1. Subject  non-compliance  with  study  procedures  
2. Unacceptable  adverse  events  (safety  or tolerability) 
3. Voluntarily withdraw  (at any time,  for any reason)  
4. Physician discretion 
 9.  SAFETY AND  REPORTABLE  EVENTS  
For study  purposes,  adverse  events will be categorized at the investigative  site into 2 groups:  Relatable 
(Expected)  Adverse  Events  (Grade  1-3)  or Serious Adverse  Events  (Grade  4-5).  Therefore, any AEs that are not 
relatable to the devices, themselves, will not be collected  for study  purposes. However, all non-relatable AEs 
will be recorded  on the anesthesia record.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_224631],  or not related to the device or its deployment  will assess the causal  relationship of each  adverse  
event. 
  9.1 
 Adverse  Events  Definitions  
An adverse  event  (AE) is any undesirable clinical  event  occurring to the subject  during a clinical  study,  
whether or not it is considered related to the investigational product. This includes a change in a 
subject's  condition  or laboratory  results, which  has or could  have  a deleterious effect on the subject's  
health or well-being. An Adverse  Event that is related to the investigational  device  may  be referred to 
as an Adverse  Device Effect  (ADE).  If any of the above -mentioned events  occurs,  the study  will be 
terminated and case  will report  according to the standard clinical  pathway.   
 
An adverse  event  does  not include:  
 
• Medical or surgical  procedures;  the condition  that leads  to the procedure  is not an adverse  event 
• Pre-existing disease, conditions,  or laboratory  abnormalities present at the start of the study  that 
do not worsen  in frequency  or intensity  
• Situations where an untoward  medical  occurrence has not occurred  (e.g.,  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_224632]/convenience admissions)  
• Expected  post -operative course  
 Unanticipated  Adverse  Device  Effect (UADE):  Any device  related adverse  event, the nature or severity 
of which  is not consistent  with  or listed in the applicable product information  (e.g.,  instructions  for use, 
subject  informed  consent document,  subject information  brochure [if applicable], promotional  
literature) or any other  unanticipated  serious problem associated  with  a device  that relates to the rights,  
safety, or welfare  of subjects. 
 A 
serious adverse  event (SAE)  is defined  as any adverse  medical  experience that results in any of the 
following outcomes:  
 
• Death;  
• Is life threating;   
• Requires inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_224633];  
• Results  in persistent or significant disability/incapacity; 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  9 of  15 
• Requires medical/surgical  intervention to prevent permanent  impairment or damage  
 
9.[ADDRESS_270005]  (i.e.,  drug  or device), contributing  factors,  and any 
action  taken  with  respect to the study  drug/device.  
 
Investigators  and research coordinators  will be instructed  that all AE and corresponding relevant 
information should  be recorded  on the Adverse  Event  Form.  In addition,  the clinical  site will be 
responsible for notifying  the Sponsor  within [ADDRESS_270006]  anesthesia equipment; further,  the study  is no more  than  a 
data  collection process  via routine anesthesia care,  no modification from  routine  practice  added to a 
study  subject. Therefore, other  than  general  precaution  and potential  risks  from  corresponding 
anesthesia care,  the study  itself does  not have  added risk to a study  subject other  than  data  collection. 
No additional  risk justification  needed  for the study.  
 9.[ADDRESS_270007]  all serious adverse  experiences that occur  during the study  period in the appropriate  
source  documents  and/or  AE log as applicable. 
 
9.4  Compliance  
It is expected  that all involved study  personnel  (Investigators,  study  coordinators,  ancillary site 
personnel,  and study  subjects)  will be compliant  with  the study  protocol.  Should  it be determined  that 
the site is non-compliant,  reasonable  efforts  will be made to secure  compliance. These efforts/actions  
shall  be documented  in writing and maintained  within the study  administration file at the Sponsor ’s 
location.  
 
Should  the site continue  to remain non-compliant,  the study  Sponsor  may  restrict  device  availability 
and/or  notify  the governing IRB. Should efforts  to bring the site into compliance fail, the site may  be 
suspended  from  study  participation  until  the noncompliance  is resolved. Federal regulations require  the 
Sponsor  to report  non- compliance  with the study  protocol  to the appropriate regulatory  authorities. 
Therefore, in the event of an Investigator  or site suspension,  the governing  IRB and other  appropriate  
regulatory  authorities shall  be notified. 
 
9.5 
 Protocol  Deviations  
Protocol  Deviations (PDs)  will be documented  on a Protocol  Deviation Case  Report Form. PDs are 
reportable to the institution's  governing IRB and regulatory  agencies  during the annual  reporting  
process,  unless  otherwise directed by [CONTACT_224647].    
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_270008]  the soundness  of the 
investigation or the rights,  safety, and welfare of study  subjects.  
 
9.6.Investigator  Reports  and Responsibilities 
Investigators  are responsible for ensuring the investigation is conducted  in accordance with  the study  
protocol  and applicable Federal regulations  (21 CFR,  Part 812, Subpart E). Investigators  are also 
responsible for:  
  
• Obtaining IRB approval  for study  conduct and re-approval  as applicable (if more than  one 
Investigator  is participating  in the study  at a site, the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_224634]-approvals)   
• Obtaining i nformed  consent of study  subjects  prior  to enrollment into the clinical study  
• Protecting  the subject rights,  safety, and welfare  
• Maintenance  of subject records  and confidentiality 
• Record  retention  as defined  in Federal regulations  21 CFR,  Part 812.140 (a), (d), and (e) 
• Management  of investigation and study  related activities according to the Clinical Investigator  
Agreement  and the Study  Research  Agreement 
• Submission  of site-specific study  closure  report  to governing IRB within 3 months  of notification  
from  study  Sponsor  (if more than  one Investigator  is conducting  the study,  the Primary  Investigator  
is responsible  for submission of the study  closure  report)   
• Return  of any unused  investigational  product  to the study  Sponsor  upon  request  or at the 
conclusion  of the clinical  study  
 In addition:  
• An Investigator  shall  report  to the Sponsor,  within 5 working days, a withdrawal  of approval  by [CONTACT_93001]'s  part of an investigation 
• If an Investigator  uses  a device without  obtaining  informed  consent,  the Investigator  shall  report  
such  use to the Sponsor  and the reviewing IRB within  5 working days  after  the use occurs  
• An Investigator  shall, upon  request by a reviewing IRB or regulatory agency  official, provide  
accurate,  complete, and current  information about  any aspect  of the investigation 
 
9.7.S 
ponsor  Reports  and Responsibilities 
The study  Sponsor  is responsible for ensuring  the study  is conducted  in accordance  with  the study  
protocol  and applicable federal  regulations  (21 CFR,  Part 812, Subpart C). Further, the study  Sponsor  is 
responsible for the following:  
 
• Selecting qualified Investigators and providing Investigators  with  appropriate information for study  
conduct   
• Ensuring  review and approval  process  for governing IRB is obtained  
• Training  all clinical  investigators in the study  on how  to properly  use the Optiflow™ THRIVE  
• Appropriate monitoring  of the clinical  study  
• Prompt  notification  to the appropriate regulatory  and all Investigators  of UADE  
• Record  maintenance  and retention per Federal regulations  (21 CFR,  Part 812.140 (b), (d), and (e) 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  11 of  15 
• Submission  of final  study  closure  report  that details cumulative  study  experience to the 
appropriate regulatory  authorities, governing IRBs,  and Investigators  within 6 months  of 
completing  the clinical investigation, in addition  to fulfilling annual  reporting requirements  
 
In addition:  
• A Sponsor  who  conducts  an evaluation of an UADE shall  report  the results of such  evaluation to all 
reviewing IRBs  and participating  Investigators  within [ADDRESS_270009].  
• A Sponsor  shall  notify  all reviewing IRBs  and participating Investigators of any withdrawal  of 
approval  of an investigation or a part of an investigation by a reviewing IRB within 5 working days  
after  receipt of the withdrawal  of approval.  
• At regular intervals, and at least yearly, a Sponsor  shall  submit  progress  reports  to all reviewing 
IRBs.  In the case  of a significant  risk device, a Sponsor  shall  also submit  progress  reports  to the 
regulatory  authority.  
• A Sponsor  shall  notify  all reviewing IRBs  of any request  that an Investigator  return,  repair, or 
otherwise dispose of any units  of a device. Such  notice  shall  occur  within [ADDRESS_270010]  was made.  
• In the c ase  of a significant risk device, the Sponsor  shall  notify  the IRB within  30 working  days  of 
the completion  or termination  of the investigation and shall  submit  a final  report  to all reviewing 
IRBs  and participating Investigators within 6 months  after  completion or termination. In the case  
of a device that is not a significant risk device, the Sponsor  shall  submit  a final  report  to all reviewing 
IRB's  within  6 months  after  termination  or completion.  
• A Sponsor  shall  submit to the IRB a copy  of any report  by [CONTACT_224648] a device  without  
obtaining  informed  consent,  within 5 working days  of receipt of notice  of such  use. 
• If an IRB determines that a device is a significant  risk device, and the Sponsor  had proposed  that 
the IRB consider  the device not to be a significant risk device, the Sponsor  shall  submit  to the 
appropriate regulatory  agency  a report  of the IRB's  determination within [ADDRESS_270011] learns of the IRB's  determination.  
• A Sponsor  shall, upon  request by a reviewing IRB, provide accurate,  complete, and current  
information about  any aspect  of the investigation. 
 
9.8.Study  Termination  
The
 Sponsor  may  terminate the study  at any time.  If terminated,  the Sponsor  will promptly  notify  the 
Investigator  to cease  enrollment  of subjects.  The study  will also be terminated when  the objectives have  
been fully met and all of the designated data  collected.  
 
10. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT 
 
10.[ADDRESS_270012]  patients.  The potential  risks  are the same  as routine  anesthesia  care  when  
related to oxygen  therapy/administration. No added  risk to study  subjects  other  general  precaution  or 
risks  related anesthesia care.  
 
10.[ADDRESS_270013]  Risks (Risk Minimization)  
The data  collection will be terminated  if an identifiable adverse  event happens. The event  will be 
handled  and reported according the standard  clinical pathway.    
 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  12 of  15 
10.3 Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
Improved  oxygen  delivery, administration,  and oxygenation (potentially). The data  collected during  the 
study  may  improve the airway  safety  profile for future procedures. As a specific benefit,  the high -flow 
oxygen  delivery may  provide stenting  of the airway  during the procedure  and therefore  supply  
additional  airway  support.  
  
10.[ADDRESS_270014]  anesthesia care  will be delivered to the study  subjects;  however, no data  collection during  
the procedure. 
 
11. CONFIDENTIALITY  OF DATA  AND  INFORMATION  STORAGE  
Study  data  will be collected  and managed  using REDCap  (Research  Electronic Data Capture)  electronic data  
capture  tools  hosted  at MD Anderson.  REDCap  (www.project -redcap.org)  is a secure, web- based  application  
with  controlled  access designed  to support data  capture for research  studies, providing: 1) an intuitive 
interface  for validated data  entry;  2) audit  trails for tracking  data  manipulation  and export  procedures;  3) 
automated  export  procedures  for seamless downloads  to common  statistical  packages;  and 4) procedures  for 
importing data  from  external  sources.12 In the case  of multi -center  studies  REDCap  uses  Data Access  Groups  
(DAGs)  to ensure that personnel  at each institution  are blinded to the data  from  other  institutions.  REDCap  
(https://redcap.mdanderson.org)  is hosted  on a secure  server by [CONTACT_224649]'s  Department  
of Research  Information  Systems & Technology  Services. REDCap  has undergone a Governance  Risk & 
Compliance  Assessment  (May  2014)  by [CONTACT_38182]'s  Information  Security Office  and found to be compliant  
with  HIPAA, [LOCATION_007]  Administrative Codes  202-203, University  of [LOCATION_007]  Policy 165,  federal regulations  outlined 
in 21CFR  Part 11, and UTMDACC Institutional  Policy #ADM0335.  
 
Thos
e having  access to the data  include  the study  PI [INVESTIGATOR_76255].  Users  are authenticated  
against  MDACC's Active  Directory  system.  External  collaborators are given access  to the database  once  
approved  by [CONTACT_978], with  their access  expi[INVESTIGATOR_224635] [ADDRESS_270015]  of the PI. The application is accessed  through Secure  Socket Layer (SSL). All protected  health 
information (PHI)  will be removed from  the data  when it is exported from  REDCap  for analysis.  All dates  for a 
given patient  will be shifted by a randomly  generated number  between 0 and 364, thus  preserving the 
distance  between dates.  Dates for each patient  will be shifted by a different randomly  generated  number.   
 Following publication study  data  will be archived in REDCap.  Since  study  data  may  be useful  for future  research  
studies  performed  under  separate  IRB approved  protocols,  study  data  will be archived indefinitely in REDCap.  
Since REDCap  is a secure  electronic database  with  controlled access, and because  patient identifiers may  be 
needed  to link study  data  to data  from  other  sources  under  future IRB approved  protocols,  patient ’s 
identifying information will be retained in the archived  database.   
 
11.1  
 Training of Clinical Site Personnel  
The training of clinical site personnel  will be the responsibility of the Sponsor. To ensure uniform data  
collection and protocol  compliance,  personnel  from  Sponsor  will review the investigational plan,  
techniques for the identification  of eligible subjects,  instructions  on data  collection, methods  for 
soliciting data  from  alternate  sources, and schedules  for follow- up, as necessary, with  the research 
coordinator.  
 
11.2  Data  Reporting  
All data  will be recorded  on the site's standard  source  documentation.  The Investigator  or designee is 
responsible for transferring  the information to the appropriate Case  Report  Forms  (CRFs)  supplied  by 
[CONTACT_1034]. The Investigator  is responsible for ensuring the forms  are accurately  completed  at the time  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_270016] results. The Investigator  
is required to sign the CRF on the appropriate page(s)  to verify that he/she has reviewed the recorded 
data.   
 
11.[ADDRESS_270017] further  documentation  such  
as physician  procedure  notes  when  UADEs  and/or  malfunctions  are observed and reported.  
 The Sponsor  will provide clinical  monitoring,  including comparison  of CRFs  to source  documentation  for 
accuracy  and appropriateness,  review of/for adverse  events, prompt  evaluation of UADE,  and site 
compliance. To this end,  the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_224636]/or  responsible government agencies. 
 Prior  to trial initiation the study  site will be trained on the clinical  protocol,  accepted  clinical  practices  
and Federal regulations  pertaining to clinical  research. The study  site will receive interim monitoring,  as 
needed,  and a final  visit prior  to study  closure.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_270018] (IRB) 
Prior  to participating  in th
 is investigation, the site will be required to obtain  approval  from  its governing  
IRB. The Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_224637]. Prior  to subject enrollment, a signed  copy  of the IRB approval  letter addressed to 
the Investigator  certifying study  approval  must  be submitted  to the Sponsor. The IRB for this study  is 
the local  IRB at the University of [LOCATION_007]  MD Anderson  Cancer  Center in Houston,  TX (IRB00000308,  
IRB00003763, IRB00004604 or IRB00008445).  
 
The Investigator  will report  to the Sponsor  immediately if, for any reason,  the approval  to conduct  the 
investigation is withdrawn.  This report  will include  a complete  description  of the reason(s)  for which  
approval  was withdrawn.  
 11.[ADDRESS_270019] of 1996 (HIPAA).   Patient data  will be entered 
into a password  protected  electronic spreadsheet and online database  (i.e. REDCap).   Only  the 
investigators, who  have  been  invited to participate  in the study  and who  are registered with  the IRB, as 
well as have  documented  completion  of all IRB and HIPAA  regulations  will have access to the file and 
password.  No identifiable data  will be collected. Electronic records  will be stored  for five years  after  
study  conclusion  on the agreed upon  investigator ’s laptop  computer,  after which  time  they  will be 
deleted. If there is a breach  in confidentiality or violation of IRB and HIPAA  regulations, the IRB will be 
notified in a timely manner  (within 7 days)  and appropriate actions  taken  thereafter. 
 No per
sonal  identity  information  including name,  MRN  will be collected from  study  subjects  instead,  a 
random sequential number  labeled envelope will be assigned  to each  of the study  subjects.  Each  
envelope has a unique  code  linked to the study  subject  identifier. The study  PI [INVESTIGATOR_224638].  
 The study  data  will be stored  in a secured/locked place  (for hard  copy)  or encrypted/passcode protected  
electronic device  (for electronic data).  All the data  will be de-identified after the study  for future  
databank  to use. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/[ADDRESS_270020]’ s name [CONTACT_224651]. 
 
Data collected and stored  by [CONTACT_224650]. Any photos taken  during the study  will make every effort  not to include subject  
faces  or other  identifying marks  such  as scars or tattoos.  
 
In order  to ensure compliance  with  the Health Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA), all 
subjects  enrolled in the study  will be required to provide authorization  to disclose Protected  Health 
Information  (PHI).  This authorization  will be included in the informed consent  document  as required by 
[CONTACT_1201]. In all study  reports  and in any resulting publications, their  initials and/or  study  identification 
number  will not refer to subjects.  
 
  12. R
EFERENCES  
 
 
1. Vari A, Gangi  A. Anesthesia practices  for interventional radiology  in europe. CardioVascular and 
Interventional  Radiology  2017;40:803-813.  
2. Cashman  JN, Ng L. The management  of peri- and postprocedural  pain  in interventional radiology:  A 
narrative  review.  Pain management  2017;7:523-535. 
3. Norii  T, Homma  Y, Shimizu H et al. Procedural  sedation and analgesia in the emergency  department  in 
japan:  Interim  analysis of multicenter  prospective  observational  study. J Anesth  2019.  
4. Murabito  P, Serra A, Zappia M et al. Comparison  of genioglossus  muscle  activity  and efficiency of 
dexmedetomidine  or propofol  during  drug-induced sleep endoscopy  in patients  with  obstructive  sleep 
apnea/hypopnea  syndrome. Eur Rev Med  Pharmacol Sci 2019;23:389-396. 
5. Lim H, Oh M, Chung YH, Ki H, Lee JJ. Effects  of continuous  positive airway  pressure in patients  at high  risk 
of obstructive  sleep apnea  during propofol  sedation after  spi[INVESTIGATOR_224639].  Journal of clinical monitoring 
and computing 2018.  
6. Shin H-J,  Kim E-Y,  Hwang J- W, Do S-H, Na H-S. Comparison  of upper  airway  patency  in patients with  mild 
obstructive  sleep apnea  during  dexmedetomidine  or propofol  sedation:  A prospective, randomized,  
controlled trial.  BMC Anesthesiol 2018;18. 
7. Rostin P , Teja  BJ, Friedrich S et al. The association  of early postoperative  desaturation  in the operating 
theatre  with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_224640] a skilled nursing or long-term care  facility. Anaesthesia 2019.  
8. Yang  S-H, Wu C-Y,  Tseng  W-H et al. Nonintubated  laryngomicrosurgery  with  transnasal  humidified  rapid-
insufflation ventilatory exchange:  A case  series.  Journal of the Formosan  Medical Association  2018.  
9. Möller W, Celik G, Feng S et al. Nasal  high flow clears anatomical  dead  space  in upper  airway  models. J 
Appl Physiol  2015;118:1525-1532.  
10. Kumar  H, Spence CJT, Tawhai  MH. Modeling the pharyngeal  pressure  during adult  nasal  high flow therapy.  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_224641] & Neurobiology  2015;219:51-57.  
11. Chidekel  A, Zhu Y, Wang J, Mosko JJ, Rodriguez E, Shaffer TH. The effects  of gas humidification with  high -
flow nasal  cannula  on cultured  human  airway  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1663].  Pulmonary Medicine  2012;2012:1-8. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
Protocol  #: 2019-0348 
Date:  01/19/21 
  Page  15 of  15 
12. Harris PA, Taylor  R, Thielke R,  Payne  J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research  electronic data  capture (redcap) --
a metadata -driven methodology  and workflow process for providing  translational  research informatics  
support. Journal of biomedical informatics  2009;42:377-81.  
 
APPENDICES  
 Appendix  A. – Case  report  forms  (CRFs);  data  collection forms  
Appendix  B. – PACU  discharge patient  satisfaction  evaluation
 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson