 
 Study Title: Evaluation of two mouth sprays for post -irradiation xerostomia in 
head and neck cancer survivors: a randomized, double- blind clinical trial  
 
 NCT #: 04608773  
 Document Type: Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Document Date: 10/3/2023  
  
Objective(s) :  
The main objective of this study is to compare the efficacy of two FDA -approved 
mouth sprays (Biotene and Refresh) at relieving symptoms of xerostomia, or dry 
mouth, in patients who have received radiation for carcinoma of the head and neck. 
We aim to con duct a randomized, double -blinded, crossover study to demonstrate to 
what extent, two different FDA- approved mouth sprays are effective in relieving 
symptoms of xerostomia in patients who meet inclusion criteria for this study. We 
also want to determine to  what extent, these mouth sprays are superior to water or to 
one another at relieving symptoms of xerostomia in this population. We will test the 
hypothesis that the use of either Biotene or Refresh mouth spray will be more 
effective at relieving symptoms of xerostomia than the use of water as mouth spray 
and that either Biotene or Refresh mouth spray will be more effective than the other at 
relieving symptoms of xerostomia in the included patients in this study. We also will test the hypothesis that both m outh sprays will increase the pH of patient mouths 
compared to water.  
 Study Design:   
This [ADDRESS_391495] experimental phase. They will receive the opposite mouth spray 
during the second experimental phase. Patients will be given a 1- month supply of both 
masked mouth sprays labeled as "Oral Hydrating Spray A" and "Oral Hydrating Spray 
B", as well as pH testing strips, prior to the initiation of the study. They will be given 
specific directions regarding the usage of the mouth sprays. They may use the mouth 
sprays as n eeded, every four hours, with [ADDRESS_391496] of the trial. Participants can use 4 sprays every 4 hours. However, 
the frequency of usage is symptoms dependent. If participants are still experiencing 
relief after 4 hours, they may delay the next usage.  
Recruitment Methods:  
Patients will be recruited, in person, from the Head and Neck Survivorship clinic at 
the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_45589] (UPMC). Patients will be screened for 
xerostomia at their regularly scheduled clinical visit and will be approached by 
[CONTACT_318065]. For any patients other than those of [CONTACT_94795]'s, a clinical care provider known to the patient will confirm that the potential subject has given 
permission for the research team to approach.  
 Stastical Analysis Plan:  
All statistical analyses were performed using STATA SE 17.[ADDRESS_391497] deviations (SD), and interquartile  
ranges (IQR), were used to compare demographic and clinical features between treatment 
groups. The primary outcomes were reported dry mouth scores derived from the [ADDRESS_391498] of 
HydraSmile  vs Biotène, we followed the recent recommendation for analysis of 2*2 cross -over 
trials with two baseline measurements by [CONTACT_318066] ( ANCOVA ) model to regress the  difference in after-treatment measurement 
between HydraSmile  and Biotène over the difference of baseline between HydraSmile  and 
Biotène.10,[ADDRESS_391499] of HydraSmile  compared to 
Biotène. In the exit survey, patients indicated which mouth spray ( Biotène  or HydraSmile ) they 
preferred. Sub-group anal ysis was completed within each preference group to determine the 
effect of each mouth spray  and the difference between them . 
  
 