Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™   
  
                  
 
 
 
REFRAME RPD Post-Market Clinical Study  
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol v5 
27 July 2018  
 
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
    
              Page 1 of 29 
  
Clinical Investigational  Plan  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
 
 
 
STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 
 
Sponsor:  
Sponsor  Address:  Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™,  
A division  of Solvay  Specialty  Polymers  [LOCATION_003],  LLC 
[ADDRESS_441786]  
Alpharetta,  GA [ZIP_CODE] 
 
Medical  Research  
Organization  (MRO)  
Address:   
NAMSA  
[ADDRESS_441787]:   
Christopher DeMorett  
Manager, Clinical Research Services  
 Tel: [PHONE_2226] -600-9774 
 [EMAIL_6797]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFRAME  RPD Post -Market  Clinical  Study  
CIP Number:  DS002  
CIP Version:  Rev 05 
 

              Page 2 of 29 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Clinical Investigational  Plan  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
  
 
 
Protocol Approval Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This protoco l has been read and approved by:  
 
 
 
 
 
   [CONTACT_354683]:  
 Kristy Wynn, Director Quality and Compliance  
Signature:  
  
[CONTACT_1782]:  
  
Statistician:  
 Anna Nordell  
Signature:  
  
[CONTACT_1782]:  
   
REFRAME RPD Post -Market Clinical Study  

Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  3 of 29   
  
Principal Investigator  – Protocol  Approval  Page  
 
 
I, the undersigned,  have read and understood the Protocol  specified  above,  and agree on the 
contents.  The Protocol  and the Clinical  Investigation  Agreement  will serve  as a basis  for 
cooperation in the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
REFRAME  RPD Post -Market Clinical  Study  
Principal Investigator [CONTACT_5627]:  
Principal Investigator  [CONTACT_1641]:  
Principal Investigator  
[CONTACT_2761]:  
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_354659]: 
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354660]: 
Principal Investigator  E-mail 
Address:  
 
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_7496]:  
 
Date of Signature : 
[CONTACT_354700]  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  4 of 29   
  
 
1. Summary  
 
Primary  Objective:  To evaluate the change  in patient  Oral Health -related  Quality  of 
Life (OHRQoL) from wearing  a cobalt  chrome  (CoCr) removable  
partial  denture  (RPD) to wearing  the Solvay  Dental  360™  
polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  for 8 weeks.  
Secondary  Objectives:   
• To investigate the difference in health of the abutment teeth  
following  the use of the polymer  Removable Partial  Denture 
(RPD)  as compared to the Cobalt  chrome  (CoCr)  Removable 
Partial  Denture (RPD)  as assessed  by [CONTACT_354684]  
 
• To investigate the difference in whole plaque  score  following  
the use of the polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  as 
compared  to the Cobalt  Chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  
Denture  (RPD)  
 
• To investigate the health of the mucosal  bearing  areas  of the 
polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  as compared  to 
the Cobalt Chrome  (CoCr)  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
 
• To investigate framework  hygiene (disclosing), probing  
depths, and  abutment  tooth  mobility  
 
• To investigate the professional  (operator) based outcomes  
for the fit, function,  occlusion  and aesthetics  
 
• To investigate the patient  assessment  of the comfort,  
aesthetics  and chewing  ability after the polymer  Removable  
Partial  Denture (RPD)  and Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr)  
Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  
• To determine the denture preference of each  patient  
Indication:  Partial  edentulism  with no active  periodontal  disease  or caries  
Investigational  
Design:  Cohort  study  conducted  in the United  States  & United  Kingdom  
to assess  Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL) in 
patients receiving  the study polymer  Removable Partial  Denture 
(RPD)  as compared to their baseline  Cobalt  Chrome (CoCr)  
Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  Oral Health  Quality  of Life 
(OHRQoL).  
Subjects  who are current wearers  of a Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr)  
Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  will complete an Oral Health  
Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL) instrument, the Oral Health  
Impact  Profile  (OHIP) questionnaire,  at baseline  and again  after 
wearing  their prescribed  polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  
(RPD) for 8 weeks  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  5 of 29   
 Inclusion/exclusion 
criteria:   
Inclusion  criteria:  
 
Adults  from age 18 upwards:  
• With the absence  of [ADDRESS_441788] molars  
• Partial  denture  in one arch only 
• With previous  denture  wearing  experience,  and Cobalt  
Chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  fitted  
in the previous  60 months  and the patient is  currently  
and routinely  wearing  the denture 
• With a stable oral health in terms  of absence of disease 
activity affecting  the periodontium, dental  hard tissues  
(caries),  pulp and the structural/aesthetic  integrity  of 
restored  teeth  
• With at least 1 posterior  natural  tooth occlusal  stop 
(molar or premolar)  
• Class  I, Class II and Class  III (Kennedy’s  Classification)  
• Occlusal  spacing  (static  and dynamic)  around clasp  
assembly  including  the occlusal  rest 
 
Exclusion  criteria:  
• Patients  requiring  extensive treatment prior to the 
provision  of a removable partial  denture (RPD)  
• Patients  with active  primary disease;  caries, periodontal  
disease  or symptoms  of pulpal  or api[INVESTIGATOR_354661]  
• Patients  with irreversibly  compromised 
structural/aesth etic integrity  of restored  teeth that cannot  
be restored  as part of the provision  of treatment. 
• Patients  with an opposing  Removable Partial  Denture  
(RPD).   Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD) to only be 
in one arch and must  oppose  a full denture  or a 
dentate  arch which  provides  a stable occlusal  
relationshipCanines  are NOT to be replaced  with the 
Removable Partial  Denture’s  (RPDs).  Patients  must  
have their natural  canines  present  
Number  of Subjects:  40 subjects  
Maximum  of 3 sites (US and [LOCATION_006]) 
Target  Population:  Patients  aged 18 Years  and older  
Follow -up: 
 
 
Length of 
Investigation:  Enrollment, standard of care prosthodontic  visits  for prescribing 
Removable Partial  Dentures (RPDs),  3 study  follow- up visits  
during  8 week  polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
wearing  period 
 Up to 6 months  
 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  6 of 29   
 Primary  Endpoint:  Change  in Patient  Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  
after wearing  the polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD)  and 
Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
Secondary  Outcome • Comparison  of the health  of the abutment  teeth  
during/following  the use of the polymer Removable 
Partial  Denture (RPD)  as compared  to Cobalt Chrome  
(CoCr) Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  
• Operator assessment  of the adaptation  of the polymer  
frame, adaption of the tissue  base  areas  and their 
relationship  to the frame  adaptation,  functional  
evaluation,  aesthetic  assessment  and oral health  
assessment  of abutment  teeth and the periodontium  
 
• Patient -centered  assessment of comfort,  aesthetics  and 
chewing  ability  before  and after construction  of the new 
denture  by a 5 point  Likert scale  
 
• Oral health  parameters  associated with the Removable  
Partial  Denture (RPD)  abutment teeth  (probing  depths  
and mobility)  and Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
mucosal  bearing  areas  
 
• Evaluation  and photographic  documentation  of the 
Polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture (RPD) for cracks,  
fractures,  permanent  deformation  or other signs  
mechanical  failure 
Test Device/  
Procedure:  Removable partial  polymer  prosthesis  to replace missing  teeth 
Clinical Performance  
Assessments:  To investigate  patient  overall  Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life 
(OHRQoL)  with the polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
as compared  to the Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable Partial  
Denture  (RPD).  
Statistical  Analysis:  A one-sample  T-test will be used  to assess  the change  in patient  
overall  Oral Health  Related Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  using  the 
Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  and 
Polymer  Removable Partial  Denture (RPD). A non-inferiority  
boundary  will be used.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  7 of 29   
  
 
2. Background  and Rationale  
Partial  edentulism is  prevalent,  especially  in adults  65 and older.  Periodontal  disease is one of the 
major  causes  of loss of teeth, along  with caries  (cavities)  and trauma.  Tooth loss subsequently  
affects  individual  overall  oral health  and quality  of life. Removable partial  dentures  (RPDs) are  
commonly  made for people with few to several  missing  teeth  as a cost-effective method  for 
replacing  teeth. In addition  to being  more  affordable  than fixed  partials  and dental  implants,  
Removable Partial  Dentures (RPDs)  are a less invasive treatment and  may be easier to maintain  
by [CONTACT_70513]. Removable  partial  dentures (RPDs) allow  individuals  to regain oral function  and 
health and bilateral  occlusal  support  (Wismeijer,  2011). Several  factors affect  satisfaction  and 
quality  of life of those with Removable  Partial  Dentures (RPDs),  including  aesthetics,  comfort,  
phonetics, mastication  and retention.  
 
The framewo rk of Removable Partial  Dentures (RPDs)  can be made  out of different materials,  
including metal, acrylic  and polymer, all  comprised  of different properties.  A common  framework  
material  is cobalt chromium  (CoCr),  a rigid, nonprecious  metal  alloy.  Other  framework  materials  
include  titanium and  non-metal  materials  such  as medical  grade  arylketone polymer  (AKP).  
Polymer  Removable  Partial  Dentures (RPDs)  provide an alternative  to individuals  with metal  
allergies  or sensitivity.  The plastic  replacement teeth and gingival/alveolar  complex  sit on the 
framework. The removable partial  denture  (RPD)  stabilises  the remaining  dentition  and unites  the 
entire  arch.  
 
Computer Aided Design  (CAD)  and Computer  Aided  Manufacturing  (CAM)  is utilised  in the 
fabrication  of the polymer  Removable Partial  Dentures (RPDs). The  3D software  provides  
increased  accuracy and  faster turn -around  time in providing  removable dentures  to patients.  
 
Careful  attention is paid to denture  base fit and extensions,  functional  elements  of speech and 
mastication,  occlusion,  and appearance/soft tissue  support.  Post-placement  evaluation  is done  to 
assess patient comfort,  function  and aesthetics. Fitting  adjustments  are made  as necessary.  
 
When  evaluating  or comparing  treatment options, variables  such  as survival  rate and longevity  of 
the prostheses, and frequency  of complications  have  been regarded  as the most  important  
outcomes  for clinicians; however,  the social  and psychological  impacts  of treatment, cost  
effectiveness,  benefit, and utility  are more  important factors  from the patient’s  perspective 
(Furuyama, 2011).  
 
Patient's  satisfaction  or dissatisfaction with their partial  dentures  is an important  part of the 
removable partial  denture  (RPD)  treatment. Patients  adapt  to partial  dentures  individually,  
depending on their prior experience,  expectations,  emotional  and general  health  status,  as well as 
on the status  of the oral cavity.  For some patients,  satisfaction with partial  dentures  relates  
primarily  to comfort  and ability  to masticate,  while  aesthetics  and retention  are more  important  for 
others (Dubravka, 2000).  
 
In addition,  the condition, number, and  alignment of the abutment teeth;  the gingival,  periodontal,  
and mucosal  tissue  health;  the type of the construction  and denture  support;  and the material  and 
denture  base shape are also common  reasons  for patient  dissatisfaction.  Other factors  dependent  
on the patient  may be the quality of the denture- supporting  area and oral mucosa,  influence  of the 
surrounding  muscles  on the denture  flanges,  viscosity of saliva,  patient’s  age and ability  to get 
used  to the denture,  state  of the abutments, condition  of the other teeth  in the mouth, relation 
between  the horizontal  and vertical dimensions  of occlusion,  hygiene  habits,  diet, presence  of 
chronic  diseases,  position  of the patient’s  teeth  in the mouth, and quality  of the removable 
appliance.  (Reference: Treatment Outcomes  with Removable Partial  Dentures: A Comparison 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441789]  Assessments).  Therefore,  a thorough initial  oral exam  is a 
critical step in the preparation  for the insertion  of the Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD).  
 
There is a need to assess  the impact  of polymer removable partial  dentures  (RPDs)  on overall  
patient  oral health  and quality  of life. Based on previous  studies  and literature, Removable  Partial  
Denture  (RPD)  alternatives,  such  as polymer  Removable  Partial  Dentures  (RPDs),  should  be 
considered  and assessed,  with Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  validated 
instruments and patient  satisfaction  surveys.  
 
 
 
2.1. Background 
Background of Polymers and  use in Denture  Frames 
The family  of polymers  known  as arylketone  polymers  (AKP) are  high performance polymers  that 
have proven  useful  in a variety  of demanding  engineering  applications, often  as a lightweight  
alternative  to metals. Because of their physical  and chemical  properties,  Arylketone  is considered  a 
high-performance polymer  with utility  in fabrication  via traditional  melt processing  and used 
successfully in the aerospace,  chemical  processing,  and medical  devices  markets.  Arylketone  
Polymers  (AKP) also  exhibit  biocompatibility  and have  been used  successfully in a variety  of 
medical  applications, including orthopaedic  implants  and instrumentation.  The arylketone  polymers  
have long been  considered  viable  replacements  for metals  in medical  applications  as demonstrated 
by [CONTACT_354685].  Arylketones offer  weight reduction  over                    
metals  for devices  such  as surgical  retractors  and orthopaedic  implants.  Polymers  such  as PEEK 
have been used  extensively to replace cobalt  chrome and titanium  in orthopaedic  implants  to 
reduce the effects  of stress  shielding  (Najeeb S., 2015).  These polymers  are also radio- lucent,  
thereby  [CONTACT_354686]. Polymers  may also offer significant cost  
savings  and eliminate  the risk of metal  sensitivity.  
 
Due to these combinations  of properties,  arylketones  represent promising  alternatives  for metals  in 
denture  frames. Their  customisation  to patient  needs,  via either conventional  melt processing or 
machining  of fabricated  forms,  enables  dentists  and dental  labs to optimally  customise  each frame 
to the patient  with a material  that has  a safe history  in medical  devices.  There  are currently  several  
polymeric  products  on the market in  the United  States  and Europe  which  are thermoplastic  
materials  used  for the manufacture  of full and partial  removable dentures  and implant  
overdentures.  Many  of these are formed  into milling  blanks  which  enable  the dentist and  dental  
labs to customise  the design of the denture  frame  for each  patient  using  standard CAD/CAM  
milling  techniques.  
 
They  have also been tested  and evaluated  for biocompatibility  and strength  according  to 
internationally  recognised  standards.  These  include  ISO 7405:2008 Dentistry  — Evaluation  of 
biocompatibility  of medical  devices  used  in dentistry  and ISO [ZIP_CODE]- 1:2013 Dentistry  – Base  
polymers  – Part 1: Denture base  polymers.  
 
 
2.2. Risk/Benefit  Analysis  
Arylketone  polymers  provide an alternative  to metal  and acrylic  denture  frames  that have 
previously  been  used in various  medical  device  applications  and have completed  full 
biocompatibility  testing.  
 
There are no additional  risks to the patient for participating  in the study  that he/she  would  not 
otherwise  encounter with standard denture  frame  assessment  and fitting.  Standard procedures  for 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  9 of 29   
  
a removable partial  denture includes  an oral exam,  impressions  of the jaws,  wax bite block, trial  
insertion  of the framework  and teeth, fitting  and placement  of the denture frame, followed by a final 
review  visit. 
 
The public  will benefit from the study  results that  will help to refine  the use of polymer removable 
partial  dentures. This  will help aid clinicians  in the selection of materials  to optimise  their clinical  
outcomes  of treatment.  Data  acquisition includes  non-invasive  collection  methods  before  and after 
the fitting  of the polymer denture frame. The goal of this study is  to obtain  data on patient centered 
outcomes  on the Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL) in  patients  wearing  arylketone  
polymer  (AKP) Removable Partial  Dentures (RPDs).  The results  of this study  will advance  the 
design,  fabrication  and fitting  of the polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD)  to further  benefit  
the partially  edentulous population.  This will help aid clinicians  in the selection  of materials  to 
optimise  their clinical  outcomes  of treatment.  
 
 
3. Objectives  
 
3.1. Hypothesis  
Patient Oral Health -related Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  after wearing  the Solvay  Dental  360™  
polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  is non-inferior to patient Oral Health -related  Quality  of 
Life (OHRQoL)  after wearing  a cobalt  chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD).  
 
3.2. Primary  Objective  
 
To evaluate the change in patient  Oral Health -related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  from wearing  a 
cobalt  chrome (CoCr) removable partial  denture  (RPD)  to wearing  the Solvay Dental  360™  
polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD) for 8 weeks.  
 
3.3. Secondary Objectives  
 
The secondary  objectives  are: 
 
• To investigate  the difference in health of the abutment teeth  following  the use of the polymer  
Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  as compared  to the Cobalt  chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  
Denture  (RPD)  as assessed  by [CONTACT_354687].  
 
• To investigate the difference in whole plaque  score  following  the use of the polymer  Removable 
Partial  Denture (RPD)  as compared  to the cobalt chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  Denture 
(RPD).  
 
• To investigate the health of the mucosal  bearing  areas  of the polymer Removable Partial  
Denture  (RPD)  as compared  to the Cobalt Chrome (CoCr) Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD).  
 
• To investigate the framework  hygiene (disclosing), probing  depths,  and abutment tooth  
mobility.  
 
• To investigate the professional  (operator) based outcomes  for the fit, function,  occlusion  and 
aesthetics.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  10 of 29   
  
• To investigate the patient  assessment  of the comfort,  aesthetics  and chewing  ability  after the 
polymer  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  and Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable Partial  
Denture  (RPD).  
 
• To determine the denture preference of each  patient.  
 
3.4. Primary  Endpoint  
Change in patient  Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  after wearing  the polymer  
Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  and Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable Partial  Denture (RPD).  
 
3.5. Secondary Endpoint  
Secondary  outcome measures  will be included  to detect health of the abutment teeth  and plaque  
accumulation, using  the whole plaque  score  and gingival  bleeding index  of abutment teeth.  
• The comparison  of the health  of the abutment  teeth during/following  the use of the polymer  
Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD) as  compared  to the Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr)  Removable 
Partial  Denture (RPD)  as assessed  by [CONTACT_354688].  
• Operator assessment  of the adaptation  of the polymer  frame, adaption of the tissue  base  
areas  and their relationship to the frame  adaptation, functional  evaluation, aesthetic  
assessment  and oral health assessment  of abutment  teeth and the periodontium.  
• Oral Health parameters  associated with the Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD)  abutment  
teeth (probing  depths  and mobility)  and Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  mucosal  bearing  
areas.  
• Patient -centered  assessment of the comfort,  aesthetics  and chewing  ability  before  and after 
construction  of the new denture  by a 5 point  Likert scale.  
• Evaluation  and photographic  documentation  of the Polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture  
(RPD)  for cracks,  fractures,  permanent  deformation  or other  signs  of mechanical  failure.  
 
4. Investigation  Design  
 
4.1. Study Summary  
This non-significant risk post-market clinical  study utilizes  a prospective  design to compare patient  
Oral Health Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL) wearing  the arylketone  polymer (AKP) Removable 
Partial  Denture (RPD)  to their baseline  Oral Health  Related  Quality  of Life (OHRQoL)  while  
wearing  a Cobalt Chrome (CoCr)  Removable Partial  Denture (RPD).  The study  is intended to 
simulate  actual  fitting  and use to allow  the gathering  and analysis  of data on the comparative  oral 
health related  quality  of life (OHRQoL) of the arylketone  polymer (AKP) and cobalt chrome  (CoCr)  
denture  frames.  
 
 
4.2. Number  of Patients and 
Investigation  Sites  
A minimum  of 40 patients  will be enrolled  at a maximum  of 3 sites in the United  States  and United  
Kingdom. It is expected that each site will enroll  a minimum  of 10 patients.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  11 of 29   
 
 
 
5. Investigational  Device  
The Ultaire™  arylketone  polymer  (AKP) prosthesis  are milled  from the Dentivera™  Milling  Discs  
using  available  dental  Computer  Aided Design  / Computer Aided Manufacturing  (CAD/CAM)  
systems.  The Dentivera™  Milling  Disc is a thermoplastic  denture  base  resin  designed  for the 
manufacture  of full and partial  removable dentures  and implant  overdentures.  
 
 
Image 1: Ultaire™  AKP Removable  Partial  
Denture  in model   
Image 2: Ultaire™  AKP Removable  Partial  
Denture  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
5.1. Manufacturer  Information 
The intended use of the arylketone polymer (AKP) denture  frames  are supported  by [CONTACT_354689] 2015.  Solvay  Dental  360™  received FDA clearance  for 
this denture  relining, repairing, and  rebasing  resin as defined  under  21 CFR 872.3760, on June  15, 
2016.  
The Dentivera™  Milling  Disc resin  testing  showed that the material  is in accordance with the ISO 
[ZIP_CODE] -1: Dentistry -  Base  polymers  Part 1: Denture base  polymers standard relating  to mechanical  
properties  of denture  base materials.  
 
Biocompatibility  testing  has been completed  on the Dentivera™  Milling  Disc resin  in accordance 
with ISO [ZIP_CODE] -1:2009 (Biological Evaluation  of Medical  Devices – Part 1: Evaluation  and Testing  
within  a risk management  process).  The following  biocompatibility  tests  were  performed:  
cytotoxicity,  sensitisation,  irritation,  systemic toxicit y, subchronic  toxicity,  implantation, genotoxicity,  
pyrogenicity, mutagenicity,  and physical -chemical  testing.  
 
The device  milling  facility  for this clinical trial is ISO [ZIP_CODE]  certified,  fully audited  and qualified  by 
[CONTACT_157242].  
 
5.2. Packaging  and Labelling 
All denture  frames utilised  for this study will be labelled  with a unique  identifier (reference  number).  
The reference  number will  be recorded  in clinical  records  (source  data) and Electronic  Data 
Capture  System (EDC)/Case  Report Form  (eCRF).  
 
The arylketone polymer (AKP)  denture  frames will  be shipped in commercially  available  packages.  
All study  products  must  be kept in a secure  place  under appropriate  storage conditions, away from 
sunlight,  as per the instructions  for use. 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  12 of 29   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1: Dentivera  Milling  Disc Single  Pack  Shelf  Box Label  
 
 
5.3. Device  Accountability  
Each  denture frame  has a unique identifier  (reference number) that  will be recorded  on the study  
device  accountability  log. All devices  received  and shipped  must be recorded  on this log and kept 
current  in the Electronic  Data Capture  system (EDC/eCRF)  and the Investigator Site  File (ISF).  
 
 
5.4. Device  Training/Experience 
 
The fitting  and adjustments, completed  by [CONTACT_33328] (investigator), of  removable partial  dentures  
(RPD)  are standard  of care.  
 
The design of each  arylketone  polymer (AKP) denture frame  will be agreed  jointly  by [CONTACT_15370]  
(the PI [INVESTIGATOR_354662]) and  the milling  facility  prior to production.  The approval  
will be recorded  by [CONTACT_47656]’  signature  [CONTACT_354701]  (eCRF)  prior to production.  
 
 
6. Cohort  Study Subject  Selection  
All subjects  who fulfil the  inclusion  criteria  will be invited  to participate  by [CONTACT_2960] a study  informed  
consent.  Subjects  will only be considered  enrolled once they sign the study consent form  
provided.  

Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  13 of 29   
  
6.1. Inclusion  Criteria  
• Adults  from age 18 upwards:  
• With the absence  of [ADDRESS_441790] molars  
• Partial  denture  in one arch only 
• With previous  denture  wearing  experience,  and Cobalt  Chrome  (CoCr) Removable  Partial  
Denture  (RPD)  fitted  in the previous  60 months  and the patient is  currently and routinely  
wearing  the denture 
• With a stable oral health  in terms  of absence  of disease activity affecting  the periodontium,  
dental  hard tissues  (caries), pulp  and the structural/aesthetic  integrity  of restored  teeth  
• With at least  1 posterior natural  tooth occlusal  stop (molar  or premolar)  
• Class  I, Class II and Class  III (Kennedy’s  Classification)  
• Occlusal  spacing  (static  and dynamic)  available around  clasp  assembly  including the 
occlusal  rest 
 
6.2. Exclusion  Criteria  
• Patients  requiring  extensive treatment prior to the provision  of a removable partial  denture 
(RPD)  
• Patients  with active  primary disease;  caries, periodonta l disease  or symptoms  of pulpal  or 
api[INVESTIGATOR_354663]  
• Patients  with irreversibly  compromised structural/aesthetic  integrity  of restored  teeth  that 
cannot  be restored  as part of the provision  of treatment  
• Patients  with an opposing  Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD).  Removable Partial  Denture 
(RPD)  to only be in one arch and must oppose a full denture  or a dentate  arch which  
provides  a stable occlusal  relationship  
 
6.3. Subject  Withdrawal  and 
Discontinuation 
During  the course of the study Subjects  will be or may  elect to withdraw  from further  treatment  and 
assessments  through any of the following  reasons:  
 
• Subject’s  rescission  of consent  
• Any unexpected  adverse  device  effect  which  is, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_354664],  
related  to the device and will endanger the wellbeing of the subject  if treatment is  continued 
• The development  of any undercurrent illness(es), infection  or condition(s) that might  
interfere with the protocol  
• Any problem  deemed by [CONTACT_45822] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or  Solvay  Dental  360™  to be 
sufficient to cause  discontinuation 
• Subject Lost  to Follow -Up 
All subjects  who discontinue  due to an unexpected  adverse  device  effect, directly  related to the 
study,  will be treated until the effect resolves. The Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354665](s)  for subject withdrawal  in his/her  Case Report Form  (eCRF)  and the monitor  
must be  notified.  
 
A subject  will be classified  as lost to follow  up only if, he/she has failed  to return  to the required  
study  visits  and his/her  dental  status  remains  unknown,  despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] [ADDRESS_441791]  via telephone, fax,  email, and/or  certified  letter.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441792]  
enrolled subjects  
Subjects  not meeting  the inclusion/exclusion  criteria  for a study  should  not be enrolled  into the 
study.  If a subject  is enrolled who does  not meet inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  a protocol  deviation  
will be completed and this will be noted  in the final report.  
 
 
7. Investigation  Procedures  
 
7.1. Screening Evaluations  
 
7.1.1.  Informed  Consent  
After  a normal  clinical assessment,  the Principal  Investigator  (PI) may approach  patients  whom  he 
feels  may be suitable  for entry  into this study.  The Principal  Investigator  (PI) should  introduce  the 
patient  to the study  by [CONTACT_354690],  procedures  and objectives  to the patient.  The 
Principal  Investigator  (PI) will then provide an information sheet  describing  the study,  potential  
discomforts,  risks and benefits  of participation.  The patient  will have sufficient  time to decide  
whether  they wish to participate  in this study.  
 
Any queries  that patients  may have  regarding  the study  will be addressed  appropriately  by [CONTACT_11087]  (PI), or another  member  of the study  team  at the center.  Subjects  will be 
instructed  that they are free to obtain  further  information from the Principal  Investigator  (PI) at any 
time,  that they are free to withdraw  their consent  and to discontinue their participation in the study  
at any time without  prejudice.  
 
If the patient  is willing  to participate  in the study,  he/she  must  read,  understand  and sign the 
informed  consent  form.  The Principal  Investigator  (PI) will also sign this at the same  occasion.  
Three  copi[INVESTIGATOR_354666]. The original  copy  of the signed consent form  will be 
kept in the Investigation  Site File (ISF).  A copy  will be kept in the subject’s  medical  notes  and a 
further copy  will be provided to the subject.  
 
Written  informed  consent  from  the subject  must  be obtained  before any study  related  
procedures are performed.  
 
 
Prior to evaluation  of the study  device,  the following  activities  must  be recorded as part of the 
subjects’  records:  
 
• Meeting all general  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  
• Signing  the Informed  Consent  Form  
• Collecting  demographic  information 
 
7.1.2.  Subject  Eligibility  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  15 of 29   
  
Once  written   informed  consent   has  been   obtained,   the  Case   Report   Form   (eCRF)   will  be 
completed  to document  adherence  to the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.  
 
Where  a patient  fails to fulfil any element  of the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria,  this will be 
documented  and the signed consent  form and completed  inclusion/exclusion criteria  retained by 
[CONTACT_45822]. The patient will not be advanced any further  into this study.  
 
7.1.3.  Subject  Identification 
When  a subject is  considered  eligible for entry  into this study, the subject  will be allocated  the next 
available investigation  number (subject ID number), as  assigned within  the EDC (Electronic  Data  
Capture)  system, in  order  in which  the subjects  are entered.  
 
For subjects  enrolled, this  number  will consist  of [ADDRESS_441793]  and written  on each  page  of the 
Case  Report Forms  (CRF)  in the EDC  system  and all other documentation relating  to that subject.  
 
Once identified  and approached a patient will  be asked  for consent as  per section 7.1.1.  
 
 
7.2. Pre-Treatment  Evaluations  
VISIT  1: 
 
• Patient  eligibility  screening  (Registration). Informed  consent  to be sought.  
• Patient  Initial  exam  
• Inter-occlusal  space  confirmation (static  and dynamic)  of clearance  both for opposing  
edentulous  area and rest area 
• Initial  impressions  of opposing  arch (alginate),  and treatment  arch with and without  the 
existing  Removable Partial  Denture  (RPD)  in place  
• Initial  alginate  impressions  poured  in diestone 
Lab Stage1,  Post-Clinical  Exam:  
• Survey  & design, confirm contours  are adequate  for material  
• Inter-occlusal  space  confirmation (static  and dynamic) for clearance of both the opposing  
edentulous  area and rest/clasp assembly area 
• Custom tray  fabrication  (2mm spacer thickness) with  extensions  to adequately  capture  the 
edentulous  areas  
 
The first visit includes  a standard  oral examination.  During  this visit, impressions  will be taken of 
the subject’s  mouth.  
 
7.3. Treatment  Evaluations  
VISIT  2: Patient Identification  number assigned.  
Dentist  and/or dental  technician  performs / records  the following:  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  16 of 29   
  
• Plaque  scores  
• An individual custom impression tray will be constructed by [CONTACT_354691] (to 
design of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_354667])  
• Polyvinylsiloxane  impressions  will be completed  
• Polyvinylsiloxane  (PVS)  impression  poured  in Diestone   
• Framework  hygiene  disclose  (of original  appliance  (Photograph)  
• Bleeding  on Probing (BOP)  of abutment  and adjacent teeth  (limited  perio  exam;  6 point  
assessment)  
• Pocket  depths  
• Mobility of  the abutment teeth  
• Health of Mucosal  Bearing  area 
• Classification  of occlusion:  static  and function 
• Aesthetics (operator  assessed)  
• Photographs  with and without  appliance frontal, RL lateral  & occlusal  
Patient  assessments:  
• Assessment  of satisfaction  of current  Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  prostheses  
including:  aesthetics,  function, speech,  eating, general  comfort and  complaints  
o clinician  to confirm assessment  
• Oral Health Impact  Profile  (OHIP)  questionnaire  completion  
LAB Stage  2: 
 
• Design on initial  alginate  cast (working  cast not  to be modified): teleconference  confirmation 
/ discussion  between milling  center,  Dental  technician,  treating  Dentist and  Sponsor  
representative.  To include  clasp  assembly  design,  location,  bulk, undercuts, as  well as 
major  connector  and other  Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD) aspects  
o If consensus is  not reached, treating  Dentist  will make final determination.  
• Transfer  of cast to milling  center  
• Milling  Center  scan  
• Mill RPD  
• Add occlusal  wax rim on the Removable Partial  Denture (RPD)  frame edentulous  area to 
accurately  demonstrate tooth position  and allow  occlusal  registration.  Wax must be out of 
occlusion by 2mm space 
• Verification  of framework  returned  to treating  Dentist  
 
At the patients  second  visit a working  impression  will be constructed  using the custom impression 
tray and an elastomeric  impression  material  (polyvinyl  siloxane  or polyether).  
 
 
VISIT  3 
 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441794]  and/or dental  technician  performs  / records  the following:  
 
• Tooth shade  and mould  selection  
• Photographic  verification  of Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD)  polymer frame  fit: frontal,  RL 
lateral,  & occlusal  
o Only minimal  adjustments  permitted. If  adjusted - record  via photograph  after 
adjustment  
• Assess  framework  only on cast and  in mouth for adaption  and adequacy.  Confirmation  of 
occlusion  with the polymer frame  in place 
•  Confirm wax rim clinically including confirmation that there is 2mm of occlusion before 
proceeding with occlusal registration  
• Jaw registration  utilizing  Polyvinylsiloxane  (PVS)  registration  material.   Confirmation  by 
[CONTACT_354692]  
• Balance occlusion  to be established if opposing  a denture 
• Ensure occlusal  consistent  with presenting  condition and shape 
LAB Stage  3: 
 
• Articulate  the casts  on an articulator  as indicated by [CONTACT_54775] .   
• Lab completes  tooth  set up in ideal occlusion , ensuring occlusion is consistent with 
the patient’s presenting condition and CoCr RPD. Balanced occlusion to be established if 
opposing denture   
• Photographs  on cast 
 
 
VISIT  4 
 
• Patient  wax tooth set-up and frame  try-in 
o Clinician  Assessment: evaluate occlusion, aesthetics,  adaptation 
LAB Stage  4 
 
• Dental  technical  processes  to finish  
 
VISIT  [ADDRESS_441795]  performs  and records  the following:  
• Assess  fit 
• Health of Mucosal  Bearing  area 
• Mobility  of the abutment teeth  
• Classification  of occlusal:  static  and function 
• Aesthetics (operator  assessed)  
• Photograph  of prosthesis  in situ, ensuring  fit of appliance  
• Photographs  with and without  appliance frontal, RL lateral  & occlusal  
• Dentist  delivers  the Polymer Removable  Partial  Denture  (RPD)  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  18 of 29   
  
 
Patient  assesses their current  Cobalt Chrome dentures  for the following,  via the 5 point Likert  
scale:  
• Comfort  
• Aesthetics  
• Chewing  ability  
The patient’s  original  CoCr  RPD  will be taken and securely  stored  at the dentist’s  office  for the [ADDRESS_441796] period.  It may be tried in at the 1  week, 4 week  and 8 week  recall  appointments  to 
ensure  they are still fitting  and to assess  any changes  in tooth position  and adaptation.  
 
 
VISIT  6:  Recall  1 week  
 
• Patient  assessment of satisfaction of polymer  appliance aesthetics, function,  speech,  
eating, general  comfort and complaint wearer  – self reported and clinician  confirmation  
Dentist  performs  and records  the following:  
• Health of Mucosal  Bearing  area 
• Abutment tooth  mobility  
• Classification  of occlusal:  static  and function 
• Aesthetics (operator  assessed)  
• Photographs  with and without appliance  frontal, RL lateral  & occlusal  
• Evaluation  and photographic  documentation  of the Polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture 
(RPD)  for cracks,  fractures,  permanent  deformation  or other  signs  of mechanical  failure 
• Try-in of original  CoCr RPD to assess  fit and any changes  in tooth  position  and adaptation 
 
 
VISIT  7: Recall 4 week  
 
• Patient  assessment of satisfaction of polymer  appliance aesthetics, function,  speech,  
eating, general  comfort and complaint wearer  – self reported and clinician  confirmation  
Dentist  performs  and records  the following:  
• Health of Mucosal  Bearing  area 
• Abutment tooth  mobility  
• Classification  of occlusal:  static  and function 
• Aesthetics (operator  assessed)  
• Photographs  with and without appliance  frontal, RL lateral  & occlusal  
• Evaluation  and photographic  documentation  of the Polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture  
(RPD)  for cracks,  fractures,  permanent  deformation  or other  signs  of mechanical  failure 
• Try-in of original  CoCr RPD to assess  fit and any changes  in tooth  position  and adaptation 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  19 of 29   
  
VISIT  8: Recall 8 week  
 
Patient  assesses the polymer  denture  for the following, via the 5 point  Likert scale:  
• Comfort  
• Aesthetics  
• Chewing  ability  
• Oral Health Impact  Profile  (OHIP)  questionnaire  completion  
 
 
Dentist  performs  and records  the following:  
• Plaque  scores  
• Framework  hygiene  disclose  
• Bleeding  on Probing (BOP)  
• Pocket  depths  
• Abutment tooth  mobility  
• Health of Mucosal  Bearing  area 
• Classification  of occlusal:  static  and function 
• Aesthetics (operator  assessed)  
• Evaluation  and photographic  documentation  of the Polymer  Removable  Partial  Denture  
(RPD)  for cracks,  fractures,  permanent  deformation  or other  signs  of mechanical  failure 
• Photographs  with and w/o appliance  frontal, RL  lateral, occlusal  
• Try-in of original  CoCr RPD to assess  fit and  any changes  in tooth  position  and adaptation 
• Patient’s  original  CoCr  RPD is returned to the patient  
 
 
8. Adverse  Events and Device  Observations  
 
8.1. Adverse  Event  (AE) 
An adverse  event  (AE) is defined  according to the European  Standard  EN ISO [ZIP_CODE]:   as ‘any 
untoward medical  occurrence in a subject.   An adverse event  related  to a device is defined  as an 
‘adverse  device  effect’  (ADE)  and is defined  as ‘any untoward and unintended  response to an 
investigational  medical  device’.  
 
An adverse  event  or an adverse  device effect may  be mild, moderate or severe and are usually  
unexpected.  
 
A device  deficiency  is defined as the inadequacy  of a medical  device  with respect to its identity,  
quality,  durability,  reliability,  safety  or performance,  which  may include device  malfunctions,  user 
errors  and inadequate labelling.  
 
All adverse  events,  adverse  device  effects  and or device  deficiencies  either  observed by [CONTACT_11087] [INVESTIGATOR_354668],  must be  reported  to the Sponsor  within  24 hours.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441797]  or device  deficiency, the Principal  Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_354669].  The 
report  will include  the following  information: device  name, model  number,  lot/serial  number,  
manufacturers  date,  expi[INVESTIGATOR_11313], nature  of event,  severity,  date of onset,  duration, course  and 
history  of the adverse  event/adverse  device effect and causality. The  subject  will be questioned 
about  any adverse event(s) and adverse  device  effect(s)  at each visit. 
 
8.1.1.  Expected adverse  events are as follows  
There are no expected  Adverse Events  for this study.  
 
 
8.2. Reporting  of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)/Serous Adverse Device 
Effects (SADE),  Unanticipated Adverse Device  Defects  (UADE) and 
Device  Deficiencies  
A serious  adverse  event  is defined  an adverse  event  that: 
 
• led to death 
 
• led to a serious  deterioration  in the health of the subject that either resulted in: a life- 
threatening  illness  or injury,  or a permanent  impairment  of a body  structure or a body  
function, or in -patient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_40088],  or in medical  
or surgical  intervention  to prevent  life-threatening  illness  or injury  or permanent  impairment  
to a body  structure  or a body function  
 
• led to foetal  distress,  foetal  death  or a congenital  abnormality  or birth  defect  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_206080] [ADDRESS_441798] ([LOCATION_003]DE)  is defined as a serious  adverse  device 
effect  which  by [CONTACT_5942],  incidence, severity  or outcome  has not been  identified  in the current  
version  of the risk analysis  report.  
 
All serious  adverse  events, serious  adverse  device  effects  and/or device deficiencies  that may  
have led to a [LOCATION_003]DE  must  be reported to the Sponsor  or Sponsor  Representative  by [CONTACT_155417]  24 hours  of the Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_354670]. 
 
The Sponsor Representative can be contact[CONTACT_354693]:  
Contact [CONTACT_5627]:  Anna Bader  
Telephone  Number:  [PHONE_7337] 
Email:   abader @namsa.com  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441799]’s  electronic Case Report  Form.   Each telephone reported  reaction must be 
reported  in writing  to Solvay  Dental  360™  within  [ADDRESS_441800]  (IRB)  in a timely  manner.  
 
8.3. Follow -up of Unresolved Events  
 
All serious  adverse  events, serious  adverse  device  effects  and/or unexpected adverse  device 
effects  will be followed until they are resolved  or for [ADDRESS_441801]’s  participation  in the 
study  ends.  
 
8.3.1.  Anticipated clinical benefits  
The public  will benefit from the study  results  which  will help to refine  the use of arylketone polymer  
(AKP) removable  partial  dentures (RPDs).  This will help aid clinicians  in the selection  of materials  
to optimize  their clinical  outcomes  of treatment. 
 
 
8.3.2.  Risks associated with participation in the study  
 
Tooth movement may  occur from the 1  week  to 8 week  recall  visit that may  result in the patient’s  
original  CoCr  RPD  not fitting  as it used to. If this occurs  a new metal  RPD may have to be 
fabricated  for the patient  after the study  has been  completed.  
 
There are no additional  risks to the patient for participating  in the study  which  he/she would  not 
otherwise  encounter with standard  removable partial  denture (RPD)  assessments  and fitting  
 
 
9. Data  Collection  
 
9.1. Retention of documentation 
The Principal  Investigator  (PI) will retain  all copi[INVESTIGATOR_354671] a 
minimum period  of 5 years  from the completion  or discontinuation  of the study.   In all cases, the  
Principal  Investigator  (PI) must contact [CONTACT_354694].   Included  in records  to be maintained  are signed  Protocol, copi[INVESTIGATOR_354672], signed consent forms, IRB  approval  letters, correspondence concerning  the clinical study  
and any other documents  to identify  the subjects.  
 
In addition, if the Principal  Investigator  (PI) moves/retires,  etc., they should  provide Solvay  Dental  
360™  with the name  [CONTACT_354702].  
 
 
9.2. Site Qualification  / Selection 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  22 of 29   
  
Principal  Investigator’s  (PI) and investigation  sites will be selected  by [CONTACT_115000]’s  
representative  through  the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354673].  All selected 
Investigators  will be responsible  for complying  with all study -related  and regulatory  requirements  
and will be ultimately  responsible for overseeing the conduct of the study  at their respective 
investigation sites,  per the Investigation  Agreement.  
 
Selected  Principal  Investigators (PIs)  will have  the required training and expertise to conduct the  
study. The investigation sites where assessments are to be performed  must  have the adequate  
volume of the target  subject  population,  experienced staff,  as well as the appropriate facilities  and 
equipment to meet the requirements  of the study  protocol  and the expected  enrollment time 
frames.  
 
All Principal  Investigators  (PIs) and  research  staff must be  willing  to undergo  all study related  
training and participate  and assist with  monitoring  initiated  by [CONTACT_115000]’s  
representative.  
 
10. Termination of the Study  
 
10.1.  Subject  Withdrawals and Discontinuation  
During  the course  of this study,  subjects  will be or may elect to withdraw  from further  treatment  
through  any of the following  reasons:  
 
• Subject’s  rescission  of consent.  
• Any unexpected  adverse  device effect  which  is, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_354674],  related  to the device  and will endanger  the well-being  of the subject  if the 
treatment  is continued.  
• The development  of any undercurrent  illness(es),  infection  or condition(s)  that might  
interfere with the Protocol.  
• Any problem  deemed  by [CONTACT_45822]  (PI) and/or  Solvay  Dental  360™  to 
be sufficient to cause discontinuation.  
 
All subjects  discontinued  from the study  due to an unexpected  adverse device  effect,  directly  
related  to the study,  will be treated until the effect resolves.  The Principal  Investigator  (PI) will 
clearly  document  the date and reason(s)  for subject  withdrawal  in his/her  Case  Report  Form  and 
the monitor  must be  notified.  
 
Subjects  who are withdrawn  will not be replaced if they have received  the investigational  device.  If 
possible,  any procedures  or assessments  planned  for the subject  on withdrawal  from the study  
should  be performed  when intention  to withdraw  the subject is  announced.  
 
Subjects  who are withdrawn prior to receiving  investigation  device will be replaced.  
 
10.2.  Early Termination of the Clinical  Investigation 
Both the Sponsor  and the Principal  investigator  (PI) reserve the right to terminate the clinical 
investigation at any  time. Should this be necessary,  the procedures  will be arranged  on an 
individual  basis  after review  and consultation  by [CONTACT_49249].  In terminating the clinical 
investigation Solvay Dental 360™ and  the Principal investigator  (PI) will assure  that adequate  
consideration is given  to the protection  of the subject’s  interests.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  23 of 29   
  
11. Data  Management  
Electronic  case  report  forms  (eCRF)  via a web-based Electronic  Data  Capture (EDC)  system  will 
be utilised  for the study. The eCRF  will be completed  for each included patient.  The completed 
eCRFs  will not be made  available in any form to third parties  without  written  permission  from Data  
Management.  The data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_354695],  monitor or designee  and queries  
will be issued. The study  site personnel  are required to resolve  any such  queries.  At the end of the 
study,  Data  Management  will perform final validation checks, including  central  consistency  checks,  
after which  Clean  File will be declared  and the database locked.  
 
 
12. Statistics  
This section  provides  a summary  of the planned  statistical  analyses.  
 
 
12.1.  Description  of Statistical  Methods  
 
12.1.1.  General  Statistical  Considerations  
 
The primary  endpoint  will be the difference  in the overall  score from the Oral Health  Impact  Profile  
(OHIP -14) questionnaire between  baseline  (assessing  the metal  RPD)  and follow -up (assessing  
the polymer RPD).  This overall  score for each frame is calculated  by a summation  of the score  
from each  of the 14 questions;  each  having  the following  scoring:  
 
 
Response  Score 
Never  [ADDRESS_441802] a performance  goal will be conducted  with the following  
hypothesis:  
H0: OS diff > Δ 
Ha: OS diff ≤ Δ; 
Where  OS diff is the overall  score  for the cobalt  chrome frame  subtracted from the overall  score for 
the polymer  frame,  and Δ is the performance  goal.   The performance  goal is 1.5. 
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  24 of 29   
  
12.1.2.  Study Cohorts for Analyses 
 
Because  this is a prospective  observational  study,  all subjects  with available questionnaire data at 
both baseline  and follow -up will be included  in the study  cohort  for analysis.  
 
12.1.3.  Primary  Outcome  
 
The primary  endpoint  will be the difference  in the overall  score from the Oral Health  related  Quality  
of Life questionnaire  between baseline and follow -up. This score is calculated  by a summation  of 
the score  from each  question;  each  having  the following  scoring:  
Response  Score 
Never  [ADDRESS_441803] will be conducted  with the following  hypothesis:  
H0: OS diff > Δ 
Ha: OS diff ≤ Δ; 
Where  OS diff is the overall  score  for the cobalt  chrome frame  subtracted from the overall  score for 
the polymer  frame,  and Δ is the performance  goal.   The performance  goal is 1.5. 
 
 
12.1.4.  Secondary Outcomes  
 
Plaque  score and gingival  bleeding index  are considered  secondary  endpoints  and will be 
summarised  at both baseline and follow -up. In addition,  framework  hygiene  (disclosing), BOP,  
probing depths, abutment  teeth  mobility  and health of the RPD  mucosal  bearing  areas,  as well as 
professional  (operator)  based  outcomes  of the function,  occlusion  and aesthetics  are important  
outcomes. Additionally,  the denture  preference will be summarised  and considered  a secondary  
endpoint for the study  as well. 
 
12.1.5.  Poolability Analyses 
 
Poolability  analyses  will be performed  on the primary  endpoint to assess  whether  results  are 
poolable across  the participating  centers.  
 
A linear  regression  model  with change in the summary  score of the Oral Health  related  Quality  of 
Life Questionnaire  as the dependent variable will be reported  using  a categorical  variable for site. If 
there  is evidence that the data is not poolable  across  centers, examination of the data will be 
performed  to determine the underlying  cause(s).  
 
12.1.6.  Missing  Data  
It is anticipated  that missing  data will be very minimal.   Every  effort will  be made to collect complete 
data from all patients.   In the event  of missing  data, the extent and types  of missing  data will be 
assessed  and reported.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  25 of 29   
  
12.2.  Sample Size Determination  
 
In a previous  study  (S. Shaghaghian, 2014), the average overall  score on the OHIP  questionnaire 
for subjects  wearing  a cobalt  chrome denture  was 13.8 (standard  deviation  = 10.1).   Based  on the 
anticipated  improved performance  of the polymer frame, 36  subjects  with an alpha level of 0.05 
provides  approximately 80%  power  to detect a difference  of -3 (standard  deviation = 11) between 
the 2 overall  scores  with a non-inferiority  margin of 1.5. The total number  of subjects  enrolled  will 
be 40, given  the anticipated  attrition  rate of 10%.  
 
 
12.3.  Additional  Analyses  
 
Additional  study  analyses  are possible and may be performed.  
 
13. Reports and Publications  
 
13.1.  Interim Report  
 
An interim report will not be issued  during  the conduct  of this study  
 
13.2.  Final  Report  
 
The final report will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_354675]  360™  or Sponsor Representative  and reviewed,  
approved  and signed off by [CONTACT_45822].  The Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_354676]  a 
final report to the IRB as per local policy  and procedures.  
 
13.3.  Publications  
Details  of publications  will be addressed  in each  Clinical Investigation  Agreement.  
 
 
14. Ethical  Considerations  
 
14.1.  Institutional  Review  Board Approval  
Prior to the initiation  of this study,  the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354677],  patient  
information  sheet,  patient  consent  form and any other  documents  as may be required  to the 
appropriate  IRB for review  and approval.  The Principal  Investigator,  and any other  member  of the 
investigative  team,  if a member  of the IRB, must  not participate  in the decision -making.  A signed  
and dated  letter  granting  approval  must  be provided to Solvay  Dental  360™  prior to the initiation  of 
the study.  A list of the members  of the IRB reviewing  this Protocol  will be requested.  
 
14.2.  Informed  Consent  and Patient  Information  
The Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354678],  including any risks 
and benefits,  its purpose and procedures,  and expected  duration  of involvement  in the study.  Each  
patient  must  be informed  that participation  in the study  is voluntary  and non-participation  will not 
affect   his/her   right  to  the  most   appropriate   treatment   or  affect   the  doctor/clinician -patient  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441804]  also give their permission  for representatives  of the Sponsor,  auditor  and 
regulatory  authorities  to review  their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_354679].  
 
The principal  investigator(s)  at each  center  will ensure that the subject  is given  full and adequate  
oral and written  information  about  the nature,  purpose,  possible risk and benefit  of the study.  
Informed  consent  process  will be conducted in accordance with Code  of Federal  Regulations  Title 
21. Subjects  must  also be notified that they are free to discontinue  from the study  at any time.  The 
subject  should  be given  the opportunity  to ask questions  and allowed  time to consider  the information 
provided.  
The subject’s  signed  and dated informed consent  must  be obtained  before  conducting  any 
procedure  specifically  for the study.  The principal  investigator(s)  must  store  the original,  signed  
Informed  Consent  Form  in the subject’s  medical  record.  A copy  of the signed Informed  Consent  
Form must be  given  to the subject.  
 
 
14.3.  Subject  Confidentiality  
Subject  Confidentiality  will be maintained  throughout  the study,  in a way that ensures  the 
information can always  be tracked back to the source  data.  For this purpose a unique  identification  
code (ID number  and patient  name [CONTACT_104846])  will be used that allows  identification  of all data reported 
for each  patient.  Subject  anonymity  will be guaranteed and all documentation relating  to a subject  
will be kept in a secure  location.  
 
14.4.  Declaration of Helsinki 
This study  will be conducted  in accordance with the relevant  articles  of the Declaration  of Helsinki  
as adopted  by [CONTACT_941] 18th World  Medical  Assembly  in 1964  and as revised  in Tokyo (1975),  Venice  
(1983),  Hong Kong  (1989),  South  Africa  (1996)  and Edinburgh (2000)  Washington  (2002),  Tokyo  
(2004) and  Seoul  (2008).  
 
 
14.5.  Insurance 
 
All research  subjects  enrolled  in this study  are covered by [CONTACT_354696].  
 
15. Regulatory Requirements  
This is a post-marketing  surveillance  study  with a FDA clearance  and CE marked  device  approved 
for this indication,  hence, this  study  does  not require submission  to the Regulatory  Authority.  
 
16. Good  Clinical Practice  Compliance  
This study  will be conducted in accordance  with the principles  of the European Standard  EN ISO 
[ZIP_CODE]:2011 Clinical Investigation  of Medical  Devices  for Human Subjects – Good  Clinical Practice.  
 
16.1.  Study Personnel  and Responsibilities  
Before a subject's  enrollment in the study  and any study -related  procedures  are undertaken  the 
following  should be fulfilled:  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  27 of 29   
  
• Signed  Clinical  Study  Protocol  and other  agreements  
• Approval  of the study,  investigator  and Informed  Consent  by [CONTACT_1201] 
• Collection  of study  required documents  
• Formal  written  approval  by [CONTACT_354697] 
 
16.2.  Monitoring  
Before first subject  is recruited  into the study,  a representative  from the Sponsor  or Sponsor’s  
representative  will visit the clinical  study  site to: 
 
• Determine  the adequacy  of the facilities  
• Discuss  with the investigator(s) (and  other  personnel  involved  with the study)  their 
responsibilities  with regard to protocol  adherence,  and the responsibilities  of the Sponsor  or 
Sponsor’s  designee.  
 
The monitor (Sponsor or  designee) will be responsible  for securing  the compliance of the 
Principal  Investigators  to the signed  agreement, the  study  Protocol  and all applicable national  
regulations,  guidelines  and standards  in the country  where the study  is being  conducted.  
 
During  the study,  the monitor  will have regular  contact [CONTACT_354698], including  regular  
monitoring  visits  to: 
 
• Provide  information  and support to the investigator(s)  
• Confirm that facilities  remain  acceptable 
• Confirm the study  team is  adhering  to the protocol  and that data are being  accurately  recorded 
in the eCRFs  
• Perform source  data verification  (a comparison  of the data in the eCRFs  with the subject’s 
medical  records  at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_144108], and  other records  relevant  to the study).  This will 
require direct access  to all original  records  for each  subject (e.g., clinic  charts)  
 
The Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354680]’s  clinic  records  and/or original  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_354681].  These  visits  
are for the purpose  of verifying  adherence  to the Protocol  and the completeness  and accuracy  of 
the data being  entered on the electronic Case  Report Forms.  
 
The planned  extent of study  monitoring  and source  data verification  (SDV)  is detailed  in the 
monitoring  plan.  
 
A Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_354682]/or  written  notification  
of the deficiency,  which  will include  a request that  deviation be corrected  immediately.  
 
16.3.  Auditing 
During  the running  of the study,  Solvay  Dental  360™  may appoint  Quality  Assurance  (QA) personnel  
to provide audit  of the administration and conduct  of the study,  both at the investigation  site and at 
Solvay  Dental  360™.  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  [ADDRESS_441805]  institute  any and all medical  procedures  he/she  deems  to be medically  sound.  All 
such  events  and procedures  must  be documented in the subjects  electronic  Case Report  Form  
and reported  to the sponsor  or designee within  [ADDRESS_441806] of the investigation,  patient management,  or patient  
assessment  are to be documented  on the eCRF  provided for that purpose.  Notification  to the IRB 
should  be documented  and maintained in the clinical  investigator file (as required).  
Clinical  Investigational  Plan 
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Solvay  Dental  360™  
Strictly  Confidential  Version  05 
Page  29 of 29   
  
 
 
References  
de Aquino,  A. R. (2011).  Longitudinal  Clinical Evaluation  of Undercut  Areas  and Rest Seats  of Abutment  Teeth  in 
Removable  Partial Denture  Treatment.  Journal  of Prosthodontics,  20, 639-642. 
de Souza  RF, e. a. (2014).  Focusing on outcomes  and methods  in removable  prosthodontics  trials: a systematic  review.  
Clinical Oral  Implants  Research,  25, 1137- 1141.  
Dubravka,  K.-Z. e. (2000).  Patients'  Satisfaction  with Partial Denture  Therapy.  Acta Stomatol  Croat.,  34. 
Furuyama,  C. e. (2011).  Oral health -related  quality  of life in patients  treated  by [CONTACT_354699] -supported fixed  dentures  and 
removable  partial  dentures.  Clinical Oral  Implants  Research,  23, 958-962. 
Gray,  e. a. (2012).  IMPROVDENT:  Improving dentures  for patient  benefit.  A cross- over randomised clinical trial 
comparing  impression  materials  for complete  dentures.  BMC  Oral  Health,  12(37).  
Najeeb  S., e. a. (2015).  Applications  of polyetheretherketone  (PEEK) in oral implantology  and prosthodontics.  Journal  
of Prosthodont  Research . Retrieved  from  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpor.2015.10.001 
S. Shaghaghian,  e. a. (2014).  Oral health -related  quality  of life of removable partial  denture  wearers  and related  factors.  
Journal  of Oral  Rehabilitation . Retrieved  July 23, 2016,  from  
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rafat_Bagheri/publication/264984808_Oral_health-  
related_quality_of_life_of_removable_partial_denture_wearers_and_related_factors/links/540d51d00cf2df04e  
7548a42.pdf  
Shah,  R. e. (2013).  Esthetics  in Removable Partial Denture  - A Review.  Kathmandu University  Medical  Journal,  44(4),  
344-348. 
Wismeijer,  D. e. (2011).  Multicentre  prospective  evaluation  of implant -assisted  mandibular  bilateral  distal  extension  
removable  partial dentures:  Patient  satisfaction.  Clinical Oral  Implants  Research,  24(1),  20-27. 
 