 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099058] Market Study: A Clinical Trial to Study the Effects of Stimgenics Spi[INVESTIGATOR_307880] (SGX-SCS) programs in treating Intractable Chronic Back Pain Protocol Number:   SGEN-2018PM2 NCT Number    [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Study Reference:   SGX-SCS RCT  Sponsor:    Stimgenics [ADDRESS_1099059]. Bloomington, IL [ZIP_CODE]  Study Responsibility:   Wesley Park      Vice President, Clinical Affairs      Stimgenics  Date of Issue:     Jan 2, 2019  Revision:    2.0  Revision History:       Revision Description Date 1.[ADDRESS_1099060] Market Study: A Clinical Trial to Study the Effects of Stimgenics Spi[INVESTIGATOR_307880] (SGX-SCS) programs in treating Intractable Chronic Back Pain  Protocol Number SGEN-2018PM2 Study Device The IntellisTM neurostimulator, a Spi[INVESTIGATOR_307880] (SCS) device system manufactured and commercialized by [CONTACT_13735] (Minneapolis, MN)  Study Purpose The purpose of this investigational study is to study the effects of Stimgenics Spi[INVESTIGATOR_307880] (SGX-SCS) in subjects with chronic, intractable pain of the trunk with lower limb pain, including unilateral or bilateral pain associated with the following conditions: failed back surgery syndrome, intractable low back pain and leg pain.  Study Design This is an open-label prospective, randomized, controlled, multi-center study comparing SGX-SCS programming approach to Standard SCS programming approach.  Subjects meeting study entrance criteria will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of two study treatment groups: • Test treatment group with SGX-SCS programming approach  • Control treatment group with Standard SCS programming approach  Data at follow-up visits will be compared between the two treatment groups, and in reference to baseline assessments collected at the beginning of the study.  Study Size Approximately [ADDRESS_1099061] 100 subjects (approximately 50% in each treatment arm) to complete the 3-month endpoint.  Study Duration The expected total duration of this study is approximately [ADDRESS_1099062] MEET ALL of the following inclusion criteria: 1. Be a candidate for SCS system (trial and implant) per labeled indication (back and leg pain) 2. Has an average back pain intensity ≥ 5.0 cm on the 10.0 cm Visual Analog Scale (VAS) at the time of enrollment with moderate to severe chronic leg pain  3. Be willing and capable of giving written informed consent to participate in this clinical study based on voluntary agreement after a thorough explanation of the subject’s participation has been provided. 4. Be willing and capable of subjective evaluation, read and understand English-written questionnaires, and read, understand and sign the written inform consent in English. 5. Be [ADDRESS_1099063] NOT MEET ANY of the following exclusion criteria: 1. Has a medical, anatomical, and/or psychosocial condition that is contraindicated for commercially available IntellisTM SCS systems as determined by [CONTACT_737] 2. Be concurrently participating in another clinical study 3. Has an existing active implanted device such as a pacemaker, another SCS unit, peripheral nerve stimulator, and/or drug delivery pump, etc. 4. Has a pain in other area(s) and/or medical condition requiring the regular use of significant pain medications that could interfere with accurate pain reporting, and/or confound evaluation of study endpoints, as determined by [CONTACT_737] 5. Has mechanical spi[INVESTIGATOR_708636] 6. Has undergone, within 30 days prior to enrollment, an interventional procedure and/or surgery to treat back and/or leg pain, which is providing significant pain relief  7. Has unresolved major issues of secondary gain (e.g., social, financial, legal), as determined by [CONTACT_093] 8. Be pregnant (determined by [CONTACT_796771]-menopausal. If female, sexually active, and childbearing age, subject must be willing to use a reliable form of birth control.) Primary Endpoint The primary efficacy endpoint is the percentage of randomized subjects who respond (a decrease in back pain VAS by [CONTACT_2669] 50% compared to baseline) to SCS therapy at 3 months (non-inferiority analysis).  Subjects who do not have a 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 4 of 41 successful Trial Phase are considered failures (non-responders) toward the primary endpoint.     
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099064] Stimulation (SCS) device system manufactured by [CONTACT_13735] (Minneapolis, MN). The system is indicated for spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185] (SCS) as an aid in the management of chronic, intractable pain of the trunk and/or limbs-including unilateral or bilateral pain associated with conditions, including Failed Back Syndrome (FBS). It is designed to deliver electrical stimulation to the spi[INVESTIGATOR_397529] (also called leads) placed in the dorsal epi[INVESTIGATOR_13814].  The study will use commercially available IntellisTM neurostimulator and compatible SCS system components from Medtronic in accordance to the approved FDA indication. Section D of this Investigational Plan provides detailed description of IntellisTM neurostimulator.  A.2.  Purpose of the Investigation The purpose of this investigational study is to study the effects of Stimgenics spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185] (SGX-SCS) programs in subjects with chronic, intractable pain of the trunk with lower limb pain, including unilateral or bilateral pain associated with the following conditions: failed back syndrome, intractable low back pain and leg pain. This study is a post market, open-label, multi-center, prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial that evaluates the treatment outcomes resulting from SGX-SCS programming approach and Standard SCS programming approach. Both programming approaches will be discussed in section B.[ADDRESS_1099065] SCS programs will utilize an FDA-approved and commercially available SCS system (IntellisTM neurostimulator and compatible SCS components) as is, without any modification using approved parameters under approved labeling for indicated population. Outcomes will be assessed via standardized tests.   A.3.  Study Size Approximately [ADDRESS_1099066] 100 subjects (approximately 50% in each treatment arm) to complete the 3-month endpoint. Sample size estimates are discussed further in section B.5.[ADDRESS_1099067] received the permanent implant will be followed up for approximately 8 months. This consists of Baseline assessments, up to 10 days of trial stimulation, and 6 months of treatment following implantation and activation of the device. All subjects who remain implanted at the time of Study Completion will be offered to return for an additional visit 12-months after device activation.  B.  Protocol B.1.  Rationale for Study It is estimated that about 20% percent of the population worldwide is affected by [CONTACT_796772]1. Chronic pain becomes a burden to the individual as this affects a person’s ability to carry out many daily life activities, such as exercising, walking, driving a car, attending social events, or performing household chores.  In the [LOCATION_002], chronic pain is considered one of the most pervasive and intractable conditions affecting at least one third of the population at an estimated cost of five hundred billion dollars per year, when combining health-related expenditure and the cost-impact on loss of productivity and income2.  Conventional medical management, including medication and physical therapy, is often not adequate for treating chronic pain. Medication therapy based on opi[INVESTIGATOR_796756]. Extensive use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_796757]3. Furthermore, surgical interventions have also failed to remediate severe cases of neuropathies and intractable back pain for many patients. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185] (SCS) is a proven therapy that has been in use for about 50 years for various types of chronic pain. SCS is a reversible therapy that allows patients to evaluate the therapy for several days using an external neurostimulator (ENS) prior to receiving an implantable neurostimulator (INS) system4,5,6,7.  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_307880] (SCS) utilizes pulsed electric fields that are applied to the dorsal section of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_397530], called leads, implanted in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_13814].   Standard SCS programming approach utilizes pulsed electric fields oscillating in the 40-250 Hz frequency range although up to 1,200 Hz is approved for use. The electric field stimulates neurons that induce a tingling sensation (paresthesia) that is steered by [CONTACT_796773]. The concept behind Standard SCS is that the paresthesia induced by [CONTACT_796774]. Standard SCS programming typi[INVESTIGATOR_796758] a few program groups, allowing patients to select the program group that suits them best. Each program group contains multiple programs that deliver, for a given pulse rate, different stimulation parameters (e.g. pulse width, amplitude) to same or different electrodes. This approach has been used to create better paresthesia patterns for the given patient’s pain patterns or more tolerable paresthesia depending on patient’s different positions or postures.  Historically, Standard SCS has not had high success for back pain patients due to the challenge of having paresthesia pattern overlap the back-pain region without causing uncomfortable paresthesia. Although different approaches to SCS exist, Standard SCS still remains the most used SCS programming approach in treating chronic back and leg pain.  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 7 of 41 Stimgenics SCS (SGX-SCS) programming approach relies less on paresthesia pattern and programmed stimulation parameters will be set to levels that span above the perception threshold, yet well below the levels that could cause uncomfortable paresthesia.  SGX-SCS will use only programming parameters that are currently available on the device. In a given program group, SGX-SCS provides programs with two different pulse rates and pulse widths for the goal of better pain relief.  For example, starting parameters may be a combination of a program with [ADDRESS_1099068] SCS programming approach, SGX-SCS may offer an alternative approach to SCS that will help thousands of chronic pain sufferers make substantial improvement in pain relief, reduction in disabilities, and reduce the likelihood of uncomfortable paresthesia. Stimgenics has completed a multicenter feasibility study ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) in which SGX-SCS programming approach was evaluated during the required period for trialing SCS therapy. In this acute study [ADDRESS_1099069] SCS programming approaches.  In terms of back pain relief, SGX-SCS programming approach provided a mean of 68% pain relief and Standard SCS programming approach provided a mean of 43% pain relief, which translates to SGX-SCS achieving 25% greater reduction than Standard SCS.  Notably with SGX-SCS, 80% of subjects experienced 50% or better back pain relief, and 85% of the subjects preferred therapy received through SGX-SCS programming approach.  The safety results were in line with expectations of previous SCS studies and were mostly resolved within a few days with minimal interventions.  There was one serious adverse event, epi[INVESTIGATOR_115909], which although uncommon, is well established as a potential risk in SCS trial and was not related to either programming approach. There were no unanticipated adverse events. For this study, the study design is a post market, open-label, prospective, randomized, controlled multi-center study that will again evaluate SGX-SCS programming and Standard SCS programming for chronic back and leg pain sufferers.  This scientifically sound study will provide more information on effectiveness of SGX-SCS programming approach.  B.2.  Study Objectives The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of SGX-SCS in reducing back pain as compared to Standard SCS for the treatment of intractable chronic back pain. The secondary objectives of this study are to further demonstrate the effectiveness of the SGX-SCS when compared to Standard SCS for the treatment of chronic pain of the trunk and limbs.  This study will also include the characterization of the safety of SGX-SCS.  B.3.  Selection of Study Population 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 8 of 41  B.3.1.  Study Population  The intended study population is individuals suffering from chronic, intractable pain of the trunk and/or limbs associated with a number of conditions, including Failed Back Syndrome (FBS) and are candidates for commercially available SCS device systems.   B.3.2.  Inclusion Criteria In order to participate in the study, a subject must MEET ALL of the following inclusion criteria: 1. Be a candidate for SCS system (trial and implant) per labeled indication (back and leg pain) 2. Has an average back pain intensity ≥ 5.0 cm on the 10.0 cm Visual Analog Scale (VAS) at the time of enrollment with moderate to severe chronic leg pain  3. Be willing and capable of giving written informed consent to participate in this clinical study based on voluntary agreement after a thorough explanation of the subject’s participation has been provided. 4. Be willing and capable of subjective evaluation, read and understand English-written questionnaires, and read, understand and sign the written inform consent in English. 5. Be [ADDRESS_1099070] NOT MEET ANY of the following exclusion criteria: 1. Has a medical, anatomical, and/or psychosocial condition that is contraindicated for commercially available IntellisTM SCS systems as determined by [CONTACT_737] 2. Be concurrently participating in another clinical study 3. Has an existing active implanted device such as a pacemaker, another SCS unit, peripheral nerve stimulator, and/or drug delivery pump, etc. 4. Has pain in other area(s) and/or medical condition requiring the regular use of significant pain medications that could interfere with accurate pain reporting, study procedures, and/or confound evaluation of study endpoints, as determined by [CONTACT_737] 5. Has mechanical spi[INVESTIGATOR_796759]-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 9 of 41 6. Has undergone, within 30 days prior to enrollment, an interventional procedure and/or surgery to treat back and/or leg pain, which is providing significant pain relief  7. Has unresolved major issues of secondary gain (e.g., social, financial, legal), as determined by [CONTACT_093] 8. Be pregnant (determined by [CONTACT_796771]-menopausal. If female, sexually active, and childbearing age, subject must be willing to use a reliable form of birth control.)  B.4.  Treatment Groups Subjects meeting the study entrance criteria will be randomized to one of two study treatment groups in a 1:1 ratio: • Test treatment group with SGX-SCS programming approach • Control treatment group with Standard SCS programming approach  B.5.  Study Design  B.5.1.  Overall Design This is a post market, open-label, multi-center, prospective, randomized, controlled study to evaluate SGX-SCS in subjects with chronic, intractable pain of the lower back with moderate to severe limb pain.  Data at follow-up visits will be compared between the two treatment groups, and in reference to baseline assessments collected at the beginning of the study.  B.5.2.  Bias Minimization This Investigational Plan and its associated documentation have been designed to minimize potential sources of bias.  Each Investigator’s qualification for meeting the requirements of this investigational plan will be reviewed prior to their participation in this investigation.  Randomization of subjects to one of the two treatment groups will occur after the subject completes Baseline assessments in order to minimize selection bias.  Each therapy, SGX-SCS programs and Standard SCS programs, will be programmed by [CONTACT_796775], and in accordance with their standard therapy algorithms for optimal pain relief. This will minimize bias related to potential preference by a given clinical representative to a particular SCS therapy.    B.5.3.  Comparison Groups Both groups in the study are active treatment groups. Treatment outcomes from subjects in the SGX-SCS group will be compared to those of the Standard SCS group.    
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099071] SCS studies indicate that there is no reason to believe that subjects and Investigators/clinical staff will be influenced one way or another by [CONTACT_670468] a particular SCS program has been used.  B.5.5.  Sample Size Primary Endpoint Assessment occurs at the follow up visit [ADDRESS_1099072] 100 total subjects (at least [ADDRESS_1099073] SCS group) who have passed screening requirements, have been randomized, and have completed the primary endpoint assessment.   The clinical investigational plan requires a screening process for all subjects that provide written informed consent. These subjects will undergo screening to assess eligibility. Subjects may be excluded for various reasons during screening.  Accordingly, in order to include an estimated [ADDRESS_1099074] group to the control group.  Established methods were followed in determining the non-inferiority criteria and the related sample size estimate • Test basis:  Farrington-Manning binomial test for non-inferiority • Estimated responder rate of 70% in the test group and 50% in the control group • Significance level, alpha, of 0.05 one-sided • Statistical power = approximately 90% or greater • Non-inferiority margin of 10% • Randomization:  1:1 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 11 of 41 Based on these assumptions, a minimum of 50 randomized and trialed subjects per treatment group (100 total) are required.  B.5.5.2 Overall Sample Size and Enrollment Based on the primary endpoint requirement, a minimum of 50 subjects per treatment group are required (100 total). To account for a combined estimated attrition of 20% for subjects that do not complete the Trial Phase, and subjects that exit study before the 3-month primary endpoint visit, a total of 125 subjects would need to be randomized.    To account for 50% attrition prior to randomization (including subject ineligibility after signing the informed consent and subject dropout), it is estimated that a total of up to [ADDRESS_1099075] 12 months. Subjects who are expected to complete will commit to it for approximately 8 months. This consists of Baseline assessments, up to 10 days of trial stimulation, and 6 months of treatment following implantation and activation of the device. All subjects who remain implanted at the time of Study Completion will be offered to return for an additional visit 12-months after device activation.   B.5.7.  Interim Administrative Analysis   For the purposes of business decisions and planning purposes (e.g., to provide an update to  third-party investors), an administrative analysis will be performed.  The results of this analysis will not be widely distributed, and access will be limited to those persons with a “need to know”.  Access will be restricted from those involved with the study conduct or management to prevent the introduction of bias.  The administrative analysis will not be used to modify the trial or stop early for potential benefit. As there is no chance of early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007], the type I error rate is not affected. Limiting changes to the protocol and access to the interim administrative analysis also prevents operational bias due to knowledge of interim results.   B.6.  Enrollment, Assessments, Randomization, and Clinical Procedure 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099076] (IRB) approvals, and when written informed consent from subjects has been obtained.  Prior to enrollment, Investigators and clinical site staff will approach subjects, who have been determined to be candidates for SCS therapy and talk about potential participation in the study.  Following informed consent, the eligibility of subjects to participate in the study will be assessed according to inclusion and exclusion criteria outlined in this Investigational Plan.  Various assessments including pain intensity, evaluation of medical history and records, and the Investigator’s clinical judgment will be used in the selection process.   B.6.1.  Summary of Study Protocol Potential study subjects will be identified from a pool of candidates for SCS therapy that are either affiliated with or referred to the clinical sites.  Advertisements of the study may be used for recruitment purposes, upon approval of the patient recruitment materials by [CONTACT_397563](s). An informed consent form (ICF) will be given to the potential subject for private evaluation. The Investigator or Study Clinical Staff will be available to respond any questions the potential subject may have during evaluation of the ICF. Potential study subjects willing to participate in the study will visit the study site for providing written consent and for evaluation of eligibility based on inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Once a consented subject is deemed qualified to participate in the study, baseline assessments and randomization will occur followed by [CONTACT_796776].  Subjects who complete a successful SCS trial phase will be scheduled to receive a permanent implant of leads and the INS and will undergo 6 months of stimulation delivery with assessments at 1, 3, and 6 months after the activation of the therapy. Baseline assessments will include measures for pain intensity, use of medication, extent of disability, and quality of life. Following completion of the baseline assessment, study subjects will be randomized in a 1:[ADDRESS_1099077]’s response to assigned treatment group. Temporary or permanent leads and an external neurostimulator (ENS) will be used during the Trial Phase. Subjects will evaluate the assigned treatment group based on pain intensity under optimal parameters. Those who have a "successful Trial Phase" (defined as a 40% or greater pain reduction from Baseline in their back pain) will proceed to permanent implantation of a SCS system to evaluate the assigned treatment group. The implanted INS will be activated within [ADDRESS_1099078] satisfaction will also be recorded at 3 months after Device Activation. All subjects who remain implanted at the 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 13 of 41 time of Study Completion will be offered to return for an additional visit 12-months after device activation. Figure 1 summarizes the sequence of study-related assessments, procedures, and activities.  B.6.2.  Consent/Enrollment Written informed consent for participation in the study must be obtained from subjects before initiation of any study-related activities, including those that assess eligibility.  Following informed consent, subjects will be assigned a unique subject identification number and will be considered to be enrolled in the study.  Eligibility for advancing to the next stage of the study will be evaluated by [CONTACT_796777]. Subjects will be assessed for pain intensity and disability.   B.6.3.  Entry Criteria Evaluation (0-14 days from Enrollment) The eligibility of subjects who have consented participation will be assessed based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Study subjects must meet all of the study inclusion criteria and none of the study exclusion criteria to be eligible.  Assessments for eligibility include average pain intensity (which will be used as Baseline pain intensity), medication usage, medical records and history, and the Investigator’s clinical judgment.  Subjects with confirmed eligibility will proceed to Baseline assessment, while subjects who do not will be discontinued from the study.    B.6.4.  Baseline Before a subject is randomized, a subject will be requested to fill out standard questionnaires that will assess extent of disability, use of medications, and quality of life.  The medical and surgical history of the subject will be collected. At this visit and subsequent visits, the subject will be assessed for adverse events, medication usage and be reminded to not increase pain medications from baseline through the 3-Month Visit.  Pre-operative assessments will follow the standard of care for SCS therapy and be determined by [CONTACT_9257].   B.6.5.  Randomization Subsequent to completing Baseline assessments, qualifying subjects will be randomly assigned to either one of the two study treatment groups: SGX-SCS programming or Standard SCS programming (active comparator).  Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_796778]. Randomization will be done at each study site by [CONTACT_638847].  B.6.6.  SCS Trial Phase Subjects will undergo a Trial Phase with the randomly assigned treatment group.  The Trial Phase will last up to [ADDRESS_1099079]’s pain condition and pain pattern as described in the Physician Implant Manual. Stimulation will be delivered from an external neurostimulator (ENS).   Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral X-ray imaging will be done following lead implantation at the beginning of the Trial Phase and when significant lead migration is suspected. Stimulation therapy will be as follows for each study arm: • For Standard SCS: stimulation parameters will be trialed according to standard practice as described in the IntellisTM labeling/manuals.   • For SGX-SCS: As with Standard SCS programming, subjects will be given multiple program groups to try. Each SGX-SCS program group will have multiple parameters.  The stimulation parameters will be within the specifications described in the IntellisTM labeling/manuals.  Each SGX-SCS program group has at least two programs with different pulse rate in the [ADDRESS_1099080]’s self-reported pain relief.  Adjustments to therapy will be attempted until at least 50% self-reported back pain reduction from baseline is achieved or until conclusion of the trial phase (no more than 10 days). Subjects will be assessed for adverse events and medication usage.   B.6.7.  End of Trial Assessment  At the end of the Trial Phase, subjects will be assessed for pain intensity under optimal therapy parameters. Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral X-ray imaging may  be done at the end of the Trial Phase.) The subject will be assessed for adverse events and medication usage. Those who have a "successful Trial Phase" (defined as a 40% or greater pain reduction from Baseline in their back pain) will proceed to permanent implantation of a SCS system to evaluate the assigned therapy, and permanent implantation of the IntellisTM SCS system will be scheduled. A threshold of 40% for the Trial Phase was predetermined as the minimum pain reduction that warrants consideration of a permanent implant and an opportunity to achieve a 50% pain reduction as defined in the Individual Subject Success criterion (see Section B.7.3).)  Data from subjects who did not achieve 40% or greater pain reduction in back and do not receive permanent implantation will be carried forward toward the primary endpoint. These subjects will exit the study after being followed up for two weeks after explant of the leads to assess adverse events.  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 15 of 41 B.6.8.  Permanent Device Implant (0-60 days from end of successful Trial Phase) As described in section B.6.7, subjects who underwent a successful trial of the assigned SCS therapy and who agreed to continue into the next stage of the study will proceed to permanent implantation stage.  Permanent percutaneous leads will be placed in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_397531] a vertebral level based on the subject’s pain condition and pain pattern as described in the IntellisTM Physician Implant Manual. The INS will be implanted by a trained physician according to standard practice and following the Physician Implant Manual for the device.  Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral X-ray imaging will be obtained.  Standard practice of a study site for prophylactic pre-surgery antibiotics and post-surgery pain medications will be followed). Subjects will be assessed for adverse events and medication usage.   B.6.9.  Device Activation (0-14 days following Permanent Implant) Clinical personnel at the site will assess if healing of surgical wounds is sufficiently appropriate to start charging and programming of the INS. The INS will be initially programmed to the group therapy or set of stimulation parameters that provided adequate pain relief during the Trial Phase. Adjustments to therapy may be made based on patient response to a program group or set of stimulation parameters. The subject will be provided with instructions on how to operate the charger and patient remote control at this visit.  Subjects will be assessed for adverse events and medication usage.   B.6.10.  Unscheduled Visits Unscheduled visits may occur at any time during the study for the assessment of possible adverse events, changes in pain medication, and programming adjustments.  Each unscheduled visit will be documented and recorded on an eCRF.  B.6.11.  Telephone Calls Subjects will be contact[CONTACT_371118], via a telephone call, before each study visit. The study coordinator will check on the well-being of the subject, remind the subject of the upcoming scheduled visit, remind the subject not to change pain medication usage prior to the scheduled visit, and remind the subject to contact [CONTACT_737]/study staff should he/she have any concerns or questions. The telephone calls should be made two to three weeks before the scheduled visit.  B.6.12.  1 Month After Device Activation (± 10 days) Subjects will visit the study site where they will be assessed for pain intensity.  Programming adjustments may be made, as needed. Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral X-ray imaging may be done if significant lead migration is suspected. Subjects will be assessed for adverse events and medication usage.   
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 16 of 41 B.6.13.  3 Months After Device Activation (± 15 days) Subjects will visit the study site where they will be assessed for pain intensity, extent of disability, use of medication, quality of life, Patient Global Impression of Change, and subject satisfaction. Paresthesia generated by [CONTACT_397565]. Programming adjustments may be made, as needed. Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral X-ray imaging may be done if significant lead migration is suspected. Subjects will also be assessed for possible adverse events and medication usage.   B.6.14.  6 Months After Device Activation (± 30 days) The follow-up visit [ADDRESS_1099081]’s condition is stable, at which point the Study Completion Clinical Research Form (eCRF) should be completed. Beyond Study Completion, all subjects who remain implanted at the time of Study Completion will be offered to return for an additional visit 12-months after device activation. Following the last scheduled study visit, subjects will be followed by [CONTACT_796779], as dictated by [CONTACT_397567], in order to facilitate pain management, stimulation adjustments, possible revisions and/or replacements of neurostimulation components. Any additional non-study related monitoring of the subject will be the responsibility of the subject’s personal physician, as dictated by [CONTACT_796780].  B.6.15. 12 Months After Device Activation (± 30 days) Subjects will be offered an additional visit at [ADDRESS_1099082]’s condition is stable.  Beyond the [ADDRESS_1099083] of care at each site, in order to facilitate pain management, stimulation adjustments, possible revisions and/or replacements of neurostimulation components. Any additional non-study related 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099084]’s personal physician, as dictated by [CONTACT_796780].   B.6.[ADDRESS_1099085] additional AP and lateral X-rays taken to confirm the new lead position in order to aid the Investigator in determining a course of action. Paresthesia testing may also be performed to assess lead location and therapy coverage of pain areas. Programming adjustments may be made based on patient feedback following assessment. Additional information on Medication Usage: • The investigator will instruct all subjects to take the Baseline doses of pain medication until the 3-Month Visit.  However, after Device Activation Visit, the Investigator may reduce the dose of pain medication if the subject is benefitting greatly from SCS and not benefitting from Baseline dose pain medication. o Subjects should not fluctuate medication usage nor dosages even if the dose is at or below Baseline doses. The investigator will instruct all subjects to maintain stable dosing of medication for at least two weeks prior to scheduled follow-up visits. • Acetaminophen, NSAIDs or other pain medications (new prescriptions or greater than Baseline doses) may only be taken for an acute condition and for a limited duration. For each type of pain medication, dosing should not exceed the maximum daily dosage recommended by [CONTACT_796781] 5 days. Should acute pain medication usage coincide with a follow-up visit, the visit will be postponed until two weeks after acute pain medication usage has been stopped. • Following trial and permanent implants, the clinical site’s standard practice for prophylactic pre-surgery antibiotics and post-surgery pain medications will be followed. Investigators will instruct subjects not to change usage of any other concomitant pain medications.  B.6.17.  Device Explant At any time during the study, a subject may elect to withdraw from the study and have the SCS device system explanted.  Additionally, an Investigator may elect to explant a device due to an adverse event. The Investigator must follow the appropriate guidelines set forth by [CONTACT_796782]/or lead(s) as well as the accessories (charger, patient remote control).  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099086] Withdrawal Although efforts will be made by [CONTACT_796783], subjects may withdraw early from the study for a number of reasons, including but not limited to: • Failure of SCS Trial Phase • Subject request • Investigator request • Subject lost to follow-up • Subject’s death • Adverse events (e.g., intolerable adverse event occurrence that forces subject to stop participation in the study) If a subject is considering withdrawing from the study due to unsatisfactory effectiveness of the assigned treatment, the Investigator will make attempts to improve therapy during a study visit. When a subject is withdrawn early from the study, a Study Termination eCRF will be completed describing the reason for discontinuation.  Study staff will contact [CONTACT_796784] a subject that is not responding to a contact [INVESTIGATOR_1306]. If a subject has withdrawn consent for the study, or is lost to follow-up, the completion of this visit is not required.  In situations where study withdrawal is due to an adverse event, subjects will be followed until resolution of the adverse event or determination that the adverse event is not likely to change.  B.6.19.  Study Completion All subjects enrolled in the study are expected to complete all scheduled visits through the follow up visit [ADDRESS_1099087] been issued and reported to the IRB. Stimgenics, the Investigators, or the IRB(s) may suspend or terminate the study early at any time.  If the study is suspended or terminated prematurely, all subjects that are still enrolled will be terminated from the study. A Study Completion eCRF will be completed 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099088]’s personal physician.   Stimgenics reserves the right to terminate the study but intends only to exercise this right for reasons related to the protection of subjects or valid scientific or business reasons.  Stimgenics will notify Investigators and IRBs in writing in the event of study termination.   Stimgenics reserves the right to stop the enrollment of subjects at any clinical site at any time after the clinical site initiation. Possible reasons for suspending or terminating a clinical site may include, but are not limited to: • Non-compliance by [CONTACT_10670]  • Failure to obtain proper written informed consent • Repeated failure to complete or submit eCRFs in a timely manner • Failure to report SAEs to the Sponsor within 48 hours of knowledge of the event and to reviewing IRB in accordance with its policies • Repeated failure to comply with clearance of queries generated during monitoring of the study • Inactivity  B.7.  Study Endpoints  B.7.1.  Definition of Analysis Populations  • Intent to Treat (ITT): All randomized subjects. • Modified Intent to Treat (mITT): All randomized subjects who complete the Trial Phase. • Per-Protocol (PP):  All subjects who complete the Trial Phase and who complete the study without any major protocol deviations (that would render their data unevaluable).  The primary analysis of the primary and secondary endpoints will be performed on the ITT population. Supportive analyses will be performed for the mITT and Per-Protocol population.   B.7.2.  Effectiveness Assessment Definitions • Primary Effectiveness Assessment:  For subjects who have a successful Trial Phase and receive a permanent implant, the Primary Efficacy Assessment occurs at the follow up visit [ADDRESS_1099089] a successful Trial Phase, the Primary Efficacy Assessment occurs at the end of the Trial Phase.  • 6-month Secondary Effectiveness Assessment:  For subjects who have a successful Trial Phase and receive a permanent implant, the 6-month Secondary Efficacy 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099090] widely used outcome measure in assessing pain due to its documented reliability and validity, ease in administration, and minimal training requirements for the administrator. • Individual Responder:  A decrease in back pain VAS by [CONTACT_2669] 50% at [ADDRESS_1099091]-Permanent Device Activation as compared with Baseline.  Overall Study Success:  The percentage of Individual Responders in the test group is shown to be statistically non-inferior to the percentage in the control group.   B.7.4.  Secondary Endpoints The following secondary endpoints will be evaluated:  • Comparison of the percentage of Individual Responders between the test and control groups in a statistical test of superiority • Comparison of change from Baseline in back pain score (VAS) determined at the 3-month visit after device activation, between test and control in a statistical test of non-inferiority.  This is calculated as: Change from Baseline in Back Pain VAS = 3-Month Visit Pain VAS – Baseline Pain VAS. A negative result reflects a decrease in the Pain VAS, while a positive result reflects an increase in Pain VAS.  • Comparison of Back Pain Treatment Success (responder rate), measured as subjects with at least a 50% reduction in Back Pain VAS, evaluated at [ADDRESS_1099092] and control  • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in Back Pain VAS, evaluated at [ADDRESS_1099093] and control • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in disability as measured by [CONTACT_481393] (ODI), evaluated at [ADDRESS_1099094] and control • Frequency of treatment emergent adverse events  B.7.5.  Additional Data Collection  These following data will be collected: • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in Back Pain VAS, evaluated at 1-month after device activation, between test and control 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 21 of 41 • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in Leg Pain VAS, evaluated at 1, 3, and 6 months after device activation for subjects with baseline leg pain VAS score ≥ [ADDRESS_1099095] and control • Comparison of Leg Pain Treatment Success, measured as at least a 50% reduction in Leg Pain VAS, evaluated at 3 and 6 months after device activation for subjects with baseline leg pain VAS score ≥ [ADDRESS_1099096] and control • Subject Satisfaction, evaluated at 3 and 6 months after device activation • Comparison of patient satisfaction between two arms • Patient Global Impression of Change, evaluated at 3 and 6 months after device activation • Comparison of Patient Global Impression of Change between two arms • Comparison of ODI change from baseline at 6 months after device activation between the two arms • Comparison of quality of life (QoL) change (from PROMIS Scale - Global Health) from baseline at 3 and 6 months after device activation between the two arms • Quality of paresthesia at [ADDRESS_1099097] and control  • Activity level based on IntellisTM adaptive data log Details on additional data collection for the [ADDRESS_1099098] using the following tests: • Pain – Visual Analog Scale (VAS, 10 cm) at Baseline, End of Trial Phase, Months 1, 3, and 6  • Disability – Oswestry Disability Questionnaire • Quality of Life – PROMIS Scale v1.2- Global Health • Impression of Change in Quality of Life – Patient Global Impression of Change • Satisfaction with Therapy – Subject Satisfaction Questionnaire • Paresthesia generated by [CONTACT_796785]-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 22 of 41 – Paresthesia Questionnaire  Study personnel will be appropriately trained for administration of each test. Details on evaluation criteria for effectiveness for the [ADDRESS_1099099]’s self-reported pain intensity score based on the 10 cm Visual Analog Scale (VAS) is considered the outcome measure for the efficacy component of the primary endpoint. VAS is a widely used outcome measure in assessing pain. It is a reliable and valid method, which is easy to administer, and requires minimal training for the test administrator. VAS scores will be collected for both back and leg pain.   Study success will be declared if the non-inferiority test for the primary effectiveness endpoint is statistically significant.  There are no additional pre-specified subject or study-level success criteria for secondary and tertiary endpoints.   B.8.3.  Safety Safety will be assessed by [CONTACT_796786].  B.8.3.1 Definitions An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject associated with the use of the therapy under the study whether or not related to IntellisTM SCS system or the study procedures. An AE is also any event related to any underlying medical condition, present at baseline, which increases in severity or frequency by a clinically meaningful amount during the study as determined by [CONTACT_737].  For all adverse events, the Investigator will provide an assessment of the adverse event, its seriousness, treatment/intervention provided, relationship to the device/procedure, and resolution. As the efficacy measures in this study are back and leg pain, back and leg pain do not need to be reported as an adverse event unless it meets the definition of a serious adverse event. Investigators may, however, report any other pain-related adverse events during the study.   Pre-existing conditions will not be reported as an adverse event unless there has been a substantial increase in the severity or frequency of the problem, which has not been attributed to its natural history. A serious adverse event (SAE) is an adverse event that  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 23 of 41 • Leads to death • Leads to serious deterioration in the health of the subject, that either results in  o a life-threatening illness or injury (life-threatening is defined as at risk of death at the time of the event), or o a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function, or o in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] (in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_31561] a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_81539] a period of greater than 24 hours), or  o medical or surgical intervention to prevent life-threatening illness or injury or permanent impairment to a body structure or a body function, • Leads to fetal distress, fetal death, or a congenital abnormality or birth defect Those known adverse events related to the device, procedure or therapy are listed in the section C. (Risk Analysis) of this Investigational Plan.  B.8.3.2 Reporting All AEs and SAEs will be assessed and captured from enrollment through the completion of the study on the Adverse Event Case Report Form (AE-eCRF).  AEs and SAEs will be reported as required by [CONTACT_1201]. However, as would be the common practice when using commercial medical devices, device -related AEs may be reported by [CONTACT_779] (per their institutional policy) to the Customer Service or Technical Support of Medtronic as specified in the manufacturer's labeling/manuals. All Adverse Events (see list in section C.1.) reported during the study will document seriousness, treatment/intervention provided, relationship to the device/procedure, and resolution.   This is a post market, open-label study so Data Monitoring Committee will not be used.    B.9.  Data Collection and Analysis  B.9.1.  Data Collection Study data will be collected using a secure Electronic Data Capture system meeting the requirements of [ADDRESS_1099100] names will not be published. Data collection is summarized in Table 1. 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2                                                                       CONFIDENTIAL 24 Table 1. Schedule of Study Activities  Pre-Trial Phase Trial Phase    Activity Enrollment Baseline  Start Trial Phase End Trial Phase (up to10 days after start of trial) Permanent Implant (up to 60 days after end of trial) Device Activation (0-14 days after implant) 1-month visit (±10 days after activation) 3 months visit (±15 days after activation) 6 months visit (±30 days after activation) Optional 12 months visit (±30 days after activation) Informed Consent* X          Pain Intensity Evaluation (VAS) X   X   X X X X Medication Use X X X X X X X X X X Medical/Surgical History  X         Eligibility Criteria Evaluation X          Disability Assessment (ODI)  X      X X X Quality of Life Assessment (PROMIS)  X      X X X AP/Lateral x-ray imaging   X [X] X [X] [X] [X] [X] [X]  Paresthesia Questionnaire        X X X Patient Global Impression of Change        X X X Subject Satisfaction        X X X Adverse Event Monitoring  X X X X X X X X X Device Programming   X   X [X] [X] [X] [X]  Device Follow-up Log        [X] [X] [X] Study Completion    Xa     X  a For subjects that do not have a successful Trial Phase. [X] Optional activity. *For subjects consented prior to the IRB approval of the revised consent, they may be reconsented at any study visit.  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2                                                                       CONFIDENTIAL [ADDRESS_1099101] for non-inferiority at the one-sided 0.05 alpha level. H0: The percentage of subjects (P) who achieve a 50% improvement in their back VAS pain score at [ADDRESS_1099102]  ≤  PControl - 10% H1: The percentage of subjects (P) who achieve a 50% improvement in their back VAS pain score at [ADDRESS_1099103]  >  PControl - 10% A 10% margin has been previously used in a similar study.[ADDRESS_1099104] based on a 10% margin should produce clinically acceptable results.   B.9.2.2 Secondary Analyses The following secondary endpoints will be evaluated: • If the primary efficacy endpoint in the test group is found to be non-inferior to that in the control group, then a secondary endpoint will evaluate whether the proportion of subjects who achieve a 50% improvement in their back pain VAS score at [ADDRESS_1099105] based on the difference in proportions will be performed based on the following null hypothesis, with a one-sided p-value of 0.05 or less considered evidence of statistical significance. H0: The proportion of subjects (P) who achieve a 50% improvement in their back pain VAS score at [ADDRESS_1099106]   ≤  PControl  H1: The proportion of subjects (P) who achieve a 50% improvement in their back pain VAS score at [ADDRESS_1099107]  >  PControl    
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 26 of 41 • Change in mean VAS will be evaluated with two-sample t-test of non-inferiority in means with a 0.65 cm margin at 3 months. H0: The change (C) in subject’s VAS pain intensity score relative to baseline at the Primary Efficacy Assessment in the Test group is inferior to that of subjects in the Control group (active control). CTest  ≥  CControl - 0.65 cm H1: The change (C) in subject’s VAS pain intensity score relative to baseline at the Primary Efficacy Assessment in the Test group is not inferior to that of subjects in the Control group (active control). CTest  <  CControl - 0.[ADDRESS_1099108] traditional SCS.8 In that study, the experimental therapy showed a 4.9 point improvement while traditional SCS showed a 3.6 point improvement for a difference of 1.3 points. Taking 50% of this treatment effect yields the margin of 0.65.   The following secondary endpoints do not have an associated hypothesis, and no significance level will be assigned to statistical tests that may be performed. • Comparison of Back Pain Treatment Success (responder rate), measured as subjects with at least a 50% reduction in Back Pain VAS, evaluated at 6-months after device activation, between test and control: • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in Back Pain VAS, evaluated at 6-months after device activation, between test and control • Comparison of mean change from Baseline in disability as measured by [CONTACT_481393] (ODI), evaluated at 3- months after device activation between test and controlFrequency of treatment emergent adverse events  Data will be summarized in frequency distributions by [CONTACT_796787] (AE) type and by [CONTACT_796788].    B.9.2.3 Additional Data • Efficacy at 1-month: The primary efficacy endpoint will be reassessed at 1-month • Leg pain relief: Efficacy will be assessed for reduction of leg pain VAS score vs baseline evaluated at 1-, 3-, and 6-months after device activation for subjects with baseline leg pain VAS score ≥ [ADDRESS_1099109] and control • Responder rate for leg pain: The proportion of subjects that respond to treatment defined as having at least a 50% reduction in leg pain VAS relative 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 27 of 41 to baseline, evaluated at 3- and 6-months after device activation for subjects with baseline leg pain VAS score ≥ [ADDRESS_1099110] and control • Satisfaction with Therapy:  Subject Satisfaction will be compared between the treatment groups at 3- and 6-month visits after device activation. • Patient Global Impression Change:  The Patient Global Impression of Change from Baseline to follow-ups at 3- and 6-month visits after device activation will be compared between the treatment groups. • Oswestry Disability Index (ODI):  The changes in ODI from Baseline to 6-months will be summarized as continuous variables and compared between the treatment groups.  • Quality of Life:  The changes in the PROMIS instrument from Baseline to follow-ups at 3- and 6-months will be summarized as continuous variables and compared between the treatment groups. • Paresthesia Questionnaire: Questions about the paresthesia will be used at 3- and 6-month visits and compared between test and control  Details on additional data for the [ADDRESS_1099111] Stimulation (SCS) Risks: SGX-SCS programming approach will be used with commercially available, FDA approved IntellisTM SCS system within approved indications for use. Anticipated potential adverse events resulting from the study are expected to be in line with adverse events already documented for SCS using a Standard programming approach.  There are known risks associated with the use of any SCS system.  Known risks are associated with the implant procedure, the stimulation, the implanted device (not associated with 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 28 of 41 stimulation) and external devices such as the charger and remote control. These are typi[INVESTIGATOR_796760]. Subjects will be informed of these anticipated risks in the study consent process.  Risks of Surgery Implanting a neurostimulation system has risks similar to spi[INVESTIGATOR_397533], including spi[INVESTIGATOR_28062] (spi[INVESTIGATOR_397535]), headaches, swelling, bruising, bleeding, infection, or paralysis.  Subjects on anticoagulation therapy may be at higher risk for problems after surgery such as hematomas that could result in paralysis. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_796761] a spi[INVESTIGATOR_796762]. In addition to those normally associated with surgery, implantation or use of a neurostimulation system includes, but is not limited to, the following risks: • Allergic or immune system response to the implanted materials • Infection • Lead or neurostimulator erosion through the skin or migration • Leakage of cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_872] • Loss of pain relief may return patients to their underlying pain condition • Persistent pain at the neurostimulator site • Placement of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_397538] a surgical procedure that may expose patients to risks of epi[INVESTIGATOR_307865] (bleeding), hematoma, or paralysis • Radicular chest wall stimulation • Seroma (fluid collection in pocket where stimulator is placed) or hematoma at the neurostimulator site • Change in stimulation, possibly related to cellular changes around the electrode(s), shifts in electrode position, loose electrical connections, lead fractures, which has been described by [CONTACT_397580] (jolting or shocking sensation) • Over time there could be changes in the level of symptom control. In most cases, the physician can correct these changes without surgery. • Formation of excessive tissue around the lead in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_796763], requiring surgical intervention. Time to onset can range from weeks to many years after implant. • The safety of this therapy is unknown for pregnancy, unborn fetus, or delivery • Stimulation-dependent gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, incontinence or constipation • Stimulation-dependent bladder symptoms such as urinary retention, incontinence or frequency • Unexpected changes in stimulation - Electromagnetic interference, changes in posture, and other activities can cause a perceived increase in stimulation 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 29 of 41  System Revision Risk The Intellis AdaptiveStim Neurostimulator may require replacement in 9 years or earlier, regardless of the number of times the neurostimulator is recharged.  It is possible that the system will need to be revised (explanted, replaced, or repositioned) earlier than 9 years.  Possible reasons for revision/explant may include infection, malfunction, and migration of the system components.  The risks associated with system revision are equivalent to the commercially available systems.    Pregnancy Risks Pregnant women are not able to take part in this study.  Female subjects must agree to not become pregnant during the study by [CONTACT_2329] a medically acceptable method of birth control. If a subject becomes pregnant during this study, there may be risks to the unborn child that are not yet known.  Subjects will be advised and encouraged to notify the study doctor immediately if they think they are or have become pregnant.  Subjects that become pregnant during the study will be instructed to turn the neurostimulator “OFF” and will be exited from the study. Radiographic Imaging As part of the study, subjects may  be required to have fluoroscopic or X-ray images taken of their thoracic spi[INVESTIGATOR_708648].  This may be beyond what is standard of care.  The risk associated with these additional images has been considered and determined to be minimal since the total radiation dose will be approximately the same as one CT scan of the abdomen.     Study Risk Control Measures  The following will be done to mitigate risks associated with the implanted system: • Investigators who are experienced with spi[INVESTIGATOR_796764] • Instructions will be given to the study participants to ensure they can properly use the patient programmer and recharger system • Subjects can turn off stimulation at any time during the study with the patient programmer or recharger • Periodic monitoring of the study participants • Written materials that contain precautions, warnings, and contraindications, as well as instructions on the use of the devices will be available and/or provided to the clinicians and subjects  Since the efficacy measure in this study is intensity of pain in the back and legs, pain in these areas does not need to be reported as an adverse event unless it meets the definition of a serious adverse event. However, Investigators may, at their discretion, report any other pain-related adverse events during the study.    C2.  Minimization of Risks 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099112] training to become familiar with the components of the IntellisTM SCS systems and their functions. They will also receive training on assessment tools and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) in the conduct of clinical trials with human participants.  D.  Description of the Device D.1.  Each Important Component, Ingredient, and Property of the Device  D.1.1.  Device System Overview The Intellis™ system is a totally implantable spi[INVESTIGATOR_796765]/or limbs. The system has been approved by [CONTACT_397581]. The Intellis system system consists of a rechargeable implantable neurostimulator (INS) with [ADDRESS_1099113] percutaneous leads located in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_13814].  The INS can be controlled by a Patient Programmer and/or a Clinician Programmer.   Before permanent implantation, a trial phase of therapy lasting up to 10 days is required. Components of the system during trial include an External Neurostimulator (ENS) capable of delivering the same stimulation as the INS, and Stimulation Leads. Other components of the system include Clinician Programmer, Communicator, Patient Programmer, Extensions, Charger and charging system, and surgical accessories.  D.1.2.  Device System Details     Only FDA approved, commercially available components will be used for the study.  D.1.2.1  Major Components Implantable Neurostimulator: Intellis neurostimulator (Model [ZIP_CODE], Medtronic, Minneapolis MN) will be used for the study. The INS is a multi-programmable, rechargeable device that delivers stimulation through one or two 8-electrode leads. The stimulation settings are stored in programs. A program is a specific combination of pulse width, rate, and amplitude settings acting on a specific electrode combination (up to 16 electrodes per program).  Each of the [ADDRESS_1099114] through the electrodes in the leads that are connected to the output terminals of the INS. The electrical pulses used for stimulation are generated using a single current source.  The INS is designed to produce charge-balanced, biphasic rectangular pulses.  The battery is recharged using an external charger that uses transcutaneous RF energy transmission. The INS is capable of communicating with the Charger to control the recharging function.   The INS communicates with the Clinician Programmer and Patient Programmer (also called Patient Remote Controller). Clinician Programmer is used to program the INS and the ENS. The Patient Programmer is used by [CONTACT_796789], change therapy programs, and turn stimulation on and off. External Neurostimulator (ENS) for Trial Phase: The Medtronic Model [ZIP_CODE] Wireless External Neurostimulator (ENS) is part of a neurostimulation system used for trial stimulation outside of the operating room. The ENS is powered by [CONTACT_796790]. The ENS is connected to leads implanted in the subject. The subject uses the ENS during the Trial Phase to evaluate the effectiveness of SCS therapy prior to receiving a permanent implant. The ENS also communicates with the Clinician Programmer system and Patient Remote Controller, similar to the INS.  Clinician Programmer System:  The Medtronic Model A710 Intellis™ clinician programmer application resides on a tablet and is intended to be used by [CONTACT_796791] (Model [ZIP_CODE]) and IntellisTM INS (Model [ZIP_CODE] and [ZIP_CODE]) for pain therapy. The Clinician Programmer requires the use of the Communicator (Model 8880T2) to communicate with the INS.  Patient Programmer: The Patient Programmer (Model [ZIP_CODE]), also called Patient Remote Controller, is a handheld unit able to communicate with the INS or ENS.  The Patient Programmer is powered by [CONTACT_708685]. The Patient Programmer is used by [CONTACT_397586], to turn on or off the INS or ENS, and to change some of therapy parameters such as stimulation amplitude.   Charging System:  The Charging system (Model [ZIP_CODE]) is used by [CONTACT_796792].  It is a portable device powered by a rechargeable battery and can be held in one hand. The charging system used in this study is a commercially available charging system manufactured by [CONTACT_13735] (Minneapolis, MN) and fully compatible with the study INS. Stimulation Leads and Lead Extensions:  The study will use commercially available percutaneous eight-electrode leads manufactured by [CONTACT_13735] (Minneapolis, MN) and compatible with the INS and ENS to be used in this study. The leads are positioned percutaneously in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_796766]. The percutaneous leads are intended to be single use. Temporary or permanent percutaneous leads may be used during the Trial Phase of the study. The proximal end of these leads connect directly to the ENS. Permanent leads will be used during the Permanent Phase of the study. These 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099115] to the INS. Commercially available lead extensions (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) compatible with the percutaneous leads and INS may be used in this study.   D.1.2.2.  Surgical Accessories  The surgical accessories that will be used in the study will be commercially available devices. Torque Wrench:  A commercially available Torque Wrench is used to tighten the screws that lock a percutaneous lead into the INS and/or a lead extension. It also tighten the screws that lock the lead extension into the INS when this is used. Lead anchors:  Lead anchors may be used to possibly prevent lead migration and/or lead strain. These are used to anchor the percutaneous leads to the supraspi[INVESTIGATOR_796767].  Lead anchors used in this study are commercially available (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) and designed to slide freely over the lead length to the required fixation position. Surgical sutures are then tied around the anchor clampi[INVESTIGATOR_796768].   Insertion Needle:  Percutaneous leads are implanted in the dorsal epi[INVESTIGATOR_796769].  An insertion needle contains a cannula and stylet that facilitate access to the spi[INVESTIGATOR_397550].  The insertion needle is a 14G epi[INVESTIGATOR_397551] a thin wall and a modified Touhy non-coring tip.  The cannula and stylet are designed to lock together and maintain the orientation of the tip of each component. The hub of the insertion needle has a standard luer fitting. Stylets:  Stylets are used to push and “steer” a percutaneous lead into the desired place within the epi[INVESTIGATOR_13814].  The distal end of the stylet could be straight or curved.  The implanter is able to use either one in order to comfortably maneuver a percutaneous lead through the epi[INVESTIGATOR_397552]. Tunneling Tool:  A Tunneling Tool is used to create a subcutaneous tunnel that directs the percutaneous leads or lead extensions from the midline incision to the leads from the INS implant site.  This is a single use tool.  INS Template:  The INS Template is an aid to be used for the implanter intended for proper sizing of the INS pocket within each subject. INS Port Plug:  An INS Port Plug is used to seal the port of the INS that is not in use when only one percutaneous lead is implanted. Lead Blank:  A Lead Blank is an optional aid made out of flexible stainless steel that has an outer diameter similar in size to the percutaneous lead. A lead blank can be optionally used to clear a path for the introduction of a percutaneous lead into the epi[INVESTIGATOR_13814].   D.2.  Principle of Operation of the Device 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099116] stimulation therapy for pain management has been used for more than four decades. Its efficacy and safety has been widely documented.   D.3.  Labeling Instructions for Use:  The study devices will be used in accordance with IntellisTM Manual.  D.4.  Any Anticipated Changes in the Device There are no anticipated changes at this time.  E.  Administrative Procedures E.1.  Monitoring   Clinical site monitoring is conducted to ensure that the rights and well-being of trial participants are protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), and with applicable regulatory requirement(s).   E.1.1.  Study Clinical Monitor Stimgenics will assign a Clinical Monitor(s) in order to fulfill the required Sponsor and monitoring responsibilities according to the Study Monitoring Plan.  The Study Monitoring Plan describes in detail who will conduct the monitoring, at what frequency monitoring will be done, at what level of detail monitoring will be performed, the distribution of monitoring reports, and key monitoring activities and specifies the data to be reviewed over the course of the clinical study. The monitoring plan will facilitate compliance with Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and other relevant guidelines. The clinical study monitors will conduct monitoring visits in accordance with this plan.   E.1.2. Monitoring Procedures Monitoring visits to the clinical investigational sites will be made on-site periodically and according to the monitoring Plan.  These visits will ensure that Investigators and their staff understand and accept their defined responsibilities, assess compliance with current GCP guidelines, evaluate clinical trial progress, assess the continued acceptability of the site facilities, evaluate compliance with this investigational plan, and verify the data entered on the eCRFs.  
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.[ADDRESS_1099117] completed questionnaires, laboratory results, supporting medical records, and any applicable electronic files.  These source documents will be used by [CONTACT_796793]. Clinical monitoring activities will include review and resolution of missing or inconsistent results to assure the accuracy of the reported data.  Where any discrepancies are noted, the Clinical Monitor will generate queries. Discrepancies will be resolved with the Investigator and/or an individual designated by [CONTACT_737].  If data is incomplete, the Investigator will attempt to obtain the missing data.  The original source documents will remain stored in a secure location at the clinical sites as designated by [CONTACT_737].   The safety and welfare of study subjects will be ensured by [CONTACT_796794], including proper documentation (Informed Consent Form) by [CONTACT_708687], and by [CONTACT_796795]. The Clinical Monitor will summarize the evaluation and assessment of each monitoring visit in written reports. These reports will identify any issues with repeated data recording or reporting and will specify clear recommendations for resolution of noted deficiencies. The conduct and monitoring of the clinical investigation will be conducted in accordance with Stimgenics’ internal procedures.    E.2.  Data Quality Assurance Data collection is the responsibility of the clinical trial staff at the site under the supervision of the site investigator. The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported. The subject data will be entered into an electronic data capture system (EDC) system following the study visits. Hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_226538].  All source documents should be completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation of data. Data recorded in the electronic case report form (eCRF) should be consistent with the data recorded on the source documents. Data will be reviewed to identify inconsistent or missing data as well as potential adverse events.  Data discrepancies will be addressed by [CONTACT_397594]/or during clinical site monitoring visits. Stimgenics and representatives of regulatory authorities are permitted to access study documents (e.g. investigational plan, eCRFs, medical records/files) as needed. All attempts will be made to preserve the privacy and confidentiality of subjects.  E.3. Study Conduct The Investigator agrees that the study will be conducted according to this investigation plan, the principles of GCPs as outlined in the [LOCATION_002] Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) - [ADDRESS_1099118] of the trial including those study related duties delegated to other appropriately qualified individuals and designated in the delegation of authority documentation.  The Investigator will assure that study staff cooperates with monitoring and audits, and will demonstrate due diligence in recruiting, screening, and retaining study subjects. The Investigator will also be responsible for filing an annual study progress report to the IRB as per IRB guidelines. The Investigator and/or Sponsor, as required by [CONTACT_427], are required to report in writing to the IRB, notice of completion, termination, or discontinuation of the study. If the study is discontinued for safety concerns, the Investigator and/or Sponsor will notify the IRB immediately.  The Investigator is also responsible for recording and assessing the severity of Adverse Events. Investigators must report any severe adverse event (SAE) to the sponsor within [ADDRESS_1099119] be obtained from all subjects prior to study participation.  Informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_397596]-designated healthcare professional as per GCP guidelines.  An informed consent form (ICF) will be provided to potential subjects for their private evaluation. If a subject consents to participate, the ICF must be signed by [CONTACT_28246] a legally authorized representative of the subject.  Study ICF must be approved by [CONTACT_1201]. Signed ICFs will be retained in the subject's study records at the clinical site. The ICF will be in compliance with the requirements set forth in [ADDRESS_1099120] of an Investigator.  A formal change to this study under this investigational plan cannot be initiated 
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 36 of 41 by [CONTACT_796796]’ approval, IRB approval, and the Investigator’s approval. Exception for Emergency Deviation:  An exception to the policy noted above is an emergency deviation to the investigational plan which may be initiated by [CONTACT_796797] a change is necessary to eliminate any immediate apparent hazard to subjects.  Emergency deviations must be reported to the Sponsor and the IRB no later than 24 hours following the emergency. Deviations from the investigational plan and study requirements (including GCP guidelines) will be reviewed by [CONTACT_796798]. Appropriate corrective actions will be implemented as necessary.  E.7. Additional Record and Reports This study will be registered on clinicaltrials.gov.  Sponsor/Investigator Records and Reports will be maintained and provided in accordance to 21 CFR 812.140 and 812.150.  No additional records or reports will be maintained.    
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 37 of 41 F.  Appendices  A. Informed Consent Form B. Case Report Forms    
 Stimgenics SGEN-2018PM2 Rev 2.0  CONFIDENTIAL Page 38 of 41 G.  References  1 The Global Pain Therapeutics Market Analysis, R&D Pi[INVESTIGATOR_397554], Arrowhead Publishers, 2007, pp. 408. 2 Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Advancing Pain Research C, and Education. Relieving Pain in America: A Blueprint for Transforming Prevention, Care, Education, and Research. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US), 2011, pp. 2. 3 https://www.hhs.gov/opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]/about-the-epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]/index.html [ADDRESS_1099121] stimulation and neuropathic pain: mechanism of action, technical aspects, and effectiveness. Pain Practice 2013; 13:154-168.   [ADDRESS_1099122] and peripheral nervous system for the treatment of chronic pain and ischemic diseases: the neuromodulation appropriateness consensus committee. Neuromodulation 2014; 17:515-550. 6 Deer TR, Mekhail N, Provenzano D, et al. The appropriate use of neurostimulation: avoidance and treatment of complications of neurostimulation therapi[INVESTIGATOR_668685]. Neuromodulation. 2014; 17:571-597. [ADDRESS_1099123] stimulation for chronic back and leg pain and failed back surgery syndrome: a systematic review and analysis of prognostic factors. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Phila Pa 1976) 2005; 30:152-160. [ADDRESS_1099124] MW, et al. Novel 10-kHz high-frequency therapy (HF10 Therapy) is superior to traditional low-frequency spi[INVESTIGATOR_796770]: The SENZA-RCT randomized controlled trial. Anesthesiology 2015; 123:851-860.  