 
 Title: Evaluating High Flow Humidification Therapy in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis  
 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document  date: May 25, 2016  
 
Document Type: Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
  
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 1 of 10 Evaluating High Flow Humidification Therapy  
in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis  
Protocol Number:    HM20002205 
    [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Sponsor:   Virginia Commonwealth University  
 
Funding Support:  Fisher & Paykel Healthcare  
 
Investigators:  Bruce K. Rubin, MEngr, MD,MBA, FRCPC (Principal Investigator)  
  H. Joel Schmidt, MD (Co- Principal Investigator)  
  Michael S. Schechter, MD, MPH (Sub-Investigator) 
    Nauman A. Chaudary, MD (Sub-Investigator) 
  Ronald W. Williams, Jr., MD (Sub-Investigator) 
 
Sites:      Children’ s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52683]/VCU Medical Center  
    Main Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 7th Floor – Pediatric Services  
   [ADDRESS_481290] 
    Richmond, Virginia [ZIP_CODE], [LOCATION_002]  
Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_384787]’s Pavilion     [ADDRESS_481291] epi[INVESTIGATOR_2130].1 Although mucus plays 
a defensive role, secretion  retention is a common but serious problem in patients with chronic lung disease such 
as cystic fibrosis (CF).[ADDRESS_481292] and this is thought to contribute to poor mucus clearance, increasing pulmonary symptoms (pulmonary exacerbation), poor sleep quality and a reduction in  quality of life  (QoL).
[ADDRESS_481293] 
recently shown that  high- flow,  heated and humidified air delivered by a nasal cannula (HHNC) improves 
mucociliary  clearance and clinical outcomes in young children requiring chronic mechanical ventilation.5 To date, 
nocturnal HHNC (without supplemental  oxygen) therapy has not been studied in individuals diagnosed with CF 
but previous laboratory research suggests that this could be safe and beneficial .6  
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 2 of 10  
HYPOTHESIS  
It is hypothesized that HHNC delivered at  20 liters  per minute (LPM)  via Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™[ADDRESS_481294]’s  ability to clear 
secretions , resulting in beneficial clinical effects and improved quality of life.  
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
Primary Objectives  
• To evaluate the effectiveness of 20 LPM HHNC  therapy (Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™2 device)  – 
experimental therapy versus 5 LPM  HHNC  therapy ( Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™2 device) – control 
therapy  on physiological outcomes in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_384788] .   
 
Secondary Objectives  
 
• To determine if the experimental therapy has an effect  on Quality of Life as measured by  [CONTACT_384797] - Revised (CFQ -R) comp ared to control therapy 
• To determine the effect of the experimental therapy on sleep duration using actigraphy (Actiwatch® 2) 
and subjective sleep quality  measured by [CONTACT_384798] (LSEQ) compared to 
control therapy 
• To determine the effect of the experimental therapy on Quality of Life  in respect  to nasal dysfunction as 
measured by [CONTACT_384799]- Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20) compared to control therapy 
• To determine the effect of the experimental therapy on comfort and ease of use using the non- validated 
comfort survey (VAS score) compared to control therapy  
Primary Endpoints  
• Change in sputum volume, cough transportability and hydration (% solids) 
• Change in FEV 1 % predicted from admission to end of study.  
STUDY DESIGN 
The study is a single -center, randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_384789] 20 LPM HHNC  
(Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™2 device)  experimental therapy, versus 5 LPM  HHNC (Optiflow™ cannula 
and AIRVO™2 device) control therapy, on specified  outcome s in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_384790].   
Potential subjects  will be identified in clinic before admission to the Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52683] 
(CHoR)  or Virginia Commonwealth University Medical. If potential subj ects are not identified in clinic, they will 
be introduced to and informed of the study by a member of the study team within [ADDRESS_481295]’s parent or legal guardian . Informed consent will be obtained from subjects aged 18 years or older. 
All informed consent/assent discussions will take place in a private room and be documented according to the 
Pediatric Research Office’s ‘Informed Consent Process Cover Sheet’. Potential subjects and family members will 
be given as much time as necessary  to determine if they would like to participate in the study. No study team 
member will be present during this period to minimize any possible coercion.  
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. [ADDRESS_481296] will be assigned a unique ‘Subject Identification Number.’  This 
number will consist of ‘VCUFP##’, where the first subject  will be ‘VCUFP01’, the second ‘VCUFP02’, and so 
forth.  This unique identifier  will be used instead of the subject ’s name, birth date, etc., to identify the subject for 
all study records and data.   
After Subject Identification Number assignment is performed, randomization will occur. The study team will use 
the website www.randomization.com  to randomize 30 study conditions (15 experimental and 15 control). The 
Study Coordinator will follow the randomization table chronologically as new subje cts are consented.  
This study is designed to accommodate 30 subjects (15 subjects per group) (Table 1) . The  study population will 
be determined from previously diagnosed CF patients  who receive their CF care at CHoR and Virginia 
Commonwealth University. Subjects will be  aged 10 years and older who are experiencing a CF exacerbation 
that requires  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_384791]. 
 
Table 1  
STUDY DESIGN  
 
Study  Group  Assigned Intervention  Total Number of Subjects  
 Control Therapy 
 Low-Flow, 5 LPM  
(via Optiflow™ cannula) 
Heated  (34°C), humidified  air 15 
Experimental Therapy  High -Flow, 20 LPM  
(via Optiflow™ cannula) 
Heated  (34°C), humidified air [ADDRESS_481297] will forfeit any compensation for study participation.  
Study subjects may be involuntarily removed from the study if the study doctor believes that they are not complying with the study protocol and/or the study doctor believes it is in the best interest of the subject to stop participation.   
Study devices/equipment  
The experimental therapy will be administered using Optiflow™ nasal cannula with the AIRVO™2 humidifier.  
The AIRVO™2 device will heat and humidify ambient air and the Optiflow™ nasal cannula  will deliver the 
heated  (approximately 34°C) and humidified air via the nares  at a flow  of 20 LPM . 
Fisher & Paykel Healthcare manufactures  the Optiflow™ nasal cannula and the AIRVO™2 device. The 
Optiflow™ nasal cannula  and AIRVO™2  device are being provided by [CONTACT_3493] & Paykel Healthcare for the study 
with no cost to the study subject. In addition, the subject will not be subjected to any further costs associated with 
the study. The study devices  will only be able available for use by [CONTACT_384800]. The 
subject will be required  to return the study device  at the conclusion of the subject’s study involvement, or when 
the subject is discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (whichever occurs first).  
The control therapy will be administered using Optiflow™ nasal cannula with the AIRVO™2 device.  The nasal 
cannula will deliver heated  (approximately 34°C) and humidified air into the subject’s nares  at a flow of [ADDRESS_481298]’s n ares 
and the time when the device is turned on will be recorded regardless of the intervention group to which the 
subject is assigned .  The nursing staff will be instructed to check that the individual is wea ring the device (either 
experimental or control) appropriately throughout the entire night. Should the nursing staff notice the nasal 
cannula being worn incorrectly the nurse will attempt to correctly reposition without disturbing the subject or if 
this is  not successful the subject will be awakened  to ensure correct  cannula placement . Following the overnight 
intervention, the nasal cannula will be removed from the device and washed with warm water and mild dish 
washing detergent. After rinsing  with clean w ater the nasal cannula will be stored in a clean zip locked bag taped 
to the device during periods of non-use.  
At study conclusion for each subject (Table 2. Study Procedures), the device will be cleaned and sanitized per 
manufacturer’s guidelines. Whil e not in use, the devices will remain clean/sanitized and stored appropriately 
within in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_11964] . 
Eligibility Criteria    
Individuals must meet all of the inclusion criteria listed below in order to be considered as a potential study 
subject.  
Inclusion Criteria: 
• Confirmed diagnosis of CF • Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] a dmission for acute pulmonary exacerbation of CF 
• 10 years of age or older • Is able to comply with the procedures scheduled within the protocol 
• Provide informed consent /assent  
If an individual is eligible as defined by [CONTACT_384801], they will not be permitted to enroll in the study.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Receipt of any aerosolized experimental or investigational drugs with in 1 month of enrollment 
• History of ENT surgery, nasal bleeding or nasal polyps within 6 months of starting  study 
• R equires supplemental oxygen  
• History of obstructive sleep apnea • History of pressure headaches requiring therapy within 1 month of enrollment • Other medical or psychological conditions in which the study doctor(s) believe(s) would inhibit the    individual from being an appropriate study subject. • Has any contraindications to HHNC as listed below: 
Maxillofacial trauma  
  Complete nasal o bstruction 
  Presence of s uspected base of skull fracture 
• Any contraindication that applies to CPAP/ NIV therapy  
 
 
 
 
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 5 of 10 STUDY PROCEDURES  
The study requires clinical observations and overnight intervention therapy for /up to the first 5 nights of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. The study procedures to be performed on/by [CONTACT_384802] 2.  
 
 
Table 2  
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Time point  Procedure/Assessment  
SCREENING  
(Day 0) 
(In CF Clinic or 
within 24 hours of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063])  • Admission into the Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_384792]  (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]). 
• Introduction to study and review the study procedures/study device with the study 
coordinator and/or study doctor 
• Verification of inclusion/exclusion criteri a and signing of Informed Consent 
Document. 
• Assignment of the unique Subject Identification Number 
• Review of medical history and treatment records  
• Baseline tests (as part of standard of care as medically indicated)  
• Completion of the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire (LSEQ)  by [CONTACT_1130]. 
• Complet ion of the CF -specific health related quality of life survey (Cystic Fibrosis 
Questionnaire – Revised (CFQ -R) by [CONTACT_1130]. 
• Completion of the Sino- Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20) by [CONTACT_1130].  
• Sputum sample collection (if possible) 
• Randomization to intervention - e ither: ‘ Control Therapy’ (Low Flow,  heated and 
humidified air  delivered at 5 LPM via Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™2 device )) or 
‘Experimental Therapy’ (High -Flow, heated and humidified air  delivered at 20 LPM via 
Optiflow™ cannula and AIRVO™2  device )  
 
BASELINE  
Day 1  (Approximately 9:00 AM) • The device will be turned off (unless the subject has awakened  earlier, in which case 
the subject can turn off the device when they wak e). 
• Sputum sam ple will be collected  (where possible) or collection of previously 
produced sputum to research laboratory by [CONTACT_384803] 10:00 AM. 
• Study coordinator will ensure that the nasal cannula is removed from the device and 
washed with warm water and mild dish washing detergent  and rinsed thoroughly  
with clean water . The study coordinator will then place  the nasal cannula in a clean 
zip locked bag taped to the device until required.  
• Completion of the Leeds Sleep Evaluat ion Questionnaire (LSEQ)  
• Completion of the device comfort survey (VAS Score). 
• The study coordinator will collect the device log, and review the previous night’s medical records (including any test results or medication dispensed). 
 
TREATMENT 
PHASE  
Day 2 – 5 (PM)  • There will be no collection of produced sputum during this time.   
• There will be no surveys completed during this time.  
• The study coordinator and/or the study doctor will continue to review the subject’s 
treatment and medication records.   
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 6 of 10  
Table 2  
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Time point  Procedure/Assessment  
• Subject s will be allowed to go to sleep at whatever  time they choose  but must turn 
on the device before sleep  onset and leave it on throughout the sleep period. 
• The nursing staff will be instructed to ensure the subject continues to wear the device 
during the night. If for some reason the device comes off, or is turned off, the nurse will record the event and will attempt to correctly reposition without disturbing the 
subject or if this is not successful the subject will be awakened to ensure correct cannula placem ent. 
If the subject is discharged between Day 2 – Day 5, then the date of 
discharge will follow the ‘Discharge’ study procedure in place of the ‘Treatment Phase’ study 
procedure  
 
DISCHARGE  
Day 6 (AM)* 
(*or earlier if 
discharged prior to 5 
days of treatment)  • The device will be turned off (unless the subject has wakened  earlier), in which case 
the subject can turn off the device when they wak e. 
• Sputum sample will be collected  (where possible) or collection of previously 
produced sputum to research laboratory by [CONTACT_384803] 10:00 AM. 
• Subject will remove Actiwatch® 2 and Study Coordinator will download 
Actiwatch® 2 data  
• Completion of the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire (LSEQ) by [CONTACT_1130] 
• Complet ion of the CF-specific health related quality of life survey (Cystic Fibrosis 
Questionnaire – Revised (CFQ -R) by [CONTACT_1130] 
• Completion of the Sino- Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20) by [CONTACT_1130]  
• Completion of the device comfort s urvey (VAS Score) by [CONTACT_1130] . 
• The study coordinator will collect the device log, and review the previous night’s 
medical records (including any test results or medication dispensed). 
• A follow- up appointment in the CF clinic will be scheduled according to the study 
doctor’s recommendations (as part of standard care) .   
• The subject will be reminded to call the study coordinator or the study doctor if there 
are any new problems, questions or concerns once discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].    
 
Clinical Follow -
up Appointment  • The study coordinator and/or the study doctor will review  the medical history and 
treatment records.  
• Baseline tests (as part of standard of care as medically indicated)  
• Completion of the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire (LSEQ) by [CONTACT_1130] 
• Complet ion of  the CF-specific health related quality of life survey (Cystic  Fibrosis 
Questionnaire – Revised (CFQ -R) by [CONTACT_1130] 
• Completion of the Sino- Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20) by [CONTACT_1130]  
• Sputum sample collection (if possible).  The sputum will be delivered to the research 
laboratory by [CONTACT_941] S tudy Coordinator 
• Study c ompensation 
 
 
 
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. [ADDRESS_481299] of high-flow HHNC  therapy to improve sinopulmonary symptoms in CF. 
Thus, the current study is designed as a pi[INVESTIGATOR_384793].  
Electronic Database Capture  
Study data will be collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture). REDCap is a secure 
web application designed to support data capture for research studies, providing user -friendly web -based case 
report forms, real -time data entry validation (e.g. for data types and range checks), audit trails and a de -identified 
data export mechanism to common statistical packages (JMP, SAS). REDCap also includes a powerful tool for building and managing online surveys. The database is hosted by [CONTACT_384804]1RR031990 from the National Center for Research Resources and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research, National Institutes of Health.  
Only the study coordinators and the research assistant s will have access to this password protected database.   
With the exception of  the ‘Informed Consent /Assent ’ page s in the REDCap database, all subsequent pages will 
only identify the subject by [CONTACT_384805].   
All hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_384794] /Assent  documents will be kept in locked cabinet which is located 
in the study coordinator’s locked office.  A copy of the signed Informed Consent/Assent will be scanned into the 
subject’s electronic medical record.  Any  other paper records that may be  generated during the course of the study 
will be de -identified and labeled with the individuals Subject Identification Number and kept separated from the 
consent forms and  locked in a cabinet in the study coordinator’s locked office.   
OnCore 
OnCore is a clinical trial management systems (CTMS)  which  will be used for recording and tracking regulatory 
approvals, staff training  and safety management (SAE tracking and IRB reporting). The CTMS system was 
developed by [CONTACT_384806]. The program is 
a secure web -based system hosted by [CONTACT_384807].  Only fully -trained, credentialed 
employees of VCU have access to this database.  The study coordinator will be the only individual (besides individuals that manage OnCore) with  access to data entered for this study into the OnCore database.  
SPUTUM SAMPLE COLLECTION AND PROCESSING  
Sputum collection is needed  for evaluation of biophysical propert ies. 
The study coordinator will ask the study subject to cough sputum into a provided, sterile sample cup at 9:[ADDRESS_481300] is able to produce sputum 
before  this time, they will be provided the s terile sample cup and the sputum collected. All sputum samples will 
be transported on ice to the research laboratory as soon as possible on the day of screening and at follow-up. At 
baseline, intervention, and discharge, sputum will be delivered to the research laboratory on ice by 10:[ADDRESS_481301] Identification Number and the applicable time -point only.   
 
 
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 8 of 10 SPUTUM SAMPLE ANALYSIS  
All collected sputum samples will be used for cough transport and mucus hydration measurements . 
In vitro  cough transportability 
A simulated cough machine is used to measure the airflow -dependent clearability of sputum. A model Plexiglas 
"trachea", rectangular in cross section (1.2 x 2 cm) is connected to an 8 L tank containing air pressurized to 8 psi 
giving a flow of about 11 L/s. A solenoid controls air release through a flow constrictive element used to mimic the airflow pattern of a natural cough. A sinusoidal constriction (length 7.7 cm and height 8 mm) is used to decrease the airway diameter while minimizing the turbulence (Reynolds number) of the system. A sample, 40 µl in volume and 0.5 mm in depth, is placed in a thin line across the base of the Plexiglas trachea. The bulk transport of the sample is measured in mm after a single cough maneuver. Three successive measurements are made and the results averaged (3).  
Mucus hydration (% solids), and mucus density  
A mucus sample is weighed in a microbalance and dried for 4 hours in a lyophilizer. The dried sample is then 
reweighed in order to calculate the percent solids composition. The density of the mucus is also calculated by [CONTACT_384808]. As the density of mucus should be 1.00 ± 0.15, this mea surement 
is used as a check on the validity of the hydration measurement. 
SLEEP DURATION ANALYSIS  
Actigraphy provides a precise measurement of the motion of the part of the body to which a device is attached. Sleep/wake patterns will be recorded using the Actiwatch
® 2. The data collected by [CONTACT_384809] ® [ADDRESS_481302] ’s sleep/wake patterns during the study period without influence. The 
unique Subject Identification Number assigned at Day [ADDRESS_481303]- worn devices. The data collected will be downloaded into a software program “Actiw are”.  
This software will be located on the Coordinator’s password protected computer.  T he data will then be scored 
and analyzed into predetermined intervals that will identify the epoch as either periods of wake or sleep . Statistics 
including Time in Bed  (TIB), Total Sleep Time (TST), Wake After Sleep Onset (WASO), Sleep Efficiency (SE) , 
Number of Wake Bouts (NWB) and Sleep Onset Latency (SOL) can be tracked over the study period.  
Data Analysis 
Statistical analysis of data will be performed using the JMP Pro 10 statistics package (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). 
Normality of data distribution will be visually checked and normally distributed data will be compared using two-tailed t-test and ANOVA. A p<  0.05 will be considered statistically significant. All results will be presented 
as means + the standard error of the mean.  
QUALITATIVE EVALUATION 
 One sleep and three separate quality of life evaluations will be administered at various time -points according to 
Table [ADDRESS_481304] 
Identification Number, which is kept in a locked cabinet, in the study coordinator’s locked office.   
 
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. 1                Page 9 of 10 Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire  (LSEQ)  
The Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire (LSEQ) is a  10-i tem, subjective , self -report , 5-10 minute paper and 
pencil measure designed to assess changes in sleep quality over the  course of a psychopharmacological  treatment 
intervention. The scale evalu ates four domains:  ease of initiating sleep, quality of sleep, ea se of waking and 
behavior following wakefulness  using paper and pencil. Developers initially validated the LSEQ in individuals 
aged 18- 49 years. In the evaluation "initiating sleep" and the "quality  of sleep" factors were correlated with one 
another while "awakening from sleep" and "behavior following wakefulness" factors were also correlated.  Of the 
validated scales available to use for this study the LSEQ appears to be the most appropriate given the study being 
conducted.  
Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire -Revised (CFQ -R) 
The Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire -Revised (CFQ -R) is health -related quality of life (HRQ oL) measure for 
children, adolescents and adults with CF. Initially it was developed through interviews with CF patients and healthcare providers and var ious focus groups and has since undergone comprehensive reliability and validity 
testing. This revised questionnaire is one of the most widely used HRQ oL tests for CF. The CFQ -R measures 
how well an individual functions in a variety of domains, including P hysical Functioning, Vitality, Health 
Perceptions, Respi[INVESTIGATOR_208466], Treatment Burden, Role Functioning, Emotional Functioning, and Social Functioning. This questionnaire is written for the intended age group in regards to language and length of questionnaire.    
The Sino -Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20)  
The Sino- Nasal Outcome Test 20 (SNOT -20) is a validated, health- related quality of life (HRQ oL) questionnaire 
designed to determine the impact of nasal dysfunction on an individual’s social/emotional healt h. This test 
consists of 20 questions and asks patients to assess nasal symptoms, emotion, and activity on a scale of worsening 
symptoms scored 1 through 7 to provide a quantifiable score capable of disease severity.
1,2  
Non-validated device comfort survey  (VAS score)  
The non- validated device comfort survey used for this study will be conducted using a VAS score. The VAS 
(visual analog scale) will be used to measured characteristics, such as pain, that cannot be directly measured. The subject will be asked to point to a face depi[INVESTIGATOR_384795] a VAS that corresponds to the associated 
pain level when on HHNC and high- flow therap ies. 
ETHICS  
Institutional Review Board 
This protocol and any accompanying material to be provided to a potential subject  (such as advertisements, 
information sheets, or descriptions of the study used to obtain informed consent) will be submitted to an IRB by [CONTACT_384810] . This approval will be 
documented in a letter to the investigator specifying the protocol number, protocol version, protocol date, documents reviewed, and the date on which the committee met and granted the approval. 
Any amendments  made to the protocol after receipt of IRB approval must also be submitted to the IRB for 
approval prior to implementation , if appropriate or the study must be paused and no further recruitment made 
until approval of the amendments has been granted.  All related correspondence and IRB approved documents will be retained in a regulatory binder located in a locked cabinet in the study coordinator’s locked office.   
 
Revised 25May2016 Version 4. [ADDRESS_481305]  
This study will be conducted in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements, as well as the general 
principles set forth in the International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (Council for International  Organizations for Medical Sciences 2002), Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice 
(International Conference on Harmonization 1996), and the Declaration of Helsinki (World Medical Association 2008).  In addition, the study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, the International Conference on Harmonization guideline on Good Clinical Practice, and applicable local regulatory requirements and laws.  
All members of the study team have completed the necessary Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative at the University of Miami (CITI) training.  This program also includes Good Clinical Practice training .  All copi[INVESTIGATOR_384796]’s certificates of completion as well as their current medical license and Curriculum Vitae will be maintained in the study regulatory binder.     
 
LITERATURE CITED  
1. Pynnonen MA, Kim HM, Terrell JE. Validation of the  Sino- Nasal Outcome Test 20 (SNOT -20)  
  domains in nonsurgical patients. Am J Rhinology & Allergy. 2009 Jan-Feb;23(1):40-5 
2. Rudnick EF, Mitchell RB. Long- term improvements in quality -of-life after surgical therapy for pediatric  
  sinonasal disease. OTO  HNS 2007;6:873-877. 
3. Agarwal M, King M, Rubin BK, Shukla JB. Mucus transport in a miniaturized simulated cough  
  machine: Effect of constriction and serous layer simulant.  Biorheology. 1989; 26:977-88 4. Rubin BK. Mucus, phlegm, and sputum in cystic fibro sis. Resp Care, 2009;54:726-32. 
5.  McNamara DG, Asher MI, Rubin BK, Stewart A, By[CONTACT_196138]. Heated humidification improves clinical  
  outcomes compared to a heat -and-moisture exchanger in children with tracheostomies.  Respir Care.  
  2014;59:46-53. 
6. Voynow JA, Rubin BK. Mucus, mucins, and sputum. CHEST 2009;135:505-512. 
 
 