 
 
 
 
 
Treating Chronic Pain in Gulf War Illness  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
NCT #: 02378025  
 
March 17 , 2015 
  
Attachment 3: Technical Abstract  
 
Background: Many military personnel who participated in the Gulf War in [ADDRESS_299694] prevalent of these health consequences involves a triad of 
symptoms that include fatigue, pain and cognitiv e disturbances commonly referred to as "Gulf War Illness" 
(GWI). No clear, unifying patho -physiological disease process or effective treatments have yet been identified for 
GWI. Results from a diverse spectrum of research studies support the view that vete rans with GWI are medically 
ill, but that the physiological abnormalities that contribute to their illness are not currently well understood nor 
sufficiently treated by [CONTACT_246430]. While the cause of GWI remains unknown, a potential link between  
GWI and autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysregulation has been suggested.  Y oga has been suggested to exert 
its therapeutic effects through adjusting imbalances in the ANS.  Yoga  has been shown to be clinically effective in 
treating many of the physical sy mptoms typi[INVESTIGATOR_246425].  As chronic 
pain is perhaps the most prevalent and debilitating symptom of GWI we propose to target pain.  Significantly for 
this application, no improvements in pain have yet been reported in any clinical trial involving GWI. Furthermore, 
no published studies have investigated yoga as an intervention in GWI.  
Objectives:   The primary objective is to investigate yoga for the treatment of chronic pain in veterans with GWI.  
A secondary objectiv e is to provide veterans with skills in yoga breathing, postures, and meditation that can be 
used to promote health and well -being.  
Hypothesis 1 (primary): a) The subjective experience of pain as measured by [CONTACT_7854] -Short 
Form will be reduced at end of treatment in the group given a 10 -week Yoga Treatment program compared to a 
Pain Support control group.  b) This effect will be sustained acros s time and will be found at the end of the [ADDRESS_299695] treatment follow -up.  Hypothesis 2: (secondary) . Yoga will have beneficial effect on general 
wellbeing:   Thus, compared to the control group, the Yoga Treatment Group will show benefits across a broad  
range of measures including quality of life, fatigue, and medication use.  Hypothesis 3: (exploratory).  Yoga 
treatment will lead to improved ANS function. Specifically, improvements in ANS function will be manifested by 
[CONTACT_246431] (HRV) that will be observed in patients from baseline to end of treatment 
compared to the control group.  Hypothesis 4: (exploratory) : Moderators of Response. Age, severity of 
symptoms at baseline, type of comorbidity (depression pain medication, fatigu e, duration of illness, HRV, 
baseline estimate of likelihood of attending class), or any combinations of these may affect or “moderate” 
treatment response.   
Specific Aims: 1.  To assess the efficacy of yoga in reducing chronic pain, and to determine if the health -related 
benefits of yoga persist after termination of the treatment program.   2.  To obtain symptom -based outcome 
measures for veterans with GWI, before and after randomization, to assess pain, fatigue, physical functional status 
and quality of life .  3. To obtain measures of ANS function by [CONTACT_246432].   4. To analyze the data to determine whether yoga treatment reduces symptoms of GWI 
including chronic pain, quality of life, fatigue, and med ication use.  Due to the variability of GWI, we will also 
perform statistical analyses to determine whether the treatment response is moderated by a range of baseline 
variables including mood, medication, fatigue, and duration of illness.  
Study Design:  The intervention to be tested is a 10 -week Yoga Treatment program that has been specially 
designed for the treatment of chronic pain as experienced by [CONTACT_246433].  One hundred (100 ) patients will 
be randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups: Y oga Treatment Group or a Pain Support control group.  
The control group has been carefully designed to control for many features of a yoga intervention.  Patients in 
both groups will attend weekly classes for [ADDRESS_299696] :  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_246426], the provision of yoga in veteran healt hcare remains sparse. This is due in large part to a lack of 
randomized clinical trials capable of demonstrating the efficacy and safety of yoga for the treatment of conditions 
such as GWI.  Such a demonstration would strengthen the case for offering yoga as a widely -available treatment 
for pain in GWI and would help promote yoga as part of integrative healthcare.  This treatment trial is designed to 
begin to determine potential mechanisms of pain maintenance in GWI.  If yoga leads to improvement in pain 
outcome, this would support performing a larger clinical trial of yoga for treating pain and other symptoms of 
GWI.   
  
Attachment 4: Lay Abstract  
 
Background: Many military personnel who participated in the Gulf War in [ADDRESS_299697] common of these health concerns involves a triad of unexplained 
chronic symptoms (fatigue, pain and cognitive disturbances) commonly referred to as "Gulf War Illness" (GWI).  
No clear cause of GWI or effe ctive treatments has yet been identified.  Indeed, results from various research 
studies support the view that veterans with GWI are medically ill, but that the physical abnormalities that 
contribute to their illness are not currently well treated by [CONTACT_246434]. Yoga offers a potentially effective 
treatment for GWI and it has been shown in clinical trials to be effective in treating some of the most common 
symptoms of GWI including chronic pain, chronic fatigue, and negative mood.  Y oga involves a com bination of 
physical and mental exercises including controlled breathing techniques, postures, and meditation .  One of the 
ways that yoga is suggested to exert its beneficial effects is by [CONTACT_246435] (the system t hat controls bodily functions including heart rate, digestion and respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]).  A strong link 
between GWI and peripheral nervous system dysregulation has been shown.  Interestingly some of the most 
common complaints of GWI are also symptoms typi[INVESTIGATOR_246427], weakness, and digestive problems. However, there are no 
published studies that have looked at the beneficial effects of yoga in veterans with GWI.  The objec tive of this 
proposal is to evaluate yoga as treatment for chronic pain in veterans with GWI.  Chronic pain was chosen 
because it is one of the most common and debilitating symptoms of GWI and yoga was chosen since it has been 
found to be effective in trea ting chronic pain in other medical conditions.  The yoga program has been specially 
designed by [CONTACT_246436].  The yoga program includes a broad selection of techn iques including breathing, postures, and 
meditation that have been selected due to their reported benefits in  treating chronic pain and fatigue.  Design :  
One hundred (100) patients with GWI will be recruited and assigned with equal probability to one of t wo 
treatment groups: Yoga Treatment Group or a Pain Support control group.  Patients in the Yoga Treatment 
Group will attend once -weekly yoga classes for 10 weeks.  Patients in the Pain Support group will attend once -
weekly classes for 10 -weeks in which th ey will learn mental and physical techniques to control their pain.  This 
“active” control group is intended to control for some of the benefits that patients may gain from group 
membership.  These benefits include the camaraderie of group membership as we ll as learning some techniques 
for pain management that would be learned from the group.  Participants in both groups will be monitored 
closely using assessments of pain, fatigue, quality of life and nervous system function.  At the end of the 10 -
week prog ram, all participants will be tested every 2 months for a total of six months using the same assessments 
to gain an understanding of whether yoga has an enduring benefit.  Results will be analyzed by [CONTACT_246437], with an emphasis on the effects of yoga on pain.  Application : This research is relevant 
to all patients with GWI who have chronic pain.  As pain is one of the most common symptoms of GWI 
occurring in approximately one third of all patients with GWI, the results could have  a broad impact on this 
patient group.  Ultimately, this research is designed to provide veterans with GWI with a comprehensive yoga 
program that is both safe and effective in treating their pain.  Such programs are not usually available to veterans, 
large ly due to the lack of evidence that yoga or other forms of complementary and alternative treatment are 
clinically effective.  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_246428].  If yoga is shown to be safe and effective for 
treating pain in GWI, the programs may be offered at venues such as the Veteran’s Affairs Healthcare System 
which currently offers a limited number of such programs and which could promote yoga as part of an 
“integrative healthcare” approach.  This is a new and growing approach to healthcar e with a broader focus than 
conventional care.  Due to the minimal resources needed to provide yoga programs it is likely that this approach 
could be rapi[INVESTIGATOR_246429] a 
program which can be given in a class setting.  Finally, this treatment trial has the potential to determine some of 
the mechanisms of pain in GWI, especially dysfunction in the peripheral nervous system.  If yoga is associated 
with improvement in pain, this would  support performing a larger clinical trial of yoga for treating pain and other 
symptoms of GWI.   
 
Specific Aims  and Hypotheses  
 
Objectives  
The objective of this study  is to identify  a yoga  treatment protocol  that will ease the burden of  pain in  
veterans  with GWI.  A secondary  objective  is to provide veterans  with skills  in yoga  breathing,  postures, and 
meditation  that can be used lifelong  to promote  their health  and well-being.  
 
Specific Aims  
1. To assess  the safety  and feasibility  of recruiting  100 veterans  with Gulf War Illness  (GWI) who  have  chronic  
pain to complete a study  that involves  randomization  to a 10-week  Yoga Treatment Group  or a control Pain 
Support  Group.    We will assess  the efficacy  of yoga  to bring about  an improvement  of pain that will be measured  
9 times  over the course of the study.  The effects  of yoga on pain will be determined  using growth  curve modeling  
across  this extended  time period.  
2. To obtain  symptom -based  outcome measures  for veterans  with GWI,  before  and after randomization,  to 
assess  pain,  fatigue,  physical  functional  status  and quality  of life measures  during  treatment,  at end of treatment  
and at 6-month  follow -up. 
3. To obtain  measures  of ANS  function  by [CONTACT_246438],  at end of treatment,  and at 6-month  follow -up. 
4. To analyze the data to determine whether  yoga  treatment  reduces  symptoms of  GWI  including  chronic  pain,  
quality  of life, fatigue,  and medication  use. Due to the complexity  and variability  of GWI,  we will  also perform  
statistical  analyses  to determine whether the treatment response is moderated  by a range  of baseline  variables  
including  mood, medication,  fatigue,  or duration  of illness.  
 
Hypothesis  1 (primary).   a) The subjective  experience of pain as measured  by [CONTACT_246439] -Short  
Form  will be reduced  at end of treatment  (EOT) in the group  given  a 10-week Yoga Treatment compared  to the  
Pain Support  Group.  b) This effect  will be sustained  across  time and will be found  at the end of the 24-week  post 
treatment  follow -up. 
 
Hypothesis  2 (secondary).  Yoga will  have beneficial  effect  on general  wellbeing:   Thus,  compared  to the  control  
group,  the Yoga  Treatment  Group  will show  benefits  across  a broad range of measures including  quality  of life, 
fatigue,  and medication  use. 
 
Hypothesis  3 (exploratory).  Yoga treatment  will lead to improved  ANS  function. Specifically, an  increase in HRV 
will be observed  in patients  in the  Yoga Treatment  Group  from  baseline  to EOT compared  to the  control  group.  
 
Hypothesis  4 (exploratory).  Moderators  of Response; age, severity  of symptoms  at baseline,  type of comorbidity  
(depression  pain medication,  fatigue,  duration  of illness,  HRV,  baseline estimate of likelihood of  attending  class,  
or any combinations of  these) may affect  or “moderate” treatment response.  
 
Study  Design  
Our hypothesis  will be tested  in a three -year RCT  of yoga for  chronic pain among  veterans  identified  with 
GWI  following  deployment  during  the first Gulf War.   One hundred (100) participants  will be recruited  and 
evaluated  on a wide variety  of measures  including  neurological  and functional  parameters.   All participants  will 
meet  study  criteria for chronic  pain and all will have at  least two other symptoms  from the  fatigue and/or mood -
cognition categories  as outlined  in the  GWI  case definitions by [CONTACT_246440]. (1998).  The primary  dependent  
measure will  be pain scores  at the end of treatment  (EOT),  and secondary  and exploratory  analyses  will be 
conducted  on other indices.    
 
 
Figure 3: Overview of the experimental  design  and study  procedures  
Group  Assignment and Randomization  
Patients  who sign the informed  consent  and meet  the study  eligibility  criteria  will be enrolled  into the  
study  and randomized into one  of two treatment  groups:  the Yoga  Treatment  Group  or the Pain Support  Group.  
The primary  and secondary  hypotheses  to be tested  do not include interaction  terms,  so simple  randomization  will 
be used via a computer -generated  table of random  numbers  to allocate the 100 patients to  one of the two groups.  
Case Definition  of Gulf War  Illness  
The case definition  for chronic  multi -symptom  illness  as outlined  in Fukuda  et al., (1998)  will be used to 
define GWI  symptoms.  According  to this definition , a case is defined  as having  one or more chronic  symptoms  
(present  for ≥ 6 months)  from  at least two of the following  categor ies: fatigue ; mood and cognition  (symptoms  of 
feeling  depressed,  difficulty  remembering  or concentrating,  feeling  moody,  feeling  anxious, trouble finding  words,  
or difficulty  sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]);  and musculoskeletal (symptoms  of joint pain,  joint stiffness,  or muscle pain).  
The symptom -category  approach  will be applied  with the restriction  that to be  enrolled  in the  study, diagnosed  
patients  will be required  to have symptoms of  chronic  pain as outlined  in the  musculoskeletal  category  and at least 
two additional  symptoms  from  the mood -cognition  and/or fatigue categories.  
 
Statistical  Plan  and Data  Analysis  
We will examine  whether the Yoga Treatment  Group will show  more improvement,  compared  to the  Pain 
Support  Group  in various  outcome measures  including  pain,  quality  of life, and physical  and mental health.  The 
group  comparison  will be  made in line  with the principle of intention  to treat.  We will analyze the data using  
mixed effects  (growth curve) modeling  (Raudenbush &  Bryk,  2002;  Singer  & Willett, 2003)  fully  utilizing  
outcome data  repeatedly  measured  9 times  for participants  completing  assessments  at all time points  (baseline,  4 
week,  10 week (EOT),  and every  8  weeks  during  the 6 month  follow -up assessments).   For estimation  of mixed 
effect  models,  maximum  likelihood  (ML)  estimation  will be used.  For ML estimation  of these models,  the Mplus 
program  version  6.11 or above will  be used (Muthén &  Muthén,  1998 -2011). Data  points that are missing  due to 
subject  attrition  will be handled  assuming  that data are missing  at random (MAR:  Little and  Rubin, (2002))  
conditional  on observed  information,  which  is less restrictive than  missing completely  at random  (MCAR:  Little & 
Rubin, 2002)  assumed in fixed effects  analyses such as ANCOVA  and regression  analysis.  In this procedure,  all 
available  cases  including  the ones with missing  information  will be included  in the analyses.  By [CONTACT_246441], we are not only  more  likely  to conserve power,  but also less likely  
to produce  biased effect  estimates.  We expect  about  30% attrition  by [CONTACT_64318]  (10 week) and  45% by [CONTACT_941] 24 week  
follow -up (see Power Calculation  below  for justification  of attrition rates).  In mixed effects  analyses, the change in 
the outcome  will be modeled  as the key dependent  variable  predicted  by [CONTACT_246442].  We will conduct  the analysis  with and without,  conditional  on relevant  baseline  covariates.  The results 

of these  longitudinal  analyses  can be  easily  converted  to group  treatment  effects  at each assessment  point to  
directly  respond  to our  specific  hypotheses.  In particular,  we are interested  in the group  difference  at the end of 
treatment  (10 week) and  at the 24 week  follow -up assessment.  
The same analysis  strategy  focusing  on mixed effects  analysis  will be employed for Hypotheses  1-3, where 
the focus  is in examining  group differences  (i.e., treatment  effect).   In exploratory  Hypothesis  4, we will examine  
whether baseline  variables  such as age or severity  of symptoms  will moderate treatment  response.  For this 
investigation,  we will  employ  the MacArthur  framework  for moderator analysis.  A moderator variable  determines  
on whom  or under  what  conditions the  treatment  (Yoga  Treatment  Group  vs. control) affects  the outcome 
differently.  We will strictly  follow the eligibility  and analytical  criteria  for determining  moderators  described  in 
Kraemer et  al. (2008).  All analyses  will be conducted  in the  mixed effects  modeling  framework,  where the 
McArthur  framework  will be embedded . 
 The reviewers suggest comparing the percent of participants that achieve a clinically significant reduction 
in pain (decrease of ≥1.75 points in the pain scale) across the two treatment groups using a chi -square test.  This is 
an excellent suggestion and w e will use this as a secondary outcome.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
The inclusion/exclusion  criteria  are designed  to identify  patients with GWI  who have chronic type pain as 
their defining  feature and  exhibit a  full range of the manifestations  of that condition.  Furthermore,  the study’s  
sample is intended  to be  representative of the VA’s  pool of  patients  with GWI.  
 
Identify inclusion criteria.  
 
1. Born between 1936 and 1975 (ages 18 to 55 during Gulf War I).  
2. Enlisted in armed forces between [ADDRESS_299698] symptoms suggestive of Gulf War Illness, including:  
a. Chronic pain rated in the moderate to severe range on the SF -MPQ  
b. At least 2 other symptoms in the mood -cognition and/or fatigue categories of GWI (as define d by [CONTACT_246443]. (1998) case definitions) manifested within the year after leaving the Gulf region.  
4. If on a psychotropic medication regimen, that regimen will be stable for at least [ADDRESS_299699]  is located  in the  same  building  as the PI ([CONTACT_246447]),  and other study  
team members  ([CONTACT_246448],  Louise Mahoney)  who will be available to answer  any questions  that the  potential  
participant  might  have.  First,  the information  contained  in the written  informed  consent document  will be 
explained  verbally  to prospective participants  in language they can understand.  Repetition  will be used during  the 
process  if necessary.  Special  care will  be taken  to inform  prospective participants that their participation  is entirely  
voluntary  and that they may withdraw at  any time and for any reason  without  penalty  or loss of  currently  existing  
benefits. Prospective participa nts will then be asked  to carefully  read the written  informed  consent form, and any 
questions  will be answered.  Next,  the prospective participant will be asked  to summarize the consent  form with 
special  focus  on the  discomforts,  risks,  and confidentiality  sections. When prospective participants  have 
demonstrated  (by [CONTACT_246444]) that  they understand  the purposes, risks,  and benefits  of the study,  
they will be asked to initial  each page and sign and date the last page.  The Study  Coordinator  conducting  the 
informed  consent procedures  will also sign and date the consent  document,  and the participant  will be given  a 
copy.  The emphasis  on the  voluntary  nature of participation  is designed  to minimize  the possibility  of coercion or  
undue  influence to participate.   If necessary,  extra  time will be given  for potential  participants  to consider their  
involvement  in the  study.
d. Screening  Procedures  
 
To avoid  unnecessary  travel  by [CONTACT_23065],  a telephone  pre-screening  questionnaire will  be given  to those  
interested  in participating  in the  study.   The questionnaire will establish  basic  eligibility  criteria (see Table  2 and 
“Telephone Pre -Screen  Data Collection  Form” in “Surveys.pdf”) (Note that such pre-screening  questions can be 
given  after obtaining  verbal  consent.   [CONTACT_246447]  (PI) was recruitment  chair  for a recent  VA study  using similar 
pre-screening  procedures  in which  verbal consent  was used). Veterans  who pass the  short  phone  screen  will be 
scheduled  for a full screening  visit during  which they  will complete more extensive  screening  procedures  listed  in 
Table 2.  The primary  purpose  of the screening  is to establish eligibility  for inclusion  into the  study  and will be 
initiated  after the patie nt signs  the Informed  Consent  Form.  Screening  will normally  be started  on the  same  day as 
the consent  visit. Depending  on the  participant’s  availability,  the screening  phase  will last up to four weeks  to 
allow  adequate time for all  of the assessments  to be  completed,  to assure  the patient’s  capacity  and willingness  to 
participate in the  study  and to ensure that  all patients meet  study  criteria for chronic pain as well as two other 
associated  symptoms  of GWI  identified  in the  inclusion  criteria section  for the study  within  seven  days prior to 
randomization.  Although  screening  data will not be  used in the  primary  analysis,  it will be retained  to determine if 
participants  who entered the  study  were  comparable to those  who were  excluded.  
Telephone pre -screen.   To be given  via telephone  before the screening  visit to establish  eligibility  related  to 
several  inclusion/exclusion  criteria including  age, military  service,  chronic  pain,  and presence of major  
neurological  conditions.  
Demographics  Questionnaire .  Self-report  questionnaire to collect  demographic,  military  and health  
characteristics.  
SF-McGill  Pain  Questionnaire (SF -MPQ) (Melzack,  1987).  A  commonly  used measure  of clinical  pain that is 
well-validated,  reliable,  and sensitive  It is a self-administered  instrument  containing  15 descriptors  that yield  
scores  of both sensory  and affective components of  pain.  Physical  Exam .  This examination  will be performed  by 
[CONTACT_246445]  ([CONTACT_246448]) or an assistant  and will include vital  signs,  height,  weight, skin, ears (including 
gross  hearing),  eyes (including  extra -ocular  eye movements and retina), nasal  passages,  throat,  neck,  lungs,  heart,  
abdomen,  lymph  nodes.  
Clinical  Questionnaire .  This will ask about  the presence,  duration and intensity  of [ADDRESS_299700]  chosen.  
Clinical  Interview .  This will be performed  by [CONTACT_246445]  ([CONTACT_246448]) or an assistant  and will review 
the answers  to the  clinical  questionnaire.  The interviewer  will use these  responses  to decide  whether the 
prospective participant meets  the criteria for GWI  as defined  by [CONTACT_246446]., (1998).   
 
 
Evaluation  Eligibility  Criteria  
Telephone pre- 
screen  Served  in first Gulf War and experiencing  chronic  pain 
Demographics  
questionnaire  Born  between  1936  and 1975 (ages  18 to 55 during  Gulf War I) 
SF-MPQ  Sensory  and affective pain ratings  in the  moderate  to severe range  (2-3) 
 
  
Physical  Exam  Able to stand  and walk  without too much  pain 
Clinical  Interview  Criteria for GWI  as defined by [CONTACT_246440]., (1998).  
Clinical  
Questionnaire  GWI  defined  as having  one or more  chronic symptoms from  at least 2 of 3 
categories  (fatigue,  mood -cognition,  and musculoskeletal)  
Table 2.  Screening  evaluations  used to establish  eligibility  criteria for study  
 