 
Study protocol  
 
 
A Multicenter Randomized Trial , Comparing a 25G EUS Fine Needle 
Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] (FNA) Device with a 20G EUS ProCore Fine Needle 
Biopsy (FNB) Device  
 
 
ASPRO trial  (ASPi[INVESTIGATOR_338870])  
 
 
 
ProCore study group  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE  
Protocol  ID ASPRO trial  
Short title  Comparing a 25G EUS -FNA with a 20G EUS ProCore 
FNB Device  
Version  Version 1  
Date  13-10-2014 
Coordinati ng investigator  
 Drs P.A. van Riet  
Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology,  
Room Ca -415, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands  
Email; [EMAIL_6570]  
Principal investigator  
 
 (See paragraph 3.[ADDRESS_418918] of all 
principal investigators per site)  
 
 Dr D.L. Cahen  
Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology,  
Room H -337, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands  
Email; [EMAIL_6571]  
Sponsor  SLO (in Dutch: Stichting Lever Onderzoek, in English: 
Foundation for Liver and Gastrointestinal Research)       
on behalf of the Department of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology of the Erasmus University Medical Center in 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands  
Subsidising party of  
unrestricted grant  Cook Medical  
O'Halloran Road  
National Technology Park  
Limerick, Ireland  
www.cookmedical.com  
 
Independent physician  Dr D. Sprengers  
Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Erasmus 
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands 
Email; [EMAIL_6572]  
 
Laboratory sites  Department of Clinical Pathology, Erasmus University 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands  
Pharmacy  Not applicable  
 
SUMMARY  
Rationale:  During Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS), tissue samples can be obtained with different 
techniques . Fine needle aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] (FNA) provides a cytological specimen. With f ine needle biopsy 
(FNB) , a histological specimen  is obtained , which generally results in a better diagnostic performance. 
However, FNB needles are stiffer and more difficult to handle, and can therefore  result in less tissue 
acquisition.  
Objectives : To compare the performance and diagnostic accuracy of two EUS -guide d tissue 
acquisition devices; a 25G Echotip Ultra Fine Needle Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] (FNA) device and a new, more 
flexible 20G Echotip ProCore Fine Needle Biopsy (FNB) device.  
Study design:   International randomized multicenter trial.  
Study population:  Patients ≥18 ye ars old, referred for EUS -guided tissue sampling of a: (I) 
pancreatic mass lesion, (II) lymph node, or (III) other submucosal or undefined mass (non -pancreatic), 
≥ 1 cm in size.  
Intervention: EUS-guided tissue acquisition by [CONTACT_338871] 25G Echotip  Ultra FNA device, 
or the 20G Echotip ProCore FNB device.  
Main study parameters/endpoints:  The main endpoint is the diagnostic performance, measured 
against the gold standard  diagnosis (based on the surgical resection specimen or in non -operated 
patients, the outcome of the diagnostic work -up (i.e. tissue sampling and imaging studies), confirmed 
by a compatible clinical disease course). Secondary endpoints include I. technical success, II, specimen 
specifics, such as; quality, presence of tissue cores , and pathological classification (cytology, cell -block, 
or histology), III. procedural aspects, such as; safety, the yield  of a single  needle pass, and the value of 
on-site pathologi cal evaluation , and IV. inter -observer variation.  
Nature and extent of the burd en and risks associated with participation, benefit and 
group relatedness:  There are no additional risk s involved. Patients are referred for EUS -guided 
tissue acquisition , as part of the standard diagnostic work -up. Previous reports showed EUS-guided 
FNA and FNB  sampling to be equally safe . 
 