1 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Quantitative Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753189]’s Disease (Stages I -IV, REM 
sleep behavior disorder) and Controls  
 
PRINC IPAL INVESTIGATOR: [CONTACT_753206], MD, PhD, Weill Cornell Medicine  
IRB Protocol #: [PHONE_15704] 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED] 
 
Current Version : September 10, 2021 
 Prior Version Dates
: 
Version September 10, [ADDRESS_1031115] 4, 2021  
Version May 11, 2021  
Version September 9, 2019  
Version February 2, 2019  
Version November 28, 2018  
Version October 25, 2018 
Version September 26, 2018  
Version June 29, 2018  
Version November 9, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
2 
  
 
 
 
BACKGROUND  
To help  the development  of  iron chelation  as a potential  therapy  for Parkinson's  Disease  (PD),   
this   study is  designed  to  establish  an  accurate and  sensitive  Quantitative  Susceptibility Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] 
(QSM)- based  Substantia  Nigra (SN)  iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_19188].  Furthermore, should  trials  of   iron   
chelation   therapy in  PD prove  that this intervention  has clinical  effectiveness,  an improved  
method to  measure  SN iron concentration  (such  as QSM  as proposed  herein)  could  become a  
companion  Radiological  Biomarker  for triage  and response  assessment;  and potentially  for dose  
modulation  to prevent potential  over -treatment.  We propose  a study  to assess  SN iron changes  
to test the hypothesis  that the QSM  based  iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753190]  R2* method  for monitoring  nigral iron  change  in PD patients.  Prooxidant  iron accumulation  
in the substantia  nigra pars compacta  (SNc)  in  the  midbrain  is  one possible reason for SNc 
vulnerable to neurodegeneration. Increased iron  in SN of PD patients  have  been evaluated  by 
[CONTACT_753200],  duration, and  other  patient  
assessments.  Longitudinal studies  show  that iron estimated  by [CONTACT_753201].  Iron elevation  can  cause cell death  mediated  by [CONTACT_753202].  The 
increased  iron is located  within  individual dopaminergic  neurons  in the PD SNc, which  leads  to 
the following  consequences:  1) The interaction  of ferrous  iron (Fe(II)) with  oxygen  (hydrogen  
peroxide)  readily generates  highly  toxic  hydroxyl  radicals (HO¿)  via Fenton  chemistry.  Post  
mortem PD- affected  brains  display  increased  lipid peroxidation,  oxidative  damage  to DNA, and  
lowered  levels  of  the  reduced  form of  glutathione,  which  all reflect  oxidative stress.  2) Iron can 
impact  the aggregation of alfa- synuclein,  the major component  of Lewy bodies  in PD. Alfa- synuclein  
binds  to iron, which  accelerates  its aggregation into fibrils and  is consistent  with  pathological  finding  
of enriched  iron in Lewy  bodies.  Alfa- synuclein has  also been  shown  to directly  generate hydrogen  
peroxide  when  it  aggregates and,  in the presence  of iron,  produces toxic  hydroxyl  radicals.  3) 
The aggregation of alfa- synuclein in PD can proliferate microglia,  and iron can polarize  microglia 
to the  pro-inflammatory  M1  phenotype that  produces  cytotoxic  cytokines,  which is  observed  in 
the advanced  dopaminergic degeneration  in symptomatic  PD. While noninvasive  MRI is sensitive to 
the presence of  iron  that  is  paramagnetic,  current MRI  methods  to quantify  iron are highly 
problematic.  A commonly  used  method  is the  signal decay  rate R2*,  to be precise,  the decay  rate 
of the magnitude  signal  along the  data  sampling echo  time  TE in the commonly  used  gradient  
echo  sequence. We  have  found  that R2* suffers  from various  problems  including 1) dependences 
on imaging  parameters  including voxel  size and  field  strength,  2) blooming  artifacts, which are 
particularly  strong  at  SNc  that is  near  the nasal  cavity  air-tissue  interface of strong  magnetic  
susceptibility  difference, and  3) interfering  effects  from  cellular contents  such  as membranes,  
proteins (neuromelanin,  alpha -synuclein,  etc).  Our investigations  have  lead  to the physics insight  
to model  MRI  signal  dependence on  paramagnetic  iron,  which  is the so called  forward  problem  
from  iron to MRI signal phase  or field.  Accordingly,  we have innovated  the inverse  solution  from  
field  to iron  source,  which  is termed  as quantitative susceptibility  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (QSM).  We are 
performing  ex vivo studies  to demonstrate that  QSM  is much  more  accurate  that R2* for measuring  
[ADDRESS_1031116]  is designed  
to demonstrate that QSM  will provide  much  better  image quality and higher sensitivity than R2* 
quantitatively mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753191].  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
Prospective,  single  center  trial to determine whether  the current  R2* iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753192]'s  Disease  (PD)  can be significantly  improved  by [CONTACT_753203][INVESTIGATOR_007]  (QSM) based  iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753193].  This study  will include six  cohorts  - 
Parkinson's  Disease  (PD) Stage  I (20 subjects), PD Stage  II (20 subjects), PD Stage  III (20 subjects),  
PD Stage  IV (20 subjects),  REM  Sleep  Behavior Disorder (RBD) (10 subjects),  and healthy controls  (10 
subjects).  Subjects  who  meet the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria and whom  sign an informed  
consent  form  will be  eligible  for participation  in this  study and  will undergo  the following  
assessments regardless  of cohort  stratification.  Screening and  Baseline:  Subjects  will be  seen  in the  
Movement  Disorder Clinic  within  the Department of Neurology  at Weill  Cornell Medicine,  or at 
HSS, or at Cornell Ithaca (other  recruiting  sites) for  an in-office  visit which  will include  review of  
medical  history,  concomitant  medication review,  physical  exam,  urine  pregnancy  test (females  of 
childbearing  potential  age)  and completion  of clinical surveys.  This visit may  be a standard  of  care,  
office  visit, or  may  be an office  visit performed  for research  purposes.  If standard  of care, in -office  
neurological assessments  have already  been  performed  within  three  months of  study  imaging,  this 
may  be used  to satisfy the  study  baseline/screening  and 24 month in  office  assessments.  All subjects,  
whether recruited  at WCM  or HSS,  will receive  either a PE2i Positron  Emission  Tomography  (PET)  scan 
or DaT single photon emission computed tomogrpahy (SPECT) scan, and  Magnetic  Resonance  Imaging  
(MRI) scan of the brain at WCM. If the subject received a standard of care MRI scan of the  brain  within  
[ADDRESS_1031117]  of care  MRI of the brain  was performed  either  at an outside 
facility  or at New  York  Presby[CONTACT_194840] -Weill Cornell  Medicine  outside  the required  1 month  window  
to enrollment,  the  MRI  of the  brain  will be repeated  at Baseline  as performed  for research  
purposes.  Month  24 (+/ - 2 Months):  Subjects  will  be  seen  in the  Movement  Disorder Clinic  within  
the Department of Neurology  at Weill Cornell Medicine,  or at HSS for an in-office  visit (either  
as a standard  of care  office  visit,  or may  be an office  visit for research  purposes) which  will include  
review  of medical history, review  concomitant  medications,  physical exam,  urine  pregnancy   test   
(females of  childbearing  potential  age),  complete surveys;  and subjects  will receive  a repeat  PE2i  
PET scan or DaT scan  and MRI of the brain  at WCM.  The following  outlines which  procedures  are 
considered  performed for research  purposes  vs. performed  for standard  of care  purposes  for PD and 
RBD Cohorts:  Performed  for Research  Purposes: PE2i  PET Scan or DaT scan  performed  at Baseline 
and Month  24 visit;  MRI of the brain performed  at Baseline  (only  if repeated  for research  purposes  
as outlined  above)  and Month  24 visit;  Urine  pregnancy  test for female  subjects  of child -bearing  
potential age  performed  at  baseline  and  Month [ADDRESS_1031118] of Care 
Purposes:  Office  visit performed  at Baseline and  Month  24 visit (unless  subjects  are asked  to return  
for an office  visit performed for research  purposes  with  the Neurology team  at WCM  or HSS);  
MRI of the brain performed  at Baseline  visit;  Completion  of clinical neurological surveys (e.g. 
UPDRS). Subjects recruited at Cornell Ithaca will have the MRI at the Cornell MRI Facility and may or 
may not have a PE2i PET scan or DaT scan at WCM. Subjects who receive the DaT scan will have to 
take Lugol’s soluti on before scanning to protect their thyroid.  
4 
 Our primary objective is to establish that Quantitative Susceptibility Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (QSM) is more sensitive 
than R2* for nigral iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753194].  
 
Our secondary objective is to evaluate rate of iron accumulation throughout different disease stages. 
1. Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores to monitor for clinical changes. 2. 
Quantitative PE2i PET scan estimations to monitor for dopam inergic degeneration.  
 
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease, REM sleep behavior disorder subjects without signs of 
Parkinsonism and normal healthy controls.  
a. If tremor is not present, subjects must have unilateral onset and persistent asymmetry 
of the symptoms.  
b. For PD subjects only: age > 30 years  at time of diagnosis of PD with a maximum age of 
100 years old.  
c. Hoehn & Yahr stage < V (if PD)  
2. For PD subjects only: receiving an optimized dopaminergic regimen (i.e., either MAO -B inhibitor, 
a dopamine agonist and/or low doses of L -dopa, with dose change no more frequent than every 
6-months in the course of the study); or medications naïve  
3. No overt anemia, iron deficiency, or other hematological disorders  
4. Deemed healthy and able to undergo MRI and PE2i PET  imaging by [CONTACT_6962], based 
on screening assessments —medical history, physical examination  
5. For controls and REM sleep behavior disorder subjects only: age 20 -80; willing to undergo 
multiple imaging sessions  
6. Signed informed consent form  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Patient  with  atypi[INVESTIGATOR_116250]  (such as  suspected  Progressive  Supranuclear Palsy,  
Multiple  System  Atrophy)  and secondary  parkinsonism  (such  as normal pressure  
hydrocephalus,   drug- induced, or  vascular  parkinsonism)   
2. Patients with  uncertainty  as to having classical Parkinson's  disease,  such   as   those who  
might  have  scans  without  evidence of     dopaminergic     deficits     (SWEDDs)  
3. Presence   of   a   medical   or psychiatric  comorbidity  that can compromise participation  in  
the  study   
4. Patients with  clinically  significant  depression  as determined  by  [CONTACT_753204]  
>  15    
5. History   of   exposure to  typi[INVESTIGATOR_753195]  6 months  prior to enrollment   
6. Patients  with psychosis/active  hallucinations  and memory difficulty  pre-dating the onset  of 
motor symptoms   
[ADDRESS_1031119] safety. In addition, subjects will return for in -office physician visits at designated time 
points (baseline and 24 months) where physica l exam, vital check, and adverse events will be assessed 
and tabulated.  
There  are no defined  stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_753196],  in  the  event  that  the  FDA, IRB,  or other  regulatory  
agencies  request stoppage,  all study  activities  would  be immediately  halted.  The goal  of the study 
is to to establish  an accurate  and sensitive QSM -based  SNc iron mappi[INVESTIGATOR_753197],  thus  no defined stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004].  
Circumstances  for subject termination/dropout  due to study -related adverse  events  are highlighted  
in the adverse events -related  termination  section listed below.  
Adverse events that may cause termination/dropout of a subject: generally, inability to tolerate the 
study procedures, imaging: claustrophobia during imaging studies or inability to obtain venous access.  
Anticipated adverse events and risks of study interventions:  
1. Pe2i  scans.  Subjects  may  experience discomfort  from  lying  still on their  back  for each  scan;  
Some  people  feel claustrophobic in  the  PET  scanner.  If   this   happens the  scan  will stop  
immediately.  PE2i -PET scans  are experimental  studies  that  may be  conducted  only  for 
medical  research purposes.  PE2i -PET involves  exposure to radiation,  and that exposure  
is increased the  more  often  such  tests  are done. Radiation  exposure  at certain  doses  can 
potentially  cause  cancer.  The PE2i  tracers are  radioactive  because  one of the atoms 
(Carbon -11) that make  up the drug has been  man -made  in such  a way that it will 
spontaneously  decompose.  When  it does, it  will give off a type  of  radiation  in  the form  
of rays.  These special type  of rays are  a form  of radiation  that cannot  be seen with  the 
human  eye,  but the PET camera has  sensors  that can detect where  it is coming  from  inside  
your  body.  These  rays will be used  to make  pi[INVESTIGATOR_753198]'s brain.  The total  amount  
6 
 of radiation  that subjects  will be exposed  to from  the PET scans  in this study  is  a  little  
less  than the  amount  of radiation  exposure  allowed for occupational  workers  over  a 
period  of one year. There are always theoretical risks associated  with  exposure  to radiation  
of any  kind,  including the risks  of developi[INVESTIGATOR_753199].  These 
risks  are considered  within  acceptable  limits for human  subjects  who  will not personally 
benefit  from  their  participation  in the research  study.   
2. Allergic  reactions.  With any  drug (radioactive  chemical substance used  in PE2i  PET 
scans), there  is a possibility  of an allergic  reaction.  Allergic reactions  most  commonly  
are  mild  such as a rash, cough, dizziness, or fainting, hives, itching, chest tightness, 
shortness of breath or  wheezing.  Rarely,  a more severe and possibly  even  life-threatening 
reaction  can occur,  such  as  anaphylaxis (a reaction  which  may  involve  shortness  of 
breath,  swelling  or closing  of the airway and/or drop  in blood  pressure).  In the event of  
an allergic  reaction,  medical treatment will  be immediately  available  from  the study 
staff.  The risks  of an allergic  reaction  from imaging  exams  in this study  are very  low.  
3. IV catheter.  Before  each  PE2i  PET scan study  begins,  a catheter  will be placed  in the 
subject's  forearm.  Catheter  placement  may cause  bleeding,  bruising,  redness,  swelling 
discomfort,  and/or  pain  at the needle  site or dizziness  and fainting.  The bruising and 
discoloration at the areas where the venous catheters  are inserted  may  last for several 
days after the study. On rare occasions, they  may  cause  clot formation  and infection. The  
subject  will be instructed  to notify  the study  physician  right  away  if symptoms are  
caused  from  the IV catheter.   
4. MRI scans.  There  are no known  risks  or adverse effects  resulting  directly  from  
exposure  to magnetic  fields  and radiofrequency  signals used  in  the  MRI  imaging   other   
than the  potential risks  associated with the scanning  procedure  summarized  below:  A. 
Claustrophobia.  Some  subjects  may  feel claustrophobic  in the MR scanner.  If this 
happens  the study  team  will stop  the scan immediately.  B. Metallic  Foreign  Body  Risks. 
Subjects  may  not be able  to undergo MRI  scanning if they  have  pacemaker,  or certain  
other  implanted  electronic  or metallic devices.  Subjects  will be screened  for MRI 
contraindications during the screening visit.  
5. DaT scans. The most common side effects of DaT  imaging are headache, increased appetite, 
and dizziness. However, it is important for you to know that the injection of DaTscan may 
include risks that cannot be predicted, although for the purposes of this study, it is being used 
in accordance with its FD A approved usage. The insertion of the IV may feel uncomfortable and 
may leave a bruise. You will need to lie very still under the camera for up to [ADDRESS_1031120]'s vital  
signs  will be taken  and injection -site tolerance will be assessed  after the injection of  radioactive  
material.  Any assessment  of adverse  events  will be documented  and reported as necessary.  
[ADDRESS_1031121] being 
terminated from the study: in the event of premature discontinuation, subjects will receive adequate 
clinical follow -up from their treating physicians in accordance with standard of care follow up 
guidelines.  
 
Appropriate screening will be performed, including physical exam, vital signs, urine pregnancy test to 
verify eligibility before initiating any study related procedures. On the day of PE2i PET or DaT scan 
imaging, subject’s vital signs will be taken and in jection -site tolerance will be assessed after the 
injection of radioactive material. Any assessment of adverse events will be documented and reported 
as necessary.  
 
In the event of premature discontinuation, subjects will receive adequate clinical follow -up from their 
treating physicians in accordance with standard of card follow up guidelines.  
Adverse  events  will be graded  on severity, attribution,  and expectedness.  All AEs whether  related  
or not, anticipated  or not, will be reported  to the IRB. Severity  defined as:  Mild:  the subjects  is 
aware  of the sign or  symptom,  but it does  not interfere  with his/her  usual  daily activities and/or  
it  is of no clinical consequence.  Moderate:  the AE  interferes  with  the usual  daily  activities of the 
subject of it is of some clinical consequence. Severe: the subject is unable to work normally or to carry 
out his/her usual daily activities, and/or AE is of definite clinical consequence. AE's  will be reported 
to the WCMC  IRB as they  occur.  According to  local requirements,  the study  team  will communicate  
relevant  safety  information  to the appropriate  agency(ies),  IRB, and/or  all active  investigators  as it 
becomes  available.  
 
We will be using a medical monitor. The monitor will be affiliated with WCMC -NYP and is a part of the 
research study.  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Clinical outcome  assessments:  The six subject  cohorts  will be compared  to assess differences  in 
their  clinical evaluations and  MRI iron measurements  obtained  in this  study.  MRI iron measurements 
will be  correlated  with  clinical evaluations  to estimate  iron overload  effects  at baseline visit  and 
month  24 visit after enrollment. Also,  these  MRI iron measurements  will be correlated  with  rate of 
dopaminergic  loss if detected  by [CONTACT_153056]2i  PET or DaT scan  imaging.  Statistical analyses:  All analyses  will 
be performed using a statistical software  (SPSS,  Chicago, IL).  The kappa  test will be used to assess  
reader agreements,  and covariance analysis  (adjusted  for baseline  differences) to  estimate clinical  
outcomes  as measured by  [CONTACT_753205] [ADDRESS_1031122] will be adjusted  for baseline  differences. Correlation  and logistic  regression  will be 
performed  among  various  MRI and PE2i PET or DaT  scan  measurements  and other  clinical data.  The 
longitudinal  data  will be modeled using the generalized  estimating  equation (GEE)  to assess 
significant  change.  Paired t -test and ROC  curve  comparison  will be performed  to assess differences  
between QSM and R2*.  
 
8 
  