Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.[ADDRESS_158587] Title:   
Nonpharmacologic Management of Challenging Behaviors in Veterans with Dementia  2. Investigator(s):   
William C . Mann, OTR, Ph.D. , Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_139690], B.A., Coordinator  
W. Bruce Vogel, Ph.D., Other (Economist/Statistician)  
Samuel S. Wu, PhD (Statistician)  
Paul Arthur, M.S., MOT, Other (Interviewer)  
Sandra Winter, Ph.D, MOT, Other (Interventionist)  
Jason Rogers, Other (WOC)  
Xinpi[INVESTIGATOR_139691], Ph.D.  
 
3. Abstract:  
     Over [ADDRESS_158588] Alzheimer’s disease or related dementias, a progressive and 
irreversible neurodegenerative syndrome, with prevalence rates expected to reach close to 16 million individuals by 2050.  As populations age worldwide, dementia will increase dramatically and 
reach epi[INVESTIGATOR_91898]. Among Veterans 65 and older, prevalence rates are similar to the 
population at -large with 7.3% having dementia across all races, except for African- Americans for 
whom the rate is 50% higher. Prevalence rates across VISNs range from 5.8 to 9.4% with dementia 
associated with substantially higher Inpatient and outpatient service utilization relative to other VA 
patients.   
     A hallmark of dementia is neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) which include agitation, apathy, 
depression, mood lability, and aggressiveness.  NPS are associated with increased health care 
costs, and reduced quality of life and daily functioning, heightened family caregiver burden, and 
nursing home placement.
 Standard care typi[INVESTIGATOR_139692], but these are at 
best modestly effective, carry serious risks including mortality, and do not address behavioral 
symptoms families themselves consider most distressful or that prompt nursing home placement. 
Given the devastating effects of the disease and that a cure is not  imminent, medical organizations 
nationally and internationally including the VA have urged for the development and testing of new 
approaches to manage NPS .  
     This proposed study addresses this call by [CONTACT_139714] a transformative patient -centric 
intervention designed to reduce the burden of NPS in Veterans with dementia who live at home with 
family caregivers. The innovative intervention, the Tailored Activity Program ( TAP- VA), involves 8 
session s over 4 month s in Veterans’ homes. An occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_139693] a systematic 
assessment to identify a Veteran’s preserved capabilities and deficit areas, and previous roles, 
habits and interests from which to develop and introduce activities tailored to the Veteran’s profile.  
Family caregivers are then trained to incorporate tailored activities into daily care routines. The 
intervention was pi[INVESTIGATOR_139694] 60 community -living individuals with 
dementia. Findings from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_139695], specifically agitation and less time being on “duty” by [CONTACT_116964]. Results 
of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_139696] a full -scale Phase III efficacy trial.  We plan to test 
TAP- VA in a randomized two- group parallel design in which 160 racially  and ethnically diverse 
Veterans with dementia and their family caregivers (dyads) will be randomly assigned to receive TAP- VA or an attention control group. All dyads will be evaluated at baseline and 4 -months (main 
trial endpoint), and then reassessed at 8 -months to evaluate long- term treatment effects (baseline 
to 8 months), including continued activity use, caregiver well -being, and cost s.   
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.04 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_13949] 11.17.14     
  
 
4. Background :  
Over [ADDRESS_158589] Alzheimer’s disease or related dementias, a progressive and irreversible neurodegenerative syndrome, with prevalence rates expected to reach close to 16 
million individuals by 2050.  As populations age worldwide, dementia will increase dramatically and 
reach epi[INVESTIGATOR_91898]. Among Veterans 65 and older, prevalence rates are similar to the population at -large with 7.3% having dementia across all races, except for African- Americans for 
whom the rate is 50% higher. Prevalence rates across VISNs range from 5.8 to 9.4% with dementia associated with substantially higher Inpatient and outpatient service utilization relative to other VA 
patients.  
     A hallmark of dementia is neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) which include agitation, apathy, 
depression, mood lability, and aggressiveness.   NPS are associated with increased health care 
costs, and reduced quality of life and daily functioning, heightened family caregiver burden, and 
nursing home placement.
 4,[ADDRESS_158590] urged for the development and testing of new approaches to manage NPS.
  
  5. Specific Aims:     
Our primary study aim concerns the Veteran with dementia and tests the immediate eff ect of 
TAP- VA at 4-months on NPS.  Our hypothesis is that Veterans with dementia who receive TAP- VA 
will manifest lower total scores on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), which assesses frequency 
and severity of 12 common neuropsychiatric symptoms, compared to Veterans assigned to an 
attention control group. We also propose four secondary aims.  These are to: 1) Test the long -
term effects of TAP- VA at 8-months on quality of life and neuropsychiatric behaviors of Veterans 
with dementia. Hypothesis:   Veter ans receiving TAP- VA will manifest higher quality of life and lower 
total NPI [INVESTIGATOR_139697] (baseline to 8 -months) in comparison to Veterans in the attention control 
group; 2)  Test the immediate effects of TAP- VA at 4-months and long -term effects at 8 -months on 
caregiver burden, skill acquisition, efficacy using activities, and time spent providing care. 
Hypotheses : Caregivers receiving TAP- VA will report reduced burden, enhanced skills and efficacy 
using activities, and less time providing care compared to the control group at 4 and 8- months; 3) 
Examine whether caregivers receiving TAP- VA are using activities at 8 months; and 4) Examine 
whether TAP-VA results in reduced VHA health care use and costs for Veterans with dementia and 
their caregivers.  Results from these secondary aims will provide further evidence of treatment 
efficacy, identify whether booster sessions are necessary, and inform dissemination efforts and 
translation of TAP- VA system- wide.  
     Our long- term objective, if proven efficacious,  is to integrate TAP- VA into standard care 
practices within the VHA system as the first treatment choice to address NPS in Veterans with dementia living at home. This would transform the current paradigm of dementia care which relies 
on pharmacologic manag ement.  
 6. Research Plan:  
     Overview:  This study will test whether a targeted Veteran -centric intervention reduces NPS (NPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_139698]) and, secondarily, whether it reduces burden by [CONTACT_139715] , and enhanc ing skill in family caregivers. We also seek to evaluate its cost savings in 
terms of health care utilization rates of both Veterans and family caregivers  using a cost diary.  We 
will enroll 160 Veterans with dementia whose caregivers report one or more NPS and are living at 
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.04 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_13949] 11.17.14     
 home. Veterans with diagnosis codes 290.0, 290.2, 290.3, 331.2 (senile dementias), 290.4 (vascular 
dementia), 294.8 (dementia not otherwise specified), 331.0 (Alzheimer’s disease), 331.1 
(frontotemporal dementia), and 331.82 (Lewy body dement ia) will be considered to have dementia 
diagnoses and eligible for study participation.  Veterans with these diagnostic codes will be recruited 
from NF/SG VHS Geriatric Research, Education & Clinical Center (GRECC) and Geriatrics and 
Extended Care Service (GECS) outpatient services, including the Home Based Patient Care (HBPC) and Homemaker Home Health Aide program.  
      Eligible dyads will receive a baseline home interview (T1), and then be randomized to 
experimental ( TAP- VA) or attention -control group conditions.  Experimental dyads will receive up to 
[ADDRESS_158591] (OT) interventionist over 4- months whereas caregivers in 
the attention control group will receive bi -monthly telephone contact (up to 8 contacts) in which 
education is provided and tailored to address unmet expressed informational needs of caregivers.  
Information concerning the value of activity and a list of activity ideas will also be provided.  All dyads will be retested at 4- months from baseline (T2), main study endpoint, and 8- months from 
baseline (T3) at home  to evaluate long -term effects. Interviewers will be masked to treatment 
assignment throughout the study (Figure 1 ).  Each study component is described in more detail 
below.    
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 Recruitment  
Step 1 : 
 Identify  
Potential  
Eligible Dyads  
 Step 2 : 
 Interested  
caregivers  
call research 
team or return 
postcard 
Invitation  
letters to 
caregivers  
 Telephone  
Screen to 
determine 
potential 
eligibility  
Not interested  
caregivers  
Ineligible  
caregivers  Step 3: 
Eligible  and 
willing  dyads  
Baseline  
(TI) Home  
Interview  
 
 Randomization  
Stratified by [CONTACT_2073]   
(spouse vs. non -spouse)  
TAP-VA 
Intervention  
Assessment , 
activity 
identification, careg iver skills 
training, p ractice & 
monitoring, 
generalize to other 
 
 
 
 
 Attention  
Control Group  
N = 80 Experimental 
Group  
N =[ADDRESS_158592] (T2) [ADDRESS_158593] (T3) 8 -month Home  Follow -up 
 Attention Control  
Education on 
home safety, falls 
prevention, advanced care planning, 
financial issues, 
use of activities  
 
Telephone evaluation of study participation 
(acceptability, quality control)  Unwilling to 
continue  Enrollment (N=160)  
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.04 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_13949] 11.17.14     
      
 
 
 
 
  
 Eligibility Criteria :  Inclusion Criteria for Veterans with dementia  include: 1) English speaking; 2) 
diagnosed with dementia as above; 3) able to participate in at least two activities of daily living 
(ADLs - bathing, dressing, grooming, toileting, transferring from bed to chair); and 4) not currently 
participating in any other dementia- related intervention. If the Veteran with dementia is on any of 
four classes of psychotropic medications (antidepressant, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], antipsychotic, or anti -
convulsant) or an anti- dementia medication (memantine or a cholinesterase inhibitor), we will 
require that he/she have been on a stable dose for 60 days prior to enrollment to minimize possible confounding effects of concomitant medications (the typi[INVESTIGATOR_139699])  and 5) 
[ADDRESS_158594] be: 1) English speaking, 2)  self-identify as 
the primary member of the family caring (hands -on or supervision) for the Veteran and 21 years of 
age or older (male or female),  Legal Authorized Representative (LAR),  3) living with the Veteran, 4) 
accessible by [CONTACT_139716], intervention sessions and follow -up interviews, 5) 
planning to live in area for 8 months (to reduce loss to follow -up), 6) indicate willingness to learn 
activity use, 7) report one or more NPS in the Veteran in the past month; and 8) not currently participating in any other caregiver -related intervention.  Finally, we will require that caregivers 
taking a psychotropic medication (antidepressant, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], antipsychotic, or anti -
convulsant) at time of telephone screen be on a stable dose of the medication for 60 days prior to enrollment . In the event more than one caregiver wishes to be involved in the study, the study team 
will obtain informed consent from each caregiver and will work with them as a caregiving unit.  
Recruitment Procedures:  Our recruitment and enrollment procedures primarily target the 
caregive rs of VA patients in geriatric service p rograms that are directed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Nannette 
Hoffman, co- investigator on this project. Services include Home Based Patient Care (HBPC)  
and the Homemaker Home Health Aide program.  Our recruitment strategy is based on over 
20 years experience with and success in enrolling families managing dementia in clinical 
trials. It will involve mailings to families identified through the VA services.  The mailing will 
include a letter from the medical director of the service ([CONTACT_139727]) explaining study procedures and inviting study participation and it will also include a descriptive flyer about 
the study.  Caregivers will be directed to either contact [CONTACT_139717] a post card in a self -addressed and stamped envelope that indicates an interest in 
being contact[CONTACT_139718].  Caregivers contact[CONTACT_139719]; and if interested, they will complete a brief telephone screen to determine eligibility. For caregiv ers eligible and willing 
to participate, a baseline interview will be conducted by a trained interviewer within 2 weeks of determination of eligibility, and prior to randomization to study group.  At the time of the 
interview, the Mini -mental Status Examination (MMSE) will be administered to the Veteran. 
For Veterans with MMSE scores>23, a follow -up telephone call with their physician to 
confirm a dementia diagnosis will be obtained.  Dyads eligible and willing following the baseline interview will be rando mized (see data analytic considerations ) to treatment or 
attention control . Caregivers who do not respond to the initial mailing will receive a second, 
duplicate mailing several months after the first mailing.   Subsequent recruitment letters , 
including the  flyer, will be sent to the following facilities in the NF/SGVHS study area: 
1. Altrusa House, Gainesville    
2. All Saints Daycare Center, Jacksonville             
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.[ADDRESS_158595]. Augustine 
4. Blessed Trinity Adult Elder Care Home, Ocala  
5. Tallahassee Memorial Rehabilitation  Center, Tallahassee 
6. Hope Adult Day Care, Inc., Jacksonville Beach 
7. VA Social Work Service , NF/SGVHS  
8. VA Mental Health Clinic , NF/SGVHS  
9. Al’z Place, Gainesville  
10. Brooks Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Jacksonville  
11. Park of the Palms, Keystone Height s 
These letters will request nursing staff and social workers  to ask Veterans or their caregivers 
who might benefit from or be interested in this study to call the study team at the toll free 
number listed on the flyer.  
 
     Subject Accrual, Replacement Rule, Subject Attrition and Retention:  Subject Accrual : 
Recruitment procedures will be implemented in month [ADDRESS_158596] year 01 and continue to mont h 3 
of year 04 for a total of 33  months with close to 5 dyads enrolled per month. Based on our previous 
caregiver studies, the typi[INVESTIGATOR_139700] a targeted mailing to families is 10% ; of 
responders, typi[INVESTIGATOR_139701] 80% are eligible to participate in our studies that have similar enrollment criteria as that proposed for this trial. Thus, as shown in Table 1, even with one mailing from the two 
primary VA recruitment sources, we would be able to obtain our target sample size of 160 even 
when a conservative estimate of a 60% eligibility rate is applied. The numbers in the table were 
based on projections developed from actual new patients in each NF/SG VHS service over the past 
two years, with data provided by [CONTACT_139720].  Thus, we do not anticipate difficulties obtaining the 
desired sample size dyads.   
Techniques:  The intervention is designed to tap into spared  or residual abilities and provide an 
environment supportive of these abilities.  The OTs select activities that build on preserved 
capabilities but do not tax areas of cognition that are most impaired (e.g., memory, new 
learning). In designing activities,  OTs simplify activity and structure it to focus on single rather 
than multiple or complex tasks, thereby [CONTACT_139721].  The activity environment is set up to 
provide auditory or tactile cues to facilitate recall and guide initiation and sequencing. By  
[CONTACT_139722]’s capabilities, the OT minimizes demand that may 
heighten stress (e.g., high functioning individuals will be introduced to more goal -directed and 
multi- step activities, whereas lower functioning individuals will be introduced to activities that are 
based on repetitive motion (e.g., washing windows, folding towels) and integrate multi -sensory 
stimulation (e.g., soft music, objects pleasant to touch). Whereas previous activity interventions 
emphasized new learning, our  approach does not, although it may entail some procedural 
learning if  appropriate.  
 TAP provides caregivers with the requisite knowledge and skills to use activities. Caregivers are 
instructed in specific skills such as ways to simplify activities, the environment and their communication, and how to help the Veteran initiate and follow a sequence. The overall goal is to 
provide predictability, familiarity and structure in the daily life of Veteran and caregiver  and establish 
a level of environmental stimulation appropriate to Veteran  abilities. Three clinical elements are 
used to enhance caregiver  receipt and enactment of intervention strategies: 1) the OT engages 
caregivers (vs being prescriptive ), 2) the caregiver is provided repeated opportunities for pr actice 
and modification of techniques, and 3) the OT uses validation and actively demonstrates techniques 
within the context of their use. Caregivers  are provided concrete knowledge as to what the Veteran  
is capable of doing (e.g., can grasp object such as  a plate) and his/her specific limitations (e.g., 
needs verbal cueing to place dish in cabinet).  With this knowledge, interventionists can help caregivers  cognitively restructure their expectations, behavioral goals and reactions to the Veteran. 
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.04 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_13949] 11.17.14     
 During tr eatment sessions , caregivers are taught to:  1) recognize capabilities and deficits, 2) 
translate capabilities into objective activity goals, and 3) generate specific steps to set up activities 
and help caregivers initiate/sequence.   
 7.  Possible Discomforts and Risks:  
This s tudy involves the delivery of an online caregiving training and telephone support 
for CGs of elderly Veterans with dementia . 
 
If a research staff member encounters a medical emergency over the telephone, we 
identify whether another individual is in the home, the person is put on hold and we call 911 immediately.  If the situation occurs within the home, then the staff person 
calls 911 immediately, and stays with participant until help arrives.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_139702] 24 hours of the event.  PI [INVESTIGATOR_139703] a follow -up 
within two days.  Research staff member completes alert form and provides to PI.   
 
 If a research staff person encounters a situation in which the person (Veteran or CG)  
threatens to hurt self immediately,  then staff person stays with person (on phone or 
in home), calls 911 and stays with individual until help arrives. If the person (Veteran 
or caregiver) is determined to not be an immediate threat to self, then the person is actively encouraged to contact [CONTACT_139723]. An agreement is obtained with the person that they will not hurt 
themselves. The research staff person also informs the person that a member of the 
research team will be contact[CONTACT_139724]/her sho rtly to follow -up. Immediately at the 
conclusion of the interview, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_139704]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_139705] (e.g., 
physician referral).  PI [INVESTIGATOR_139706] 24 hours of event and consultation 
with the team’s geriatrician will occur to review next steps.  Research staff person 
involved fills out Alert form and provides to PI.   
 
If caregiver scores in the high depressed range on the CES- D (>15 on 10- item ve rsion)  
in an interview, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_139707] -up with their physician.  Consultation by [CONTACT_50783]’s 
geriatrician will be obtained if necessary. Research staff person involved complet es 
Alert form and provides to PI.  
 
  
Evidence of physical abuse is as follows:  
1) Caregiver or Veteran with dementia states to research staff that abuse occurs;  2) or research staff observes physical evidence (black eye, black and blue marks on 
arms/legs)  
Research staff member informs participant that a senior member of the research team 
will contact [CONTACT_12552]/her later that day.  Staff member informs PI [INVESTIGATOR_139708]. PI (or designate) contacts participant  
to obtain further information.  Participant is strongly encouraged to call his/her physician and/or Adult Protective Services (phone number will be provided).  Based  
on the situation, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_139709]’s  
geriatri cian. PI (or designate) completes Alert form.  
 
The DSMB will be responsible for reviewing the safety of study participants during the conduct of this study and provide recommendations to the research team on specific aspects of the research 
protocol as it pertains to safety, potential study alerts and adverse events.  Specific responsibilities 
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.04 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_13949] 11.17.14     
 of the DSMB will be to:  a) provide an independent periodic review of recruitment and enrollment 
progress; b) review adverse events (AEs) including serious events and  offer recommendations 
regarding the trial based on such observed events; c) serve in a consultative capacity to the research team regarding study procedures to address ethical dilemmas (e.g., reporting of abuse), 
safety of subjects in the trial, and appropriateness of all study procedures.  
     Composition of the DSMB:  The DSMB will be an independent multi -disciplinary group 
consisting of biostatistical and research and clinical experts who collectively have experience in the treatment of depression, dementia and the environment, and the conduct and monitoring of 
randomized clinical trials that are c ommunity/home- based and nonpharmacologic.  The 5-member 
board has no apparent conflict of interest with the study including financial, scientific or regulatory  
in nature.  DSMB members are not employed by [CONTACT_139725] [INVESTIGATOR_139710].  DSMB members will be responsible for advising the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_139711]/or financial interests that occur during the course of the trial.  The DSMB and PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_139712] a conflict of interest. Any DSMB 
member who develops a conflict of interest during the course of the trial will be asked to resign 
from the DSMB and another person with similar areas of expertise will be sought.  Otherwise, 
DSMB membership is to be for the duration of the trial.   
     DSMB Meetings, Documentation:   The DSMB will have one face -to-face meeting prior to 
entering into the field for the trial and one tele- conference call each subsequent year unless the 
DSMB decides otherwise at its first organizational meeting. More frequent meetings or 
teleconferences may be held to review serious adverse events from the trial at the discretion of the DSMB.   At the initial meeting in year 01 (anticipated to occur in month 3 prior to entry into the 
field), the DSMB will review all study procedures including data collection forms, intervention 
protocol and oversight plan.  At this meeting, the DSMB will agree on whether there should be 
interim analyses of efficacy endpoints and, if so, the stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_139713]. Modifications to protocols based on the DSMB 
review will be made prior to entering the field. At subsequent conference calls, the DSMB will review the progress of the study (accrual rate, protocol deviations and interim study analyses if 
recommended) and make recommendations.  A representative of the research team will keep 
minutes of these meetings.  A copy of the minutes approved by [CONTACT_139726] -01. The minutes will include recommendations of the DSMB. Meetings of the DSM B will be 
open unless the DSMB requests otherwise.  A closed meeting of the DSMB may be requested if it 
is deemed necessary to review efficacy data.  The DSMB chair or his/her designate will take 
meeting notes of closed sessions.  
  Provision of Data for D SMB Review :  Interim Analyses:  We have elected to not consider 
interim analyses in this study due to the extended time for recruitment and the low likelihood of a sufficiently large effect that would make it possible to stop early.  However, we will revis it this 
decision with the DSMB at its first organizational meeting.    
 
 
 8.  Possible Benefits : 
Participants may learn about dementia and may be able to apply that knowledge in their daily 
CG activities. A better understanding of the responsibilities and varied activities of CGs of 
elderly Veterans with dementia will further research on the Veteran CG role: responsibilities, 
benefits and value.  
 
9. Conflict of Interest:  
Protocol    
IRB vers ion 03.09.[ADDRESS_158597] for the investigators . 