MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 1 of 9  
Date: ____06/25 /2019 ________________    
Version Number: __ 1________________  
Principal Investigator: ___ Timothy J. Wolf , OTD, PhD, OTR/L ______________  
Application Number: ___ 2015868 ________  
Application Title: Efficacy of Metacognitive -Strategy Training to Improve Activity Performance and Reduce 
Motor Impairment in Sub -Acute Stroke  
 
Protocol  
 
 
 
1. Abstract  
The long -term goal of this research is to improve activity performance and reduce motor 
impairment in individuals with stroke. There are two primary gaps in current stroke rehabilitation 
practice that must be addressed to achieve this goal: (1) current impairment- based approaches (e.g. 
motor) are not improving meaningful activity performance; and (2) current stroke rehabilitation interventions are often not designed to be clinically feasible and are rarely implemented into practice. The overall hypothesis of this proposal is that a clinically -feasible, activity -based 
intervention, metacognitive strategy training (MCST), will produce a significant improvement on 
objective and subjective measures of activity performance and motor function in comparison to a 
usual care occupational therapy (OT) group. These gains will transfer and generalize to untrained tasks in novel environments. The specific aims of this project are: (1) to evaluate the efficacy of MCST to improve subjective and objective activity performance in individuals with subacute stroke; and (2) 
to evaluate the efficacy of MCST to improve motor function in individuals with subacute stroke. 
Participants with subacute stroke living in the community with self -identified activity performance 
goals and hemiparesis will be recruited through a local stroke registry (n = 108). Those individuals who meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be randomized to either a MCST group or to a usual 
care occupational therapy group. Both groups will receive ten, [ADDRESS_1019099] -
intervention. Treatment efficacy outcomes will be analyzed with an intent- to-treat model with an 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Potential covariates will include age, stroke severity, degree of cognitive impairment, and degree of motor impairment. Independent samples t- test and chi- square 
test will be used to ensure successful randomization and balance between groups. Group differences 
at baseline that are statistically significant will also be considered as covariates in the analysis. Post-hoc tests will be employed as appropriate. Significance levels, effect sizes, and confidence intervals will be reported. Completion of this study is likely to result in an efficacious, clinically feasible 
intervention to improve activity performance and reduce motor deficits in individuals with stroke 
that can be feasibly implemented into current systems of care. The proposed study and anticipated outcomes are consistent with the research priority of the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (NCMRR), which is to focus on identifying, preventing, and treating key secondary 
conditions that are associated with physical impairments and disabilities, including stroke.  
 
2. Objectives  
 
The goal of this proposed project is to evaluate the efficacy of a clinically -feasible metacognitive 
strategy training (MCST) intervention, the Cognitive Orientation to daily Occupational Performance 
(CO-OP) approach, to improve activity performance and reduce stroke impairment for individuals 
with sub -acute stroke.  
 
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 2 of 9 3. Background  (briefly describe pre- clinical and clinical data, current experience with 
procedures, drug or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research)  
 
Contemporary stroke rehabilitation focuses on remediation of post- stroke impairments with a 
false assumption that reduction in impairments will automatically lead to improvements in activity 
performance. Specifically, stroke rehabilitation is focused primarily on the use of task -specific 
training (TST), which recent research has found to yield negligible improvement in upper  extremity 
motor function often consistent with or less than control conditions.1,2 These protocols are time intensive and often do not lead to transfer of training effects to improvement in activity performance. This is a common issue that has been evidenced in longitudinal studies of individuals with stroke; over half of stroke survivors continue to be dependent on others for the most basic of life activities 
after rehabilitation.3 Decreases in activity performance further contribute to lower life satisfaction, 
quality of life, and participation in daily life.3 -5  
Recent evidence highlights two primary issues in stroke rehabilitation. 1) Interventions are 
needed that directly target activity performance. Gains in upper extremity function, even using the 
most contemporary approaches, are not translating to meaningful gains in activity performance. 2) 
Interventions need to be clinically feasible for future implementation. In recent stroke rehabilitation clinical trials, participants  received an average of over 30 hours of therapy in only one treatment 
modality.1,2 Individuals in stroke rehabilitation receive a median of only 6 outpatient visits across all health care specialties combined (OT, PT, SLP, physiatrist).6  
Metacognitive strategy training (MCST), specifically the Cognitive Orientation to daily 
Occupational  
Performance (CO -OP) approach, is a potential solution to address both of these gaps. CO -OP is a 
performance- based, problem -solving approach that enables participants to improve task 
performance through cognitive strategy use.7 In our exploratory clinical trial for individuals with sub-acute stroke (n=26) we compared ten, [ADDRESS_1019100] (CO -OP) with dose- matched 
outpatient usual care outpatient occupational therapy (OT).7,[ADDRESS_1019101] (CO -OP) group 
demonstrated a large effect over usual care on objective measures of trained functional activities 
(d=1.6) and untrained functional activities ( d = 1.1).[ADDRESS_1019102] over usual care o utpatient OT on improving motor function ( r = 0.3)8  
 
4. Study Procedures  
 
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures (distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care).  
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants.  
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.  
d. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped.  
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non- treatment group.  
f. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
g. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if a participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely.  
 
a. We will use a single- blind, parallel, randomized clinical trial design. The raters who will complete 
all the outcome assessments will be blinded. Participants will be asked prescreening questions 
over the phone to determine eligibility. Following baseline testing (T1), subjects will be 
randomized to either receive ten 45 minute sessions of metacognitive- strategy training (the 
Cognitive Orientation to daily Occupational Performance approach) (CO -OP) or dose -matched 
usual care outpatient occupational therapy. Each group will receive a total of ten 45 -minute 
MU IRB version:  08/24/[ADDRESS_1019103] -intervention assessment (T2). A follow -up assessment will be conducted at three months post-
intervention assessment (T3).  
 
Name  [CONTACT_745085] 
(COPM) T1, T2, T3  The COPM is a semi -structured 
interview guide for establishing a subject's activity performance 
levels within self -care, leisure, 
and productivity.  
The subject will set a minimum of 5 activity goals, providng a 
self-rating of 1 -10 
Performance Quality Rating  
Scale (PQRS)  T1, T2, T3  The PQRS is an observational, 
objective method of scoring subject activity performance of goals set via the COPM. A blind, 
trained rater external  
to the research study team will 
view video recordings of each subject performing goals.  
Each goal is rated on a scale of 1 
(no activity criteria were met) 
to 10 (all activity criteria were 
met). The final score will be an 
average of all 5 goals.  
National Institutes of Health  
(NIH) Toolbox Cognition  
Battery  T1, T2, T3  The NIHTB -CB is a collection of 
[ADDRESS_1019104]- stroke hemiparesis. 
Each item is scored either a 0 (cannot perform), 1 (performs partially), or 2 (performs fully) 
with a maximum score of 66.  
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 4 of 9 In the present study, the upper 
extremity scaled  
scored will be utilized.  
Patient Health Questionnaire  
(PHQ -9) T1, T2, T3  The PHQ -[ADDRESS_1019105] experienced 9 depressive symptoms. The total score 
reflects the severity of 
depressive symptoms. A score of 21 or greater indicates severe depressive symptoms.  
This variable will be treated as a 
covariate.  
Montreal Cognitive  
Assessment (MoCA)  T1 The MoCA is a brief screener for 
dementia symptoms. Sixteen items are used to assess  
short -term memory, language, 
orientation, and visuospatial abilities. Within the present 
study, a previously established 
cut-off score of <[ADDRESS_1019106] Scale  (SIS)  T1, T2, T3  The SIS is a self -report measure 
of stroke recovery. Specifically, the measure assesses  
physical, cognitive, psychosocial, community  
mobility, and general activity performance on a 5 point Likert scale. There is an additional 
item for overall recovery rated 
on a scale of 0 (no recovery) to 
100 (full recovery).  
Life Space Questionnaire  T1, T2, T3  Self-reported measure of 
community mobility and  
social participation. It is comprised of 9 yes/no 
questions related to places 
visited in the previous three days. Total score will be used in 
analysis.  
  b. Involvement in this study will  consist of [ADDRESS_1019107] for approximately 24 weeks with a total time commitment between 13 -
14 hours as follows:  
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 5 of 9 • baseline assessment (2 hours),  
• CO- OP (ten, 45 minute sessions) or  
• usual care outpatient occupational therapy (ten, 45 minute sessions ), 
• post -intervention assessment (2 hours), and  
• follow -up assessment (2 hours).  
c. All raters who complete outcom e assessments will be blinded  to prevent  biased assessment of 
outcomes.  It is impractical to blind treating therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], participants, and key personnel for a 
behavioral study of this nature.  
d. This study does not request individuals to stop their routine care or current therapy. However, if a 
person is actively receiving rehabilitation for their upper extremity, they are not eligible to participate in this study as to avoid compromising the outcome measurement results.  
e. It is important to include a usual care Occupation therapy group, so as to evaluate if MCST is more effective at improving activity performance and reducing motor impairment.  
f. Participants will be removed from the study  if they fail to meet to  eligibility criteria or if  the 
participant fails to attend one assessment or two treatment visits and  research staff are not able to 
reach  the participant after several attempts .  
g. Participation in this study will not affect  the participant’s health care in any way , regardless  if their 
participation in the study ends  prematurely.   
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 Inclusion Criteria:  
• less than [ADDRESS_1019108]- stroke  
• adults age 50 -85 
• completed inpatient rehabilitation services (if recommended)  
• living in the community with or without caregiver support (i.e., not living in a skilled nursing 
facility)  
• ability to read, write, and speak English  
• self- identified activity performance goals per the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure 
(COPM) 
• upper extremity hemiparesis as indicated by a score of 1 -3 on the NIHSS motor arm score  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• inability to provide informed consent  
• severe depressive symptoms as indicated by a score >21 on the Patient Health Questionnaire 
(PHQ -9) 
• dementia symptoms as indicated by a score of <23 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA)  
• additional neurological diagnoses identified by [CONTACT_246402] (e.g., brain malignancy)  
• moderate or severe aphasia as indicated by a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scal e (NIHSS) 
aphasia score of 2 or higher  
• no voluntary movement in affected upper extremity as indicated by a score of 4 on the NIHSS 
motor arm score  
• anosognosia as indicated by [CONTACT_745080]  
• any other condition not otherwise specified that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_745076]  
• currently  receiving   outpatient  rehabilitation  for  their  upper  extremity  
 
 
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 6 of 9 6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
 
N/A  
 
7. Study Analysis Plan 
 
a. Primary outcome variable.  
b. Secondary outcome variables.  
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis.  
d. Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004].  
 
a. The primary ou tcome variable s will be the COPM, PQRS, and Upper Extremity Fugl -Meyer . 
b. The secondary outcome variables will be the NIH Toolbox, PHQ -9, MoCA, SIS, and Life Space 
Questionnaire.  
c. All data will be cleaned and checked for accuracy. Data accuracy will be evaluated using a 
double -data entry procedure (see Data Safety and Monitoring Plan). As a randomized design we 
expect the treatment groups to be well balanced. There is always the potential for differential 
attrition to result in treatment groups that are somewhat imbalanced with respect to potential covariates predictive of the outcomes (see Table 3). Prior to the initial analysis we will examine differences in potential covariates and those that exhibit statistically significant and clinically 
meaningful differences between groups will be included as covariates in the analysis. The primary 
analysis for Aims 1 & 2 will be a two -factor (Group, Time) analysis of variance (or covariance) with 
time the repeated factor. Following a statistically significant time by [CONTACT_745081], contrasts will be constructed to test for group differences by [CONTACT_745082]- group 
change from baseline at each time point. Estimation will be via maximum likelihood methods that do not require complete data for each participant but do assume the drop out mechanism is non-informative. The primary analysis follows the intention- to-treat principal, but should the groups 
differ with respect to drop -out or compliance we will treat “dose” as a covariate for a secondary 
analysis of each aim.  
d. This study will be stopped prior to its completion if: (1) the intervention is associated with 
adverse effects that call into question the safety of the intervention; (2) difficulty in study recruitment or retention will significantly impact the ability to evaluate the study endpoints; (3) any 
new information becomes available during the trial that necessitates stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356]; or (4) other 
situations occur that might warrant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356].  
 
8. Risks  
 There are no expected risks from participation in this study. This expectation is based on the 
nature of the behavioral study but also on substantial preliminary data across three clinical trials the PI [INVESTIGATOR_745077]/or similar behavioral interventions. The risks associated with participation in this study are no greater than what the subjects may encounter 
in everyday life. The f ollowing risks are considered rare possible risks from participation in this 
study.  
1. Breach of confidentiality: With any research study involving human subjects, there is a 
possible risk of  a breach of confidentiality where identifiable health information related to the 
subjects is inadvertently made available to individuals beyond the research team.  
2. There is the risk that confidentially will be initially broken if during the PHQ -[ADDRESS_1019109] two weeks, "Thoughts 
that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in some way," their treating physician 
will be notified. The interviewer will also give the participant mental health resources, including a 
psychiatrist and psychologist contact [CONTACT_3031]. If someone states they have intentions of 
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 7 of 9 hurting themselves we will encourage them to go to the emergency room for immediate support 
and care. If necessary, security will be called to escort them to the emergency room.  
3. Psychological distress: In rare circumstances, subjects may experien ce psychological 
distress while discussing changes in their abilities following stroke.  
4. Physical injury: Subjects will perform their chosen activity -related goals with trained 
rehabilitation personnel. Some of these goals involve physical activity (e.g., cooking), in which the 
subject could sustain a physical injury, such as a cut on the hand.  
5. There is the low risk that some questions during testing may make the participant feel 
bored or frustrated.  
 
9. Benefits  
 The subject may potentially experience benefit from participating in either the CO -OP 
intervention or from  usual care outpatient occupational therapy by [CONTACT_745083]/or experiencing less stroke- related impairment (e.g., motor 
impairment). The po tential benefits definitely outweigh the risks. The risks of participating in this 
study are minimal and  considered rare. The potential benefits of this study could also extend to the 
subjects’ family members and friends through decreases in caretaker burden as a result of potential gains in function on the part of the subject.  
We hope that in the future other people might benefit from this study  because it will help 
health care professionals determine the best intervention and assessment methods to use for persons with stroke in order to improve their ability to participate in everyday life activities and/or reduce  stroke -related impairment, e.g., motor impairment. This study  can help address this very 
important clinical issue.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
 Each subject  will be paid $50 following the each of the 3  assessment s, for a total of $ 150.00. The 
payments will be in the form of a University issu ed check mailed to participants’  homes within [ADDRESS_1019110] maintain an overall score of 80% to be compliant with 
MU IRB version:  08/24/[ADDRESS_1019111] during the 
next weekly meeting following the audit. Failure to maintain an 80% on any fidelity check will require individual instruction. For every participant, a minimum of two sessions are recorded: (1) 
one from sessions 2 -5; and (2)  one from sessions 6 -9. Additional sessions may be recorded and 
reviewed at the PIs discretion, if therapi[INVESTIGATOR_745078] 80% threshold.  
 
Subject Accrual and Compliance  
Subject accrual (including compliance with protocol enrollment criteria), status of all enrolled 
subjects, as of date of reporting, and outcome data accuracy (double- data entry) will be reviewed 
quarterly by a blind rater (confirmation by [CONTACT_745084]). Adherence data regarding 
study visits and intervention will be reviewed quarterly by [CONTACT_976]. Treatment fidelity will be reviewed 
quarterly by [CONTACT_976] (with CO -OP Academy). Adverse Events and rates will be reviewed quarterly by [CONTACT_976] 
[INVESTIGATOR_214058].  Review of the rate of subject accrual and compliance with inclusion/exclusion 
criteria will occur quarterly during the 3.5 year recruitment phase to ensure that: (1) a sufficient 
number of participants are being enrolled; (2) participants are meeting eligibility criteria; and (3) the 
targeted ethnic diversity goals outlined in the grant proposal are being met (see Inclusion of Women, 
Minorities, and Children).  
 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_520645]: (1) the intervention is associated with 
adverse effects that call into question the safety of the intervention; (2) difficulty in stud y 
recruitment or retention will significantly impact the ability to evaluate the study endpoints; (3) any new information becomes available during the trial that necessitates stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356]; or (4) other situations occur that might warrant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356] . 
 
Safety Review Plan 
Study progress and safety will be reviewed quarterly . Annual progress reports, including patient 
recruitment, retention/attrition, and AEs, will be provided to the University of Missouri Health 
Sciences IRB. The annual report will include a list and summary of AEs. In addition, the annual report 
will address (1) whether AE rates are consistent with pre- study assumptions; ( 2) reason for 
dropouts from the study; (3) whether all participants met entry criteria; (4) whether continuation o f 
the study is justified on the basis that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of the 
study; and (5) conditions whereby [CONTACT_72771]. The annual report 
will be provided to the sponsoring IC as part of the RPPR. The IRB and other applicable recipi[INVESTIGATOR_745079].  
 
13. References  
 
1. Lang CE, Strube MJ, Bland MD, et al. Dose response of task -s pecific upper limb training in people at  
l
east 6 months poststroke: A phase II, single
-bl
ind, randomized, controlled trial. Annals of neurology. 
2016;
80(3):[ADDRESS_1019112] of a task -oriented rehabilitation program on upper 
extremity recovery following motor stroke: the ICARE randomized clinical trial. Jama. 2016;315(6):571- 
581. 
 
3. Hartman- Maeir A, Soroker N, Ring H, Avni N, Katz N. Activities, participation and satisfaction one- year 
post stroke. Disability and rehabilitation. 2007;29(7):559 -566. 
 
4. Bergström AL, von Koch L, Andersson M, Tham K, Eriksson G. Participation in everyday life and life 
satisfaction in persons with stroke and their caregivers 3– 6 months after onset. Journal of rehabilitation 
medicine. 2015;47(6):508- 515. 
MU IRB version:  08/24/2018   Page 9 of 9  
5. Mayo NE, Wood- Dauphinee S, Côté R, Durcan L, Carlton J. Activity, participation, and quality of life 6  
months poststroke. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. 2002;83(8):1035- 1042.  
 
6. Chan L, Wang H, Terdiman J, et al. Disparities in outpatient and home health service utilization  
following stroke: results of a 9- year cohort study in Northern [LOCATION_004]. PM&R. 2009;1(11):997- 1003.  
 
7. McEwen S, Polatajko H, Baum C, et al. Combined cognitive- strategy and task -specific training improve  
transfer to untrained activities in subacute stroke: an exploratory randomized controlled trial.  
Neurorehabilitation and neural repair. 2015;29(6):526- 536. 
 
8. Wolf TJ, Polatajko H, Baum C, et al. Combined cognitive- strategy and task -specific training affects  
cognition and upper -extremity function in subacute stroke: an exploratory randomized controlled trial.  
American Journal of Occupational Therapy. 2016;70(2):7002290010p7002290011-  
7002290010p7002290010.  