 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Toward Understanding Drivers of Patient Engagement With Digital  
Mental Health Interventions – Part I 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Date: 9/28/[ADDRESS_365373] 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_44003] M Lipschitz, PhD  
 
Project Title: Toward Optimizing Digital Mental Health Interventions: A Clinic al Trial 
Aimed at Understanding What Drives Patient Engagement – Part 1  
 
Version Date: National Institute of Mental Health   
 
Version Name/Number: 9/28/23 
 
 
 
1.  Background and Significance 
 
Digital mental health interventions (DMHIs), delivere d via the internet and/or mobile apps, have 
the potential to remove many of the barriers that plag ue in-person behavioral health interventions. 
They can be widely disseminated at minimal marginal cost, do not require transportation or 
daytime appointments, and promote patient autonomy. Re views and meta-analyses suggest that 
DMHIs are effective in controlled research settings.1-3 But, in routine care implementations, 
effectiveness is limited by [CONTACT_299557].4,5 Only 20-50% of patients engage at the 
recommended frequency and/or complete the full course of  treatment.4,6,[ADDRESS_365374] 
hypothesis to date is that achieving reliable engagement  with DMHIs requires adding human 
support.8,9 But strategies for adding human support are widely vari ed—from less scalable options 
like weekly phone calls with a clinician to more scalable o ptions such as asynchronous 
communication with a health coach —and little is known about the impact of the more scalab le 
strategies. A less explored, even more scalable strategy for improving engagement is automated 
motivational messaging (AMM). While AMM has been effect ive in some trials,10,[ADDRESS_365375] 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.10  Page 2 of 8  3. General Description of Study Design 
 
This is an in situ user-centered design study for the autom ated motivational push messaging we 
are developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Users will download an example DMHI ( IntelliCare) use it for three weeks. In 
tandem, they will receive automated motivational push me ssages from the set that we have in 
development on a randomized schedule. That is, each day t hey will be randomized to either 
receive an automated motivational push message (60% likeli hood) or not receive an automated 
motivational message (40% likelihood). On days when they re ceive a push message, they will 
then be promoted to complete a brief survey on their re action to the push message. They will 
also be asked to complete weekly symptom ratings . At the end of three weeks, they will be 
asked to complete a qualitative interview to provide further feedback on messages under 
development.  
 
The primary outcome in this study is user ratings from the brief surveys provided after push 
notification delivery . We will also, however, look at user feedback on messages un der 
development in the qualitative interview as well as wh ether receiving a message makes users 
more likely to engage with the DMHI (IntelliCare) du ring the three hours following message 
delivery. 
 
4. Subject Selection 
 
We will enroll up to 40 patients with clinically signifi cant anxiety and/or depression. Inclusion 
criteria will be: (i) Age 18+; (ii) Patient Health Q uestionare-8 (PHQ- 8) score ≥10 and/or 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD- 7) score ≥8; (iii) owns a smartp hone; (iv) fluent in English ; 
and (v) have a MGB primary care provider. Exclusion criter ia will include: (i) diagnosis of bipolar 
disorder, any psychotic disorder, or a current substance use d isorder per patient’s report or 
medical record; (ii) acute and/or unstable medical pr oblem that may interfere with participation 
(e.g., scheduled for surgery in the next two months). 
 
Thus, enrollment will be open to all English-speaking, adult, MGB primary care patients with 
clinically significant depression and/or anxiety and no cur rent or past serious mental illness or 
acute medical illness that may interfere with participati on. Potential subjects who do not speak 
English will be excluded from the study due to the fact t hat not all of the validated assessments 
used are available in languages aside from English. A dditional eligibility criteria will be added as 
needed after recruitment of N=10 participants to ensur e adequate representation of racial 
minorities and men (who are historically underrepresen ted in studies on depression and anxiety 
disorders). 
 
Subjects will be recruited from the Mass General Brigha m Clinical Trials website/Rally and 
RPDR patients who have not opted out of Research Invita tions. We will send IRB-approved 
recruitment letters by [CONTACT_299558].  We will also recruit from ongoing 
studies across the MGB system being conducted by [CONTACT_299559] h IRB approval to offer 
current participants opportunities to participate in oth er ongoing research. An IRB-approved 
telephone script will be utilized by [CONTACT_299560]-screen subjects prior to 
scheduling. 
 
 
 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.[ADDRESS_365376] has been pre-screened, the study research assistant will review the 
consent form verbally with eligible subjects. Eligible sub jects will be given an opportunity to ask 
questions by [CONTACT_648].  Potential subjects are not required to sign the consent on-the-spot, they 
are able to carefully read the document and discuss the r esearch with their family, friends 
and/or physician and develop questions to ask the research st aff. Once they have read the 
consent document and their questions are answered by a q ualified member of the study staff, if 
they agree to participate in the research, they will b e provided a copy of the consent form via 
REDCap to sign.  
 
Consented subjects will be scheduled for a study enrollmen t call via phone or Zoom based on 
the participants’ preference. During this call, participants will be guided through the download 
process for the study intervention app (Intellicare) and the push notification delivery/survey app 
(MyDataHelps and/or Catalyst by [CONTACT_299561]) on their pe rsonal smartphone. Participants will be 
randomized each day over the next three weeks to either r eceive a push notification from the 
pool of notifications being tested (60% probability) or not (40% probability). Daily randomization 
will be done using the R package randomizeR. 
 
6. Study Procedures 
 
User-centered, participatory design consists of iterative q ualitative feedback meetings with 
patients (i.e., participants).  Up to 40 participants will be recruited for this study. After scre ening 
(by [CONTACT_648]), eligible participants will be invited to pa rticipate in the study. After consent, but prior 
to enrollment, study staff will check diagnoses in particip ants’ EPIC chart to ensure that 
participants do not meet exclusion criteria. 
 
The first step in study participation will be for partici pants to complete an enrollment call and an 
enrollment survey in REDCap. The enrollment survey will i nclude a demographic questionnaire, 
the Technology Adoption Propensity Scale, symptom surveys a nd a brief enrollment survey on 
messaging preferences. The enrollment call will be conduct ed via phone or Zoom (per the 
participant’s preference) with study staff . The call will entail walking users through downloadin g 
the study intervention app (IntelliCare) and the push  notification delivery/survey app 
(MyDataHelps and/or Catalyst by [CONTACT_299561]) on their per sonal smartphone. Participants will be 
told that IntelliCare is most effective when used on a daily basis and be asked to respond to 
surveys attached to push notifications by [CONTACT_53737][INVESTIGATOR_299553] p ush notification. Participants will then 
be randomized each day to either receive a push notifi cation from the pool of notifications being 
tested (60% probability) or no notification (40% proba bility). On days when a push notification is 
received, they will have the opportunity to respond to a  brief survey in the MyDataHelps and/or 
Catalyst by [CONTACT_299562]. Participants will earn $2 for each 
push notification survey they complete. At the end of we ek 1 and week 2, participants will be 
prompted to complete a depression severity self-report  measure (PHQ-8) and an anxiety severity 
self-report measure (GAD-7) and will earn $5 each wee k these are completed. 
 
Three weeks later, participants will be invited to engag e in a study visit, either in lab or remotely 
via Zoom, based on current COVID- 19 prevention guidelines and the participant’s preferen ce. 
Study visits will last up to [ADDRESS_365377] 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.[ADDRESS_365378] about 
digital mental health interventions and/or the goal of the automated motivational messaging being 
developed . They will then be asked to complete a brief self-report q uestionnaire including the 
PHQ-8, GAD-7 and a repeat administration of the enro llment survey (to evaluate whether answers 
have changed). The remainder of the meeting will consist  of a qualitative interview focused on 
generating subject feedback on design and content considera tions in development of automated 
motivational messages. Subjects will be asked to offer ad ditional feedback related to messages 
received over the preceding 3 weeks and be presented wit h low-fidelity prototypes  of additional 
messages not delivered in the preceding 3 weeks with  open-ended questioning used to generate 
feedback.  
 
Participants will be paid $50 for participation in the  study visit. All meetings with participants will 
be audio recorded and recordings will be immediately t ransferred onto Partners secure servers 
and deleted from the recording device. All recording d evices will be stored in the PI’s lab in a 
locked file cabinet. 
 
The primary outcome in this study is user ratings on message likeability and message 
motivation from the brief surveys provided after push no tification delivery. We will also, however, 
look at user feedback on messages under development in the  qualitative interview as well as 
whether receiving a message makes users more likely to e ngage with the DMHI (IntelliCare) 
during the three hours following message delivery. 
 
The intervention offered as part of this study is only int ended to facilitate user-centered design 
and will be presented as such. It will not be consider ed part of the participant’s treatment plan 
nor will it be presented as an alternative to other t reatment. Neither participation in this study nor 
engagement with the intervention app prohibit partici pants from engaging with other treatments 
for depression and/or anxiety. This study does not involve ong oing assessment of clinical 
symptoms because this is not an outcome consistent with study aims. If at any point, a 
participant expresses that participation in the study may be adversely impacting his or her 
mental health, study staff will make it clear to the pa rticipant that he or she can choose to 
withdraw at any time.  Participants can be removed from the study at any time at their own 
request.  
7. Risks and Discomforts 
 
Foreseeable risks that might exist are described in the foll owing four categories: (a) risks 
associated with the intervention; (b) risks associated with st udy visits; (c) risks associated with 
potential loss of confidentiality; and (d) risks of worse ning mental or emotional state.  
(a)Risks associated with the intervention: Technology-enab led mental health intervention 
programs have not been shown to cause any harm. The clinic al risks of the intervention used in 
this study are very low. The digital mental health inter vention being used in this study 
(IntelliCare) has been studied previously with no serio us adverse events and potential for 
clinical benefit. The IntelliCare suite is already in pu blic use. Participants may continue with or 
begin any other treatments they choose for anxiety and/or  depression while they are engaging 
in the app-based intervention.  
 
(b)Risks associated with study visits: Subjects may experience  fatigue from the study visits, and 
potential discomfort from the nature of questions. Som e of the questions asked in the qualitative 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.[ADDRESS_365379].  Risks involving the compromise  of privacy and confidentiality during 
study visits will be minimized through the utilization of the PI ’s laboratory space, where there are 
private rooms for study visits and infrastructure in place t o ensure the proper adherence to IRB-
approved protocol such as the use of password protected c omputers and locked storage space.  
 
(c) Risks associated with potential loss of confidentiality . As with all studies, potential loss of 
confidentiality is also a risk. Risks in this study are minimize d by [CONTACT_299563] –REDCap, the MyDataHelps and Catalyst by [CONTACT_299564]. 
The IntelliCare app can be used anonymously with parti cipants labeled by a study ID number 
only.  Additionally, questionnaire data collected has been lim ited to only those measures 
essential for addressing primary aims of this project. Stil l, there is some possibility that others 
may see the app open on the participant’s smartphone. The re is also the possibility that 
databases may be hacked. Confidentiality may be broken by [CONTACT_299565]’s safety if there is an immin ent threat to self or others. All of these potential losses of 
confidentiality will be disclosed in the consent docume nts.  
 
(d)Risks of worsening mental or emotional state: It is no t believed that the risk of these 
depressive, anxious, suicidal, or other adverse outcomes ar e increased as a function of being 
enrolled in this study. However, due to the common course  of depression and anxiety, it is 
expected that there will be exacerbations in symptoms of so me participants over the course of 
the study. Subjects may pursue all treatment services they o therwise would alongside 
participating in this study.  
While there is no point in which we are assessing current  suicidality, several procedures are in 
place to protect participants who convey suicidality in th e course of their participation. Language 
in participants’ free -form responses to questions in the intervention app (I ntelliCare) are 
continuously monitored by [CONTACT_299566]. If any wo rds related to death, suicidality or 
means of suicidality (e.g., gun, pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]) are mentioned, t he participant will receive an automated 
message indicating the followi ng “IntelliCare is NOT an emergency service. If you do not feel  
safe and need immediate police or medical assistance, call  9-1-[ADDRESS_365380] 
emergency room.” Additionally, the study PI (or covering clinician) would receive an alert and 
call the participant.  Additionally, if at any time, a subject communicates any im minent safety risk, 
they will be assessed by [CONTACT_978] (a licensed psychologist) or  a covering clinician and referred for 
immediate care if it is clinically determined. 
8. Benefits 
 
There may be no immediate benefits to you from participa tion in this research study; however, 
results may allow researchers to design effective ways to be tter engage patients with digital 
mental health interventions. Subjects engaged in this t ype of participatory design research, 
sometimes report a sense of accomplishment from partici pation.  
 
9. Statistical Analysis 
 
The primary aims of this study are qualitative and descript ive consistent with user-centered 
design standards. Descriptive data will be collected on the following: average likability ratings for 
messages sent, average motivation ratings for messages sen t, percentage of the time users 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.10  Page 6 of 8  engaged with the intervention app (IntelliCare) wit hin three hours of receiving a message. Daily 
randomization of message delivery is being applied to mirror message frequency delivery to 
what we intend to use in the clinical trial not to inf er causality.  
 
Data from qualitative interviews will be analyzed using a  rapid qualitative analysis approach.12 
Final decisions on messaging will be made in consultatio n with my mentorship team with t he 
goal of producing 10- 15 messages in each “bucket” (i.e., targeting attitude,  self-efficacy and 
habit strength respectively) to avoid delivering redund ant messages in the clinical trial.  
 
10.   Monitoring and Quality Assurance 
 
As the proposed study involves no more than minimal risk to  subjects, there is no formal Data 
Safety Monitoring Board established for this study. The P I will review safety data in real time to 
address any concerning adverse events and discuss these with  her mentor, [CONTACT_299570]. [CONTACT_299571] has served as an active member of three IRBs over th e past 15 years and will ensure 
that all AEs are appropriately reported and followed up. 
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_299554]. We do not a nticipate frequent problems given that 
this is a minimal risk protocol; however, we will closely monitor data collected in the event of any 
unanticipated problems. In the event of any unanticipat ed problems and adverse events we will 
report to the PHRC: 1) during the conduct of the stud y, 2) after study completion, or 3) after 
subject withdrawal or completion. Reports are to be subm itted within 5 working days/[ADDRESS_365381] becomes aware of  the problem, as outlined in Partners 
System-wide policy. 
 
Self-report data will be collected in REDCap and the  HIPAA-compliant MyDataHelps and/or 
Catalyst by [CONTACT_299567]. Additionally, de-identified  participant engagement data will be 
collected automatically via the IntelliCare app. Assuranc e of data validity and integrity will be 
monitored closely by [CONTACT_978]. Similarly, audio recordings o f subject interviews will be uploaded 
onto the research drive (and deleted from the record ing device) the day the interview is 
conducted. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_299555]-approved protocol. 
 
11.   Privacy and Confidentiality 
 
☒ Study procedures will be conducted in a private setting 
☒ Only data and/or specimens necessary for the conduct of the study will be collected 
☒ Data collected (paper and/or electronic) will be maintained in a secure location wi th appropriate 
protections such as password protection, encryption, physical security measures (locked 
files/areas) 
☐ Specimens collected will be maintained in a secure location with appropriate protectio ns (e.g. 
locked storage spaces, laboratory areas) 
☒ Data and specimens will only be shared with individuals who are members of the IRB-approved 
research team or approved for sharing as described in this IRB protocol 
☒  Data and/or specimens requiring transportation from one location or electro nic space to 
another will be transported only in a secure manner (e.g. encrypted files, password protecti on, 
using chain- of-custody procedures, etc.) 
Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.10  Page 7 of 8  ☒   All electronic communication with participants will comply with Mass General  Brigham secure 
communication policies 
☒ Identifiers will be coded or removed as soon as feasible and access to files linking ident ifiers 
with coded data or specimens will be limited to the minimal necessary members of the research 
team required to conduct the research 
☒ All staff are trained on and will follow the Mass General Brigham policies and procedur es for 
maintaining appropriate confidentiality of research data and specimens 
☒ The PI [INVESTIGATOR_157792] 
(RISO) requirements for this research 
☒ Additional privacy and/or confidentiality protections 
  
Risks in this study are minimized by [CONTACT_299568] a collection tools – REDCap, the 
MyDataHelps and Catalyst by [CONTACT_299569]. The IntelliCare app can be 
used anonymously with participants labeled by a study ID nu mber only.  Additionally, 
questionnaire data collected has been limited to only t hose measures essential for addressing 
primary aims of this project. Finally, risks involving the com promise of privacy and confidentiality 
during study visits will be minimized through the utilization of the PI’s labo ratory space , where 
there are private rooms for study visits and infrastructure in place to ensure the proper 
adherence to IRB-approved protocol such as the use of p assword protected computers and 
locked storage space. 
 
12.   References 
 
1. Firth J, Torous J, Nicholas J, et al. The efficacy of smartphone‐based mental health interventions 
for depressive symptoms: a meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials. World Psychiatry . 
2017;16(3):287-298. doi:10.1002/wps.[ZIP_CODE] 
2. Richards D, Richardson T. Computer-based psychological treatments for depression: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review . June 2012 2012;32(4):329-342. 
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2012.02.004 
3. Firth J, Torous J, Nicholas J, Carney R, Rosenbaum S, Sarris J. Can smartphone mental health 
interventions reduce symptoms of anxiety? A meta-analysis of randomized controlled t rials. Journal of 
Affective Disorders . 2017/08/15/ 2017;218:15-22. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.046  
4. Hensel JM, Shaw J, Ivers NM, et al. A Web-Based Mental Health Platform for Individuals Seeking 
Specialized Mental Health Care Services: Multicenter Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Tr ial. J Med 
Internet Res . Jun 2019;21(6):e10838. doi:10.2196/[ZIP_CODE] 
5. Karyotaki E, Riper H, Twisk J, et al. Efficacy of Self-guided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy in the Treatment of Depressive Symptoms: A Meta-analysis of Individual Participant Data.  JAMA 
Psychiatry . Apr 2017;74(4):351-359. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.0044 
6. Gilbody S, Brabyn S, Lovell K, et al. Telephone-supported computerised cognitive-behavioural 
therapy: REEACT-2 large-scale pragmatic randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry . 
May 2017;210(5):362-367. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.116.[ADDRESS_365382] sector self help clinic. Behavioral and Cognitive 
Psychotherapy . 2011;39:427-442. doi:10.1017/S1352465810000858 
8. Kelders SM, Kok RN, Ossebaard HC, Van Gemert-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_299556]. Persuasive system design does 
matter: a systematic review of adherence to web-based interventions. J Med Internet Res . Nov 
2012;14(6):e152. doi:10.2196/jmir.[ADDRESS_365383] 
Intervention/Interaction Detailed Protocol 
 
Version 2021.06.10  Page 8 of 8  9. Andersson G, Cuijpers P. Internet-based and other computerized psychological treatments for  
adult depression: a meta-analysis. Cogn Behav Ther . 2009;38(4):196-205. 
doi:10.1080/16506070903318960 
10. Bidargaddi N, Almirall D, Murphy S, et al. To Prompt or Not to Prompt? A Microrandom ized Trial 
of Time-Varying Push Notifications to Increase Proximal Engagement With a Mobile Healt h App. JMIR 
Mhealth Uhealth . Nov 2018;6(11):e10123. doi:10.2196/[ZIP_CODE] 
11. Kelders SM, Bohlmeijer ET, Pots WT, van Gemert-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_299556]. Comparing human and automated 
support for depression: Fractional factorial randomized controlled trial. Behav Res Ther . Sep 2015;72:72-
80. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2015.06.014 
12. Hamilton AB . Qualitative methods in rapid turn-around health services research. Health services 
research & development cyberseminar. 2013 Dec 11:2023-03.  
 