  
 Center Alcohol and Addiction Studies  
Brown University  
 
 
TITLE: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69902]: Carolina L. Haass -Koffler   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IND121984  
DATE:  December 15 2014  
 
 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
2 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
  
 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69904]:  
Carolina L. Haass -Koffler, PharmD , PhD  
Brown University , Providence, RI  
(415) 519 -1385  
(401)  863-6630  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Objective: The primary objective s of the study include: A) Establish the safety and tolerability of using 600mg of 
mifepristone and 32.4mg yohimbine while consuming alcohol; and B) Demonstrate  the feasibility of the study 
design an d obtain an effect size to estimate a sample size for a n appropriately powered larger R01 application 
using mifepristone and yohimbine together when administering alcohol.    
Rationale:  Glucocorticoids (GC) mediate adaptation to stress and regulate termin ation of the stress response 
through the hypothalamic –pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] –adrenal (HPA) axis feedback action. The link between stress and chronic 
relapsing alcohol -use disorders (AUD) and substance -use disorders (SUD) has long been established in the 
addiction resea rch field. Preclinical studies show the GC -receptor antagonist , mifepristone , reduces behavioral 
hyperexcitability during the acute phase of alcohol withdrawal, suggesting that mifepristone is a promising 
pharmacotherapy for alcoholic individuals to reduce  the cognitive deficits caused by [CONTACT_69946]. In our preclinical studies, we showed that in conditions where stress is limited, mifepristone 
has no effect on alcohol intake, corroborating the hypothesis that GC blockade represents a key element in the 
preoccupation/anticipation  (craving) stage of the addiction cycle. However, what remains unknown is the role of 
mifepristone in stress -induced craving and relapses of alcohol drinking in humans.  
Overview of Study Design:  The design will be a randomized within, crossover, double -blind, placebo -controlled 
human study with mifepristone in non -treatment -seeking -alcohol -dependent individuals. The study will be 
conducted in in consecutive phases (Figure 1):  
Visit#1: Screening;  
Visit#2: Randomization and drug/placebo dispensed  (for seven days) ;  
Visit#3: First lab -session: single dose of yohimbine;  
Visit#4: Washout period , follow -up (one month ) and drug/placebo dispensed  (for seven days) ; 
Visit#5: Second lab -session, single dose of  yohimbine; Motivational session (MET) ; 
Visit#6: Follow -up (one month) ; END o f STUDY . 
 
Study Population:  Sixty -five non -treatment -seeking, alcohol -dependent participants will be recruited.  Fifty -
eight  participants will be enrolle d for screening  with 50 participants (n = 50)  expected to complete the study.  
Participants will primarily be recruited via advertisements placed in local newspapers and posted on buses.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
3 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 Safety Measurement/Parameters:  Risks of medication side effects will be minimized through careful and detailed 
screening of participant. Signs of anxiety and stress, adverse events and vital signs will be assessed at each visit  
by [CONTACT_69947] . Safety laboratory tests and will be evaluated at baseline , and at th e end of the 
study participant s will receive a behavioral motivational session  at the end of Visit 5 .  
Financial considerations:   There will be no cost(s) to participate in this study. The study medication s and all 
procedures that are not part of routine c are, but are required for the study, will be provided to the participant.  If eligible 
for the study, participants will receive $2 5 for the randomization visit ( Visit# 2) and for the follow -up visit s (Visits #4 
and #6). During the laboratory phase, at each  visit ( Visits #3 and #5) participants are compensated $ 100 + another 
possible $ 3/drink as incentive for not drinking (max $24).  Therefore, each participant may be compensated up to 
$323 during the entire study period.  Participant s will be also compensated  for their travel costs.  
Specific Aims:  
Aim 1: to assess the safety and tolerability of mifepristone and yohimbine while consuming alcohol.  
Aim 2:  to test the hypothesis that an increase in alcohol craving induced by [CONTACT_69948] -
adminis tration with mifepristone.  
Aim 3:  to test the hypothesis that an initial priming drink and alcohol consumption induced by [CONTACT_69949] -administration with mifepristone.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
4 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS                        2 
TABL E OF CONTENTS                        3 
SPECIFIC AIMS                          4 
RATIONALE AND SIGNIFICANCE TO THE ALCOHOL FIELD             5 
Stress and alcohol dependence                     5 
Clinical relevance                         5 
Pharmacological stre ss targets                     5 
Mifepristone                          5 
Stress -induced models                       6 
Integration: psychoneuroendocrinology and trauma factors              [ADDRESS_76204] Risks                       11 
Recruting and Inform Consent Form (ICF)                             12 
Insuring Informed Consent and Comprehension                 12 
Psychological Assesments                      13 
Screening and randomization                      14 
Inclusion an d Exclusion Criteria (Table 1)                  14 
Source of Materials                        15 
Description of Potential Risks                      15 
Medications and Drug -drug interactions                   16 
Drug Storage and Accountability                     18 
Mifepristone and yohimbine administration                  18 
Alcohol Cue -Reactivity (CR) and Alcohol -Self-Administration  (ASA) experiments        19 
Adverse Events                         19 
Potential Benefits of Proposed Research                  22  
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained                  22 
Inclusion of Women, Minorities and Children                  22 
BIBLIOGRAPHY & REFER ENCES CITED                   23 
 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
5 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76205] been well described; however, the integral mechanisms by [CONTACT_69950]. The leading goal of this study is to evaluate preventive 
pharmacological interventions that can dampen the influence of stress on alcohol consumption and relapse in 
AUD populations . This protocol will test a preclinical model that investigated wheth er mifepristone, a 
glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, plays a role on yohimbine -induced reinstatement of ethanol  seeking. This 
model builds on the hypothesis and evidence that glucocorticoid receptors play a role in the reinstatement 
behaviors elicited by  [CONTACT_59848], an  α-[ADDRESS_76206], known to induce reinstatement of ethanol -
seeking behaviors.  
Translating preclinical paradigms into effective models for assessing pharmacological approaches  for stress -
induced alcohol relapse in humans requires a comprehensive model capable of integrating: alcohol -proximal 
variables that influence drinking (withdrawal symptoms, craving), neuroendocrine  variations (cortisol), and 
stress -risk factors (different temporal traumatic events ). A comprehensive stress mod el is needed because 
emotional distress, neuroendocrine activation, stress -related genetic variations, craving , and alcohol 
consumption do not necessarily overlap in alcohol -dependent individuals. Mifepristone may be a valuable 
pharmacotherapeutic strategy  for preventing relapse to AUD, and yohimbine is a pharmacological stressor 
capable of increasing craving, creating recall of traumatic memories , and altering neuroendocrine levels in 
alcohol -dependent individuals. As FDA -approved medications, both  mifepri stone and yohimbine  have the 
advantage of being directly applicable to an alcohol clinical setting and being utilized in the translational efforts 
described in this application.  
The overall objective  of this study is to conduct a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_69905] y study consisting of a placebo -
controlled assessment of the effects of 600 mg of mifepristone for a week, in a stress -induced condition 
triggered by a single dose of 32.4 mg of yohimbine in non -treatment -seeking -alcohol -dependent individuals. In 
the follo wing specific aims, I propose:  
Aim 1 : to assess the safety and tolerability of mifepristone and yohimbine while consuming alcohol. 
Randomized participants will complete two alcohol laboratory sessions along with a battery of physiological 
and psychological  assessments that measure adverse events and pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic 
(PD) interactions.  
Aim 2 : to test the hypothesis that an increase in alcohol craving induced by [CONTACT_69951] -administration with mifepristone.  To test this  hypothesis, we will  establish the effect of mifepristone 
on alcohol cue -elicited craving during  a cue-reactivity (CR) experiment  along with a series of physiological and 
psychological tests assessing alcohol craving.  
Aim 3 : to test the hypothesis that an initial priming drink and alcohol consumption induced by 
[CONTACT_69948] -administration with mifepristone.  To test this hypothesis, we will  
establish the effect of mifepristone in an alcohol self -administration (ASA) experiment. We will als o establish if 
mifepristone has an effect on alcohol PK/PD levels.  The data obtained from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_69906]/PD safety data to support a future study and an effective 
sample size for an a ppropriately -powered larger R01 application.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
6 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 RATIONALE AND SIGNIFICANCE TO THE ALCOHOL FIELD  
Stress and alcohol dependence . Stressful events may lead to a wide range of health and psychiatric 
illnesses including alcohol use disorders (AUD)1-4. Furthermore, exposure to stress at multiple time points 
across an individual life course is associated with risk for AUD4,5. Though stress has been difficult to define6,7, it 
has been widely studied in the AUD field because it has been identified as one of the key factors contributing 
to escalation from social drinking to alcohol dependence8. In addition, AUD prognosis appears to be affected 
by [CONTACT_69952], both of which appear to promote alcohol craving9,[ADDRESS_76207], as this strategy may both lessen acute distress and 
promote stress resilience during alcohol abstinence. Thus, blunting and resetting the stress system could 
represent an effective and exciting novel pharmaceutical target for treating AUD.   
Phar macological stress targets . Stress responses involve the ( a) neural corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) 
system, and ( b) activation of the hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal (HPA) axis leading to increases in 
glucocorticoids (GCs)24. The use  of alcohol dysregulates the stress system both at the neural CRF25-[ADDRESS_76208] 
shown efficacy in preclinical ethanol models33,34 and are currently in clinical trials ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] and 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). Preliminary results from those studies, in line with preclinical findi ngs35,26, report that 
medications targeting the CRF system may  be more effective in treating alcohol -dependent individuals to 
prevent stress -induced craving and relapse than preventi ng alcohol relapse that is not related to stressor 
triggers36.  
Alternative pharmacological targets within the stres s system are the GCs, which interact with many 
neuroendocrine systems37-[ADDRESS_76209] of GC function, mifepristone  is used to treat disorders that occur when the body is exposed 
to high levels of cortisol (Cushing syndrome49 and psychological disorders50). Mifepristone may have the 
potential to “reset” a dysregulated HPA axis, as it upregulates GC receptor function, restores  normal HPA 
feedback, decreases depression -like behavior, and attenuates relapse51. 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
7 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76210] on alcohol 
intake47,52-54, corroborating the hypothesis that GC receptors represent a key element in the 
preoccupation/anticipation (craving) stage of the addiction cycle. What remains unknown is the effect of 
mifepristone in acute stress precipi[INVESTIGATOR_69907].   
Stress -induced models . One of the most challenging aspects in designing a human laboratory study is the 
inclusion of an acute stress condition intended to represent a comprehensive naturali stic environment in 
chronic alcohol -dependent individuals. Hence, testing pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_59792] -induced relapse models in 
alcohol laboratory paradigms is critical for the identification and development of therapeutic interventions to 
prevent alcohol relapse. Because the level of stress experienced by [CONTACT_69953], for this 
pharmacotherapy proposal, I will use a mode l that integrates a pharmacological stress -induction paradigm with 
cue-reactivity (CR session) and alcohol self -administration (ASA session) laboratory measures in non - 
treatment -seeking alcohol -dependent individuals.  
Pharmacological challenges such as yoh imbine, an α-[ADDRESS_76211] been shown to activate 
the primary events of stress response (CRF/ACTH/cortisol) in addition to increasing sympathetic nervous 
system activity55, facilitating recall of traumatic memories56, and increasing alcohol craving correlated with 
alcoholism severity57. Although acute psychological  stressors presented in the laboratory have the advantage 
of modeling stress -induced emotions (anxiety, frustration, and embarrassment) encountered by [CONTACT_69954], they  do not create the cascade of neuroendocrine events that likely trigger the urge to drink and 
lead to rela pse under naturalistic conditions. Physical stressors (cold presser test or isometric handgrip) induce 
cardiovascular activation and discomfort, but produce limited cortisol activation and no increase in craving in 
alcoholics58,59. Yohimbin e provides a safe57,60 pharmacological opportunity to overcome methodological 
weaknesses in studying the impac t of realistic mobilization of neuroendocrine processes during an acute, 
transient stress on human cognition.  Yohimbine, being a FDA -approved oral medication, has the advantage of 
being directly applicable to an alcohol clinical setting and utilized in the  translational efforts described in this 
application .  
Integration: psychoneuroendocrinology and trauma factors.  In addition to acute life stressors, direct 
contributors to stress neuroendocrine dysregulation include early -61-63 and late -life64 trauma. Individuals who 
experienced life trauma may use alcohol to help cope w ith trauma -related symptoms. Recent investigations 
highlight the importance of assessing trauma among patients with alcoh ol use disorders65-67. This stress study 
will incorporate the life traumatic experiences to evaluate their association with neuroendocrine changes68,69 
and the later development of AUD65.  
Significance to the field and for NIAAA . This proposed study is consistent with the mission of National 
Institute on Alcoh ol Abuse and Alcoholism ( NIAAA)  to “promote the identification  and prevention  of alcohol and 
other drug use problems in our society through research.” This proposed study meets two of the needs of 
research on the field of alcoholism: 1) to develop new phar macotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_30260]; and 2) to elucidate 
mechanisms by [CONTACT_69955]. This research will add to the 
current knowledge about the potential benefits of mifepristone by [CONTACT_69956] -elicited urge, 
the effects of drinking, and its effects on alcohol -free choice during stressful events . Although it is a priority of 
NIAAA to develop new AUD therapeutic interventions, currently there are only four FDA -approved medications 
to treat AUD. All of t hese interventions exhibit limited efficacy  20, and none target the stress component. The 
stress system is ideally suited to develop a short -term therapeutic int erventions with a long -enduring effect, as 
it can lessen acute distress, and promote stress resilience during long alcohol abstinence. Thus, blunting and 
resetting the stress system, in order to improve both physical and psychological factors in alcohol -dependent 
individuals, represent s an effective and exciting novel pharmaceutical target for treating AUD. Finally, our 
approach builds from a network of sciences that may have the potential to target other mental disorders 
(posttraumatic stress disorder and psychotic major depression) that have high comorbidity with AUD.   
Innovation . This research is innovative in three ways.  First, it focuses on a novel target for the prevention of 
alcohol relapse, the stress system. The second major innovation of this pro posal is the development of a 
translational research clinical model that integrates administration of pharmacological stressors with alcohol 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
8 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76212] has built logically on our prior work, it is our intent to translate our neuroscience safety 
results to clinical research, which includes examining the effects of pharmacokinetic (PK) interactions (alcohol, 
yohimbine, mifepristone) on Pharmacodyn amics ( PD) additive responses (CNS depressant properties of 
alcohol or increased sedation/depression of respi[INVESTIGATOR_69908]/or cardiac functions). Although not observed in our 
preclinical models, possible negative outcomes may be observed in stress -induced con ditions in alcohol -
dependent individuals, such as potentiation of the stimulant phase of alcohol, increase in behavioral effects of 
alcohol intoxication, or worsening alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Our strong team includes well -established 
clinicians in the fields of experimental pharmacotherapeutics in alcohol laboratory studies, psychiatry and 
neuropsychopharmacology, to ensure safety and answer additional clinical questions that may arise during or 
between alcohol laboratory sessions. This interdisciplinar y-validated human laboratory protocol is critical to 
determine safety and tolerability of stress -induced pharmacological procedures before moving forward into a 
larger randomized clinical trial and to pave new hypotheses to be explored in alcohol and stres s neuroscience 
research . Finally, by [CONTACT_69957]/PD  data, this proposed application will pave the way 
for new therapeutic targets that could be utilized in other stress/anxiety mental disorders that have high 
comorbidity with AUD.  
The Investigator Team . The PI, [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler, is a T32 -funded postdoctoral fellow at CAAS. This REA 
proposal represents a logical extension of her previous experimental pharmacology and preclinical work with 
mifepristone on alcoholism done at the Gallo Ce nter at U niversity  of [LOCATION_004] San Francisco (UCSF)  before 
moving to  the Center  for Alcohol Addiction Studies ( CAAS ) at Brown. As such, under the supervision of her 
mentor , [CONTACT_70004], this application will allow [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler to 1) conduct a translat ional clinical study , the 
rationale  of which  is directly driven from her preclinical work; 2) gain experience and receive mentorship on 
human  behavioral pharmacology research; and 3) collect pi[INVESTIGATOR_69909] r NIH R01 proposal.  
The qualified medical personnel during the laboratory sessions .  
Responsibilities for each visit for each member of the Research Staff are described in Appendix Z.   
The PI, [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler  has extensive experience in the PK/PD drug -drug interactions .  She obtained her 
PK/PD training during her doctorate at UCSF , and she applied  her PK/PD knowledge  at a clinical level in her 
postdoctoral training in the  department of  Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics in the School of 
Medicine  at UCSF ; she also taught drug -drug interaction lecture s in the core PK course  to UCSF Pharmacy 
students  (for two years) . [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler is also familiar with possible physiological adverse events that may 
arise during the administration of mifepristone , yohimbine and alcohol , since she ran the same mifepristone -
yohimbine -alcohol study at  a preclinical level . She also authored a drug -drug interaction book chapter in a 
medical Substance Abuse Textbook (please see CV, publications) and she was part of the Medication Use and 
Safety Subcommittee (MUSS), San Francisco General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (SFGH) (please see CV, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69910]).  [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler is a trained military officer nurse  who served in Italian Army/Air Force Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69911] s (Somalia, Rwanda and Ex -Yugoslavia) for four years. She was the Lieutenant 
in change of medical training for the nurses’ qualification in Air Mobile Search and Rescue, School of Medicine, 
Italian Air Force. The medical experience in military hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69912] d in war zones professionally prepared [CONTACT_70005] -Koffler to assess both physical and psychological human distress and determine situations that may 
trigger a call to the study physician (please see CV, military service). Furthermore, regarding specific training in 
addictive behaviors in the alcohol -dependent population , [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler worked at the Department of Public 
Health, Community Behavioral Health Services, San Francisco General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (SFGH) as a Drug Information 
intern for two years during her  doctoral training  (please see CV, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69913]) . She was responsible 
for researching and presenting scientific and clinical information that would provide recommendations intended 
to represent the best -practice guidelines for the use of medication s for the treatment of alcohol dependence 
and other psychiatric disorders (please see CV, list of CBHS publications). To augment her formal training on 
addictive behaviors, [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler also attended the University of Utah, School on Alcoholism and Ot her 
Drug Dependencies training. This program focuses on keepi[INVESTIGATOR_69914]. Academically, [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler received her 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
9 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 PharmD with the double track in Pharmace utical Science at UCSF, School of Pharmacy (#1 Pharmacy School 
in the US). She performed research at the prestigious Ernest Gallo Clinical and Research Center in [LOCATION_004] 
under the mentorship of [CONTACT_70006], now one of the top directors at NIH. T his high selective doctoral 
program allowed her to receive a double concurrent appointment at UCSF in the Neuroscience Department 
(Gallo Center) and in the Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (School of 
Medicine).  
The study p hysician, either [CONTACT_59894] , will be present during the screening visit. They will  perform the physical 
exam and psychological assessment s.  [CONTACT_59894], is a practicing physician and is Board Certified in Addiction 
Psychiatry. [CONTACT_59894] is Staff Psychiatrist  at the VA Medical Center at Roger Williams Medical Center and at 
CAAS; he has extensive alcohol laboratory experience and contributed to the advancement of knowledge in 
the AUD research field through several selected publications23,70-86. [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler and the RA will 
immediately call the study physician if any safety issues arise duri ng or between sessions (i.e. CIWA score ≥7). 
[CONTACT_59892] -Koffler has the support of Research Associates (RA) who have been trained in administering 
psychological assessments (i.e. CIWA, SCID, HAM -D/A), conducted similar alcohol and pharmacological 
studies for many years at Brown and included in ou r peer -review.   They also will  collect blood, saliva and urine 
samples and monitor  blood pressure and heart rate using a Dinamap  Adult Vital Signs Monitor.  
 
METHODS  
Overview of Proposed Research . The design will be a randomized within, crossover, double -blind, placebo -
controlled human study with mifepristone in non -treatment -seeking alcohol -dependent individuals. The study 
will be conducted in two consecutive phases with one month washout period (Figure 1 ): Visit #1, Screening; 
Visit #2: randomization and  drug/placebo dispensed; Visit  #3: first lab -session: single dose of yohimbine; Visit 
#4: After o ne-month washout period  (30 days, plus or minus t wo days to accommodate the schedule of 
the next visit) , follow -up and drug/placebo dispensed; Visit #5: second  lab-session, single dose of yohimbine , 
motivational session (MET) ; Visit #6: follow -up (one month). END of STUDY.   
Figure 1 – Study Design  
 
Medications and doses : Participants receive an oral dose of 600 mg of mifepristone  or matching placebo for 
approximately seven days  (plus three extra pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]) . Participants will receive detailed information on the study 
medications, including their current use and possible side effects. Mifepristone treatment in clinical setting has 
shown  to be safe, tolerable, and acceptable87-89, including in participants  suffering from depression, anxiety , 
and PTSD90-92. On Days 7 and 44, all participants will receive a single oral dose of 32.4 mg yohimbine  
approximately one hour ( tmax=1 hour) prior to the lab sessio n. The oral dose of yohimbine for this study is 
based on prior studies in which yo himbine was administered to examine neuroendocrine probe in human 
studies57,93,94. Ample data support the safe use of yohimbine to induce craving in alcohol -dependent 
individuals57, and the safe induction of str ess in PTSD veterans95 and gamblers60. We already obtained the 
Investigational New Drug (IND#121984) from FDA that determined that the clinical investigation of mifepristone 
and yohimbine while consuming alcohol is safe to proceed (see attaché letter form FDA).  Our IND was also 
cross -referenced by [CONTACT_69958] (IND#059737) for chemistry, manufactory, 
pharmacological, and toxicology data of mifepristone (see attached letter form Corcept). Participants will 
receive detailed information on the st udy medications, including their current use and possible side effects.  
 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
10 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 STUDY PROCEDURES:  
Visit 1 (Screening). All procedures and responsibilities of each member of the research team are described in 
Appendix Z (page 1). Following a breath analyzer (BrAC)  that must be 0.00 , participants will then be assessed 
on demographics, medical history, physical examination, vital signs and ECG. Blood , urine , cortisol and  clinical 
assessments are performed to screen individuals for inclusion/exclusion criteria and mon itor adverse effects ; 
we will collect a baseline salivary cortisol sample  (three samples by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_69915] a tube) and administer 
psychometric assessments . The salivary cortisol samples will be stored in [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler ’s lab. A study 
physician will adminis ter the Brief Trauma Questionnaire (BTQ, Appendix J). After a study physician reviews 
and approves the medical history and lab results , the participants  will be called with the results and scheduled 
for Visit 2.  When the RA or [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler administer s the SCID, Drs. Swift will review the SCID the 
screening day.  They will review  the rest of the other blood, saliva and urine laboratory analysis before 
enrolling any participant in the study.  Session will last approximately 3-4 hours. Randomization will be 
performed on Visit 2 .  
 
Visit 2 (Randomization): All procedures and responsibilities of each member of the research team are 
described in Appendix Z (page 2). BrAC = 0.00 before initiating any procedure ; participants in addition to the 
psychometric asse ssments (see complete list in Appendix Z) they will then be assessed for life trauma 
exposure. We will assess lifetime history of trauma exposure using Life Events (LEC) and P ost Traumatic 
Stress Disorder (P TSD) (PCL) Checklist s. The  participants will then  be randomized  and we dispense the study 
medication  (see Appendix Z ). The overall descriptions of the measures and the specific questions and 
responses that may trigger a call to the licensed clinician are provided in the Protection of Human Subject 
sectio n. Compensation : sessions will last approximately 3 hours, and subjects will receive $25 for participation . 
 
Visits 3 and 5 (Stress -induction and Alcohol Laboratory Session): All procedures and responsibilities of 
each member of the research team are descr ibed in Appendix Z (page 3 and 5). Participants will be instructed 
not to consume alcohol for [ADDRESS_76213], followed by [CONTACT_47721] (Assessments 
Schedule , Appendix Z ). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_69916] #3 and Visit #5 (alcohol laboratory sessions) only if [CONTACT_59894] 
will be in proximity of CAAS laboratory.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_69917] #3 and Visit #5 if both study physicians 
are traveling or not in Providence . 
Cue-reactivity (CR) . The CR will be similar to previously published studies73,97-101. The entire procedure takes 
about [ADDRESS_76214] aced with their 
preferred alcoholic beverage and the bottle of water will be replaced with the appropriate commercially -labeled 
alcohol bottle. After every 3 -minute beverage exposure, participants will rate their urge to drink alcohol by 
[CONTACT_69959] (ACQ) to assess attention to the sight and smell of 
water and alcohol cues. Saliva (w eight in cotton rolls, mg), heart rate  (HR; beats/min) and blood pressure 
(systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure -MAP) will be monitored continuously using a Dinamap Adult 
Vital Signs Monitor. After the conclusion of the CR, participants will unde rgo the ASA. Consistent with 
recommendations102, participants will be informed they will receive alcohol following the CR.  The last of 
salivary cortisol (by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_69915] a tube) will be collected at the en d of the CR.  
Alcohol Self -Administration (ASA) . Participants are presented with a priming dose of alcohol  designed to 
raise blood alcohol levels to 0.03 g/dl. Consistent with previous studies78,103,104, we will wait 40 minutes before 
presenting more alcohol. We will assess craving and whether stress -induce d craving will modify responses to 
the priming drink using the ACQ . Stimulant and sedative effects of alcohol will be assessed using the Biphasic 
Alcohol Effects Scale (BAES)105. The ”free -choice” phase of the ASA lasts 120 min and the ACQ  will be 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
11 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 administered every 30 min78,103,104,106. Each participant will get $3.00 per drink (max possible is $24), provided 
as an alternative reinforcer for not drinking. Ea ch beverage is calculated to raise the blood alcohol levels by 
0.015g/dl. If the participant’s BrAC has reached 0.1, then the alcohol consumption period will stop. We will 
also collect multiple BrAC values in order to monitor the mifepristone effects on al cohol pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic levels. Participants wait until BrAC = 0.00 (repeated twice) before being discharged. At the 
end of Visit 5, a Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET)  will be performed to provide education about 
alcoholism and to e xplore participants’ desire to get treatment if they wish to receive it, and then we will 
assess at last follow -up to ascertain that drinking has not increased.  
Participants are strongly encouraged to remain in the lab until no longer intoxicated.  After t he laboratory 
session, we will provide food and water and they can watch television.  If they want to leave, we will provide a 
taxi ride.  
Compensation : sessions will last approximately 6 hours, and subjects will receive $100 for participation plus  
another possible $3/drink as incentive for not drinking (max $24).  
 
Washout period : During the washout and follow up period (30 days , plus or minus two days to accommodate 
the schedule of the next visit ) we will contac t participants weekly by [CONTACT_69960] t hat there are not 
unexpected side effects. We will alert the study physicians in the event of anxiety, depression and suicidality. 
We will also send a text reminder for the next visit (Visit #4 and Visit #6).   
 
Visits 4 and 6 (Follow -up): All procedures an d responsibilities of each member of the research team are 
described in Appendix Z (page 4 and 6). After a one-month Washout period  (30 days, plus or minus two days 
to accommodate the schedule of the next visit) , participants will be asked to return for a follow -up and for 
dispensing of medication: mifepristone 600 mg/day or placebo for a week. The purpose of setting a month -
long follow -up is because mifepristone may have the potential to “reset” a dysregulated HPA axis. In this 
manner, we will assess if th ere is an  enduring effect of mifepristone beyond when the drug is stopped. The 
follow -up after one month will exclude pharmacokinetic mechanisms and will assess if the mifepristone 
antagonism at GC -receptors is responsible for resetting the HPA axis feedba ck loop. Due to the distinct 
circadian rhythm of cortisol, we will schedule Visits [ADDRESS_76215] salivary samples to be measured both under natural (Visit 1) and induced -stress response (Visits 3 and 
5) cond itions. At the follow -up visits, the participants will complete assessments, including a urine drug 
screening, as outlined in Appendix Z . As there is no medication or alcohol administration during the 
randomization (Visit #2), medication dispensing (Visit #2 and Visit #4), and follow -ups (Visit #4 and Visit #6), 
these visits may be conducted without the physical presence the of the study physicians in the CAAS 
laboratory , but preferably within the Providence area .  
. 
Compensation : sessions will last approxi mately 2 hours, and subjects will receive $[ADDRESS_76216] intervention of mifepristone on yohimbine -induced alcohol craving and 
consumption in this population. As this is a safety and tolerability s tudy, adverse events evaluation (AEE) will 
be reported as the number and their intensity. We will compare the number and intensity of AEE in the 
mifepristone vs. placebo groups weekly and during the alcohol laboratory sessions. These events will be rated 
as none, mild, moderate , and severe. Paired t-tests will be used to test for medication effects.  Generalized 
Estimating Equations (GEE) will be used for dichotomous data if events are rare. To guard against Type II 
errors, we will also report additional de scriptive data on adverse events (the distribution of the maximum level 
of an adverse event collapsed across time points per condition). This study integrates self -reported and 
clinician -administered assessments with clinical laboratory analysis. A series of analyses of covariance 
(ANCOVA) will be conduct to test the effect of mifepristone on alcohol craving while controlling for variance 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
12 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76217] -laboratory session 
scores of A lcohol Urge and Craving Questionnaires (ACQ), Alcohol Visual Attention Scale (A -VAS) and 
Alcohol Attention Scale (AAS). The covariates will be trauma experienced  as measured by [CONTACT_69961] (LEC), stress level measured by [CONTACT_69962] (P SS) and PTSD (PCL) Checklist scores, 
and anxiety level measured by [CONTACT_69963] (HAM -A), Self -Evaluation Questionnaire for state 
(STAI -y1) and Self -Evaluation Questionnaire for trait (STAI -y2). To examine the relation ship between 
mifeprist one compared to placebo on neuroendocrine fluctuations, we will use repeated measures ANCOVA 
with the cortisol baseline curve (three time -points: neutral, yohimbine challenge and after cue -reactivity) 
change during the laboratory sessions. Finally, to exam ine the effect of mifepristone compared to placebo in 
increasing the alcohol consumption during the alcohol self -administration, we will utilize an analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) with repeated measures. We will also attempt to establish an effect size for ap plying this paradigm 
on craving and drinking. These dependent measures will be operationalized by [CONTACT_69964] m l of alcohol 
consumed during the drinking session, respectively. An effect size also will be obtained so that a target sample 
size to ensure adequate statistical power may be calculated for future proposed studies. Naturalistic drinking 
will be tracked via Alcohol Timeline Followback (TLFB) outside of the lab at each visit  (by [CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_69918] ’ calendar ). 
Alternative Design Considerations .  We considered (1) testing the stress -induced model by [CONTACT_69965]; however, yohimbine challenge demonstrated to (a) 
be safe57,60,93, (b) induce a robust cortisol response, (c) elevate alcohol craving correlated  with alcoholism 
severity but (d) not anxiet y57, demonstrating that yohimbine as a pharmacological challenge produces robust 
and reproducible responses that are w ell suited  for medication development. Similarly, we considered (2) 
testing only mifepristone in AUD population; however, (a) this approach is already ongoing ( [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) 
and o ur previous results47, aligned with other preclinical data52-54, showed that in conditions where stress is 
limited, mifepristone has modest effect  on alcoh ol intake. In addition, we considered (3) inclusion criteria for 
women that were less stringent than our proposal by [CONTACT_69966] ; however, due to the FDA aborti facient indication of mifepristone, we 
opted for a more prudent approach that has been used by [CONTACT_2312] ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). We understand that the 
exclusion of pre -menopausal women in this study could be a source of variability in medication response since 
the ag e range for male and female participants could end up being different; therefore we considered (4) 
changing the age to [ADDRESS_76218]. Carolina Haass -Koffler, is a T32 -funded postdoctoral fellow at CAAS. This study is an extension of 
her previous experimental pharmacol ogy and preclinical work with mifepristone, yohimbine on alcoholism done 
at the Gallo Center at University [LOCATION_004] San Francisco (UCSF) before moving to  the Center  for Alcohol 
Addiction Studies (CAAS) at Brown.  She has  previously  tested th ese drugs wit h alcohol in preclinical models. 
To ensure participant safety, the investigator team includes well -established clinicians in the fields of 
experimental pharmacotherapeutic  in alcohol laboratory studies, psychiatry and neuropsychopharmacology , to 
ensure sa fety and answer additional clinical questions that may arise during or between alcohol laboratory 
sessions . Research Assistant ( RA) trained to administer psychological assessments (including SCID) or the PI  
(when completed her training at Butler Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307])  will assess  the withdrawal syndrome by [CONTACT_69967] (Appendix F). Self -report scales will provide  the anxiety level by (STAY -y1/2, appendix R and S ) and the 
stress level PSS (Appendix P) if there is need to call the study physician ([CONTACT_59894]).  Specific questions and 
responses during the psychological assessment that may trigger a call to the licensed clinician are included 
(page 13 -15). When the RA or [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler will administer the SCID, [CONTACT_59894] will review the SCID the 
same day of scree ning.     
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
13 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76219] Risks:  This human  subject research meets the definition of Phase I Clinical Trial 
Research that has received an IND121984 from FDA to [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler. This is a randomized within, 
crossover, double -blind, placebo -controlled human laboratory study with mifepristone (600 mg/ day for seven 
days) in a stress -induced condition triggered by [CONTACT_59848] (32.4 mg, single dose) in non -treatment -seeking 
alcohol -dependent individuals. Participants will be recruited primarily through adver tisements in the media. The 
participants will be 21 to 65 years (inclusive) in good physical health and competent to provide consent. 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria are  outlined  in Table 1 . 
This study involves non -treatment -seeking alcohol -dependent indi viduals who are heavy drinkers but do not 
meet the threshold criteria for alcohol withdrawal (CIWA -Ar ≤7). This is first to ensure participants ’ safety, and 
also because our study evaluates the neuroendocrine response to alcohol craving triggered by [CONTACT_69968] -related negative emotions rather than withdrawal syndrome. If we identify individuals who meet the 
threshold criteria for clinically significant withdrawal syndrome during recruitment/eligibility process, we will 
follow a standard referral pro tocol ( Potential Risks  session , below), which includes calling the study physician 
([CONTACT_59894]). Regardless of eligibility, all screened participants will receive a local resource sheet of mental  
health  and substance abuse services. Any unexpected ethical i ssues that arise with our study population will 
be discussed during weekly te am meetings. Referrals and emergency protocols will be reviewed by [CONTACT_69969] (RPO)/Institutional Review Board (IRB).   
Recruitment and Informed  Consent:  Participants will be recruited through newspaper, TV and radio 
advertisements and screening efforts conducted at CAAS, Brown University, centrally located in Providence, 
Rhode Island. After routine screening involving telephone interviews and com pletion of a research initiat ed 
screening instrument, each participant will receive an explanation of the study protocol, its risks and potential 
benefits. In specific, each participant must acknowledge they understand that this is not a treatment study . 
Should participants want treatment, treatment program information will be provided. At baseline following a 
breath alcohol level ( BrAC) = 0.00, participants will provide written informed consent that is approved by [CONTACT_69970]/RPO. Following resolution of  questions from interested participants, volunteers will be asked to 
read and initial each page of the informed consent, acknowledging their understanding of each page. An entire 
copy of the informed consent will be given to each participant.  
Participants will be enrolled based on inclusion and exclusion criteria ( Table 1 ). Careful participant evaluation 
by [CONTACT_69971]/or psychiatric 
conditions. The PI, Dr. H aass-Koffler will be res ponsible for administer ing the procedures described in the 
protocol. A  RA, is also a phlebotomist, will be responsible for drawing blood, and collecting urine and salivary 
cortisol samples during the study.  The risk of hematomas will be minimized by [CONTACT_69972] -use butterfly 
needles or BD vacuntaiers . Eligible volunteers will receive the Emergency card (Appendix T) for the study to 
keep in the wallet ; they will be closely monitored during the entire study period. During the trial individuals’ 
substance use  and psychiatric status will be monitored. Participants with po sitive BrAC levels or evidence of 
intoxication will be monitored until no longer intoxicated, or referred for appropriate treatment. Intoxicated 
individuals who drove to a visit and who refuse to stay for whatever reason will be sent home via taxi. 
Participants will be given a card  (Appendix X)  identifying themselves as participants in a research study, and 
containing emergency numbers of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_69919] 24 hours a day. The b lind will be broken 
if necessary for emergency assessment or treatment. Adverse events will be systematically evaluated and 
recorded. If adverse events are serious or intolerable, participants will be immediately withdrawn from the 
study and given treatmen t and or referral as the situation dictates.  Participants will be referred for treatment 
according to their needs and wishes if they show severe deterioration  such as withdrawal syndrome (tremor, 
anxiety, and agitation ) monitored by [CONTACT_69973]  (score ≥7 will call the study physician) (Appendix 
F), and continued evaluation of them will provide ongoing information concerning their clinical status. Given the 
nature of alcohol -dependent participants, we are aware that special consideration and safe ty precautions must 
be provided for our subjects. Our first precaution is the comprehensive assessment that we conduct on the 
subjects prior to initiating the study. Subjects are screened by [CONTACT_30230], questionnaire, medical history, 
physical examination a nd laboratory testing to eliminate subjects with a personal history of current substance 
abuse or dependence or other psychiatric comorbidity whose symptomatology precludes participation in a 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
14 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 research study. A second precaution is the orientation to the pr ocedures, conducted prior to the experimental 
sessions. Subjects will sit in the lab room and be acclimated to the blood pressure cuff. This will serve to 
diminish any anxiety and will identify subjects who are too anxious or paranoid to undergo subsequent  testing , 
assessed by [CONTACT_69974] (Appendix P) and STAY -y1/2 (Appendix R and S ). A third precaution is the monitoring and 
medical backup present throughout the study. Finally, a follow -up visit will be performed at the end of the 
study . Finally, i ndividuals should  always carry their ID (appendix X) and Emergency card (Appendix T). 
Individuals will be referred for further evaluation and treatment should any medical or psychiatric conditions 
occur.  
Insuring Informed Consent and Comprehension:  The Informed Consent For m will be written at 8th grade 
reading level. At the initial visit, participants will be provided with information about the study, its rationale, 
risks, and potential benefits. Participants will be informed that they are participating of their own free wi ll and 
can withdraw their consent at any time during the study. Participants who elect to withdraw or are discontinued 
for any reason will be provided with information about places to receive treatment should they desire. All 
questions pertinent to the stu dy raised by [CONTACT_69975]. 
All participants will consent in writing.  The consent form will be dated and countersigned by a staff member. A 
copy of the consent form will be given to the subject, as is m andated by [CONTACT_69976]. 
The consent form will contain details of whom to contact [CONTACT_69977], details of the principal 
investigator, and information on how to contact [CONTACT_69978] a com plaint. Another 
copy of the form will be kept on file. Participants who complete screening but who are not eligible for study 
inclusion will be provided with the self -help pamphlet on how to achieve alcohol cessation , as well as the 
address and telephone n umber of a local treatment center.   
Psychosocial assessments:  This is a stress study; therefore, to minimize risks of assessments, participants 
who are distressed or who show clinical deterioration will be referred for further assessment or intervention a s 
required. The baseline assessments can be conducted over more than one day if necessary to minimize 
participant fatigue .  These measures are utilized to establish clinical eligibility at screening and for 
safety during the course of the trial .   
 
- Structu red Clinical Instrument for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -IV 
(SCID -I/P) is used for exclusion criteria such as current substance dependence (other than alcohol and 
nicotine), diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder or anxiety dis order, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or 
other psychoses and life time of attempted suicide.   
 
- Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment Alcohol (CIWA)  (please see Appendix F)  is used to assess 
symptoms of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (Research studies re quire a score of <10 to participate, in this 
protocol we adopt a more conservative score, ≤7) and exclude potential participants who might 
experience withdrawal symptoms during the course of the study. This assessment is implemented at 
every session before  initiating any procedure to ensure participants’ safety.   
Overall: For monitoring withdrawal syndrome.  
Specific questions and scores that will trigger a call to the study physician:  
#4 Anxiety: observation, moderately anxious (so anxiety is inferred), s core >4  
#5 Agitation: observation, restless, Score >4  
#6 Tactile Disturbance: moderately, severe hallucinations, score >4  
#7 Auditory Disturbance:  moderately, severe hallucinations, score >4  
#8 Visual Disturbance:  moderately, severe hallucinations, score  >[ADDRESS_76220] (PCL) (please see Appendix H)  
Overall:  To monitor stress.  
Specific questions:  
#[ADDRESS_76221] in activities that you used to enjoy  (so depression is inferred), score >4  
  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
15 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 - Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)  (plea se see Appendix P)  
Overall:  To monitor stress over ti 13)me, we will adopt the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) PSS -10 scores 
are obtained by [CONTACT_29162], e.g., 0=4, 1=3, 2=2, etc. and then 
summing across all 10 items.   We wi ll call the study physician with participants scoring >30 .   
 
- Side Effects Report Form (please see Appendix Q)  
Specific questions and scores that will trigger a call to the study physician:  
#19 and 20 Restlessness and Nervousness (so anxiety is inferred), score >3  
 
- Drinking Inventory consequences, (DrInC) (please see Appendix L)  
Specific questions and scores that will trigger a call to the study physician:  
#[ADDRESS_76222] in activities because of my drinking (so depression is inferred), score >3  
 
- Hamilton Anxiety and Depression Rating Scale (HAM -A; HAM -D) (please see Appendices O and O2)  
in addition to being utilized as research outcomes, in our proposed study, these measures are used to 
monitor participants’ anxiety and depression during the course  of the trial. These assessments are critical 
to assess anxiety (HAM -A) — especially during yohimbine administration — and monitor for possible 
symptoms of depression that can lead to suicidality (HAM -D).  It is important to know the clinical state of 
each  participant before initiating any procedure.  
Overall: To monitor for anxiety we will use the Hamilton Anxiety rating scale (HAM -A) and for depression 
we will use the Hamilton Depression Rating scale (HAM -D). Each item of the HAM -D is rated from 0 (not 
present) to 4 (severe) with a total score range from 0 to 56, where <17 (mild severity), 18 -24 (mild to 
moderate) and 25 -30 (moderate to severe). We will alert the study physician with a score of >24.   
Specific question in the HAM -D and score that will trig ger a call to the study physician:  
#3 Suicide: Feel life is not worth living  (so suicide may be considered), score >0  
 
- Self-Evaluation Questionnaire (STAI y1/2) (please see Appendix R and S)  
Overall: State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) -y1 and -y2, which are a commonly used measure of trait 
and state anxiety. The STAI has 40 items allocated to each of the State -anxiety and Trait -anxiety 
subscales.  Responses for the S -Anxiety scale assess intensity of current feelings “at this moment,” and 
the T -Anxiety sc ale assesses frequency of feelings “in general” from 1 (never) to 4 (always).  We will alert 
the study physician to a score of > 60 on each subscale.    
Specific question:  
#22 I feel nervous and restless  (so anxiety is inferred), score >3  
 
NOTE - Suicidali ty: To assess the risk of suicidality we included the Suicide Assessment Five -Step Evaluation 
and Triage (Appendix K). It is a 5 -step screening tool developed  in collaboration with the Suicide Prevention 
Resource Center and Screening  for Mental Health.  This assessment will be done by [CONTACT_69979] (see Appendix Z for assessments schedule)..  Also, the HAM -D question # 3 is about suicide; 
if participants score >[ADDRESS_76223]. Swift iimmediately.  
 
Screening and Randomization: Potential participants will be screened by [CONTACT_5791] a standardized 
questionnaire, which includes alcohol use, personal medical/mental health history and the major 
inclusion/exclusion criteria for the study. Eligible part icipants will receive information of the logistics (duration, 
commitment, compensation, measures) and on the medications that will be administered in the study. 
Interested volunteers are asked to come for a comprehensive visit at CAAS. At screening, subjec ts must 
have their BrAC mesured ( must be = 0.00 ), and  must be = 0.00  every time  before initiating any 
procedure  at every visit . During this visit, participants will be assessed using Inclusion/Exclusion criteria 
(Table 1 ), psychometric scales ( Appendix Z ), vital signs, ECG, blood (two tubes)  and urine analysis ; three  
sample s of salivary cortisol will  also be collected  (by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_69920] ) to measure cortisol level . All participants 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
16 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76224] meet all inc lusion and no exclusion criteria 
to qualify for this study.  
 
Table 1 – Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion  
• Male or female, 21 to 65 years of age  
• Females must be postmenopausal for at least one year or surgically sterile (proven by [CONTACT_38825] ) 
• Meet criteria for Alcohol Use Disorders (AUD) DSM -5 diagnosis   
• Meet criteria for heavy drinking (≥35 drinks/week for men; ≥28 drinks/week for women)  
• Must be in good health as confirmed by [CONTACT_9870], physical examination, ECG, lab tests  
• Participant s must be willing to take oral medication and adhere to the study procedures   
• Breath alcohol (BrAC) = 0.00 at each visit  
• Be able to understand informed consent and questionnaire in English at an 8th grade level  
Exclusion  
• Individuals expressing interest i n treatment for alcoholism  
• Premenopausal women  
• Participants who have significant alcohol withdrawal symptoms, defined as a CIWA -Ar score ≥ 7  
• A repeated positive urine drug screen at baseline for any illegal substance except marijuana.  
• Individuals diagnosed with a current “severe” Substance Use Disorder  (SUD) diagnosis, other than alcohol 
or nicotine  
• Meet DSM -5 criteria for a diagnosis of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or other psychoses  
• An active illness within the past six months of the screening visit that meets the DSM -5 criteria for a 
diagnosis of  Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) or Anxiety Disorder, or history of attempted suicide  
• Clinically significant medical abnormalities: unstable hypertension, clinically significant abnormal ECG, 
bilirubin >150% of the upper normal limit, ALT/AST >300% the UNL , creatinine clearance ≤60 dl/min  
• Current use of psychotropic medications that may have an effect on alcohol consumption  
• Current use of any medication involved in the metabolism of alcohol such as aldehyde dehydrogenase 
(ALDH), alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and CYP2E1: Cefamandole, Cefotetan, Sulfamethoxazole, 
Nitroglycerin, Chlorpropamide, Glyburide.  
• Current use of any medication (CYP3A 4 inhibitor and substrate) that may interact with mifepristone :  
cyclosporine, fentanyl, heparin, escitalopram, lovastatin, simvastatin, warfarin  
• Current use of any medication (CYP2D6 inhibitor and substrate) that may interact with yohimbine: 
amitriptyline, doxepin, nortriptyline, venlafaxine  
• Medical contraindications for use of mifepristone or yohimbine   
• A history of adverse r eaction or hypersensitivity to mifepristone or yohimbine  
• History of suicide  
• History of seizure disorders  
• Hypokalemia (low potassium level) <3.5mEq/L  
• Participated in any behavioral and/or pharmacological study within the past 30 days  
• Neuroendocrine disorders  
• Taking corticosteroids  
• Bleeding disorders  
• Pre-existing QT prolongation on ECG  
• History of porphyria (Mifepristone progesterone receptor antagonist is an inducer of CYP -[ADDRESS_76225] the ability to precipi[INVESTIGATOR_69921])  
• Not willing to engage in protected sex (condom). This risk includes both women and men.  Mifepristone 
long half -life ( t1/2 = 18 hrs) and its three main metabolites retain considerable affinity toward human 
progesterone and glucocorticoid receptors,  with serum level similar to the parent mifepristone and there 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
17 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 are no studies on the presence of mifepristone or metabolites in semen  
 
Sources of materials:  Research data include: interviews, self -reported and clinician -administered 
questionnaires, breath , saliva, blood, and urine samples. All data will be gathered and obtained exclusively for 
research purposes. Cortisol and other data will be obtained by [CONTACT_5292], clinical laboratory 
evaluation, and data from observation of participants by [CONTACT_69980]. Standardized diagnostic 
and psychological assessments and the time of research staff responsibilities  are descri bed in Appendix 
Z. To evaluate safety and tolerability data, we will assess adverse events and they will be reported  as the 
number and their intensity. To assess pharmacological intervention efficacy, we will gather quantitative data at 
baseline, between alcohol sessions, and one month post -intervention. Subject numbers will be entered to code 
all data. To ensure partic ipants’ privacy, o nly authorized persons will have access to the data.   
 
Description of Potential Risks . Participants will be carefully screened at the beginning and closely monitored 
during the study procedures. Eligible individuals will be informed of ea ch study procedure and the associated 
potential risks. Risks include distress during assessments, breach of confidentiality, issues related to coerci on, 
and effects of alcohol withdrawa l syndrome (including tremor, agitation, anxiety) . 
Assessments and Brea ch of Confidentiality : There is always some risk that participants will be identified 
as participants in a study or that clinical assessments will involve questions on illegal behaviors, or will 
adversely affect participants’ well -being ; while this does pr esent a confidentiality risk, studies have been 
performed in the open public without evidence of participant harm. Inadvertent breach of confidentiality 
concerning drinking behavior is also a risk. All data will be used for research purposes only, and will  not be 
revealed without the participant ’s written consent. Data will be kept in a secure locked file in the locked 
study office. Data will be entered into a computer database at the study site, which is password protected 
involving only numerical identifi cations that can only be linked with subjects’ identification locked in a 
cabinet known only to the research staff. Access to data will be available only to investigators involved in 
the study. The research staff is trained in confidentiality procedures. As an additional layer of security, we will 
use a “Subject Number” from a Log and keep contact [CONTACT_69981] a separate locked location.  
We will apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality  issued by [CONTACT_69982]. The certificate will allow those of us who have 
access to research records to refuse to disclose identifying information on research participants in any civil, 
criminal, administrative, legislative, or other pr oceeding, whether at the federal, state, or local level. By 
[CONTACT_69983] . A Certificate of Confidentiality helps achieve the research objectives and pr omote 
participation in studies by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_69922].  
Coercion:  Risks of coercion are minimized by [CONTACT_69984]. The likelihood of financial coercion 
is low because the compensation is commensurate with the amount of time and effort required for this 
study.  There will be no cost(s) to participate in this study. The study medications and all pro cedures that are 
not part of routine care, but are required for the study, will be provided to the participant.  If eligible for the study, 
participants will receive $25 for the randomization visit (Visit# 2) and for the follow -up visits (Visits #4 and 
#6). During the laboratory phase, at each visit (Visits #3 and #5) participants are compensated $100 + 
another possible $3/drink as incentive for not drinking (max $24). Therefore, each participant may be 
compensated up to $[ADDRESS_76226] been approved by [CONTACT_69985]. 
There will be no other inducements.  
 
Alcohol withdrawal: Since participants must have BrAC = 0.0 0 before initiating any procedure, there is risk 
of withdrawal syndrome. Our experience across numerous alcohol studies suggests that the risks for 
withdrawal from alcohol are minimal in this study as any potential p articipant  with a CIWA ≥ 7 or having 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
18 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 significant hepatic dysfunction (by [CONTACT_69986]) will be excluded during screening. As a result 
of our screening we can recruit people who drink enough to qualify for this study yet don’t drink at a level 
that would potentially put them at risk for withdrawal. Alcohol craving following yohimbine administrations 
are reported to be modest, but significantly higher than placebo, however with not increased anxiety ratings. 
Alcohol craving will be monitored by [CONTACT_69987]. However, it is still possible that some participants 
may experience some withdrawal symptoms if they stop or reduce their drinking on their own. These 
symptoms may become severe enough to require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69923]. Agai n, any 
participant with a CIWA score ≥ 7(agitation, tremor, sweats)  at any time will be excluded from the study and 
immediately referred for medical attention  at a Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69924] y Room or mental hea lth clinic . 
Compliance: We will use a modified Medical M anagement (MM) used by [CONTACT_69988]107.The use of these components of MM in this study is aimed to facil itate 
participant adherence to pharmacotherapy. Sessions are conducted by [CONTACT_7628] .. We will be 
dispensing the medication or placebo in blister packs to facilitate compliance. The initial session will be 30 -
45 minutes in order to establish ra pport and will include a discussion of how the medications work, 
discussion of potential side effects and what to do about them, and a motivational interviewing -oriented 
discussion related to medication adherence, including the participant’s experience wit h medications 
compliance, when and why they might miss doses , and what mechanisms could be useful to enhance 
medication adherence. Another important part of the MM is the focus on alcohol -related medical problems  
(such as liver panel exam) .  
Medications  and Drug -Drug Interactions : Corcept Therapeutics will provide mifepristone (600 mg, for seven 
days plus three extra day doses) or matching placebo. Participants will receive a blister pack containing 10 
capsules of mifepristone or placebo (7 days + three  extra doses). Participants will return for the first follow -up 
visit and they will receive the additional blister pack. Bayview pharmacy will provide yohimbine (32.4 mg) 
formulated in a single capsule that will be administered at CAAS under team supervision p rior to the alcohol 
laboratory session. Risks of medication  side effects  will be minimized through careful and detailed screening of 
participants by [CONTACT_978] ([CONTACT_59892] -Koffler) to minimize recruitment of those who might be at higher risk for 
adverse events,  as well as careful and detailed monitoring of adverse events and participant well -being during 
the study.  
Mifepristone:  Since mifepristone is a FDA -approved oral medication for the termination of early pregnancy, 
we will exclude women with childbearing p otential regarding the birth control methods used. The following 
complications or risks have been reported, are known, or may occur with mifepristone: the most commonly 
reported side effects associated with the use of mifepristone include: abdominal or sto mach pain, back pain, 
diarrhea, dizziness, headache, nausea or vomiting. Other less common side effects associated with the use 
of mifepristone include: cough, fainting, fever, heartburn, indigestion, lack of strength, or stomach 
discomfort. Rare side effe cts associated with the use of mifepristone include: sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], pain during sexual 
intercourse, pale skin, shaking chills, shortness of breath, stuffy or runny nose, and unusual bleeding or 
bruising. Mifepristone may cause low blood potassium (hypokalemia ); symptoms may include muscle 
weakness, aches, or cramps, or abnormal palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814]. Subjects with low potassium levels at screening will 
be excluded. In eligible participants, hypokalemic symptoms will be monitored during the entire study. 
Mifepristone pr ogesterone receptor antagonist is an inducer of CYP -[ADDRESS_76227] the ability 
to precipi[INVESTIGATOR_69925] (exclusion criteria).  
Because mifepristone has been used safely for termination of early pregnancy by [CONTACT_38785] A since September 
2000 at doses of 600 mg (single dose), we considered mifepristone titration in our study (one week therapy) ; 
however, mifepristone has been used at 600 mg dose in other clinical research studies and is currently 
being evaluated by [CONTACT_69989] i n conducting studies using a similar dose including: control of 
hyperglycemia secondary to hypercortisolism in adult s with endogenous Cushing's syndrome who have type 
[ADDRESS_76228] failed surgery or are not candidates for surgery. 
Additionally, Corcept Therapeutics is engaged in the discovery, development and commercialization of 
drugs for severe metabolic, psychiatric and oncologic disorders. Current trials include: Metastatic Triple 
Negative Breast Canc er (phase I), A Study of Mifepristone vs. Placebo for individuals With Major 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
19 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 Depression With Psychotic Features (phase III) and Mifepristone in Children With Refractory Cushing's 
Disease in collaboration with National Institute of Child Health and Human De velopment.  
It will be stated clearly in the consent form and to the participants verbally, that participants must engage in 
protected sex (i.e. wear a condom) . This risk includes men and women . Mifepristone has a long half -life (t1/2 
= 18 hrs); its three main metabolites retain considerable affinity toward human progesterone and 
glucocorticoid receptors, with serum levels similar to the parent mifepristone and there are no studies on the 
presence of mifepristone or metabolites in semen. This will be clearl y spelled out in the consent form 
document  
Yohimbine:  The oral dose of yohimbine for this study is based on prior studies in which yohimbine was 
administered to examine neuroendocrine probe in human studies. Ample data support the safe use of 
yohimbine to induce craving in alcohol -dependent individuals, and the safe induction of stress in PTSD 
veterans and gamblers. In this study, yohimbine (32.4mg) is administered below the therapeutic index to a 
dose considered dangerous (>100mg). Furthermore, yohimbine w ill be administered only once, during the 
laboratory session and under direct supervision of the study personnel. It will be given at a safety -tested 
dose to increase noradrenergic activity already being evaluated in psychiatric individuals with clinically  
relevant stress conditions such as PTSD, anxiety, and depression. Finally, yohimbine’s short half -life (t1/2 = 
1-2 hour) provides a transient effect. The protocol includes close monitoring of blood pressure, heart rate, 
and cortisol levels  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Haass -Koffler or research laboratory  staff, and we have [CONTACT_59894]  on call. In 
addition, the Hamilton Anxiety  Rating  Scale (HAM -A) (Appendix O) , Self -Evaluation Questionnaire for state 
(STAI -y1) and Self -Evaluation Questionnaire for trait (STAI -y2) (Appendix R and S) to assess and compare 
anxiety at baseline and prior to releasing the participants  after laboratory session are included in the 
assessments ( Appendix Z ). If anxiety is higher at the end of the study we will call [CONTACT_59894] to have him 
meet with the partic ipant  before release. The most common side effects reported by [CONTACT_69990]:  an allergic reaction, irregular or fast heartbeat, confusion, dizziness, anxiety, irritability, or nervousness, 
tremor, headache, skin flushing.  
Drug -drug interaction s: To reduce risk of drug -drug interactions, participants will be instructed to call our 
study team before taking any new prescription or over -the-counter medication. Participants will be asked to 
avoid taking medications that could interact with mifeprist one and yohimbine. A wallet card identifying 
themselves as participants in a study receiving mifepristone and yohimbine (single dose) will be provided. 
This card will also contain the contact [CONTACT_69991], including emergency numbers of the PI  
[INVESTIGATOR_69919] 24 hours a day  (Appendix X ). Participants will be asked to carry this card that 
will, in case of emergency, alert the medical personnel treating the participants that they may be taking 
mifepristone. This card, which should be  kept at all times, will also include appropriate drug information and 
precautions.  
As this project is guided by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Haass -Koffler’s neuroscience pre -clinical work, she did not observe any two-
way drug interactions  in preclinical models when administering  the combination  of mifepristone 
(systematically and by [CONTACT_69992]) and yohimbine47. 
Moreover, pharmacokinetical ly, yohimbine and mifepristone do not share liver microsome metabolic 
pathways; yohimbine is metabolized by [CONTACT_097]2D6, and mifepristone via CYP3A4. In [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler’s 
preclinical models, she did not observe any three -way drug interactions  when administeri ng the 
combination of mifepristone, yohimbine, and alcohol. The primary enzymes involved in the metabolism of 
alcohol are aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and CYP2E1. 
Pharmacodynamically, both mifepristone and yohimbine do not sho w the CNS depressant properties of 
alcohol and we should not expect increased sedation or depression of respi[INVESTIGATOR_69908]/or cardiac functions. 
[CONTACT_70007] -Koffler has pharmacy background and they will include: 1) a search using Lexicomp, and 2) 
systematic symp tom monitoring of drug -drug interactions between yohimbine, mifepristone and alcohol. 
While we recognize that both drugs, as well as alcohol, have indirect adverse effects, we note that [CONTACT_59894] 
have experience in administering multiple drugs (aripi[INVESTIGATOR_34770] e with topi[INVESTIGATOR_69926]) and alcohol. 
Their experience suggests that without direct interactions, the side effects from both drugs may be broader 
but not additive with each other. Finally, we have already obtained the Investigational New Drug 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
20 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 (IND#121984) from FDA that determined that the clinical investigation of mifepristone and yohimbine while 
consuming alcohol is safe to proceed. In addition, our IND was cross -referenced by [CONTACT_69993] (IND#059737) for chemistry, manufact ory, pharmacological, and toxicology data of 
mifepristone. Participants will receive detailed information on the study medication, including its current use 
and possible side effects . 
The following medications are contraindicated with mifepristone : antithr ombin alfa, antithrombin iii, 
argatroban, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], bemiparin, bivalirudin, budesonide, cisapride, clobetasone, cortisone, cyclosporine, 
dabigatran, dalteparin, deflazacort, dexamethasone, dihydroergotamine, dronedarone, enoxaparin, 
ergotamine, fentanyl, fl udrocortisone, fondaparinux, heparin, hydrocortisone, lepi[INVESTIGATOR_8412], lovastatin, 
methylprednisolone, phenindionem, pi[INVESTIGATOR_3924], prednisolone, prednisone, protamine, quinidine, simvastatin, 
sirolimus, tacrolimus, thioridazine, tinzaparin, triamcinolone, warfarin . 
The following medications are contraindicated with yohimbine: amitriptyline, doxepin, nortriptyline, 
venlafaxine  
The following medications are contraindicated with alcohol: cefamandole, cefotetan , 
sulfamethoxazole , nitroglycerin , chlorpropamide , glyburide . 
The most common medications are listed in the emergency card and in the consent form.   
Drug Storage and Accountability. The investigator will ensure that all study drugs are stored in a secured 
area under recommended storage conditions and in accordance with applicable state regulatory requirements 
in a locked closet in a room accessible only by a card -activated lock.    
Mifepristone and yohimbine administration:  The use of mifepristone and yohimbine in these studies will be 
under FDA -approval via IND#121 984 ([CONTACT_59892] -Koffler is the IND holder). Only healthy individuals will be 
eligible for enrollment. Medications will be prepared by [CONTACT_69994]. Females with childbearing potential 
are excluded regardless of the birth control method adopted, unless t he woman has had a surgical sterilization. 
Participants will be monitored by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Haass -Koffler or research laboratory staff for symptoms of adrenal 
insufficiency (weakness, nausea, fatigue, and hypotension) that may result by [CONTACT_69995] d 
increasing BP and HR that may result from the adrenergic effect of yohimbine.  [CONTACT_59894] will be alerted 
immediately if any adverse effect arises during the entire study duration . [CONTACT_59894] will determine  if a participant 
is in need  of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69927] .  
Alcohol Cue -reactivity (CR) and Alcohol Self-Administration (ASA) Sessions : The PI [INVESTIGATOR_69928] 
#3 and Visit #5 (alcohol laboratory sessions) only if [CONTACT_59894] will be in proximity of CAAS laboratory.  The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_69917] #3 and Visit #5 if both study physicians are traveling or not in Providence. To assess for 
medical/psychiatric conditions requiring an intervention, all participants will be evaluated at the end of each 
laboratory session and at follow -up visits. Individuals will be referred for further evaluation and treatment 
should any medical/psychiatric conditions occur. Participants are selected for the study and monitored carefully 
throughout the alcohol laboratory session ; should a participant di splay  an adverse effect, [CONTACT_59894] will be 
called immediately.  [CONTACT_59894] will determine  if a participant is in need of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69929].  
 
Adverse E vents  
We include d the list of side effects  and occurrence  associated with  the two study drugs administered 
separately.    
Side effects and occurrence with study medications  
Mifepristone  Yohimbine  
Abdominal pain, crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (96%)  
Uterine crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (83%)  
Nausea (43 -61%)  
Headache (2 -31%)  
Vomiting (1 -26%)  Anxiety  
Irritability  
Headache  
Sweating  
Nausea  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
21 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 Diarrhea (12 -20%)  
Dizziness  (1-12%)  
Fatigue (48%)  
Nausea (48%)  
Headache (44%)  
Endometrial hypertrophy (38%)  
Hypokalemia (34%)  
Arthralgia (30%)  
Vomiting (26%)  
Peripheral edema (26%)  
Hypertension (24%)  
Dizziness (22%)  
Decreased appetite (20%)  
Abnormal thyroid test  (18%)  
Xerostomia (18 %) 
Back Pain (16%)  
Dyspnea (16%)  
Myalgia (14%)  
Pain (14%)  
Sinusitis (14%)  
Nasopharyngitis (12%)  
Extremity pain (12%)  
Diarrhea (12%)  Tachycardia  
Priapi[INVESTIGATOR_69930] : Adverse events (AEs) will be recorded and tracked for this protocol  and will be reported to 
Brown University IRB and FDA.  At the follow -up visit, AEs will be recorded and followed to resolution only if 
they are serious or unexpected, or if the study physician assesses them to be clinically significant. In 
accordance with FDA reporting requirements, all AEs occurring during the course of the study will be collected, 
documented, and reported by [CONTACT_473]. The occurrence of AEs will be assessed starting on the day of 
randomization.  
Unexpected Adverse Events: An unexpected AE is one that is not described with respect to nature, severity, 
or frequency in the current pro tocol . 
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs):  Each adverse event or reaction wi ll be classified by a study physician as 
being serious or non -serious. Based on the seriousness of the adverse event or reaction, appropriate reporting 
procedures will be followed. The Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 part 312.32 and International 
Conf erence on Harmonization (ICH) Guideline for Industry: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and 
Standards for Expedited Reporting, ICH -E2A March 1995, as implemented by [CONTACT_941] U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, defines a SAE or serious adverse drug exp erience as any untoward medical occurrence at any 
dose that:  
• results in death  
• is life -threatening;  (NOTE: The term "life -threatening" in the definition of "serious" refers to an event in 
which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which 
hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe)  
• requires hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
• results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity; or  
• is a congenital anomaly/birt h defect  
In addition, important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious adverse drug reaction, when based on appropriate medical 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
22 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76229] from the study because of an SAE  (assessed by t he Side Effect 
Reporting Form (Appendix Q) , the subject must have appropriate follow -up medical monitoring including, if 
necessary, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. The research laboratory staff will continue to m onitor by [CONTACT_69996] (phone) until the prob lem prompting hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69931].  
Unexpected  and Serious Adverse Events Reporting : Any Unexpected or SAE, inclu ding death due to any 
cause, which occurs to any subject from the time of admission through discharge whether or not related to the 
investigational product, will be reported within [ADDRESS_76230] via fax or phone call.  
Detailed written documentation for all SAEs/unexpected AEs will be submitted within seven (7) days to our 
Brown IRB. Required documents that must be submitted include the following  information:  
• title of protocol  
• description of the unanticipated adverse event  
• a determination of whether the event was related to the research study  
• name [CONTACT_18467]  
• where and when the event occurred  
• to whom else the event has been reported  
Upon receipt of a notification of an unanticipa ted adverse event or death, the IRB will determine whether 
further investigation of the event is required. Depending on the circumstances , the investigator may be 
required to suspend the study pending the outcome of an IRB review. Also, the IRB may require  modification of 
the risks section of the consent form. These documents may be submitted by [CONTACT_6972], as e -mail attachments, 
or via overnight courier.  
Reporting to FDA:  In agreement with the IND regulations, the investigators will report SAEs/Unexpected AEs 
to the FDA as well as the Program Officer at NIAAA:  
• in [ADDRESS_76231], with a follow -up written report 8 days later  
• in 15 days if the SAE is unex pected, but not immediately life -threatening  
• in an annual report in all other cases  
Follow -Up of All AEs/SAEs:  All adverse medical events must be followed until they are resolved, or until all 
attempts to determine the resolution of the AE/SAE are exhauste d.  All outcomes  and information regarding 
whether or not the subject was referred to their Primary Care Provider for additional follow -up must be 
recorded in the source document. Any SAEs and/or unexpected AEs among study participants during the 
follow -up period will be reported within [ADDRESS_76232] via fax or phone call. All follow -up AEs will be recorded and followed to 
resolution only if they are serious, or if the study physician assesses them to be clinically significant.  
Periodic Review of the Safety Data:  Drs. Haass -Koffler  and Swift will meet prior to the enrollment of the first 
subject to review the research protocol, informed consent documents and plans fo r safety and data monitoring 
of the study. This review will determine the risks and benefits to research subjects, protection and safety of the 
subjects and offer suggestions for improving the study design. Moreover, Drs. Haass -Koffler  and Swift  will 
meet in a regular basis during the duration of the study. These meetings will take place every 10 weeks for the 
entire duration of the study. ‘Ad hoc’ and/or emergency meetings will take place if needed for specific and/or 
safety reasons. Minutes of these meeti ngs will be taken and filed in the regulatory binder of this project. The 
goals of these meetings will be to:  
(1) determine adherence to research plan  
(2) review interim analysis, if applicable, and determine specific data to be analyzed  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
23 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 (3) evaluate end point/stop po int rules  
(4) review protocol violations and deviations to assess adequacy of study  
(5) ensure documentation of informed consent  
(6) enrollment (followed eligibility criteria, enrollment numbers, visit compliance, screening failure information)  
(7) discuss investigator or  key personnel changes  
(8) review completeness and quality of data collection forms, vital signs, clinical tests, and confidentiality  
(9) evaluate the aggregate analysis of adverse events/serious adverse events  
The major outcomes following data review include:  
(1) continuing the trial unchanged  
(2) modify ing the protocol and/or consent form  
(3) terminat ing the study  
If the protocol and/or consent form should be changed, or the study should be terminated, [CONTACT_59892] -Koffler 
will be responsible for all the necessary communication s with the Project Officer, the FDA and the Brown 
University IRB.  
Potential Benefits of Proposed Research: There are no benefits of participating in this study. The level of 
risks and potential side effects are outweighed by [CONTACT_69997]. However, we believe 
that the risk-benefit ratio justifies the conduct of this study, given the magnitude of alcohol dependence and the 
need to identify novel targets for alcoholism . 
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained:  Alcohol abuse and de pendence is a major public health 
problem for which treatment options are limited. This study provides an opportunity to explore a novel pathway 
that could represent a target for possible pharmacological approach es able to help problem drinkers to reduce 
or stop their alcohol consumption. On this point, this study provides much needed data necessary for potential 
future clinical trials testing other new possible compounds (glucocorticoid -receptor antagonists).  
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Women will b e encouraged to participate in this research. Our experience is that between 29% and 33% of 
alcoholics in our research centers are women and that about 36% of subjects who enrol in similar studies are 
women.  However, due to the FDA abortifacient indication  of mifepristone, women with childbearing potential 
will be excluded regardless of the birth control methods adopted. Based on [CONTACT_70008]’s alcohol studies , between 
15% and 33% of the women enrolled are postmenopausal or surgical ly sterile ; therefore , we exp ect about 24% 
of those  enrolled in our study  to be women . We will attempt to target women for recruitment by [CONTACT_69998]’s health section of the major state newspaper as well as sections that focus on women’s health in 
local newspapers and mag azines.  In our radio ads we will target women and women of color who are typi[INVESTIGATOR_69932].  
All ethnic and minority groups will be welcome to participate. Our experience suggests that involvement in 
studies reflects the m ost recent (2009) Rhode Island demographics with about 2.7% of participants Asian, 
5.5% African -American and about 11.4% Hispanic. That said, the Hispanic population makes up 36% of the 
Providence area ; therefore , we will aim to enroll a greater amount tha n 11.4% Hispanic individuals. We will 
attempt to target minorities for recruitment by [CONTACT_69999] .   
 
Inclusion of Children  
As this is an alcohol study, children are ineligible for enroll ment.  
 
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
24 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY and REFERENCES CITED  
1. Herman JP, Cullinan WE. Neurocircuitry of stress: central control of the hypothalamo -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenocortical axis. 
Trends Neurosci . Feb 1997;20(2):78 -84. doi:S0166 -2236(96)[ZIP_CODE] -2 [pii]  
2. Reul JM, Holsboer F. Corticotropin -releasing factor receptors 1 and 2 in anxiety and depression. Curr Opin 
Pharmacol . Feb 2002;2(1):23 -33. doi:S1471489201001175 [pii]  
3. Sarnyai Z, Shaham Y, Heinrichs SC. The role of corticotropin -releasing factor in drug a ddiction. Pharmacol Rev . Jun 
2001;53(2):209 -43.  
4. Keyes KM, Hatzenbuehler ML, Hasin DS. Stressful life experiences, alcohol consumption, and alcohol use disorders: 
the epi[INVESTIGATOR_69933]. Research Support, N.I.H., Ext ramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Nov 2011;218(1):1 -17. doi:10.1007/s00213 -011-2236 -1 
5. Jose BS, van Oers HA, van de Mheen HD, Garretsen HF, Mackenbach JP. Stressors and alcohol consumption. 
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Alcohol Alcohol . May -Jun 2000;35(3):307 -12.  
6. Selye H. A syndrome produced by [CONTACT_70000]. 1936. Biography  
Classical Article  
Historical Article. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci . Spring 1998;10(2):230 -1.  
7. Selye H. Forty years of stress research: principal remaining problems and misconceptions. Can Med Assoc J . Jul 3 
1976;115(1):[ADDRESS_76233] pathways, and the transition to drug dependence. Research 
Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Review. Am J Psychiatry . Aug 2007;164(8):1149 -59. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.[ADDRESS_76234] KL, Hong KI, Sinha R. Stress -induced and alcohol cue -induced craving in recently abstinent 
alcohol -dependent individuals. Research Support, N.I.H., Extram ural. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Mar 2007;31(3):395 -403. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530 -0277.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
10. Sinha R, Li CS. Imaging stress - and cue -induced drug and alcohol craving: association with relapse and clinical 
implications. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Review. Drug Alcohol Rev . Jan 2007;26(1):25 -31. doi:10.1080/09595230601036960  
11. Heilig M, Egli M. Pharmacological treatment of alcohol dependence: target symptoms and target mechanisms. 
Review. Pharmacol Ther . Sep 2006;111(3):855 -76. doi:10.1016/j.pharmt hera.2006.02.001  
12. Willinger U, Lenzinger E, Hornik K, et al. Anxiety as a predictor of relapse in detoxified alcohol -dependent patients. 
Clinical Trial  
Meta -Analysis  
Randomized Controlled Trial. Alcohol Alcohol . Nov -Dec 2002;37(6):609 -12.  
13. Rohsenow DJ, Monti PM, Rubonis AV, et al. Cue reactivity as a predictor of drinking among male alcoholics. 
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Consult Clin Psychol . Jun 1994;62(3):620 -6.  
14. Marquenie LA, Schade A, van Balkom AJ, et al. Origin of the comorbidity of anxiety disorders and alcohol 
dependence: findings of a general population study. Eur Addict Res . 2007;13(1):39 -49. doi:10.1159/000095814  
15. Spanagel R, Montkowski A, Allingham  K, et al. Anxiety: a potential predictor of vulnerability to the initiation of ethanol 
self-administration in rats. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Dec 1995;122(4):369 -73.  
16. Thomas SE, Randall CL, Carrigan MH. Drinking to c ope in socially anxious individuals: a controlled study. Clinical 
Trial 
Comparative Study  
Controlled Clinical Trial. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Dec 2003;27(12):1937 -43. doi:10.1097/01.ALC.[PHONE_1710].[ZIP_CODE].8C  
17. Childs E, O'Connor S, de Wit H. Bidirectional int eractions between acute psychosocial stress and acute intravenous 
alcohol in healthy men. Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Oct 2011;35(10):1794 -803. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -
0277.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x  
18. Brown SA, V ik PW, Patterson TL, Grant I, Schuckit MA. Stress, vulnerability and adult alcohol relapse. Research 
Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Stud Alcohol . Sep 1995;56(5):538 -45.  
19. Higley AE, Koob GF, Mason BJ. Treatment of  alcohol dependence with drug antagonists of the stress response. 
Alcohol Res . 2012;34(4):516 -21.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
25 
Confidential   V: December [ADDRESS_76235] 2010;39(3):218 -26. 
doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2010.06.002  
21. Lejoyeux M, Solomon J, Ades J. Benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_69934] -dependent patients. Review. Alcohol Alcohol . 
Nov-Dec 1998;33(6):563 -75.  
22. Addolorato G, Leggio  L, Abenavoli L, et al. Baclofen in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal syndrome: a comparative 
study vs diazepam. Comparative Study  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Am J Med . Mar 2006;119(3):276 e13 -8. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.200 5.08.042  
23. Leggio L, Kenna GA, Swift RM. New developments for the pharmacological treatment of alcohol withdrawal 
syndrome. A focus on non -benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_69935]. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psych iatry. Jul 1 2008;32(5):1106 -17. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.09.021  
24. Koob GF, Heinrichs SC. A role for corticotropin releasing factor and urocortin in behavioral responses to stressors. 
Brain Res . Nov 27 1999;848(1 -2):141 -52. doi:10.1016/s0006 -8993(99)0199 1-5 
25. Koob GF. Brain stress systems in the amygdala and addiction. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Brain Res . Oct 13 2009;1293:61 -75. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2009.03.038  
26. Funk CK, O'Dell LE, Crawford EF, Ko ob GF. Corticotropin -releasing factor within the central nucleus of the amygdala 
mediates enhanced ethanol self -administration in withdrawn, ethanol -dependent rats. Comparative Study  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural. J Neurosci . Nov 1 2006;26(44):[ZIP_CODE] -32. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3096 -06.2006  
27. Merlo Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69936] E, Lorang M, Yeganeh M, et al. Increase of extracellular corticotropin -releasing factor -like 
immunoreactivity levels in the amygdala of awake rats during restraint stress and ethanol withdrawal as meas ured by 
[CONTACT_70001]. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Neurosci . Aug 1995;15(8):5439 -47.  
28. Adinoff B, Junghanns K, Kiefer F, Krishnan -Sarin S. Suppression of the HPA axis stress -response: implications for 
relapse.  Congresses  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Jul 2005;29(7):1351 -5.  
29. Morrow AL, Porcu P, Boyd KN, Grant KA. Hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis modulation o f GABAergic neuroactive 
steroids influences ethanol sensitivity and drinking behavior. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Review. Dialogues Clin Neurosci . 2006;8(4):463 -77.  
30. Clarke TK, Treutlein J, Zimmermann US, et al. HPA -axis activity in alcoholis m: examples for a gene -environment 
interaction. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Addict Biol . Mar 2008;13(1):1 -14. doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_76236] Biol . Sep-Dec 2004;9(3 -
4):205 -12. doi:10.1080/13556210412331292532  
32. Heilig M, Thorsell A, Sommer WH, et al. Translating the neuroscience of alcoholism into clinical treatments: from 
blocking the buzz to curing the blues. Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. 
Review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev . Nov 2010;35(2):334 -44. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.11.[ADDRESS_76237], Cramer J, Morin SM. Effects of corticotropin -releasing factor 1 receptor antagonism on the hypothalamic -
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis of rodents. J Pharma col Exp Ther . Jun 2012;341(3):672 -80. doi:10.1124/jpet.111.[ADDRESS_76238], Cippi[INVESTIGATOR_23247] A, Thorsell A, et al. 3 -(4-Chloro -2-morpholin -4-yl-thiazol -5-yl)-8-(1-ethylpropyl) -2,6-dimethyl -
imidazo [1,2 -b]pyridazine: a novel brain -penetrant, orally availabl e corticotropin -releasing factor receptor [ADDRESS_76239] with 
efficacy in animal models of alcoholism. J Neurosci . Mar 7 2007;27(10):2718 -26. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4985 -06.2007  
35. Lowery -Gionta EG, Navarro M, Li C, et al. Corticotropin releasing factor sign aling in the central amygdala is recruited 
during binge -like ethanol consumption in C57BL/6J mice. Comparative Study  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. J Neurosci . Mar 7 2012;32(10):3405 -13. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6256 -11.2012  
36. Zorrilla EP, Heilig M, de Wit H, Shaham Y. Behavioral, biological, and chemical perspectives on targeting CRF(1) 
receptor antagonists to treat alcoholism. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, N.I.H., Intramural. Drug Alcohol Dep end. Mar 1 2013;128(3):175 -86. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.12.017  
37. Elias CF, Saper CB, Maratos -Flier E, et al. Chemically defined projections linking the mediobasal hypothalamus and 
the lateral hypothalamic area. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Resea rch Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Comp Neurol . Dec 28 1998;402(4):442 -59.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
26 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 38. Kuwaki T, Zhang W. Orexin neurons and emotional stress. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Vitam Horm . 2012;89:135 -58. doi:10.1016/B978 -0-12-394623 -2.[ZIP_CODE] -1 
39. Tye SJ, M iller AD, Blaha CD. Differential corticosteroid receptor regulation of mesoaccumbens dopamine efflux during 
the peak and nadir of the circadian rhythm: a molecular equilibrium in the midbrain? Synapse . Nov 2009;63(11):982 -90. 
doi:10.1002/syn.[ZIP_CODE]  
40. Diorio D, Viau V, Meaney MJ. The role of the medial prefrontal cortex (cingulate gyrus) in the regulation of 
hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal responses to stress. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. J Neurosci . Sep 1993;13(9):3839 -
47.  
41. Magarinos AM, Somoza G, De Nicola AF. Glucocorticoid negative feedback and glucocorticoid receptors after 
hippocampectomy in rats. Horm Metab Res . Mar 1987;19(3):105 -9.  
42. Sapolsky RM. Stress hormones: good and bad. Neurobiol Dis . Oct 2000;7(5):540 -2. doi:10.1006/nbdi.2000.0350  
43. Koob GF. A role for brain stress systems in addiction. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Review. Neuron . Jul 10 2008;59(1):11 -34. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.[ADDRESS_76240], 
mifepristone, on the consequences of withdrawal from long term alcohol consumption. Comparative Study  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Dec 2008;32(12):2107 -16. doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_76241] mifepristone reduces ethanol intake in rats under limited 
access conditions. Comparative Study  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Psychoneuroendocrinology . Sep 2004;29(8):999 -1003. 
doi:10.1016/ j.psyneuen.2003.09.004  
46. Richardson HN, Lee SY, O'Dell LE, Koob GF, Rivier CL. Alcohol self -administration acutely stimulates the 
hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis, but alcohol dependence leads to a dampened neuroendocrine state. Research 
Support, N.I. H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Eur J Neurosci . Oct 2008;28(8):1641 -53.  
47. Simms JA, Haass -Koffler CL, Bito -Onon J, Li R, Bartlett SE. Mifepristone in the central nucleus of the amygdala 
reduces yohimbine stress -induced reinstatement of ethanol -seeking. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Neuropsychopharmacology . Mar 2012;37(4):906 -18. 
doi:10.1038/npp.2011.268  
48. Doyon WM, Dong Y, Ostroumov A, Thomas AM, Zhang TA,  Dani JA. Nicotine decreases ethanol -induced dopamine 
signaling and increases self -administration via stress hormones. Neuron . Aug 7 2013;79(3):530 -40. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.06.006  
49. Johanssen S, Allolio B. Mifepristone (RU 486) in Cushing's syndrome . Review. Eur J Endocrinol . Nov 
2007;157(5):561 -9. doi:10.1530/EJE -07-0458  
50. DeBattista C, Belanoff J, Glass S, et al. Mifepristone versus placebo in the treatment of psychosis in patients with 
psychotic major depression. Multicenter Study  
Randomized Con trolled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Biol Psychiatry . Dec 15 2006;60(12):1343 -9. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.05.034  
51. Born J, DeKloet ER, Wenz H, Kern W, Fehm HL. Gluco - and antimineralocorticoid effects on human sleep: a role of 
central corti costeroid receptors. Clinical Trial  
Controlled Clinical Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Am J Physiol . Feb 1991;260(2 Pt 1):E183 -8.  
52. Fahlke C, Engel JA, Eriksson CJ, Hard E, Soderpalm B. Involvement of corticosterone in the modulation of ethanol  
consumption in the rat. Alcohol . May -Jun 1994;11(3):195 -202. doi:10.1016/0741 -8329(94)[ZIP_CODE] -0 
53. Yang X, Wang S, Rice KC, Munro CA, Wand GS. Restraint stress and ethanol consumption in two mouse strains. 
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Supp ort, N.I.H., Intramural. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . May 2008;32(5):840 -52. doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_76242] decrease 
binge -like ethanol drinking in C57BL/6 J mice independent of the HPA axis. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Neuropsychopharmacology . May 2010;35(6):1241 -52. doi:10.1038/npp.2009.[ADDRESS_76243] SC. Central noradrenergic neurones and stress. Review. Pharmac ol Ther . 1995;68(2):297 -42.  
56. Southwick SM, Krystal JH, Morgan CA, et al. Abnormal noradrenergic function in posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Arch Gen Psychiatry . Apr 1993;50(4) :266-74.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
27 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 57. Umhau JC, Schwandt ML, Usala J, et al. Pharmacologically induced alcohol craving in treatment seeking alcoholics 
correlates with alcoholism severity, but is insensitive to acamprosate. Comparative Study  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Su pport, N.I.H., Intramural. Neuropsychopharmacology . May 2011;36(6):1178 -86. doi:10.1038/npp.2010.253  
58. Brady KT, Back SE, Waldrop AE, et al. Cold pressor task reactivity: predictors of alcohol use among alcohol -
dependent individuals with and without como rbid posttraumatic stress disorder. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Jun 2006;30(6):938 -46. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -0277.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
59. Bernardy NC, King AC, Parsons OA, Lovallo WR. Altered cortisol response in sober alcoholics: an examination of 
contributing factors. Alcohol . Sep -Oct 1996;13(5):493 -8. doi:10.1016/0741 -8329(96)[ZIP_CODE] -2 
60. Elman I, Becerra L, Tschibelu E, Yamamoto R, George E, Borsook D. Yohimbine -induced amygdala activation in 
pathological gamblers: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. PLoS One . 2012;7(2):e31118. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031118  
61. Sher KJ, Gershuny BS, Peterson L, Raskin G. The role of childhood stressors in the intergenerational transmission of 
alcohol use disorders. Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Stud Alcohol . Jul 1997;58(4):414 -27.  
62. Heim C, Mletzko T, Purselle D, Musselman DL, Nemeroff CB. The dexamethasone/corticotropin -releasing factor test 
in men with major depression: role of childhood trauma. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Biol Psychiatry . Feb 15 2008;63(4):398 -405. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.07.002  
63. Lee R, Geracioti TD, Jr., Kasckow JW, Coccaro EF. Childhood trauma and personality disorder: positive correlation 
with adult CSF corticotropin -releasing factor co ncentrations. Comparative Study. Am J Psychiatry . May 2005;162(5):995 -
7. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.5.995  
64. Kessler RC, Sonnega A, Bromet E, Hughes M, Nelson CB. Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National Comorbidity 
Survey. Research Support, Non -U.S. G ov't 
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Arch Gen Psychiatry . Dec 1995;52(12):1048 -60.  
65. Enoch MA. The role of early life stress as a predictor for alcohol and drug dependence. Research Support, N.I.H., 
Intramural  
Review. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Mar  2011;214(1):17 -31. doi:10.1007/s00213 -010-1916 -6 
66. Petrakis IL, Poling J, Levinson C, Nich C, Carroll K, Rounsaville B. Naltrexone and disulfiram in patients with alcohol 
dependence and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlle d Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Biol Psychiatry . May 15 2005;57(10):1128 -37. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.02.016  
67. Brady KT, Sonne S, Anton RF, Randall CL, Back SE, Simpson K. Sertraline in the treatment of co -occurring alcohol 
dependence  and posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Mar 2005;29(3):395 -401.  
68. Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ. Early, postnatal experience a lters hypothalamic corticotropin -releasing factor (CRF) mRNA, 
median eminence CRF content and stress -induced release in adult rats. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Brain Res Mol Brain Res . May 1993;18(3):195 -200.  
69. Ladd CO, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB. Persistent changes in corticotropin -releasing factor neuronal systems induced by 
[CONTACT_70002]. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Endocrinology . Apr 1996;137(4):1212 -8. doi:10.1210/ endo.137.4.8625891  
70. Tidey JW, Monti PM, Rohsenow DJ, et al. Moderators of naltrexone's effects on drinking, urge, and alcohol effects in 
non-treatment -seeking heavy drinkers in the natural environment. Comparative Study  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramu ral 
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Jan 2008;32(1):58 -66. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -
0277.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x  
71. Rohsenow DJ, Colby [CONTACT_10009], Monti PM, et al. Predictors of compliance with naltrexone among alcoholics. Clinical Trial  
Randomized C ontrolled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Oct 2000;24(10):1542 -9.  
72. Monti PM, Rohsenow DJ, Swift RM, et al. Naltrexone and cue exposure with copin g and communication skills training 
for alcoholics: treatment process and 1 -year outcomes. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Nov 2001;25(11):1634 -47.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
28 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 73. Monti PM, Rohsenow DJ, Hutchison KE, et al. Naltrexone's effect on cue -elicited craving among alcoholics in 
treatment. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Sup port, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Aug 1999;23(8):1386 -94.  
74. Leggio L, Kenna GA, Ferrulli A, et al. Preliminary findings on the use of metadoxine for the treatment of alcohol 
dependence and alcoholic liver disease. Comparative Study  
Research  Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Hum Psychopharmacol . Dec 2011;26(8):554 -9. doi:10.1002/hup.1244  
75. Leggio L, Ferrulli A, Cardone S, et al. Ghrelin system in alcohol -dependent subjects: role of plasma ghrelin levels in 
alcohol drinking and craving. Randomized Co ntrolled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Addict Biol . Mar 2012;17(2):452 -64. doi:10.1111/j.1369 -1600.2010.[ZIP_CODE].x  
76. Leggio L, Cardone S, Ferrulli A, et al. Turning the clock ahead: potential preclinical and clinical neuropharmacological 
targets f or alcohol dependence. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Review. Curr Pharm Des . 2010;16(19):[ADDRESS_76244], Swift RM, Willenbring ML. Advances in the pharmacotherapy of alcoholism: 
challenging misconceptions. Congresses  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Feb 2006;30(2):272 -81. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -0277.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
78. Kenna GA, Zywiak WH, McGeary JE, et al. A within -group design of nontreatment seeking 5 -HTTLPR genoty ped 
alcohol -dependent subjects receiving ondansetron and sertraline. Randomized Controlled Trial. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 
Feb 2009;33(2):315 -23. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -0277.2008.[ZIP_CODE].x  
79. Kenna GA, Roder -Hanna N, Leggio L, et al. Association of the 5 -HTT gene -linked promoter region (5 -HTTLPR) 
polymorphism with psychiatric disorders: review of psychopathology and pharmacotherapy. Pharmgenomics Pers Med . 
2012;5:19 -35. doi:10.2147/PGPM.S23462  
80. Kenna GA, Nielsen DM, Mello P, Schiesl A, Swift RM. Pharmacotherapy of dual substance abuse and dependence. 
Review. CNS Drugs . 2007;21(3):213 -37.  
81. Kenna GA, Leggio L, Swift RM. A safety and tolerability laboratory study of the combination of aripi[INVESTIGATOR_69937]. Randomized Contro lled Trial. Hum Psychopharmacol . Aug 2009;24(6):465 -72. 
doi:10.1002/hup.1042  
82. Johnson BA, Swift RM, Ait -Daoud N, DiClemente CC, Javors MA, Malcolm RJ, Jr. Development of novel 
pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_69938]: focus on antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_62692]. Congresses  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Feb 2004;28(2):295 -301.  
83. Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, et al. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_69939]: a randomized controlled 
trial. Multicenter Study  
Randomized Contro lled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Jama . Oct 10 2007;298(14):1641 -51. doi:10.1001/jama.298.14.1641  
84. Hutchison KE, Wooden A, Swift RM, et al. Olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_69940]: a DRD4 VNTR polymorphism by 
[CONTACT_70003]. Clini cal Trial  
Comparative Study  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Neuropsychopharmacology . Oct 2003;28(10):1882 -8. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300264  
85. Edwards S, Kenna GA, Swift RM, Leggio L. Current and promising pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], a nd novel research target 
areas in the treatment of alcohol dependence: a review. Review. Curr Pharm Des . 2011;17(14):1323 -32.  
86. Anton RF, Swift RM. Current pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_69941]: a U.S. perspective. Review. Am J Addict . 2003;[ADDRESS_76245] 1:S53 -68.  
87. Kathol RG, Anton R, Noyes R, Gehris T. Direct comparison of urinary free cortisol excretion in patients with 
depression and panic disorder. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Biol Psychiatry . Apr 1 1989;25(7):873 -8.  
88. Sachar EJ, Hellman L, Roffwarg HP, Halpern FS, Fukushima DK, Gallagher TF. Disrupted 24 -hour patterns of cortisol 
secretion in psychotic depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry . Jan 1973;28(1):[ADDRESS_76246] studies in psychotic depress ion: a meta -analysis. Comparative Study  
Meta -Analysis. Am J Psychiatry . Nov 1997;154(11):[ADDRESS_76247] N Z J Psychiatry . May 2006;40(5):402 -5. 
doi:10.1111/j.1440 -1614.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
29 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 91. DeBattista C, Belanoff J. The use of mifepristone in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders. Review. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab . Apr 2006;17(3):117 -21. doi:10.1016/j.tem.2006.02.006  
92. Golier JA, Caramanica K, Demaria R, Yehuda R. A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69942] -Related PTSD. Depress 
Res Treat . 2012;2012:393251. doi:10.1155/2012/393251  
93. Wangelin BC, Powers MB, Smits JA, Tuerk PW. Enhancing exposure therapy for PTSD with yohimbine HCL: Protocol 
for a double -blind, randomized controlled study imple menting subjective and objective measures of treatment outcome. 
Contemp Clin Trials . Aug 9 2013;36(2):319 -326. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2013.08.003  
94. Greenwald MK, Lundahl LH, Steinmiller CL. Yohimbine increases opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -seeking behavior in heroin -dependent, 
buprenorphine -maintained individuals. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Feb 
2013;225(4):811 -24. doi:10.1007/s00213 -012-[ADDRESS_76248] -traumatic stress disorder: a preliminary r eport on response 
to exercise -induced stress. Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci . Winter 1992;4(1):59 -63.  
96. Owen JA, Nakatsu SL, Fenemore J, Condra M, Surridge DH, Morales A. The  pharmacokinetics of yohimbine in man. 
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Eur J Clin Pharmacol . 1987;32(6):577 -82.  
97. Monti PM, Rohsenow DJ, Rubonis AV, et al. Alcohol cue reactivity: effects of detoxification and extended exposure. 
Research Support, U.S.  Gov't, Non -P.H.S. J Stud Alcohol . Mar 1993;54(2):235 -45.  
98. Rohsenow DJ, Monti PM, Martin RA, Michalec E, Abrams DB. Brief copi[INVESTIGATOR_69943]: 12 -
month substance use outcomes. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Su pport, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. J Consult Clin Psychol . Jun 2000;68(3):515 -20.  
99. Rohsenow DJ, Monti PM, Rubonis AV, et al. Cue exposure with copi[INVESTIGATOR_69944]: 6 - and 12 -month outcomes. Clinical Trial  
Comparative Study  
Controlled Clinical Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Addiction . Aug 2001;96(8):1161 -74. doi:10.1080/09652140120060752  
100. McGeary JE, Monti P M, Rohsenow DJ, Tidey J, Swift R, Miranda R, Jr. Genetic moderators of naltrexone's 
effects on alcohol cue reactivity. Comparative Study  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Aug 2006;30(8):1288 -96. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -
0277.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
101. Miranda R, Jr., MacKillop J, Monti PM, et al. Effects of topi[INVESTIGATOR_69945]: a preliminary laboratory study. Comparative Study  
Randomi zed Controlled Trial  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Mar 2008;32(3):489 -97. doi:10.1111/j.1530 -
0277.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x  
102. Wertz JM, Sayette MA. A review of the effects of perceived drug use op portunity of self -reported urge. Research 
Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.  
Review. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol . Feb 2001;9(1):3 -13.  
103. O'Malley SS, Krishnan -Sarin S, Farren C, Sinha R, Kreek MJ. Naltrexone decreases craving and alcohol self -
administration in al cohol -dependent subjects and activates the hypothalamo -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenocortical axis. Clinical Trial  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Feb 2002;160(1):19 -29. doi:10.1007/s002130100919  
104. Anton RF,  Drobes DJ, Voronin K, Durazo -Avizu R, Moak D. Naltrexone effects on alcohol consumption in a 
clinical laboratory paradigm: temporal effects of drinking. Clinical Trial  
Comparative Study  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Psyc hopharmacology (Berl) . Apr 2004;173(1 -2):32 -40. doi:10.1007/s00213 -003-
1720 -7 
105. Martin CS, Earleywine M, Musty RE, Perrine MW, Swift RM. Development and validation of the Biphasic Alcohol 
Effects Scale. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . Feb 1993;17(1):140 -6.  
Title: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69903]: Carolina  Haass -Koffler  
 
30 
Confidential   V: December 15  2014  
 106. Drobes DJ, Anton RF, Thomas SE, Voronin K. A clinical laboratory paradigm for evaluating medication effects on 
alcohol consumption: naltrexone and nalmefene. Clinical Trial  
Comparative Study  
Evaluation Studies  
Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Neuropsychopharmacology . Apr 2003;28(4):755 -64. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300101  
107. Johnson BA, Ait -Daoud N, Roache JD. The COMBINE SAFTEE: a structured instrument for collecting adverse 
events adapted for clinical studies in the alcoholism field. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.  
Validation Studies. J Stud Alcohol Suppl . Jul 2005;(15):157 -67; discussion 140.  
 
 