 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Translating a Dementia Caregiver Intervention Into a Mobile Application 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
9/22/[ADDRESS_496605] is to combine elements of two interventions 
into a mobile health (mHealth) App for informal dementia caregivers. Caring for a person with 
dementia is a highly stressful activity and is as sociated with negative physical and mental health 
consequences, including increased risk of depression and worse reported health-related quality of life (1). There is currently no effective disease-modifying treatment for Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD) and related dementias, and 70% of persons with AD are cared for by [CONTACT_395284] (2). There is a pressing need for strategies to care for both the 
increasing population of dementia patients and their family caregivers. Psychosocial 
interventions (particularly multicomponent interventions) for dementia caregivers are successful in reducing depression, stress, and burden associated with caregiving and delaying nursing home placement (3-6). Although over [ADDRESS_496606] been found 
efficacious in randomized trials, less than 3% of interventions have been empi[INVESTIGATOR_395262] (7). As a result, family caregivers do not receive intervention strategies 
shown to be most effective. The few translational studies that exist demonstrate that complex 
trials from randomized interventions can be adapted for community implementation and tend to obtain similar results seen in RCTs (8,9). One method for widespread dissemination and scalability of an intervention is technology-based approaches, such as mHealth Apps.  
Our research group developed the Family Intervention: Telephone Tracking Caregiver 
(FITT-C), which is an entirely telephone-delivered psychosocial intervention (R21MH062561). A full-scale efficacy study (R01NR010559; [10]) showed that compared to a supportive intervention, the FITT-C reduced caregiver depressive symptoms and their reactions to patient memory and behavior problems. A secondary analysis revealed that FITT-C caregivers had lower healthcare utilization and greater community resource use compared to support 
caregivers (11). Our team also conducted an RCT of a mind-body intervention (i.e., yoga, 
meditation) in individuals with depressive symptoms (R01NR012005; [12]), which showed reduced depressive symptoms at 6-month follo w-up compared to a health education program. 
The proposed study will combine and translate each of these interventions into a mHealth App (CARE-Well [Caregiver Assessment, Resources, and Education]). A strength of the proposed 
project is merging these complementary interventions to provide caregivers with a range of 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675]-supported opportunities for psyc hoeducation, stress management, and problem 
solving.  Aim 1:  Develop and preliminarily test a mHealth tablet App for dementia caregivers 
incorporating important elements of FITT-C and a mind-body (yoga, meditation) intervention. 
 Collaborate with a computer/biomedical engineering team with an expertise in mHealth 
technologies to integrate key components of both interventions and develop a beta version of the App for initial testing. 
 Conduct a month-long open trial of the App in 10 dementia caregivers and elicit 
feedback about the App using qualitative interviews.  
Aim 2:  Conduct a feasibility trial of the newly-developed CARE-Well App in 40 dementia 
caregivers to establish acceptability and feasibility of the intervention, study procedures, and outcome measures. 
The current proposal aligns well with NIH priorities as outlined in PAR-18-179, including 
development of novel interventions to meet needs of caregivers and leveraging technology to 
support caregivers in the home. The recent 2015 Alzheimer’s Disease Summit recommended 
initiating programs that bring together cross-disciplinary expertise to develop more personalized 
technologies to serve the diverse populations of aging adults with and without AD and their 
caregivers. The overarching goal of this application is to develop a highly transportable and 
scalable intervention for dementia caregivers that can be tested in a future clinical trial.  
 
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY 
SIGNIFICANCE 
AD currently affects 5.7 million people in the U.S. (2). There is currently no effective 
disease modifying treatment for AD, and most phar maceutical trials for the disease failed, 
suggesting that we are still far from an effective treatment. Dementia caregivers are the main support source for these individuals, with over 70% of individuals with AD cared for by [CONTACT_395284] (2). Dementia caregivers are at heightened risk for depression, anxiety, stress, and other negative health consequences (1, 13-14). It is therefore 
important to develop interventions for this hi gh-risk group. Psychosocial interventions for 
dementia caregivers are successful in reducing depression, stress, and burden associated with caregiving and delaying nursing home placement (3, 5, 10). In addition, there is evidence that multicomponent interventions are most efficacious compared to single-focused approaches in treating the negative effects of caregiving and delaying institutionalization of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] 
(3,5). Individual and tailored interventions for caregivers are also more effective than group and 
one-size-fits-all models (15). 
Although over [ADDRESS_496607] been found efficacious in 
randomized trials, less than 3% of interventions have been empi[INVESTIGATOR_395263] (7). As a result, family caregivers do not receive intervention strategies shown to be 
most effective. Barriers to implementation of multicomponent interventions (even those delivered by [CONTACT_756]) include high cost, personnel time, and limited accessibility. Caregivers also encounter numerous barriers related to in-person programs and support groups, such as limited transportation, time pressures of caregiving, inability to find care for the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], lack of knowledge of services, reluctance, or stigma associated with seeking support. Consequently, dementia caregivers tend to underutilize community support services and other resources (16).  
MHealth Apps are a particularly promising strategy to meet caregivers’ needs that are 
accessible during convenient times. Mobile  and web-based interventions show promise in 
specific skill building for dementia caregivers (17), lessening burden in cancer caregivers (18) and reducing depressive symptoms in adults with m ental illness (19). Many of these studies are 
plagued by [CONTACT_395285], involving inadequate controls, lack of blinding, and 
limited descriptions of methods (20). The proposed project aims to address these 
limitations by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_395264]-based, multi-component 
intervention into a mHealth App that has the potential to increase dementia caregivers’ 
access to support and care.  
Conceptual Framework. The FITT-C intervention is based on a combination of 
theoretical models, including psychosocial transitions (21), transactional stress and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (22), 
and the McMaster Model of Family Functioning (23). These models propose that dementia 
caregiving consists of stress-inducing events that result in an appraisal process by [CONTACT_395286]. Caregiver burden can be viewed as a situation in which subjective and objective demands exceed subjective and objective copi[INVESTIGATOR_395265], and persisting burden becomes a stressor that results in 
feelings of depression and helplessness. The focus of the intervention is on increasing caregiver 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_395266]-solving skill development and promoting positive changes within the family system. As such, the FITT-C inte rvention directly targets caregiver appraisal and 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and has shown reductions in burden, depression, and reactions to memory and behavior problems in dementia caregivers (10). The framework underlying the mind-body intervention involves multiple components (physical activity/postures, breathing exercises, and 
meditation) that target depressive symptoms and may decrease rumination. Yoga and 
meditation are efficacious in reducing depression (12), reducing anxiety (24) and may amplify the FITT-C intervention by [CONTACT_395287]. The negative effects of dementia caregiving are broad and complex and may be best addressed by a multipronged approach, such as 
increasing copi[INVESTIGATOR_395267], depression, burden, reactions to behavioral 
problems, and rumination/worry.  
 
INNOVATION The current project represents the first study to develop a combined psychosocial and mind-body intervention based on evidence-based programs that show reduction in the negative consequences of dementia caregiving and depression and rumination. The project will create and test a multicomponent, mHealth App rather than a specific educational or skill building 
approach. The design of the App will allow for: 1) tailoring and personalizing the intervention 
based on caregiver assessment; 2) using conceptual frameworks of the interventions in developi[INVESTIGATOR_395268], 3) including current dementia caregivers in the process of refining and adapting the intervention; and 4) developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a cross-disciplinary collaboration between computer engineers and clinical researchers. Given the widespread availability of mobile 
devices, the intervention has the potential for efficient dissemination into the community 
following demonstration of efficacy.    APPROACH 
Overview. This project will translate the FITT-C and mind-body interventions into a 
mHealth App through a collaboration between clinical and computer engineering scientists. In 
Aim 1, we will develop the mHealth App and use par ticipatory research methods to modify the 
App. In Aim 2, we will conduct a feasibility study in [ADDRESS_496608] is to demonstrate viability of 
translating in-person interventions into mHealth Apps. The proposed study includes Stage 1a 
(intervention modification) and Stage 1b (feasibility and pi[INVESTIGATOR_395269]).  
Preliminary Studies. The PI (Tremont) developed the Family Intervention: Telephone 
Tracking intervention (R21MH062561; [6]) and demonstrated efficacy of the intervention (R01NR010559; [10]), showing that compared to a supportive intervention, the FITT-C reduced 
caregiver depressive symptoms and their reactions to patient memory and behavior problems. A 
recent secondary analysis showed that the FITT-C reduced ER visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_395270] a supportive intervention (11). We have a detailed treatment manual that includes sample dialogue, intervention strategies, and strategies for management common behavioral problems in dementia that will available for use in the current study. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_395271] a mind-body intervention that we tested in a randomized clinical 
trial in 122 individuals with depressive symptom s who were taking antidepressant medications 
(R01NR012005; [12]). Results showed that the 10-week intervention reduced depressive symptoms at 6-month follow-up compared to a h ealthy living educational program. As part of 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_334749], we started a collaboration with the computer/biomedical engineering 
group from the University of Rhode Island (URI; led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Kunal Mankodiya serving as a Co-I in 
this proposal). Mankodiya’s team has developed and deployed a number of mHealth technologies  with medical and psychiatric patients including SPARK (25), EchoWear (26-28), Android EAR (29-31), and Face Emotion Monitoring (32,33). Overall, our multidisciplinary 
research team is uniquely positioned to conduct this study.  
Aim [ADDRESS_496609] detailed treatment manuals that will be used to identify 
specific content.  
Phase 1. Translation of intervention. In this step (6 months), we will work with Co-I 
Mankodiya to design the App and add intervention content. In preliminary discussions, we have identified equipment needed for the study and developed a preliminary outline of the App components (see below and Figure 1).  Technical issues. The mHealth App will be designed for the android platform. We chose this 
platform because of simplicity in implementation and time and financial limitations of the current award. Future projects will allow for development for other platforms including iOS (iPad or iPhone). In addition, we chose to provide all participants in the study with android tablets to standardize operating procedures and minimize troubleshooting of multiple personal devices. We will restrict participants’ access within the tablet to the CARE-Well, Gmail, and Zoom Apps 
only. Future projects will incorporate personal devices to increase accessibility and applicability 
of the intervention. All App data will be stored on  participants’ tablet devices but will not include 
any personal or health information. At completion of each study phase, data will be downloaded into a password-protected database for analysis. The message forum (described below) will involve a Google group that is embedded in the App. Mankodiya’s team at URI will provide 
technical support for participants and will develop troubleshooting procedures but will not have 
access to personal or health information. Our partner will also develop an orientation training 
and video about how to use the App
.   
Intervention Description. The overall intent of the CARE-Well mobile App is to replicate the 
content and strategies in the telephone-based FITT-C intervention and to integrate the 
mindfulness and meditation exercises with FITT-C components (see Table 1). Caregivers will be encouraged to use the App at least four times per week. Caregivers will be prompted to 
complete an in-App, weekly assessment of key areas (i.e., family functioning, health, mood, 
social support, and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395272]) that will allow for tailoring of intervention components.  As caregivers complete recommended components, they will receive rewards within the App. Reminders will be used to increase accountability for tasks assigned and for recommended readings. Embedded in the App will be an online caregiver community (Google 
group), in which caregivers can anonymously post and respond to messages under a username 
[CONTACT_395296]. The research team will recommend against posting any personal or identifying information; however, it is ultimately up to the participant to decide whether or not they want to post more personal information. The Google group will be monitored by [CONTACT_395288], corrections, and links to helpful material. Allowing caregivers to respond to each other will provide social support 
and identify content that could be added to the App. Other App components will include:    
 Psychoeducation  – general education about dementia and caregiving; educational 
components about family functioning, healthy living strategies, managing mood, and seeking social support 
 Community Resources  – listing and links to community supports 
 Daily positive messages  including some that focus on positive aspects of caregiving 
 Managing behavior problems  in care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] –as part of the FITT-C, we developed a 
common behavior problem guide that includes recommended strategies to manage behaviors. We will use this guide to develop an interactive problem-solving approach.  
 Stress management exercises  – based on the mind-body intervention video/audio 
segments of breathing practices, guided meditation/relaxation exercises, simple yoga poses, and mindfulness themes 
 Setting a task directive  – based on caregiver assessments, certain tasks related to social 
support and family functioning will be recommended.  
 Bibliotherapy  – caregivers will be linked to important brochures and informational 
materials relevant to problem areas 
Table 1. Crosswalk between FITT-C Telephone Intervention, Mind-Body Intervention, and CARE-Well App 
FITT-C & Mind Body Key 
Areas CARE-Well Components 
Mood Daily positive messages;  
Health Health Tips; reminders to attend to  their own nutrition, medical care, sleep, 
exercise; bibliotherapy 
Social Support Message forum; links to community resources; ta sk directives to attend support 
groups and other activities 
Family Functioning Task directives to invo lve family in care; educational materials 
Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395273]-solvi ng guide; message forum 
Yoga Audio/video (AV) segments – Neck and Shoulder rolls, Yoga Nidra (relaxation) 
Breathing AV segments: Prayer brea th, alternate nostril breathing 
Meditation AV segments: Guided meditation 
Mindfulness Education about mindfulness exerci ses throughout the day, mindful eating, 
listening to music, walking meditation 
 
Phase 2. Beta Testing and Modification of the CARE-Well App. In this step (3 months), 
we will recruit [ADDRESS_496610] diverse caregivers across sex, relationship type (spouse, adult child, other), race/ethnicity, and severity of 
dementia in care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. Otherwise, recruitment will be based on inclusion/exclusion criteria 
outlined in Aim 2. Participants will be recruited from multiple sources, including the Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (RIH) Alzheimer’s and Memory Disorders Center (two full-time neurologists seeing only aging and dementia cases; 728 new cases and 1,352 follow-ups annually), RIH Neuropsychology Program (6 full-time adult clinicians seeing about 50% older adult referrals; approximately 200 new dementia cases annually),  and community advertising (including the 
Alzheimer’s Association, RI Chapter). Our research team has used these strategies previously 
to recruit almost 300 dementia caregivers for two intervention studies. Participants will be delivered a package that includes: one android tablet; two copi[INVESTIGATOR_395274] (if electronic consent form is for some reason inaccessible or unable to be completed for other reasons). A member of the study 
team will review the consent form (whether paper  or electronic) with participants during a Zoom 
video call on the tablet. They will be instructed to sign and initial the form and send it back to the study team either via REDCap or in the prepaid postage envelope so that a member of the study team can sign it and send a signed copy back to them. Participants will be instructed to keep the unsigned copy in their records as a reference. Once a participant completes the consent process during the initial Zoom call, they will be given a de-identified Gmail username 
[CONTACT_395297]/ App and will be shown how to operate the device and 
use the App. After one month of use, they will complete and participate in in-depth, semi-structured interviews with two interviewers (clinical researcher and computer engineer). Interviewers will assure participants of privacy and emphasize confidentiality. Interviews will last approximately [ADDRESS_496611] in a private location, will be digitally 
recorded with audio and video (via Zoom), and transcribed using NVivo software (QSR 
International, 2018). The interviews will follow a standard discussion guide, include probes to explore and seek clarification, and will address the participants’ experience with technical 
aspects of the App and content (see appendix for sample questions). We will also have quantitative data about frequency of App and component use. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_395275]. Uebelacker 
will conduct the qualitative data analysis by [CONTACT_395289]. We plan one month for modifications prior to beginning the 
feasibility study. 
Aim [ADDRESS_496612] a feasibility trial, in which 40 dementia 
caregivers will be randomized to receive a computer tablet preloaded with the CARE-well App or preloaded with internet links relevant to dementia and caregiving. Electronic outcome measures (detailed below) administered via RE DCap secure web platform will be assessed at 
baseline and end of intervention (3 months) during each study visit. To measure sustainability of the App, the first 10 caregivers from each group will be offered the tablets for an additional 
month to monitor usage of the App outside the formal trial. The goal of this aim is to determine 
feasibility of the intervention, study procedures, and outcome measures. 
Participants & Recruitment . Informal caregivers of individuals (aged 18 and older) who 
are formally diagnosed with mild-moderate Alzhei mer’s disease or related dementia (e.g., Lewy 
body dementia, frontotemporal dementia) documented by a neurologist, psychiatrist, or 
geriatrician will be screened for study eligibility (diagnoses will be confirmed via a release of 
information signed by [CONTACT_154697][INVESTIGATOR_841]). Care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395276], not in nursing homes or assisted living facilities. Care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395277], active 
medical illness besides dementia. Caregivers will be recruited from the RIH Alzheimer’s and Memory Disorders Center and RIH Neuropsychology Program by [CONTACT_395290]’ clinicians and their caregivers. In this way, we will obtain consent to contact [CONTACT_286725]. In addition, we will provide letters to clinic patients that will invite their caregivers to participate in the study. Community advertising will also be implemented. We will recruit for 11 months (Month 11-Month 21) and will need to recruit about 3-[ADDRESS_496613] FITT-C trial, we had a recruitment rate of 4.7 caregivers per month. 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria . Inclusion criteria include: 1). adequate English-speaking and 
reading skills; 2). provide at least 4 hours of supervision per day for the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (either 
directly or by [CONTACT_756]); 3). live in the community (either with the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395278]); 4). have provided supervision/assistance for at leas t six months prior to enrollment and have no 
plans for to place the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395279]; 5). report some degree of distress associated with caregiving, 
which will be assessed through endorsement of two of nine negative experiences associated 
with caregiving (feeling overwhelmed or stress ed, sad mood/depression, anger/frustration, loss 
of contact [CONTACT_395291], conflict in family or family stress, neglecting own health, demands or pressures from caregiving, exhaustion /fatigue, not taking care of their own needs or 
other responsibilities); and 6) access to WIFI at home. Exclusion criteria include: 1). major acute medical illness; 2). severe mental illness (e.g., bipolar, schizophrenia); or 3). diagnosed 
cognitive impairment. 
Procedure & Interventions. After screening and consenting, caregivers will complete an 
electronic baseline assessment (described bel ow) and will be randomly assigned to receive a 
computer tablet that has the newly developed CARE-Well App or internet links relevant to dementia caregiving for 3 months. We will provide the caregivers with written information about 
expectations for the App use at orientation and they will be encouraged to use the website links 
daily. Computer engineers and/or a research assistant will provide IT support for caregivers in both groups. To minimize face-to-face contact [CONTACT_325825]-19 pandemic, caregivers will remain at home to complete the second and final study ‘visit,’ which entails completing follow-up assessments within two weeks of intervention completion. Once follow-up assessments are complete, participants will be instructed to send the computer tablet back to RIH using a prepaid 
package given to them during their initial study visi t. Due to time limitations of the current award, 
the first [ADDRESS_496614] is to demonstrate feasibility of the 
CARE-Well App and study procedures to support a future trial. As such, the study is not 
powered to determine efficacy, but rather to determine 1) whether a future trial will be 
successfully conducted; and 2) whether an in-person caregiver intervention can be reasonably 
adapted into a mobile App. We will focus on the following (benchmarks in parentheses): 
 Identify the best recruitment sites and methods (% who enrolled from each source and 
% contacts received from each recruitment method) 
 Determine participant willingness to be randomized (% who decline participation 
because of randomization) 
 Establish study enrollment rate and retention (latter variable examined by [CONTACT_19313]) 
 Determine adherence to intervention (% of par ticipants who use the App or internet links 
at least once per day)  
 Calculate timing of assessments and completion rates (% of assessments completed 
within two weeks of study enrollment and intervention completion)  
 Determine interest in continuation of tablet/App use (along with frequency of use) after 
formal trial in a subset of caregivers (10 from each group) as an estimate of 
sustainability 
 Collect ratings of satisfaction with technology and content (% satisfied or very satisfied) 
 To establish feasibility for a future trial, we will collect standard dementia caregiving outcome 
measures at baseline and following the intervention via REDCap secure web platform. We have used these measures extensively in our previous work. These will include demographic characteristics (sex, age, education, race and ethnicity, characteristics of the caregiver (e.g., 
relationship to recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], length of caregiving), and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395280] (e.g., dementia 
type and severity). We also will collect the following: 1). Depression:  Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141953], a 20-item self-report inventory (34); 2) Caregiver burden : Zarit 
Burden Interview, a 22-item self-report measure that examines subjective feelings related to the 
negative impact of caregiving on physical, emotional, financial, and social functioning (35). 3) 
Caregiver reaction to problem behaviors :  Revised Memory and Behavior Problem Checklist 
(36); 4). Desire to institutionalize : Desire to Institutionalize Scale (37): six-item scale to assess 
caregiver planning for long-term placement of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]; 5). Healthcare resource 
utilization:  Resource Utilization in Dementia - Lite Version (38); a measure on sexually 
disinhibited behaviors observed in the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (39).  
Future Trial: Any challenges, recommendations from participants, and innovative solutions 
that emerge through the proposed project will assure the CARE-Well App will be well-developed and ready for testing in future trials. The next step will be a fully-powered efficacy study in a large sample of dementia caregivers. We will also examine the effect of CARE-Well on specific outcome measures (including behavioral change  outcomes) as described above, examine 
moderators (mechanisms) of treatment (e.g ., App usage, component analysis, caregiver 
characteristics), and compare the effect sizes of CARE-Well to the FITT-C telephone 
intervention. In the next stage of the intervention, we will examine sustainability of CARE-Well through monitoring usage and feedback from study participants. Given the widespread availability of mobile technology and internet access, we anticipate efficiently moving from 
efficacy to dissemination. We hope to disseminate the intervention on a community-level, where specific facilities or agencies can tailor the intervention as needed and post specific content in 
the message forums. Our future trial will combine Stage II (pure efficacy) and Stage III 
(community efficacy) components. In particular, we will examine the effect of study/setting (memory clinic, agency, community) on effect iveness and utilization of the App.   
 
Potential Problems and Alternative Strategies 
 
App development time. Although we plan on App development in [ADDRESS_496615] a group ready to use the App as soon as the feasibility trial begins. App use. If we encounter low App or internet links use, we will increase reminders to 
participants. Older adults (who will likely comprise 50% of our sample) are increasingly using touchscreen devices (40) and accept and use tablet technology (41), suggesting that this would not be a confounding factor to the proposed App.
  
 
Protection of Human Subjects  All research contained in this proposal wi ll be approved by [CONTACT_274626][INVESTIGATOR_395281]. Written informed c onsent will be obtained for all participants. 
 1. Risks to Human Subjects   a. Human Subjects Involvemen t, Characteristics, and Design  
We will enroll a total of [ADDRESS_496616] will be a collaboration between Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_395282] (URI). Investi gators at URI will engage in build ing the application and will 
participate in qualitative interviews as part of Aim1.   Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria . Inclusion criteria include:  1). adequate English-speaking 
and reading skills; 2). provide at least one hour of supervision per day for the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (either directly or by [CONTACT_756]); 3) . live in the community (either with the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395278]); 4). have provided supervision/assistanc e for at least six months 
prior to enrollment and have no plans for to pl ace the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_395283] m onths of study enrollment; 5). report some 
degree of distress associated with caregiving, which will be assessed through 
endorsement of two of nine negative experiences associated with caregiving (e.g., 
feeling overwhelmed, sad mood,  frustration, loss of family /friend contact, family conflict, 
etc.); and 6) access to wifi at  home. Exclusion criteria in clude: 1). major acute medical 
illness; 2). severe mental illness (e.g., bi polar, schizophrenia; or 3). diagnosed cognitive 
impairment.  b. Study Procedures, Materi als, and Potential Risks  
Ten participants will be given an android tablet and asked to use a mobile application at 
least four times per week for one month. They will then participate in a qualitative 
interview in which they will be queried about  technical and content aspects of the 
application. Participants in Aim 1 will be co mpensated $50.[ADDRESS_496617] four 
times per week. Data will be collected via paper-pencil assessments fr om participants at 
two timepoints (Baseline and End-of-Treat ment). The assessm ent measures will 
address mood, burden, reactions to behavior pr oblems, health-related quality of life, 
sexual disinhibition in the care  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], and desire to instit utionalize the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. 
The data from participants’ in-App w eekly assessments of key areas will be 
programmed (using a computer algorithm) to generate personalized recommendations 
and references to relevant resources wit hin the App. This data will not include any 
personal or health information and will not be ex tracted from the App. Participants in 
Aim 2 will be compensated $[ADDRESS_496618]-protected database. 
 There are no serious risks associated with part icipating in this study. Participants will 
undergo testing with standardized questionnaires and measures. They may feel slightly 
frustrated, fatigued, or bored when completi ng these tests. Because we will assess 
depression, there is a possib ility that participants will repor t severe depression and/or 
suicidality. In addition, they are providi ng care for persons with dementia and we may 
uncover neglect or abuse.  2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  Confidentiality will be protect ed in the following ways: (1) participants’ names will not be 
included on the App, data sheets, or in the computerized database,  (2) all data will be 
kept in a locked file cabinet in a locked office, and (3) the com puter database will be 
password protected and only accessi ble by [CONTACT_41314].  
 
a. Informed Consent and Assent  
We will follow standardized procedures  for obtaining informed consent. 
Consent will be obtained at a face-to-face  visit at the Neuropsychology Program 
office at Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. C onsent will be obtained by [CONTACT_395292]. We will fully explain the study procedures, 
risks, benefits, and alternatives to all su bjects. They will be informed that they 
can refuse to participate or withdraw from the study at any time, and that this will 
have no effect on any treatment or care  they receive at  our facility.  
 
 
b. . Protections Against Risk  
If potential participants report severe depr essive symptoms or suicidality, 
we will refer them to the Acute Psychia try Service at Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The 
PI [CONTACT_832] a licensed clinical psychologist and has the skills to assess the suicidal risk 
and to make an appropriate referral. If there is evidence of elderly abuse or 
neglect, we will contact [CONTACT_395293]. 
.  
 
c. Vulnerable Subjects, if relevant to your study  
Not relevant  
3. Potential Benefits of t he Proposed Research to Resear ch Participants and Others  
The potential benefit of developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a m obile health intervention to improve 
negative effects of dementia caregiving appear s to outweigh the risks of the current 
study. Individuals in the bet a test of the application ma y experience benefits from 
education and other strategies of fered by [CONTACT_99023]. Ca regivers in both groups of 
the feasibility study may benef it from educational materials and learn about dementia, 
caregiving strategies, and stress management. Those randomized to the mobile health 
application may benefit from techniques to manage the negative effects of caregiving 
and development of copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110].  Participants will receive interventions free of charge.  
 
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
Results of this study will help to devel op an interactive, multicomponent mobile 
application for dementia caregivers. We will also collect data to inform a future 
large randomized trial to study the effica cy of the newly deve loped application. 
As such, the minimal risks to subjects in the current study seem reasonable 
given the knowledge to be gained.   
 
      
 
      
 
 
 Bibliography & References Cited
 
1. Brodaty, H., & Donkin, M. (2009). Family caregivers of people with dementia. Dialogues in 
clinical neuroscience, 11(2), 217. 2. Alzheimer’s Association. (2018). 2018 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures. Alzheimer’ s & Dementia, 14, 367-429. 3. Belle, S. H., Burgio, L., Burns, R., Coon, D., Czaja, S. J., Gallagher-Thompson, D., ... & 
Martindale-Adams, J. (2006). Enhancing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different 
ethnic or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Annals of internal medicine, 145(10), 727-738. 4. Dickinson, C., Dow, J., Gibson, G., Hayes, L., Robalino, S., & Robinson, L. (2017). Psychosocial intervention for carers of people with dementia: What components are most 
effective and when? A systematic review of system atic reviews. International psychogeriatrics, 
29(1), 31-43. 5. Mittelman, M. S., Haley, W. E., Clay, O. J., & Roth, D. L. (2006). Improving caregiver well-being delays nursing home placement of patients with Alzheimer disease. Neurology, 67(9), 1592-1599. 6. Tremont, G., Duncan Davis, J., Bishop, D. S., & Fortinsky, R. H. (2008). Telephone-delivered 
psychosocial intervention reduces burden in dementia caregivers. Dementia, 7(4), 503-520. 
7. Gitlin, L. N., Marx, K., Stanley, I. H., & Hodgson, N. (2015). Translating evidence-based dementia caregiving interventions into practice: State-of-the-science and next steps. The Gerontologist, 55(2), 210-226. 8. Burgio, L. D., Collins, I. B., Schmid, B., Wharton, T., McCallum, D., & DeCoster, J. (2009). 
Translating the REACH caregiver intervention for use by [CONTACT_395294]: The 
REACH OUT program. The Gerontologist, 49(1), 103-116. 9. Nichols, L. O., Martindale-Adams, J., Burns, R., Graney, M. J., & Zuber, J. (2011). Translation of a dementia caregiver support program in a health care system—REACH VA. Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(4), 353-359. 
10. Tremont, G., Davis, J. D., Papandonatos, G. D., Ott, B. R., Fortinsky, R. H., Gozalo, P., ... & 
Bishop, D. S. (2015). Psychosocial telephone intervention for dementia caregivers: A randomized, controlled trial. Alzheimer's & Dementia, 11(5), 541-548. 11. Tremont, G., Davis, J. D., Ott, B. R., Galioto, R., Crook, C., Papandonatos, G. D., ... & Bishop, D. S. (2017). Randomized Trial of the Family Intervention: Telephone Tracking—Caregiver for Dementia Caregivers: Use of Community and Healthcare Resources. Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society, 65(5), 924-930. 
12. Uebelacker, L. A., Tremont, G., Gillette, L. T., Epstein-Lubow, G., Strong, D. R., Abrantes, 
A. M., & Miller, I. W. (2017). Adjunctive yoga v. health education for persistent major depression: a randomized controlled trial. Psychological medicine, 47(12), 2130-2142. 
13. Schulz, R., & Martire, L. M. (2004). Family caregiving of persons with dementia: prevalence, 
health effects, and support strategies. The American journal of geriatric psychiatry, 12(3), 240-
249. 14. Vitaliano, P. P., Zhang, J., & Scanlan, J. M. (2003). Is caregiving hazardous to one's physical health? A meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin, 129(6), 946. 15. Sörensen, S., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051], M., & Duberstein, P. (2002). How effective are interventions with caregivers? An updated meta-analysis. The gerontologist, 42(3), 356-372. 
16. Robinson, K. M., Buckwalter, K. C., & Reed, D. (2005). Predictors of use of services among 
dementia caregivers. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 27(2), 126-140. 
17. Farran, C. J., Zurawski, P., Inventor, B. R., Urbanic, J., & Paun, O. (2017). An evidence-
based technological caregiver skillbuilding intervention for dementia family caregivers: pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association, 13(7), P836-P837. 18. DuBenske, L. L., Gustafson, D. H., Namkoong, K., Hawkins, R. P., Atwood, A. K., Brown, R. L., ... & Govindan, R. (2014). CHESS improves c ancer caregivers’ burden and mood: Results of 
an eHealth RCT. Health Psychology, 33(10), 1261. 
19. Firth, J., Torous, J., Nicholas, J., Carney, R., Pratap, A., Rosenbaum, S., & Sarris, J. (2017). 
The efficacy of smartphone -based mental health interventions for depressive symptoms: a 
meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. World Psychiatry, 16(3), 287-298. 
20. Egan, K. J., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946]-Bruno, Á. C., Bighelli, I., Berg-Weger, M., van Straten, A., Albanese, E., & 
Pot, A. M. (2018). Online training and support programs designed to improve mental health and reduce burden among caregivers of people with dementia: a systematic review. Journal of the 
American Medical Directors Association. 
21. Tyhurst, J. S. (1957). The role of transition states—including disasters—in mental illness. In Symposium on preventive and social psychiatry (pp. 149-169). Walter Reed Army Institute of Research Washington, DC. 22. Lazarus, R. S. (1986). Folkman. S.(1984) Stress, Appraisal, and Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. [LOCATION_001]: Springer. 
23. Ryan, C. E., Epstein, N. B., Keitner, G. I., Miller, I. W., & Bishop, D. S. (2012). Evaluating 
and treating families: The McMaster approach. Routledge. 24. Li, A. W., & Goldsmith, C. A. (2012). The effects of yoga on anxiety and stress. Altern Med Rev, 17(1), 21-35. 25. Sharma, Vinod, Kunal Mankodiya, Fernando De La Torre, Ada Zhang, Neal Ryan, Thanh 
GN Ton, Rajeev Gandhi, and Samay Jain. "SPARK: personalized Parkinson disease 
interventions through synergy between a smar tphone and a smartwatch." In International 
Conference of Design, User Experience, and Usability, pp. 103-114. Springer, Cham, 2014. 26. Harishchandra Dubey, Jon C. Goldberg, Mohammadreza Abtahi , Leslie Mahler, and Kunal 
Mankodiya. 2015. EchoWear: smartwatch technology for voice and speech treatments of 
patients with Parkinson's disease. In Proceedings of the conference on Wireless Health (WH 
'15). ACM, [LOCATION_001], NY, [LOCATION_003], Article 15, 8 pages. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2811780.2811957  
27. Dubey, Harishchandra , Matthias R. Mehl, and Kunal Mankodiya . "Bigear: Inferring the 
ambient and emotional correlates from smart phone-based acoustic big data." In Connected 
Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE), [ADDRESS_496619] 
International Conference on, pp. 78-83. IEEE, 2016. 
28. Debanjan Borthakur, Harishchandra Dubey, Nicholas Constant,  Leslie Mahler, Kunal 
Mankodiya. SMART FOG: FOG COMPUT ING FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED 
CLUSTERING ANALYTICS IN WEARABLE INTERNET OF THINGS. In the Proceedings of the 2017 fifth IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), Montreal, 
Canada 
29. Constant, Matthew , Leslie Brick, Nicole Nugent, Michael Armey, and Kunal Mankodiya. 
"Smartwatch-driven multisensory recorder: Design and testing of a smartwatch-based 
framework to support psychiatric disorders." In MIT Undergraduate Research Technology Conference (URTC), 2016 IEEE, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2016. 30. Debanjan Borthakur, Harishchandra Dubey, Nicholas Constant,  Leslie Mahler, Kunal 
Mankodiya. SMART FOG: FOG COMPUT ING FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED 
CLUSTERING ANALYTICS IN WEARABLE INTERNET OF THINGS. In the Proceedings of the 2017 fifth IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), Montreal, Canada 
31. Amiri, Amir Mohammad, Mohammadreza Abtahi , Anna Rabasco, Michael Armey, and Kunal 
Mankodiya. "Emotional reactivity monitoring usin g electrodermal activity analysis in individuals 
with suicidal behaviors." In Medical Information and Communication Technology (ISMICT), 2016 
10th International Symposium on, pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2016. 32. Mankodiya, K., Sharma, V., Martins, R., Pande, I. , Jain, S., Ryan, N., & Gandhi, R. (2013, 
December). Understanding User's Emotional Engagement to the Contents on a Smartphone 
Display: Psychiatric Prospective. In Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, 2013 IEEE 10th International Conference on and 10th International Conference on Autonomic and Trusted 
Computing (UIC/ATC) (pp. 631-637). IEEE. 
33. Mandal, Indrani, Terry Ferguson, Gabriel De Pace , and Kunal Mankodiya. "An Emotional 
Expression Monitoring Tool for Facial Videos." In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence, pp. 796-807. Springer, Cham, 2017. 34. Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the 
general population. Applied psychological measurement, 1(3), 385-401. 
35. Zarit, S. H., Reever, K. E., & Bach-Peterson, J. (1980). Relatives of the impaired elderly: correlates of feelings of burden. The gerontologist, 20(6), 649-655. 36. Teri, L., Truax, P., Logsdon, R., Uomoto, J., Zarit, S., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1992). Assessment of behavioral problems in dementia: the revised memory and behavior problems checklist. 
Psychology and aging, 7(4), 622. 
37. Morycz, R. K. (1985). Caregiving strain and the desire to institutionalize family members with Alzheimer's disease: Possible predictors and model development. Research on aging, 7(3), 329-361. 38. Wimo, A., & Winblad, B. (2003). Resource utilization in dementia: RUD lite. Brain Aging, 3(1), 47-58. 
39. Chapman, K. (2020). Sexual disinhibition measure. 
40. Page, T. (2014). Touchscreen mobile devices and older adults: a usability study. 41. Ramprasad, C., Tamariz, L., Garcia-Barcena, J., Nemeth, Z., & Palacio, A. (2017). The Use of Tablet Technology by [CONTACT_395295]—Is It Effective and Satisfying? A Systematic Review and Meta Analysis. Clinical gerontologist, 1-10. 
 