ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 1 
 
 
  
The Emergency Department Sedation Pi[INVESTIGATOR_664619].gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date : Original IRB approval on July 1, 2020. Protocol modification  approved by [CONTACT_664648] (HRPO)  on March 3, 2021.  IRB ID #: 201909100.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 2 
 
 
 The ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] : a Multicenter, Before -After  Study  to 
Improve Sedation in the Emergency Department  
 
Protocol Version 1.6 (26 January 2022) 
 
Study PI:    [INVESTIGATOR_6085] M. Fuller, MD, MSCI , FCCM  
Department of Anesthesiology  
Division of Critical Care  
Department  of Emergency Medicine  
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis  
St. Louis, MO [ZIP_CODE]  
[EMAIL_12654]  
[PHONE_13737]  
   
 
 
Co-Investigators:         Nicholas M. Mohr , MD, MS  
                                   Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine  and Anesthesiology  
                                   Departments of Emergency Medicine and Anesthesiology  
                                   Division of Critical Care  
                                   Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine  
                                   University of Iowa  
    
Brian W. Roberts, MD  
Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine  
Department of Emergency Medicine  
Cooper University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] /Cooper Medical School of Rowan University  
Camden, New Jersey  
 
Participating Si tes: Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO; University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA; Cooper Medical School of Rowan University , Camden, NJ   
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 3 
 
 
 1 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS  
 
ACCM = American College of Critical Care Medicine  
AE = Adver se Event  
AIDS = Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome  
BMI = Body Mass Index  
CAM  = Confusion Assessment Method  
COPD  = Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
CI = Confidence Interval  
DSMB  = Data Safety Monitoring Board  
ED = Emergency Department  
ED-SED = Emergen cy Department Sedation  
GCS  = Glasgow Coma Scale  
HIPAA  = Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
ICC = Interrater Correlation Coefficient  
IRB = Institutional Review Board  
ICU = Intensive Care Unit  
IRB = Institutional Review Board  
NIH = National Institutes of Health  
OR = Odds Ratio  
PBW  = Predicted Body Weight  
PHI = Protected Health Information  
PI = Principal Investigator  
[CONTACT_100082]  = Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale  
RCT = Randomized Controlled Trial  
REDCap  = Research Electronic Data Capture  
SAE = Seri ous Adverse Event  
SAS = Statistical Analysis Software  
SOFA = Sequential Organ Failure Assessment  
US = [LOCATION_002]  
VFD = Ventilator -free days  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 4 
 
 
 2 STUDY  SUMMARY  
 
2.1 Title 
 
The ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]: a Multicenter, Before -After Study to Improve Sedation in the E mergency Department  
 
2.[ADDRESS_897676] -intubation sedation in the ED.  
 
2.3 Hypothesis  
 
Feasibility of adhering to goal -oriented  sedation in the ED will be demonstrated by : 1) effective trial recruitment; 
2) efficacy in achieving target sedation; 3) reliability of RASS measurements during routine care in the  ED; and 
4) a low and similar incidence of adverse events.  
 
2.4 Study Design  and Synopsis  
 
The ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74489] a multicenter, prospective, obse rvational before -and-after study conducted on 400 
mecha nically ventilated ED patients at three academic medical centers : Washington University  in St. Louis 
School of Medicine (St. Louis, MO), Cooper Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664620] (Camden, NJ), and University  of 
Iowa Carver College of Medicine (Iowa City, IA).  In addition, we will conduct a survey on an estimated [ADDRESS_897677] -intubation sedation practices in the ED  
 
The primary outcome measures are related to feasibility and include : 1) participant recruitment; 2) proportion of 
RASS scores in the deep sedation range ; 3) reliability of RASS measurement s during routine care in the ED ; 
and 4) adverse events. To better assess potential facilitators and barriers to adherence to guideline -supported 
sedation recommendations , we will also conduct a qualitative assessment (i.e. sur vey) of nurses and 
physicians.  The study  is intended to be pragmatic, so patient -level data will be easily accessible from the 
electronic medical record.  
 
2.5 Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube.  
2. Age ≥ 18 years.  
 
2.6 Exclusion Criteria  
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 5 
 
 
 1. Acute neurologic injury (stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, cardiac arrest, status 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_7397], fulminant hepatic failure).  
2. Ongoing neuromuscular blockade.  
3. Death or transition to comfort measures within 24 hours.  
4. Transfer to another hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52084] . 
5. Chronic/home mechanical ventilation . 
6. Transfer directly from the ED to the operating room.  
 
2.7 Randomization and Study Initiation Time Window  
 
This is a prospective, observational, before -and-after study with no randomization. Consecutive mechanically 
ventilated patients, satisfying inclusion and exclusion criteria, will be studied. Enrollment and p ertinent data 
(see below) collection will be initiated and obtained from  the patient’s ED stay.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_897678] for mechanically ventilated patients.  The outcome 
measures revolve around feasibility,  and not clinical outcomes. Quantitative outcomes include: 1) participant 
recruitment; 2) proportion of RASS scores in the deep sedation range ; 3) reliability of RASS measurements 
during routine care in the ED ; and 4) adverse events. These data will be sup plemented with a qualitative 
survey of nurses and physicians to assess facilitator s and barriers to adherence to guideline -supported 
sedation recommendations . The primary analysis and sample size calculation will be based on  the proportion 
of RASS scores i n the deep sedation range , as a reflection of success  of our sedation education initiative . 
 
2.[ADDRESS_897679] clinical outcome data, including: 1) duration of mechanical ventilation; 2) duration of stay in 
the ICU and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]; 3) incidence of acute brain dysfunction (i.e. delirium and coma); and 4) mortality.  
2.[ADDRESS_897680] a pplicable in assessing success  of our education initiative . Our preliminary data from the three sites in 
this pi[INVESTIGATOR_664621] 63% of RASS assessments will be in the deep sedation range. We assume 
an effect size (proportion difference) of 15% (i.e. deep sedation in  63% in the before phase and 48% in the 
after phase), which is: 1) within the expected range based on an ICU sedation trial which targeted light 
sedation 1; 2) feasible to attain; and 3) a clinically meaningful demonstration of adherence to goal-directed 
sedation . Assuming α=0.05 and power=0.80 (two -tailed), we calculate that [ADDRESS_897681] risk. Given the risk of deep sedation as documente d in the medical literature,  our 
own p reliminary data, and the very low event rates for adverse events  described in this population , we believ e 
the risk: benefit r atio of this proposal is favorable . In addition, we estimate that approximately 300 nurses and 
physicians will respond to the survey (total number in the study= 700).   
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 6 
 
 
 3 TRIAL DESCRIPTION  
3.1 Background  
Annually, approximately 30 0,000 pati ents receive mechanical ventilation in U.S. emergency departments (ED), 
many of whom have protracted lengths of stay while aw aiting ICU  admission2. Up to 30% of these patients will 
die and 25% of survivors are readmitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_79638] [ADDRESS_897682] on adverse events, such as 
inadvertent extubation  7-22. As a result, the American College of Critical Care Medicine Practice Guidelines for 
the Management of Pain, Agitation, and Delirium recommend: 1) “ an assessment -driven, protocol -based, 
stepwise approach for pain and sedation managem ent in critically ill adults”; and 2) “clinicians should target a 
light rather than deep level of sedation in their intubated, critically ill adult patients, unless deeper sedation is 
clinically indicated”.  
 
As a summary, based on over [ADDRESS_897683] practice for mechanically ventilated patients is the use of goal -oriented sedation protocols which favor 
light (versus deep)  sedation targets when possible.   
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_664622], t here has been an overall lack of data regarding the  
early period of mechanical ventilation in the ED, yet this time frame may  be particularly influential on outcome 
23. Retrospective, observational data from our center indicate that deep sedation in the ED is common in 
mechanically ventilated patients and a key risk factor for m ortality and longer lengths of stay 24. In a 
comprehensive systematic review and meta -analysis, we showed a strong association between early (i.e. 
within 48 hours of instituting mechanical ventilation) sedation depth and outcome 23. Finally, in a prospective, 
multi -center cohort study (The ED -SED Study), we demonstrated again that deep sedation in the ED was 
common and negatively associated with patient -oriented clinical outcomes 25. This suggests that, despi[INVESTIGATOR_664623] -based sedation protocols for mechanically ventilated patients, these sedation protocols are not 
being followed  in the ED set ting. Therefore, the ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_664624] -recommended sedation 
care in the post -intubation period.  
 
3.1.1  Background on the three ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_664625] -SED Study, and published data from the ICU domain, the three 
sites in the ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_664626], 
propofol, and midazolam , via the use of existing sedation protocols  and/or order sets in the electronic medical 
record  25-28 (See Table) . An example of the sedation protocols  from each site is included in the Appendix, and 
this demonstrate s simi larities among each site, including medications used, addressing pain first, and targeted 
sedation based on a goal sedation depth. This background information also demonstrates  that post-intubation 
sedation at each site is standard, and that the curr ent study will not be introducing any new therapy into the 
routine care of the patients, yet attempting to optimize (via education) the care that is already in place.  
 
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 7 
 
 
  
Table  1. Sedation practices at the three ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_664627] n 
protocol
/order 
set in 
place?  Deep 
sedation  
incidence
%* Drug  
n (%)  
Cumulative dose  
Weight -based dose  
    Fentanyl  Propofol  Midazolam  No 
analgesia  No 
sedation  
Cooper 
Universit y 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664628], 
urban, level 
1 trauma  Yes 51.7 21 (35.0)  
200 (96 - 525) 
2.4 (1.1 - 7.6) 50 (83.3)  
386 (168 - 1061)  
5.4 (2.4 - 13.4)  12 (20.0)  
4.0 (4.0 - 5.8) 
0.05 (0.04 - 0.08)  22 (36.7)  7 (11.7)  
University 
of Iowa  Academic, 
urban, level 
1 trauma  Yes 58.1 20 (64.5)  
138 (75 - 188) 
1.4 (0.8 - 2.0) 24 (77.4)  
351 (152 - 663) 
4.2 (1 .6 - 7.7) 4 (12.9)  
3.5 (1.3 - 8.8) 
0.04 (0.01 - 0.09)  11 (35.5)  4 (12.9)  
WashU  in 
St. Louis  Academic, 
urban, level 
1 trauma  Yes 63.5 43 (82.7)  
275 (150 - 500) 
3.6 (2.0 - 6.6) 26 (50.0)  
201 (105 - 660) 
2.4 (1.5 - 8.6) 20 (38.5)  
6.0 (2.0 - 8.0) 
0.08 (0.02 - 0.10)  9 (17.3)  13 
(25.0)  
 
3.[ADDRESS_897684] -intubation sedation in the ED.  
3.3 Specific Aims  
 
Aim 1 : Evaluate recruitment of mechanically ventilated patients into the ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].   
Hypothes is: On average, 0.3 patients per day will be recruited to participate in the study at each site.   
Aim 2: Evaluate the impact of an educational initiative on post -intubation sedation practices in the ED.  
Hypothesis  2a: The proportion of RASS scores in the  deep sedation range will be reduced by 15% after      
the educational initiative .   
Hypothesis 2 b: The interclass correlation coefficient in RASS measurements among bedside nurses will be > 
0.90. 
Hypothesis 2c : The incidence of adverse events will be simi lar before and after the educational initiative . 
Aim 3: Describe facilitators and barriers to adherence to guideline -supported sedation recommendations  with a 
qualitative assessment of nurses’ and physicians’ perception and understanding of sedation.   
 
3.4 Endpoints  
 
3.4.1  Primary Endpoint s - Feasibility  
 
The primary endpoints to demonstrate feasibility are: 1) participant recruitment; 2) proportion of RASS scores 
in the deep sedation range; 3)  reliability of RASS measurements during routine care in the ED ; and 4) ad verse 
events. We will also co nduct a qualitative  survey of nurses and physicians to better understand facilitator s and 
barriers to adherence to guideline -supported sedation recommendations  
 
3.4.2  Secondary Endpoints – Clinical   
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Clinical Endpoints  
 
The main purp ose of the study is to test feasibility and will not be powered to demonstrate efficacy. However, 
we will also collect clinical outcome data to guide future studies as needed.  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 8 
 
 
  
1. Ventilator -free days (VFD) to day 28: VFD depend on both duration of ventilati on and mortality and is 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_664629] 28. In participants who survive [ADDRESS_897685] 
study day of assisted breathing through day 28. Isolated periods of ventilation briefer than 24 hours for 
surgical procedures and ventilation solely for slee p-disordered breathing do not count towards duration of 
ventilation. Participants who do not survive 28 days will be assigned zero VFD.  
 
2. ICU- and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -free days: These will be assessed and calculated in a similar fashion as VFD.  
 
3. Acute brain dysfuncti on in the ICU: Acute brain dysfunction is a composite outcome comprised of 
delirium and coma. Delirium will be assessed by [CONTACT_664649] (CAM -ICU) 
per standard clinical care.  This is a highly reproducible and well -validated me thod for diagnosing delirium in 
mechanically ventilated patients. Coma will be defined as having all documented RAS S scores of -4 
(responsive to only physical stimulus) or -5 (unresponsive) during the first [ADDRESS_897686] to use this 
composite outcome since both delirium and coma are major categories of cognitive dysfunction. As 
delirium cannot be assessed during periods of coma, using this composite outcome provides a more 
accurate event rate for the incidence of acute organ dysfunction of the brain.   
 
4. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_34380] : This endpoint is the proportion of participants who have survived at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] . 
4 STUDY POPULATION AND ENROLLMENT  
 
4.1 Number, Source, and Screening  
 
4.1.1  Patient Population  
We will screen all consecutive mechanically ventilated ED pat ients and enroll 400 patients that fulfill inclusion 
and exclusion criteria.  
 
Recruitment method : All participants for the study  will be identified in the ED, and each participating site has 
standard operating procedures in place to identify consecutive m echanically ventilated patients. Examples 
include in -person screening by [CONTACT_664650], as well as electronic triggers to capture 
mechanically ventilated ED patients by [CONTACT_664651] a neuromuscular blocker (e.g. succinylchol ine, 
rocuronium) , mechanical ventilation orders, or an endotracheal intubation procedure note.  
 
Each site will have dedicated study physicians and research assistants who are certified and trained in human 
subjects protection and understand the study proto col. 
 
4.1.2  Provider Participant  Population  
We will aim to get survey responses from 150 ED providers (50 physicians and 100 nurses).  
 
Recruitment method : Nurses and physicians will be recruited via electronic mail to participate in the voluntary 
and anonymous s urvey to assess facilitators and barriers to adherence to best sedation practices in the ED.  
  
4.2 Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Age ≥ 18 years  
2. Receipt of invasive mechanical ventilation in the ED  
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897687].  
4.3 Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Acute neurologic injury (stroke, intracran ial hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, cardiac arrest, status 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_7397], fulminant hepatic failure)  
2. Ongoing neuromuscular blockade  
3. Death or transition to comfort measure s within 24 hours  
4. Transfer to another hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52084]  
5. Chronic/home mechanical v entilation  
6. Transfer directly from the ED to the operating room  
 
4.3.1  Reasons for Exclusions  
 
While guidelines recommend light levels of sedation to improve outcome, deep sedation is warranted in some 
clinical situations. The exclusion criteria for this study e xclude patients in whom: 1) deep sedation could be 
indicated; and 2) duration of mechanical ventilation is unlikely to be altered by [CONTACT_664652]. It 
therefore selects for a cohort of patients in whom a sedation protocol which favors light sedation is appropriate 
as part of standard, routine care. Presence  of neurological injury is an exclusion as patients with neurological 
injury can have depressed  levels of consciousness and coma that are  independent of sedation, therefore 
serving  as a confounder b etween sedati on depth and clinical outcomes. Patients receiving ongoing 
neuromuscular blockade have an absolute indication for the receipt of deep sedation, and will therefore be 
excluded. We exclude patients dying within 24 hours of presentation, because in our experience of conducting 
studies on mechanically ventilated ED patients, this represents a cohort of patients with an acutely non -
survivable illness (e.g. intracranial hemorrhage, refractory shock), or a chronic illness burden prompting next of 
kin to forego aggressive therapy and opt for early comfort measures. It is therefore unlikely that the sedation 
approach in the ED would affect outcome. These patients can also be so critically ill that deep sedation is 
appropriate in their management. Patient s that are transferred to another hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664630], as it would 
not be possible to obtain clinical data or pertinent outcomes. Patients on chronic/home ventilation typi[INVESTIGATOR_664631] (i.e. no sedation at all ), given their chronic condition. Also, the 
ability to calculate VFD (a secondary study outcome) in these patients is challenging.  Patients that are 
admitted directly to the operating room from the ED as the sedation provided in the operating room would 
serve as a confounder in the assessment of pre -ICU care.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_897688] 
pertinent data collection  initiated from  the patient’s ED stay.  
 
4.5 Informed Consent  
 
This study meets the criteria for waiver of informed consent per 45 CFR 46.116.f.3.  
 
(i) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects . The study is entirely 
observational, and involves no intervention with the su bjects. At all times, patients will be cared for 
at the discretion of the treating clinical team. Specifically, the after phase of the study is focused on 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897689] prac tice for mechanically ventilated patients is 
the use of goal -oriented sedation protocols which favor light (versus deep) sedation targets when 
possible. Given these facts, the probability and magnitude of harm associated with this study is not 
greater than  that encountered during routine medical care. The study and data collection will occur 
remotely via access of the electronic medical record to obtain routine clinical data. Therefore the 
study will not intervene on routine care in any way or influence car e givers by [CONTACT_664653].  
 
(ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration . 
Obtaining consent in the immediate post -intubation period is not feasible, as all patients will be 
altered and unable to cons ent in this time period due to medications given to facilitate intubation 
and sedation, or because of their level of critical illness  and commensurate altered mental status . 
Further, in our experience of conducting research in thousands of mechanically ven tilated ED 
patients, it is rare for a legally authorized representative (LAR) to be present during the post -
intubation period in the ED (travel delays, lack of transportation, lack of knowledge regarding 
patient’s presence in the ED). Time -sensitive data c apture in the immediate post -intubation period 
is vital and this research cannot be conducted without these data. Finally, if consent is required then 
only the subjects who survive, successfully come off the mechanical ventilator , and are 
neurologically in tact will be able to consent. As we are collecting pertinent clinical endpoints in this 
study, including ventilator -free days, ICU -free days, and mortality, the study would not be able to 
enroll subjects who have bad outcomes (only good outcomes enrolled),  resulting in completely 
biased data.  Thus, it is not practicable  to do the study without waiver.  
 
(iii) If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the 
research could not practicably be carried out without using  such information or biospecimens in an 
identifiable format . This does not apply to the current study.  
 
(iv) The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects . See section s 
“9.1 Potential Risk to Subjects” , “9.2 Minimiza tion of Risk ”, “9.5 Safety Monitoring”, and “10.2 
Justification of Including Vulnerable Subjects”  below, regarding the robust safeguards, precautions, 
and protections that will be implemented throughout the study.  
 
(v) Whenever appropriate, the subjects or le gally authorized representatives will be provided with 
additional pertinent information after participation . Given this is an observational study we do not 
anticipate additional pertinent information for the patients to be identified.  
  
 
Regarding the qual itative survey of potential barriers to implementation, this aspect of the research proposal 
meets exemption 45 CFR 46.101(b)(2): Research involving the use of educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, 
aptitude, achievement), survey procedures, interview p rocedures or observation of public behavior, and (i) 
information obtained will be recorded in such a manner that human subjects cannot be identified, directly or 
through identifiers linked to the subjects, and (ii) any disclosure of the human subjects' res ponses outside the 
research will not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' 
financial standing, employability, or reputation.  
 
We will use a consent information sheet without signatures as the f irst page(s) of the survey given to the 
nurses and physicians who provide care for the participants.  We estimate that approximately 300 will respond 
to the survey.  
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897690] t hat the enrollment of women will be approximately 45% and the enrollment of minorities will be 
approximately 35% African -American and 10% Hispanic.  
5 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Trials should be conducted in a setting reflective of good clinical practice that can be clearly described and 
reproduced in a clinical (non -trial) setting. The standard care elements known to impact outcome in 
mechanically ventilated patients are already in place at the clinical centers participating in this study . These 
include quantitative resuscitation for patients with shock and tissue hypoperfusion, early empi[INVESTIGATOR_664632], lung -protective mechanical ventilation, and aspi[INVESTIGATOR_134174]. These elements 
decrease risk that subjects will vary systematically across the before and after  phases of the study and reflect 
current guideline recommendations. We will monitor the provision and results of key processes of care and 
pertinent data variables and will implement the sedation protocol efficiently.  
 
 
5.1 Before P hase Group   
 
Patients in the before phase  of the study will receive usual care: clinician -directed sedation after the initiation of 
mechanical ventilation.  
5.[ADDRESS_897691] successfully implemented other research protocols in the ED, yet be modi fied to achieve the goals of this  
study . The educational initiative will include the following: 1) a lecture outlining the background regarding the 
clinical impact of sedation for mechanically ventilated patients, the importance of sedation protocols on patient 
outcome,  our background data on ED sedation (see section 3.1, Background, above) , and an introduction to 
the ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]; and 2) a one -page card given to providers, which highlights the rationale of the study 
and its overarching goals. We will evaluate  the use of sedation  with a voluntary survey of nurses and 
physicians in order for us to better understand facilitators and barriers to adherence to guideline -recommended 
post-intubation care (see Appendix) , and   to better understand providers’ perception of and experience with 
ED-based sedation protocols. Before every nursing shift in the ED, it is standard practice for the nurses to 
gather in a “huddle” in or der for nursing leadership to provide such things as announcements and reminders. 
Going forward, as part of this standard nursing huddle , there will be an informal reminder to document sedation 
depth in all mechanically ventilated patients, as per the exis ting protocol.  Finally, a laminated sedation depth 
card, which details the elements of sedation depth documentation,  will be placed at each nursing station  so the 
nurses do not have to remember the sedation depth elements on their own.   The implementation phase is 
needed because post -intubation sedation is  standard care for mechanically ventilated patients at each site, 
congruent with guideline recommendations. However, our data suggest that these protocols are just not being 
effectively used in the ED.  Implementation will proceed so that targeted sedation is effectively used in the ED 
as well, allowing us to test the intervention under real -world conditions. To maintain a pragmatic approach to 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897692] -intubation  care at a site  (i.e. medications delivered) . It will only educate providers on 
the importance of using a sedation protocol effectively,  including: 1) addressing pain first; 2)  setting a target 
sedation depth; 3) targeting a light sedation depth (Richmond Agitation -Sedation Scale  -2 to 0) as the default 
when possible; and 4) appropriately titrated sedation . 
 
5.[ADDRESS_897693] and there will be no influence from 
the study team.   
 
5.3.1  IRB-requested Modification and Further Explanation Regarding the After Phase of the Study  
Per the WU IRB minutes (7/1/2020), a modification is requested regarding the after phase of the study.  
 
As a summary, based on over [ADDRESS_897694] care at each site  participating in this study. See  section 3.1.1 above (“Background 
on the three ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_417197]”), along with the accompanying table in that section, to view the historical 
sedation practices at each site. Additionally, the existing sedation protocols  from each site are included in 
Appendix A of this study protocol. Both our background data and the existing sedation protocols show 
similarities among the sites with respect to post -intubation sedation for mechanically ventilated patients in the 
ED. Additionally, interim data from the befo re phase of the study is shown in the table below.  
 
Table 2. Sedation practices at the ED -SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_185911], before -group data.  
Site Deep sedation 
incidence, n 
(%) Drug  
n (%)  
Cumulative dose  
Weight -based dose  
  Fentanyl  Propofol  Midazolam  
Cooper 
University  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  30 (57.7)  49 (94.2)  
425 (166 – 913) 
3.8 (2.4 – 10.8)  44 (84.6)  
360 (191 – 922) 
5.0 (2.0 – 11.3)  3 (5.8)  
7.0 (5.0 – NA) 
0.09 (0.06 – NA) 
University 
of Iowa  34 (85.0)  27 (67.5)  
112 (50 - 100) 
1.4 (0.8 – 3.3) 32 (80.0)  
266 (121 – 626) 
3.6 (1.3 – 7.1) 1 (2.5)  
5.0 (NA)  
0.05 (NA)  
WashU in 
St. Louis  52 (50.0)  92 (88.5)  
400 (200 - 788) 
5.0 (2.8 - 8.3) 78 (75.0)  
444 (187 - 838) 
5.4 (2.4 - 10.4)  38 (36.5)  
6.5 (3.8 - 10.5)  
0.07 (0.04 - 0.15)  
 
These data demonstrate continued similarities among each site - the use of some combination of fentanyl, 
propofol, and midazolam, via the use of existing sedation protocols and/or order sets in the electronic medical 
record, to facilitate sedation for mechanically ventilated patients in the ED. It also further demonstr ates that 
post-intubation sedation at each site is standard, and that the current study will not be introducing any new 
therapy into the routine care of the patients. In the Background (section 3.1), the potential harms associated 
with deep sedation are de monstrated, and Table [ADDRESS_897695] -
intubation period. The study will attempt to optimize (via education) the care that is already in place.  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897696] . At all 
times, clinical care, including all aspects of sedation, will be at the discretion of the treating clinical team and 
there will be no influence from the study team, nor any study -mandated aspects of care. The study therefore 
remains completely observational, is minimal risk, and satisfies approval for waiver of the requirement to obtain 
informed consent as outlined above.   
 
 
 
 
5.4 Common Strategies for Both Groups  
 
This trial will not mandate aspects of routine clinical care becaus e: 1) the intention is to evaluate the protocol  in 
the context of routine clinical care; 2) there is a broad spectrum of condition s leading to the need for 
mechanical ventilation ; 3) the cli nical sites already have protocols in place for the standard care elements 
known to impact prognosis in mechanically ventilated patients; and 4) demonstrating feasibility of the protocol 
during routine care is a more valid  prepa ration for any future trials that could result from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732] .  
 
[ADDRESS_897697].  
 
6.1 Background Assessments  
 
1. Inclusion/exclusion criteria  
2. Demographic and admission data (including age, gender, race ) 
3. Pertinent medical  history and comorbid conditions [dementia, diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, congestive 
heart failure, dialysis/end -stage renal disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
immunosuppression, malignancy, alcohol abuse, psychiatric illness (schizophrenia, b ipolar, depression, 
anxiety)]  
4. Height, actual body weight,  calculated predicted body weight (PB W), body mass index (BMI)  
5. Presenting vital signs  
6. Pertinent laboratory values (lactate, creatinine, bilirubin, platelets, arterial blood gas)  and illness 
severity  
7. Location of intubation (ED, prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], outside hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/other facility), drugs used to facilitate   
intubation, and indication for mechanical ventilation  
8. Ventilator settings  
9. Responses from the modified Brice questionnaire  
 
6.2 ED Process of Care Variables  
 
1. ED length of stay (minutes)  
2. Procedures (e.g. central venous catheter, arterial catheter)  
3. Antibiotics for infection  
4. Blood product transfusion  
5. Vasopressor infusion  
6. Intravenous fluids  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 14 
 
 
  
6.3 ED Sedation -Pertinent Variables  
 
1. All medications for ED sedation including : opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], propofol, ketamine, 
dexmedetomidine, etomidate, haloperidol, quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], and neuromuscular blockers.  
2. Sedation depth will be recorded per our standardized order set for post -intubation care, including RASS 
assessments every hour  in the ED.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_897698] review:  
 
1. Duration of ventilation.  
2. Organ failure assessments daily to day 2 (arterial blood gas, bilirubin , creatinine, and vasopressor use),  
using clinically available data . 
3. Agents used for the management of analg esia and sedation  during the first 48 hours of ICU admission.  
4. Depth of sedation while mechanically ventilated . 
5. Acute brain dysfunction (presence of coma and delirium) during the first  7 days  of ICU admission.  
6. Lengths of stay in the ICU and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . 
7. Date of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664633], as applicable . 
 
6.5 Assessments After Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664634].  
7 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
7.1 Statistical Methods   
 
The data analyses for this before -after observational  study are mostly descriptive. Demographic and treatment 
variables, as well as participant characteristics, will be summarized  by [CONTACT_664654] (standar d deviation) and median (interquartile range) for continuous  variables, and frequency 
distributions for categorical  variables. For r ecruitment rate and adverse events , the type of data include 
Poisson count  and binary. Point estimates and confidence interv als will be presented for data analyses. Based 
on empi[INVESTIGATOR_12484], the methods for confidence intervals may be based on the normal distribution approximation 
to Poisson/binomial distribution (when Poisson mean > 10 or the number of binomial events > 10), or  the exact 
method (when Poisson mean or number  of binomial events is small). The proportion of deep sedation 
measurements before and after the intervention  will be compared using the  Chi-square test to compare two 
independent proportions. Logistic regressi on will be used to compare before -and-after differences, adjusting f or 
potential confounders . For s urvey results regarding barriers to  the implementation , the data will be summarized  
and reported as frequencies and proportions, and responses from time 1 (b efore phase ) will be compared time 
2 (after phase ).  
 
The sample size  is based on the proportion of RASS scores in  the deep sedation range , as that is most 
applicable in assessing protocol success. Our preliminary data from the three sites in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_664635] 63% of RASS assessments are expected to be in  the deep sedation range. We assume an 
effect size (proportion difference ) of 15% (i.e. deep sedation 63% in the before phase and 48% in the after 
phase), which is: 1) within the expected  range based on an ICU sedation trial which targeted light sedation  1; 2) 
feasible to attain; and 3) a clinically meaningful demonstration of adherence to goal-directed sedation . 
Assuming α=0.05 and power=0.80 (two -tailed), 200 patients will be needed in each phase, i.e. a total of 400 
patients .  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897699] significant 
difference s in the adverse events between the before and afte r groups. To analyze adverse events, point and 
interval estimates  of the occurrence of these events in the before and after groups will be presented. As the 
event rates  are expected to  be very low  (self-extubation <1%, dev ice removal 1 -2%) the confidence interval s 
will be based on the exact binomial method. For completeness in exploratory analyses of these adv erse 
events, Fisher exact test will be used to explore possible significant difference s in the occurrence of adverse  
events between the two  groups.  
 
[ADDRESS_897700] and store data 
using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap), a secur e, web -based data management application. 
Patients will be assigned Study ID numbe rs, and clinical data will be downloaded and stored  according to the 
Study ID numbers. There will be no protocol -mandated aspects of routine clinical care. For survey 
questio nnaire data collection, respondents will fill out the survey directly into REDCap, completely 
anonymously . These providers (physicians and nurses in the ED) will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]/recruited directly via email, 
which will provide a link to the REDCap survey.  
 
8.2 Site Monitoring  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_6012] w ill review data on an ongoing basis for completeness and accuracy, as well as protocol 
compliance. Data quality will also be reviewed with back -end monitoring of  data via statistical  reports. The 
overall study PI [CONTACT_1629] d site PIs will communicate on an ongoing basis regarding the study.  
9 RISK ASSESSMENT  
9.1 Potential Risks to Subjects  
 
Data Risks:  All data collected as part of this study are part of routine clinical care. There is the slight possibility 
of unauthorized relea se of PHI data about participants (i.e. breach of confidentiality). Such disclosure would be 
extremely unlikely to involve a threat to life, health, or safety but would be an invasion of the participants’ 
privacy. It is conceivable that such disclosure cou ld have psychological, social or legal effects on the 
participants. The risk of loss of confidentiality is minimized by [CONTACT_664655]. All study 
personnel who have access to the data will be educated regarding the need to protect confide ntiality and the 
procedure to be followed to ensure such protection. All personnel will complete their own site’s university -
mandated human subject education program. The computer system on which data are maintained will use 
standard password protection pr ocedures to limit access to authorized users. The database for this study will 
be fully HIPAA -compliant. Data to be used for analysis will contain only the assigned identification numbers. 
The data analysis team will not have access to a master list linkin g the identification numbers with any normal 
identifiers such as name, social security number, address and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664636].  
 
Protocol Risks:  Guidelines recommend sedatio n protocols with target -driven sedation  depth goals  in 
mechanical ly ventilated patients because of a favorable risk -to-benefit ratio, with consistent data showing 
impro ved outcomes . While the ED environment is somewhat unique, given the frequency with which 
mechanical ventilation and sedation is used, there is no empi[INVESTIGATOR_27969] c reason to believe that adherence to sedation 
protocols in the ED domain will have a different risk -to-benefit ratio.  
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 16 
 
 
 Self-extubation/inadvertent extubation  is a potential risk of a sedation protocol  which favors light sedation . 
Registry da ta from the E D demonstrate inadvertent extubation to occur at a rate of 0.30% ( J Emerg Med. 
41(4), 347 -354). Our data from the multicenter ED -SED Study showed a self -extubation rate of 0.74% (1 
patient lightly sedated and 1 patient deeply sedated). Before -after studies  and randomized trials involving 
sedation protocols (i.e. sedation interruptions, light sedation targets) have consistently shown no difference in 
the rate of self -extubation associated with light sedation  22. 
 
Device removal (e.g. urinary catheter, venous or arterial access, enteric tubes) is also a potential risk. To our 
knowledge, this has not been reported in mechanical ly ventilated ED patients. Data from the ICU demonstrate 
this incidence to be 1-2% (Can J Anaesth. 2014; 61(7): 619 -630). 
 
Awareness during mechanical ventilation can lead to serious emotional sequelae. There is a dearth of data on 
this from the ICU and th e ED. As neuromuscular blockers are used to facilitate endotracheal intubation in up to 
90% of ED patients, this is an important adverse event to measure. Data from the operating room estimate the 
incidence of awareness to be <1% ( Anesth Analg. 2004; 99(3) : 833 -9). Therefore, in patients that survive and 
are extubated, we will assess for awareness with the modified Brice questionnaire. Similar to how we have 
assessed for awareness in a prior study (IRB ID# 201905074), we will also conduct this portion of th e study 
with waiver of informed consent for the following reasons: 1) assessing awareness after extubation is part of 
routine post -intubation care for the millions of mechanically ventilated patients undergoing anesthesia annually 
in the U.S., and should b e routine in all care domains; 2) obtaining informed consent immediately after 
intubation would render this portion of the study not feasible; 3) time -sensitive data capture in the immediate 
post-intubation period is vital and this research cannot be condu cted without these data ; 4) all eligible patients 
are needed to avoid biasing the data; and 5) we already have robust safeguards in our network to ensure data 
confidentiality.   
 
Standard treatment risk : The current conventional approach to post -intubation sedation in the ED involves a 
high incidence of deep sedation, which we have shown to increase the incidence of deep sedation in the ICU  
24,25. Furthermore, we have shown that deep sedation in the ED is negatively associated with clinical outcomes, 
including ventilator duration, lengths of stay, mortality, and acute brain dysfunction  24,25. This suggests that 
currently, despi[INVESTIGATOR_664637] -based publications and existing treatmen t guidelines regarding post -intubation 
sedation, clinicians are not targeting (or perhaps not paying attention to) sedation in post -intubation care. 
Therefore, we contend that the current approach to se dation in the ED is a greater threat to patient safety  than 
the quality improvement intervention we propose.  
 
Questionnaire Administration Risks : The qualitative survey of nurses and physicians is designed to assess 
potential barriers to implementing an ED -based sedation protocol. This is an important aspect of effectively 
implementing a sedation protocol that is geared toward improving care delivery and patient outcome, but is 
also embraced by [CONTACT_664656]. Although unlikely, as a consequence of 
questionnaire completion, participants  may experience emotional discomfort. If any particular question makes 
a participant feel uncomfortable, he or she may choose not to answer it. In addition, completion of the 
questionnaire is voluntary and completely anonymous. The participant’s choice wil l not at any time affect any 
aspect of their job, clinical environment, or patient care.  
 
Awareness Questionnaire Administration Risks : Although unlikely as a consequence of completing the 
questionnaire, patients may experience emotional discomfort. If any  particular question makes a participant 
feel uncomfortable, he or she may choose not to answer it. In addition, completion of the questionnaire is 
voluntary. The participant’s choice will not at any time affect any aspect of their care. Assessment of 
awar eness with recall is part of routine post -extubation care annually for millions of OR patients. Based on the 
complications associated with awareness, we believe assessing for awareness carries a favorable risk -to-
benefit ratio. If awareness is identified, the treating clinical team will be notified and the patient will be offered 
counseling.   
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897701] for patients in whom targeted 
sedation is appropriate (i.e. deep sedation not clinically indicated ). At all times, treating clinicians will manage 
patients with the primary interest of patient care first. All research  staff personnel involved in this proposal have 
undergone training in Good Clinical Practice guidelines for research studies. Any risk to  confidentiality for 
participants is low. All key personnel involved in the design or conduct of research involving human subjects 
have obtained required education on protection of human research participants prior to funding of this project.  
 
General data  precautions and safeguards:  The study leadership is sensitive to needs for data security, 
including that related to PHI, and the study staff is experienced in the operation of databases and in protecting 
them against loss or misuse. We will hold periodic staff meetings to remind personnel of required operating 
procedures and safeguards and monitor adherence to precautions and safeguards. We will ensure that all staff 
have appropriate training to comply with their medical center’s policies and procedures re lated to the HIPAA . 
Only study investigators will have access to individually identifiable patient information, and clinical data will be 
de-identified as soon as possible.  
 
Patient confidentiality safeguards:  We will ensure that all data flow procedures f rom the study sites exclude the 
transmission of patient identifying information. For example, data will be uploaded from each site into REDCap, 
and no patient identifiers will be included in this master dataset. Patient identifying information will be stor ed at 
each site electronically in an encrypted form or in a separate file, on password -protected research computers.  
 
Safeguards against misuse of data:  We will limit the number of persons who have access to any study data, 
especially those containing pati ent identifying information. Patients will be assigned Study ID numbers, and 
clinical data will be stored according to the Study ID numbers. A master list pairing patients to the Study IDs 
will be kept on a password -protected file on a password -protected c omputer. Password -restricted access to 
data files containing study results will improve security. Separate passwords for files, server, and computer 
desktops, frequent change of passwords, and use of password -choice guidelines requiring alpha -numeric 
passw ords will all improve data security. All materials will be stored in a secured environment. Data will be 
encrypted, managed in REDCap, and password -protected.  
 
Data loss safeguards:  All data entered into the REDCap database will be stored on Washington Un iversity 
servers. Thus, all project data is stored and hosted at the local institution, and no project data is ever 
transmitted at any time by [CONTACT_664657]. User 
privileges related to data managem ent (i.e. beyond that related to data entry) will be restricted to site PIs. As a 
standard operating procedure, the use of REDCap to enter and store data prior to analysis, in a secure and 
password -protected manner provides certainty that data will not be lost.  
 
Data security and confidentiality:  After study completion, data will be exported into a statistical analysis 
package (e.g. SAS) for analysis by [CONTACT_543584] (Yan Yan, PhD), who is a member of the Division of 
Biostatistics at Washington Unive rsity. No PHI will be exported and analysis will proceed in a way such that 
patient confidentiality is completely maintained. Standard procedures provide substantial certainty that data 
stored within the Division of Biostatistics will never be lost and tha t confidentiality will be maintained. 
Longstanding Division policies emphasizing these issues include requiring that employees sign confidentiality 
agreements, that personal identifiers are included in electronic databases only under strong necessity, that  
encryption be used when identifiers are present, that access to data is password protected, and that all data 
are backed up in accordance with standard operating procedures. Access to all systems in the Division is 
restricted to Division faculty, staff, a nd collaborators. Access to study data will be restricted to study personnel. 
The entire Division of Biostatistics network wiring plant is behind a firewall and access to all computers is 
logged. Finally, should problems arise with the system, a full -time network engineer runs the system and is on 
call (with backup) 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 18 
 
 
  
Data and database safeguards:  Data will be stored according to HIPAA compliance regulations and the 
policies of the NIH and local IRBs. PHI will not be stored on media accessible from external locations. 
Computer and storage disks will have password protection. Data files will be stored in locked cabinets in 
locked rooms.  
 
Protocol -Related Protection : A sedation protocol in the immediate pos t-intubation period carr ies minimal risk. 
Sedation protocols that target a specific sedation depth and monitor depth of sedation are standard care for 
mechanically ventilated patients and already in place for use in the ED. This study aims to codify and make 
more precise an initi ative that should be executed better and is of great interest to practicing clinicians. Over [ADDRESS_897702] practice for mechanically ventilated patients is the use of 
goal-oriented sedation protocols which favor lig ht (versus deep) sedation targets when possible.  Regarding 
potential risks associated with sedation in the ED, as detailed above, these risks are extremely rare  and have 
not been associated with the use of sedation protocols in other domains. Given these f acts, the probability and 
magnitude of harm associated with this study is not greater than that encountered during routine medical care . 
However, we will monitor adverse events  across the duration of the study . In addition, our inclusion and 
exclusion crit eria select for a population in which targeted  sedation is safe and clinically indicated. For 
example, patients receiving ongoing neuromuscular blockade will not be included in the study  because they 
have an absolute indication to have very deep sedation . 
 
Questionnaire -Related Protection : The sedation knowledge and impediment survey will be designed and 
managed in REDCap. Respondents will upload their responses directly into REDCap, with no identifying 
information included. Completion of the questionnaire is completely voluntary and completely anonymous.   The 
awareness questionnaire will also be managed in REDCap. Responses will be uploaded directly into REDCap. 
No identifying information will be exported from the database.   
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_897703] privacy in this study, the low risk nature of the research, and the 
potential ben efits to study participants as well as future patients, we believe that the risk/benefit ratio is 
favorable for participation in this study.  
9.5 Safety Monitoring  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_664638], including all adve rse events, 
compliance with IRB requirements, investigator compliance, minimizing risks and protecting the confidentiality 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897704] of a sm all group of experts independent of the study, including a biostatistician, emergency physician, 
and pulmonary/critical care physician. DSMB members will familiarize themselves with the protocol and 
communicate by [CONTACT_664658]. Th ey will periodically review the developi[INVESTIGATOR_664639], as well as outcome and safety data.  
 
As this is a preparatory pi[INVESTIGATOR_664640] -intubation 
sedation in the ED , it will not be powered to detect a statistical difference in clinical endpoints or adverse 
events. Therefore a key role of the DSMB will be in evaluating successful enrollment and implementation of the 
protocol. They will accomplish this by [CONTACT_664659], study 
procedures, efficacy in achieving target sedation, reliability of sedation measurements during routine care in 
the ED, data quality, losses to follow up, and other measures of adherence to the protoc ol.  
 
While the study is not anticipated to be able to detect differences in adverse events, another key role of the 
DSMB will be to review any adverse ev ents that occur during the study. All adverse events determined to be 
related to the study and unantic ipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be reviewed by [CONTACT_664660].  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_664641]. During 
the after phase, the DSMB will review the prepared study data for safety every month.  
 
The prepared data and safety monitoring report for each formal DSMB meeting, will include the following items: 
number of potential partic ipants eligible, number of eligible participants enrolled, protocol implementation data 
(depth of sedation, RASS measurements, sedat ive drugs ), adverse events, unforeseeable outcomes, clinical 
outcomes (delirium, coma, lengths of stay, ventilator duration,  death), and a statistical comparison of rates of 
events between the study groups. Data will be presented in a blinded manner during the open sessions of the 
DSMB. At DSMB meetings, data and discussion will be confidential. DSMB members will not know study  
participant identities.  
[ADDRESS_897705]. Louis.  
 
 
10.1 Selection of Subjects  
 
This study will i dentify patients presenting to the ED requiring mechanical ventilation in three academic centers 
(Washington University, University of Iowa, and Cooper University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]). Patients satisfying inclusion an d 
exclusion criteria will be enrolled and data col lection will begin in the ED. Study exclusion criteria neither 
unjustly exclude classes of individuals from participation in the research nor unjustly include classes of 
individuals from participation in the research. Hence, the recruitment of subjects con forms to the principle of 
distributive justice . 
 
10.[ADDRESS_897706] the care of the individual. Further , as all patients wi ll already be on a mechanical 
ventilator as the primary inclusion criteria, those  recruited for this trial are not being unfairly burdened with 
involvement in this research simply because they are easily available . 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 20 
 
 
  
10.3 Informed Consent  
 
This study meets the criteria for waiver of informed consent per 45 CFR 46.116.f.3.  
 
(i) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects . The study is entirely 
observational, and involves no intervention with the subjects. At all times, patients will be cared for 
at the discretion of the treating clinical team. Specifically, the after phase of the study is focused on 
educating staff and reminding them about the existing sedation protocol, with a primary endpoint of 
seeing if compliance with the protocol improves. Th e final choice to follow the protocol will remain at 
the discretion of the treating clinical team at all times . As mentioned above, there is over [ADDRESS_897707] practice for mechanically ventilated patients is the use of goal -
oriented sedation protocols which favor light (versus deep) sedation targets when possible. Given 
these facts, the probability and magnitude of harm associated with this study is not greater than that 
encountered during routine medical care. The study and  data collection will occur remotely via 
access of the electronic medical record to obtain routine clinical data. Therefore the study will not 
intervene on routine care in any way or influence care givers by [CONTACT_664661].  
 
(ii) The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration . 
Obtaining consent in the immediate post -intubation period is not feasible, as all patients will be 
altered and unable to consent in this time period due to medications given to facilita te intubation 
and sedation, or because of their level of critical illness and commensurate altered mental status. 
Further, in our experience of conducting research in thousands of mechanically ventilated ED 
patients, it is rare for a legally authorized rep resentative (LAR) to be present during the post -
intubation period in the ED (travel delays, lack of transportation, lack of knowledge regarding 
patient’s presence in the ED). Time -sensitive data capture in the immediate post -intubation period 
is vital and this research cannot be conducted without these data. Finally, if consent is required then 
only the subjects who survive, successfully come off the mechanical ventilator, and are 
neurologically intact will be able to consent. As we are collecting pertinent  clinical endpoints in this 
study, including ventilator -free days, ICU -free days, and mortality, the study would not be able to 
enroll subjects who have bad outcomes (only good outcomes enrolled), resulting in completely 
biased data. Thus, it is not practi cable to do the study without waiver.  
 
(iii) If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the 
research could not practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an 
identifiable format . This does not apply to the current study.  
 
(iv) The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects . See sections 
“9.1 Potential Risk to Subjects”, “9.2 Minimization of Risk”, “9.5 Safety Monitoring”, and “10.2 
Justificat ion of Including Vulnerable Subjects” below, regarding the robust safeguards, precautions, 
and protections that will be implemented throughout the study.  
 
(v) Whenever appropriate, the subjects or legally authorized representatives will be provided with 
addit ional pertinent information after participation . Given this is an observational study we do not 
anticipate additional pertinent information for the patients to be identified.  
  
 
Regarding the qualitative survey of potential barriers to implementation, this  aspect of the research proposal 
meets exemption 45 CFR 46.101(b)(2): Research involving the use of educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, 
aptitude, achievement), survey procedures, interview procedures or observation of public behavior, and (i) 
informa tion obtained will be recorded in such a manner that human subjects cannot be identified, directly or 
through identifiers linked to the subjects, and (ii) any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897708] the su bjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' 
financial standing, employability, or reputation.  
 
We will use a consent information sheet without signatures as the first page(s) of the survey given to the 
nurses and physician s who provide care for the participants.  
 
10.4 Confidentiality  
 
See “Minimization of Risk” above.  
 
 
11 ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
11.1 Safety Monitoring  
 
Assuring patient safety is an essential component of this protocol. Each participating investigator has primary 
responsibil ity for the safety of the individual participants under his or her care. Safety data including Adverse 
Events ( AE) and Serious Adverse Events ( SAE) will be presented according to study group at each DSMB 
meeting. The investigators and their IRBs have estab lished policies and procedures to identify, report, and 
review adverse events.  
 
An AE is defined as any new untoward medical occurrence or worsening of a pre -existing medical condition in 
a clinical investigation participant administered an investigationa l product and that does not necessarily have a 
causal relationship with this product. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign such as an 
abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease temporarily associated with the use of an investiga tional 
product, whether or not considered related. An SAE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that 
results in death, is life -threatening (defined as an event in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of 
the event; it does not refer to  an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe), 
requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_312], results in persistent or 
significant disability or incapacity, results in a congenital an omaly or birth defect, is an important medical event 
based upon appropriate medical and scientific judgment, results in potential drug induced liver injury, or results 
in suspected transmission of an infectious agent via the study drug.  
 
The DSMB physician s, independent o f the study team, will grade  the causal relationship to the study. The AE 
attribution scale can be one of the following:  
 
a. Definitely related: AE is clearly related to the investigational agent/procedure/ intervention.  
b. Probably related: AE i s likely related to the investigational agent/procedure/ intervention.  
c. Possibly related: AE is possibly related to the investigational agent/procedure/ intervention.  
d. Unlikely related: AE is doubtfully related to the investigational agent/procedure/ interve ntion.  
e. Unrelated: AE is clearly not related to the investigational agent/procedure/ intervention.  
 
Classification of AE severity : AEs will be labeled according to severity, which is based on their impact on the 
patient. An AE will be termed “mild” if it do es not have a major impact on the patient, “moderate” if it causes the 
patient minor inconvenience, and “severe” if it causes a substantial disruption to the patient’s well -being.  
 
AE Reporting and Follow Up : Adverse events will be summarized in table for mat with information including 
Study ID number, date of AE, description of event, severity classification, designation as serious or not, 
attribution, action taken, and outcomes.  
 
SAE Reporting : SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and possibly related t o the study intervention will be 
reported to the DSMB and the IRB. Unexpected, life -threatening AEs related to the intervention will be reported 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897709] reviewed all AE reports.  
  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897710] SPECIFIC IS WRITTEN AFTER A DRUG ORDER BY [CONTACT_664662], A GENERIC EQUIVALENT DRUG APPROVED BY [CONTACT_664663].  
Please check () the appropriate box □ and fill in the blank(s) as needed.  IF you do not need an order, draw a line through it and initial.  
DATE  TIME  ORDERS  
  Before initiating sedation orders, assess the indication(s) for sedation.  
  □  Target RASS 0 to -2 
□  Other  RASS goal:  □ -3  □ -4  □ -5 
  Analgesia Initiation and Breakthrough : 
□ Fentanyl _______ mcg (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 25 -100 mcg) IVP PRN Q5 minutes (Max dose 300 mg in 15 minutes) . MAR Entries 6. 
Reason: Pain  
 
Sedation Initiation and Breakthrough : 
□ Propo fol _____ mg IVP (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 0.5mg/kg, Max single bolus = 50mg). Now. MAR Entries 1. Reason Sedation.  
□ Midazolam ______ mg (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 1 -5 mg) IVP PRN Q5 minutes ( Max dose 15 mg in 15 minutes ). MAR Entries 6. Reason: 
Sedation  
  Analgesia Maintenance:  
□ Fentanyl infusion _____ mcg/hour (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 50 mcg/hour. Max dose 200 mcg/hour ; higher doses require MD order ). 
Reason: Pain  
 
Sedation Maintenance:  
Choose one : 
□ Midazolam infusion at _____mg/hour (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 1-2 mg/hr. (Max dose 8 mg/hour;  higher doses require MD order ). Titrate 
to target RASS goal. Reason: Sedation.  
□ Propofol ______ mcg/kg/minute (typi[INVESTIGATOR_664642] 10 -25 mcg/kg/minute), increase rate 10 mcg/kg/min PRN Q5 minutes ( Max dose 
50 mcg/kg/min, h igher doses require MD order ).  Titrate to target RASS goal. Reason: Sedation.  
  Sedation Monitoring and Dose Titration  
Sedation is:  
ADEQUATE (RASS at specified goal) if <  2 PRN doses given in previous 2  hours  
1. Continue curr ent medication(s), dosage and Q1  hour monitoring  
 
UNDERSEDATED (RASS +1 above specified goal) if ≥ 2 PRN doses given in previous 2  hours.                                                                          
Increase sedation/analgesia as follows and reassess Q1 hour:   
1. Repeat Sedation/Analgesia  initiation  to achieve desired sedation level  
2. Increase midazolam by 1  mg/hr or propofol by 10 mcg/kg/minute  
3. Increase fentanyl by 25 mcg/hr  
 
OVERSEDATED (RASS -1 below specified goal)                                                                                        
Decrease sedation/analgesia as follows a nd reassess Q1 hour:  
1. Decrease midazolam infusion by ½ of infusion rate (or discontinue if less than 1 mg/hour)  
2. Decrease propofol  infusion by 10 mcg/kg/minute (or discontinue if less than 10 mcg/kg/minute)  
3. Decrease fentanyl infusion by ½ of infusion rate (o r discontinue if less than 25 mcg/hour)  
  Discontinue all induction, PRN and maintenance sedation/analgesia upon extubation  
  Physician:_______________________  _________________________ 
Telephone#/Pager#_____________  
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 24 
 
 
  
A2. Cooper University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664643]-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 25 
 
 
  
 
A3. University  of Iowa  
 
 
Adult Intubation and Mechanical Ventilation Order Set  
 
 
DATE  TIME  ORDERS  
  INTUBATION  
  Paralytics:  
□  Succinylcholine ____mg (1.0 -1.5 mg/kg), Intravenous, Once  
□  Rocuronium ___mg (1.0 -1.2 mg/kg), Intravenous, Once  
  Induction Agents:  
□ Etomidate (AMIDATE) ___mg (0.3 mg/kg), Intravenous, Once  
□ Midazolam (VERSED) ___mg (0.1 mg/kg), Intravenous, Once  
□ Ketamine (KETALAR) ___mg  
□ Propofol (DIPRIVAN) ___mg  
 
  POST -INTUBATION ANALGESIA AND SEDATION  
  □  Fentanyl injection, ___mcg (25 -100 mcg), Intravenous, PRN Q15 minutes  
□  Midazolam injection, ___ mg (1 -5 mg), Intravenous, PRN Q15 minutes  
□  Propofol i njection, ___ mg (0.5 mg/kg), Intravenous, Once  
□  Propofol infusion, ___ mcg/kg/min (10 -50 mcg/kg/min), Intravenous  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 26 
 
 
  
B. Time -Events Schedule  
Measurement/Event  0* 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 MV** HOSP 
D/C 
Inclusion/exclusion criteria  X          
Demographi cs X          
Co-morbid conditions  X          
Height, weight, PBW, BMI  X          
Vital signs and pertinent labs  X          
Illness severity - SOFA  X          
Intubation details  X          
Ventilator settings/data  X          
ED process of care variab les X          
Medications for sedation  X X X        
RASS measurements  X X X      X  
Incidence of deep sedation  X X X      X  
Organ failure assessment  X X X        
Delirium assessment, CAM -ICU X X X X X X X X   
Ventilator status  X         X 
Length o f stay (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664644])           X 
Mortality  status           X 
* Day 0 refers to the emergency department  
** MV refers to the entire period of mechanical ventilation  
 
  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 27 
 
 
 C. Modified SOFA Scoring System  
 
SOFA Score  0 1 2 3 4 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_664645]2/FIO2 (mm Hg) 
or imputed P/F 
using SaO 2/FIO2 ≥400 <400  <300  <200  <100  
Coagulation  
Platelets 103/mm3 ≥150 <150  <100  <50 <20 
Liver  
Bilirubin (mg/dL)  <1.2 1.2-1.9 2.0-5.9 6.0-11.9 >12.0  
CardiovascularB 
Hypotension  No 
hypotension  MAP <70  Dopamine ≤ 
5 or 
dobutamine 
(any)  Dopamine >5  
or  
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238] 
≤ 0.1 
or 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_238] 
≤0.1 Dopamine >15  
or 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238] 
>0.1 
or 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]  
>0.1 
Renal  
Creatinine (mg/dL) 
or urine output 
(mL/d)  <1.2 1.2-1.9 2.0-3.4 3.5-4.9 
or <500  
mL/day  >5.0 
or <200  
mL/day  
A: Values for scores 3 and 4 are with respi[INVESTIGATOR_1413]  
B: Adrenergic agents administered for at least one hour (doses given in µg/kg/min)  
  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 28 
 
 
 D. De-identified data elements for  screened, non -enrolled  
Data elements will be collected on screened subjects that are not enrolled, including r eason  (s) patient 
excluded from  study:  
 
1. Acute neurologic injury (stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, cardiac arrest, status  
epi[INVESTIGATOR_7397], fulminant hepatic failure).  
2. Ongoing neuromuscular blockade.  
3. Death or transition to comfort measures within 24 hours.  
4. Transfer to another hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52084]  
5. Chronic/home mechanical ventilation  
6. Transfer directly from the ED to the operating room  
 
 
 E.  Definitions of pre -existing comorbid conditions  
Dementia: documentation of clinical history in patient’s medical record, including all types of dementia (e.g. 
Alzheimer’s, vascular, Lewy body, Parkinson’s, etc.)  
 
Diabetes Mellitus: Documentation of clinical history in patient’s medical record; current presentation congruent 
with diabetes mellitus (e.g. diabetic ketoa cidosis).  
 
Cirrhosis: Biopsy proven cirrhosis or medical record history suggestive of cirrhosis (ascites, coagulopathy, 
nodular liver on computed tomography scan  or ultrasound).  
 
Heart failure: Clinical diagnosis on current presentation or history of hear t failure in the medical record; 
includes systolic and diastolic heart failure.  
 
Dialysis/end stage renal disease: Current use of peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis as an outpatient.  
 
COPD: Not fully reversible airflow limitation; FEV1 <80% + FEV1/FVC <70 %; history of COPD in patient’s 
medical record.  
 
Immunosuppression: Therapy with immunosuppressants, chemotherapy, radiation, long term/recent high dose 
steroids, active leukemia, lymphoma, or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).  
 
Malignancy: Documen tation of current or clinical history of malignancy in patient’s medical record; includes all 
solid malignancies (e.g. carcinoma, sarcoma, central nervous system  cancers), leukemia, lymphoma, or 
myeloma  
  
Alcohol abuse: Known diagnosis of chronic alcoholis m; previous admission for alcohol detoxification or 
withdrawal; daily consumption of >14 drinks/week or > 5 binges.  
Psychiatric illness : History schizophrenia , bipolar, depression, or anxiety
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897711].  
 
For each item below, please indicate how strongly you agree or disagree with the statement.  
● Disagree strongly  
● Disagree somewhat  
● Neutral  
● Agree somewhat  
● Agree strongly  
 
 
1. I believe sedation for mechanically  ventilated patients is a common situation frequently experienced by [CONTACT_664664].  
2. I believe sedation for mechanically ventilated patients is managed well in my ED.  
3. I believe a sedation protocol is being consistently used in my ED.  
4. I believe goal -oriented sedation depth, targeting a specific RASS, is important for patient outcome.  
5. I am confident in my ability to use the RASS to assess depth of sedation.  
6. I understand the components of the RASS.  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 30 
 
 
 7. I believe assessing depth of sedation with the RASS is too  time consuming.  
8. I believe the documentation involved in the RASS is too time consuming.  
9. I believe deep sedation negatively effects patient outcomes in my ED.  
10.  I believe the physician’s role is the most important when achieving on -target sedation depth.  
11. I believe the nurse’s role is the most important when achieving on -target sedation depth.  
12. I prefer patients to be deeply sedated (unresponsive).  
13. I prefer patients to be lightly sedated (calm and interactive).  
14. I have the support I need fr om other personnel to use a sedation protocol in mechanically ventilated patients.  
15. In my ED, it is difficult to speak up if I perceive a problem with patient care.  
16. Management /leadership  supports my efforts to manage critically ill patients in my ED.  
17. Disagreements in my ED a re resolved appropriately.  
18. It is easy for personnel in my ED to ask questions when there is something that they do not understand.  
19. The physicians and nurses in my ED work together as a well -coordinated team.  
20. The levels of staffing in my ED are sufficient t o handle the management of mechanically ventilated patients.  
21. I experience good collaboration with nurses in my ED.  
22. I experience good collabor ation with physicians in my ED . 
23. Communication breakdowns that lead to delays in delivery of care are common in my E D. 
24. I regularly provide input during the ED stay for mechanically ventilated patients.  
25. My input is well received in my ED.  
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 31 
 
 
  
For each item below, please indicate your answer and/or provide free text answers to better address the item.  
 
 
 
1. The part of the sed ation protocol that is most beneficial to patients is: 1) addressing pain in all patients; 2) having a coordinated care plan with 
respect to sedation; 3) having a goal -oriented RASS target for sedation depth; 4) targeting light sedation; 5) other, please s pecify __________  
 
2. The part of the sedation protocol that is least beneficial to patients is: 1) addressing pain in all patients; 2) having a co ordinated care plan with 
respect to sedation; 3) having a goal -oriented RASS target for sedation depth; 4) targe ting light sedation; 5) other, please specify __________  
 
3.  My biggest challenge in implementing a sedation protocol is __________  
 
4.  My biggest concern in implementing a sedation protocol is __________  
 
5.  The best way to improve the sedation protocol in our ED would be __________  
 
6.  I learned the most about the sedation protocol by: 1) completing the on -line educational program; 2) attending in -services; 3) graphics displayed 
in my clinical area; 4) pocket cards; 5) informal bedside education from the study te am; 6) other, please describe__________  
 
 
 
 
 
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | [ADDRESS_897712] sedation in mechanically 
ventilated critically ill patients: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Critical care medicine. 2013;41(8):1983 -1991.  
2. Easter BD, Fischer C, Fisher J. The use of mechanical ventilation in the ED. The American journal of emergency 
medicine. 2012;30(7):1183 -1188.  
3. Fuller BM, Ferguson IT, Mohr NM, et al. Lung -Protective Ventilation Initiat ed in the Emergency Department 
(LOV -ED): A Quasi -Experimental, Before -After Trial. Annals of Emergency Medicine. 2017.  
4. Fuller BM, Mohr NM, Dettmer M, et al. Mechanical ventilation and acute lung injury in emergency department 
patients with severe sepsis  and septic shock: an observational study. Academic Emergency Medicine. 
2013;20(7):659 -669. PMCID: PMC3718493.  
5. Fuller BM, Mohr NM, Miller CN, et al. Mechanical Ventilation and ARDS in the ED: A Multicenter, Observational, 
Prospective, Cross -sectional Study. Chest. 2015;148(2):365 -374. PMCID: PMC4524326.  
6. Page DB, Drewry AM, Ablordeppey E, Mohr NM, Kollef MH, Ful ler BM. Thirty -day hospi[INVESTIGATOR_664646]. Emergency Medicine Journal. 2018.  
7. Burns SM, Earven S, Fisher C, et al. Implementation of an institutional program to improve clinical and financial 
outcomes of mechanically ventilated patients: one -year outcomes and lessons learned. Critical care medicine. 
2003;31(12):[ADDRESS_897713]. 1998;114(2):[ADDRESS_897714] journal o f anaesthesiology. 
2007;19(2):[ADDRESS_897715] of a scoring system and protocol for 
sedation on duration of patients' need for ventilator support in a surgical intensive care unit. Bmj. 
2002 ;324(7350):[ADDRESS_897716] of a nursing -implemented sedation protocol on the duration of 
mechanical ventilation. Critical care medicine. 1999;27(12):[ADDRESS_897717] of systematic evaluation of pain and agitation in an intensive care 
unit. Critical care medicine. 2006;34(6):1691 -1699.  
13. De Jonghe B, Bastuji -Garin S, Fangio P, et al. Sedation algorithm in critically ill patients without acute brain 
injury. Critical ca re medicine. 2005;33(1):[ADDRESS_897718]. Annals of Pharmacotherapy. 1997;31(6):689 -695.  
15. Jakob SM, Lubszky S, Friolet R , Rothen HU, Kolarova A, Takala J. Sedation and weaning from mechanical 
ventilation: effects of process optimization outside a clinical trial. Journal of critical care. 2007;22(3):219 -228.  
16. MacLaren R, Plamondon JM, Ramsay KB, Rocker GM, Patrick WD, Hal l RI. A prospective evaluation of empi[INVESTIGATOR_664647]‐based sedation and analgesia. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug 
Therapy. 2000;20(6):[ADDRESS_897719] -enforced intensive care unit sedation protocol 
on duration of mechanical ventilation and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]. Critical care medicine. 2008;36(2):[ADDRESS_897720] of rational use guidelines on the provision of 
analgesia, sedation, and neuromuscular blockade in critical care. Critical care medicine. 2000;28(7):[ADDRESS_897721] of a nurse -implemented sedation protocol on the incidence of 
ventilator -associated pneumonia. Critica l care medicine. 2007;35(9):[ADDRESS_897722] associated 
with midazolam and lorazepam infusions in critically ill patients. The Canadian Journal of Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] P harmacy. 
1996;49(4).  
ED-SED Pi[INVESTIGATOR_47002] v 1. 6 (26 January 2022) ED-SED Research Program  P a g e  | 33 
 
 
 21. Devlin JW, Skrobik Y, Gélinas C, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the prevention and management of pain, 
agitation/sedation, delirium, immobility, and sleep disruption in adult patients in the ICU. Critical Care Medicine. 
2018;46(9):e825 -e873.  
22. Jackson DL, Proudfoot CW, Cann KF, Walsh T. A systematic review of the impact of sedation practice in the ICU 
on resource use, costs and patient safety. Critical Care. 2010;14(2):1.  
23. Stephens RJ, Dettmer MR, Roberts BW, et al. Pr actice Patterns and Outcomes Associated With Early Sedation 
Depth in Mechanically Ventilated Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Critical Care Medicine. 
2017;46 (3):471 -479. PMCID: PMC5825247.  
24. Stephens RJ, Ablordeppey E, Drewry AM, et al. Analgosedation practices and the impact of sedation depth on 
clinical outcomes among patients requiring mechanical ventilation in the ED: a cohort study. Chest. 
2017;152(5):963 -971. PMCID: PMC5812748.  
25. Fuller BM, Roberts BW, Mohr NM, et al. The ED -SED S tudy: A Multicenter, Prospective Cohort Study of Practice 
Patterns and Clinical Outcomes Associated With Emergency Department SEDation for Mechanically Ventilated 
Patients. Critical Care Medicine. 2019.  
26. Payen J -F, Chanques G, Mantz J, et al. Current Pr actices in Sedation and Analgesia for Mechanically Ventilated 
Critically Ill PatientsA Prospective Multicenter Patient -based Study. The Journal of the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists. 2007;106(4):687 -695.  
27. Reade MC, Finfer S. Sedation and delirium  in the intensive care unit. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2014;370(5):444 -454.  
28. Shehabi Y, Bellomo R, Reade MC, et al. Early intensive care sedation predicts long -term mortality in ventilated 
critically ill patients. American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_4447]. 2012;186(8):724 -731.  
 
 