Smartphone  Training  for Attention  Regulation  for IBS 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 11, [ADDRESS_241274]. Creswell and our team biostatistician (co -I [CONTACT_202192]) will 
coordinate the data analytic aspects of the project, and carry out the proposed mixed effect linear models 
(MLMs). A secure de -identified database will be maintained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_187081] (see Budget 
Justification). A CONSORT flowchart will be generated in Year [ADDRESS_241275] . To help  explain  study  attrition,  chi-square  and independent -sample  t-tests will compare  dropouts  to 
non-dropouts . We are defining successful treatment completion as having completed 11 out of the 14 
available lessons.  While our primary analyses follow intention -to-treat principles, w e will also assess how 
sensitive results are to excluding subjects who do not successfully complete their respective treatment.  
Treatment  groups  will be dummy  coded  with CC (copi[INVESTIGATOR_202190])  used as the reference  group. We  will 
test for treatment condition effects on the stress and symptom outcome measures using MLMs as we did in 
our publications  in the R21 feasibility  trial18. MLMs  provide  an optimal  analytic  strategy  because  they 
model  all available data (following intent -to-treat principles in RCTs) and allow us to flexibly evaluate the 
nested nature of this data structure. Specifically, we will create (for EMA) 3 -level MLMs (levels: individual 
participants; day;  within -day time) using restricted maximum likelihood estimation. The 3 -level EMA 
MLM s testing each aim will compare the 3 treatment intervention groups on each dependent variable (e.g., 
daily stress) from the pre, post, and follow -up training measurement occasion. The 3 -level models will 
include a random intercept  for day nested within participant . Measurement occasion (pre, post intervention, 
follow -up), group condition, day -specific factors (e.g., day -of-week or weekday versus weekend),  and 
within -day time will be modeled as fixed effects. All models will be fit with compound symmetric v ariance -
covariance data structure but other structures (e.g., autoregressive covariance structure, ARH(1), spectral 
power) will be evaluated using Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC). We have specified this initial 
approach for modeling random and fixed e ffects, but we  will evaluate  whether  this approach best fits  the 
data using likelihood ratio tests and AIC. In testing each aim, each measurement occasion × treatment 
interaction will be evaluated with a decision rule that a significant effect is observed when the measurement 
occasion × treatment interaction statistic and corresponding p -value is less than .05 (two -tailed). When a 
significant interaction is observed, follow -up planned contrasts in each MLM will compare specific groups 
at post -training. To help with benchmarking we will provide effect size statistics corresponding to the 
magnitude of change over time, and between groups  at each post -treatment time  point. One  strength of our 
approach here is that it extends an established MLM data ana lytic pi[INVESTIGATOR_202191] -arm EMA 
R21 trial publications with success18,76, along with MLM mediation analyses in other MBSR RCT 
publications98. 
 
Testing our Hypotheses. We are specifying a priori predictions about the effects of MA -MBSR 
intervention,  relative  to MO-MBSR  and CC. Thus  no statistical  corrections  for multiple  comparisons  will be 
made for our primary study hypotheses or specified pair -wise comparisons. When additional exploratory 
analyses are conducted, a Holm’s correction will be made for multiple comparisons. We have previously 
published our MLM approach evaluating MA -MBSR eff ects relative to these two control groups (see Chin 
et al., 2019 or Lindsay et al., 2018 publications )—so here we highlight our equations and approach. In 
previous work we have focused on stress, so below we apply this approach to evaluating hypothesis #2, 
specifying that MA -MBSR will reduce symptoms relative to MO -MBSR and CC. This hypothesis will be 
tested  separately  for clinician  assessed,  physician  assessed  or patient  self-reported  symptoms  (using  the IBS- 
SS). The general form of the model to be tested, exclusive of covariates, is as follows, in mixed model 
notation:  
 
IBS symptoms it = γ00 + γ01*(txgroup i) + γ10*(time it) + γ11*(txgroup i)*(time it) + u0i + eit where IBS 
symptoms it is the composite symptoms  score  for individual i at time -point t, time it is the  measurement 
occasion (pre, post intervention, or follow -up) assessment  time of  year,  txgroup i is the treatment group  a 
participant  is assigned  to. In  multilevel notation :
 
  Level 1:  Symptoms it = β0i + β1i*(time it) + eit  
  Level 2:  β0i = γ00 + γ01*(txgroup i) + u 0i 
β1i = γ10 + γ11*(txgroup i) 
The primary test of hypothesis is the F -test of the null hypothesis H 0: γ11= 0. Note that this general model will 
be used, with different outcomes (e.g., stress) and for subsequent aims below but will not be repeated.  
For hypothesis #3, we will use EMA -sampled IBS symptom severity to test whether EMA -sampled stress 
reduction will statistically mediate symptom improvements. We will test for concurrent relations between 
EMA -sampled stress and IBS symptom severity (within the same moment) and also test lagged relations 
(stress at time t predicting IBS symptom severity  at time t+1). To conduct this mediation analysis, we will 
compare two MLMs that use IBS symptom severity as the outcome and group condition as a fixed effect:  one 
MLM will include stress as an additional fixed effect, and another will not. If the fixed effect for group 
condition is statistically significant in the latter but not the former, stress reduction will be declared to act as a 
mediator for symptom impr ovements.  
For hypothesis testing, we will first run unadjusted models without covariates, as described above. Then, as a 
sensitivity analysis, we will run adjusted models that incorporate baseline characteristics related to 
sociodemographic covariates (sex, gender, age, race), clinical covariates (IBS subtype, baseline IBS 
symptom severity, baseline perceived stress), and other time -related covariates such as day -of-week when 
appropriate (e.g., for analyses involving EMA samples where we observe repeated measures acr oss and 
within days).  
Attrition  and Missing  Data.  We expect  minimal  participant  attrition  (<15%)  during  the study  period  across 
conditions. Dropouts are not expected to be a function of the missing outcome data given the observed.  
Our unadjusted analyses assume data are missing completely at random, while our adjusted analyses loosen 
this assumption to allow for data to be missing at random. We will also assess the sensitivity of our results to 
violations of the missing -at-random as sumption (e.g., via pattern -mixture models).  Additionally, we will 
evaluate whether adherence to the program and EMA vary across groups. To evaluate attrition, we will 
compare study dropouts to study completers based on observed participant characteristics . 