Randomized Comparison of Evidence -Based Protocols for Adolescents with ADHD in Specialty 
Care: Behavioral Only versus Integrated Behavioral and Medication Interventions  
Aaron  Hogue, Ph.D.  
Center on  Addiction  
Jacqueline Horan Fisher, Ph.D.  
Center on Addiction  
Sarah Dauber, Ph.D.  
Center on Addiction  
PCOR I Cont ract ID: CER-1403-[ADDRESS_690285] was awarded t o the Cent er on Addictio n [formerly CASAColumbia]. 
ClinicalTrials.gov Registration number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
3/01/[ADDRESS_690286]  
Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) exists in 20 -50% of the 3 million 
adolescents annually enrolled in outpatient mental health and substance use treatment.  
Adolescents with ADHD present deficits in attention, self -regulation, and social competence that 
significantly impede achievement of developmental and educational milesto nes.  Currently there 
are only two evidence -based treatment options for this age group: academic training and 
stimulant medications.  Both options remain vastly underutilized. Academic training is not 
available in most school settings and rarely implemente d in clinical care.  Similarly, ADHD 
medications are rarely utilized with adolescents in primary or specialty care for a host of reasons 
related to stigma, misinformation about effects and side effects, and adolescent autonomy issues.  
Moreover, the widesp read fragmentation of pharmacological versus behavioral services prevents 
families from making informed treatment selections.  
The primary objective of this randomized parametric trial is to compare the effectiveness 
of behavioral only versus integrated (be havioral plus medication decision -making) interventions 
for adolescents with ADHD in outpatient behavioral services.  The behavioral intervention, 
Changing Academic Support in the Home for Adolescents with ADHD (CASH -AA), contains 
three components: ADHD ps ychoeducation, family -based motivational interventions, and 
academic training.  The medication decision -making intervention, Medication Integration 
Protocol (MIP), contain three components: psychoeducation about ADHD medication, family 
decision -making, and  medication management.  The study will compare the effects of two 
legitimate treatment options for adolescents with ADHD on service utilization, behavioral 
symptoms, and quality of life. It will generate new evidence on patient -centered treatment 
selectio n that aligns with family -specific principles and treatment goals.  
This parametric comparative trial will randomly assign 140 inner -city adolescents with 
ADHD to (1) CASH -AA Only or (2) CASH -AA + MIP. Treatment will occur in community 
behavioral health cli nics. All participants will receive behavioral interventions (CASH -AA): 
family psychoeducation in ADHD symptoms, executive functioning, and developmental 
impacts; family -based motivation and ADHD accommodation interventions; and academic 
training focused o n home environment support and organizational skills. Half of the participants 
will also receive medication decision -making interventions (MIP): ADHD medication 
psychoeducation, family decision -making interventions, and (for those who elect to start 
medica tion) coordinated medication management. Half of the sample will have comorbid 
substance use problems.  Treatment will occur in three community clinics; therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531624].  Caregivers and adolescents will complete asse ssments at 
baseline, 3, 6, and 12 -month follow -up.  Multilevel modeling will compare the effectiveness of 
each condition on key patient and service use outcomes. Patient -centered analyses will explore 
differential treatment effects based on (a) Medication decision (yes/no); (b) Substance use 
comorbidity (yes/no); (c) Race/Ethnicity (Hispanic, African American).  
Quantitative outcome analyses will test for service use effects, symptom reduction, and 
quality of life improvements that are primary reasons for se eking clinical services.  Qualitative 
interviews will document family -specific rationale for decisions about medication, compliance 
with behavioral and medication interventions, and suggestions for improving services and 
service integration.  Note that fam ilies assigned to CASH -AA Only will retain the option of 
pursuing ADHD medication through treatment -as-usual procedures at their respective clinic.  
Similarly, families assigned to CASH -AA + MIP will not be required to start ADHD medication .  
Instead, they  will receive informed -choice interventions and can choose when and if to start 
medication; the study will assess the impact of these decisions on clinical outcomes.  
If proven efficacious, the CASH -AA and MIP protocols could be rapi[INVESTIGATOR_531625]. The 
protocols can also be readily combined with other behavioral treatments to form a 
multicomponent treatment package for adolescents with co -occurring behavior problem s. In 
addition, the family -based, patient -centered CASH -AA and MIP protocols could be delivered in 
conjunction with other family -based treatments or with individual approaches that flexibly 
include caregivers in multiple treatment sessions. This makes CASH -AA and MIP highly 
efficient clinical resources for addressing ADHD -related problems in any outpatient setting that 
serves adolescents and their families.  
 
Study Purpose And Aims  
For childhood ADHD, treatments that combine behavioral and pharmacological 
interventions have proven to be more efficacious than either behavioral treatment alone or 
medication alone.  Current practitioner guidelines, which do not differentiate between children 
and adolescents, stipulate that medication is the first -line treatment option for all youth.  
However, the evidence base on adolescent treatment outcomes does not readily support this 
generalization.  For example, the most rigorous longitudinal study of ADHD treatment to date 
found that the superiority of combined treatment d uring childhood years dissipated in 
adolescence, possibly due to medication desistance and/or stronger maintenance effects for 
behavioral interventions.  Moreover, long -term medication use by [CONTACT_531696].  Thus there are several compelling reasons to test 
medications combined with behavioral interventions during the teenage years.  Yet combined 
treatment has not been systematically tested among adolescents, leaving many important issues 
about treatment choices for teens unresolved.  
The proposed study will help fill this alarming gap in the evidence base for adolescents 
with ADHD.  The study is significant for several reasons. It will occur in existing behavioral 
health clinics to test front -line treatment effectiveness.  Both protocols (CASH -AA and MIP) are 
evidence -based, affording a rigorous test of the best available treatment options for this clinical 
group.  The test has immediate real -world implications: Families enrolled in specialty trea tment 
settings invariably prefer behavioral services only, but they need to know whether integrated 
medication interventions can provide a meaningful boost to outcomes that are most important to 
them. Importantly, whereas ethnic minorities and also girls w ith are severely underserved and 
under -researched, the current study will focus on urban minority teens, and about half the sample 
will be female.  Also, this study will be among the first to test evidence -based ADHD treatment 
options for adolescent s who u se substance s, another significantly underserved and high -priority 
clinical risk group.  
This comparative trial will randomly assign 140 adolescents with ADHD to Behavioral 
Only (containing CASH -AA) or Integrated (containing CASH -AA + MIP) treatment.  The 
CASH -AA and MIP protocols will be incorporated in existing services in four clinics that 
support both study conditions. Adolescents and caregivers will complete research interviews at 
baseline and 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_690287] patient -centered heterogeneity 
of treatment effects and individual difference effects.  Semi -structured interviews will document 
family -specific rationale for decisions abo ut initiating and continuing in behavioral and 
medication interventions, along with suggestions for improving the respective treatment services . 
The study has three specific aims:  
 
Aim 1:  Comparative Impact on Client Functioning  
Hypothesis 1: Reduced Symptoms.  Integrated clients will show greater decreases in ADHD 
symptoms (inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity) and comorbid problems (conduct 
problems, drug use) than Behavioral Only clients.  
Hypothesis 2: Improved Quality of Life.  Integrated clients  will show greater improvements in 
executive functioning (self -regulation, self -organization) and school functioning (grades, 
attendance, motivation) than Behavioral Only.  
 
Aim 2:  Comparative Impact on Service Utilization  
Hypothesis 3: Better Treatment At tendance.   Integrated clients will attend more behavioral 
therapy sessions and medication management sessions than Behavioral Only clients.  
Hypothesis 4: Greater Medication Acceptance and Treatment Satisfaction.   Integrated clients will 
more often consent to medication, show greater medication compliance, and report 
greater overall satisfaction than Behavioral Only.  
 
Aim 3:  Examine Patient -Centered Outcomes  
Research Question 1: Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects.  Will clients with co -occurring 
substance u se problems have worse treatment outcomes than those without?  Will there 
be outcome differences based on age, ethnicity, sex?  
Research Question 2: Analysis of Individual Differences.  Across treatment conditions, will 
clients who choose to start a medicat ion regimen have better treatment outcomes than 
those who do not?  
 
Study Design  
This study emphasizes ecological validity: Both protocols will be implemented in 
existing outpatient behavioral services by [CONTACT_531697].  To promote internal validity, 
randomization will occur within site at both the client and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531626] (i.e., study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531627]). The primary benefit of “doubly randomized” 
designs is that they minimize potential bias related to site effects —because randomization occurs 
within each site —and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531628] —because therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531629] .  The use of a Behavioral Only condition will control treatment expectancy effects.  
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531630] -AA and MIP as part of their 
otherwise routine duties; that is, the protocols will be additional components of their usual 
practice for study cases. To maximize protocol exposure, and to promote consistency in the 
timing of protocol  implementation across conditions and cases, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531631] -AA and MIP at the start of treatment (unless contraindicated).  
Note: (1) ADHD medication will be available to all Behavioral Only cases via routine 
site practices for A DHD treatment; and (2) MIP supports family decision -making about 
medication but does not require families to start a medication regimen.   
 
Sample Description  
Study eligibility criteria will be: (1) Adolescent age 12 –18; (2) Primary caregiver able to 
participate in treatment; (3) Adolescent meets DSM -5 diagnostic criteria for ADHD; (4) 
Adolescents who use substances  (estimated 20 -50% of sample) meet ASAM criteri a for non -
intensive outpatient services; (5) Adolescent not enrolled in any other behavioral treatment; (6) 
Caregiver expresses desire, and adolescent expresses willingness, to participate in outpatient 
treatment; (7) Family has health benefits that meet t he requirements of study treatment sites, all 
of which accept a broad range of insurance plans including Medicaid.  Exclusion criteria will be: 
mental retardation or autism -spectrum disorder; medical/psychiatric illness requiring 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]; current p sychotic symptoms; active suicidal ideation; severe substance use 
problems that require immediate relief (detox or residential placement).  
The study sample will be drawn from similar referral streams to those that produced cases 
for the recently completed CASALEAP RCT and the CASH -AA and MIP pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], as well 
as from the existing clinical referral stream of each treatment site.  Thus the following 
projections for study demographic and psychiatric characteristics are based on data from those 
affiliated studies.  Participants will include both males (52%) and females and averaged 
approximately 15.7 years of age (SD = 1.5).  Self -reported ethnicities will be Hispanic (59%), 
African American (21%), multiracial (15%), and other (6%).  Households will be head ed by a 
single parent (66%), two parents (26%), or grandparents (6%).  Among caregivers, 71% will 
have graduated high school and 64% worked full - or part -time.  Also, 45% will have earned less 
than $15,000 per year, 17% on public assistance, and 51% with a  history of child welfare 
involvement.  Many adolescents will report current or past year involvement in an individualized 
education program (30%) and/or school -based counseling (41%); 17% will have received some 
outpatient mental health care during the pa st year; 7% will have been on probation in the prior 
year. Psychiatric diagnoses will be based on DSM -5 criteria; following convention, diagnoses 
will be given for meeting threshold based on either adolescent or caregiver report.  According to 
study eligib ility criteria, 100% of teens will be diagnosed with ADHD.  About 33% will have 
been diagnosed with ADHD during childhood, and 20% will have been prescribed ADHD 
medication during childhood but not adolescence.  We estimate the following rates of other 
diagnoses: Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) = 87%, Conduct Disorder (CD) = 53%, SUD = 
30% (79% for cannabis, 21% for alcohol) [Note; an additional 20% will meet ASAM 
requirements for outpatient treatment of sub -threshold substance use problems], Mood Disor der 
or Dysthymia = 42%, Generalized Anxiety Disorder = 17%, PTSD = 17%. We expect 89% will 
be diagnosed with more than one disorder.  
 
Procedures  
Participant Consent and Enrollment Procedures  
Participant recruitment .  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_531632] a clinical referral network of 
high schools, family agencies, and community programs serving youth in inner -city areas of 
lower Manhattan.  Partners will make study referrals to research staff during site visits and also 
by [CONTACT_648]. Additionally, we will also leverage the existing referral stream of the participating 
treatment sites, whereby [CONTACT_531698].  Project staff will contact [CONTACT_531699] a brief phone screening to assess the reason for study 
referral and, if desired, discuss study enrollment.  
Eligibility screening .  Research staff will contact [CONTACT_531700], identify our project as being affiliated with the referral source, and explain 
the nature of the proposed study.  Staff will then seek verbal consent from the caregiver to 
administer a behavioral health screening instrument.  Phone screens will be cond ucted in English 
or Spanish at the preference of the family.  Families will receive a $[ADDRESS_690288].  Caregivers and adolescents will be consented and interviewed 
separately; caregivers will consent for themselves and their teens, and teens will assent for 
themselves.  Assessment mea sures will consist of structured clinical interviews and audio 
computer -assisted self -report measures.  Caregiver assessments will be administered in English 
or Spanish as preferred.  Each member will receive a $40 honorarium in store vouchers for 
completi ng the interview (60 -75 minutes).  After members complete the baseline interview, staff 
will confer regarding eligibility for the follow -up study.  Eligible families will then be consented 
to participate in the follow -up study (caregivers and adolescents w ill again consent separately), 
which includes assisted enrollment in a partnering treatment site in which site clinicians have 
been trained in the study protocols (MIP, CASH -AA).  Following this final consenting process, 
staff will meet with both family me mbers to answer any questions, and for consenting families, 
prepare the family for linking to treatment (described below).  Families will then be scheduled 
for follow -up interviews to be conducted 3, 6, and 12 months from the date of the baseline; each 
mem ber will receive a $50 honorarium in store vouchers for completing the 3 - and 6 -month 
interview (60 minutes api[INVESTIGATOR_13959]), and $100 in certificates for the 12 -month interview (75 minutes).  
Non-eligible and non -consenting families will be offered a referral to a ppropriate behavioral 
services as requested.  
Linking to treatment .  The goal of treatment linking is to ensure that families enrolled in 
the study complete an intake appointment at the designated treatment site.  Families drawn from 
community referral part ners will be assigned to a designated site based on site capacity and 
geographical proximity; families drawn from the referral stream of a partnering site will continue 
in that site’s enrollment process.  Once assigned to a designated site, research staff will use 
intensive family engagement and family -agency coordination efforts to help families overcome 
barriers to enrolling in services, procedures especially valuable for enrolling hard -to-engage 
families.  Linking procedures will cease upon completion of  the first intake interview (after 
which randomization will occur).  After linking is completed, research staff will maintain contact 
[CONTACT_531701] -up interviews, which will occur with every randomized 
family regardless of treatme nt attendance.  
Randomization to study condition and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531633] .  Cases will be randomly 
assigned to study condition after completing an intake interview at the assigned site.  Urn 
randomization will promote balance between conditions on 3 variabl es: sex, ethnicity (Hispanic, 
African -American, Other), and ASU problems (Yes, No).  Once randomized, cases will be 
assigned to a study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531634].  Note that in some sites, it will be necessary to 
follow “nearly random” assignment to con dition, if the given site assigns cases to clinicians 
based on a shared rotation of case assignment. That is: Any given case is assigned to the next 
available clinician in the duty rotation, or, the clinician who is on duty during the given intake 
appointm ent.  Treatment site therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531635].  We anticipate some degree of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531636].  Whe n a study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531637], the given site will be asked to nominate two potential replacements, 
and the new therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531638].  All partnering treatment sites 
will be in close proximity to assigned s tudy participants and easily accessible via public 
transportation.  Each site will routinely prescribe weekly treatment sessions and offer in -house 
psychiatric support for all cases.  All therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531639].  
 
Study Conditions  
Behavioral Only  Condition: Changing Academic Support in the Home for Adolescents with 
ADHD (CASH -AA) 
Clients assigned to this condition will participate in routine serv ices at the designated 
treatment site.  In addition, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531640] -AA protocol.  
That is, CASH -AA will be delivered as one component of the client’s treatment plan; the 
remaining components will be determined accordin g to the site’s usual assessment and treatment 
planning procedures.  For study clients, all of whom will carry an ADHD diagnosis confirmed by 
[CONTACT_531702], this may or may not include provision of medication in accord with site 
routines. The study wi ll carefully track but not directly influence medication interventions in this 
condition.  
CASH -AA is a family -based clinical protocol intended for use with adolescents 
diagnosed with ADHD as either a primary or secondary disorder.  It can be delivered in 
conjunction with family -based treatment or with individual -based treatment that can include 
caregivers in multiple sessions.  It consists of four flexibly delivered treatment modules:  
Module 1 Motivation & Preparation: Home Academic Environment .  Module 1 i n 
intended to engage adolescents as active participants in therapeutic activities focused on 
improving school performance, link ADHD traits to school functioning, reframe adolescent 
school problems as family problems with family solutions, assess character istics of the home 
environment that support or impede school success, and determine caregiver and adolescent 
readiness to make changes in the home academic setting.  Clinicians actively engage teens in the 
treatment process by [CONTACT_531703] l treatment goals and fostering a collaborative 
approach to problem solving.  Clinicians also facilitate more constructive family engagement in 
school problems by [CONTACT_531704] (altering negative attributions about an ADHD -related 
behavior by [CONTACT_531705], thereby [CONTACT_531706] a more 
benign light) and reframing interventions (change focus of discussion about ADHD -related 
school deficits from “individual” problems to “family” problems that affect, and are affected b y, 
the larger family environment).  Reframing also creates the opportunity to collaboratively assess 
caregiver capacity to participate in reconfiguring the home academic environment.  
Module 2 Behavior Change: School Attendance & Homework Plan .  Module [ADDRESS_690289] school attendance (as 
needed) and homework quality.  For adolescents with lateness or truancy issues, clinicians and 
families design a developmentally calibrated behavior contract featu ring incentives for regular 
school attendance.  All cases will receive two evidence -based training interventions specifically 
designed for adolescents with ADHD.  First, the Homework Management Plan is used to train 
adolescents to develop good study habits  while decreasing family anxiety and conflict over 
homework completion.  The plan involves helpi[INVESTIGATOR_531641] (e.g., knowing the homework assignments each day) and make renewed effort to 
influence things they can (e.g., minimizing schoolwork distractions in the home).  The goal is to 
increase the amount of time teens spend on schoolwork each evening. Caregivers and teens 
negotiate an amount of time and establish contingencies for adherence.  Clinicians review the 
progress of the plan each week, seeking a fixed routine that allows completion of all assigned 
homework.  Second, the Bookbag Organization System helps adolescents take relatively small 
steps to create a more efficient and reliable organization of school ma terials. It takes place in the 
clinic office, follows a series of detailed checklists, and requires a few inexpensive school 
supplies.  
Module 3 Collaboration: Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -Family -School Partnership .  Module [ADDRESS_690290] aim is to provide the family with education and advocacy training on 
special education rights and school -based services (modifications, accommodations, and 
interventions) available to adolescents with ADHD.  The second aim is for clinicians to complete 
at least one school visit (if feasible) to solidify partnerships with scho ol advocates and, as 
indicated, construct a mutually determined plan for tailored educational services.  Clinicians then 
assist caregivers in developi[INVESTIGATOR_531642] a s schooling progresses.  
 
Integrated Condition: CASH -AA combined with the Medication Integration Protocol (MIP)  
Clients assigned to this condition will also participate in routine behavioral services at the 
given site.  In addition, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531643] -AA (described above) and the 
MIP protocol.  MIP is a family -based protocol designed to integrate pharmacological 
interventions for ADHD into outpatient behavioral treatment for teens with ADHD and co -
occurring disorders.  As with CASH -AA, t he 5 MIP Tasks are modular and flexibly delivered:  
Task 1: ADHD Assessment and Medication Consult .  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531644]; helps family understand 
the psychiatric evaluation  and its results.  
Task 2: Psychoeducation in ADHD Medication .  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531645], expected course, and potential side effects of ADHD medications; 
details the trial -and-error approach to appropriate dosing; and su mmarizes other key factors that 
inform eventual decision -making about medication initiation (see Task 4).  
Task 3: ADHD Symptoms and Family Relations : Congruent with CASH -AA Module 1 
(w/o school -specific focus).  
Task 4: ADHD Medication and Family Decision -Making .  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531646] -related issues.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531647], school, and peer contexts.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531648], side effects, trial -
and-error titration, and substance use issues on a regular basis.  Supported by [CONTACT_38802][INVESTIGATOR_541], the 
family accepts, refuses, defers, or is declared ineligible (due to chaotic/ unsupervised home 
setting) for medication.  
Task 5: Medication Management and Integration Planning .  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531649] a case 
coordination framework for medication compliance tailored to each family, with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531650].  Psychiatrist implements a titration schedule for the client and arranges ongoing 
medication management visits.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531651], including progress of management visits with the psychiatrist.  
Psychiatrist and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531652] a working arrangement for regular communication and 
integrated case planning.  
 
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531653] -AA protocols, the proposed 
study will provide on -site training in CASH -AA (3 hours) to all study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], led by [CONTACT_83671].  Study investigators will then continue training therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531654] (additional 3 hours).  After initial training, two separate monthly fidelity 
monitoring meetings will occur at each site, one for each study condition.  Ad hoc training will 
be provided to new therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531655]. 
Fidelity monitoring (FM) meetings will be organized using principles of localized quality 
assurance procedures for promoting the sustainability of evidence -based practices in usual care .  
Specifically , FM meetings will feature data from the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -report CASH -AA and MIP fidelity 
measures, along with a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -report measure of evidence -based practices for adolescent 
conduct and substance use problems, as quality assurance tools and clinical superv ision aids.  
Also, over the course of the study FM meetings will follow a multistep process to develop on -
site clinical expertise and incrementally increase on -site supervision responsibilities in 
proportion to decreased extramural involvement.  
 
Study Meas ures 
Client Demographics, Multidomain Risk Factors, and Psychiatric Diagnoses  
The Comprehensive Addiction Severity Index for Adolescents (CASI -A) collects 
demographic information on high -risk adolescents and their families and also assesses risk 
factors in  education (academics, attendance, behavior, attitudes), family relations (history of drug 
use/criminality, abuse/neglect), and legal involvement (illegal activities, involvement in juvenile 
justice).  The CASI -A has demonstrated strong reliability and val idity with clinical chart reviews 
of adolescents receiving inpatient psychiatric or substance use treatment and with diagnostic 
interviews such as the CIDI and DISC.  The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(MINI)  (Version 5.0) is a brief structu red diagnostic interview that assesses DSM diagnoses in 
adolescent and adult populations: ADHD, ODD, CD, SUD, GAD, PTSD, MDD, and Dysthymia.  
It has demonstrated interrater and test -retest reliability on international samples of psychiatric 
and non -psychia tric patients, has shown excellent convergent validity with the SCID and the 
CIDI, and is designed to be administered to treatment -seeking clients by [CONTACT_531707].  As in 
previous studies, the [ADDRESS_690291] (CBCL)  is a parent self -report measure that assesses 
children’s externalizing and internalizing symptoms.  It has de monstrated strong reliability, 
criterion validity, and convergent validity with other established measures of child psychological 
symptoms.  The Youth Self -Report  is a youth -report version of the CBCL with equivalent items, 
dimensions, and psychometric pro perties.  The Self-Report Delinquency Scale  assesses 
adolescent criminal behavior and peer criminal behavior; it is well -validated and has been used 
extensively with African American and Hispanic populations.  The Timeline Follow -Back 
method (TLFB)  measure s quantity and frequency of daily consumption of substances using a 
calendar and other memory aids to gather retrospective estimates.  It is frequently used to assess 
substance use in treatment -referred, ethnic minority adolescents.  
 
Quality of Life Indica tors 
Executive functioning will be measured with the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive 
Function , a parent -report measure of behavior problems linked to executive functioning and 
commonly found in ADHD youth.  It has been validated on ADHD outpatient s amples and teens 
with mixed diagnoses.  School functioning indicators will derive from three sources.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531656].  The CASI -A will yield data 
on past -year academic, attendance, and behavior  problems.  The Bonding to School (BTS)  is a 
self-report measure of adolescent bonding to teachers and orientation to school used with high -
risk samples.  
 
Service Utilization, Treatment Satisfaction, and Semi -Structured Post -treatment Interview  
Research st aff will ask study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531657].  The Services Assessment for Children and Adolescents  (SACA) i s a 
structured assessment of parents’ reports of their children’s behavioral health service utilization, 
perceived need for services, barriers to services receipt, and retrospective estimate of days of 
ADHD medication use.  It has demonstrated strong agree ment with administrative service 
records; test -retest reliability of lifetime and past year service use are also strong.  The Client 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ)  measures consumer satisfaction with the quality and 
effectiveness of treatment services an d will be completed by [CONTACT_531708].  Internal 
consistency ranges are high, and concurrent validity is supported by [CONTACT_531709][INVESTIGATOR_531658].  Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531659] d uring each session via caregiver and/or teen report: type and dose of current prescription, 
and number of days that medication was taken since last log entry.  This will yield interval -level 
prospective data, the most rigorous self -report method for medica tion use.  Semi -structured 
qualitative interviews  will be administered to teens and caregivers at [ADDRESS_690292] Measures  
 Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531660]: (1) Upon consenting to 
participate in the study, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531661], and a second questionnaire 
documenting their clinical strengths and preferred clinical practices.  (2) When treating study 
cases, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531662] -AA fidelity checklist and, for those in the 
Integrated conditio n, the MIP fidelity checklist after every session; and each condition will 
complete a brief checklist of evidence -based practices for adolescent behavior problems; all 
checklists (total completion time: 5 minutes) will be collected by [CONTACT_531710] a r egular 
basis.  (3) When treating study cases, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531663] a regular basis.  (4) Upon closing a study 
case, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137086] a termination summary o f clinical activity that documents 
information about sessions held, participants in sessions, and treatment procedures that were the 
main foci of session activity.   
 
Data Analysis  
Preliminary Analyses and Refuser Analyses  
All analyses will be preceded by [CONTACT_531711], 
outliers, and need for using transformed variables or non -parametric tests. We will examine 
whether randomization successfully created equivalent study groups by [CONTACT_14664] t-tests or chi -
square tests on demographics and other variables; those that differ between groups will be 
entered as covariates in subsequent analyses. Logistic regression will examine potential biases 
due to failure to contact [CONTACT_531712] -up on base line characteristics, study condition, and their 
interactions. These analyses will determine whether the followed sample differs from the 
randomized sample and whether there is differential attrition by [CONTACT_3004]. Also, analyses on 
refuser characteristics will be conducted to inform the generalizability of the sample, as follows. 
Families completing the phone eligibility screening instrument will provide information on 
personal and family demographics. Families of eligible adolescents who refuse to particip ate in 
the baseline interview, or who participate in the baseline interview but do not complete an intake 
appointment at the assigned treatment site, will be asked to complete a brief study refuser 
measure. Also, phone screening data from the engaged versu s non -engaged samples will be 
compared to test for significant differences in demographic or family characteristics.  
Analytic Strategy to Account for Nesting Effects  
 The proposed study has a nested design: clients are nested within therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], and 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531664]. In a nested design, the application of a standard fixed 
effects GLM typi[INVESTIGATOR_531665]. We will use multilevel mo deling with random effects that 
includes  the sandwich estimator to adjust parameter estimates and standard errors for nested 
structure. This approach is used to analyze nested data when the goal is to examine outcome 
effects at the level of the individual (i.e., client), and the hierarchical structure of the data (i.e., 
client nesting at therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531626]) is akin to a nuisance factor to be accounted for, but inference 
about the degree of correlation is not of interest. Also, the design is nested at the level  of 
treatment site: therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531666]. Recommendations stipulate that [ADDRESS_690293] the given analysis 
using a within -site approach; due to small sample size this would be considered an exploratory 
analysis.  
Plan of Analysis for Main Outcomes: Aims 1 & 3  
Latent growth curve mode ling (LGC) will be used to examine the impact of treatment 
Condition on change over time in client outcomes: symptoms (ADHD, conduct problems, 
substance use) and QOL indicators (executive and school functioning). LGC produces estimates 
for the growth curve s of each individual and then aggregates individual trajectories to estimate 
mean growth parameters (intercept and slope), characterizing the sample in terms of the average 
baseline value of the dependent measure (intercept) and the rate and shape of chang e over time 
(slope). Analyses will utilize a 2 (treatment condition) by 2 (baseline substance use) by 4 (time) 
repeated measures intent -to-treat design; missing data will be handled with robust maximum 
likelihood estimation (described below).  
LGC will proc eed using Mplus version 7, as follows. First, we will test a series of growth 
curve models for each outcome, representing three forms of growth (no change, linear change, 
quadratic change), to determine the overall shape of the individual change trajectori es; overall 
model fit will be evaluated by [CONTACT_531713] -square, RMSEA, CFI, and TLI indices. Second, 
we will test unconditional models for all outcomes to obtain the average effect for change over 
time in outcome, without including treatment condition  or other covariates. Third, we will add 
the two predictors, Condition (Behavioral Only vs. Integrated) and baseline Substance Use (SU+ 
vs. SU -) to the models in order to test the impact of each predictor on initial status and change 
over time. We will als o test Condition X SU interactions, and if any are significant for a given 
outcome, we will re -run that model separately for the SU+ and SU - participants to test simple 
effects. Treatment effects (Aim 1) for any given outcome will be shown by a statistical ly 
significant effect  parameter, as tested by [CONTACT_157571] z test —calculated by [CONTACT_531714] —associated with Condition. Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects (HTE; Aim 
3) for any given outcome will be identified by a significan t effect for the Condition X SU 
interaction term; post -hoc analyses will be used to explore these interactions to determine 
whether Integrated effects appeared to be stronger or weaker in SU+ versus SU - cases. Initially, 
all models will be adjusted for nui sance covariates: sex, age, and ethnicity; family income; 
caregiver education level; and treatment site. We will then further explore HTE (Research 
Question 1) by [CONTACT_531715], ethnicity, and sex subgroups. Per 
above we will  use the sandwich estimator to control for therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531667]. Effect size estimates 
for significant findings in Aims 1 and 3 analyses will be calculated based on Feingold’s 
procedures for calculating effect sizes for LGC analyses. Also, for any outcome tha t deviates 
substantially from normality —typi[INVESTIGATOR_531668] —we will use two -part 
growth curve models, which allow for the simultaneous estimation of separate but correlated 
continuous and categorical LGC models. Two -part models are used whe n a large number of 
participants report the absence of the given variable (i.e., no delinquent activities or SU), 
resulting in highly skewed data. In two -part models, the original distribution of the outcome is 
separated into categorical and continuous par ts, each modeled by [CONTACT_531716]. In the categorical part, a binary indicator variable is created to indicate any vs. none of 
the outcome in question. The continuous part models the frequency of occurrence of the outcome 
given a ny positive occurrence.  
Finally, for Research Question [ADDRESS_690294] step is to create 2 new groups: High Use vs. Low/No Use (or 3 groups, 
depending on data distributions). This will be done via propensity score matching analyses for 
ordinal treatment variables. Prop ensity scores will be calculated using an ordinal logit model to 
represent each client’s probability to be medicated over time as a function of multiple baseline 
variables presumed to influence medication choice (condition, demographics, ADHD symptom 
sever ity, comorbid symptoms). Clients will be matched on these variables to minimize 
differences in propensity scores and maximize differences in medication use days at [ADDRESS_690295] matched -pair analyses for each outcome, using dependent t-tests for continuous 
and McNemar’s chi -square test for dichotomous var iables78. 
Plan of Analysis for Main Outcomes: Aim 2  
Multilevel modeling will examine Condition effects on time -invariant client outcomes: 
treatment attendance, medication acceptance, and client satisfaction (averaged  across caregiver 
and adolescent);  separate models will be run for each variable. Outcomes will be analyzed using 
multilevel regression analysis with random intercepts and slopes in Mplus version 7. Condition 
will be entered as a level -1 predictor and regressed directly on the outcome variable; the 
influence of the predictor is examined by [CONTACT_531717]. As 
discussed above, to control for therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531669]; all 
models will be adjusted for the nuisance covariates listed above; and missing data will be 
handled with robust maximum likelihood estimation (see below).  
Analytic Plans for Missing Data  
 Based on [ADDRESS_690296] rates of missing assessment data on outcome variables 
between 10 -15%. All proposed analyses involving client outcome data will be carried out in 
Mplus, which p rovides full information maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which produces 
unbiased parameter estimates under the assumption that data are missing at random. Moreover, 
MLE outperforms other missing data approaches, such as listwise deletion, even when MA R is 
not met.  
 
Risks And Benefits  
Potential Study Risks  
Potential Risks for Client Participants: Research Interviews and Treatment Session Recording  
Interview Risks.  Because this study will involve participants answering questions, and 
enrolling in and at tending treatment services, there are minimal risks associated with 
participation in the study.  We believe the risks to participants are reasonable in relation to the 
anticipated benefits (see below).  Study participants might feel uneasy about answering personal 
questions during the research assessment interviews.  No side effects have been noted in the 
current literature in association with the behavioral questionnaires, interviews, or assessments 
used in this study, although, as with many assessment bat teries, some people may experience 
mild fatigue or momentary concern about their ability to do well.  It is unlikely that participants 
will experience more than minor discomfort; however, research assistants (RAs) will be trained 
to deal with this issue if  it does occur.  RAs will take a computerized suicide assessment training 
course through QPR Institute, which we have used in prior studies.  Additionally, the PI (a 
licensed Clinical Psychologist) will be available via cellular phone for consultations wit h clients 
if deemed necessary.  Adolescents and families who participate in individual and family 
treatment sessions may experience some intrapersonal and interpersonal anxiety or discomfort 
during the routine practice of clinical counseling for ADHD and r elated behavior problems; risk 
of this discomfort will be minimized by [CONTACT_531718].  Another concern inv olves the ability of adolescents to provide informed assent.  
Because recruited adolescents will be ages [ADDRESS_690297] that are produced by [CONTACT_531719]’s Services, as well as available training videotapes for identifying 
and intervening with participants at risk for suicidal behavior.  
Session Recording Risks .  Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531670], using recording devices supplied by [CONTACT_3647].  There is 
potential loss of privacy related to the reviewing of audiorecorded therapy sessio ns, given in 
some instances, surnames or other identifying information may be spoken by [CONTACT_38802][INVESTIGATOR_531671].  To protect the privacy and confidentiality of the participants, project staff 
and research partners who listen to recordings for the purpose of fidelity monitoring and 
assessment will be trained on ethical standards related to privacy and confidentiality in 
psychotherapy and psychosocial intervention research.  
 
Potential Risks for Client Participants: ADHD Behavioral and Medicat ion Interventions  
The two study protocols, CASH -AA and MIP, are drawn from evidence -based 
interventions for adolescents with ADHD and are not associated with any documented risks.  
Both protocols will be delivered by [CONTACT_531720] [INVESTIGATOR_531672].  Medications for ADHD will be 
prescribed and monitored only licensed and qualified physicians as part of their routine clinical 
activities at the partnering sites.  
Although  medication interventions will be assessed and delivered by [CONTACT_531721], because one protocol (MIP) is designed to help 
families make informed decisions about ADHD medication and (when selected) coordin ate those 
services with behavioral services, it is prudent to describe the general risks that pertain to all 
youths who elect to use ADHD medications.  The most commonly prescribed ADSHD 
medications are psychostimulants such as methyphenidate (Ritalin, Con certa), Adderall, and 
Straterra.  These stimulants act to increase the activity of the central nervous system.  They are 
used to increase alertness, reduce fatigue, and improve daily functioning at home, school, and 
work settings.  They help manage the sym ptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity in 
persons diagnosed with ADHD.  They also increase wakefulness, attentiveness, and in some 
cases, cognitive functioning.  Stimulant medication is about [ADDRESS_690298] the medication as indicated.  
Common physical side effects for many stimulants include : abdominal pain; aggravation, 
nervousness, hostility, sadness; dizziness and/or shortness of breath; headache; tics; insomnia  
and prolonged sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]; loss of appetite, depressive symptoms, or depression; increased 
coughing, sinusitis, or upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092]; vomiting; allergic reaction; increased 
blood pressure and/or tachycardia; and in rare cases, psychosis (ab normal thinking or 
hallucinations).  
Note also that the FDA mandates that a “black box” warning label be affixed to bottles of 
several brands of stimulants that contains the following consumer safety information:  (1) 
chronic abusive use can lead to marked tolerance and psychological dependence with varying 
degrees of abnormal behavior; (2) frank psychotic epi[INVESTIGATOR_531673], especially with abusive 
use; (3) should be given cautiously to patients with a personal or family history of drug 
dependence or alcoho lism; (4) careful supervision given during drug withdrawal from abusive 
use since severe depression may occur: (5) withdrawal during chronic therapeutic use may 
unmask symptoms of the underlying disorder that may require follow -up.  In addition, the FDA 
recommends caution in treating patients whose underlying medical conditions might be 
compromised by [CONTACT_531722], for example, those with preexisting 
hypertension, heart failure, recent myocardial infarction, or hyperthyroidism, or those already 
using vasopressor agents.  There are additional cautions related to taking long -acting, osmotic -
release medication (OROS -MPH, aka Concerta): (1) If not taken early in the morning, doctors 
often recommend skippi[INVESTIGATOR_531674], as the stimulants will affect normal sleep 
patterns.  (2) Some people find that even with early morning dosing, stimulants disrupt normal 
sleep patterns.  (3) Changing the dosage by [CONTACT_531723] a new prescription.  
 
Potential Risks for Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531675].  
Only full -time behavioral health clinicians at partnering treatment sites will be asked to 
participate as therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531676].  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531677], demands, and benefits of study 
participation.  Upon agreei ng to participate in the study, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137086] a brief baseline 
questionnaire that requests information about demographics.  The project will seek to collect 
digital audiorecordings of all treatment sessions with all study cases.  Also, study the rapi[INVESTIGATOR_531678]: client 
retention, number of contacts with parents and adolescents (in and out of session), total number 
of sessions held, number an identity of partic ipants in every session.  These data will be 
requested only for families that have signed the appropriate consent to release such information 
to the research project.  Participating therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531679] -report fidelity 
measures (CA SH-AA for both conditions, MIP for the Integrated condition only) immediately 
following each completed session.  In addition, they will be asked to participate in weekly 
Fidelity Monitoring meetings with the research team members to review study cases (des cribed 
above in Section 3).  
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531680].  They will be clearly assured that they can refuse to 
participate or drop out of the study at any tim e.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531681] -report and taped session data to research staff in a timely 
manner, activities which will take place outside their normal working hours and duties: $25 for 
completin g the baseline questionnaire, $25 for completing treatment termination summaries 
using clinical chart data, $[ADDRESS_690299] -session fidelity therapy checklists, and $[ADDRESS_690300] Study Risks for Clients: Research Interviews and Treatment Session 
Recording  
If acute mental or physical health issues arise during the course of the study, the family 
will be referred immediately to the nearest hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9487].  If the initial family 
assessment indicates very severe adolescent problems that would n ot be adequately served by [CONTACT_531724], adolescents will be 
referred to a residential treatment center or inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5120], where they would receive 
more intensive treatment, or to anothe r appropriate care facility.  
The issues surrounding confidentiality are of supreme importance and sensitivity because 
highly personal clinical information will be obtained from the adolescent and their caregivers.  
Adolescents and caregivers will sign a st atement that attests to their understanding that the 
information they provide will be held as confidential to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371].  Consent 
forms will clearly state the right to refuse participation or to withdraw at any time.  Further, 
refusal to participate will not influence any of the services the adolescent and family may receive 
at the behavioral healthcare clinics to which they are referred.  During recruitment of 
participants, it will be made clear that this study is being conducted by [CONTACT_531725].  
Thus, all research assessment information collected by [CONTACT_531726].  
In order to address any concerns regarding coercion, adolescents and caregivers will be 
informed that they are free to choose not to participate and may withdraw at any time (this is 
included in the consent form s).  Because this study involves minors, particular caution will be 
exercised in obtaining informed consent separately and independently from caregiver consent.  
To this end, as described above, an initial step in subject enrollment involves obtaining care giver 
permission for participation by [CONTACT_469753].  Once caregiver consent is secured, adolescents 
will be asked separately  and independently  for informed assent (i.e., caregiver consent will not 
be used to persuade teens to assent).  This approach is c onsidered very effective in minimizing 
coercion to participate.  In addition, the reimbursement rate of $40 -$100 api[INVESTIGATOR_531682] a moderate amount that is 
appropriate for the time investment  and therefore is not considered to be coercive.  Persons who 
are hesitant to consent/assent or express the desire to withdraw will not be offered additional 
financial incentives to continue with interviews.  
 
Protection Against Study Risks for Clients: ADH D Medication  
Medication needs assessment, dosage monitoring, and tolerance and effectiveness 
monitoring will be conducted at the respective partnering treatment sites by [CONTACT_63689] -site 
psychiatrist as part of routine child psychiatric services provided during the course of behavioral 
health counseling.  All partnering sites are licensed to provide pharmacological interventions for 
youth with mental health disorders, and all operate in compliance with state -mandated safety 
monitoring and adverse event protocols,  in addition to safety and best practice guidelines put 
forth by [CONTACT_216418], in the dispensation of pharmacological services 
for minors.  Prior to prescribing medication, site psychiatrists will carefully review all safety 
informa tion and precautions (including information contained on FDA black box warning labels) 
with both the adolescent and primary caregiver(s), and the psychiatrist will conduct all 
assessment procedures necessary to determine whether medication is indicated and  safe to 
prescribe for a given client.  If medication is ultimately prescribed and accepted, site 
psychiatrists will meet on a regular basis with adolescents and families for medication titration 
and management, per routine site procedures.  Medication man agement will be coordinated with 
the site behavioral clinicians throughout the course of treatment.  Any adverse events (AEs) or 
serious adverse events (SAEs) related to medication interventions will be clinically managed by 
[CONTACT_531727], including t oxicity assessment, downward titration, termination of the 
medication regimen, and emergency treatment or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_531683].  Any AEs/SAEs 
that occur at any treatment site will be reported directly to the CASAColumbia IRB by [CONTACT_531728].  
 
Protection Against Study Risks for Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531684].  The 
respective site clinical administrators will not require their clinical staff to participate —that is, 
participation will be completely voluntary —and there will be no negative consequences if 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531685].  No one at any clinical site, nor anyone outside the CASAColumbia 
research team, will know the answers that therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531686] -report questionnaire, 
case termination summary, or post -session therapy technique checklist.  No identifying 
information will be attached to the session recordings.  Any member of the CASAColumbia 
resear ch team, or any of the study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531687], who 
listens to recorded sessions will be subject to confidentiality with regard to all aspects of the 
given session.  All information contained in research documents and mat erials will be password 
protected and accessible only to members of the CASAColumbia research team.  
 
Confidentiality  
Regarding assessment data and other records, the study investigators have an established 
set of procedures designed to ensure the protectio n of data confidentiality.  All staff who 
participates in research with human subjects will be required to complete an on -line course on 
protection of human subjects (including confidentiality).  Additionally, staff will be trained on 
and strictly monitore d for adherence to federal guidelines for maintaining the privacy and 
confidentiality of participants throughout the research process.  Assessment data will be 
collected at the participant’s home or in assessment offices at one of the referral sites.  All 
assessments will have a computer administration platform, which ensures greater confidentiality 
in transporting and storing the data.  No identifying information will appear on any form.  Upon 
completion of each interview, the data will be transferred to a  database at CASAColumbia, 
where all participant records will be coded and filed numerically according to a unique project 
identification number, with no names attached to the database.  Access to the database and data 
files will be strictly controlled by [CONTACT_978].  Passwords will be used to restrict entry into the 
database.  A master list linking participants to project identification codes will be kept in a 
double locked filing cabinet at CASAColumbia in the office of the Project Coordinator, along 
with any  other identifying information used to track clients for the purpose of completing follow -
up assessment interviews.  Follow -up contacts will be made by [CONTACT_531729].  
Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_531688].  
Digital audio recordings, which represent sensitive clinical material, will be regularly 
harvested from site recordin g devices, stored in password protected electronic files in 
CASAColumbia office at all times, and subsequently erased from site recording devices once 
properly stored.  Use of the recordings will be restricted to the CASAColumbia research team.  
All adoles cents and adults will be asked to sign a separate consent form that provides permission 
for recording sessions for the purposes of fidelity monitoring and evaluation.  Consent forms will 
clearly specify that any family member has the right to request that their recordings be destroyed 
in part or in whole at any time during the course of the study or thereafter.  In addition, no 
identifying information other than case numbers will be associated with recordings.  Any 
researcher or professional who listens to the recordings will be subject to confidentiality with 
regard to all aspects of the recorded session.  It should be noted that in the PI’s twenty years of 
clinical research using these procedures, not a single incident of violation of confidentiality has 
occurred.  
All project staff will be required to successfully complete the NIH online course in the 
protection of human subjects in research studies; certificates of completion will be kept on file in 
the office of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_531689].  In addi tion, project staff will observe the 
following data security procedures:  
Digital recordings, which represent very sensitive clinical material, shall be kept in 
secured and encrypted databases on CASAColumbia laptops at all times.  The laptops will be 
equip ped with a standard industry leading AES [ADDRESS_690301] access 
to the recorded material.  In addition, when the laptop is on but not in use, the Windows screen 
shall be locked.   In the event any laptop is stolen, the incident shall be reported to the 
CASAColumbia IT department immediately upon discovery.  The laptops are equipped with 
Absolute Computrace which allows CASAColumbia to persistently track IP address, location, 
softw are installed, etc.  If at any point a laptop is reported stolen, it can be locked up.  
Computrace partners with law enforcement officials to retrieve the stolen hardware.  
 
Procedures For Obtaining Informed Consent  
Clients: Caregivers and Adolescents  
Clien t research interviews (phone screen, baseline interview, and 3 -, 6- and 12 -month 
follow -up interviews) will conducted by [CONTACT_531730].  Caregivers and teens will be c onsented and 
interviewed separately; caregivers will consent for themselves and for their adolescents, and 
adolescents will assent for themselves.  Recruitment procedures, randomization procedures, and 
assessment measures and procedures are fully described  above.  Caregiver consents and 
assessments will be administered in the preferred language: English or Spanish.  Many 
assessment measures have Spanish versions available from the vendor; all other measures, and 
all consents, will be translated by a profess ional translation agency using back -translation 
techniques that are high -standard methods in the field.  Clients will be fully informed about the 
general treatment services to be offered —with at least some focus on attention and impulsivity 
problems —and ab out randomization procedures prior to consenting to participate, in the 
following manner: “You and your teen agree to enter a lottery at the counseling program.  Half 
of families in the study will be assigned to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531690], and half will be assigned to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531691]. All study families will receive the same access to 
all available services at the clinic.”  Resear ch staff will give a copy of the consent/assent form 
(consent/assent to participate in the study; consent/assent to audiotape sessions) to caregivers and 
adolescents, read them aloud, and then ask family members if they have any questions, 
clarifications, or concerns before signing.  After consenting/assenting to study participation and 
completing the Baseline interview, families will then be linked to services at a partnering 
treatment site by [CONTACT_531731] -based engagement strategi es (also 
described above).  Caregivers will receive $25 in vouchers for completing the Phone Screen, and 
caregivers and adolescents will each receive $40 for completing the Baseline interview, $[ADDRESS_690302] two follow -ups, and $100 api[INVESTIGATOR_531692] e final follow -up interview  
 
Site Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531693].  Research staff will give a copy of  the single 
consent —addressing consent to participate in the research study  and consent to audiotape 
sessions —to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], read the consent aloud, and then ask therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531694], clarifications, or concerns before signing.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_531695] ($25), for submitting se lf-report checklists and session recordings in a timely 
manner ($10 api[INVESTIGATOR_13959]), and for submitting post -treatment clinical logs and procedures checklists 
for each study case ($50), according to the institutional policy of the given site.   
 