 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, 10 -20-20, AMD    V   
                              1  
 
 
 
 
 
COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : Effect of Behavioral Lifestyle Intervention on Frailty in Older Adults With Diabetes  
 
NCT number : NCT 04440449  
 
IRB Approval Date : 10/20/20  
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC20190019H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, [ADDRESS_101709]  
UTHSA Clinical Trial Description  
This form is not mandatory.  Other documents are acceptable if equivalent  information  is provided . 
UTHSCSA Tracking 
Number  (internal use 
only)  HSC20190019H  1. Original Version 
Date   
  1.1. Revision 
Date(s)  
add rows as needed   
 
 
2. Background  
Briefly discuss the  important literature relevant to the trial and that p rovide s background for the trial.  Include the 
importance of the trial and any relevant treatment issues or controversies . 
Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) is a significant problem in older adults and is known to increase the risk of future frailty. More 
than 25% of the U.S. population aged ≥ 65 years has T2D; and, recent projections suggest that the number of cases of 
diagnosed T2D in those aged ≥65 years will increase by 4.5 -fold (compared to 3 -fold in the total population) betwe en 
[ADDRESS_101710] on working -aged adults, the 
disease also affects longevity, disability, and common geriatric syndromes such as frailty, which ultimately leads 
inability to maintain independence. The comb ination of the T2D epi[INVESTIGATOR_92159] (mHealth) that can play a 
significant role in modifying the lifestyle behaviors of older adul ts in order to improve frailty characteristics and 
manage T2D.  It has been supported that  mHealth  can facilitate behavior promotion (diet, physical activity), improve 
self-management, self -efficacy, and medication adherence in older adults.  Research indica tes that older adults have 
positive attitudes toward the use of mHealth interventions and applications and confident in their ability to self -manage 
their T2D suggesting that the benefits of technology outweigh the costs of adapting its use in this populat ion. 
To the best of our knowledge, no study has reported on the impact of behavioral lifestyle interventions for 
overweight/obese older adults with T2D on improvements of frailty characteristics. For this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we will 
conduct a randomized controlle d trial to determine the feasibility and compare the preliminary efficacy of a behavioral 
lifestyle intervention and its impact on frailty -related measures in overweight/obese community -dwelling  older adults 
with T2D. We will be using mHealth tools to enha nce self -monitoring of multiple behaviors (diet and physical activity) 
and to manage T2D. Our overall goal  is to test the hypothesis that the implementation of behavioral lifestyle 
interventions  to promote physical activity and dietary modifications will help older adults with T2D to improve frailty 
characteristics and manage the disease, which may eventually lead to healthy  aging. Such intervention would include 
the use of self -monitorin g of diet and physical activity.  
 
 
3. Objectives and Endpoints      All data points collected in the study should support an objective or have a regulatory 
purpose.   
Complete the table – add rows as needed.   
3.1. Objective (s)  
Clearly and concisely define  the 
primary and secondary outcomes.  3.2. Endpoint  
Clearly define the endpoints.   
(endpoints  are the basis for 
concluding that the objective  has 
been met) . 3.3. Justification for Endpoint  
Briefly explain why the endpoint(s) were 
chosen.  
Determine the feasibility of the 
lifestyle intervention using a 
smartphone for self -monitoring of 
diet and physical activity for the 
improvement of frailty measurements Results from this study will 
provide the first information 
regarding the efficacy of a 
behavioral lifestyle intervention 
using a smartphone in the Behavioral lifestyle intervent ions using a 
smartphone for self-monitoring to  
improve frailty measurements, body 
weight, and glycemic control in 
overweight/obese older adults with T2D.  
 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, 10 -20-20, AMD    V   
                              3 (primary outcome) and on weight 
management and glycemic control 
(secondary outcomes) in 
overweight/obese older adults with 
T2D.  improvement of frailty 
measurements in community -
dwelling older adults with T2D.  
 
4. Rationale  
Briefly s tate the reason for conducting the clinical trial.   
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_92160] T2D among older adults and/or those with multiple comorbidities, these 
populations have been excluded from randomized controlled trials of treatments for T2D and its associated conditions. 
Based on the prevalence of T2 D, its related complications, implementation of cost -effective treatment and up to date 
(or less burdensome) self -monitoring strategies for overweight/obese older adults with T2D, this study is needed.     
 
 
5. Study Design : Randomized controlled trial  
5.1. Number of 
Groups /Arms  1 Group name(s)  mHealth+ group Intervention  group  
5.2. Overall Design  
Select all applicable    
☐ Randomization  ☐ Cluster Randomized  
☐ Group -Sequential  ☐ Adaptive Design  
☐ Parallel Design  ☐ Placebo -Controlled  
☐ Superiority  ☐ Equivalence  ☐ Non-inferiority  
Device  ☐ Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]  ☐ Pi[INVESTIGATOR_22735]  ☐ Post-Approval  
Drug/Biologic  ☐ Phase 
1 ☐ Phase 1/2  ☐ Phase 2  ☐ Phase 2/3  ☐ Phase 3  ☐ Phase 4  
☐ Dose escalation  If yes, details 
→  
☐ Dose ranging  If yes, details 
→  
☐ Sub-studies  If yes, details 
→  
5.3. Other Design Details : This will be a 6 -month randomized controlled trial. The study will start after the approval 
from UT Health San Antonio IRB department. All study visits will be performed in the UT Health School of Nursing.  
 
 
 
6.  Study Population :  
6.1.  Study Population(s)  
Label/Name  
 
 
 
 
[CONTACT_92173] s – 
select a row, copy & paste  6.2.  Identify the criteria for inclusion  
The criteria that every  potential 
participant must satisfy, to qualify for 
study entry.  
 
All individuals in this study population 
must meet all of the inclusion criteria in 
order to be eligible to participate in the 
study  6.3.  Identify the criteria for exclusion  
The characteristics that make an 
individual ineligible for study 
participation.   
 
All individuals in this study population 
meeting any of the exclusion criteria at 
baseline will be excluded from study 
participation.  
 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, 10 -20-20, AMD    V   
                              4 Overweight/obese community -
dwelling  older adults with T2D  Community -dwelling  
Age [ADDRESS_101711] 6 months.  
Received basic diabetes self -
management education  
Stable medication regimen  and no 
medication changes are expected over  
the next 6 months.  
Overweight/obese (BMI ≥25 kg/m2  
Able to read and write in Engli sh  
Own a smartphone  
At PI [INVESTIGATOR_9106], participant is 
willing /able  to  comply with the 
protocol requirements  
 Unsafe to walk using EASY criteria or 
clinical judgement of the PI.  
History of severe psychiatric disorders  
or cognitive impairment which 
interfe res with active participation in 
the study  
Residence of long -term care facility  
History of substance abuse in the past 
year 
Unwilling to be randomized in a 
mHealth+ individual intervention group  
6.4.  
Will screen failures be allowed 
to re -screen at a later date?  ☒ No ☐ Yes            If yes, describe criteria below ↓ 
 
 
7.  Study Intervention(s) being tested or evaluated  
This can include prevention, diagnostic or therapeutic interventions (e.g., drug or device) or educational, health 
services or basic science interventions (e.g., educational program, health care delivery model,  or examining basic 
physiology)  
Behavioral l ifestyle intervention: Participants (N= 40) will be randomized to the mHealth+ group Intervention 
group ( Group A; n=20) and mHealth+ individual intervention group ( Group B; n=20) group using a block 
randomization table. (1)  The mHealth+ group Intervention gr oup (Group A) will receive a modified Look 
AHEAD behavior lifestyle intervention with smartphone -based self -monitoring of diet and physical activity. 
This comprises ten group sessions for lifestyle intervention in 6-months. The group will receive three wee kly 
classes in the first month and then bi -weekly classes for  month  2-3, and  three  monthly  session in month four , 
five, and six . The frequency and layout of these classes will allow participants to master new skills gradually, 
then eventually wean off, and  adopt  the modified lifestyle as the part of their daily lives. (2)  The mHealth+ 
individual intervention group (Group B) will receive an abbreviated behavior lifestyle intervention with 
smartphone -based self -monitoring of diet and physical activity in one face-to-face individual session at the 
beginning of the study . In addition, participants will receive self -study materials, from Look Ahead modules, 
and a monthly follow -up phone calls for the duration of the study (6 -months). The goal for these follow up 
phone calls  are to assess understanding of the modules,  to promote continued engagement with  the study 
material, and to provide clarification on materials as needed.  Participants in the mHealth+ group Intervention 
group  (Group A)  and mHealth+ individual in tervention group  (Group B  will receive instruction on how to 
download an app to help them record their diet and physical activity at the beginning of the study . (see 
updates to study protocol dated below)  
Fitbit  offers a simple, easy -to-use tool for tracking food and physical activity. It helps set daily calorie budget, and 
set and work towards goals for nutrient intake, weight loss, exercise, and more. https://www.f itbit.com/inspi[INVESTIGATOR_1312]   
04.12.20: Due to COVID -[ADDRESS_101712] and frailty assessments.  
10.20.20: we finished our participants (N=20) in the group intervention and due to CO VID-19 restrictions we were not 
able to enroll our participants for the control group  (Group B) . We talked with IRB staff and study team and decided 
to stop enrolling participating for the control group (group B) as the risk was higher based on the inclusi on criteria for 
our study participants than the benefits for the control participants.  Modification due to Pandemic, forgoing control 
arm, and worked with the interventional participants still worked with the study data to meet study aim -the deviation 
related to COVID -[ADDRESS_101713] all procedure s directed by [CONTACT_92167] - including items or services provided as part of routine or conventional 
care and those needed to diagnosis or treat research related complications.     
Important Note – The protocol directed procedures listed must match those in the Schedule of Activities  (attachment ) 
8.1. Drugs (trade and generic, dosage, route of administration)     
N/A 
 
8.2. Devices  
N/A 
 
8.3. Biologics  
N/A 
 
8.4. Laboratory Tests  
Laboratory tests:  Complete blood count, chemistry with liver function tests, lipid profile, HbA1c, and inflammatory 
markers (CRP, IL6) will be collected from all participants. Approximately  [ADDRESS_101714]. Approximately 16  ml of blood will be 
collected in a serum separating tube and will be used for clinical lab values (complete metabolic panel, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_1842] 
A1c) .  The remaining 12  ml of blood will be collected in an ED TA tube and will be used to quantifying circulating 
cytokines .  
04.12.20: Due to COVID -[ADDRESS_101715] other end of study assessments virtually.  
 
8.5. Imaging Procedures  
N/A 
 
8.6. Other  Research Procedures (e.g., other safety and efficacy assessments .)  
Frailty assessment : We will conduct the assessment at the baseline and then at the end of the study. Frailty is defined as 
the presence of ≥3/5 of characteristics  1) self -reported unintentional weight loss of ≥[ADDRESS_101716] year, 2) self -
reported exhaustion, 3) low phys ical activity based on the Minnesota Leisure Time Physical Activity Questionnaire, 4) 
weak handgrip , 5) and slowness on a 10-foot walk at the usual  pace. These measures have been standardized in SALSA 
study 7,21 and will be used in this study. Pre -frailty is defined as 1 or 2 of these characteristics and Non -frailty is defined 
as the presence  of 0 characteristics. As a measure of lower extremity func tion, we will use the Short Physical 
Performance Battery (SPPB).[ADDRESS_101717], 10 -20-20, AMD    V   
                              6  History and Physical Assessment : We will document participants’ medical history regarding his/her  diagnosis of T2D, 
length time having T2D, and use of any glucose -lowering  medications and/or insulin.  Height, weight, waist 
circumference, and vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]) will be measured.  
 Patient -Reported Out comes Measurement Information System (PROMIS):  PROMIS -Global Health (GH) and 
PROMIS -[ADDRESS_101718] 4 -8 
participants in each group intervention   The focus group will be conducted at the end of study visit and procedures 
(session 10, visit 11) for  the group intervention  population .  Participants will be informed in the consent and once 
again before the focus group that their responses will be audio -recorded. Participants will be informed that no 
personally identifiable information will be discussed or recorded as part of the focus groups, and that questions will 
be centered on improving the program and evaluating its successes and areas for improvement. Risks of the focus 
groups would include discomfort answering questions and/or discomfort from participating in a group setting  and 
breach of confidentiality. Participants do not have to answer or discuss any questions that make them uncomfortable, 
and that confidentiality will be protected by [CONTACT_92168] a secure, locked location.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_92161].   
Focus Group Questions  
As we are currently going through lifestyle changes due to the corona virus, tell me the impact of it on your 
day to day on self -monitoring of diet, physical activity, and diabetes manageme nt. (04.12.20)  
What behavioral strategies have been most helpful to you in making the changes?  
Behavioral strategies that have worked for you?  
Behavioral strategies that have not work for you?  
What are your plans for staying on track in the absence of the se group sessions?  
Since joining the program, what are the health -related benefits that you have experienced?  
Since joining the program, what are the appearance -related benefits that you have experienced?  
How would you say these benefits have influenced y our quality of life?  
 
8.7  Attach a Schedule of Activities (SOA) Excel File  [Download the Template 
here: Schedule of Activities ] Check to indicate that 
the  
SOA Excel File is 
attached  →  ☒ 
 
 
9. Preparation/Handling/ Storage/Accountability of  Investigational Drug, Biologic, or Device  
N/A  - This study does not include any investigational product s (e.g. drugs, devices or biologics)  
N/A  - An Investigator Brochure is attached  
N/A  - A Drug/Device Manual is attached  
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
9.1.  Acquisition and accountability  
State how the study intervention and control product will be provided to the investigator. Describe plans about how 
and by [CONTACT_92169], including participation of a drug repository or  pharmacy, and 
plans for disposal of expi[INVESTIGATOR_92162].  
N/A 
9.2. Formulation, Appearance, Packaging, and Labeling  
Describe the formulation, appearance, packaging, and labeling of the study intervention and control product, as 
supplied.  Information in this section can usually be obtained from the IB or the package insert, or device labeling. This 
section should include the name [CONTACT_92174].  
N/A 
 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, [ADDRESS_101719] Storage and Stability  
Describe storage and stability requirements (e.g., protection from light, temperature, humidity) for the study 
intervention and control product.  For studies in which multi -dose vials are utilized, provide additional information 
regarding stabili ty and expi[INVESTIGATOR_92163] (e.g., the seal is broken).  
N/A 
9.4.  Preparation  
Describe the preparation of the study intervention and control product, including any preparation required by [CONTACT_92170]/or study participants.  Include thawing, diluting, mixing, and reconstitution/preparation instructions in this 
section. For devices, include any relevant assembly or use instructions.  
N/A 
 
 
10.  Study Intervention Additional Details  
10.1.  Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomization and Blinding  
This section should contain a description of randomization and blinding procedures (if applicable to the study design).  
It should include a description or a table that describes how study participants will be assigned to study g roups, 
without being so specific that blinding or randomization might be compromised.  Plans for the maintenance of trial 
randomization codes and appropriate blinding for the study should be discussed. The timing and procedures for 
planned and unplanned br eaking of randomization codes should be included.  Include a statement regarding when 
unblinding may occur and who may unblind. Provide the criteria for breaking the study blind or participant code.  
Discuss the circumstances in which the blind would be br oken for an individual or for all participants (e.g., for serious 
adverse evets (SAEs)). Indicate to whom the intentional and unintentional breaking of the blind should be reported.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_92164]+ group Intervention group  and mHealth+ individual intervention 
group .  
Participants (N= 40) be randomized into t wo groups using a block randomization table to receive behavioral lifestyle 
educational intervention. Everyone will receive a baseline and end of study visits.  
 
We divided our future participants into 4 groups (10 - (group  A):10 - (group  A):10 - (individual  B):10 (individual  B) and 
with the help of computer generated program, we will start our intervention group (Group A - n=20) first followed by 
[CONTACT_92171]  (Group B - n=20) . (see updates dated below)  
 
Participant in mHealth + group intervention  (Group A) you will receive a total of [ADDRESS_101720] month and then bi -weekly classes for month 2 -3, and three monthly 
session in month four , five, and six .  
 
 
 
10.20.2020: we completed up to three face to face group intervention sessions (Group A ) over WebEx due to COVID -
19 restrictions.  
 
10.20.20: we finished our participants (N=20) in the group intervention and due to COVID -[ADDRESS_101721], 10 -20-20, AMD    V   
                              8 10.2.  Study Intervention Compliance  
Define how adherence to the protocol (e.g., administration of study intervention, use of device,) will be assessed, and 
verified (if applicable, e.g., plasma assays, electronic monitoring devices, daily diaries).  
The project is limited because we are enrolling only older adults from the community with T2D who carry a 
smartphone . In addition, given the significant commitment necessary to participate in the group sessions for the 
intervention group  an attrition is an inherent potential issue. We will take several steps to minimize attrition including 
providing reimbursement  and collecting multiple contact [CONTACT_3031] (cell phone, home phone, email addresses) from 
the participants i n order to remind them of the scheduled  group sessions .  We will also provide periodic updates to 
providers to remind them of the study and the importance of their support. The information gained from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_92165] g mHealth tools toward community -dwelling older adults with T2D.  
10.3.  Permitted Concomitant Therapy  
This section should be consistent with the medication restrictions in the inclusion/exclusion criteria previously listed .  
Describe how allowed concomita nt therapy might affect the outcome (e.g., drug -drug interaction, direct effects on the 
study endpoints).  
N/A 
10.4.   
 Rescue Medicine  
List all medications, treatments, and/or procedures that may be provided during the study for “rescue therapy” 
and relevant instructions.  
☒ N/A, no rescue medicine  
 
 
 
 
11.  Study Intervention Discontinuation  
11.1.  Discontinuation of Study Intervention  
Describe the criteria for discontinuing the study intervention (e.g., halting rules), including any monitoring test(s) and 
associated clinical decision point(s). Include reasons for temporary discontinuation of the study intervention (e.g., type 
and quanti ty of adverse events), clearly stating the length of time, if applicable, and describe the data to be collected at 
the time of study intervention discontinuation and approaches for restarting administration of or re -challenging with 
study intervention.   
Participants will be allowed to discontinue from the study ( mHealth+ group Intervention group ) anytime.   
 
11.2.  Continued Follow -up Discontinuation of Study Intervention  
Describe efforts that will be made to continue follow -up of participants who discontinue the study intervention, but 
remain in the study for follow -up, especially for safety and efficacy study endpoints (if applicable).  Reasonable efforts 
must be made to undertake protocol -specified safety follow -up procedures to capture adverse events (AE), serious 
adverse events (SAE), and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]).  
Participants will be allowed to discontinue  from the study ( mHealth+ group Intervention group ) anytime.   
 
 
 
12.  Statistical Considerations  
12.1. Statistical Hypotheses   
State the formal and testable null and alternative hypotheses for primary and key secondary endpoints, specifying the 
type of comparison (e.g., superiority, equivalence or non-inferiority, dose response) and time period for which each 
endpoint will be analyzed.  
Behavioral lifestyle interventions using a smartphone for self-monitoring to  improve frailty measurements, body 
weight, and glycemic control in overweight/obese olde r adults with T2D.  
 
19-019H, Jiwani, Form CT, [ADDRESS_101722] 20 participants in 
the group ( mHealth+ group Intervention group ) are needed. The effect of the intervention  on the change in frailty 
category and/or frailty scores will be used to calculate power and sampl e size estimation for a future, larger study.  
12.3.  Populations for Analyses  
Clearly identify and describe the analysis datasets (e.g., which participants will be included in each).  
The impact of the intervention on frailty status (non -frail, pre -frail, frail) and frailty score (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5) over the 6 -
month period (from baseline to follow -up) will be assessed by [CONTACT_92172] (POCL) model to 
assess the lo g-odds of frailty as an indicator of being exposed to the intervention. The initial POCL model will adjust 
only for the baseline value of frailty status. A subsequent model will adjust for baseline age, sex, ethnic group, BMI, 
and Hba1c, to determine poten tial covariate interactions with the intervention. Continuous secondary outcomes 
including fasting glucose, Hba1c, and BMI will be assessed using linear regression with intervention, baseline frailty, 
sex, and ethnic group as categorical predictor variable s and baseline age, BMI, and Hba1c as continuous predictor 
variables. The categorical outcomes SPPB and PROMIS scores will also be evaluated using the POCL model.  
12.4.  Statistical Analyses    
Include analysis of primary efficacy endpoints, secondary endpoints, safety analyses, and any planned interim analyses  
The impact of the intervention on frailty status (non -frail, pre -frail, frail) and frailty score (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5) over the 6 -
month period (from baseline to follow -up) will be asse ssed by [CONTACT_92172] (POCL) model to 
assess the log -odds of frailty as an indicator of being exposed to the intervention. The initial POCL model will adjust 
only for the baseline value of frailty status. A subsequent model will adjust  for baseline age, sex, ethnic group, BMI, 
and Hba1c, to determine potential covariate interactions with the intervention. Continuous secondary outcomes 
including fasting glucose, Hba1c, and BMI will be assessed using linear regression with intervention, b aseline frailty, 
sex, and ethnic group as categorical predictor variables and baseline age, BMI, and Hba1c as continuous predictor 
variables. The categorical outcomes SPPB and PROMIS scores will also be evaluated using the POCL model. Because 
the POCL mode l is complex and this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], it is not practical or feasible to do a power analysis for the given 
experimental design  but based on the work of Drs. Espi[INVESTIGATOR_92166], we believe at least 20 participants in the group 
(mHealth+ group Intervention group ) are needed. The effect of the intervention  on the change in frailty category and/or 
frailty scores will be used to calculate power and sample size estimation for a future, larger study.  
 