 
 
 
Heart Watch Study: a Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: February 17, 2023  
Page 1 of 24  
 
  
                                    
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
(2016 -1) 
 
 
  
Protocol Title : Heart Watch Study: a Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial   
  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_5951] S. Ross, MD, MHS ; Professor of Medicine (General Medicine) and Public Health 
(Health Policy and Management), 203 -785-2987 , [EMAIL_3370] . 
 
 
Version Date:  February 14, 2023  
 
 
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov  Registration  #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
 
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes all of the necessary information 
needed by [CONTACT_20892] a study meets approval criteria. Read the following instructions 
before proceeding:  
 
1. Use this protocol template for a PI [INVESTIGATOR_79613]. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system Library.  
 
2. If a section or question does not apply to your research study, type “Not Applicable” underneath.  
 
3. Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 24  
 SECTION  I: RESEARCH PLAN 
 
1. Statement of Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.   
 
We plan  to conduct a randomized, controlled trial to determine the impact of the Apple Watch Series 6  on 
both patient -reported outcomes and clinical utilization over 1 year . Our research method will employ a 
patient- centered health data -sharing platform  (called Hugo) for real -world surveillance of outcomes in [ADDRESS_196170] current cardioversion (DCCV) or catheter ablation for treatment of 
atrial fibrillation  or atrial flutter . We will recruit a total of 150 patients  across  3 clinical sites - 60 at Yale -New 
Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , 60 at the Mayo Clinic , and 30 at Duke Health - before they undergo DCCV for  atrial fibrillation  
or atrial flutter  or after they undergo catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation  or atrial flutter . Half of the 
patients will be randomized to receive the Apple Watch Series 6 , while half will receive a control device 
(Withings Move ). Patients will then be queried about specific symptoms related to atrial fibrillation and 
medication adherence monthly for a total of [ADDRESS_196171] -procedure  (6 months)  and also at [ADDRESS_196172] of an innovative digital health technology on real -world patient outcomes . 
 
Specific Aim 1 : To assess the impact of using the Apple Watch ECG and irregular rhythm notification features 
on patient -reported outcomes and clinical utilization after patients receive cardioversion or catheter ablation 
for atrial fibrillation  or atrial flutter.  
 
Specific Aim 2 : To determine the accuracy of the Apple Watch ECG compared to physician  interpretation of  
12-lead ECGs obtained in routine clinical care.   
 
2. Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow- up and data 
analysis activities.  
 The project is expected to be completed no later than June [ADDRESS_196173] -procedure . As batches of patien ts complete the 6 -
month  follow- up duration , we will begin to clean  and review the data  on a rolling basis.  We will examine data 
for 1 year after enrollment.  
 
3. Background:  Describe the background information that led to the plan for this project. Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.  
 The pace of innovation for digital health technologies is accelerating. Many novel technologies employ software as a medical device and enable consumers to access their own health data in previously unimaginable ways. Simultaneously,  the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA) is establishing a nimble, least 
burdensome regulatory framework for such technologies under its Digital Health Innovation Action Plan.
1 2 
For software -based medical devices, the agency has initiated a Software Precertification (Pre -Cert) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]; a key 
element is collecting and interpreting post-market, real -world data about software performance.3 In 
September 2018, FDA cleared 2 software features for the Apple Watch: 1) to detect irregular heart rhythms likely to be atrial fibrillation
4 and 2) to generate a single -lead ECG.5 However, several risks were identified, 
including: misinterpretation and/or over -reliance on the device, false negatives, and false positives; mitigation 
strategies were also identified.[ADDRESS_196174] -market randomized, controlled trial to understand the safety 
and effectiveness of the Apple Watch ECG and irregular rhythm notification features on patient- reported 
outcomes and clinical utilization in real -world patients receiving car dioversion or catheter ablation for atrial 
fibrillation  or atrial flutter. Patients receiving cardioversion  or catheter ablation  for atrial fibrillation or atrial 
flutter  will be randomized to receive the Apple Watch Series 6  or the Withings Move used as a  control device . 
Using a patient- centered health data -sharing platform  for data collection and aggregation, we will monitor 
patient quality of life for 12 months. We will also examine additional treatment for atrial tachyarrhythmias  
and how clinical utilization differs between the 2 groups. Finally, we will assess the Apple Watch’s ability to serve as a tool for post -market ECG surveillance monitoring by [CONTACT_168119] 12 -lead ECGs obtained in routine clinical care. This study is funded by [CONTACT_168120] (NESTcc) and advances the use of real -world 
data generation in peoples’ home environments and the use of routinely collected clinical data to support safety and effectiveness evaluations.  Of note, we will be leveraging infrastructure from a recently -completed study for this work. We recently 
completed a 60 -patient study conducted by [CONTACT_168121] -Mayo Clinic FDA Center for Excellence in Regulatory 
Science and Innovation, of which 30 patients wer e enrolled at Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (IRB Protocol 
#[PHONE_3675]), YNHH Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_5951] S. Ross, MD, MHS, which pi[INVESTIGATOR_168107] H ealth platform for post- market surveillance of patients after either catheter -base d atrial 
fibrillation ablation or bariatric surgery. Thirty additional patients were enrolled at Mayo Clinic.  
 
 
 
4. Research Plan:  Summarize t he study design and research procedures  using non- technical language that can 
be readily understood by [CONTACT_20894]. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits specifying their individual times 
and lengths . Describe the setting in which the research will take place.  
 
Overall Study Design  
This will be a prospective multi- center, randomized, controlled trial of [ADDRESS_196175] of individual use of the Apple Watch on patient -reported and clinical outcomes at 1 year . Sixty of 
these patients will be recruited at Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  This sample size was calculated assuming 80% 
power to detect an effect size of 8.8 on the AFEQT questionnaire (slightly higher than the minimal clinically important difference of 5), with alpha 0.05. Additionally, we will validate Apple Watch Series 6  ECG readings 
when a simultaneous 12 -lead ECG is obtained in clinical practice; the purpose of this validation is to assess the 
Apple Watch’s ability to serve as a heart rate and ECG monitoring tool that may be used for periodic rhythm checks in post -marke t surveillance of other medical products (such as catheters used for atrial fibrillation 
ablation or antiarrhythmic medications).  
 
 
Enrollment Procedure  
As part of routine practice, outpatients who are planned to undergo cardioversion for atrial fibrillation  or 
atrial flutter  at Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168108]. At this time the scheduler will tell the patient he/she may be  eligible 
for a study examining the impact of using a wearable digital health device following cardioversion and the n 
Page [ADDRESS_196176] in the study ( Please see a ppendix  for script ). Should they express interest, the schedule r 
will let them know that a Research Associate (RA) may  reach out to them in advance of their procedure to 
discuss the study in further detail. The scheduler will then provide the RA with the patient’s preferred contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  
 
Once the patient has expressed interest in the study, the RA will open the patient’ s chart to ensure that the 
patient has a history of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter before calling the patient. If there is not a confirmed 
diagnosis in the chart,  the RA will confirm with a study clinician. The RA will attempt to contact [CONTACT_168122]. The RA will then use a checklist to confirm the patient meets all of the 
eligibility criteria (see below) , including asking if  they receive primary and cardiology care in the Yale -New 
Haven Health System. If  the patient does not receive primary care in the Yale -New Haven Health System, the 
RA will ask the patient a) where they receive primary care and b) if they have a patient portal account for that 
provider. If the patient has a portal account for their primary care provider  and that provider  uses an Epic - or 
Cerner -based EHR , they are eligible for this study. If they do not, they will be considered ineligible. The RA will 
then review the process with the patient and inform him/her that participation is optional but if they would 
like to learn more  and possibly enroll , they should arrive 60 min utes before their scheduled arrival time to 
meet and go through the consent and enrollment process. The RA will also ask the patient to bring his/her  
smartphone and YNHH MyChart login information (if they have it) and any phone account passwords with them that day, as well as advising them to update their device  to the latest iO S if they have not done so 
already. The RA will be able to provide guidan ce on updating the device , if necessary.  
 A member of the clinical team may also introduce the study to eligible patients. If the patient expresses interest in being contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], a member of the office staff will provide the RA with the patient’s preferred contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 
If a member of the clinical team identifies a patient that has been admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168109] [ADDRESS_196177] to confirm the patient meets all of the eligibility criteria (see below). The RA will then review the s tudy  with the patient and inform him/her 
that participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll the RA will walk through the consent and enrollment process with them. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the device, if necessary. 
 
On the day of  the anticipated cardioversion , or the day prior for inpatients , the RA will then review the study 
consent form and discuss the specifics of the study described below. If, after reviewing, the patient agrees to the study, then he/she will be asked to sign the digital consent and authorization form for YNHH in the Hugo  
platform .  
 Separately, patients undergoing catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter will be informed about study eligibility by [CONTACT_9682]. As with cardioversion patients, the RA will attempt to contact [CONTACT_168123]. The RA will then use a checklist to confirm the patient meets all of 
the eligibility criteria (see below) , including asking if they receive primary and cardiology care in the Yale -New 
Haven Health System. If the patient does not receive primary  care in the Yale -New Haven Health System, the 
RA will ask the patient a) where they receive primary care and b) if they have a patient portal account for that 
provider. If the patient has a portal account for their primary care provider and that provider uses an Epic - or 
Cerner -based EHR, they are eligible for this study. If they do not, they will be considered ineligible. The RA will 
then review the process with the patient and inform him/her that participation is optional but if they would 
like to learn more and possibly enroll, they  will have the option after their ablation, on the first post-
Page 5 of 24  
 procedure day. If the patient is interested and eligible, the RA will ask the patient to bring his/her smartphone 
and YNHH MyChart login information (if they have it) and any phone account passwords with them that day, 
as well as advising them to update their device to the latest iOS if they have not done so already.  On the first 
post -procedural day, patients will be approached by [CONTACT_168124]. The RA will use a checkl ist to confirm the patient meets all of  
the eligibility criteria (see below). The RA will then review the s tudy  with the patient and inform him/her that 
participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll the RA will walk through the 
consent and enrollment process with them. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the devi ce, if 
necessary.  
 
We will ensure that the patient has a full and clear understanding that enrollment will not in any way impact his/her care nor alter the standard post- procedure follow -up visits. As a part of the consent process, the RA 
will also make clear to the patient that this study will not replace their normal medical care and advise 
him/her that should they begin having new or worrying symptoms to contact [CONTACT_168125], exactly as the patient would have done if he/she were not enrolled in our study. During 
enrollment the patient will also confirm their preferred contact [CONTACT_168126]- up period. Patients can indicate if they prefer text, email, and/ or phone calls . In 
addition to their preferred method, we will ask them if they would be willing to be contact[CONTACT_168127] . Should they indicate text or phone calls, the RA will offer to enter or suggest that the  patient enter, 
the RA’s Yale office number into their contact [CONTACT_168128].  
 
The RA will then assist the patient in linking his/her YNHH electronic health records to the Hugo platform . This 
linkage  enables the patient to shar e all of the  data available as part of the ir electronic health record data  via 
their  patient portal , with our researcher  team . Because the patient- centered health data -sharing platform  
(Hugo) obtains patient data through patient portals, all patients who connect will need a YNHH MyChart account. The RA will assist the patients in creating a MyChart account if they do not already have one . Once 
the patient has completed the MyChart sign- up process, then the RA will assist the patient in creating and 
activating an account for the mobile health platform, Hugo, on either the study laptop or on  the patient’s 
personal smartphon e depending on the patient’s  preference . Some patients may need to reset their MyChart 
password, and the RA will help them to do so. The RA will also assist the patient in connecting any other health systems found in the Hugo platform  where they have received care by [CONTACT_168129] ; for patients who receive primary care outside of YNHH but 
within an Epic - or Cerner -based electronic health record, we will ensure that patients connect data from that 
health system . Patients will receive a digital version of the [ADDRESS_196178] on QualiTy -of-life 
(AFEQT) questionnaire via email or text message (per patient preference) ; this questionnaire assesses 
symptoms , daily activities, treatment concern, and satisfaction.  
 
At this time, the patient will be randomized 1:1 to the Apple Watch or control ( Withings ) arm using a  central  
randomization algorithm. Patients randomized to the former will receive an Apple Watch Series 6  (WiFi/GPS)  
or a Withings Move . For Apple Watch patients, an Apple HealthKit account  will be  set up and linked to the 
Hugo platform ; they will also need to install the Hugo App for iPhones which  will enable receipt of Apple 
Watch -related data . Patients randomized to a Withings Move will be assisted in setting up a Withings Health 
Mate  account , which will be link ed to the Hugo platform. While setting up the Apple Watch application, RAs 
will assist patients in answering that they have not been previously diagnosed with atrial fibrillation (as enrichment of the study population with people likely to have recurrent atr ial fibrillation and/or atrial flutter 
is necessary to understand how this device functions in people diagnosed with atrial fibrillation  and/or atrial 
flutter ).  
Page [ADDRESS_196179] any of the following co -morbidities: arrhythmias other than atrial fibrillation or atrial 
flutter (and ask them to report which one(s), if any), hypertension, diabetes mellitus, high cholesterol, sleep 
apnea, coronary artery disease  (including myocardial infarction/heart attack) , heart failure, stroke,  weak or 
failing kidneys, any liver condition, cancer, asthma, emphyse ma, depression , PTSD , or g eneralized anxiety 
disorder . 
 For patients undergoing cardioversion, the RA will attempt to complete all of  the enrollment steps before the 
patient's procedure  (cardioversion) . Review of and signing of the consent will always be required prior to the 
procedure. In order to not impact the clinical workflow, some enrollment procedures may be complete d post -
operatively , if necessary , due to time constraints.  If any part of enrollment needs to be completed post -
procedure , the RA will always wait a minimum of [ADDRESS_196180] items such as syncing the 
devices to the phone and/or connecting any portal to Hugo, to be completed after the procedure. The 
baseline survey will be prioritized to be completed , after informed consent, pre- procedure.   
 For patients who had undergone catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter, all enrollment procedures will occur only on the first post- procedural day, when the patient is generally recovering and 
awaiting discharge.   
 Of note, even though the Apple Watch Series 6  device is not intended for use in individuals previously 
diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, the ECG feature is not recommended for users with arrhythmias except  for 
atrial fibrillation and sinus rhythm (since the software can only distinguish these two heart rhythms)
5. People 
with atrial fibrillation may be more likely to purchase this device than others to monitor their rhythm and correlate with symptoms. Indeed, in the Apple Heart Study, nearly 20% of  first study visit participants 
reported a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation /flutter  before enrollment, even though a history of atrial fibrillation 
was an exclusion criterion.
[ADDRESS_196181] enrolled patients with clinical morbidities to 
examine outcomes; such studies have instead focused on healthy volunteers.[ADDRESS_196182] of the Apple Watch on patient- reported outcomes and 
clinical utilization requires an enriched population; otherwise, study duration would be many years with a population size multiple s larger than our proposal, resulting in significant cost and delays in generating much -
needed evidence.   
 
For patients undergoing cardioversion, i f there is time before the cardioversion and always a fter the 
cardioversion, we will ask the patient to obtain an ECG using the Apple Watch Series 6  (and the RA will assist 
the patient if needed) , with the 10-second  interval that has the best resolution and is free from artifact for 
comparison to the interpretation of a 12-lead ECG obtained for clinical care  (as these are 10 seconds long) . If 
possible, we will also ask the patient to take a SpO2 reading while the RA is present and they are connected to 
a standard, medical grade  pulse oximeter  in the clinic al setting .  
 A separate survey , both for patients undergoing cardioversion and who received catheter ablation for atrial 
fibrillation or flutter,  will be sent at enrollment asking patients, only with the help of study staff, to enter both 
their Apple Watch pulse oximeter reading and the reading taken using a medical grade SpO2 monitor.  
Page [ADDRESS_196183] the total time (minutes) for enrollment of  each patient, including: device and account 
setup, in -person consenting, baseline survey  (if the RA is present) , ECG measurement (if performed) and 
SpO2 measurement  (for Apple Watch patients) . The RA will record a total time, and segment the times into 
discrete enrollment steps, if possible. The RA will not record time that the RA is not with the patient (for example, when the patient is undergoing cardioversion).  The RA will also record enrollme nt type (inpatient or 
outpatient , with all patients undergoing catheter ablation considered inpatients ) within Hugo. After 
enrollment, p atients will also receive a follow- up email that contains their consent form  as well as  to again 
provide contact [CONTACT_168130] . 
 
If a patient refuses to participate, then we will note the number of people who refused. If the patient is agreeable, we will then administer a short questionnaire to understand his/her rationale for not participating in the study, to understand potential reasons for non- participation. Please see Appendix for questionnaire.  
 
If for any reason, portal and/or device connections cannot be completed at the time of enrollment (i.e., there is not enough time to complete, patient does not have their passwords with them, etc.), the RA will follow up with the patient via phone to finis h the connections. Up to [ADDRESS_196184] as well as patient -generated data from the Apple Watch  and Apple HealthKit  
(including irregular rhythm notifications, high heart rates, low heart rates , 
and other data, which may 
include SpO2 ), as well as from  the Health Mate platform  for patients randomized to Withings Move, into our 
researcher database using the Hugo platform. For the AFEQT questionnaire, patients will receive this via secure email or text message link monthly for [ADDRESS_196185] 6 months, i f 
they do not respond within 24 hours, they will receive a reminder. If they do not respond within 48 hours, they will receive a second reminder. Should there still be no response after an additional 48 hours, the RA will 
reach out to the patient via phone to follow-up to ask the patient to complete the unanswered survey.  
 A weekly automated  reminder (text  or email – based on the patient’s preference ) will be sent from Hugo, 
reminding patients to wear and sync their device. If no data are received, the RA will reach out to the patient 
via phone to follow- up. RAs will record if they successfully reach patients and if reasons for lack of data are 
identified . 
Page 8 of 24  
  
Additionally, patients in the control (Withings Move ) arm will receive a small  stipend  in addition to the 
Withings Move for completion of PROMs (patients in the Apple Watch arm will have received an Apple 
Watch, which we will explain comes with the expectation of responses to monthly PROMs, which would not 
be expected to take more than 5 -10 minutes). We will also ask patients to obtain a final Apple Watch ECG at 6 
months.  Patients will be asked to share all of their Apple Watch -obtained ECG s with the research team by 
[CONTACT_168131] [EMAIL_3371].  which has been created specifically for  this study.  For patients 
randomized to the Apple Watch, we will also send them a reminder at the end of the [ADDRESS_196186] obtained on their device. We will also attempt to obtain ECGs directly through a 
connection between Hugo and Apple.  
 
If patients choose to share other data, such as by [CONTACT_168132], through the Hugo 
platform that will be noted in our study  and those data will be made available for analyses .  
 
If a patient reaches out to any member of the study team to withdraw from this study, we will ask if he/she 
would be willing to share why they have decided to withdraw. If they  are willing to share, we will document 
that reason.  
 
Analytic Plan  
Baseline characteristics to be collected will be patient age , sex, location of  primary care , location of primary 
cardiac care , and  the comorbidities mentioned above . At baseline , patients will also be qu eried about their 
likelihood to use personal digital devices for health care purposes outside of this study, including if they have 
previously used a personal digital device and if they have previously used a personal digital device for 
cardiovascular monitoring . 
 
Primary Outcome: Difference in the Atrial Fibrillation Effect on QualiTy -of-life (AFEQT) questionnaire9 global score 
at 6 months compared to baseline  
 Secondary Clinical Outcomes  
1. Change within individual domains of AFEQT questionnaire (symptoms, daily activities, treatment concern, and treatment satisfaction) monthly (at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 months  as well as at 12 months ) 
2. Additional clinical treatment for atrial fibrillation  or flutter  at 6 and 12  months: a composite outcome of 
rhythm control intervention, which is defined as at least one additional cardioversion, initiation of antiarrhythmic medical therapy, dose escalation of antiarrhythmic medication, change to another 
antiarrhythmic medication,  or ablation for atrial fibrillation  or flutter . The medication data will be 
obtained primarily from electronic health record data.  
3. Acute care use at 6 and 12 months: emergency department visits, observation stays, all hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] 
4. Outpatient care use at 6 and 12 months: outpatient primary care visits, outpatient cardiology or cardiac 
electrophysiology visits, and scheduled telephone encounters.  
5. Rhythm -related diagnostic testing  at 6 and 12 months : total ECGs and total outpatient heart rhythm 
monitors 
6. Anticoagulation persistence: through adopting the Brief Medication Questionnaire and asking patients if they have taken their anticoagulant, and for how many days in the past 1 week (monthly at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 months  as well as at 12 months ) 
 For the primary outcome, we will calculate the difference in the AFEQT global questionnaire score at baseline and [ADDRESS_196187] s will be used to review ECG tracings . We 
will also trend patients’ monthly responses about anticoagulation adherence.  
 The secondary outcomes for accuracy of Apple Watch Software Features that will be compared are a 
comparison of the heart rhythm (identical to 12 -lead ECG or different), rate (difference in beats per minute), 
and intervals: PR, QRS, and QT interval (difference in milliseconds) between what is assessed by [CONTACT_168133] 12 -lead ECGs during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168110]- up. This will be a blinded 
independent assessment of the Apple Watch ECG, and we will calculate both inter -observer re liability (among 
two reading cardiologists of Apple Watch ECGs), as well as intra -observer reliability.   
 
As an exploratory outcome, we will aim to assess differences between SpO2 from the Apple Watch and 
medical grade readings .  
 
The metrics we plan to  collect are as follows:  
 
A. Enrollment -related  
• Number of people asked for study participation and number enrolled  
• Among patients who decline enrollment, if willing, the reason for declining  
 B. PROM -related (for all  PROMs)  
• Proportion  of items completed  
• Content of PROM responses  
 C. Personal Digital  Device -related  
• Number of patients who obtain  Apple Watch  ECGs over the study period , and the 
number of ECGs obtained  
• Number of patients who receive an irregular rhythm notification during the study period, 
and the number of irregular rhythm notifications per patient 
• Data obtained from Apple HealthKit and Withings Move  
 
 
As each patient completes [ADDRESS_196188] will clean and curate the data made available through the Hugo platform.  
 
Finally, at the official end of the  study (i.e. at [ADDRESS_196189] -procedure), study participants will receive a 
close -out questionnaire  (see below ) to assess occurrence of atrial fibrillation /atrial flutter , quality of life, 
anticoagulation medications, and device usage . 
 
 
4. Genetic Testing    N/A ☒ 
 
5. Subject Population: Provide a detailed description of the types of human subjects who will be recruited into 
this study.  
 We will recruit a total of [ADDRESS_196190] classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects that will be specifically recruited  for 
enrollment in the research project.  Will subjects who may require additional safeguards or other 
considerations be enrolled in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring special 
safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.  
 Pregnant women or females of childbearing potential have the potential of being enrolled in this study but will not be specifically recruited for enrollment preferentially over other patients. We anticipate that this study presents minimal risk to pregnant  women.  
 
 
☐Children    ☐ Healthy    ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus  
☐Non- English Speaking   ☐ Prisoners    ☐Economically disadvantaged persons  
☐Decisionally Impaired   ☐ Employees    ☐Pregnant women and/or fetuses  
☐Yale Students    ☐ Females of childbearing potential 
 NOTE: Is this research proposal designed to enroll children who are wards of the state as potential subjects? 
Yes ☐  No ☒  
 
7. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : What are the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or  exclusion?  
Inclusion criteria:  
• Age >22  
• English -speaking  
• Planned for direct current cardioversion for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter , as noted by [CONTACT_168134]  
• Post- procedure day 1 after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter  
• Participant is willing and able to read and sign consent and participate in study 
• Participant lives independently and does not require continuous care  
• Participant has an email account (or is willing to create one)  
• Participant has a compatible smartphone (iPhone 6s or later)  
• Participant is willing to wear only the device they are randomized to receive for the study period for as many hours during the day as they are able, except for time spent charging the device or in 
environments that may be suboptimal for the device  
• Participant is willing to use the Hugo mobile health platform and Apple Watch Series 6  or 
Withings 
Move  
• Participant has cardiology care at YNHH, Duke Health, or Mayo Clinic  and primary care in a health 
system with a patient portal 
 
 
8. How will eligibility  be determined, and by [CONTACT_20898]?  
 
To be eligible , patients must meet the  inclusion criteria  listed  above. A checklist will be used by [CONTACT_168135] (RA) to determine if the patient is eligible for this study.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_196191] in the study , the RA  will review the patient’s 
chart to confirm they have a history of a trial fibrillation or atrial flutter before contact [CONTACT_5713] . The RA 
will confir m that the patient meets  all the eligibility requirements and discuss the specifics of the study 
described above.  For inpatients, i f a member of the clinical team identifies a patient that has been admitted 
to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168111] [ADDRESS_196192], and usually planned for discharge , and eligibility will be 
confirmed prior to enrollment . 
 
9. Risks:  Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks to subject privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with subjects participating in the research.  
 The risk to patient privacy is no different with this study than it is with any other study that securely collects and appropriately stores personally identifiable information or protected health information.  
The Hugo platform , like many other personal health records, is not a covered entity; therefore, the HIPAA 
privacy rule does not apply to this platform. The Hugo Health platform does take all necessary precautions, 
including industry -standard encryption, to minimize privacy and security risks to personally identifiable 
information stored on behalf of study participants. Hugo Health makes publicly available its Security 
Statement ( https://hugo.health/security ), its Privacy Notice ( https://hugo.health/privacy -policy
), and Terms of 
Service ( http://hugo.health/terms -of-service ) 
 Participants will undergo the  possible  inconvenience of filling out electronic  patient- reported outcome 
measure surveys , which should take no more than [ADDRESS_196193] been cleared by [CONTACT_168136] a de novo classification  device, the  FDA’s approval letter noted multiple identified risks to health, 
which were:  
Poor quality ECG signal resulting in failure to detect arrhythmia; misinterpretation and/or over -reliance on the 
device  output, leading to: failure to seek treatment despi[INVESTIGATOR_168112]/or discontin uing or 
modifying treatment for chronic heart conditions; false -negative  resulting in failure to identify arrhythmia and 
delay of further evaluation or treatment; and  false -positive  resulting in additional unnecessary medical 
procedures.
[ADDRESS_196194] their 
regular care plans . 
 
10. Minimizing Risks:  Describe the manner in which the above -mentioned risks will be minimized.  
 All patient data will be collected, handled, and stored according to the most rigorous accepted standards. Staff involved in the study will be appropriately trained to maximize data security and technical systems will meet or exceed requirements imposed by  [CONTACT_2373]. Sensitive information will always be encrypted in transit and at rest.   
Page 12 of 24  
  
11. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) based 
on the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the 
risk to subjects.) 
 a.  What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating in this study? Minimal risk to patients  
b. If children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the children participating in this study? No children will be involved in this study  
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan . Examples of DSMPs are   
available here  
http://your.yale.edu/policies -procedures/forms/420 -fr-01-data- and-safety -
monitoring -plans -templates  f or 
i. Minimal risk  
ii. Greater than minimal  
The principal investigator s (PI) are responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol compliance, and 
conducting the safety reviews at the specified frequency regularly. During the review process the PIs will 
evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.  
 The PIs or the Institutional Review Board (IRB)  have the authority  to stop or suspend the study or require 
modifications.  
 
PROMs and syncable data received will not be reviewed by [CONTACT_33365], and this fact will be made clear to study participants at enrollment.  Patients will be informed that symptoms reported in  this study are not being 
monitored or evaluated in real -time and that any adverse or severe symptoms should be reported directly to 
their physician (s), or emergency room physicians  as they would have in the normal course of their care . 
 
The study coordinators will regularly monitor the status of the portal data (EHR/Apple Watch /Withings)  
coming into the Hugo platform using the Hugo study dashboard only available to research staff listed on the IRB. Within this dashboard, the research staff will be able to review the connection status of all portals connected to each patient’s Hugo account . Should a connectivity issue be noticed by [CONTACT_3647], they will 
note the connection issue reported by [CONTACT_168137], or if multiple participants are experiencing the same problem. The research staff will then follow up directly 
with the Hugo support team.  
 Once the source of the issue is identified, research staff will follow up with the affected patients as needed to 
correct the issue in a timely fashion.  
 
Research staff will also keep track of any technical issues reported by [CONTACT_168138]- up period. If 
the technical issues are not able to be resolved by [CONTACT_16133], or if multiple patients report the same problem, the research staff w ill forward the issue to the Hugo Health support team to identify and correct the 
issue and in order to follow -up with those patients affected.  
 
d. For multi- site studies for which the Yale PI [INVESTIGATOR_22422] : 
i. How will adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed?   
ii. What provisions are in place for management of interim results?   
iii. What will the multi -site process be for protocol modifications?   
 
Page 13 of 24  
  
 
12. Statistical Considerations:  Describe the statistical analyses that support the study design.  
 
All analyses will be intention -to-treat. For the primary outcome, we will calculate the difference in the AFEQT 
global questionnaire score at baseline and 6 months for patients randomized to the Apple Watch and patients randomized to the Withings Move  arm.  
 The secondary clinical
 utilization outcomes will also be compared between the two groups using an intent- to-
treat approach. Hugo  will be the primary mechanism used to obtain clinical outcomes  and clinical utilization , with 
comparisons between groups. We will also trend patients’ monthly responses about anticoagulation adherence.  
In an additional secondary analysis , we will examine all of  the outcomes at 12 months.  
 For the secondary outcomes for accuracy of Apple Watch Software Features that will be compared are a 
comparison of the heart rhythm (identical to 12 -lead ECG or different), rate (difference in beats per minute), and 
PR, QRS, and QT interval s (difference in milliseconds) between what is assessed by [CONTACT_168139] [ADDRESS_196195],  medical grade pulse oximeter  
 
This sample size was calculated assuming 80% power to detect an effect size of 8.8 on the AFEQT questionnaire 
(slightly higher than the minimal clinically important difference of 5), with alpha 0.05.   
  
SECTION  II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , RADIOTRACERS , PLACEBOS  AND DEVICES  
 
 If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, check off  N/A and delete the rest of the section.  
 
A.  RADIOTRACERS  ☒N/A 
 
B.  DEVICES  ☐N/A 
 
1. Are there any investigational devices used or investigational procedures performed at Yale -New Haven 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (YNHH) (e.g., in the YNHH Operating Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular Center)?   ☐Yes   ☒No    
 
 If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements : 
 
A YNHH New Product/Trial Request Form must be completed via EPIC: Pull down the Tools tab in the EPIC Banner, 
Click on Lawson, Click on “Add new” under the New Technology Request Summary and fill out the forms 
requested including the “Initial Request Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary”, and attach any other pertinent 
docu ments. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request ;   AND  
 
Your request must be reviewed and approved in writing  by [CONTACT_22454]/subjects may be scheduled to receive the investigational device or investigational procedure. 
 
2. Background Information : Provide a description of previous human use, known risks, and any other factors 
that might influence risks. If this is the first time this device is being used in humans, include relevant data on animal models.  
Page 14 of 24  
  
In September 2018, FDA cleared 2 software features for the Apple Watch: 1) to detect irregular heart rhythms likely to be atrial fibrillation
4 and 2) to generate a single -lead ECG.5 Both of these features were classified as 
Class II. Several risks were identified, including: misinterpretation and/or over -reliance on the device, false 
negatives, and false positives; mitigation strategies were also identified.4 5 Of note, the Apple Watch Series 6  
device is not intended for use in individuals under the age of 22 or those previously diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, and the ECG feature is not recommended for users with arrhythmias except  for atrial fibrillation 
and sinus rhythm (since the software can only distinguish these two heart rhythms)
5. People with atrial 
fibrillation may be more likely to purchase this device than others to monitor their rhythm and correlate with symptoms. Indeed, in the Apple Heart Study, nearly 20% of first study visit participants reported a diagnosis of atrial fibr illation/flutter before enrollment, even though a history of atrial fibrillation was an exclusion 
criterion.
[ADDRESS_196196], the  Withings Move  has been deemed a ‘Low -Risk Device’ by [CONTACT_1622]10 and 
is therefore not deemed  a medical grade  device.   
 
3. Source:   
a) Identify the source of the device to be used.  
All Apple Watch Series 6  used in this study will be purchased directly from Apple.  Withings Move  
devices will be purchased directly from Withings . 
 
b) Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? ☒Yes   ☐No     
  
4. Investigational device accountability :  State how the PI, or named designee, ensures that an investigational 
device is used only in accordance with the research protocol approved by [CONTACT_20907], and maintains control of the investigational device as follows:  
 
a) Maintains appropriate records, including receipt of shipment, inventory at the site, dispensation or use by [CONTACT_20908], and final disposition and/or the return of the investigational device (or other disposal if applicable): N/a  
b) Documents pertinent information assigned to the investigational device (e.g., date, quantity, batch or serial number, expi[INVESTIGATOR_22429], and unique code number): N/a 
c) Stores the investigational device according to the manufacturer's recommendations with respect to temperature, humidity, lighting, and other environmental considerations: N/a  
d) Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area with limited access in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements: N/a  
e) Distributes the investigational device to subjects enrolled in the IRB -approved protocol: N/a 
 
SECTION  III: RECRUITMENT /CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES   
1. Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of subjects:   
a. Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol:  60 Participants  
b. If this is a multi- site study, give the total number of subjects targeted across all sites : 150 Participants  
 
Page 15 of 24  
 2. Indicate recruitment methods below.   Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_20881]. 
☐ Flyers  ☐ Internet/web postings  ☐ Radio  
☐ Posters  ☐ Mass email solicitation  ☐ Telephone  
☐ Letter  ☐ Departmental/Center website  ☐ Television  
☐ Medical record review*  ☐ Departmental/Center research boards  ☐ Newspaper  
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters  ☐ Web -based clinical trial registries  ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov  
☐ YCCI Recruitment database  ☐ Social Media (Twitter/Facebook):   
☒ Other: The scheduler /clinical care 
team for cardioversions will identif y 
patients scheduled to undergo  
cardioversion for atrial fibrillation  or 
atrial flutter  and tell them about the 
study when confirming their 
procedure  and ask if they have an 
iPhone  6s or later . If the patient 
meets these enrollment criteria and 
expresses interest in the study, a research associate  may  reach out to 
further screen and then discuss 
meeting to complete enrollment. 
Clinicians may also identify p atients 
admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168113] [ADDRESS_196197] -procedural 
day.   
   
* Requests for medical records should be made through JDAT as described at  
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx  
 
3.  Recruitment Procedures:   
a. Describe how potential subjects will be identified.   
Patients will be identified prior to  cardioversion for atrial fibrillation  or atrial flutter  when being called with a 
reminder about  their scheduled procedure  or by a study clinician upon admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . Similarly, 
Page [ADDRESS_196198] in the study, a research associate  will open the patient’s chart to ensure that the 
patient has a history of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter before calling the patient. If there is not a confirmed diagnosis in the chart, the RA will confirm with a study clinician.  If a diagnosis is confirmed, the RA will then 
reach out to the patient to further screen  for inclusion criteria , discuss  the study in more detail , and to 
determine a time to  meet to complet e enrollment before their procedure . 
 
A member of the clinical team may also introduce the study to eligible patients. If the patient expresses 
interest in being contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], a member of the office staff will provide the RA with the patient’s preferred 
contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 
If a member of the clinical team identifies a patient that has been admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168109] [ADDRESS_196199] to confirm the patient meets all of the eligibility criteria (see below). The RA will then review the process with the patient and inform him/her tha t 
participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll the RA will walk through the 
consent and enrollment process with them. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the device, if 
necessary.  
 
For patients undergoing catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter, a member of the clinical team 
will introduce the study to eligible patients.  
 
c. Who is recruiting potential subjects?  
Postgraduate associates Emanuela Pi[INVESTIGATOR_168114].  
  
4. Assessment of Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:  
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship with any 
potential subject?  
☐Yes, all subjects  
☒Yes, some of the subjects  
☐No  
 If yes, describe the nature of this relationship.   
It is possible that Dr s. Akar , Hummel, or Freeman , co-investigators of this study,  may have treated patients  at 
some point  prior to their procedure. N either of the se physicians  would directly enroll the patient in the study , 
and care would not be impacted in any way if a patient consents or does not consent to participation in the study.  
 
5. Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization:  (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either the 
entire study or for recruitment purposes only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email 
screen, you must request a HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.)  
Choose one:  
Page 17 of 24  
 ☐ For entire study  
☒ For recruitment /screening  purposes only   
☐ For inclusion of non -English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there is no translated HIPAA 
research authorization form  available on the University’s HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.  
 
i. Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data:  For patients planned for cardioversion, w e would aim to ensure that out patients have a history 
of atrial fibrillation  or atrial flutter prior to making them come in early and complete steps that would 
lead to their likely enrollment in this study . Only those outpatients  that express interest in the study 
to the scheduler would have their record review ed. 
 
ii. If requesting a waiver of signed  authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data : For patients planned for cardioversion, 
the aim would be to ensure the patient meets the inclusion criteria prior to asking them to come in 
early before their procedure. Therefore we would not yet have had the opportunity to ask them to sign an authorization.  
 
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person or entity other than those listed in this application, except 
as required by [CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by [CONTACT_2717].  
 
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA -Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by [CONTACT_20911], purpose, date, recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840], 
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.  
 
6. Process of Consent/Assent:  Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure subjects’ independent decision -making.  
 
As part of routine practice, patients who are planned to undergo outpatient cardioversion for atrial fibrillation 
or atrial flutter at Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168115]. At this time the scheduler will tell the patient he/she may 
be eligible for a study examining the impact of using a wearable digital health device following cardioversion 
and the n ask about interest in the study ( Please see a ppendix  for script ). Should they express interest, the 
scheduler will let them know that if they are eligible  a Research Associate (RA) will reach out to them in 
advance of their procedure to discuss the study in further detail. The scheduler will then provide the RA with the patient’s preferred contact [CONTACT_3031].   Once the patient has expressed interest in the study, the RA will open the patient’s chart to ensure that the patient has a history of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter before calling the patient. If there is not a confirmed diagnosis in the chart, the RA will confirm with a study clinician. If deemed eligible, the RA will then attempt 
to contact [CONTACT_168140]. The RA will then use a checklist to confirm the patient meets all of the eligibility criteria , including co nfirming that they receive primary and cardiology care 
in the Yale -New Haven Health System. If the patient does not receive primary care in the Yale -New Haven 
Health System, the RA will ask the patient a) where they receive primary care and b) if they have  a patient 
portal account for that provider. If the patient has a portal account for their primary care provider and that 
Page 18 of 24  
 provider uses an Epic - or Cerner -based EHR, they are eligible for this study. If they do not, they will be 
considered ineligible. . The RA will then review the process with the patient and inform him/her that 
participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll, they should arrive 6 0 minutes 
before their scheduled arrival time to meet and go through the consent and enrollment process. The RA will 
also ask the patient to bring his/her smartphone and YNHH MyChart login information  (if they have it) and 
any phone account passwords with them that day, as well as advising them to update their device to the 
latest iOS, if they have not done so already. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the device , if 
necessary.  
 
A member of the clinical team may also introduce the study to eligible patients. If the patient expresses interest in being contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], a member of the office staff will provide the RA with the patient’s preferred contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 
If a member of the clinical team identifies a patient that has been admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_168116] [ADDRESS_196200] to confirm the patient meets all of the eligibility 
criteria (see below). The RA will then review the process with the patient and inform him/her tha t 
participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll the RA will walk through the consent and enrollment process with them. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the device, if 
necessary.  
 
On the day of the anticipated cardioversion , and including the day prior for inpatients, the RA will then review 
the study consent form and discuss the specifics of the study described below. If, after reviewing, the patient agrees to the study, then he/she will be asked to sign the digital consent and authorization form in the Hugo 
platform . We will ensure that the patient has a full and clear understanding that enrollment will not in any 
way impact his/her care nor alter the standard post- procedure follow -up visits. As a part of the consent 
process, the RA will also make clear to the patient that this study will not replace their normal medical care 
and advise him/her that should they begin having new or worrying symptoms to contact [CONTACT_168141], exactly as the patient would have done if he/she were not enrolled in our study. 
During enrollment the patient will also confirm their preferred contact [CONTACT_168142] -up period. Pat ients can indicate if they prefer text, email, and/or phone calls. 
In addition to their preferred method, we will ask them if they would be willing to be contact[CONTACT_168127]. Should they indicate text or phone calls, the RA will offer to enter or su ggest that the patient enter, 
the RA's Yale office number into their contact [CONTACT_168128].  
 
Separately, patients undergoing catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter will be informed about 
study eligibility by [CONTACT_9682]. As with cardioversion patients, the RA will attempt to contact [CONTACT_168123]. The RA will then use a checklist to confirm the patient meets all of the eligibility criteria (see below) , including asking if they receive primary and cardiology care in the Yale -New 
Haven Health System. If the patient does not receive primary  care in the Yale -New Haven Health System, the 
RA will ask the patient a) where they receive primary care and b) if they have a patient portal account for that provider. If the patient has a portal account for their primary care provider and that provider uses an Epic - or 
Cerner -based EHR, they are eligible for this study. If they do not, they will be considered ineligible. The RA will 
then review the process with the patient and inform him/her that participation is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll, they  will have the option after their ablation, on the first post-
procedure day. If the patient is interested and eligible, the RA will ask the patient to bring his/her smartphone 
and YNHH MyChart login information (if they have it) and any phone account passwords with them that day, 
Page [ADDRESS_196201] to confirm the patient meets all of 
the eligibility criteria. The RA will then review the s tudy  with the patient and inform him/her that participation 
is optional but if they would like to learn more and possibly enroll the RA will walk through the consent and enrollment process with them. The RA will be able to provide guidance on updating the devi ce, if necessary.  
 
After enrollment, p atients will also receive a follow- up email that contains their consent form  as well as  to 
again provide contact [CONTACT_168143] . 
 
If a patient refuses to participate, then we will note the number of people who refused. If the patient is agreeable, we will then administer a short questionnaire to understand his/her rationale for not participating in the study, to understand potential reasons for non -participation. Please see Appendix for questionnaire.  
 
7. Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent:  Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s ability and capacity to consent to the research being proposed.  
 All consenting participants must be capable of providing informed consent in order to participate in the study. Participants who are cognitively impaired will not be eligible for the study. To participate in this study, subjects must be alert and oriented to person, time and place, and able to consent for themselves. No 
surrogate consents will be accepted.  
 
8. Non-English Speaking Subjects:  Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving 
non- English speaking subjects. If enrollment of these subjects is anticipated, t ranslated copi[INVESTIGATOR_20885].  
 N/A as non- English speaking people will not be asked to participate in this study  
 
As a limited alternative to the above requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process if you unexpectedly encounter a non- English speaking individual interested in study participation and the translation of 
the long form is not possible pr ior to intended enrollment?   YES ☐  NO ☐ 
 
Note * If more than [ADDRESS_196202] speaking that 
language is to be enrolled.  
 
Several translated short form templates are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp) and translated HIPAA 
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu) . If the translation of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated short form needs to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification prior to enrolling the subject.    Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available on the HRPP website.  
 
If using a short form without a translated HIPAA Research Authorization Form, please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above.  
 
Page 20 of 24  
 9. Consent Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent 
for this study, complete the appropriate section below.   
 
☐Not Requesting any consent waivers  
 
☐Requesting a waiver of signed consent:  
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)  
☐ Entire Study ( Note that an information sheet may be required.)  
 
 
  ☒ Requesting a waiver of consent:  
☒ Recruitment/Screening  only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)  
☐ Entire Study     
     
 
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS  
 
    Confidentiality & Security of Data:  
1. What protected health information (medical information along with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used for the research?   
 Age, gender, date of birth and several categories of health information (provider encounters, notes  – if 
available , medication lists, problem lists, family history, allergies, laboratory findings, procedures, 
immunizations, vital signs, and medical record numbers)  will be collected  via the Hugo platform . Patients  will 
also be asked  to self -report race, ethnicity, weight, and co -morbidities /pre -existing conditions  as part of the 
baseline questionnaire , in addition to pre-existing conditions pulled into Hugo from the EHR. We will also be  For a waiver of signed consent, address the following:  
• Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐  
• Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐ 
  
 OR 
• Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☐  
• Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non -research context? YES ☐   
NO ☐ 
 For a waiver of signed consent, address the following:  
• Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐  
• Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐ 
  
 OR 
• Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☒  
• Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non -research context? YES ☐   
NO ☒ 
Page 21 of 24  
 collecting  data provided and synced to the Hugo platform  from the Apple HealthKit (including Apple Watch 
data) and  the Withings Health Mate platform . 
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_168117] (Drs. Joseph Ross, Joseph Akar , James Hummel, and James 
Freeman)  will also have access to the patient's medical record , with read -only access , within the YNHH 
electronic medical record (EMR) system. This data will not leave the EMR system in any  way and  is only being 
used to review ECG tracings and readings captured by [CONTACT_168144] . The YNHH Epic EHR and the ECG archiving system , Epi[INVESTIGATOR_168118]. Data access to the YNHH EMR  for research purposes  will only be 
granted after all necessary trainings are complete and sign off is received from the Yale IRB and YNHH medical 
record s department using the Yale -New Haven Health System's Research Request for Medical Records Access 
form.  
 
2. How will the research data be collected, recorded and stored?  
After obtaining consent, patients will be requested to share  data from their Hugo personal health records to 
the study over SSL with a minimum of [ADDRESS_196203] for  clean ing and analysis . Access to this data will only be available to  
designated  study personnel  with collaborators at the Mayo Clinic receiving their own IRB approval.  
 EKG data will be sent by [CONTACT_168145]-in function. The Apple Health platform allows patients to designate an email to securely share EKG tracing. EKG tracings  from Yale patients  will be sent to the 
secure  Afibstudy @yale.edu  email address, and all tracings will be  deidentified and  store d on a Secure box drive 
with access only grant to the Yale study team. For the Apple Watch EKG review only deidentified data will be used. Access to this deidentified data will only by [CONTACT_168146], with collaborators at each site  
receiving their own IRB approval.  
 
3. How will the digital data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard Drive   ☒Secured Server  
☐Laptop Computer  ☐Desktop Computer  ☐Other  
 
4. What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated above during and after the subject’s participation in the study?  
 Data stored at the Mayo Clinic is protected within its firewalls and all access is password protected. EKG 
tracings for Yale patients will be saved on a password -protected secure Box drive with access granted to 
members of the Yale study team.
 
 
 
All portable devices must contain encryption software, per University Policy 5100.  If there is a technical reason a 
device cannot be encrypted please submit an exception request to the Information Security, Policy and Compliance 
Office by [CONTACT_20912]://its.yale.edu/egrc or email [EMAIL_364]  
 
5. What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable data? If yes, describe how, by [CONTACT_22467]. If no, describe how the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured.  
 
Page 22 of 24  
 Data will be maintained on secure, encrypted servers at Mayo Clinic  after co mpletion of the research study  for 
a minimum of 5 years after publication of our findings in a peer -reviewed journal (in such case as there is a 
need to return to the original data source to validate a finding or respond to a question). 
 
Study participants will always have access to their health data and the ability to download their personalized 
health record and take it with them  through  Hugo . After the completion of the study, we will also make 
summary level findings available to participants, without any identifiable personal health information.  
 
6. If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality been obtained ?  
Since the data obtained are from broad health characteristics from personal health records that do not target any particular sensitive research areas, a CoC has not been obtained.  
 
SECTION  V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
 Potential Benefits:  Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result from the research, either to 
the subject(s) or to society at large. (Payment of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.)  
 
Individuals who participate in this study will have access to their health data along with the choice and ability to share it with researchers  through the Hugo platform . Patients will be contributing to an advance ment in  the 
understanding of expected outcomes from novel wearable medical technologies, including the Apple Watch – which is already used by [CONTACT_168147] . Participants will also have the option of continuing 
access to their data at the end of the study, if they so wish, and receive updates to the Hugo Health  platform. 
Using the provided Apple Watch, participants may also gain additional awareness and information regarding their 
heart rate, rhythm, health , and activity; using the provided Withings Move, participants may gain additional 
awar eness and information regarding their activity . 
 
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS  
 
1. Alternatives:  What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research?  
 The alternative to participating in the proposed study is to not participate. Participation and non -participation 
will have no impact on the course of treatment that the patient will receive.  
2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Describe any payments that will be made to subjects , 
the amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this compensation.  
 Patients  who are not randomized to receive the Apple Watch will receive a  small  stipend  for their time 
contributed as part of this study. An estimated h ourly stipend based on the average minimum wage in  
Connecticut ($10) will be provided. This will result in a total stipend of up to $80. 
 These payments will be made
 via a Visa pre -paid card  through the platform Tremendous which is linked to 
the Hugo platform. As surveys are completed, the balance will be automatically credited to the patient’s account  which is linked to the  email address  they used to set up their Hugo account . Patients  will receive 
payments every [ADDRESS_196204] accrued  a 
balance.    
 
Patients in the Apple Watch arm will be give n the necessary Apple Watch  to keep . The fair market value of 
this device  is $399.00 . Patients in the Withings arm will be provided with a Withings Move  to keep. The fair 
market value of this device is $69.9 5. 
 
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Clearly describe the subject’s costs associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost to subjects.  
  
The platform, technology, devices , and apps used in this study will be provided to participants free of cost. 
Updates to the platform will also be provided free of cost for the duration of the study.  Participants will still 
be responsible for any costs associated with routine follow- ups or doctor's visits , as they would be in the 
normal processes of care. Participants will still be responsible for any co -pay required by [CONTACT_168148]. Participants are responsible for data c harges that may be incurred for 
utilizing  the online features of  Hugo , Withings , or Apple Watch  when not connected to Wi -Fi.  
 
4. In Case of Injury:  This section is required for any research involving more than minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents the potential for physical harm (e.g., research involving blood draws). 
 
a. Will medical treatment be available if research -related injury occurs? Write here  
 
b. Where and from whom may treatment be obtained? Write here  
c. Are there any limits to the treatment being provided? Write here  
d. Who will pay for this treatment? Write here  
e. How will the medical treatment be accessed by [CONTACT_1766]? Write here  
 
 
IMPORTANT  REMINDERS  
 
Will this study have a billable service?  Yes ☐   No☒ 
 
A billable service is defined as any service rendered to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study, would 
normally generate a bill from either Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57171]’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed by [CONTACT_20916], but may be provided by 
[CONTACT_20917]-New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20888] (examples include x -rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs, or specimens sent to path ology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction made 
whether the service is paid for by [CONTACT_20918] (Standard of Care) or by [CONTACT_1758]’s funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services or orders placed in EPIC f or research 
subjects .  
 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore , Yale’s clinical research management system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research related charges. Please contact [EMAIL_365]  
 
Are there any procedures involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☒  No ☐  
Page 24 of 24  
  
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note instructions below.   
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently  include the specific procedure  that you will perform? Yes ☒  No 
☐ 
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past for this  procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☒ 
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☒ 
  
If you answered “no” to question 4a, or "yes" to question 4b or c, please contact [CONTACT_79703] (688 -2615) for prior approval before commencing with your research protocol . 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20889], including patients at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_20890] -investigators who are physicians or mid -level practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists) who may have direct patient contact [CONTACT_20920]. If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel meet the criteria, please telephone the Physicia n Services Department at [ADDRESS_196205] has a 
medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  
 
References  
1. Food & Drug Administration. Digital Health Innovation Action Plan. 
2. Shuren J, Patel B, Gottlieb S. FDA Regulation of Mobile Medical Apps. JAMA 2018; 320(4):337-38. 
3. Food & Drug Administration. Digital Health Software Precertification (Pre -Cert) Program. Secondary 
Digital Health Software Precertification (Pre -Cert) Program. 
https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DigitalHealth/DigitalHealthPreCertProgram/default.htm . 
4. Food & Drug Administration. CDRH Clearance Letter to Apple for Irregular Rhythm Notification 
Feature, September 11, 2018. 
5. Food & Drug Administration. CDRH Clearance Letter to Apple for ECG App, September 11, 2018. 6. Farr C. Apple is in Talks with Private Medicare Plans about Bringing its Watch to At-Risk Seniors. 
Secondary Apple is in Talks with Private Medicare Plans about Bringing its Watch to At-Risk Seniors. 
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/01/15/apple- talking -to-private- medicare -plans-about-
subsidizing-apple- watch.html . 
7. Perez MV, Mahaffey KW, Hedlin H, et al. Large- Scale Assessment of a Smartwatch to Identify Atrial 
Fibrillation. N Engl J Med 2019; 381(20):1909-17. 
8. Safavi K, Mathews SC, Bates DW, et al. Top -Funded Digital Health Companies And Their Impact 
On High -Burden, High-Cost Conditions. Health Aff (Millwood) 2019; 38(1):115-23. 
9. Spertus J, Dorian P, Bubien R, et al. Development and validation of the Atrial Fibrillation Effect on 
QualiTy -of-Life (AFEQT) Questionnaire in patients with atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2011; 4(1):15-25. 
10. Administration USDoHaHSFaD. General Wellness: Policy for Low Risk Devices. Guidance for 
Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff. In: Health CfDaR, ed., 2016. 
 