Study Title: Motivation Skills Training  for Schizophrenia  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study Protocol  
 
Date of Approval:  12/23/2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Information:  
 
IRB of Record: [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute  (subsequently transferred to Columbia 
University)  
Protocol # [ADDRESS_360194] Date of IRB Approval: 12/23/[ADDRESS_360195]  Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_295545] , PhD  
Co-Investigator(s):  Alice Medalia , PhD  
NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_295546]: Behavioral Health Services and Policy Research  
 
Source of Funding:  Federal  
Institute/Agency:  National Institute of Mental Health  
Grant Name:  [CONTACT_295568]:  R34 MH129552 -01A1  
 
Background, Significance and Rationale : Schizophrenia is a major public health problem 
associated with core motivational deficits that are amongst the  strongest  predictors  of impaired  
functional  outcomes.  Without  motivation,  people  are unable  to maintain  their pursuit of 
employment or educational goals, engage in treatment, and regularly participate in healthy life  
decisions.  Current  pharmacological  and psychosocial  treatments  for schizophrenia  have  
demonstrated  limited  effectiveness for improving this core symptom. The processes by [CONTACT_295555], monitor, and  control their motivational states in service of their goals are 
collectively known as metamotivation. We developed  a group -based  intervention,  Motivation  
Skills  Training  (MST)  by [CONTACT_295556] -science  literature and strategies employed 
in educational settings that teach students to self -regulate motivation and  thereby [CONTACT_295557]. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_295547], which  provides 
training in strategies to self -motivate in order to enhance the initiation of and persistence in goal - 
directed  activities.  This proposal  takes  the next steps  to address  three  key questions:  
1. Is MST,  a group -based  motivation  skills  intervention,  feasible  and acceptable  for people  with 
schizophrenia  attending  outpatient community  mental health  clinics?  
2. Do people  with schizophrenia  who participate  in MST  demonstrate  increased  motivation  to 
engage  in goal-directed  behaviors?  
3. Does  the addition  of MST  to existing  recovery -oriented  services  improve  functional  
outcomes?  
Purpose : Facilitate a scalable approach to treating motivation impairment in people with 
schizophrenia spectrum  disorders.  Quantitative outcomes and qualitative data gathered from 
service recipi[INVESTIGATOR_295548],  
acceptability, and  clinical utility.  
 
Study Locations : [LOCATION_001] State Office of Mental Health  licensed outpatient community clinic .  
 
Description of Subject Population: The study sample includes adults with schizophrenia and 
schizoaffective     disorder  age 18-65 receiving  routine  services .  
 
 
Procedures : This is an open trial of MST taking place in one outpatient mental health clinic with 
1-[ADDRESS_360196] and about research.  
Interested clients are referred to a trained member                 of the study  team  for additional  information,  
informed  consent  and eligibility  screening  according  to inclusion/exclusion criteria. Through 
these procedures, the goal is to enroll [ADDRESS_360197]  session  entails  (1) 
psychoeducation  to introduce  motivation  knowledge  and self-regulation  skills,  (2) individualized 
goal setting and progress tracking, (3) group workshoppi[INVESTIGATOR_295549]. Individualized goal setting and weekly review of goal progress provides the context for 
identifying  what factors are positively or negatively impacting one’s motivation and for directly 
applying motivation  knowledge and skills. Research participants including those who exit early 
from MST and  MST graduates, are  asked to complete a  satisfaction questionnaire that  asks 
about the acceptability  of the assessment procedures and whether MST sessions were found to 
be helpful for self - motivation, steps  toward goal attainment, and functioning in day -to-day life. 
Additional questions will ascertain the benefits and  challenges to completing sessions. 
Participants will be asked to repeat measures of motivation, goals,  symptom severity, and 
functioning. Data summarized from pre -post assessments, satisfaction evaluation,  and feedback 
will be used to refine the assessment protocol, treatment parameters, skills training content  and 
the structure of the treatment  manual.  
 
Informed Consent:  The process of informed consent occurs in -person at the recruitment  site 
where individuals are receiving their  mental health services. All who agree to an initial meeting 
with research personnel have the full study explained  to them and have ample opportunity to 
ask questions prior to signing consent. The process of informed consent   includes explanation of 
the amount of time required, the possible risks and benefits of study participation, their  right to 
refuse participation in the study without prejudice and alternatives to study participation, their 
right to  terminate participation at any moment without prejudice, procedures to protect 
confidentiality, and the contact  [CONTACT_71722] [INVESTIGATOR_32397]. The risks of travel for in -person 
visits during COVID -19 is discussed. A consent   procedure  note documents this. The consent 
process includes discussion of the possibility for remote research procedures if  completion of 
certain components of the protocol in -person (e.g. interviews) is no longer possible.   This 
discussion describes the HIPAA -compliant platforms to be used and any concerns the  potential 
participant may have, such as access to a private space, access at home to adequate  devices,  
cell signal,  or wifi. The consent  note documents  this discussion.  
 
The research team use s additional safeguards during the consent process to ascertain capacity  
by [CONTACT_295558]:  
1. Do you have  to participate  in this study?  
2. Can you describe  some  things  you would  be asked  to do if you participate  in this study?  
3. Can you tell me one risk that is involved  when  participating  in research?  
4. Can you tell me how we protect  your privacy  (i.e. keep  your personal  information  confidential)?  
5. What  should  you do if you are uncomfortable  or want  to stop participating  in an activity  that is 
part of the  research?  
6. If you decide  not to participate,  will your treatment  at this clinic  be affected?  
A list of possible correct answers is provided to the researcher performing this assessment.  
Incorrect responses are immediately addressed to clarify the information and the question is 
asked again to ensure that clients understand the information provided. If the client’s capacity  is 
in question, the referring clinician is consulted. A progress note in the research chart documents 
the process of informed consent and the results of the capacity assessment conducted   by [CONTACT_295559].  
 
Eligib ility: 
 
CRITERION  METHOD  OF ASCERTAINMENT  
Inclusion:   
1. Age 18-65 1. Client  report  of DOB,  checked  by [CONTACT_295560]  
2. A primary DSM -5 diagnosis of  schizophrenia  or 
schizoaffective  disorder  
 
 
3. Medically  and psychiatrically  stable  outpatient  
status  2. Referral  Source  or Chart  Review,  
confirmed  by [CONTACT_295561]  
(SCID -5)  
3. Referral  Source  or Chart  Review,  
confirmed  by C- SSRS  
4. English  Fluency  4. Observation during Informed Consent, 
checked by  [CONTACT_295562] 
(TOPF)  
Exclusion:   
1. Indications of Intellectual Disability as  
documented in medical history or  measured by < 
70 premorbid Full Scale     IQ 1. Referral Source, Medical history, 
confirmed by  [CONTACT_295563] : Criteria  for early  discontinuation  follow  clinic -based  
guidelines.  A person  is discontinued  from a service if they are no longer able to attend at the 
expected rate of weekly sessions due to scheduling conflicts  (e.g. work/school), hospi[INVESTIGATOR_295550], inpatient psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  or discharged from 
the clinic. The clinicians use clinical judgment as to the appropriateness of  continued 
participation for each person, taking into account evidence of clinical worsening, suicidality, or 
other  issues that may arise during participation. Consultation with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_295551].  No additional  criteria  will be used  for research  
purposes.  
 
Assessment Measures:   
 
Structured Screening Assessments:  (1) The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM 5 (SCID -5) is 
used to  confirm a chart diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and screen out 
severe substance use in  the past 3 months. (2) The Test of Premorbid Functioning (TOPF)  
estimate s premorbid intellectual  functioning. Inclusion requires an estimated Full Scale IQ of ≥ 
70. (3) The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating  Scale  (C-SSRS)  is administered  to assess  risk 
and psychiatric  stability.  Screening  assessments  take about 30 minutes in total to complete. (4) 
The Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) is used only in participants                age 60 and older  to rule out 
mild to severe  cognitive  impairment  associated  with possible  dementia . 
Sociodemographic and Psychosocial Data : At baseline, sociodemographic data includes racial 
and ethnic  identification, gender identity, age, and educational attainment. Psychosocial data 
includes illness onset and     chronicity,  current  independent  living  and employment  status.  These  
data take about  10 minutes  to obtain.  
Outcome Measures:  Baseline and post -treatment assessments include measures of motivation,  
goal attainment and community functioning.  
 
Motivation : The Motivation and Pleasure (MAP) subscale of the Clinical Assessment Interview 
for Negative  Symptoms (CAINS) is used to assess the intervention target, motivation. The 
CAINS was developed  utilizing recommendations from the NIMH -MATRICS Consensus 
Development Conference on Negative  Symptoms. The MAP is a 9 -item clinical interview which 
examines motivation, pleasure, and engagement in  work, school, recreational and social 
activities. The MAP scale is reliable and has been shown to be correlated  with real -world 
functioning and self -rated quality of life. This measure will take about 20 minutes to complete.  
Average MAP item score at baseline will be used to stratify participants by [CONTACT_295564] (≥2  moderate -severe vs <2 mild) within each clinic for randomization. Change in total 
MAP score is the primary  outcome.  
 
Functional Outcomes:  (1) The primary functional outcome is goal attainment using Goal 
Attainment  Scaling (GAS), a standardized, ecologically valid method of measuring the extent to 
which a participant’s  recovery goals are achieved in the course of intervention. Individualized 
goal setting is a routine part of  rehabilitation and recovery services and progress towards goal 
attainment is a sensitive and specific person - centered outcome measure. On the GAS goals 
are individually identified and anchor points along a continuum  of a “successful outcome” are 
established a priori. We use a scoring method derived from previous  research which has shown 
sensitivity to change in a clinical trial targeting psychosocial functioning in adults  with serious 
mental illness. This measure takes about 20 minutes to complete. (2) The secondary functional  
outcome measure is the Heinrichs Carpenter Quality of Life Scale (QLS), an interviewer -rated 
measure of  psychosocial functioning on four domains: interpersonal functioning; intrapsychic 
foundations, instrumental role  function,  and common  objects/activities.  This measure  takes  
about  20 minutes  to complete . 
 
Research Related Delay to Treatment: There  is no research  related  delay  to treatment . 
 
Clinical Treatment Alternatives:  Individuals who do not participate in research have all 
treatment options at the clinic where they receive  outpatient  services  made  available  to them.  
Participants  can decline  involvement  in the protocol  at any time.  
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences: Research participation & confidentiality : The study is 
conducted with individuals with schizophrenia -spectrum disorders who are referred for skills 
training through collaborative decision making with their  treating clinician, and therefore have a 
pre-determined capacity to take part in decisions about their  treatment. Because the procedures 
and intervention strategies are considered no more than minimal or  standard risk, the 
designated population has capacity to consent to participate in research. The greatest risk  
involved in this study is loss of confidentiality as sensitive information (e.g., diagnosis, 
symptoms) will be  collected  for research.  However,  all health  information  collected  for research  
is de-identified.  Methods  to   protect  confidentiality are described in  the next section.  
Assessments : Goal setting, psychiatric symptom and functional assessment measures are 
commonly used in  psychiatric treatment contexts including the outpatient facilities where this 
study will take place. Some  participants may find the interviews tiring. Some participants may 
become uncomfortable talking about their  psychiatric symptoms. Extra precautions to ensure 
that no person is overwhelmed will include: (1) offering  breaks,  (2) offering  refreshments,  and 
(3) dividing  the assessment  session  if feasible.  The voluntary  nature  of 
participating  in research  procedures  will be emphasized  as needed.  
 
Intervention : Skills training and psychoeducation are an integral component of recovery -oriented 
psychosocial  services for people with serious and persistent mental illness such as those 
diagnosed with a schizophrenia  spectrum disorder. We therefore expect that participants will be 
able to engage in the skill learning activities  and do not anticipate any undue burden to 
participants during either intervention. Although there are no  anticipated risks as a function of 
MST, given that the sample involves people with  psychotic disorders, and that people may 
struggle with motivation specifically, special attention is devoted  to minimizing perceived 
burden, stress, and ensuring participant safety. The clinicians facilitating the  intervention 
sessions are specialists in providing behavioral interventions to this population and are attentive  
to signs of burden, stress, or fatigue. Breaks during treatment sessions are offered as needed. 
Session  attendance is tracked; participants discuss progress and troubleshoot barriers to 
participation with the  treating clinician on a weekly basis. The relevance of skill learning (to 
enhance motivation or to enhance health  and well -being) to everyday life is a focus of the 
intervention. The content of the intervention and the style of  intervention delivery is sensitive to 
the experience of barriers to treatment engagement. Importantly,  therapeutic content and skills 
training techniques are designed to support individuals’ sense of competency,  autonomy, create 
a sense of relatedness among group members and clinicians, which are all factors  associated 
with treatment engagement and learning success. Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_295552].  
Necessary or requested treatment for psychosis and other disorders : Participation in this study 
does not alter  clinical treatment for psychosis or other disorders (e.g., medication management, 
skills training) as designated  by [CONTACT_77310]. Changes in mental status that coincide with 
the study would likely be secondary to the  course  of the illness  as opposed  to precipi[INVESTIGATOR_295553].  Outpatient  treatment teams are trained to handle events 
such as clinical worsening, defined as an increase in symptoms (e.g.,  hallucinations, paranoia) 
that causes significant distress, poses imminent risk of harm to self or to others,  and/or impairs 
the ability of the individual to participate in study procedures. Routine structured assessment  
and management of suicidal behavior and ideation within outpatient treatment is ongoing. When 
immediate  emergency intervention is required, whether clinical worsening becomes evident 
during assessment or  treatment, the evaluating clinician will determine which of three options is 
indicated: psychiatric evaluation at  the nearest Emergency Department, increased monitoring, or 
continued treatment at current level of care. A  safety planning intervention is then invoked. Any 
unanticipated adverse event involving a participant in  research will be reported immediately to 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_295554]. Clinical  supervision will allow for routine 
discussion of participants’ clinical stability and ability to  continue  with treatment  sessions.  
 
We further ensure sufficient surveillance of risk by [CONTACT_295565]  
(ISM)  whose role  is defined  by [CONTACT_22866] (NIMH).  
 
Methods to Minimize Risk:  Procedures  associated  with potential  loss of confidentiality  and 
measures  to protect  confidentiality  are listed  in the consent form. A HIPAA Authorization form, 
reviewed at the time of informed consent, lists those entities     with whom knowledge of 
participation and data may be shared. Hard copy data (e.g., assessment forms) are labeled with 
a unique numerical identifier that does not reference any personal information and are stored in 
a locked cabinet in a locked office accessible only to the research team. Consent forms contain  
identifying  information  but are not coupled  with identification  numbers  and are kept in a locked  file 
drawer  in a locked office, separate from hard copy data, accessible only to the PI. A secure 
electronic  database in which data is entered is only accessible to the research team. The 
database is  created and managed by [CONTACT_295566]’s IT Security office to certify systems for use as 
secure and reliable repositories for clinical  data. Public dissemination of the results and data 
deposited into public repositories will contain no identifying  information  about individual  
subjects.  
As a federally  funded  study,  there  is a Certificate  of Confidentiality.  
 
Direct Benefits to Subjects:  Participants  may or may not learn  new information  or skills.  
 
Compensation or Reimbursement : Participants in the Open Trial are compensated $40 for 
the baseline assessment and $[ADDRESS_360198] -treatment assessment.  
 
References - Background, Significance and Rationale:  
 
Blanchard JJ, Cohen AS. The structure of negative symptoms within schizophrenia: implications 
for assessment. Schizophr Bull. 2006 Apr;32(2):238 -45. PMID: 16254064; PMCID: 
PMC2632211.  
 
Eack SM, Keshavan MS. Cognition, negative symptoms, and functional outcome in psychosis. 
Schizophr Res. [ADDRESS_360199];224:22 -23. PMID: 32646802.  
 
Fervaha G, Foussias G, Agid O, Remington G. Motivational and neurocognitive deficits are 
central to the prediction of longitudinal functional outcome in schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand. [ADDRESS_360200];130(4):290 -9. PMID: 24850369.  
 
Foussias G, Mann S, Zakzanis KK, van Reekum R, Remington G. Motivational deficits as the 
central link to functioning in schizophrenia: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Schizophr Res. 2009 Dec;115(2 -
3):333 -7. PMID: 19836211.  
 
Foussias G, Mann S, Zakzanis KK, van Reekum R, Agid O, Remington G. Prediction of 
longitudinal functional outcomes in schizophrenia: the impact of baseline motivational deficits. 
Schizophr Res. [ADDRESS_360201];132(1):24 -7. PMID: 21771567.  
 
Miele DB, Scholer AA. The role of metamotivational monitoring in motivation regulation. 
Educational Psychologist. 2018;53(1):1 -21. 
 
Scholer AA, Miele DB, Murayama K, Fujita K. New directions in self -regulation: The role of 
metamotivational beliefs. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 2018 Dec;27(6):437 -42. 
 
Hansen MC, Lynch DA, Stefancic A, Medalia A. Metamotivation in people diagnosed with 
schizophrenia: A conceptual introduction and qualitative study. Schizophr Res. 2021 Jul 
26:S0920 -9964(21)[ZIP_CODE] -2. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2021.06.003. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 
34325963.  
 
Hansen MC, Gertmenian E, Lynch D, Sardana S, Herlands T, Medalia A. Metamotivation 
Therapy: Is it time to focus on metamotivation in severe mental illness? Journal of 
Contemporary Psychotherapy. 2021; 51: 295 – 301. 
 
Schwinger M, Steinmayr R, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_92063]  B. How do motivational regulation strategies affect 
achievement: Mediated by [CONTACT_295567]. Learning and 
Individual Differences. 2009;19: 621 –627. 
 
References - Assessments:  
 
First MB, Williams JBW, Karg RS, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280]. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5-Research 
Version (SCID -5 for DSM -5, Research Version; SCID -RV). Arlington VA: American Psychiatric 
Association, 2015.  
 
Wechsler D. Test of Premorbid Functioning (TOPF). San Antonio, TX: Psychological 
Corporation, 2011.  
 
Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent DA, Yershova KV, Oquendo MA, Currier GW, Melvin 
GA, Greenhill L, Shen S, Mann JJ. The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity 
and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266 –1277.  
 
Blanchard JJ, Bradshaw KR, Garcia CP, Nasrallah HA, Harvey PD, Casey D, Csoboth CT, 
Hudson JI, Julian L, Lentz E, Nuechterlein KH, Perkins DO, Skale TG, Snowden LR, Tandon R, 
Tek C, Velligan D, Vinogradov S, O'Gorman C. Examining the reliability and validity of the 
Clinical Assessment Interview for Negative Symptoms within the Management of Schizophrenia 
in Clinical Practice (MOSAIC) multisite national study. Schizophr Res. 2017 Jul;185:137 -143. 
PMID: 28087270.  
 
Kring AM, Gur RE, Blanchard JJ, Horan WP, Reise SP. The Clinical Assessment Interview for 
Negative Symptoms (CAINS): final development and validation. Am J Psychiatry. 
2013;170(2):165 -172. PMID: 23377637; PMCID: PMC3785242.  
 
Kiresuk TJ, Sherman RE. Goal attainment scaling: A general method for evaluating 
comprehensive community mental health programs. Community Ment Health J. 1968;4(6):443 -
453. 
 
Tabak NT, Link PC, Holden J, Granholm E. Goal attainment scaling: Tracking goal achievement 
in consumers with serious mental illness. American Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation. 2015; 
18(2):173 –186. 
 
Heinrichs DW, Hanlon TE, Carpenter WT Jr, The Quality of Life Scale: an instrument for rating 
the schizophrenic deficit syndrome. Schizophr Bull. 1984;10:388 –398. PMID: 6474101  