Transplant Social Worker Support for Live Kidney Donation in African Americans
 Document Date: December 21, 2022
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Abstract 
Live donor k idney transplantation (LDKT) represents an optimal therapy for many patients. 
However, African Americans have been persistently and significantly l ess likely to receive LDKT 
when compared to Whites. The process of seeking and establishing a live donor for LDKT 
requires potential donors overcome several potential obstacles to LKDT. As a critical first step 
to seeki
ng LDKT, patients must engage their physicians and their family members or friends 
(who provide support for patients’ health decisions and could also be potential donors) in 
discussions about LDKT to determine whether LDKT is a viable and/or desirable treatment 
option. L DKT discussions with physicians help patients and family members understand the 
risks and benefits of L DKT t o both the potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598138]. Families’ 
LDKT discussions help them establish whether it is possible to identify willing and medically 
eligible live donors, and they help families discuss the potential psychological, physical, and 
fi
nancial strains of LDKT on patient s and families. Once discussions have occurred, potential 
donors must c onfront logistical (e.g., childcare or travel to transplant centers) and financial (e.g., 
unpaid time away from work) challenges associated with LDKT. Studies have shown that even 
when African American patients desire LDKT, rates of LDKT discussions are  suboptimal.  
Further,
 African American potential live kidney donors are less likely than their White 
counterparts t o complete the donor evaluation process, and t hey may be more sensitive than 
Whites to logistical and financial barriers to LDKT. Innovative strategies to  overcome 
interpersonal,
 logistical and financial barriers to LDKT are sorely needed for African Americans, 
particularly those who may be highly motivated to seek this therapy. Transplant social workers 
routinely perform psychosocial evaluations on potential LDKT recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598139]’ navigation of LDKT discussions. Transplant social workers are 
also well v ersed in the financial aspects of LDKT (e.g., insurance coverage rules) and frequently 
provide financial  guidance to potential LDKT recipi[INVESTIGATOR_571091]. We propose to study 
innovative transplant social worker  led interventions that will help African American potential 
LDKT recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598140] f amilies overcome interpersonal, logistical and financial barriers to 
LDKT. We will randomly assign African  Americans on the deceased kidney donor waiting list to 
receive their usual c are on the transplant list or to one of two social worker  led interventions—
one which hel ps patient s and famili es discuss LDKT with each other and with patients’ 
physicians, and one which provides families  with financial support to  overcome logistical and 
financial
 barriers to LDKT. As a primary outcome, we will measure whether the interventions 
activate live kidney donation on African Ameri can potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]’ behalves.  The proposed 
study leverages our  multidisciplinary team’s substantial prior experience studying culturally 
sensitive interventions  to overcome barriers to LDKT among African Americans. 
Primary
 Objectives 
We will study the effectiveness of highly innovative transplant social worker led interventions 
that intervene on key knowledge, interpersonal,  logistical and financial barriers to live kidney 
donation for African Americans patients on the deceased donor kidney waiti ng list. 
Objectives a nd H ypothesis 
A.Transplant Social Worker Educational and Behavioral Intervention . In o ur previous
work, we developed the Talking About Live Kidney Donation Social Worker Intervention
(TALK S WI), a c ulturally sensiti ve educational and behavioral interventi on to improv e
considerati on and pursuit of live donor kidney t ransplant s among pat ient s with chronic
kidney disease ( CKD) and their families. TALK SWI is tailor ed to accommodat e patients
with low reading (i.e., 4thgrade) and healt h literacy levels and helps patient s and their
families overcome self -identified interpersonal barriers to discussing and pursuing live 
donor kidney transplants. TALK SWI educational materials were determined to be 
culturally sensitive based on our conduct of 8 focus groups of African American and non - 
African American patients with chronic kidney disease (with and without live donor kidney transplant experience) and their family members identifying their concerns about 
live donor kidney  transplantation19.In a recently  completed randomized controlled trial,
we found TALK SWI  was effective in improving rates of consideration and  pursuit  of pre-
emptive live donor  kidney transplantation  among patients with stage  [ADDRESS_791040] already overcome some 
barriers to live donor kidney transplantation (i.e., completed the transplant evaluation).  
B.Transplant Social Worker  Financial Assistance  Intervention. We  hypothesize a
financial  assistance  intervention delivered by [CONTACT_598158] -received by [CONTACT_318129], patients, and the ir
families.
If effective, our financial intervention will provide a rationale for potentially expanding
current National Live  Donor Assistance  Center (NLDAC)  policies.  In a separately  funded
study, we are currently  testing the effectiveness of a financial assistance intervention to
improve access to live donor kidney transplantation among patients with  end stage renal
disease (ESRD) who  are not yet on the transplant waiting  list. We hypothesize that
patients who are on the waiting list and highly motivated to receive a kidney (who we
propose to study in this application) will view this intervention favorably.  The current
study leverages our substantial previous work to develop and test  these
interventions.  Our proposed  study  is a distinct  and novel extension of our
previous work in three  ways:  (1) Placing the TALK SWI and the Financial Assist ance
Intervention in the transplant social work environment:  Neither intervention has
previously been studied in the transplant center, although this is a place where social
workers are already routinely employed in clinical care. Social workers have all the skill s
necessary to execute both interventions, making this proposal a natural extension of our
prior work. (2) Studying patients on the deceased  donor transplant waiting list:  We have
not previously employed either intervention among patients waiting for a deceased donor
kidney. Because these patients are highly motivated to receive kidneys, employing t he
interventions among this population could prove highly effective. (3) Combining TALK
SWI with the Financial Assistance  Intervention:  We have not previously employed these
interventions simultaneously. Because the interventions address distinct key barriers to
African Americans’ receipt of live donor kidney transplantation, we hy pothesi ze
combining them could have an additive effect in overcoming barriers to live donor ki dney
transplantation. To enhance the perceived long -term relevance of our interventions to
African Americans, we will measure the cultural competence of the trans plant social
worker interventions using established measures developed by [CONTACT_598159]35and tailor the interventions to enhance their cultural
competence based on our findings.
Background and Significance 
Promise  of Live Donor  Kidney Transplantation  to Address Disparities in Access  to 
Kidney Transplants for African Americans 
Ethnic/race disparities in the incidence and prevalence of end -stage renal disease (ESRD) are 
striking. Over the past [ADDRESS_791041]  10 
years.1,7Suboptimal availability of deceased donor kidneys contributes to African Americans’
longer waiting times on transplant waiting lists when compared to Whites.8Live donor kidney
transplantation (LDKT) represents a promising strategy to improve access to kidney transplants 
for African Americans. LDKT not only offers improved outcomes over deceased donor 
transplantation but may also have the benefits of by[CONTACT_598160], including immunological incompatibility and longer waiting times.9-12 
Barriers Faced  by [CONTACT_598161][INVESTIGATOR_598141] (such as laparoscopic donor nephrectomy) and 
widely publicized successes  of LDKT, African Americans with ESRD continue to trail behind 
Whites with respect to the receipt of LDKT.1,13,14 A variety of barriers may contribute to
persistently lower rates of LDKT among African Americans compared to Whites including  (1) 
inadequate  knowledge or awareness  of LDKT as a treatment  option;  (2) interpersonal  difficulties  
initiating  and sustaining discussions with  families and the health care team about LDKT; (3) 
difficulties identifying willing  and medically eligible live kidney donors; and (4) logistical and 
financial barriers to live kidney donation.  
Inadequate knowledge or awareness of LDKT.   
Studies show that African Americans with progressing chronic kidney disease (CKD) often have 
poor knowledge of transplantation as a treatment option when compared to their White 
counterparts.15Further, African Americans with ESRD often initiate dialysis therapy with little to
no prior discussion of transplantation with their health care providers,  limiting  their knowledge of 
LDKT.16Inadequate  health literacy  (defined as the ability to understand health information) has
also been linked to lower rates of transplantation17and may represent a barrier to receipt of
LDKT for Afr ican Americans.  
Interpersonal  difficulties  initiating  and sustaining discussions  about  LDKT.   
African American  patients often report  they have difficulties initiating and sustaining discussions 
about LDKT with their families and health care providers8,11-14, which presents a majo r
roadblock to their active pursuit and ultimate receipt of LDKT. Even when African American 
patients on dialysis state that they desire LDKT, they have been shown to discuss LDKT only 
variably with their closest family members and their physicians.18Discussions about LDKT help
patients and families become informed about the  risks and benefits of LDKT, explore the 
feasibility of identifying potential related donors, and take the steps necessary to complete 
donor and recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598142] a timely manner. In studies, African American 
patients and their families have reported that their difficulties discussing LDKT stem from a 
variety of reasons, including their insufficient skill or discomfort with  initiating discussions, their 
awkward feelings about discussing LDKT (e.g., concerns about  coercing potential donors (for 
patients) or about openly expressing hesitance to be evaluated (for family members), and  their 
desires for professional support to he lp them navigate complex family issues related to LKT 
(e.g., needs of children or financial considerations).19,20Initiating and sustaining discussions
may be particularly challenging to accomplish when  many  patients experience denial  regarding  
their need to consider or discuss  LDKT.19,21In our own recently completed  study  among
patients with progressing CKD but who had not yet started dialysis, an intervention designed to 
enhance patients’  and families’ pre- emptive discussion of LDKT was associated with patients’ 
greater pursuit of pre -emptive LDKT as a  treatment option.[ADDRESS_791042] no obvious  contraindications  to donation, they are less likely 
to complete their medical donation evaluations when compared to Whites with t he same 
potential health risks.27 
Logistical and financial barriers to LDKT.   
Live kidney donation poses several potential logistical and financial hurdles,  such as 
travel/lodging expenses, lost wages from time off work, and expenses for domestic help among 
donors which may pose substantial  barriers to live kidney donation among African 
Americans.28A recent study  of the general public identified potential living donors who wer e
concerned about out of pocket expenses related to donation had 50% less odds  of being willing 
to donate when compared to persons not concerned about expenses.[ADDRESS_791043] national effort to address financial needs of the very poor (i.e., 300 percent of the Department of Health and Human Service s (HHS) 
Poverty Guidelines) for whom these financial and logistical challenges pose barriers to their 
being evaluated for live kidney donation.31To date, however, the studies demonstrating the
effectiveness of this program or similar programs to enhance co nsideration or pursuit of live 
kidney donation among African Americans have not been published.  
Value of Transplant Social Worker  Led Education and Support  Interventions to Improve  
LDKT and Live Kidney Donation among African Americans on the Deceased Dono r 
Kidney Waiting List  
Interventions providing African American patients and families with the support they need to 
overcome commonly encountered barriers to LDKT are critically needed. African American 
patients with ESRD who are waiting on the deceased  donor kidney waiting list represent an 
excellent target population for such interventions, as they are highly motivated to  receive 
transplants, have already overcome some barriers to receiving transplants (i.e., completed the 
transplant evaluation  process) , but may face barriers to identifying medically eligible and willing 
live kidney donors.  Many transplant centers employ social workers to assess psychosocial 
needs of potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598143].32Social workers  are trained to
help potential  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598144] a broad variety  of challenging health- related 
problems33,3 4and may be particularly well suited to help patients navigate commonl y
encountered barriers to LDKT, including interpersonal barriers to initiating and sustaining LDKT 
discussions as well as identifying strategies (e.g., public or  privately available programs 
providing financial assistance) to help them overcome logistical and financial challenges to 
LDKT.  In our own previous work, patients with CKD and their families  felt social  workers could 
be particularly useful  in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_598145] (including 
addressing issues such  as potential donor coercion and discussing LDKT with  children) as well 
as for help ing them identify ways to overcome financial barriers to LDKT.[ADDRESS_791044] not yet been established. Rigorously studied and  effective transplant  social  worker led 
interventions  could be employed widely  across the US with confidence  and could help to narrow 
ethnic/race disparities in access to kidney transplants.  
Design and Procedures  
Conceptual Framework 
We will refine and test the effectiveness of transplant social worker led educational, behavioral 
support, and financial assistance interventions to overcome barriers to receipt of LDKT among 
African American patients awaiting deceased donor  kidneys and their families. Our conceptual 
framework draws from the PRECEDE- PROCEED behavioral  model.  In the model,  Predisposing  
Factors (including knowledge,  beliefs,  attitudes, values,  and motivations) are antecedents to 
behavior and provide the rationale for motivation for health behaviors of interest. Interventions designed to activate patients and families toward LDKT must address predisposing factors that 
pose barriers to pursuit of LDKT . 
Reinforcing Factors  (such as social support, peer influence, significant others, and vicarious 
reinforcement) are factors that follow a behavior (e.g., potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598146]) and provide continuing reward or incentive for the  persistence or repetition of the 
behavior.  For instance,  interventions  providing  patients and their families  with education and 
support for considering and pursuing LDKT may provide them with greater confidence to engage in behaviors lead ing to LDKT. Enabling Factors (such as programs, services, and 
resources necessary for persons to develop skills that enable health behavior changes) are 
antecedents to behavior that allow a motivation to be realized directly or indirectly through an 
envir onmental factor.59For instance, financial assistance interventions addressing their
logistical and financial concerns could  propel  family  members  to donate.  Our study  interventions  
will intervene  on Predisposing  Factors  which  pose barriers to African American’s pursuit of 
LDKT, including patients’ and their families’ inadequate knowledge of LDKT, interpersonal 
difficulties initiating and sustaining family discussions about LDKT and LDKT discussions with 
health care providers, and lo gistical or financial barriers to LDKT. We will perform a randomized 
controlled trial to test the effectiveness of these transplant social worker led interventions as 
Reinforcing  (through the effect of educational video and booklet providing basic educatio n about 
LDKT and emphasizing the importance of engaging in discussion and pursuit of LDKT) and 
Enabling (by [CONTACT_598162] t o live kidney donation). 
We hypothesize that the behavioral intervention will lead to patients’ and families’ greater 
pursuit of LDKT compared to usual care and the  financial assistance intervention paired with the 
behavioral intervention will be most effective in increasing LDKT among  African Americans on 
the kidney waiting list.  Our primary outcomes will measure potential live kidney donors’ 
activation toward donating.  
Overview of General Approach 
We will study the incremental effectiveness of (1) an educational and behavioral social worker 
intervention and (2) a live donor financial assistance intervention to improve live donor activation 
and live kidney donation for African American patients on the deceased donor kidney transplant 
waiting list. The p roposed mechanisms through which the interventions intervene  on knowledge,  
interpersonal,  financial, and logistical  barriers to LDKT are listed  in Table 1. In a two-phase 
study, we will first adapt the previously developed Talking About Live Kidney Donatio n (TALK) 
Social Worker protocol for use with transplant social workers (Phase 1), and we will then 
conduct a randomized controlled trial (Phase 2) to study the effectiveness of interventions to improve pursuit of LDKT (in recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]) and live kidney donati on (among potential  donors). 
Study  Interventions  
1.TALK Educational and Behavioral Social Worker Intervention (“TALK SWI”). The
Talking about Live Kidney Donation Social Worker Intervention (TALK SWI) is a culturally
sensitive theory -based intervention, which we previously rigorously developed in
collaboration with a behavioral psychologist, transplant nephrologists, transplant surgeons,
transplant social workers, patient advocacy experts from the National Kidney Foundation o
f
Maryland, and the input from patients  and families  with CKD and LDKT experience.39It
consists of an educational  module  (booklet  and video)  as well as a social  worker led brief
behavioral  support intervention  to help patients and their families  overcome barriers to
considering and pursuing LDKT. In a recently completed randomized controlled trial, t he
TALK SWI was effective in activating patients to consider and pursue LDKT, including theirincreased engagement in LDKT discussions, their completion of LDKT medical ev aluations,
and their identification of potential live donors.22TALK SWI consists of (1) an educational
module and (2) a protocol -driven social worker behavioral support intervention. TALK SWI
directly addresses many concerns we previously identified among African American patients
and families considering LDKT.[ADDRESS_791045] undergone LDKT and their family member s
discussing their experiences with considering LDKT as a treatment option fromthe recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598147], as well as health care providers (transplant
surgeon, transplant nephrologist, transplant social worker) citing key factor
s
patients and families should consider when contemplating LKT.It also directl y
addresses concerns that may pose specific barriers to LDKT for Afri can
Americans, including mistrust or fear of the LDKT process, difficulties discussing
LDKT,  and financial  considerations  related to pursuing LDKT.  (The video can be
viewed  at:http://ww  w.youtube.com/watch?v=Wmo -
aTjZR64&feature=youtu.be ) The educational booklet provides a synopsis of  the 
LDKT process from recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598147]. It also includes a listing of 
publicly available resources from which further information about the LDKT 
evaluation, transplant, and donation process, clinical risks with LDKT,  and 
financial  issues  related to LDKT can be obtained.  To assist  patients and family  
members  with initiating LDKT discussions or addressing complex issues during 
LDKT discussions (e.g.,  donor coercion), the booklet also presents  several 
‘model  conversations’ presenting examples on how to initiate  and sustain LDKT 
discussions.  (Booklet can be best viewed  at: 
http://diseasemanagementboulware.org/wpcontent/themes/jhm/flipbook/tal
k-study/ ).
b.TALK SWI Behavioral Support.  TALK SWI Behavioral Support is a protocol -
driven individual and family - based social intervention applying a Social
Construction -based Family Problem Solving theoretical framework.44-
46According to this framework, families are problem solving units whose  optimal
structure for confronting problems potentially affecting all group members, such
as ESRD and LDKT, is achieved when a neutral authority figure is designated as
the mediator for relaying messages between all members and encouraging open
channels of communication to enable each member to contribute to t he
problem’s resolution, ultimately enhancing group satisfaction. The protocol
specifies that the TALK Social Worker will meet with patients considering LDKT
for up to one hour to assess their perceive d barriers to completing key behavior s
reflecting their consideration and pursuit of  LDKT (discussing  LDKT with their
families, discussing  LDKT with their physicians,  identifying  a potential  live donor).
The TALK Social Worker employs motivational intervie wing techniques to help
participants self -identify potential barriers they face toward completing LDKT
helps and patients strategize about ways they might overcome barriers. T he
TALK Social Worker also invites patients to bring family members and/or friend s
for a second visit.  During  family visits, the TALK Social Worker assesses the
extent to which previous family discussions  about  patients’  kidney disease  had
occurred, the results of such conversations, whether  family  members have
communicated about LDKT with patients’ physicians, and any barriers famil y
members perceive toward achieving LDKT.39,47However, our focus groups
identified additional support roles that transplant social workers would be we ll
qualified to fill, including a role as a point of  contact [CONTACT_598163].19During our Study Phase 1, we will
refine the TALK SWI behavioral support protocol to include these additional rolesthat are routinely filled by [CONTACT_598164] s.
2.Live Donor Financial Assistance Intervention. We have designed a financial
assistance intervention to provide support for potential  living  kidney donors’  medical  and
non-medical  expenses associated with pursuing live kidney donation. The intervention is
modeled after existing federal live donor financial assistance programs (including theNational Live Donor Assistance Center (NLDAC) program), and it is intended to provide
financial support for potential live kidney donors in circumstances  where existing federal
programs do not provide support. The intervention strictly adheres to US law governi
ng
the reimbursement of expenses for potential live kidney donors. We will offer studyparticipants the option of enrolling their willing potential live kidney donors (i.e. persons
wishing to pursue medical evaluations to potential live kidney donors on their behalf)
reimbursement for medical and non -medical expenses related to the evaluation, surgery, 
and recovery periods associated with live kidney donation. Each study participant 
(potential kidney recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]) will be offered a “bank” of $2100.[ADDRESS_791046] to be evaluated for d onation and incur expenses, the 
total amount available per patient study participant is $2100.00. Our intervention will 
provide reimbursement to a broad group of participants, of which many may not meet 
NLDAC income requirements. Participants not qualifyin g for NLDAC may not require the 
same level of financial reimbursement, or those choosing to forgo NLDAC may desire 
more broadly applicable financial assistance (e.g., for lost wages from work) than 
assistance provided by [CONTACT_598165]. Based on national  data,  $2100.[ADDRESS_791047]  from work for production or non-supervisory  workers 48,
approximately 4 weeks of child care 49and travel and lodging needs for donors comi ng
from other geographic areas. If effective, our intervention  will provide rationale for 
expanding  current NLDAC  qualification  requirements.  
Features  of our Live Donor Financial  Assistance  Intervention  Compared  to the 
National Living  Donor Assistance  Program  (NLDAC)31
Feature  Proposed 
Intervention  NLDAC  
Financial Assistance Amount  $2100 $6000 
Potential Donor and Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598148] 300% 
poverty 
level or less  
Proof of Donor Financial Hardship Required  No Yes 
Covers Travel, Hotel, Parking and Meal Costs Related to Donor Evaluation, Surgery, and Follow- up Yes Yes 
Covers Lost Wages from Work Related to Donor Evaluation, Surgery, and Follow -up Yes No 
Covers Child Care Related Costs Related to Donor 
Evaluation, Surgery, and Follow -up Yes No 
Adheres to NOTA  Yes Yes 
Specific Intervention Details.  We will reimburse potential donors for approved financial 
assistance through the study by [CONTACT_598166], receipts, and other documentation of their need for reimbursement of qualified medical and non -medical 
expenses related to live kidney donation evaluation, donation, or convalescence (up to 
[ADDRESS_791048] LDKT procedures). Qualifying expenses  include travel, doctor’s  and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6042], lodging, meals, incidental expenses (e.g., parking, long distance calls), lost wages, and childcare costs incurred by [CONTACT_598167] (1) donor  
evaluation,  clinic visit or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  (2) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_598149], and/or (3) medical or surgical follow -up clinic visit or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. All 
receipts must be submitted within 1 year (365 days) of the date the kidney patient 
(recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]) joined the study. Participants will be permitted to utilize the $2100.00 for 
multiple approved purposes, as long as the total value is not greater than  $2100.00.  
Furthermore, more  than one potential  donor  may draw  from these funds,  as the total 
value of reimbursed expenses does not exceed the value of $2100.00 per patient study 
participant. We developed the live donor  financial assistance intervention following 
guidelines of the “Organ Donation and Recovery Improvement Act (ODRIA),” (Section 3, 
42 U.S.C. 274f) signed into law on April 5, 2004, establishing the authority and 
legislative parameters to provide reimbursement for travel and subsistence expenses 
incurred towards living organ donation. The intervention is also modeled after the 
National Living Donor Assistance Center (NLDAC), a federally funded  program 
administered by [CONTACT_598168] (DoT), Healthcare Systems Bureau 
(HSB), Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), [LOCATION_002] Health 
and Human Services (HHS) through a cooperative agreement with the University of 
Michi gan and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons 
(http://www.livingdonorassistance.org/default.aspx).  We will advise  all participants that it 
is possi ble that they may be disqualified from participating in other living donor 
assistance programs by [CONTACT_598169].  
Study  Phase 1 (Planning  Phase). Adaptation of TALK SWI for use in Transplant 
Centers 
Rationale.  The TALK SWI was designed with input from African American and non -
African American patients and families with CKD to address common concerns about 
LDKT.19The TALK booklet and video were screened  to ensure their appropriateness for
all persons considering  LDKT,  including  minority and non -minority persons with low (i.e. 
4thgrade) reading level and low health literacy.39The TALK Social Worker Behavioral
Support Interve ntion was originally conducted by [CONTACT_598170]. The TALK SWI protocol was therefore 
tailored to be used by [CONTACT_598171].  
TALK SWI Adaptation Proce dures. We reviewed the original TALK SWI protocol with 
transplant social workers and adapt the TALK SWI into their existing workflows. 
Adaptation focused on (1) ensuring the intervention  provides adequately addresses 
patients’  communication  and financial  needs in social  workers’ views,  and (2) ensuring 
the intervention  can be feasibly implemented  and sustained  by [CONTACT_598172] -
term. For instance, we asked social workers to identify the resources they typi[INVESTIGATOR_598150]. We also identified potential 
challenges transplant social workers typi[INVESTIGATOR_598151].  
Study  Phase 2 (Randomized  Controlled Trial  Phase) 
We will perform a randomized controlled trial to assess the effectiveness of TALK SWI 
and the TALK SWI plus financial support intervention to improve rates of LDKT among 
African American potential transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] o n the deceased donor kidney waiting 
list at the Duke Kidney and Pancreas Transplant Program compared to usual care. We 
will follow potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_411123] 1 year via  questionnaire and 2 years via medical 
records (post baseline questionnaire completion) to  assess live  kidney donor  activation 
on their behalves  (live donor  inquiries,  completed  new live donor  evaluations,  or live 
kidney donation) (primary outcome) . We will assess all primary outcomes at 1 year after 
baseline enrollment. We will also assess potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]’ self -reported behaviors 
reflecting their pursuit of LDKT, including their conduct of LDKT discussions with physicians and with their families and their identification of potential live donors.  
A.Study population:  We will recruit  a total of 300 (100 per each study arm)  adult African
American patients with ESRD who are currently on the deceased  donor  kidney
waiting list with no prior  kidney transplant from the Duke Kidney and Pancreas
Transplant Program (DKPTP). The DKPTP cares for a highly  diverse set of patients with
ESRD,  with nearly 55% of the deceased donor  kidney transplant  waiting list comprised of
African Americans annually. As of January 2014, the DKPTP had 297 (55%) African
American patients registered on the deceased donor kidney waiting list. DKPTP addedapproximately [ADDRESS_791049] the local Durham, NC population in which 19%
have incomes below the Federal Poverty Level.50
B.Study Setting:  The kid ney/pancreas transplant program at DKPTP is a highly innovati ve
center, providing national leadership in the development and implementation of
numerous clinical strategies to improve rates of live kidney donation and donor safet y
(performed first kidney tr ansplant in NC and had performed their 3000thkidney transplant
in 2010). The center also features a complete team of transplant surgeons, nurse
transplant coordinators, administrative transplant coordinators, psychologists, and social
workers to support bo th potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]’ and donors’ medical and psychosocial
needs. The program currently  does not have a social  worker program  tailored specifically
to address knowledge,  interpersonal, logistical  or financial barriers to LDKT in Afri can
American potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840].
C.Study Design:  We will recruit, enroll and then randomly assign participants to one of
three study conditions (“arms”).  We will follow  participants actively  for 1 year to assess
the effectiveness of interventions  to improve live kidney donation and receipt of LDKT
among study participants.
Arm 1. Usual Care (N=100):  Participants  randomly assigned  to this arm will receive their
usual  care with the transplant team while awaiting a deceased donor kidney transplant.
Participants are periodically contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] (approximately once per year) to establish their
continued desire to be listed on the waiting list and to address any administrative i ssues
related to transplant (i.e., up dated contact [CONTACT_598173]) by [CONTACT_598174].
They will be mailed the booklet and video at the end of the study.
Arm 2. TALK SWI (N=100):  Participants  randomly assigned  to this arm will receive the
TALK  SWI delivered by a transplant social worker.
Arm 3.  TALK SWI Plus Financial Assistance (N=100): Participants randomly assigned
to receive the TALK SWI Plus the Financial Assistance for Living Donor Expenses will
receive the TALK SWI as described for Arm 2. Study staff will also provide parti cipant s
with information about the study Live Donor  Financial  Assistance  Intervention,  and
provide instructions  on how to use the Intervention  (details on Financial Assistance
Intervention described above)
D.Study Outcomes and Assessments:  We perform assessments at baseline, [ADDRESS_791050] information of potential donors contact[CONTACT_30697] t he
center to inquire about donation proced ures on potential recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]’  behalves  and enter  it
in the Phoenix  (PHX)  transplant  application,  which  is part of the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_598152]. For our primary outcome, we will assess “live kidney donor activation”, defined 
as the composite rate of live kidney donor inquiries on behalf of participants (clinic 
records of individuals inquiring about the process of being considered for LDKT on 
participants’ behalves), completed live kidney donor transplant evaluations (recorded 
and tracked by [CONTACT_598175]), and live kidney donor transplants (LDKT) in 
each arm after [ADDRESS_791051]- hoc analyses. Secondary outcomes  will include 
measurement of behaviors reflecting patients’ and their families’ interest and pursuit of LDKT, including: self -reported  LDKT disc ussions with physicians, self -reported LDKT 
discussions with family, and identification of a potential live donor. We will also assess 
several other correlates  of participants’ willingness or ability to pursue LDKT, including 
their demographic characterist ics, family function, self -efficacy with regard to decision-
making about LDKT, perceptions of trust in their health care team. We will ask all 
participants about their use of any financial assistance programs, including the types and 
amounts of expenditure s reimbursed. We also will track expenditures reimbursed 
specifically by [CONTACT_598176] 3. We will  also passively follow participants for one 
additional year through their medical records to determine if participants achieve 
outcomes of interest after  1 year. 
Assessment of Environment and Intervention Cultural Competency:  We will measure the 
cultural competency of the DKPTP and transplant social workers using the Agency for 
Health Care Research and Quality CAHPS Cultural Competence Item Set35, desi gned
to capture patients’ perspectives on the  cultural competence  of health care providers.  
Items include  information  on (a) research  subject -health care provider communication 
including shared decision -making; (b) experiences of discrimination due to race, 
ethnicity, insurance, or language; (c) experiences leading to trust or distrust; and 
linguistic competency.  We will also add questions to ask specifically about  the 
communication  and shared  decision -making  skills of transplant social workers employin g 
TALK SWI.  
Intervention Fidelity and Uptake:  We will ask participants whether they have used the 
TALK Education Module and/or shared it with family members through telephone 
questionnaires administered at 4 and 12 months  follow  up. To assess social  workers’ 
fidelity  to the SWI protocol,  we will audiotape and transcribe all  TALK  SWI meetings  and 
assess the TALK  social  worker’s  adherence to key behaviors specified in the protocol. 
We have previously assessed social workers’ adherence to the TALK social worker 
intervention in this manner and found the TALK SWI could be consistently 
executed.47For participants randomly assigned to the Financial Assistance Intervention,
we will assess via questionnaire whether participants made others (i.e., family members) 
aware of their participation in the Financial Assistance Intervention. We will also assess family members’ inquiries to use the Intervention and types and amounts of expenditures 
they reimburse.  
Selection of Subjects Patient Participants : Patients with end stage renal disease, who have completed the evaluation 
for kidney transplantation,  are aged [ADDRESS_791052] will be recruited from the DKPTP. We will work with DKPTP/Maestro Care 
(Duke’s electronic medical record) to identify eligible patients over a period of potentially two 
years, or until we reach our sample size.  
NOTE:  We later expanded our inclusion criteria to include persons who have previously 
received a deceased  donor  kidney transplant  but who have not previously  received  a live donor  
kidney transplant.   
Family/Friend  Participants : Family/friend  participants will only be enrolled for patient  participants 
enrolled in Arms  [ADDRESS_791053] one family member or  friend to bring to the second TALK SWI 
meeting and be approached for participation in the study.  
Potential Live Kidney  Donor Participants : Potential live kidney donors will only become aware of 
the Donor Financial Support Intervention through referrals by [CONTACT_598177] [ADDRESS_791054] any family, friends, or acquaintances of enrolled patient 
participants. Patient participants in ARM 3 will be given a brochure (by [CONTACT_598178]) for the donor financial support program and encouraged to share the 
information with people.  
We will advise patient participants to ask potential donors to contact [CONTACT_598179]. The financial assistance program being offered as 
part of this study is intended to provid e reimbursement only in those circumstances when 
payment cannot reasonably be covered by [CONTACT_598180].  Under Federal law, 
reimbursement  to any living  organ donor  for travel  and other  qualifying  expenses may only be 
provided if the donor cannot receive reimbursement for these expenses from any of the 
following sources: 
1.any State compensation  program, an insurance  policy,  or any Federal or State health
benefits program;
2.an entity that provides health  services on a prepaid basis; or
3.the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598153].
All persons who wish to become living organ donors are eligible to receive reimbursement 
from this study for their travel  and qualified  expenses if they cannot receive 
reimbursement  from the sources  outlined above and if they meet all the requirements for 
donor reimbursement as outlined below:  
1.prove that they are either  U.S. citizens or lawfully  admitted residents of the U.S.;
2.have primary residence in the U.S.  or its t erritories;
3.travel is originating from the donor’s primary residence;
4.donor and recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598154] [ADDRESS_791055] (NOTA), as amended (42 U.S.C. 274e) which stipulated in part “ * * * (i)t
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly acquire, receive, or otherwise transfer any
human organ for valuable consideration for use in human transplantation  if the transfer
affects  interstate  commerce. The preceding sentence  does not apply with respect  to
human organ paired donation”;
5.the transplant  center where the donation procedure occurs attests  to its status  of good
standing  with the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (i.e., it is not a
Member Not in Good Standing); and  any individual  who in good faith incurs  qualifying  
expenses toward the intended  donation of an organ but with respect to whom no 
donation of the organ occurs . 
Subject Recruitment and Compensation  
We will recruit three types of participants: (1) patients (“patient participants”) with ESRD, (2) 
their family members and friends (“family/friend participants”), and (3) their potential live donors 
(“live kidney donor participants”) for this study. Participants will be informed their participation 
will have no effect on patients’ or their own subsequent insurance or health care, including their 
access to a kidney transplant, and that none of their data will  be given to their physicians so 
they could be personally  identified.  Participants  will also be advised  and they can refuse to 
participate in any aspect of the study at any time.  
A.Patient Participants
1.Screening, Recruitment,  and Random  Assignment
a)Potential patients will be identified  through  Maestro  Care and the DKPTP PHX
reporting system  for screening purposes and updates throughout the two year
recruitment period or until we reach our sample size.  
b)Study staff will review  the list to ensure potential  patient  participants meet  preliminary
study  criteria  (i.e., African American, age [ADDRESS_791056], no prior kidney transplant).
A letter from DKPTP, signed by [CONTACT_598181] a letter from [CONTACT_598210]  describing  the study  and offering potential participants an opportunity to 
contact [CONTACT_598182] -out from 
participation by [CONTACT_598183] a self -addressed mailed 
envelope, or by [CONTACT_598184] p rovided prior to the first 
telephone call. A consent form will be included for them to sign and return, and 
additional one to keep for their records. (Note: A label with the unique TALKS Study 
ID will be placed on the back of the signature [CONTACT_598209] w e have documented 
the return for the correct participant.) Risk and REALM questions will be included 
for them to refer to during the baseline questionnaire. 
c)Following the [ADDRESS_791057] not opted out, via telephone to confirm eligibility, answer any
questions, review the consent form and obtain verbal consent.  (If patients contact 
[CONTACT_598185], they are allowed  to take part then.)  Study staff will administer  the 
baseline questionnaire. Potential patient participants will be asked to also sign and 
return the written consent form within the week. We will attempt to remind them to return their signed consent form at future contacts.  
d)Random  assignment  to intervention  arms will take place immediately  following
completion  of the baseline questionnaire while patient participants are on t he
telephone so they can be informed of their upcoming contacts. 
e)Study staff will mail the DVD and booklet  to patient  participants randomly assign ed to
Arms  2 and 3, as well as the TALKS Financial Assistance Program pamphlet and
forms to Arm 3 only.  
f)Study staff will mail patient  participants a thank you note and $30 check for
completing  the baseline questionnaire.
Usual Care (Arm  1) 
h)Patient participants assigned  to receive Usual Care (Arm  1) will receive their care at
DKPTP as they usually would.
TALK Social Worker  Intervention  (Arms  2 and 3 only)  and Financial Intervention  
(Arm3  only)  
i)Patient participants randomly assigned to Arms 2 and 3 will be asked to review the
20-minute TALK video and booklet  related to living  kidney donation,  as well as
attend two meetings  with the study  Social Worker  to talk about LDKT. If the patien t
participant says they are unable to attend an in -person meeting due to distance,
lack of transportation, or their health issues does not allow them to travel, we w ill
offer the Social Worker meeting (SWI) via telephone. This will not be offered to any
patient participant unless they mention the barriers noted above. We will offer this
prospectively to newly consented patient participants as well as for those who wer e
consented previously and were unable to take part in the SWI meeting due to t hese
same barriers, (recorded in our database), we will contact [CONTACT_598186] r
this option.
j)Study staff will schedule patient  participants first meeting  with the study  Social Worker
following  the baseline questionnaire and contact [CONTACT_476] a few days prior to remind 
them of the meeting and to encourage them to review the DVD and booklet.  
In-Person  SWI:  Study staff will also mail patient  participants a reminder  letter with 
the appointment  date, time and directions. 
Telephone SWI: Study staff will ask if they want to provide a number to receive a 
text and/or an email address, or  prefer a mailed letter with the appointment date, 
time and toll -free WebEx phone number and access  code to call in to a social  
worker session with the study  Social Worker.  Study staff will also remind them of 
their appointment via phone/text/email a day or so prior.  
k)In-person  SWI: On the day of their first meeting  with the study  Social Worker,  study
staff will meet  the patient participant 30 minutes prior to the meeting to review t he
DVD and booklet.  
Telephone SWI: On the day of their first meeting, the Social Worker will call in to 
the toll -free WebEx number. If the patient participant does not join the call, study 
staff will contact [CONTACT_598187]/text to remind them of the call and 
reschedule if needed. If th e patient participant joins the call, the Social  Worker  will 
verify  they have reviewed the DVD and booklet.  If they have not viewed the DVD,  
the Social Worker will encourage them to do so after the call and will proceed with 
the social worker session.  
l)The patient participant will then meet/talk with the study Social Worker for up to one
hour. We will audiotape the social  worker sessions (In-person  SWI:  encrypted 
audio voice recorder;  Telephone SWI:  encrypted audio voice recorder using 
speakerphone in a GIM  private office) as described in the initial consent. If they 
refuse, the sessions will continue and only handwritten notes will be taken by [CONTACT_598188].  
m)In-person SWI: Patient participants will be asked to attend a second visit with the
study Social Worker to further  discuss  their possible  pursuit  of LDKT.  They will be
instructed  they may bring adult  family  members and  friends to the second session,
if they desire.  We will schedule the second Social Worker  session at a time that  is
convenient for patient  participants and any family  members  or friends they wish to
bring to the second session. Telephone SWI: Patient participants will be asked to
take part in a second telephone SWI session with the study Social Worker to furthe r
discuss  their possible pursuit of LDKT. They will be asked to invite adult family
members and friends they want to take part in the second session. Study staff will 
attempt to schedule the  call at that time. They will ask the patient  participant  if they 
want to provide a number  to receive a text and/or an email address, or prefer a 
mailed letter with the appointment date, time and toll -free WebEx phone number  
and access code to call in to a social  worker session with the study  Social Worker.  
They will be asked to share the call -in information with family/friends who may want 
to join the second SWI session.  
n)In-person SWI:  Study staff will administer a brief 10 -minute hardcopy questionnaire
to the patient participant immediately following the Social Worker session to obtain
feedback about the acceptability of the TALK SWI. We will provide assistance with 
reading the question s and checking the responses if needed.  Telephone SWI: 
Once the SWI session is complete, the Social Worker will ask the patient participant to remain on the line to schedule their next session,  complete  their post assessment  
and paperwork for payment. The Social Worker will leave the call and immediately 
notify one of the other study staff to join the call and  
1)administer  the brief 10-minute  questionnaire 2) complete  the paperwork required
for payment;  and, 3) if in Arm 3, see item (o) below.
Financial Intervention  (Arm  3 only)  
o)In-person  SWI:  Patient participants in ARM  [ADDRESS_791058] study staff if interes ted. 
Telephone SWI: Patient participants in ARM [ADDRESS_791059] study staff if interested. Study staff will mail 
additional copi[INVESTIGATOR_598155].  
TALK Social Worker  Intervention (Arms  2 and 3 only)  
p)Study staff will mail patient  participants a thank you note and $[ADDRESS_791060] session with the study Social Worker.
q)In-person  SWI:  Study staff will mail patient  participants a reminder  letter with the
appointment  date,  time and directions. Study staff will contact [CONTACT_598189] s
by [CONTACT_756] a few days prior to their second Social Worker session to remind them 
of their meeting and to invite any family members or friends they  wish to bring to 
the second session.  
Telephone SWI: If the patient participant did not schedule the second social worker 
session, study staff will contact [CONTACT_598190] a date and time. Study staff will ask the patient participant if they want to provide a number  
to receive a text and/or  
an email  address,  or prefer a mailed  letter with the appointment  date,  time and toll -
free WebEx phone number and access code to call in to a social worker session with the study Social Worker. Study staff will email, text and/or mail patient 
participants a reminder letter with the appointment date, time and toll -free WebEx 
phone number and access code. Study staff will also remind them of their 
appointment via phone/text/email a day or so prior to the session. Study staff will 
remind t hem to share the call- in information with family/friends. 
r)In-person  SWI: On the day of their second session with the study  Social Worker,
study  staff will meet  with the patient participant and their consenting family 
member(s)/friend(s). Telephone SWI:  On the day of their second session,  Study 
Staff will call in to the WebEx  toll-free line. If family/friends call in, the Study Staff 
will verify they are 18 or older, review the study and obtain verbal consent from 
each family/friend as well as request  a contact [CONTACT_598191] a brief 10 -minute questionnaire via phone 
immediately following the social worker ses sion; and, 2) complete the paperwork 
required for payment.  If the patient  participant  does not join the call, study  staff will 
contact [CONTACT_598192]/text  to remind them of the call and 
reschedule if needed. The session cannot occur without the patient participant 
present even if family/friends have joined the call. No family/friends will be 
consented without the patient participant present on the call. Stud y staff will contact 
[CONTACT_598193]. Once family/friends 
are consented, the study staff will leave the call and the Social Worker will join to 
begin the session.  
s) The patient  participants and family/frien d participant(s) will then meet/talk  with the
study  Social Worker  for up to one hour.  The session will be audio recorded  (In-
person  SWI:  encrypted audio voice recorder;  Telephone SWI: encrypted audio 
voice recorder using speakerphone in a GIM private office) as described in their 
consents, but if they refuse to be audio recorded,  the session will continue  and only 
handwritten notes will be taken by [CONTACT_598194]. 
t)In-person SWI: Study staff will administer a brief 10 -minute hardcopy questionnair e
to the patient participant immediately following the Social Worker session to obtain 
feedback about the acceptability of the TALK SWI.  We will provide assistance  with 
reading the questions and checking the responses  if needed.  Teleph one SWI: 
Once the SWI session is complete, the Social Worker will ask the patient participant 
to remain on the line to complete  their post assessment  and paperwork for 
payment.  They will remind the family/friends that Study Staff will contact [CONTACT_598195].  The Social 
Worker  will leave  the call and immediately  notify one of the other  study  staff to join 
the call. The Study Staff will 1) administer the brief 10 -minute questionnaire, and 2) 
complete the paperwork required  for payment.  If consented  family/friends attended, 
the Study Staff will call the family/friends to 1) administer the brief 10 -minute 
questionnaire,  and 2) complete  the paperwork required for payment.   
u) Study staff will mail patient participants a thank you note and $50 check for
completing the session with the family/friend  participant(s) and study  Social Worker.  
2.Assessments
v)All patient participants (regardless of their random assignment) will be contact[CONTACT_6811] 4
and 12 months to complete  follow  up questionnaires via telephone.  Study staff will
mail a thank you note and $30 check for completion of each of the questionnaires. 
All questionnaires are approximately 60 minutes in length.  
w)All patient participants will be follow ed for 2 years (post baseline questionnair e
completion) via electronic medical  records  (i.e., MaestroCare  and DKPTP PHX
reporting system) to passively  assess live kidney donor activation on their behalves 
(live donor inquiries, completed new live donor evaluations, or live kidney donation) 
as well as their status on their wait list (active/inactive). 
B. Family/Friend Participants
Adult family  members  and friends are only eligible  to participate in the TALK  SWI session 
if they agree to participate after being invited by a patient participant.  
In-Person  SWI: At patient  participants’  request,  they will attend the SWI session with the 
study  Social Worker  and patient participant and will be approached to assess their 
willingness to participate in the study by [CONTACT_598196]. 
Telephone SWI:  Patient participants will share  the call-in information with family/friends 
whom  they want to join the session. They will be asked their willingness to participate in 
the study by [CONTACT_598197].  
1.Recruitment  and Consent
a)In-Person  SWI: When  family/friends (up to 5 family  members  per patient  participant)
attend the second social worker session with patient participants, study staff will
ask to meet with potential family/friend participants separately from patient 
participants, to verify they a re 18 or older, review the consent form and obtain their 
signature. Study staff will tell family/friend participants they will be asked to join the patient participant and study Social Worker to talk about LDKT one time only and 
that their session will be audio recorded as described in their consent, which they 
can refuse at any time. Study staff will also tell family/friend participants  they will 
complete  a brief 5-[ADDRESS_791061] gender, race and ethnicity, date of birth, mailing address, if 
they are a current Duke employee, and social security number (required by [CONTACT_598198]) and ask what they thought of the meeting.  
Telephone SWI:  Patient participants will be provided the call-in information  for the 
the social  worker session and asked to share with any family/friends they wish to 
join the call. Once family/friends join the call, Study staff will ask each family/friend 
to verify they are 18 or older, revi ew the study and obtain verbal consent. 
Study staff will tell family/friends they will be asked to join the patient  participant  and 
study  Social Worker  in a telephone conference call to talk about LDKT one time 
only and that their session will be audio recorded as described in their consent, 
which they can refuse at any time. Study staff will also tell family/friends they will be  
asked to complete  a brief 5-10 minute  questionnaire immediately  following  the 
session (study staff will ask them to prov ide a contact [CONTACT_598199]) to collect gender, race and ethnicity, date of 
birth, mailing address, if they are a current Duke employee, and social security 
number (required by [CONTACT_598200]) and ask what they thought of 
the session. Once the family/friend consents, study staff will document the date and 
time of the consent.  
2.TALK Social Worker  Intervention
b)The patient  participant  and family/friend participant(s) will then meet  with/talk to the
study  Social Worker  for up to one hour.
3.Assessments
c)In-Person SWI: Study staff will administer a brief 10 -minute hardcopy
questionnaire immediately following the social worker session to obtain f eedback
about the acceptability of the TALK SWI. We will provide assistance with readi ng
the questions and checking the response s if needed. Telephone SWI:  Study staff
will 1) contact [CONTACT_598201]/friend participant  and administer  the brief 10-
minute questionnaire via phone immediately following the social worker session;
and, 2) complete the paperwork required for payment.
d)Study staff will mail family/friend participants a thank you note and $[ADDRESS_791062] social  worker
session (discussed  in-person for In-person SWI and via phone for Telephone  SWI).
Study staff will advise  potential  participants that they may provide this information to
potentially interested donors if they wish to, and that potentially interested donor
s
should contact [CONTACT_598202].They will be given pamphlets and forms with study contact [CONTACT_3031] .
b.When  potential  donors contact [CONTACT_598203],  study  staff will discuss  the
program. Study staff will also mail a brochure describing the financial assist ance
program to potential donor(s) and forms required for possible reimbursements from ourprogram if they choose to take part.
c.Study staff will schedule a call back time to review the mailed materials and seek
participation if interested. Study staff  will inform them that their participation in the
financial assistance program offered by [CONTACT_598204], state or private program (e.g. National
Living Donor Assistance Center (NLDAC)). Each potential donor participant will be
offered a “bank” of $2,[ADDRESS_791063] udy
participant is $2,100.
d.Study staff will contact  [CONTACT_598205] a return call
to answer any questions  and seek participation. Interested potential donors will t hen
undergo approved consent procedures and enroll in the study via telephone. W e
anticipate that 70% of the  [ADDRESS_791064] one potential donor who will utilize the donor financial support program and w ill
therefore also be included as human  subjects in this study  (N=70). Study staff will
obtain potential  donor  participants’  gender,  race and ethnicity, date of birth, maili ng
address, telephone number, and if they are a current Duke employee (required by D uke
for payment of incentives).
e.Potential donors incurring  eligible  expenses will be asked to complete  a Living  Donor
Assistance  Program  Donor Worksheet summarizing expenses as well as sign an
attestation form to confirm that they understand the legal restrictions of the intervention.
This is required with each submission of receipts. Study staff will mail po tential donors
checks reimbursing approved eligible expenses.
BIBLIOGRAPHY  AND REFERENCES CITED 
1.USRDS 2010 Annual Data Report: Atlas of Chronic  Kidney  Disease  and End- Stage
Renal Disease in the [LOCATION_002]. 2011; http://www.usrds.org/adr.htm .
2.Wolfe RA, Ashby [CONTACT_14688], Milford EL, et al. Comparison of mortality in all patients on dialysis,
patients on dialysis  awaiting  transplantation,  and recipi[INVESTIGATOR_22880] a first cadaveric  transplant. 
N Engl J Med. 1999;341(23):1725 -1730.  
3.Ichikawa Y, Fujisawa  M, Hirose  E, et al. Quality  of life in kidney transplant  patients.
Transplant Proc. 2000;32(7):1815 -1816.
4.Jofre  R, Lopez- Gomez  JM, Moreno  F, Sanz- Guajardo  D, Valderrabano  F. Changes  in
quality of life after renal transplantation. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;32(1):93 -100.
5.Manninen  DL, Evans  RW, Dugan  MK. In: Terasaki PI, ed. Work  disability,  functional
limitations, and  the health status  of kidney transplantation  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_598156].Los
Angeles,  CA: UCLA Tissue Typi[INVESTIGATOR_163956]; 1991:[ADDRESS_791065] -effectiveness of organ
donation:  evaluating  investment  into donor  action and other  donor  initiatives.  Am J
Transplant. 200 4;4(4):569 -573.
7.(SRTR)  OPaTNOaSRoTR.  OPTN / SRTR 2010 Annual Data Report 2011;
http://www.srtr.org /annual_reports/2010/.  Accessed  June 14, 2012.
8.Hall YN, Choi AI, Xu P, O'Hare AM, Chertow GM. Racial ethnic differences in rates and
determinants of deceased donor  kidney transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol. Apr
2011;22(4):743 - 751.
9.Hariharan S, Johnson CP, Bresnahan BA, Taranto SE, McIntosh MJ, Stablein D.
Improved graft survival  after renal  transplantation  in the United  States, 1988 to 1996. N
Engl J Med. 2000;342(9): 605- 612.
10.Gaston  RS, Ayres I, Dooley  LG, Diethelm  AG. Racial equity in renal  transplantation.  The
disparate impact of HLA -based allocation. JAMA. 1993;270(11):1352 -1356.
11.Young  CJ, Gaston  RS. Renal transplantation  in black  Americans. N Engl J
Med. 2000;343(21): 1545- 1552.
12.Terasaki PI, Cecka  JM, Gjertson  DW, Takemoto  S. High survival  rates of kidney
transplants  from spousal and living unrelated donors. N Engl J Med.1995;333(6):333 -
336.
13.Gore  JL, Danovitch  GM, Litwin  MS, Pham  PTT,  Singer  JS. Disparities  in the Utilization  of
Live Donor Renal Transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2009;9(5):1124 -1133.
14.Kasiske BL, Snyder JJ, Matas AJ, Ellison MD, Gill JS, Kausz AT. Preemptive kidney
transplantation:  the advantage and the advantaged.  J Am Soc Nephrol. May
2002;13(5):1358 -1364.
15.Finkelste in FO, Story K, Firanek C, et al. Perceived knowledge among patients cared for
by [CONTACT_598206]-stage  renal  disease  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] .
Kidney  Int.Nov 2008;74(9):[ADDRESS_791066] of patients'  preferences
on racial differences in access to renal transplantation. N Engl J Med.Nov 25
1999;341(22):1661 -1669.
17.Grubbs  V, Gregorich  SE, Perez- Stable EJ, Hsu CY. Health  literacy  and access to kidney
transplantation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.Jan 2009;4(1):195 -200.
18.Boulware  LE, Meoni  LA, Fink NE, et al. Preferences,  knowledge,  communication  and
patient - physician discussion of living kidney transplantation in African Ameri can
families. Am J Transplant. Jun 2005;5(6):1503 -1512.
19.Boulware LE, Hill -Briggs F, Kraus ES, et al. Identifying and addressing barriers to
African American  and non-African American  families' discussions  about  preemptive living
related kidney transplantation. Prog Transplant. Jun 2011;21(2):97 -104; quiz 105.
20.Burroughs TE, Waterman AD, Hong BA. One organ donation, three perspectives:
experiences of donors, recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840],  and third parties with living  kidney donation. Prog
Transplant. 2003;13(2):[ADDRESS_791067] SL, Simpson  KS, Chavin  KD, et al. Racial differences in copi[INVESTIGATOR_598157]. Am J Ki dney
Dis. Feb 2006; 47(2):324-331. 22. Boulware LE, Ephraim P, Hill-Briggs F, et al. Effectiveness of Educational and Behavioral Interventions to Improve Pursuit of Pre-emptive Living-Related Kidney Transplantation: the Talking About Living Kidney Donation (TALK) Study. Am J Transplant.2011;2(Supplement S2): 28-211. 23. Burt VL, Cutler JA, Higgins M, et al. Trends in the prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension in the adult US population. Data from the health examination surveys, 1960 to 1991. Hypertension.1995;26(1):60-69. 24. Stephens GW, Gillaspy JA, Clyne D, Mejia A, Pollak VE. Racial differences in the incidence of end stage renal disease in types I and II diabetes mellitus. Am J Kidney Dis.1990;15(6):562-567. 25. Alexander CM, Landsman PB, Teutsch SM, Haffner SM. NCEP-defined metabolic syndrome, diabetes and prevalence of coronary heart disease among NHANES III participants age 50 years and older. Diabetes.2003;52(5):1210-1214. 26. Vassalotti JA, Li S, McCullough PA, Bakris GL. Kidney early evaluation program: a community- based screening approach to address disparities in chronic kidney disease. Semin Nephrol.Jan 2010;30(1):66-73.  27. Lunsford SL, Simpson KS, Chavin KD, et al. Racial disparities in living kidney donation: is there a lack of willing donors or an excess of medically unsuitable candidates? Transplantation.2006;82 (7):876-881. 28. Clarke KS, Klarenbach S, Vlaicu S, Yang RC, Garg AX. The direct and indirect economic costs incurred by [CONTACT_14690]-a systematic review. Nephrol Dial Transplant.2006;21(7):1952- 1960. 29. Boulware LE, Ratner LE, Sosa JA, et al. The general public's concerns about clinical risk in live kidney donation. Am J Transplant.2002;2(2):186-193. 30. Boulware LE, Troll MU, Wang NY, Powe NR. Public attitudes toward incentives for organ donation: a national study of different racial/ethnic and income groups. Am J Transplant.2006;6 (11):2774-2785. 31. United Network for Organ Sharing. National Living Donor Assistance Center. http://www. livingdonorassistance.org/. Accessed June 14, 2012. 32. The Authors for the Live Organ Donor Consensus G. Consensus Statement on the Live Donor. JA MA.2000;284(22):2919-2926. 33. Shanley C. Supporting Family Carers Through Telephone-Mediated Group Programs: Opportunities For Gerontological Social Workers. J Gerontol Soc Work.2008;51(3/4):199-209. 34. Pardeck JT, Yuen FY. Family health: an emerging paradigm for social workers. J Health Soc Policy.2001;13(3):59-74. 35. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. CAHPS Cultural Competence Item Set. 2012; http://www.cahps.ahrq.gov/, 2012. 36. Segev DL, Powe NR, Troll MU, Wang NY, Montgomery RA, Boulware LE. Willingness of the [LOCATION_002] general public to participate in kidney paired donation. Clin Transplant.Mar [ADDRESS_791068] TA, Powe NR. Understanding disparities in donor behavior: race and gender differences in willingness to donate blood and cadaveric organs. Med Care.2002;40(2):85-95. 38. Boulware LE, Ratner LE, Sosa JA, Cooper LA, LaVeist TA, Powe NR. Determinants of willingness to donate living related and cadaveric organs: identifying opportunities for intervention. Transplantation.2002;73(10):1683-1691. 39. Boulware LE, Hill-Briggs F, Kraus ES, et al. Protocol of a Randomized Controlled Trial of Culturally Sensitive Interventions to Improve African Americans' and Non-African 
Americans' Early, Shared, and Informed Consideration of Live Kidney Transplantation: The talking about Live Kidney Donation (TALK) study. BMC Nephrology.2011;12:34. 40. Sheu J, Ephraim PL, Powe NR, et al. African american and non-african american patients' and families' decision making about renal replacement therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Qual Health Res.Jul 2012;22(7):997- 1006. 41. Boulware LE, Troll MU, Plantinga LC, Powe NR. The association of state and national legislation with living kidney donation rates in the [LOCATION_002]: a national study. Am J Transplant.Jul 2008; 8(7):1451-1470. 42. Melancon JK, Kucirka LM, Boulware LE, et al. Impact of Medicare coverage on disparities in access to simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation. American Journal of Transplantation: official journal of the American Society of Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons.Dec 2009;9(12):2785-2791. 43. Garonzik-Wang JM, Berger JC, Ros RL, et al. Live Donor Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]: Finding Live Kidney Donors by [CONTACT_598207]. Transplantation.Mar 28 2012. 44. Bray JH. Family Assessment: Current Issues in Evaluating Families. Family Relations.1995;44(4): 469-477. 45. Cox RP. Theory-based Family Problem Solving Interventions. Clinical Excellence for Nurse Practitioners.2002;5(6):3-12. 46. Tallman I. The family as a small problem solving group. Journal of Marriage and the Family.1970;32(1):94-104. 47. DePasquale N H-BF, Darrell L, Lewis Boyér L, Ephraim PL, Boulware LE. Feasibility and Acceptability of the TALK Social Worker Intervention to Improve Consideration of Live Kidney Transplants among Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease. Health Soc Work.Nov 2012;37(4):234- 349. 48. U. S. Department of Labor BoLS. National Compensation Survey, December 2009-January 2011. http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ocs/sp/nctb1477.pdf. Accessed June 19, 2012. 49. [LOCATION_002] Department of Agriculture. Expenditures on Children by [CONTACT_598208], 2010. 2010; http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/publications/crc/crc2010.pdf. Accessed June 19, 2012. 50. Bureau USC. State and County QuickFacts. Data derived from Population Estimates, American Community Survey, Census of Population and Housing, State and County Housing Unit Estimates, County Business Patterns, Nonemployer Statistics, Economic Census, Survey of Business Owners, Building Permits, Consolidated Federal Funds Report 2012; http://quickfacts. census.gov/qfd/states/37/3719000.html, 2012. 51. Rodrigue JR, Cornell DL, Lin JK, Kaplan B, Howard RJ. Increasing live donor kidney transplantation: a randomized controlled trial of a home-based educational intervention. Am J Transplant.Feb 2007;7(2):394-401. 52. Clemens KK, Thiessen-Philbrook H, Parikh CR, et al. Psychosocial health of living kidney donors: a systematic review. Am J Transplant. 2006;6(12):2965-2977. 53. The Authors for the Live Organ Donor Consensus G. Consensus Statement on the Live Donor. JA MA 2000;284(22):2919-2926.  