Water-based Activity 
to Enhance Recall in 
Veterans 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Version Date: 10/15/2105
02. Specific Aims
Persons  with Mild Cognitive  Impairment  (MCI)  have  essentially  normal  functional  activities  yet experience 
cognitive  impairment,  of which  they are aware.  They  are ideal  subjects  for intervention because they are 
able to more  fully participate in their treatment  than individuals  with greater  cognitive  impairment.  
Interventions  at this juncture may prevent  or delay  additional cognitive  impairment.   Rates  of conversion to 
Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) can range from 4.9%  to 16% (Mitchell & Ahiri- Feshki,  2009),  with a predicted 
global  AD preva lence of 106.8 million  by 2050.  It has been suggested  that an intervention that could delay  
the onset  or conversion to AD by a little as 12 months  would lead to 9.2 million  fewer  global  AD cases  
(Brookme yer et al., 2007).   
Cognitive  t raining  (CT) programs  have been  established as an efficacious  alternative to pharmacological  
treatments  for the improvement  of memory  in nondemented  older  adults  (Rebok  et al., 2007);  however,  at 
higher  levels  of cognitive  impairment  beneficial  effects  were  reduced (O’Hara  et al., 2007).  Nonetheless,  our 
most  recent  work  using an established CT program  demonstrated some  benefit  for patients  with MCI,  albeit  
less than seen in healthy  older  adults  (Yesavage et al., 2008).  Efforts to develop augmentation strategies  to 
further  enhance the benefit  those  with cognitive  impairment  may gain from these treatments  have had some  
success.   Specifically,  physical  exercise has been  shown to have both immediate and long-term effects  on 
memory  (Geda et al., 2010)  and a possible protective effect  against  some neurodegenerative diseases  
(Pontifex  et al., 2009).  The majority  of the physical  exercise research has examined the cognitive  effects  of 
aerobic  and resistance exercises  using a combination of walking  or gym-based activities.  While  these  
exercises  are successful in reaching recommended cardiovascular  training zone,  many  older  adults,  and 
particularly  older  veterans,  are unable to participate in these  weight -bearing exercises  due to numerous  
medical  conditions  including  rheumatoid and osteoarthritis,  gait and balance disorders,  and limited  mobility.   
Water -based  ex ercise is the fourth most  popular  sports  activity  in the United  States  and is frequently  
recommended  for older  adults  (US Census  Bureau,  2012);  however,  little is known about  the impact  it has 
on cognitive  function.  This is the first study  to include a water -based exercise  training  program  as a 
component  of an intervention for veterans  with MCI.  
Few studies  have examined the effective ness  of an exercise training program  coupled w ith a memory  
training program.  Given  the success of exercise programs  with healthy  older  adults  and evidence of some  
positive  effects  of in MCI patients,  it is important  to determine if alternative approaches,  such as water -
based activity,  will extend the benefit  for those  individuals  in whom  weight -bearing  exercise is not possible.   
The knowledge gained from this proposal  will lay the groundwork  for a large-scale clinical trial testing  
hypotheses  about  the efficacy of nonpharmacological  interventions  that target  cognitive  impairment  in 
persons  with MCI.  The goal of pi[INVESTIGATOR_203406] a large -
scale clinical trial in terms  of recruitment  and retention of appropriate  subjects,  inclusion  and exclusion 
criteria , appropriateness  of treatment  condition,  and measures.    
The aims  listed  below  will be tested  in a two-phase single -arm trial conducted at the VA Palo Alto Health 
Care  System  (VAPAHCS)  that will include:  1) a physical  exercise phase and 2) a cognitive  training phase.  
The six-month  exercise phase will consist of non-weight  bearing water -based physical  exercises.  After  the 
six-month exercise phase,  veterans  will complete a two-week cognitive  training  program.  This two-year 
proposal  will include 50 veterans  with MCI aged 50 years  to 90.   
Specific  Aim 1: To determine the feasibility  of a randomized,  controlled trial combining physical  activity  + 
cognitive  training in persons  with MCI as shown by [CONTACT_203427].  
Specific  Aim 2: To evaluate the appropriateness  of suggested inclusion  and exclusion criteria  for the aims  
of the proposed project.   
Specific  Aim 3: To evaluate appropriateness  of the water -based  physical  exercise + cognitive  training  
(WATER  + CT) conditions  for study  goals.   
Specific  Aim 4: To assess the ability  of selected outcome  measurement  techniques  to determine  the 
efficacy of WATER+CT.  
Specific  Aim 5:  To examine outcome  “moderator ” and “mediator ” measurement  techniques  to determine:  
a)in whom  and under  what  conditions  clinically  relevant  change  occurs and b) the mechanisms  through
which  clinically  relevant  change  occurs.Specific Aims Page 17Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
2a. RESEARCH PLAN       
BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE  
Veterans  are at an Increased Risk of Cognitive  Decline . Vietnam  veterans  are at an increased risk of cognitive  
decline due to multiple  psychiatric  and medical  illnesses  (Krishnan et al., 2005;  Office  of Quality  and Perfo r-
mance VHA,  2000)  such as Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (Yaffe  et al., 2010),  sleep apnea  (O’Hara  et al., 
2009),  traumatic  brain  injury  (Bazararian et al., 2009),  vascular  risk factors  such as hypertension,  hypercholes-
terolamenia,  diabetes mellitus,  smoking,  and obesity  (Richard  et al., 2010),  and lifestyle  factors  such  as phys i-
cal and cognitive  inactivity  (Yaffe et al., 2014).  These  risk factors  account  for a significant  number  of the cases  
of Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) in veterans.  In 2020 ,it is estimated 75,000 veterans  will develop AD due to hyper-
tension;  63,000  to obesity;  55,000 to smoking;  51,000 to physical  inactivity;  49,000 to dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035];  and 19,000  
to diabetes  (Veitch  et al., 2013).  Clearly  veterans  are particularly  vulnerable to cognitive  decline,  and thus are 
in need of methods  to prevent  or delay  cognitive  impairment.    
Modifiable  Risk Factors  Are a Target  for Intervention.  Veterans  have numerous  risk factors  for cognitive  im-
pairment;  however  some  of these  risk factors  are modi fiable  thus may be a target  for intervention.  It has been 
estimated that a 25% reduction of modifiable risk factors  could prevent  492,000 cases in the United  States  and 
up to 3 million  cases  globally.  Modifiable risk factors include health -related  and lifestyle factors  like hyperten-
sion,  obesity,  depression,  physical  inactivity,  smoking,  diabetes,  and cognitive  inactivity  (Yaffe et al., 2014T).  
These  health- related  and lifestyle  factors  are an opportunity  for intervention to prevent  or delay  cognitive  im-
pairment  in veterans.  
Cognitive  Training Has Limitations  and Identification of Augmentation Strategies  is Necessary. Several  groups,  
including  our own,  have documented  the efficacy of cognitive  training (CT) in non-demented  older  adults  (Ball 
et al., 2002;  Fairchild  & Scogin,  2010).  A meta -analytic  study  of CT in healthy  older  adults  revealed that com-
pared to a control  or treatment  as usual,  CT improved performance  on measures  of executive functioning  
(working  memory; processing speed),  measures  of memory  (face-name  [CONTACT_203453];  immediate  recall;  and paired 
associates);  and general  composite of memory  (Kelly  et al., 2014).  Efforts  to extend these  benefits  to those  
with MCI have had modest  success with effect  sizes ranging  from 0.00 to 2.52 (Jean et al., 2010).  Perso ns 
with MCI have been shown  ability  to learn specific information  such as new verbal  information  (Akhtar  et al., 
2006)  and name -face pairs,  and that this learning  is aided by [CONTACT_203428]-
names  (Hampstead  et al., 2008).  Yet even with these  aids,  the cognitive  gains  seen in persons  with MCI are 
less than those  seen  in non-demented older  adults  (Fairchild  et al., 2013,  Stott et al., 2011).  
Physical  Activity  is Beneficial  to Cognition.  It is widely  accepted that regular  physical  activity leads  to improved 
health outcomes  (Sun  et al., 2010)  and these  benefits  have been  found  to extend to late life cognitive  function.  
A recent  meta -analysis  reported  that physical  activity  was associated with an 18% reduction of the risk of de-
mentia (Blondell  et al., 2014).  Furthermore,  there  appears  to be a dose  response with the intensity  of physical  
activity  and cognitive  functioning in older  adults  as moderate  to vigorous  intensity  physical  activity  is associated  
with better  cognitive  function than low light intensity  physical  activity  (Kerr  et al., 2013).  While  exercising  at 
mid-life reduced risk of MCI by 39%,  exercising in late-life reduced  risk of MCI by 33% (Geda  et al. 2010),  thus 
it would seem  that exercise is an intervention that could be implemented  throughout  the lifespan.  
Several  possibilities  exist as to how physical  activity  impacts  cognition.  Two primary  mechanisms  of change  
that have received increased attention  are: 1) improvement  in cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_203408]-
lar risk factors  (Richardson et al., 2001) and 2) increased expression  of brain derived neurotropic  factor  
(BDNF).  BDNF  induces  hippocampal neurogenesis,  which  influences  neural  plasticity  and results  in improved 
learning and memory  (Lista  & Sorrentino,  2010).  Both vascular risk factors  and BDNF  are modifiable  through  
physical  activity  thus both present  as potential  mechanisms  through  which  physical  activity  exerts  its positive  
effect  on cognition.  It is plausible  that by [CONTACT_203429],  we can augment  the effects  of a cognitive  training program.  Put a different,  if we 
are able to improve  cognitive  mechanisms,  such as working memory, PRIOR  to cognitive  training,  persons  with 
MCI may receive greater  benefit  from the cognitive training program  due to improved neural  plasticity.  Please  
see the Preliminary  Work  section for supporting evidence from our Current  Work.  
Exercise Trials  for Older  Adults  Show  Promise  as an Intervention.  Clinical trials  of physical  exercise and its ef-
fects  on cognition  in older  adults  with and without  cognitive  decline have noted benefits  ranging  from significant  
gains  in one-third of the studies  of healthy  older  adults  and to significant  gains  in two-thirds of the studies  of 
cognitively  impaired older  adults  (Colcombe  et al., 2 003; van Uffelin  et al., 2008).  There  is also some  evidence 
that exercise trials  show  promise as an intervention to prevent  or delay  cognitive  impairment  in persons  with 
MCI (Baker  et al., 2010)  but this research  is plagued  by [CONTACT_203430] n designs,  lack Research Plan Page 18Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
of adequate follow -up, and lack of objective  measurement  of physical  activity (Blondell  et al., 2014).  Further-
more, virtually  all exercise trials  targeting  cognitive  impairment  have used land- based and weight -bearing 
physical exercises.  This effectively limits  the generalizability  of the results  to those  who are physically  able to 
engage  in those  types  of exercises.  Yet, many  older  adults,  and particularly  older veterans,  have injuries  or 
illnesses  that limit their mobility  and their ability  to participate in weight -bearing exercises  at the recommended 
level.  Given  the possible dose- response between physical  activity  intensity  and cognitive  functioning (Kerr  et 
al., 2014) , it is imperative  that we identify  cognitively  beneficial  non-weight  bearing  physical  exercises  in which  
persons  with limited  mobility  can fully participate.  
What  is the Relationship Between Non-Weight  Bearing Exercises  and Cognition? Older  veterans experience 
mobility -limiting  injuries  and illnesses  (i.e., obesity,  diabetes,  and degenerative  disc and cartilage  diseases)  at 
high rates  (Yaffe  et al., 2014).  For those  with mobility  issues, weight -bearing activities,  such as walking, jog-
ging,  or running;  are exceedingly  difficult  if not impossible.  Non-weight  bearing exercises  are ideal  for persons  
with mobility  issues  due to injury,  illness,  or advanced age. Water -based  activity  presents  as an ideal  form of 
non-weight  bearing exercise as it allows  for freedom  of movement  while  increasing flexibility,  cardiovascular  
endurance,  and muscular  strength.  It has been  shown  to produce  positive  hypotensive effects  and improved 
vascular  functioning  in formerly  sedentary  older  adults  (Nualnim  et al., 2012).  No study  to date has used aqua t-
ic exercise as an intervention to improve  cognitive function,  yet there  is some  evidence that aquatic  exercise is 
associated with better  cognitive  function.  In a cross -sectional  analysis,  Abou- Dest and colleagues  (2012)  com-
pared young adults,  sedentary  older  adults,  and self-identified older  swimmers  on measures  of cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_141876]-
ry fitness  and executive function.  While  young adults  performed  better  than older  adults  on all measures  of 
cognitive  function,  regular  swimming  in older adults  was related to better  performance  on some  tasks  of ex ecu-
tive functioning.   
Combined Training Programs  Have  Mixed  Effects.  Given  the beneficial  effects  of physical  exercise and CT on 
cognition , the reasons  for their inclusion  in a combined t rial are apparent.  Recently,  Barnes  and colleagues  
(2013)  published  the findings  of the MAX  Trial,  which  was a RCT that examined the combined effects  of phys i-
cal activity  plus mental  activity  on cognitive  function in a group of older  adults  with cognitive  complaints.  The 
study  compared four treatment  conditions  that combined different  types  of physical  exercise (stretching  vs. 
aerobic)  with different  types  of mental  activity (computer -based  cognitive  training  vs. educational DVDs)  over 
the course of 12 weeks.  Results  indicated that while  all participants  evidenced significant  improvements  on 
global  measures  of cognitive  function,  there  were  no group  differences  in performance.  Prior  research has 
documented  that a minimum  of six months  of regular  moderate  intensity  exercise is necessary  to achieve 
meaningful  cognitive  change  (Geda et al. 2010),  thus it is possible with a longer  intervention a different  pattern  
of results  may have emerged.  
PRELIMINARY WORK  
This work  represents  a collaborative effort  between experts  in the field of cognition  and exercise training. We 
are currently  conducting  a Department  of Defense (DOD)  funded RCT of the effects  of physical  exercise and 
cognitive  training in veterans  with MCI.  Based on our current  work,  we know  that exercise training m ay aug-
ment  the effects  of CT, thereby  [CONTACT_203431];  however  it is not known  if non-weight  bearing exercise,  
specifically  water -based physical  exercise,  produces  a similar  effect.  Data  presented below  highlight  prelimi-
nary work  relevant  to the proposed  project.   
Studies  Accomplished:  Cognitive  Training. With over 25 years ’ experience in CT, we have investigated the effi-
cacy of a pharmacological  augmentation strategy  for nondemented  older  adults  (Yesavage et al., 2008).  This 
RCT compared  two groups:  1) Donepezil  + CT and 2) Placebo + CT. The overall  results  of the trial suggested 
that Donepezil  did not augment  the effect of CT as both groups  demonstrated improvement  from baseline to 
52-week  follow -up on delayed recall  of a word -list (Donepezil  + CT group:  mean gain score = 4.5, SD = 4.0, p
< 0.001;  Placebo + CT group:  mean  gain score = 4.3, SD = 4.2, p < 0.001)  and a name -face task (Donepezil  +
CT group:  mean gain score  = 1.2, SD =2.7;  Placebo + CT group:  mean  gain score = 1.6, SD = 2.7).
Studies  Acco mplished:  Exercise Training.   [CONTACT_14823]  has studied and written  extensively  on exercise training
and its benefits  for cardiovascular  disease patients.  Most  recently  he and his colleagues  at VAPAHCS pub-
lished  the results  of a randomized prospective longitudinal  study  of the effects  of supervised combined aerobic
and resistance exercise training  for persons  with abdominal aortic  aneurysm  (Myers  et al., 2014).  Results  indi-
cated that these  methods  were  safe and that participants  on average,  increased time spent  in physical  activity
to approximately  one hour daily of modest  exercise which  was an improvement  of ~30 - 40%.  These  improve-
ments  were  notably  greater  than in similar prior exercise training studies.  The authors  posited that these
marked  improvements  were  partially  due to the rigorous  activity surveillance and case- managed approachResearch Plan Page 19Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
used in that trial. The proposed project  will employ  these same  methods  of surveillance  and a case- managed  
approach,  though  coupled with water -based physical  exercise.   
Ongoing Study:  Exercise Training + Cognitive  Training.  We have successfully  collaborated on the current  
DOD- funded  project,  “A Combined Training Program  for Veterans  with Amnestic  Mild Cognitive. ” This  project  
represents  the merging  of our interests,  namely  cognitive  training  and exercise training,  towards  a new target  
problem.  At completion in September  2015, this ongoing  RCT will compare the effects  of a combined aerobic  
and resistance exercise program  + cognitive  training  (CARE  + CT) program  to a stretchin g exercise + cognitive  
training (SE+  CT) program.  Interim  results  indicate that the intervention is relatively  well received by [CONTACT_203432] i-
pants,  as recruitment  and retention rates  are positive. To date,  fifty-five veterans  have been  randomized to ei-
ther the CARE+CT  or SE+CT  condition.  Approximately  8% of those randomized have been lost to follow -up. 
Reasons  for discontinuing study  participation were  largely  due to development  of acute  illness  (i.e., CVA or 
cancer)  or injury  (i.e., concussion sustained after fall) that prevented further  study  participation.  There  are no 
group- based  differential  dropout  rates.  The preliminary results of this trial suggest that physical exercise does 
augment the effect of cognitive training as the CARE+CT group, compared to the SE+CT group, demonstrated 
clinically significant improvements on measures of learning (CARE+CT group: mean gain score = 13.5, 
SD=11.21; SE+CT group: mean gain score = 9.5, SD=9.68) and delayed recall (CARE+CT group: mean gain 
score = 7.25, SD=4.11; SE+CT group: mean gain score = 5.83; SD=2.69).  
Over  [ADDRESS_242659] been screened  study  participation and approximately  15% of those  were  ineligible  
due solely  to musculoskeletal  injuries  and illnesses  (i.e., impaired  gait, osteoporosis,  degenerative disc and 
joint disease)  that prevent  full engagemen t in weight -bearing exercises.  Given  the prevalence of these  illnes s-
es and injuries  in veterans  coupled with the increased risk of cognitive  impairment,  it is vitally  important that we 
investigate methods  to extend the cognitive  benefit  of physical  exercis e and cognitive  training  to all 
Proposed Study  Strengths.  This study  has numerous  strengths.  First,  the team  of investigators  includes  ex-
perts  in the field of cognitive  impairment,  CT, and exercise physiology  who have successfully led a number  of 
funded projects.  The proposed project  is a logical,  and necessary,  progression of the investigators  current  
work.  Thus,  the infrastructure  to support  this feasibil ity study  is already  in place.  Second,  the facilities  at 
VAPAHCS are uniquely  well-suited to run a study  of this nature.  The CT classes will be conducted at MIRECC 
which  has dedicated  classroom  space  for Center  staff.  The VAPAHCS Exercise Testing Laboratory  has state -
of-the-art equipment  to measure  ventilatory  gas exchange,  hemodynamic  and ECG  responses  to exercise.   
The VAPAHCS has two aquatic  facilities  with lap pools  and a therapy  pool,  so as to best meet  the physical  
needs  of veterans.  Third,  the cognitive  training  intervention in this study  has been successfully used in prior 
research  studies  (Yesavage  et al., 2008)  as have components  of the exercise training  (Myers  et al., 2014)  
thus,  we are applying  a novel  intervention (WATER)  with proven treatments  (CT) toward improvement  of a 
growing  problem  for veterans  (MCI).    
Implications  of this Research for Aging  Research.  Since  this is the first study  to evaluate a non-weight  bearing 
exercise training augmentation for CT program,  results  should be informative  as to the methodology  of the 
proposed trial. We anticipate that this study  will result  in the preparation of a VA Rehab R&D Merit  to test, on a 
larger  scale, the efficacy of a combined  training program,  including non-weight  bearing exercise and CT, to im-
prove cognition in older  veterans.  
RESEARCH DESIGN   
Proposed Study  Design.  The purpose  of the proposed study  to establish feasibility  of a two-phase single -arm 
trial of water -based  physical  exercise (WATER)  + cognitive  training (CT) in veterans  with MCI.  Veterans  (n = 
50)will participate in a six-month water -based physical  exercise program  and then transition to a four-week  CT
program.  Recruitment  Site. Participants  will be recruited via clinician  referrals,  media advertisements,  local
veteran agencies,  outpatient  clinic s at VAPAHCS,  and the greater  Bay Area  community.  We will also recruit
from the Stanford/VA  Aging  Clinical Research Center  (ACRC), which  provides  diagnostic  and referral  services
for persons  experiencing cognitive  impairment.  Participants . Inclusion criteria  are designed to identify  persons
with MCI based on criteria  set forth Albert  and associates  (2011).  Briefly,  those  criteria  include:  1) cognitive
complaint  (self-report  and/or  informant);  2) cognitive  impairment  in one or more  domains;  3) preserved inde-
pendence of functional  abilities;  and 4) absence  of dementia.  We recognize variants  of MCI may involve  im-
pairment  in other  cognitive  domains  than memory;  however,  for the purposes  of this proposal,  we will only in-
clude those  with amnestic  MCI.  Rationale  for Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria.  The goal of these inclusion  and
exclusion criteria  is to provide a well-characterized sample  appropriate for participation in an exercise trial. To
ensure that participants  will be properly  evaluated,  rigorous  inclusion and exclusion criteria  will be applied as
enumerated below.  These inclusion  and exclusion criteria  are a combination of those  used  previously  in ourResearch Plan Page 20Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
CT(Yesavage et al., 2008)  and exercise training (Myers  et al., 2010)  so as to ensure  participants  are appropr i-
ate for both aspects  of the intervention.  Inclusion or exclusion from the protocol  will be based on veterans ’ re-
sponses  to semi -structured clinical interviews,  specific  neuropsychological  measures,  functional  assessment,  
approval  of primary  care provider,  and a cardiopulmonary  exercise test. Inclusion criteria : 1) veterans  aged  50 
–90; 2) diagnosis  of MCI;  3) available informant;  4) visual  and auditory  acuity  to allow  neuropsychological  test-
ing; 5) willingness  to participate in exercise training + cognitive  training  program  for eight  months;  6) limited
mobility  due to musculoskeletal injury  or illness ; and 7) approval  by [CONTACT_203433].  Exclusion  criteria: 1)
current  severe  psychiatric  disorder;  2) diagnosis  of dementia,  CDR > 0.5; modified Hachinski  score ≥ 4; or de-
lirium;  3) history  of neurological  disorder  or systemic illness  affecting  CNS  function;  4) acute  illness  or unstable
chronic  illness;  5) current  severe cardiac  disease;  6) inability  to participate in an exercise tress  test; 7) morbid
obesity  (BMI  > 39); 8) inability  to read,  verbalize understanding  and voluntarily  sign the Informed Consent.
Please see the Human Subjects  for greater  detail  regarding  Inclusion and Exclusion  criteria.
Enrollment  and Study  Implementation.  Study  staff will explain  the study  to veterans  and, if interested,  the co n-
sent form and a one page project  description will be mailed.  Appointments  will then be made  for three days  of
evaluation.  Day 1: informed  consent;  cognitive,  psychological  and functional  screenin g;  Day  2: neuropsycho-
logical and self-report  measures;  and Day 3: cardiopulmonary  testing  and biological  measures.  When  these
evaluations  are completed,  eligible  participants  will be scheduled for the first exercise session within  two
weeks.  The exercise training  portion of intervention  is approximately  [ADDRESS_242660]-treatment  assessment:  cardiopulmonary  exercise testing,  cognitive  measures,  bio-
logical measures,  outcome  measures,  and measures  of physical  activity.  Participants  will receive payments  of
$50 for each  set of assessments completed.
We plan to telephone screen 200 participants,  based upon prior work  (Myers  et al., 2010;  Yesavage et al.
2008),  half or 100 are expected to proceed  to an in-office evaluation (10 per month),  half, or approximat ely 50
enrolled (5 per month).  Dropouts  will not be replaced as this is a feasibility  study  and an aim is to evaluate the
appropriateness  of the inclusion  and exclusion criteria.
All in-house exercise sessions  and activity surveillance will be supervised by [CONTACT_203434] (ACSM) . CT will be taught  by [CONTACT_978].
WATER:  Initially  all participants  in this condition  will undergo supervised exercise sessions  three  times  a week
at the Aquatic  facilities  located at the Palo Alto VA and Menlo Park VA. These  sessions  will continue for a two-
month  period.  During  these  group -based sessions,  participants  will begin their training program,  demonstrate
understanding  of exercise prescription and use of activity  monitoring  devices  and heart  rate logs,  and receiv e
guidance and instruction on what  is expected of them  during the study.  Participants  will then have the option to
transition  to a self-paced  program  with VAPAHCS -based exercise sessions repeated every  two weeks  for the
duration of this four-month  phase.  For those  veterans  who do not wish to transition to a self-paced  program,
they will continue to attend group -based pool exercise at VAPAHCS.  Those veterans  who do transition  to a
self-paced  program  will have access to the VAPAHCS aquatic  facilities  during n ormal  “drop-in” hours  so that
they may continue  their thrice -weekly  aquatic  exercises. All pool-based exercise sessions  will include  five-
minute warm -up and cool-down sessions  prior to and following  a combination of land- based stretching  and wa-
ter-based exercises  to achieve the targeted  cardiovascular  training  zone.  These aquatic  exercises  will incorpo-
rate resistance  t raining,  functional  exercise movements,  and aquatic  plyometric  activities.  Participants  will use
assistive devices  such as water  dumbbells,  noodles,  inflatable  boards,  and kickboards  so as to engage their
entire body  in resistance  exercise and provide  needed support.   They  will also engage in aerobic  activities
such as aqua walking  or jogging and plyometric  activities  such as skippi[INVESTIGATOR_203409].   Exercise intensities  will initially  be targeted to achieve 60% of heart  rate for 30 minutes  with intensity
documented  every  5 minutes  (heart  rate and rate of perceived effort/RPE).  This will progress  according  to es-
tablish ed guidelines  of the ACSM,  with the goal to increase  intensity  and duration to 70% to 80% heart  rate
reserve and 45 minutes,  respectively.  Participants  will be asked to document  daily pedometer  steps  and heart
rate/RPE  at 5-minute  increments  during  exercis e sessions.
CT: All participants  will complete a four-week  CT course after the six-month exercise phase.  The CT will follow
the format  of a “comprehensive extended”  training developed in our earlier  work  (Fairchild et al., 2010;  Yesa v-
age et al., 2008).  Training procedures  include non-mnemonic  “pre-training ” combined  with mnemonic  training.
This includes  six hours  of pre-training in a classroom- type setting (two hours/day)  consisting of imagery  train-
ing, semantic  elaboration  training,  and relaxation training.  Once pre-training  is complete,  all participants  com-Research Plan Page 21Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
plete ten hours  of mnemonic  training  in: 1) list-learning mnemonic  and 2) name -face mnemonic.  Method- of-
Loci mnemonic: This mnemonic  involves  associating a list of words  to a fixed  list of places  (or “loci”). 
Name/face  mnemonic: This mnemonic  involves  learning  faces  and names  through  a three -step technique:  1) 
choosing a prominent  feature  of persons  face,  2) developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a concrete  high imagery  transformation of per-
son’s name,  and 3) forming  a visual  image  that associates  the facial  feature with the name.  Design  Considera-
tions.  Selection of a single -arm trial was based upon the purpose  of the study,  which  is to establish f easibility  of 
the intervention.  Thus  a direct  comparison group is not needed at this time;  however,  should this intervention 
be shown feasible,  an active  control  would be appropriate  for inclusion  as a direct  comparator.  A parallel -
groups  design  was chosen so the effect  of water -based exercise could be determined separately  from that of 
the CT, thus allowing  for preliminary  evaluation of water -based exercise alone as an augmentation strategy.  
Sample size: One of the proposed project ’s aims  is to examine recruitment  and retention rates  for a MCI popu-
lation  in a treatment  study.  No prior research  has examined a water -based  physical  exercise + CT intervention.  
To guide power  analyses  for the current  project,  studies  from both the exercise training  and the CT literature 
were  examined.  A meta -analysis  (Li et al., 2011)  of cogn itive interventions  for persons  with MCI reported  a 
modest  effect size (0.45).  The literature  on effect sizes  for aerobic  interventions  for cognitive  improvement  is 
more  limited  and the effects  reported are less consistent,  hence  we assume a small  effect  size of (0.35),  less 
than that expected for the CT. Using  the smaller  of the two effect  sizes  (0.35),  we would  need [ADDRESS_242661] over 5 years,  re-
cruiting  at the same rate, we will be able to recruit  the necessary  274 participants.    
Measures.  There  are three  primary  time points  (Time  1: Screening/Baseline,  Time  2: End of Exercise Training,  
Time  3: End of CT) at which  participants  will complete cognitive,  psychological,  physiological,  and biological 
assessments. Screening measures  include measures  of epi[INVESTIGATOR_58589]  (Logical  Memory  I and II from WMS -
IV; Wechsler,  2008),  mental  health (MINI;  Sheehan et al., 2002),  activities  of daily living  (Functional  Activities  
Questionnaire  (FAQ);  Pfeiffer,  1982),  a semi -structured  interview  of cognitive  impairment  (Clinical Dementia 
Rating Scale  (CDR);  Morris, 1993),  and assessment  of risk factors  for vascular  dementia (modified  Hachinski;  
Rosen et al., 1980).  Measures  collected during the cardiopulmonary  exercise testing include the VA Prognostic  
Score,  and Veterans  Specific  Activity  Questionnaire (VSAQ;  Myers  et al., 1994),  all of which  will be used to 
estimate  risk and assess suitability  for exercise training  (Gibbons  et al., 2002;  Morrow  et al., 1993).  The VSAQ  
will be used specifically  to estimate  exercise capacity  and thus individualize the intensity  during the cardiopul-
monary  exercise test. Veterans  who are not eligible  to participate because of cognitive,  psychiatric,  or medical  
issues  will be referred  for further  diagnostic  work -up or treatment  to the Memory  Disorders  Clinic  at VAPAHCS,  
which  provides  diagnostic  services  to older  veterans.  Data  collected  regarding the reasons  for exclusion will be 
analyzed to provide  support  for the appropriateness  of the inclusion  and exclusion criteria . Feasibility  will be 
assessed through  examination of recruitment  and retention rates.   Participant  adherence:  Participants  will wear  
heart  rate monitors  during exercise sessions  and pedometers  throughout  the exercise phase of treatment.  
They  will also log their activities  on a 7- day activity  recall  questionnaire.  Data  from the pedometers,  heart  rate 
monitors  and the 7-day activity  recall  will be collected from participants  when they return  for the VAPAHCS-
based exercise sessions.  During  CT, participants  will have  homework  and complete  quizzes  assessing their 
knowledge of the techniques.  They  will also complete logs tracking  their use of mnemonic  techniques.  These  
quizzes  and logs of homework  completed  will serve  as measures  of participant  adherence during  the cognitive  
training portion of the study.  The proposed primary  outcome  measure is measure of delayed recall  on a 16-
item Word- List Task.  Equivalent  alternate lists of words  will be used to counterbalance across time points. The 
proposed secondary  outcome measure is recall  of a 12-item Name -Face  Pair Task.  Both the Word -List Task  
and the Name -Face Pair Task  have been  used success fully in our prior research and have been shown to be 
sensitive  to the mnemonics  taught  in the CT (i.e., Method of Loci and Name -Face Mnemonic)  (Yesavage et al., 
2008).  Cognitive  measures  include measures  of verbal  learning and memory  (Rey  Auditory -Verbal  Learning 
Test;  Lezak,  2004),  working  memory  (Digit  Span  from WAIS- IV; 2008),  processing speed (Symbol  Digit Modal i-
ties Test;  Smith,  1991);  attention  (Stroop  Color  and Word  Test;  Golden 1978),  and subjective  memory  impai r-
ment  (Multifactorial  Memory  Questionnaire;  Troyer  and Rich,  2002).  Self-report  measures  of physical  activity  
include the Yale Physical Activity  Survey (DiPi[INVESTIGATOR_203410]., 1993).  Finally,  biological  measures  will be collected 
from participants.  These  include measures  of DNA,  which  will be collected through  blood collected at 
VAPAHCS.  We will examine  both APOE  and BDNF  genotypes.  The APOE  genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_203411]-
cording to the restriction  isotypi[INVESTIGATOR_203412]  (1990).  BDNF  genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_203413] n-
ducted in-house by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hallmayer ’s staff.   Additionally,  plasma  concentrations  of BDNF  will be measured using  Research Plan Page 22Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
enzy me-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). These  analyses will be conducted in -house  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hallmayer ’s 
staff.  
Database Management and Planned Statistical Analyses 
Data Collection and Database  Management. There are three proposed testing time points in this s tudy: prior to 
randomization (T1), at the end of the exercise  program and prior to beginning CT (T2), and at the end of the 
CT (T3). All identifying information will be removed as data are coded by a unique subject  number/identifier. 
Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_203414]. All 
data will be checked for completeness  and every effort made to obtain missing data. Data storage will be on 
computerized password protected databases that are b acked up nightly. Additionally, our MIRECC and asso-
ciated laboratories are familiar with the relevant security and confidentiality  issues pertaining to genetic mater i-
als and take  extra safeguards to protect this information.  
Data Analyses.  Descriptive analyses of categorical variables will include frequency  tables; we will compute 
measures of central tendency  (mean, median, standard deviation, and interquartile range) for those  continuous 
variables.  Additionally we will examine the distribution of scores on dependent measures to test  assumptions 
of normality and homogeneity of variance  and thus make  appropriate transformations when necessary.  
Specific Aim 1: WATER+CT will be feasible as shown by [CONTACT_203435]. Statistical Ana l-
yses: To test  feasibility of the proposed project, the ratio of enrolled to completed participants will be calcula t-
ed; ≥ 80% will be considered good retention. Specific Aim 2: To evaluate the appropriateness  of suggested i n-
clusion and exclusion criteria for the aims of the proposed project. Statistical Analyses:  We will examine the 
reported adverse  events for participants as well as reasons for screening failures (i.e., those  who are consen t-
ed but excluded from participation prior to randomization). Descriptive analyses of these  data will include fr e-
quency  tables and be used to provide justification for the proposed inclusion and exclusion criteria or t o modify 
them appropriately. Specific Aim 3: To evaluate appropriateness of the WATER+CT for study goals.  Statis tical 
Analyses:  Appropriateness  of treatment conditions will be determined through examination of the participant 
adherence  data. Adherence  data will include information from pedometers,  heart rate monitors,  7-day activity 
logs,  and cognitive training homework  logs. Adequate adherence  to exercise  prescriptions and CT homework 
will be defined as completion of ≥ 80% of assignments as defined by [CONTACT_6270] -report and trainer observation. Speci f-
ic Aim 4: To assess outcome measurement techniques  for participant rate of response  in WATER+CT. Statist i-
cal Analyses:  As this is a single -arm trial, a direct comparison between the WATER + CT condition and a co m-
parative condition is not possible. Participants  response  rate will be determined by [CONTACT_203436]. To determine what a clinically 
relevant difference  in the primary outcome measure (delayed recall of a Word List) would be, we reanalyzed 
data from our initial clinical trial (Yesavage et al., 2008). Our strategy was to look  in that study at the difference  
in baseline scores between 60 year olds and 70 year olds on the same measure as the proposed work. We 
found that the difference  was 1.7 words.  We believe that showing such a differ ence  would be clinically mean-
ingful insofar as it represents a decade of aging ’s effects on memory. This will be an intent -to-treat analysis,  
thus all data will be analyzed.  Specific Aim 5: To examine outcome “ moderator ” and “ mediator ” measurement 
techniques to determine: a) i n whom and under what conditions  clinically relevant change occurs and b) t he 
mechanisms through which  clinically relevant change occu rs. Here we are referring to within subjects effects .  
Statistical Analyses : Multiple regression modeling will be performed in a preliminary manner to examine indi-
vidual differences in treatment response  depending or b aseline (T1) characteristics  (age, level of educat ion, 
APOE and BDNF genotypes). A significant Response  Rate X Moderator interaction indica tes a differential r e-
sponse  rate, e.g., the response  rate depends upon age. Such  measures are “ moderator ” variables,  i.e., they 
are used to determine on whom or u nder what conditions improvement occurs.   Additional analyses will be per-
formed to examine the extent to which  individual differences in the efficacy of CT treatments depend upon 
changes in cardiovascular functioning, BDNF plasma levels,  and changes in efficiency  of working memory 
(Digit Span) during combined aerobic and resistance  exercise  trainin g (T1 to T3). These  analyses  use changes 
in these two meas ures as “m ediator” variables, i.e., they are used to determine how or why improv ement oc-
curs.  
Project Management. To support the Specific Aims stated above, the investigators will perform appropriate 
tasks within the funding period. The first two months of the funding period (Start-U p Phase) will be devoted to 
hiring and training of research staff and purchasing activity monitoring devices. The Data Collection Phase will 
begin in Month [ADDRESS_242662] PD/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics.   Involvement of human subjects in the proposed study 
includes participation in a feasibility study of an water- based physical exercise plus cognitive training 
adjunct ive treatment for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) in older veterans.  We expect to enroll a total of 50 
veterans, age 50 years old to 90, in this study.  Using the criteria put forth by [CONTACT_203437] (2011), all veterans 
will be classified as having amnestic MCI.  These veterans will be recruited through clinician referral, media 
advertisement, and local veteran agencies.  Participants will also be recruited from the outpatient clinics of the 
VA Palo Alto Health Care System (VAPAHCS) as well as the Stanford / VA Aging Clinical Research Center 
(ACRC). 
Inclusion:  
•Veterans, aged 50 to 90, of any racial or ethnic group
•Diagnosis of amnestic MCI based on Logical Memory of the Wechsler Memory Scale- IV (WMS -IV) and
Func
tional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ)
•Availabl e informant
•Visual and auditory acuity to allow neuropsychological testing
•Willingness to participate in exercise training + cognitive training program for 8 months duration
•Musculoskeletal illness or injury (i.e., osteoporosis, degenerative disc or joint disease, arthritis) that
would make weight -bearing exercise difficult
•Approval by [CONTACT_203438] -based physical exercise
Exclusion: 
P sychiatric Exclusions  
•Current, uncontrolled severe psychiatric disorder, such as Bipolar I, Schizophrenia, or Major
Depressive Disorder as determined by [CONTACT_203439] (MINI)
•Diagnosis of dementia, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR) > 0.5; modified Hachinksi score ≥ 4; or
delirium.  Those veterans with scores indicative of dementia (CDR > 0.5, modified Hachinski ≥ 4) will
be r
eferred to the Memory Disorders Clinic at VAPAHCS for a full diagnostic work -up.
M edical Exclusions
•History of neurological (e.g., multiple sclerosis, seizure disorder, stroke,) or sys tem illness affecting
CNS function (e.g., liver failure, kidney failure, congestive heart failure, systemic cancer)
•Acute illness or unstable chronic illness, e.g., history of severe liver disease (cirrhosis, esophageal
varices, ascites, portal hypertension, hepatic encephalopathy)
•Current severe cardiac disease (e.g., uncontrolled atrial fibrillation, defined as mean 24 hour heart rat e
>
85 beats/min, or 24 hour maximal ventricular rate >150 beats/min; uncontrolled ventricular arrythmias,
defined as recurrent ventricular tachycardia >3 beats in succession, or 24 hour PVC count >20%;active pericarditis or myocarditis; Class III/IV heart failure and / or ejection fraction < 20%;
thrombophlebitis; pulmonary disease with a drop in O
2 Sat with exercise to 90% without oxygen;
embolism within past 6 months)
•Inability to participate in an exercise stress test
•Morbid obesity (BMI > 39)
•Inability to read, verbalize understanding and voluntarily sign the Informed Consent
Justification of Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria.   The purpose of the inclusion and exclusion criteria is to provide a 
well-defined sample of older veterans with amnestic MCI that are appropriate for participation in both an Human Subjects Page 24Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
exercise training and cognitive training trial.  The criteria chosen were based upon those used in prior studies 
of cognitive training with older adults with MCI (Yesavage et al., 2008) and those recommended by [CONTACT_203440] (2006). Prior studies have used these criteria to successfully recruit 
veterans for cognitive training interventions (Yesavage et al., 2008) and exercise training interventions (Myers 
et al., 2010).  Determination of inclusion and exclusion criteria will be based on veterans ’ responses to semi -
structured clinical interviews (MINI and CDR), specific neuropsychological measures (Logical Memory of 
WMS -IV; CDR), functional assessment (FAQ), assessment of risk for vascular dementia (modified Hachinski 
score), a physical examination by a clinician, and a cardiopulmonary exercise test.  
Recruitme nt Procedures.   Participants will be recruited through clinician referral, media advertisement, and 
local veteran agencies.  Other sources of recruitment include the ACRC and VAPAHCS outpatient clinics. Specifically, these outpatient clinics include but are not limited to those within the Sierra Pacific MIRECC (Geriatric Memory Clinic) and the VAPAHCS Psychology Service.  Recruitment will be the responsibility of the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_203415].  [CONTACT_203456] and staff will work closely with provider s in these clinics and 
centers to identify potential participants as well as be available to speak with the veterans should they have questions about the study.  Researchers in our center have a successful track record of recruiting subjects for 
cognitive training studies (Fairchild & Scogin, 2010; Yesavage et al., 2008) as well in exercise trials (Myers et 
al., 2010).  We have strong ties with  VA and community providers.  These funds will be used to purchase “ air 
time” on radio stations as well as print media to be used around the larger Bay Area community. 
Study Procedures.  Once recruited and successfully screened (i.e., Time 1 assessments) , participants will meet 
with the study staff to develop an exercise prescription based upon the information obtained  during the 
screening process.  For the first two months of the exercise training, participants will attend thrice weekly 
exercise sessions at the VAPAHCS Aquatic Therapy Center.  These training sessions will  feature a combination of land- based stretching and water -based exercises to achieve the targeted cardiovascular 
training zone.  All pool -based exercise sessions will include five- minute warm -up and cool -down sessions prior 
to and following a combination of land- based stretching and w ater-based exercises to achieve the targeted 
cardiovascular training zone.  These aquatic exercises will incorp orate resistance training, functional exercise 
movements, and aquatic plyometric activities.   Participants will use assistive devices such as water dumbbells, 
noodles, inflatable boards, and kickboards so as to engage their entire body in resistance exercise and provide needed support.  They will also engage in aerobic activities such as aqua walking or jogging and plyometric 
activities such as skippi[INVESTIGATOR_203416].    After the initial two months, participants 
may transition to a self -paced program with study staff- led exercise sessions repeated every [ADDRESS_242663] access to the VAPAHCS aquatic facilities  during normal “drop-in” hours so that they 
may continue their  thrice -weekly  aquatic exercises .  After completion of the exercise- training portion of the 
intervention, participants will undergo a second series of assessments (i.e., Time 2 assessments).  They will 
then transition to the cognitive training portion of the intervention.  The “comprehensive extended”  cognitive 
training program was selected because it has demonstrated efficacy in improvement of delayed recall of the 
proposed outcome measures (Yesavage et al., 2008).  Veterans will participate in [ADDRESS_242664] and final series of assessments (i.e., Time 3 assessments).  
Participant safety is of the utmost importance. As such, ACSM -certified exercise physiologists will conduct all 
exercise sessions and cardiopulmonary testing. During pool -based work, exercise physiologists will be in the 
water with the veterans, guiding them through the exercises. All staff to veteran ratio will be in dictated by [CONTACT_203441]. In addition to the ACSM -certified exercise physiologists, both Aquatic facilities are 
fully staffed with lifeguards certified in CPR for Professional Rescuers and Standard First Aid. Lifeguards will 
be on the pool deck and present during all pool -based exercises. Both Aquatic facilities featur e fully operational 
crash carts that undergo regular inspections. All study and pool staff are trained in basic life support as well as fully knowledgeable of all safety procedures for the facility.  Study and pool staff undergo regular facility led 
safety  drills. 
Cognitive training classes will be taught by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Fairchild, who is a board certified geropsychologist  with 
considerable expertise in cognition and cognitive training.   
Sources of Materials.   Data will come from multiple sources:  
1.Semi- structured interviewsHuman Subjects Page 25Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
2.Cognitive Assessments
3.Participant self -report of demographic information, medical history, memory complaints,  and
p
hysical activity
4.Collateral interviews
5.Physical examinati on
6.C
ardiopulmonary exercise testing
7.Laboratory work -up
8.Biological and Genetic Measures
Only research staff that have completed appropriate training in protection of human subjects at VAPAHCS and 
Stanford University will have access to the data.  Data will be collected using paper -and-pencil measures and 
by [CONTACT_22123].  Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_39344] a locked cabinet in locked offices at the MIRECC at 
VAPAHCS.  Electronic data will be stored on a secure computer on password- protected files and coded by 
[CONTACT_39795]/ number so that participants cannot be identified by [CONTACT_203442].  
Potential Risks  
Exercise Testing.   Exercise treadmill or bicycle tests will be performed to determine whether interested 
veterans are eligible for participation.  There are rare instances of serious complications such as a heart attac k, 
rhythm disturbance, or death.  These occurrences are rare; however, happening in approximately [ADDRESS_242665] and the nature of the experiment will be 
explained to them.  Interested parties will be scheduled for a screening office visit during which informed consent process will be initiated.  This will entail a discussion between the veteran and a trained clinician and / 
or research assistant.  This discussion will highlight important aspects of the informed consent form such as 
details of the project, voluntary participation, and the risks and benefits of participation.  Signatures will  be 
obtained only after all questions have been adequately addressed.  All participants will be treated in an ethical manner.  The following sections describe the measures we will take to minimize risk to participants.  
Exercise Testing.   All exercise tests  will be conducted in the state of the art VAPAHCS Exercise Testing 
Laboratory which is staffed by [CONTACT_24478] -I ([CONTACT_14823]), who is an expert in exercise physiology, as well as two 
research associates who each have extensive experience in exercise testing.  The laboratory is located in the 
Cardiology division of the main hospi[INVESTIGATOR_203417], thus if any emergency were to occur, appropriate staff Human Subjects Page 26Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
would be able to respond immediately. Additionally, if a participant becomes fatigued, short of breath, has 
chest pain, or desires to stop, the exercise treadmill test will be discontinued.  All participants will be closely 
monitored by [CONTACT_203443], if 
needed.  
Exercise Training.   Complication s during exercise training are rare, even among individuals with existing heart 
disease.  The American Heart Association has summarized the literature in this area and has suggested that a complication related to exercise (e.g., serious rhythm disturbance or myocardial infarction) occurs at a rate of 
once in every 62,000 hours of exercise.  All exercise training will be performed using individualized 
prescriptions in accordance with established guidelines and overseen by [CONTACT_203444].  
Psychiatric Screening.   For both the psychiatric screening and cognitive testing, confidentiality is assured 
through the use of study participant ID numbers, and all files are kept in locked cabinets.  Any computerized data will be identified by a study participant number.  Any documents that obtain both the study participant 
identification number and the participant ’s name [CONTACT_7637] a locked file cabinet separate from the study 
data.  Participants may have their results forwarded to their physician or other health care provider at the participant's request.  In the event of discomfort experienced during the psychiatric screening and/or cognitive 
testing, all participants will be informed that they are free to decline to answer any questions they do not w ish 
to answer, or to stop the interview or testing at any time. Psychiatric screens will be done by [CONTACT_203445].  Clinicians will be available in the case of an adverse event to debrief with the participant.  Referrals to the outpatient mental health clinic will be 
available in the case of an adverse event.   
Cognitive Testing.  Same procedures as Psychiatric Screening (above). 
Laboratory Work -up and Collection of Genetic Data.   Because disclosure of genetic information could have 
psychological consequences, as well as affecting insurability and employment status of participants and/or 
their relatives, extreme caution is taken to prevent the inadvertent disclosure of genetic informat ion.  The 
consent form states that we do not divulge genetic information to participants, their caregivers, relatives, or their physicians.  The actual clinical utility of all genetic testing which we perform at present is unknown.  For 
this reason, it is impossible to provide genetic counseling as to the meaning of results to any individual 
subjects.  Participants are, however, given free access to aggregate genetic data as it appears in publications.  Participants are informed that if in the future it becomes possible to provide meaningful genetic counseling 
based on our results this service will be provided.  We plan to follow the special genetic security procedures 
established at our Center for handling genetic information pertaining to dementia.  We take these issues very 
seriously and will have all procedures followed under this project integrated with the established Center 
procedures that are summarized below.  
Enhanced Security for Genetic Data.   The purpose of these procedures is to ensure confidenti ality of 
participant data, with particular reference to genetic information collected on all Center participants.  Currently the number of genetic markers of interest to clinicians and researchers is limited but is expected to increase 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375].  Extra safeguards are provided so that this very private and potentially damaging information is 
carefully managed.  We are sensitive to the potential impact of this information on medical insurability of participants and their children.  Therefore, each Center participant is assigned a Patient ID number (PATID), 
and the following steps are taken:  
1)The PATID is co- l ocated with a participant's name [CONTACT_203454], e.g., on clinical
charts and clinical scheduling records.
2)T
he Database Manager gener ates a Biosample ID number for each PATID.
3) The Biosample ID is used to identify biological samples for testing in independent laboratories, but no
sample also contains the PATID, participant's name [CONTACT_78207].
4)Labo
ratory results are provided to the Database Manager with the Biosample ID but not with the name.
Participants’ names or social security numbers are not in the central database.  Only the Database
Manager can match the Biosample ID with the PATID, and the Database Manager does not hav e
ac
cess to participant’s names.
5)D
ata analyses and print outs are provided by [CONTACT_203446] e
or
iginal data are sent back to the investigator who collected it for verification of data integrity.Human Subjects Page 27Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
6)Typi[INVESTIGATOR_203418], such as correlations that span multiple datasets, and printouts provided to
i
nvestigators other than those who directly collected the data, are provided without PATIDs only after
they complete the standard data request forms and the request has been approved.
Genetic data security meetings are held periodically for the Center.  All PIs, collaborating investigators, 
and staff involved in the acquisition, handling, storage, or analysis of genetic data are required to 
attend.  The following topi[INVESTIGATOR_203419]:  
• Information contained in DNA samples.
• Informed consent for DNA samples and genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007].
• How disclosure of genotypes could affect subjects.
• How disclosure of genotypes could affect relatives of subjects.
• How to respond to inquiries about genetic data.
• Security measures to prevent disclosure of genetic information.
• Transmission of genetic data among components of the Center.
All personnel collecting, managing, interpreting or receiving genetic data are required to sign  a 
statement that they attended this meeting where the above topi[INVESTIGATOR_203420].  
In addition, we have created a formal Data Security Policy document which is followed by [CONTACT_203447].  All protected health information (PHI) can only be stored and accessed from a secure 
server.   
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events. An Adverse Event (AE) is defined by [CONTACT_203448] a human subject participating in research.  The AE does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with the pharmacological product, 
study intervention or assessment. An AE can, therefore, be any unfavorable or unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or disease associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product.  All AEs that commence during the treatment phase will be collected and followed until resolution OR 
for thirty days after the veterans participation in the study ends.  
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) are a subset of adverse events and are defined by [CONTACT_203449]: 
•Results in death
•Is life -threatening
•Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]
•Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity
•Is a congenital anomaly / birth defect or
•Any other condition that, based upon medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject and requir e
m
edical or surgical treatment to prevent one of the above outcomes
A
ll SAEs will be recorded, regardless of cause. Collecting and recording of SAEs will begin at randomization 
and will continue throughout the treatment phase.  For a veteran who ends study participation prior to the 
study ’s completion date, SAEs will be monitored and reported 30 days after the “End of Study ” date for that 
veteran or until the SAE is resolved.   
Expedited Reporting of Serious Adverse Events (SAEs).   Serious Adverse Event reports will be provided to the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_874] 24 hours and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_203421] a safety report be filed (rare).  If the SAE is not resolved at the time 
the event is reported, the study personnel must monitor and provide S AE follow -up information to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_203422] [ADDRESS_242666] PD/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
evaluating all SAEs for veteran safety concerns.  Tables of AEs and SAEs will be generated and presented to 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a schedule set by [CONTACT_203450].   
3.Potential Benefit of the Proposed Research
The potential benefits of participating in the proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_203423].  These include: 1) 
participants will have their psychiatric symptoms evaluated by a trained mental health professional; 2) 
previously undetected medical conditions could be detected during the baseline and post -treatment  
evaluations; 3) participants may experience improvement in cognitive symptoms and 4) participants ’ quality of 
life may be improved.  This study will contribute to our understanding of factors affecting cognition in older veterans and the techniques that may maximize treatment outcomes for veterans with MCI.  Should this project 
be shown to be feasible, we anticipate the submission of a VA Rehab R&D Merit proposal to test the efficacy of 
WATER -VET for older veterans with MCI.  If this augmentation strategy were later shown to be an efficacious 
treatment for MCI, the investigators are uniquely positioned to disseminate these results.  The investigators are 
uniquely positioned to disseminate these results should exercise be found to be an effective augmentation to 
cognitive training for veterans with MCI.  The VISN 21 MIRECC is the primary point of point of development for 
the “roll-out” of evidenced based treatments nationwide for the VA.  Over [ADDRESS_242667] them at higher ri sk for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_203424] 
(Krishnan et al., 2005).  Thus, t he VA will  
soon be faced with large numbers of 
Vietnam veterans who have cognitive 
impairment.  Additionally, large numbers 
of recent returnees from the current conflict have concussive syndromes 
which are a risk factor for future cognitive impairment.  As m any veterans are at risk 
for developi[INVESTIGATOR_203425],  
treating memory disturbances has the 
potential of reducing distress caused by 
[CONTACT_203451], prolonging independence, and improving quality of life. 
Current research suggests that physical activity levels are associated with cognitive function (Andrade et al., 
2013; Kerr et al., 2013) .  Consequently, r esearchers have worked to develop physical exercise programs  to 
improve cognition; however, the vast majority of that  research  has used land-based weight -bearing exercises .  
Unfortunately, many older veterans are not able to participate in those sorts of exercises  due to  the same 
health conditions and medical illnesses that have placed them at greater risk for dementia .  For those veterans 
who are able participate in weight -bearing exercises , their health may prevent them from reaching the targeted 
training zone, and thus receiving  the intended physiological and cognitive benefits .  As weight -bearing and 
non-weight bearing activities produce different physiological responses, it is not known if non -weight bearing 
exercises, such as water -based activities, produce similar cognitive benefits as their weight- bearing 
counterparts.   Can the cognitive benefits of physical exercise be extended to older veterans through non-
weight bearing exercises?   That question  is the impetus of this application.  
Should this project be shown to be feasible, we anticipate the submission of  a VA Rehab R&D Merit proposal 
to test the efficacy of WATER -VET for older veterans with MCI.  Additionally, this  approach could lead to widely 
available safe treatments for older persons with cognitive impairment.  There are minimal risks to this 
investig ation, and a significant knowledge gap to fill.  There appears reasonable hope that we will learn 
important information regarding exercise and cognition in the aging veteran,  which may contribute to future Figure 1: Veterans Entering Age at Risk for Cognitive 
Decline  
  (VA, 2013)  Human Subjects Page 29Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
research, f unding, and treatment i nterventions for veterans w ith MCI as w ell as to r esearch in t he broader field 
of co gnitive impairment.  
5. Data S afety and Monitoring Plan
All dat a collect ed for this study w ill be handled and used i n compliance with VAPAHCS dat a security pl ans.  All 
patient l evel dat a will be treated as pr otected health information.  Study per sonnel w ill be required t o complete 
annual t raining co urses i n data s ecurity and human subjects ’ protection as r equired by V APAHCS and 
Stanford I RB.  These courses co ver g ood clinical practices,  hum an su bjects ’ protection, cy ber se curity, and 
privacy  policy.  Any dat a security  breaches w ill be immediately r eported.  File protections w ill be used to l imit 
access  to members o f the study group.  Patient l evel dat a will nev er be stored on por table storag e dev ices 
unless  it is encr ypted, ex plicitly aut horized, and use specific.  We have previously descr ibed the procedures i n 
place  for genetic dat a.  We also plan t o hav e this st udy monitored annua lly for sa fety and dat a quality by a 
Data and Safety M onitoring Boar d (DSMB) o f three individuals not co nnected to t he pr oject, i ncluding a 
clinician and a statistician, recruited from V APAHCS and Stanford U niversity S chool o f Medicine staff.   
As pr eviously descr ibed, w e will recruit v eterans from multiple sources including: clinician referrals, media 
advertisements, l ocal v eteran agencies, and out patient cl inics at VAPAHCS.  Our C enter has an ex cellent t rack 
record o f recruitment o f study par ticipants for co gnitive training trials.   We work closely w ith the ACRC w hich 
provides  diagnostic and referral se rvices for per sons ex periencing cognitive impairment. 
Inclusion of Women an d Minority 
We w ill act ively r ecruit w omen and m inorities for participation i n this s tudy.  We have included a detailed 
planned enrollment t able se en below.  As t his study i s concerned with late -life memory loss,  the research topic 
is not relevant to children. Page 30Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
Bibliography  & Reference Cited     
Akhtar,  S., Moulin,  C. J., & Bowie,  P. C. (2006).  Are people with mild cognitive  impairment  aware of the 
benefits  of errorless  learning? Neuropsychol  Rehabil,  16(3),  329-346.  
Albert,  M. S., DeKosky,  S. T., Dickson,  D., Dubois,  B., Feldman,  H. H., Fox, N. C.,  Phelps,  C. H. (2011).  The 
diagnosis  of mild cognitive  impairment  due to Alzheimer's  disease:  recommendations  from the National  
Institute  on Aging -Alzheimer's  Association workgroups  on diagnostic  guidelines  for Alzheimer's  
disease.  Alzheimers  Dement,  7(3), 270-279.  
Abou- Dest,  A., Albinet,  C. T., Boucard,  G., Audiffren,  M. (2012).  Swimming  as a positive  moderator  of cognitive  
aging:  A cross- sectional  study  with a multi- task approach.  J of Aging Research,  1-12. 
Ball, K., Berch,  D. B., Helmers,  K. F., Jobe,  J. B., Leveck,  M. D., Marsiske,  M., Willis,  S. L. (2002).  Effects  of 
cognitive  training interventions  with older  adults:  a randomized controlled trial. JAMA,  288(18),  2271-
2281.   
Baker,  L. D., Frank,  L. L., Foster -Schubert,  K., Green,  P. S., Wilkinson,  C. W., McTiernan,  A., Craft,  S. (2010).  
Effects  of aerobic  exercise on mild cognitive  impairment:  a controlled trial. Arch Neurol,  67(1), 71-79. 
Barnes,  D. E., Santos -Modesitt,  W., Poelke,  G., Kramer,  A. F., Castro,  C., Middleton,  L.E., & Yaffe,K. (2013).  
The mental  activity and exercise (MAX)  trial. JAMA  Intern  Med,  173(9), 797-804. 
Bazarian,  J. J., Cernak,  I., Noble -Haeusslein,  L., Potolicchio,  S., & Temkin,  N. (2009).  Long- term neurologic  
outcomes  after traumatic  brain injury.  J Head Trauma  Rehabil,  24(6), 439-451.  
Brookmeyer,  R., Johnson,  E., Ziegler -Graham,  K., & Arrighi,  H. M. (2007).  Forecasting the global  burden of 
Alzheimer's  disease.  Alzheimers  Dement,  3(3), 186-191.  
Blondell,  S. J., Hamersley -Mather,  R., Veerman,  J. L. (2014).  Does  physical  activity  prevent  cognitive decline 
and dementia? A systematic  review  and meta -analysis  of longitudinal  studies.  BMC  Public  Health,  14, 
510-522.
Colcombe S, Kramer  AF. (2003).  Fitness  effects  on the cognitive  function of older  adults:  A meta -analytic  
study.  Psychol Sci, 14, 125–130. 
Fairchild,  J.K.,  Friedman,  L., Rosen,  A., & Yesavage,  J. (2013).  Who Maintains  Benefit  from Cognitive  
Training?  Use of Signal  Detection Methods  to Identify  Long- Term Treatment  Responders.  Inter 
Psychogeriatr  25(4), 607-616. 
Fairchild,  J. K., & Scogin,  F. R. (2010).  Training  to Enhance Adult  Memory  (TEAM):  an investigation of the 
effectiveness  of a memory  training program  with older  adults.  Aging Ment  Health,  14(3), 364-373. 
Geda,  Y. E., Roberts,  R. O., Knopman,  D. S., Christianson,  T. J., Pankratz,  V. S., Ivnik,  R. J., Rocca, W. A. 
(2010).  Physical  exercise,  aging,  and mild cognitive  impairment:  a population- based study.  Arch Neurol,  
67(1),  80-86.  
Gibbons,  R. J ., Balady,  G. J., Bricke r, J. T., Chaitman,  B. R., Fletcher,  G. F., Froelicher,  V. F.,  Smith,  S. C., Jr. 
(2002).  ACC/AHA  2002  guideline update  for exercise testing:  summary  article:  a report  of the American 
College  of Cardiology/American Heart  Association Task  Force on Practice Guidelines  (Committee  to 
Update the 1997  Exercise Testing  Guidelines).  Circulation, 106(14),  1883- 1892.   
Golden,  C. J. (1978).  Stroop Color  and Word  Test:  A manual  for clinical and experimental uses . Chicago,  IL: 
Stoelting Co. 
Hamer,  M., & Chida,  Y. (2009).  Physical  activity  and risk of neurodegenerative disease:  a systematic review  of 
prospective evidence.  Psychol  Med,  39(1), 3-11.  
Hampstead,  B. M., Sathian,  K., Moore,  A. B., Nalisnick,  C., & Stringer,  A. Y. (2008).  Explicit  memory  training 
leads  to improved memory  for face-name  [CONTACT_203455]:  results  of a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_115834].  J Int Neuropsychol  Soc, 14(5), 883-889.  
Hixson,  J. E., & Vernier,  D. T. (1990).  Restriction  isotypi[INVESTIGATOR_203426] E by [CONTACT_203452].  J Lipid  Res, 31(3),  545-548. 
Jean,  L., Bergeron,  M. E., Thivierge,  S., & Simard,  M. (2010).  Cognitive  intervention programs  for individuals  
with mild cognitive  impairment:  systematic review  of the literature.  Am J Geriatr  Psychiatry, 18(4),  281-
296.  
Kelly,  M .E., Loughrey,  D., Lawlor,  B.A.,  Robertson,  I. H., Walsh,  C., & Brennan,  S. (2014).  Impact  of cognitive  
training and mental  stimulation  on cognitive  and everyday  functioning of older  adults:  A systematic 
review  and meta-analysis.  Ageing Research Reviews,  15, 28-43. 
Kerr,  J., Marshall,  S.J., Patterson,  R. E., Marinac,  C.R, Natarajan,  L., Rosenberg,  D., Wasilenko,  K., Crist,  K. 
(2013).  Objectively  measured physical  activity  is related to cognitive  function in older  adults . J Am 
Geriatr  Soc, 61, 1927- 1931.  References Cited Page 8Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
Krishnan,  L. L., Petersen,  N. J., Snow,  A. L., Cully,  J. A., Schulz,  P. E., Graham,  D. P.,  Kunik,  M. E. (2005).  
Prevalence of dementia among  Veterans  Affairs  medical  care system users. Dement  Geriatr  Cogn 
Disord,  20(4), 245-253.  
Lezak,  M. (2004).  Neuropsychological assessment  (4th ed ed.). [LOCATION_001]:  Oxford  University  Press.  
Lista,  I., & Sorrentino,  G. (2010).  Biological mechanisms  of physical  activity  in preventing  cognitive  decline.  
Cell Mol Neurobiol,  30(4),  493-503 
Morris, J. C. (1993).  The Clinical Dementia Rating  (CDR): current  version and scoring rules.  Neurology,  43(11), 
2412- 2414.   
Myers,  J., Do, D., Herbert,  W., Ribisl,  P., & Froelicher,  V. F. (1994).  A nomogram  to predict  exercise  capacity  
from a specific  activity questionnaire and clinical data.  Am J Cardiol,  73(8),  591-596.  
Myers,  J., Kaykha,  A., George,  S., Abella,  J., Zaheer,  N., Lear,  S.,  Froelicher,  V. (2004).  Fitness  versus  
physical  activity  patterns  in predicting  mortality  in men.  Am J Med,  117(12), 912-918. 
Myers,  J., McElrath,  M., Jaffe,  A., Smith,  K., Fonda,  H., Vu, A., Hill, B., & Dalman,  R. (2014).  A randomized trial 
of exercise training  in abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  disease.  Med Sports  Science,  2-9. 
Nualnim,  M., Parkhurst,  K., Dhindsa,  M., Tarumi,  T., Varek,  J., & Tanaka,  H. (2012).  Effects  of swmming  
training on blood  pressure and vascular  function in adults  > 50. Am J Cardiol,  1005- 1010.  
O'Hara,  R., Brooks, J. O., 3rd, Friedman,  L., Schroder,  C. M., Morgan,  K. S., & Kraemer,  H. C. (2007).  Long -
term effects  of mnemonic  training in community -dwelling  older  adults.  J Psychiatr  Res, 41(7),  585-590. 
O'Hara,  R., Luzon,  A., Hubbard,  J., & Zeitzer,  J. M. (2009).  Sleep apnea,  apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele,  and 
TBI: mechanism  for cognitive  dysfunction and development  of dementia.  J Rehabil  Res Dev, 46(6), 
837-850.
Oliphant,  A., Barker,  D. L., Stuelpnagel,  J. R., & Chee,  M. S. (2002).  BeadArray  technology:  enabling an 
accurate,  cost- effective  approach to high-throughput  genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  Biotechniques,  Suppl , 56-58, 60-51. 
Pfeffer,  R. I., Kurosaki,  T. T., Harrah,  C. H., Jr., Chance,  J. M., & Filos, S. (1982).  Measurement  of functional  
activities  in older  adults  in the community.  J Gerontol,  37(3), 323-329.  
Pontifex,  M. B., Hillman,  C. H., Fernhall , B., Thompson,  K. M., & Valentini,  T. A. (2009).  The effect  of acute  
aerobic  and resistance exercise on working  memory.  Med Sci Sports  Exerc, 41(4), 927-934.  
Richard,  E. ,  Ligthart,  S. A., Moll van Charante,  E. P., & van Gool,  W. A. (2010).  Vascular  risk factors  and 
dementia-- towards  prevention strategies.  Neth  J Med,  68(10),  284-290.  
Richardson,  C. R., Kriska,  A. M., Lantz,  P. M., & Hayward,  R. A. (2004).  Physical  activity  and mortality  across  
cardiovascular  disease risk groups.  Med Sci Sports  Exerc, 36(11), 1923 -1929.   
Rosen,  W. G., Terry,  R. D., Fuld,  P. A., Katzman,  R., & Peck,  A. (1980).  Pathological  verification  of ischemic  
score in differentiation  of dementias.  Ann Neurol,  7(5), 486-488.  
Sheehan,  J. J., et al. (2002).  Mini International  Neuropsychi atric Interview.  (5.0.0) . University  of South  [LOCATION_012],  
Tampa.  
Smith,  A. R. (1991).  Symbol  Digit Modalities  Test. Los Angeles,  CA: Western  Psychological  Services.  
Stott,  J., & Spector,  A. (2011).  A review  of the effectiveness  of memory  interventions  in mild cognitive 
impairment  (MCI).  Int Psychogeriatr,  23(4),  526-538.  
Sun, Q., Townsend,  M. K., Okereke,  O. I., Franco,  O. H., Hu, F. B., & Grodstein,  F. (2010).  Physical  activity  at 
midlife  in relation  to successful  survival  in women at age 70 years  or older.  Arch Intern  Med,  170(2),  
194-201.
Troyer,  A. K., & Rich, J. B. (2002).  Psychometric  properties  of a new metamemory  questionnaire  for older  
adults.  J Gerontol  B Psychol  Sci Soc Sci, 57(1),  P19-27.  
van U ffelen,  J. G., Chin,  A. P. M. J., Hopman- Rock,  M., & van Mechelen,  W. (2008).  The effects  of exercise on 
cognition  in older  adults  with and without  cognitive decline:  a systematic review.  Clin J Sport  Med,  
18(6),  486-500.  
Veitch,  D. P, Friedl,  E., K., Weiner,  W. M. (2013).  Military  risk factors  for cognitive  decline,  dementia,  and 
Alzheimer ’s disease.  Curr Alzheimer  Res, 10, 907-30. 
Verhaeghen,  P., Marcoen,  A., & Goossens,  L. (1992).  Improving memory  performance  in the aged through  
mnemonic  training:  a meta -analytic  study.  Psychol Aging,  7(2), 242-251.  
U.S. Census  Bureau.  (2012).  Statistical  Abstract  of the United  States:  Arts, Recreation and Travel:  
Participation in Selected  Sports  Activities  2009 from 
http://www.census.gov/c ompendia/statab/2012/tables/12s1249.pdf . 
Wechsler,  D. (2008a).  Wechsler  Memory  Scale  - IV. San Antonio,  TX: The Psychological  Corporation.  
Wechsler,  D. (2008b).  Wechsler  Adult  Intelligence Scales  - IV. San Antonio,  TX: The Psychological  
Corporation.  References Cited Page 9Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.
Yaffe  K., V. E., Lindquist  K., Barnes  D., Covinsky  K., Neylan  T., Kluse  M., &  Marmar  C. (2010).  Posttraumatic  
stress  disorder  and risk of dementia among  U.S. veterans.  Archives  of General  Psychiatry, 67(6),  608-
613. 
Yaffe , K., Hoang,  T. D., By[CONTACT_3727],  A. L., Barnes  D., Friedl,  K. (2014).  Lifestyle  and health -related risk factors  and 
risk of cognitive  aging  among  older  veterans.  Alzheimer ’s & Dementia,  10, S111- S121.  
Yesavage,  J. A., O'Hara,  R., Kraemer,  H., Noda,  A., Taylor,  J. L., Ferris,  S.,  Derouesne,  C. (2002).  Modeling  
the prevalence and incidence of Alzheimer's  disease and mild cognitive  impairment.  J Psychiatr Res, 
36(5),  281-286. 
Yesavage,  J. A., Friedman,  L., Ashford,  J. W., Kraemer,  H. C., Mumenthaler,  M. S., Noda,  A., & Hoblyn,  J. 
(2008).  Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor  in combination with cognitive  training in older  adults.  J Gerontol  B 
Psychol Sci Soc Sci, 63(5),  P288- 294. References Cited Page 10Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_203407], Jennifer K.