Version 1 .1 Title: SCTaware: A Comprehensive Program to Increase Sickle Cell Trait Knowledge and Awareness Among 
Parents of Infants Identified by [CONTACT_415801]: 1.1  
Updated: May 6,  [ADDRESS_524088] Summary/Abstract  
1.1. Background  
Nearly [ADDRESS_524089] sickle cell trait ( SCT) and approximately 2,000 infants are 
born annually with sickle cell disease ( SCD).[ADDRESS_524090], because each of their children has a 25% chance of having SCD and a 50% chance of 
having SCT. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_415789] (NBS) that reliably identifies infants with SCT, >80% of 
individuals of childbearing age with SCT do not know their status.3,[ADDRESS_524091] and SCD knowledge with the existing education programs. We also found that despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a presumed 
high prevalence (50%) of SCT among these parents and their reported intentions to obtain testing on their 
own, these parents did not obtain SCT testing.[ADDRESS_524092] identified by [CONTACT_219704] (SCTaware) and to 
encourage these parents to be tested. First, these parents can inform their affected children of their status 
when they are older. Also, these parents need to know their own status, since they are at imm inent risk of 
having subsequent children with SCD because they have a 50% presumed prevalence of SCT and are 
already of childbearing age. Finally, SCTaware could have additional benefits for parents of children with 
SCT, since qualitative studies of parent s with traits for other genetic diseases suggest that effective trait 
education decreases parents’ anxiety, increases their preparedness, and increases their sense of control 
about the potential of having a child with a genetic disease.[ADDRESS_524093] (e.g., different lived 
experiences and motivations for learning), these parents have similar baseline demographic and cultural 
experiences and frequently hav e low health literacy and baseline knowledge about SCT and SCD. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_415790], therefore, could inform how to more effectively educate parents of 
children with SCD to improve outcomes for children with SCD. For example, parents of children with SCD 
need effective education to obtain required screenings  and to be able to make informed decisions about 
whether to accept and adhere to SCD modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (e.g., hydroxyurea) for their children.  
Version [ADDRESS_524094] education program (SCTaware) that is appropriate for 
all parents, including those with low baseline knowledge and low health literacy. (P hase I)                      
1b. Determine if significantly more parents who receive SCTaware education have high SCT knowledge 6 
months after receiving the education compared to baseline.   
Hypotheses : SCTaware will require limited additional resources to implement compared to Ohio’s current 
program and it will result in significantly more  parents to have high SCT knowledge.                                                                                                                                                                               
Approach: A comprehensive team will develop SCTaware education through iterative review and revision 
of the current in -person program. The time required to train the educator and to administer SCTaware to 
parents wi ll be recorded. SCTaware will be feasible if educator training can be completed during 
administrative time and if SCTaware can be provided to parents within Ohio’s existing appointment 
schedule (Phase I). The SCT Knowledge Assessment will measure parents’ knowledge before, after, and [ADDRESS_524095] -SCTaware (Phase II).  
Aim 2.  Determine the barriers that prevent parents of infants with SCT from getting SCT testing.                                   
2a. Determine the percentage of parents who obtain on- site SCT testing at time of SCTaware education. 
(Phase II)  
2b. Determine the range of decisional conflict that parents may experience regarding SCT testing before 
and after receiving SCTaware education. (Phase II)        
Hypotheses : Making on- site testing available will result in ≥50% of parents  who are educated to obtain 
testing. Parents will have decisional conflict about whether to obtain testing that will be reduced with SCTaware education.                                                                     
                                                                               
Approach: Parents will self -report their SCT status before receiving education. The number of parents that 
obtain on- site testing will be recorded. We will use the Decisional Conflict Scale to measure parents’ 
uncertainty about obtaining SCT testing before and after education. Parents who do not obtain testing will 
be asked to report their other testing barriers (e.g., cost, needle phobia, other ).                                                                           
1.4. Methods  
This will be a two -phase prospective study .  
1.5. Population  
Biological parents of infants with SCT identified by [CONTACT_415802]- person SCT 
education at NCH.   
NCH is a pediatr ic, tertiary care center of The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], [ADDRESS_524096] status awareness.  
General Information  
2.1. Title of Protocol  
SCTaware: A Comprehensive Program to Increase Sickle Cell Trait Knowledge and Awareness Among  
Parents of Infants Identified by [CONTACT_415803] 
 
2. 2. Date of Anticipated Enrollment  
Phase I April 2019- October 2019  
Phase II October 2019- April 2019 
2.2. Anticipated Funding  
R03 from NHLBI  
2.3. Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_415791], MD, MSc                                                                                                                                      
700 Children’s Drive                                                                                                                                              
Columbus, OH                                                                                                                                                        Phone:   614 -722-3569                                                    
                                                                                                                    
Email: [EMAIL_7947]  
2.4. Co-Investigators  
 Mary Ann Abrams, M D, MPH  
Deena Chisolm, PhD  
Sarah O’Brien, MD, MSc  
Kristin Zajo, MS   
John Mahan, MD  
2.5. Stakeholders  
Toyetta Kirk  
Latrice Johnson  
2.6. SCT Educator  
Ismahan Adan  
 
2.  Study Design  
2.1. Type of Study  
Two-phase prospective study  
2.2. Population  
Parents of infants with Hemoglobin S -trait identified by [CONTACT_415804]- person SCT education will be 
recruited for both phases of the study  
Version [ADDRESS_524097] functional verbal English (report that they are not proficient) 
or if they request an interpreter for the education session.  
2. Parents who have previously attended an education session about an abnormal hemoglobinopathy trait  
3. Parents who self -report that they have a child with SCD 
4. Parents who self -report that they have SCD.   
Note: More than one parent of each child with SCT could be eligible for the study, if they meet all inclusion and 
exclusion criteria.  
a. Justi fication for Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  
This study requires participants to be able to understand communications in English and since the surveys have not been validated in other languages, participants or consenting adults will be required to speak Eng lish. 
Although other hemoglobinpathy traits besides S -trait are identified on newborn screening, S -trait is the most 
common SCT identified on the newborn screen and the content of these sessions is the most consistent.    
b. Study Duration  
Phase I - 1 session  
Phase II - 6 months  
c. Time to Achieve Planned Accrual  
Phase I -1 month for initial review, 3 -6 additional months to iteratively recruit to evaluate the revised 
program  
Phase II -18 months  Feasibility  Implementation resources: time required to train SCT educator and deliver 
SCTaware education  
Parental Knowledge  SCT Knowledge Assessment (SCTKA): administered before, immediately 
after, and [ADDRESS_524098] Knowledge 
Version 1 .1  
 
 
5. Methods  
a. Prospective Participant Identification (Screening)  
NCH is a pe diatric, tertiary care center of The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics. Parents of patients with an abnormal newborn screen for S -trait are referred to NCH for 
hemoglobinopathy education by [CONTACT_415805][INVESTIGATOR_897], [ADDRESS_524099] education session at 
NCH. The research team will coordinate with the hemoglobinopa thy education team that schedules these  
sessi ons to identify prospective parents of children with S -trait and approach these biological parents to 
participate when they present for the education.  
b. Recruitment  
These education appointments are scheduled 3- 4 weeks in advance by [CONTACT_415806], 
parents are mailed an in- person education appointment reminder after the appointment is made, and the 
administrative assistant calls to remind parents of this appointment approximately 1 week before the 
appointment. To increase the number of pot ential subjects that can be enrolled on a particular day, the 
administrative assistant will try and schedule multiple prospective parents on the same day of clinic.  
Prospective parents  will be identified in coordination with the hemoglobinopathy education team ([CONTACT_415816] is a member of that team). U pon arrival to the SCT counseling session, the educator will inform the 
prospective parent (s) that there is a  research study  that they may be eligible for and a clinical research 
coordinator will then approach t he parent (s) to explain the study and ask if the par ent(s) would like to 
participate.  
c. Informed Consent  
All participants will receive a thorough explanation of the study and a copy of the consent for their records.   
 
d. Enrollment  
Phase I: Approximately 5-10 participants  
Phase II: 128 participants  
e. Withdraw  
Participants will be able to withdraw from the study at any time.  
f. Study Procedures 
Phase I:   
Study Design This will be a prospective study of parents of infants with SCT identified by [CONTACT_415807]-person SCT education at NCH.   
Version 1 .1 Program Evaluation To evaluate the current program, 5 parents who attend NCH’s in- person education 
session will be recruited to have their standard SCT education session video- taped, timed, and reviewed by 
[CONTACT_415808]: principal investigato r, co-investigators, two parent 
stakeholders (a parent of a child with SCT and a parent of a child with SCD ), and the SCT educator). Since 
>50% of parents had low health literacy and baseline knowledge in our preliminary study, we anticipate that 
this smal l sample will include at least [ADDRESS_524100] status, complete a 
demographic survey, and the sickle cell trait knowledge assessment (SCTKA) before the education. They will 
also complete the SCTKA , an SCT Testing Needs 
Assessment (STNA) , and an Education Effectiveness 
Survey (EES) immediately after the education (Phase I. 
Study Measures).  
 
The Team will review the participant videos and the 
SCTKA results to identify where the education was not 
clear or appropriate for those with low health literacy 
(i.e., too much medical jargon) or did not result in 
learners being able to correctly answer t he 
corresponding SCTKA question. To determine if the 
existing print visual aids are suitable for those with low 
health literacy, multiple validated tools will be used. The Suitability Assessment of Materials (SAM) will assess 
the content, literacy demand, graphics, layout and typography, learning stimulation and motivation, and cultural 
appropriateness of the materials.
7 The CDC’s Clear Communication Index (CDCCI) will evaluate the clarity of 
the materials8 and the print and audio visual versions of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s 
Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool (PEMAT) will evaluate the understandability and action- ability of 
the materials.[ADDRESS_524101] educator will receive additional 
health literacy - and Adult Learning Theory - based education. The educator will complete an in- depth 
experiential health literacy training and the online Always Teach -back! Toolkit interactive learning module. 
From  the videos, the Team will create a plain language glossary for the SCT educator to use to reduce medical 
jargon during the education. The Team will provide specific feedback on strategies to make the education more 
understandable (e.g., open- ended questions, teach- back method, and Chunk and Check methods).10 The 
educator and a health literacy expert will role- play to increase the educators’ comfort using these techniques. 
To ensure the educator consistently uses the health literacy strategies during all sessions, the TEAM will select 
the two SCTKA items that the educator will consistently  use the teach -back method when educating parents 
about these items. Methods identified by [CONTACT_415809]’ STNA and EES surveys will be 
employed to further encourage parental learning. The time required to complete this additional educator 
training will be recorded. The Team will convert the print visual aids  to be appropriate for those with low health 
literacy and also to be more interactive  when they develop the SCTaware ebook that will be accessible on 
internet -enabled devices. The ebook will also include short videos, image hotspots, and quizzes to promote 
knowledge retention and to provide parents with a take -home tool to use to promote self -care in the Adapted 
Health Literacy Conceptual Model (Figure 2) and negotiate conversations about SCT with their family. The visual aids and ebook will be revised until they achieve pre- determined SAM, CDCCCI, and PEMAT scores.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415792], to 
have their SCTaware session video- taped and to complete the associated surveys , but additional parents will 
be recruited, if needed, so that at least one parent with low health literacy and baseline SCT knowledge pi[INVESTIGATOR_415793] . The Team will the revise the SCTaware program again after reviewing their videos and 
surveys and pi[INVESTIGATOR_415794] (at least one with low health literacy and baseline SCT knowledge). This process will continue iteratively until the Team agrees that the 
SCTaware program is finalized. The time required to deliver the SCTaware education during pi[INVESTIGATOR_415795] I. Study Measures  
Surveys  Before  
 
Day [ADDRESS_524102] status  x x 
NVS x  
SCTKA  x x 
EES   x 
STNA   X 
 
 
Version 1 .1 be recorded.  If it is not feasible to deliver SCTaware (i.e. SCTaware education cannot be delivered within the 
context of the current in- person SCT program), the current in- person SCT education will be tested in Phase II . 
Parent stakeholders The NCH hemoglobinopathy  team will help the Research Team identify the parent 
stakeholder of a child with SCT who has previously received the standard SCT education and the parent of a 
child with SCD who is currently followed by [CONTACT_415810]. These stakeholders w ill be 
compensated $1000 each for their time to review the sessions and to provide their feedback, insights, and 
lived-experience that will inform the SCTAware education.  
Phase II:  
Study Design Phase  II will be a 
six-month prospective study.   
Recruitment  Using the same 
recruitment strategy as in Phase 
I, we will recruit  [ADDRESS_524103] status  and complete the 
demographic survey, SCTKA, 
State Trait Anxiety Index for 
Adults (STAID), and Decisional 
Conflict Scales (DCS) . 
SCTaware sessions  will be timed. Participants will complete the  DCS, EES, STNA, SCTKA, STAI immediately 
after their session and a research coordinator will contact [CONTACT_415811] ≥6 months after 
their session to complete additional surveys ( Table 2).  
SCT testing  Barriers that prevent parents from obtaining SCT testing must be identified in order to increase 
SCT status awareness. Unresolved decisional conflict about whether or not to obtain SCT testing is a potential 
barrier, since the test results can have high- stakes for individuals who are identified as having SCT (e.g., being 
at risk for having a child with SCD). Decisional conflict is the psychological distress experienced when making 
a choice and it can lead to delayed and ineffective decision- making. Because decisional conflict can occur 
when individuals are uniformed about their options, effective education has the potential to reduce conflict and increase decision satisfaction. We wil l, therefore, use the Decisional Conflict Scale (DCS) to explore if parents 
experience decisional conflict about whether or not to obtain SCT testing and if SCTaware reduces this conflict 
(Aim 2b ). Another potential barrier is that most parents of these children are African American and may not 
have access to a consistent provider who can order this testing.
[ADDRESS_524104]. Creary (the PI [INVESTIGATOR_415796]), will 
be provided to participants who wish to obtain this testing. Parents will be provided contact [CONTACT_415812] (~$250). Finally, parents will be asked to report if they have other testing barriers (e.g., 
needle phobia, already aware of SCT status). [CONTACT_415817] will review and interpret all test results and the SCT 
results will be mailed to tested parents. The research coordinator , using the teach -back method, will confirm 
test result receipt when parents are contact[CONTACT_415813] -up surveys.  
Interim analyses  will confirm that SCTaware does not result in more parents to have lower knowledge at 6 
months. Several random sessions during Phase II will also be recorded and reviewed to confirm SCTaware 
education fidelity and that the teach- back method  was used for the critical items, or if educator re -training is 
required.  
6. Measures  
Phase I:  
Demographic Survey  Participants will self -report their age, SCT status, gender, race, ethnicity, primary 
language spoken, employment status, household income, and highest education level achieved.  Surveys  Before  
 
Day 1  After  
 
Day 1  Follow 
Up #1  
1 mo  Follow 
Up #2  
≥[ADDRESS_524105] education session. The NVS can 
be completed in less than three minutes and is highly sensitive for detecting adults with low health literacy.11 
Scores range from 0 -6, and scores <4 will be considered low.  
SCTKA Participants will complete the 8- item SCTKA (Table 2) before and after they receive education. This 
tool was used to quickly assess SCT knowledge during our preliminary study5 and to be understandable by 
[CONTACT_415814]. It was pi[INVESTIGATOR_415797].12 Scores <75% correct will be considered low.  
STNA  The SCTaware program in Phase II will make on -site SCT testing convenient  to parents. To identify 
parents’ testing needs and potential methods to use during SCTaware to promote parental learning and 
testing, parents will complete the STNA. It will ask parents about their kno wledge of their SCT status and their 
intentions for obtaining SCT testing and it will be developed using the results of a qualitative study of pregnant women who identified the factors they found important when deciding whether or not to obtain SCT testing and 
will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_415798] -person education and revised based on 
their feedback .
13 
EES Participants will complete a modified version of the education satisfaction survey that was used in the 
preliminary study.5 The EES will gauge parents’ reported readiness and responsibility for learning about SCT, if 
the education they received met their learning goals, if they have the self -efficacy to apply their knowledge to 
make informed reproductive health decisions, and if they have (or plan to) notify family members or their 
communities about SCT and their SCT status. Participants will provide open- ended feedback and offer 
methods to improve and/or broaden the SCTaware program to increase SCT knowledge and awareness.  
Phase II:  
Demographic, NVS, SCTKA, STNA, and EES Same as in Phase I.  
Self-Reported SCT Status and Obtaining SCT testing Parents will self -report their SCT status multiple times 
during the study to determine if self -reported SCT status is reliable and accurate and impacts their decision to 
obtain testing. The percentage of parents who obtain on- site testing will be recorded to determine if on- site 
testing increases SCT status awareness and if tested parents can accurately recall their status ≥6 months a fter 
they were tested.  
STAI D (short form) Qualitative studies suggest that SCT education has the potential to reduce parental 
anxiety.6 The STAID short form is a 20- item sensitive and reliable measure of state anxiety and will be used to 
quantify parents’  anxiety before and after receiving SCTaware education (Table 3).14,[ADDRESS_524106] testing 
barrier for parents and if SCTaware increases parents’ perception that  they made an informed decision about 
whether to obtain testing. DCS has predictive validity over a range of decisions, and in studies of decision-supporting interventions, effect sizes ranged from 0.[ADDRESS_524107] an electronic device, the non- interactive ebook content will be 
printed. Parents will be asked to report the type of device(s) they have since readability may differ by [INVESTIGATOR_16897], and to provide feedback on the content and format. They will also be asked to report how often they accessed 
the ebook since their in- person education to support their learning or to share information about SCT with their 
families and communities.  
Time to Deliver SCTaware Education and Notifications  Although health literacy -based methods can marginally 
increase the time to deliver information, in return, more learners may comprehend the information presented.16 
We will compare the time to provide SCTaware education (Phase II) to Ohio’s current in- person SCT education 
(Phase I). We antic ipate that familiarity with SCTaware will reduce delivery time. The time to deliver parents’ 
test results will also be recorded to determine if this testing can be included within the SCTaware program.  
7. Survey Completion-  A research coordinator will read a ll survey items to participants and record their 
responses electronically .  This format will be used because participants are only  required to have functional 
verbal English and the NVS was validated using an interview form at. This will also ensure that the method 
of survey completion is consistent in Phase II because the follow up surveys at 1 and 6 months will be over the telephone.   
 
 
Version 1 .1  
8. Study Compensation  
Phase I: Participants will receive $25 for completing Phase I.  
Phase II: Participants will receive $25, $5, and $10 for completing the initial, 1 -month, and 6 -month surveys, 
respectively.  
 
9. Safety  
a. Privacy  
Participants’ data will be de- identified to minimize the risk that participants’  survey  responses will be 
intercepted  by a third party. The assessments will be completed electronically  and stored in Redcap.  
b. Data Storage  
The survey results will be stored on a research drive that is maintained behind NCH secure firewall. The 
research data will be retained for [ADDRESS_524108] research 
methods.  After this time all collected data will be destroyed.  
10. Data Management and Statistical Analysis  
a. Data Monitoring  
Study data will be collected, downloaded, and stored on RedCap.  This da tabase will only contain de- identified 
patient adherence data and will be linked by [CONTACT_32221].   
b. Statistical Methods and Analysis  
Phase I: SCTaware will be deemed feasible if educator training and the time to deliver SCTaware can be 
delivered within the context of the current SCT program at NCH.  
Phase II:  During our preliminary study, ~40% of parents had high SCT knowledge prior to receiving education 
and 90% percent of parents achieved high SCT knowledge immediately after they received the current standard education program, [ADDRESS_524109] knowledge 6 months aft er receiving the education compared to baseline (Aim 1b, the 
primary aim for Phase II of the study), we will enroll 128 (n=98 evaluable) parents on Phase II of the study. This sample size was calculated using a two- sided, McNemar’s test and has 80% power, with a 5% alpha, and 
assumes 30% attrition ( Aim 1b ).  
Study Design   
Knowledge Level at 6 -month after SCTaware 
Proportion with  
High Knowledge Proportion with  
Low Knowledge 
 
Knowledge Level pre-
SCTaware Education  Proportion with  
High Knowledge  
30%  
15% 
Proportion with  
Low Knowledge  
35%  
20% 
Version 1 .1  
Similar to our preliminary results, this example assumes that 45% of participants will have high SCT knowledge 
before receiving SCTaware and 65% will have high SCT knowledge [ADDRESS_524110] 80% power to detect an odds ratio of 
2.[ADDRESS_524111] bi -monthly while participants 
are still actively participating in the study.  
12. Dissemination of Results and Publication  
a. Planned Journal for Submission  
Phase I: J Genet Couns eling  
Phase II: Pediatrics  
b. Authorship 
Susan Creary, Mary Ann Abrams, Deena Chisolm, Sarah O’Brien, Kristin Zajo, John Mahan  
 
13. Timeline  
 
Dates  Phase  
April 2019 -October 2019  Phase I  
October 2019 -April 2021  Phase II  
 
14. Anticipated Problems and Solutions  
1. Meeting recruitment goals is a challenge of all studies, however, this study will use the same strategy that 
successfully enrolled 91% of eligible parents in <[ADDRESS_524112] also expanded the eligibility criteria to include parents with 
functional verbal English (do not request interpreter services).  
2. Recruitment bias is possible, since only parents who present for in- person education will be included. Once 
SCTaware is developed, however, adapting the program for electronic delivery may increase the number of 
parents who can receive this strategy.  
 
3. The primary aim of Phase II of the study is to determine if more parents achieve high SCT knowledge at  6-
months. Since these parents do not necessarily have ongoing communication that is standard with the SCT 
educator and our prior experience suggests that study attrition may be higher than in other studies, we will 
enroll more parents in anticipation of higher attrition (30%).  Also, t o reduce attrition during Phase II, we will 
collect multiple contact [CONTACT_415815] (email, address, telephone number) and confirm 
these are still accurate at the one- month follow up. Small monetary co mpensation will also be provided 
throughout to encourage completion of all study activities.  
 
Version [ADDRESS_524113] (provided a lett er of support with the R03 grant application). If 
participants request that they want an additional session, the Team will provide a group SCT session for 
participants after they complete their 6- month surveys.    
 
5. The research team will inform parents of the potential that SCT testing could identify non- paternity. To 
ensure privacy, the research team will only disclose SCT test results to the tested parent.  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
Version 1 .1  
References  
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Data and Statistics: Sickle Cell Disease 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/sicklecell/data.html .  Accessed July 27, 2017.  
2. Powars DR, Chan LS, Hiti A, Ramicone E , Johnson C . Outco me of Sickle Cell Anemia: A 4 -Decade 
Observational Study of 1056 Patients. Medicine. 2005;84(6):363 -376.  PMID: 16267411.  
3. Treadwell MJ , McClough L, Vichinsky E.  Using qualitative and quantitative strategies to evaluate 
knowledge and perceptions about sickle cell disease and sickle cell trait.  J Natl Med Assoc.  
2006;98(5):704 -710. PMID: 16749645; PMCID: 2569269.  
4. Gustafson  SL, Gettig EA , Watt-Morse M , Krishnamurti L.  Health beliefs among African American women 
regarding genetic testing and counseling for sickle cell disease. Genet Med.  2007;9(5):303 -10. PMID: 
17505208.  
5. Creary S , Adan I, Stanek J, O'Brien SH, Chisolm DJ, Jeffries T, Zajo K, Varga E.  Sickle cell trait 
knowledge and health literacy in caregivers who receive in- person sickle cell trait education.  Mol Genet 
Genomic Med. 2017;5(6):692- 699. PMID: 29178654; PMCID: 5702560.  
6. Schneider JL, Goddard KA , Davis J , Wilfond B , Kauffman TL , Reiss JA , Gilmore M , Himes P , Lynch FL, 
Leo MC , McMullen C . "Is It Worth Knowing?" Focus Group Participants' Perceived Utility  of Genomic 
Preconception Carrier Screening.  J Genet Counsel. 2016;25:135– 145. PMID: 26093606; PMCID: 4726717.  
7. Doak, Doak & Root’s  Teaching Patients with Low Literacy Skills, Second Edition , J.B. Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_415799] , 
1996 .  
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: The CDC Clear Communication Index 
https://www.cdc.gov/ccindex/tool/how -to-use.html . Accessed June 6, 2018.  
9. Shoemaker SJ , Wolf MS , Brach C.  Development of the Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool 
(PEMAT): a new measure of understandability and actionability for print and audiovisual patient information.  Patient Educ Couns.  2014;96(3):395 -403. PMID: 24973195; PMCID: 5085258. A vailable at: 
http://www.ahrq.gov/pemat . 
 
10. Abrams MA, Rita S, Kurtz -Rossi S, Nielsen G. Always Use Teach -back! Toolkit. 2012. Available at: 
www.teachbacktraining.org  
11. Weiss BD, Mays MZ, Martz W, Castro KM , DeWalt DA , Pi[INVESTIGATOR_37084] , Mockbee J , Hale FA . Quick 
Assessment of Literacy in Primary Care: The Newest Vital Sign. Ann Fam Med. 2005;3(6):514 -522.  
PMID:16338915; PMCID: 1466931 . 
12. Kladny B , Williams A , Gupta A , Gettig EA , Krishnamurti L. Genetic counseling following the detection of 
hemoglobinopathy trait on the newborn screen is well received, improves knowledge, and relieves anxiety. 
Genet Med.  2011;13(7):658 -661. PMID: 21546841.  
13. Holtkamp KCA , Lakeman P , Hader H , Jans SMJP , Hoenderdos M , Playfair HAM , Cornel MC , Peters M , 
Henneman L . Experiences of a high- risk population with prenatal hemoglobinopathy  carrier screening in 
primary care setting: a qualitative study. J Genet Couns.  2018;27(3):635 -646. PMID: 28980104; PMCID: 
5943376.  
14. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., Lushene, R., Vagg , P. R., & Jacobs, G. A. (1983). Manual for the State -
Trait Anxiety Inventory . Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.  
15. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], C. D. (1989). State -Trait Anxiety Inventory: Bibliography  (2nd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.  
16. O'Connor  AM, Bennett CL, Stacey D , Barry M , Col NF , Eden KB , Entwistle VA , Fiset V , Holmes -Rovner M , 
Khangura S , Llewellyn- Thomas H , Rovner D . Decision aids for people facing health treatment or screening 
decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2009 8;(3):CD001431. PMID: 19588325.  
17. Janis IL, Mann L.  Decision Making. Psychological basis for defining the construct.  [LOCATION_001]: The Free 
Press, 1977.    
18. O’Connor AM. Validation of a decisional conflict scale.  Med Decis Making. 1995;15(1):25- 30. PMID: 
7898294.  
19. Press  VG, Arora VM , Shah LM , Lewis SL, Charbeneau J , Naureckas ET, Krishnan JA . Teaching the use of 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_415800]: a randomized trial.  J Gen Intern Med.  
2012;27(10):1317 -25. PMID: 22592354; PMCID:  3445679.  
 