A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915161] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 2 STUDY CHAIR S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY SECRETARIAT  
 
 
STUDY STATISTICIANS  
 Matteo Lambertini, MD  PhD 
Medical Oncology Department  
IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino – University of 
Genova  
Genova, Italy  
Email: matteo.lambertini@ unige.it  
 
Hatem A. Azim Jr., MD  PhD 
Breast Cancer Center  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_676766], Mexico  
Email: hatem .azim@ gmail .com  
 
Ameye Lieveke , MSc PhD & Marianne Paesmans   
Data Centre  
Institut Jules Bordet  
Brussels, B elgium  
Email: [EMAIL_12927]  
Email: [EMAIL_12928]  
 
 Marco Bruzzone, MSc & Marcello Ceppi, 
MSc  
Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_676767], Italy  
Email: marco .[EMAIL_12929]  
Email: [EMAIL_12930]  
 
 
 Eva Blondeaux , MD   
Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_676768], Italy Email: [EMAIL_12931]  
 Elisa Agostinetto , MD  
Medical Oncology Department  
Institut Jules Bordet  
Brussels, B elgium  
Email: elisa.agosti [EMAIL_12932]  
 Michail Ignatiadis, MD  PhD 
Medical Oncology Department  
Academic Trials Promoting Team  
Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre De Bruxelles  
Brussels, Belgium   
Email: [EMAIL_12933]  
 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915162] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915163] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 5 DOCUMENT HISTORY OF REVISIONS  
 
Type of  
amendment  Protocol 
version 
number  Final version 
date Nature of amendments  
Not 
applicable  1.0 20 December 
2016  Not applicable  
Amendment 
1 2.0 10 January 
2022 1) Update of the study team and its affiliations  with the 
addition of Elisa Agostinetto and Eva Blondeaux as study 
secretariat, as well as Marco Bruzzone and Marcello Ceppi 
[INVESTIGATOR_676769].  
2) Among primary objectives, revision of the definition of 
“incidence of pregnancy” and the way to analyze it; current 
definition is “rate of pregnancy ” to be analyzed according 
to the Kaplan -Meier method.   
3) Addition of the three  following secondary objectives  
(and respective statis tical analyses ): 
- To describe baseline, tumor and treatment characteristics 
as well as patterns of care including access to risk -reducing 
surgeries in  BRCA  mutated patients.  
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of baseline, tumor and 
treatment characteristics as well as of risk -reducing 
surgeries in  BRCA  mutated patients.  
- To evaluate tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in  
BRCA  mutated patients.  
4) Clarification and update of study eligibility criteria: 
accrual is allowed for patients diagnos ed up to December 
[ADDRESS_915164] cancer and 
germline BRCA  variants of unknown significance are 
excluded.  
5) Inclusion of  the following information for data 
collection: cause of death . 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 6 6) Clarification of the priority for the analysis of  survival 
endpoints : DFS is the primary endpoint and BCSS/OS are 
secondary endpoints . 
7) Clarifications of the  type of  survival analyses to be 
conducted for reducing the impact of selection bias (i.e. 
guaranteed time bias) . Two analyses are expected : the 
extended Cox model analysis with occurrence of pregnancy 
as a time -varying covariate  and a  “case -control” analysis. 
Type of matching for the “case -control” analysis has been 
clarified  and will be performed according to the following 
factors : disease -free interval , year at diagnosis, nodal status, 
hormone receptor status and  type of BRCA mutation  are the 
matching criteria.  
8) Addition of the ClinicalTrials.gov  identifier  of this study: 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . 
9) Correctio ns of t ypos and inconsistencies wi thin the text . 
10) Addition of 2 columns in the excel file for data 
collection  
11) Update d list of participating centers.  
  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915165] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915166] cancer  
Protocol version  2.0 – 10 January  2022 
Sponsor  Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, B elgium  
Study chairs   Matteo Lambertini, MD  PhD, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San 
Mart ino – University of Genova  
 Michail Ignatiadis, MD  PhD, Institut Jules Bordet  
 Hatem A. Azim Jr. , MD  PhD, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_676770] s Primary  objective s: 
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of pregnancy following breast 
cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated patients . 
- To evaluate the rate of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis 
in BRCA  mutated patients . 
 
Secondary  objectives : 
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of pregnancy following breast 
cancer diagnosis in various subgroups  of BRCA  mutated patients  
according to : 
 Type of BRCA  mutation ; 
 Hormone receptor status ; 
 HER2 status ; 
 Exposure to chemotherapy ;  
 Exposure to endocrine therapy ; 
 Interval between diagnosis and pregnancy ;  
 Outcome of pregnancy;  
 Breastfeeding status.  
- To evaluate the pregnancy, fetal and obstetrical outcomes of the 
pregnancies  following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated 
patients . 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 9 - To evaluate the safety of assisted reproductive technology (ART) 
procedures following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated 
patients . 
- To evaluate the impact of anticancer therapi[INVESTIGATOR_676771]’ ovarian 
function . 
- To describe baseline, tumor and treatment characteristics as well as 
patterns of care including access to risk -reducing surgeries in  BRCA  
mutated patients.  
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of baseline, tumor and treatment 
characteristics as well as of risk-reducing surgeries in  BRCA  mutated 
patients.  
- To evaluate tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in  BRCA  mutated 
patients.  
Number of patients  More than [ADDRESS_915167] cancer patients 
(estimated number s, considering a  rate of pregnancy of approximately 
10%). 
Eligibility criteria  Inclusion criteria:  
- Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer between January 2000 and 
December 20 20; 
- Breast cancer diagnosis at the age of ≤ 40 years ; 
- Known  presence of germline  BRCA  pathogenic variant . 
Exclusion criteria:  
- Known BRCA  mutation with no diagnosis of invasive breast 
cancer ; 
- Diagnosis of ovarian cance r or other malignancies with no 
history of invasive breast cancer ; 
- Diagnosis of hereditary or familiar invasive breast cancer 
without BRCA  mutation  or with BRCA  genes not tested ; 
- Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer with germline BRCA  
variant s of unknown significance . 
Design of the trial Retrospective multicenter hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based study  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915168] cancer will be 
the criteria used to distinguish between two cohorts of patients: women 
with no subsequent pregnancies afte r breast cancer diagnosis (“non -
pregnant cohort”), and women with one or more pregnancies any time 
after breast cancer diagnosis (“pregnant coho rt”). To evaluate the 
prognostic impact of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis in 
BRCA  mutated survivors, three s urvival endpoints will be considered 
in the two cohorts: disease -free survival (DFS , as primary endpoint ) 
breast cancer specific survival (BCSS , as secondary endpoint ) and 
overall survival (OS , as secondary endpoint ). To reduce the impact of 
selection bia s (i.e. guaranteed time bias), two analy ses will be 
performed. In the extended Cox model analysis with occurrence of 
pregnancy as a time -varying covariate, all eligible patients included in 
the study will be considered . In the  “case-control” analysis , each patient 
in the pregnan t cohort (case)  will be matched with 3 patients from the 
non-pregnant cohort (controls) . Each nonpregnant control  should have  
a disease -free interval equal to or longer than the time  elapsing  between 
breast cancer d iagnosis and date of  pregnancy of the matched pregnant 
case. Patients who  became pregnant after the date of the DFS event will 
be dropped from th is analysis. The other matching factors will be  year 
at diagnosis ( ± 2.5 years), nodal status (negative v s. positive), hormone 
receptor status (positive v s. negative), and  type of BRCA mutation 
(BRCA1 v s. BRCA2).  Because all  included patients are aged ≤ [ADDRESS_915169] (in terms of DFS, BCSS and OS) of 
pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis will be then evaluated in 
various subgroups of  BRCA  mutated survivors . Pregnancy rate will be 
computed according to the Kaplan -Meier method.  
  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915170] common tumor type diagnosed in women of reproductive age  [1]. The 
inheritance of a mutation in one of the breast cancer susceptibility genes (i.e. BRCA1  or BRCA2 ) 
generates the hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome [2]. For healthy women with BRCA1  
mutated gene (i.e. BRCA1  carriers), the average lifetime risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_676772] 67% and 45%, respectively; for BRCA2  carriers, these average cumulative risks are 
66% and 12%, respectively [3]. 
 
Since y oung women with breast cancer , including those with BRCA  mutation,  are more likely to 
develop biologically aggressive tumors [4], the majority of them  are candidates to receive 
antineoplastic treatments that include chemotherapy. The use of cytotoxic therapy  in premenopausal 
patients may result in the occurrence of treatment -related premature ovarian failure (POF) [5]. BRCA  
mutations seem to negatively affect ovarian reserve with consequent accelerated ovarian aging [6]. 
Although very limited data are a vailable on this topic,  it has been suggested that BRCA  carriers may 
be more sensitive to the gonadotoxic effect of chemotherapy as compared to patients without 
mutations with subsequent higher risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_297723] [6]. The impairment in  ovarian 
function negatively impacts on global health of young breast cancer survivors being associated with 
several side effects including  infertility  [7].  
 
Concerns about  fertility preservation and future chance of achieving a pregnancy  are prevalent issue s 
affecting young breast cancer patients  [8]. Hence, accordingly, major international guidelines 
recommend physicians to address with patients as part of informed consent before anticancer 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_676773] F and infertility , and then to  discuss fertility preservation 
options  in interested patients [9–11]. Specific issue s on this regard should be considered in patients 
with BRCA  mutation  in the context of their unique concerns [12]. For carriers, given the increasing 
risk of ovarian cancer with age, bilateral salpi[INVESTIGATOR_8936] -oophorectomy  is generally recommended for both 
BRCA1  and BRCA2  carriers between the ages of 35 and 40  years  and upon completion of childbearing  
[13]. Moreover, some carriers wish to eliminate the mutation from future offspring through pre -
implantation genetic diagnosis  [14]. Finally, given the increasing risk  of ovarian and breast cancer 
and the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_109916] -term treatment -related POF [15], the window for fertility and 
pregnancy may be narrow in such young women . Of note, although, the last years have brought many 
safety and efficacy data on the available options  for fertility preservation increasing the chances of 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915171] a pregnan cy after the end of treatment s, especially for 
those with BRCA  mutations. Thus, further research is needed in the field; particularly, reproduction 
studies to address the specific issues of women with BRCA  mutations are lacking and should be 
considered a research priority.  
 
Approximately 40% to 50% of w omen in whom breast cancer is diagnosed during childbearing age 
wish to have a subsequent pregnancy  [16]. However, the percentage of breast cancer patients reported 
in the literature that has at least one full -term pregnancy after breast cancer diagnosis is very low . Of 
note, a mong can cer survivors, b reast cancer patients have the lowest pregnancy rate with an overall 
67% reduction in the chance of giving birth after cancer treatment as compared to the general 
population [17]. This observation reflects not only the damage to ovarian reserve due to the 
gonadotoxic treatments required, but also patient and provider concerns related to a possible negative 
impact of pregnancy on  the evolution of breast cancer  [18].  
 
Recent data support the statement that pregnancy in cancer survivors after adequate treatment and 
follow -up should not be discouraged including among patients  with breast cancer [19]. As shown in 
a meta -analysis of [ADDRESS_915172] cancer patients who became 
pregnant following diagnosis and treatment had a 41% reduced risk of death compared to women 
who did not get pregnant (pooled relative risk  [PRR ], 0.59; 95% confidence intervals [ CI], 0.50-0.70) 
[20]. Furthermore, a  more recent multice nter retrospective cohort study confirmed  the safety of 
pregnancy after breast cancer even in patients with endocrine -sensitive disease [21]. Importantly, no 
impact of abortion on patient outcome was observed either [21]. Nevertheless, in the specific 
subgroup of patients with BRCA mutation s very limited data consisting in one single study are 
available on the impact of pregnancy on breast cancer survival [22]. In this study, out of the [ADDRESS_915173] cancer; no difference in breast 
cancer specific mortality was observed between pregnant cases and matched non -pregnant control  
(adjusted hazard ratio [ HR], 0.73; 95% CI, 0.21 -2.68) [22]. However, due to the limited number of 
patients included in the analysis, no solid conclusion can be drawn from this study to  counsel  BRCA 
mutated su rvivo rs on the safety of  having a pregnancy after breast cancer diagnosis.  Furthermore, no 
information is available on the impact of breastfeeding in these  patients , and it remains not clear yet 
the ideal interval to wait between the end of anticancer trea tments and conception . Moreover, other 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915174] 
cancer patients, including the safety of assisted reproductive technology (ART), pregnancy outcomes, 
risk of congenital malformations, breastfeeding patterns and many more.  
 
Thus , due to the lack of data on several issues on this regard , the present study aims at refining the 
understanding of th e effect of pregnancy on breast cancer outcome s in the specific population of 
BRCA  mutated patients with known history of breast cancer.  
 
2. STUDY OBJE CTIVES  
 
Primary objectives:  
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of pregnancy following breast cancer dia gnosis in BRCA  mutated 
patients . The following survival endpoints will be considered: disease -free survival (DFS , as primary 
endpoint ), breast cancer specific survival (BCSS , as secondary endpoint ) and overall survival (OS , 
as secondary endpoint ). 
- To evaluate the rate of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated patients . 
 
Secondary objectives:  
- To evaluate the prognostic impact (in terms of DFS, BCSS and OS) of pregnancy following breast 
cancer diagnosis in various subgroups  of BRCA  mutated patients  according to : 
 Type of BRCA  mutation: BRCA1  vs. BRCA2 ; 
 Hormone receptor status : positive vs. negative ; 
 HER2 status : positive vs. negative ; 
 Exposure to chemotherapy: prior exposure vs. no prior exposure ; 
 Exposure to endocrine therapy : prior expo sure vs.  no prior exposure ; 
 Interval between diagnosis and pregnancy : ≤ 2 years vs. > 2 years after diagnosis;  
 Outcome of pregnancy: abortion vs. completed pregnancy;  
 Breastfeeding s tatus: breastfeeding vs. no breas tfeeding . 
- To evaluate the pregnancy, fetal and obstetrical outcomes of the pregnancies following breast cancer 
diagnosis in BRCA  mutated patients . 
- To evaluate the safety of ART procedures following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated 
patients .  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915175] of anticancer therapi[INVESTIGATOR_676774]’ ovarian function, in terms of inc idence 
of treatment -induced POF and age at menopause.  
- To describe baseline, tumor and treatment characteristics as well as patterns of care including access 
to risk -reducing surgeries in  BRCA  mutated patients.  
- To evaluate the prognostic impact of baseline, tumor and treatment characteristics as well as of risk -
reducing surgeries in  BRCA  mutated patients.  
- To evaluate tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in  BRCA  mutated patients.  
 
3. METHODOLOGY  
 
This is a multicenter ho spi[INVESTIGATOR_307]-based retrospective cohort study  (ClinicalTrials.gov  identifier: 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) conducted across several I nstitutions managing patients with hereditary breast 
cancer. The study aims to refine the understanding of the effect of pregnancy on breast cancer 
outcome s in BRCA  mutated patients with known history of breast cancer . 
 
3.1. Eligibility criteria  
 
The eligibility criteria are intentionally broad for trying to exclude as few patients as possible so that 
true population -based data can be obtained. To be eligible for the present study, patients sh ould fulfill 
the following inclusion and exclusion crite ria. 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
- Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer between January 2000 and December 20 20; 
- Breast can cer diagnosis at the age of ≤ 40  years ; 
- Known presence of germline BRCA  pathogenic variant . 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
- Known BRCA  mutation with no diagnosis of invasive breast cancer ; 
- Diagnosis of ovarian cancer or other malignancies with no history of invasive breast cancer ; 
- Diagnosis of hereditary or familiar invasive breast cancer without BRCA  mutation or with 
BRCA  genes not test ed; 
- Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer with germline BRCA  variants of unknown significance . 
 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915176] will be requested per Institution in case of data clarification needs. A timeframe of 
4 months is given for data collection from each Institution  after a positive opi[INVESTIGATOR_676775] / Institutional Review Board . 
 
3.3. Data collection  
 
For all consecutive eligible patients  included in the study from each participating Institution , their 
medical records will be retrieved and  anonymized data entered into a  database. The following 
information will be collected, if available:  
 
1) Baseline characteristics : body mass index; smoking habit; age at menarche; age at menopause; 
menopausal status at the time of breast cancer diagnosis; use of birth c ontrol pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353] ; prior  children 
before breast cancer diagnosis; history of spontaneous abortion; history of induced abortion; prior 
treatment for infertility; prior gyne cological surgery and/or medical history with possible impact on 
fertility.  
2) Breast cancer history : date of diagnosis; age at diagnosis; disease stage ; laterality of the primary 
tumor; type of breast and axillary surgery; use of breast reconstruction su rgery; grade; histology; 
tumor size and nodal status (for patients who underwent  primary systemic therapy, only clinical tumor 
size and nodal status will be collected); hormone receptor status (estrogen and proges terone 
receptors); HER2 status.  
3) Treatmen t of the primary tumor : timing of systemic therapy administration; use of chemotherapy 
(type and number of cycles); use of endocrine therapy (type and duration); use of anti -HER2 targeted 
therapy (type and duration); use of radiotherapy.  
4) Survival status : any recurrence of invasive breast cancer including date of the event; any second 
primary breast cancer including date of the event; any second primary malignancy including date of 
the event; date of last follow -up and/or death ; cause of death (breast can cer-related or not). 
5) Ovarian function after chemotherapy:  treatment -induced POF; age at menopause.  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 16 6) Pregnancy after breast cancer : any pregnancy including date of the event; pregnancy outcome; 
gestational age at delivery; any pregnancy /fetal/birth  complications ; breastfeeding and its duration; 
use and type of ART.  
7) BRCA mutation : date of BRCA  testing; type of BRCA  mutation; use  and date of bre ast prophylactic 
surgery; use  and date of gynecological  prophylactic surgery.  
8) Additional information : diagnosis of breast cancer during pregnancy, availability of digital scanned 
images for TILs analysis  
 
Data can be sent in confidence to Matteo Lambertini ([EMAIL_12934]) and Elisa 
Agostinetto ( [EMAIL_12935] ) where they will be held secure and only used for the 
purposes of this study .Analyses will only be undertaken under the supervision of the study 
statisticians . 
 
4. STATISTICS  
 
The achievement of pregnancy after diagnosis of breast cancer will be the criteria used to distinguish 
between two cohorts of patients: women with no subsequent pregnancies afte r breast cancer diagnosis 
(“non -pregnant cohort”), and women with one or more pregnancies any time after breast cancer 
diagnosis (“pregnant cohort”).  Pregnancies could have resulted in live births, therapeutic or 
spontaneous abortion s. 
 
More than [ADDRESS_915177] cancer patients are expected to be included in the present study (estimated 
numbers, considering an incidence of pregnancy of approximately 10%) . 
 
To evaluate the prognostic impact of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated 
survivors, three survival endpoints will be considered  in the two cohorts : DFS  (as primary endpoi nt) 
BCSS  (as secondary endpoint)  and OS  (as secondary endpoint) . DFS event is defined by [CONTACT_676777] : local recurrence, distant metastases, contralater al 
or ipsilateral breast tumor , second primary malignancy, or death from any cause.  BCSS event is 
defined as death from breast cancer. OS event is defined as death from any  cause. For DFS, 
observation times of patients without the event will be censored on the date of their last contac t. Using 
individual patient data from all patients included in the study , survival outcomes of patients in the 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915178] of selection bias (i.e. guaranteed time bi as), two analyses will be performed. In the extended 
Cox model analysis with occurrence of pregnancy as a time -varying covariate, all eligible patients 
included in the study will be considered.  In the  “case-control” analysis, each patient in the pregnan t 
cohort (case)  will be matched with 3 patients from the non -pregnant cohort (controls) . To adjust for 
guaranteed time bias, each patient in the non-pregnant cohort  should have a disease -free interval equal 
to or longer than the time elapsing between breast cancer diagnosis and date of pregnancy  of the 
matched patient in the pregnant cohort . Patients who  became pregnant after the date of the DFS event 
will be dropped from th is analysis. Patients will be also matched according to several variables 
including type of BRCA  mutation  (BRCA1 v s. BRCA2) , hormone receptor status  (positive v s. 
negative) , nodal status  (negative v s. positive) , and year at diagnosis  (± 2.5 years ). Because all  
included patients are aged ≤ 40 years at the time of diagnosis,  matching according to age will not be 
performed.  The matching will be done centrally at the coordinating center . Two data sets will be 
constituted: one for the cases and one for the potential controls. Cases will be sorted randomly and 
matching will be done starting for the first case until the last one. For each case, all possible controls 
will be extracted from the data set of potential  controls. If they are only 2 controls available, matching 
criteria will be relaxed one by [CONTACT_31806] (starting from year of diagnosis, etc) until at least a third control 
is found. It is anticipated, given the expected low  rate of cases in the full data base, to reach matching 
for almos t each case. In these analyses, all survival endpoints will be calculated from  the date of 
pregnancy  until th e date of the event. In the non -pregnant cohort,  survival endpoints will be calculated 
from the date of diagnosis, adding the time  elapsing between diagnosis and pregnancy  of the matched 
pregnant  case.  
The prognostic impact (in terms of DFS, BCSS and OS) of pregnancy f ollowing breast cancer 
diagnosis  will be then evaluated  in various subgroups  of BRCA  mutated survivors  according to: t ype 
of BRCA  mutation ( BRCA1  vs. BRCA2 ), hormone receptor status ( positive vs. negative ), HER2 status  
(positive vs. negative ), exposure to chemotherapy  (prior exposure vs. no prior exposure ), exposure to 
endocrine therapy  (prior exposure vs. no prior exposure ), interval between diagnosis and pregnancy  
(≤ 2 years vs. > 2 years after diagnosis), outcome of pregnancy  (abortion vs. completed preg nancy), 
and breastfeeding status  (breastfeeding vs. no breastfeeding ). 
Considering a rate of pregnancy of approximately 10% , with [ADDRESS_915179] cancer  patients , assuming a DFS rate of 65% at 5 years in the non -pregnant 
cohort  [21], the study will have a  power of 0.[ADDRESS_915180] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915181] ratio of 0.80 in favor of the pregnant cohort, at a two -sided significance level 0.05 
(accrual duration 2000 -2020, total study duration 2000 -2030). 
 
The rate of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis will be computed according to the Kaplan -
Meier method . A possible increasing or decreasing trend in rate of pregnancy following breast cancer 
over the years  will be also assessed . 
 
The statistical analysis to evaluate the pregnancy, fetal and obstetrical outcomes of the pregnancies 
following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated survivors will be mainly descriptive and will 
include the following parameters:  
1. Gestational age at delivery ; 
2. Incidence of early pre -term ( < 34 weeks), late -preterm (34 -36 weeks) and ful l-term (≥ 
37 weeks) pregnancies;  
3. Number of pregnancies resulting in live birth and num ber of children born ; 
4. Incidence of induced and spontaneous abortion ; 
5. Incidence and nature of pregnancy complication s (if any) ; 
6. Incidence and nature of fetal complication and/or congenital malformations (if any) ; 
7. Incidence and nature of obstetrical complication s (if any) . 
 
To evaluate the safety of ART procedures following breast cancer diagnosis in BRCA  mutated 
survivors , two groups of patients within the pregnant cohort will be considered : patients who achieved 
pregnancy with the use of any ART pro cedure (i.e. “ART group”) and patients who achieved 
pregnancy without the use of any ART procedure (i.e. “no ART group”) . A subgroup analysis will 
be performed to evaluate the safety of controlled ovarian stimulation as part of ART within the ART 
group.  
 
In patients who underwent chemotherapy as part of (neo)adjuvant systemic therapy,  the impact of 
anticancer therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (i.e. chemotherapy) on patients’ o varian function, in terms of incidence of 
treatment -induced POF and age at menopause  will be evaluated, if available . According to the World 
Health Organization definition of postmenopausal status [23], treatment -induced amenorrhea will be 
defined by [CONTACT_676778] ≥ 12 months after the end of chemotherapy . Age at menopause 
will be defined as age in which patients had absence of menses for ≥ [ADDRESS_915182] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915183] 
follow -up visit, they will not be considered as having developed menopause. Subgroup analyses will 
be performed according to age at diagnosis, type of chemotherapy used (anthracycline - and taxane -
based regimens vs. anthracycline -based regimens vs . other regimens), and use of endocrine therapy 
(yes vs. no). These results will be co mpared to historical data in the  BRCA  wild-type breast cancer 
population.  
 
Considering the sample size and the uniqueness of the  young  cohort of BRCA  mutated patients 
expected to be included in the study, additional  analyses  will be conducted to describe b aseline, tumor 
and treatment characteristics as well as patterns of care including access to risk -reducing surgeries.  
Possible changes over time will be also assessed.  Moreover, similarly, the prognostic impact of 
baseline, tumor and treatment characteristics as well as of risk -reducing surgeries in BRCA  mutated 
patients  will be also evaluated . 
In order to conduct the evaluation of TILs in this cohort, there will be no need for new 
cutting/p reparation of tumor slides. The evaluation will be conducted on one archived diagnostic 
tumor -containing slide stained with hematoxylin and eosin  representative of the primary tumor . The 
TILs scoring will be performed  centrally. If available, a nonymized di gitally scanned images of the 
diagnostic hematoxylin and eosin -stained slide should be sent via email to Maria  Vittoria Dieci 
([EMAIL_12936] ) at University of Padova -Istituto Oncologico Veneto  (Padova, Italy) . 
The University of Padova -Istituto Oncologico Veneto  will take care of costs related to TILs scoring  
and storage  support (hard disk).  The evaluation will be performed according to the TILs  working 
group recommendations [24].  
 
Patients demographic, clinical and pathologic bas eline characteristics will be compared by [CONTACT_676779] -square  test or Fisher Exact test for categorical variables and Wilcoxon rank -sum test 
or t-test for continuous variables, as appropriate.  
Dichotomous outcomes will be compared using univariate and multivariate logistic regression models. 
Time -to-event outcomes will be estimated and plotted using Kaplan -Meier methods. Survival rates 
will be compared using log -rank test and Cox proportional hazards models for univariate and 
multivariate analysis, respectively.   
All tests will be two -sided and p -values of < 0.[ADDRESS_915184] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915185] availa ble statistical programs .  
 
5. ETHICAL ASPECTS  
 
The study will be submitted by [CONTACT_093](s) or the Sponsor (or its legal representative) in 
accordance with local regulations to and approved by [CONTACT_676780] / In stitutional Review Board and a Regulatory Authority if required by [CONTACT_676781].  
 
The investigators and the Sponsor will ensure that the study is conducted in full conformance with 
the principles of t he “Declaration of Helsinki” 1964, as revised from time to time or with the laws 
and regulations of the country in which the research is conducted, whichever affords the greater 
protection to the individual. For the study, the principal investigators will ensure compliance with the 
latest European Union (EU) Data Protection Directive or with local law especially if it affords greater 
protection to the patient.  
 
If required according to the national regulations and laws , it is the responsibility of the Investigator 
or a person designed by [CONTACT_737] (if acceptable by [CONTACT_427]) to obtain written informed 
consent from each potential subject prior any study data collection being carried out . However, when 
allowed by [CONTACT_676782], the investigators of the present study will apply to the 
Independent Ethical Review Committee / Institutional Review Board for a waiver of the need to 
obtain informed consent. The reasons are:  
(i) it is a retrospective study that involves no interventions with human subjects. Medical records will 
be reviewed, but none of the patients will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530];  
(ii) the research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects;   
(iii) the waiver will n ot adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; moreover, the research 
could not practicably be carried out without the waiver;  
(iv) the information collected does not include information that may be damaging to the individual 
should it be wron gfully disclosed; patients’ privacy will be protected throughout the study;  
(v) data will be anonymized and stored electronically in a restricted access network folder and will 
only be accessible to the research team.  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915186] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_676776]’s right to confidentiality is paramount. Collected data will be anonymized . All data will 
be kept confidential and will be used only for the purpose of this study.  Local data privacy laws, rules 
and guidelines must be respected.  
 
7. DATA CONFID ENTIALITY AND TIMELINE  
 
Data will be provided by [CONTACT_676783], where they will be kept secure. The data collection will be performed by [CONTACT_676784] , where as the database set up, data cleaning and the statistical analysis will be 
performed by [CONTACT_676785] s in charge of the overall analysis once the database 
has been cleaned and locked.  
The proposed timeline for project from the receipt of all data, database assembly and cleaning, 
statistical analysis to first results is 6 months . 
 
8. PUBLICATION POLICY  
 
A manuscript summarizing the results of the main analysis will be prepared for submission to and 
publication in a peer -reviewed scientific journal. Regular emails, teleconferences and/or face -to-face 
meetings will be organized to discuss progress of the data analysis.  The manuscript will be prepared 
by [CONTACT_676786]. Authorship will be based on number of included patients: 
the [ADDRESS_915187] cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: [ADDRESS_915188] Cancer in Young Women: Rare Disease 
or Public Health Problem? JAMA Oncol. 2015;1(7):877 –8.  
2.  Roy R, Chun J, Powell SN. BRCA1 and BRCA2: different roles in a common pathway of 
genome protection. Nat Rev C ancer. 2012;12(1):68 –78.  
3.  Hartmann LC, Lindor NM. The Role of Risk -Reducing Surgery in Hereditary Breast and 
Ovarian Cancer. N Engl J Med.  2016 ;374(5):454 –68.  
4.  Azim HA, Partridge AH. Biology of breast cancer in young women. Breast Cancer Res. 
2014; 16(4):427.  
5.  Poggio F, Levaggi A, Lambertini M. Chemotherapy -induced premature ovarian failure and 
its prevention in premenopausal breast cancer patients. Expert Rev Quality Life Cancer Care. 
2016;1(1):5 -7.  
6.  Oktay K, Kim JY, Barad D, Babayev SN. Ass ociation of BRCA1 mutations with occult 
primary ovarian insufficiency: a possible explanation for the link between infertility and 
breast/ovarian cancer risks. J Clin Oncol. 2010 ;28(2):240 –4.  
7.  Howard -Anderson J, Ganz PA, Bower JE, Stanton AL. Quality o f life, fertility concerns, and 
behavioral health outcomes in younger breast cancer survivors: a systematic review . J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2012 ;104(5):386 –405.  
8.  Ruddy KJ, Gelber SI, Tamimi RM, et al. Prospective study of fertility concerns and 
preservatio n strategies in young women w ith breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014 ;32(11):1151 –6.  
9.  Loren AW, Mangu PB, Beck LN, et al. Fertility Preservation for Patients With Cancer: 
American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Update.  J Clin Oncol. 
2013 ;31(19):2500 –10.  
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 23 10.  Peccatori FA, Azim HA Jr, Orecchia R, et al. Cancer, pregnancy and fertility: ESMO Clinical 
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow -up. Ann Oncol. 2013;[ADDRESS_915189] 6:vi160 -170.  
11.  Paluch -Shimon S, Pagani O,  Partridge AH, et al. Second international consensus guidelines 
for breast cancer in young women (BCY2). Breast . 2016;26:87 –99.  
12.  Lambertini M, Del Mastro L. Fertility preservation in BRCA -mutated breast cancer patients. 
Breast Cancer Managem . 2016;5(2 ):61–68.  
13.  Paluch -Shimon S, Cardoso F, Sessa C, et al. Prevention and screening in BRCA mutation 
carriers and other breast/ovarian hereditary cancer syndromes: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines 
for cancer prevention and screening. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(su ppl 5):v103 –10.  
14.  Wilkinson E. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for mutated BRCA genes. Lancet Oncol. 
2012;13(8):e331.  
15.  Valentini A, Finch A, Lubinski J, et al. Chemotherapy -induced amenorrhea in patients with 
breast cancer with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. J Clin Oncol. 2013 ;31(31):3914 –9.  
16.  Letourneau JM, Ebbel EE, Katz PP, et al. Pretreatment fertility counseling and fertility 
preservation improve quality of life in reproductive age women with cancer. C ancer. 
2012 ;118(6):1710 –7.  
17.  Stenshe im H, Cvancarova M, Møller B, Fosså SD. Pregnancy after adolescent and adult 
cancer: a population -based matched cohort study. Int J Cancer . 2011 ;129(5):1225 –36.  
18.  Biglia N, Torrisi R, D’Alonzo M, et al. Attitudes on fertility issues in breast cancer pa tients: 
an Italian survey. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2015;31(6):458 –64.  
19.  Lambertini M, Del Mastro L, Pescio MC, et al. Cancer and fertility preservation: international 
recommendations from an expert meeting. BMC Med. 2016;14(1):1.  
20.  Azim HA Jr, Santoro L, Pavlidis N, et al. Safety of pregnancy following breast cancer 
diagnosis: a meta -analysis of 14 studies. Eur J Cancer. 2011;47(1):74 –83.  
21.  Azim HA Jr, Kroman N, Paesmans M, et al. Prognostic impact of pregnancy after breast 
cance r according to estrogen receptor status: a multicenter retrospective study. J Clin Oncol . 
2013 ;31(1):73 –9.  
22.  Valentini A, Lubinski J, By[CONTACT_116] T, et al. The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer survival in 
women who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Breas t Cancer Res Treat. 2013;142(1):177 –85.  
23.  World Health Organization (WHO). Research on the Menopause. Geneva, Switzerland: 
WHO; 1991. Technical Report Series 670.  
24.  Salgado R , Denker t C, Demaria S , et al. The evaluation of tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes 
A multicenter retrospective study on the prognostic impa ct of pregnancy in women with history of BRCA  mutated breast cance r 
 
Protocol version 2.0: 10 January  2022 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Information and data included in this protocol contain trade secrets and privileged or confidential information which is the property of the Institut 
Jules Bordet.  No person is authorised to make it public without the written permission of the Institut Jul es Bordet  
 24 (TILs) in breast cancer: recommendations by [CONTACT_123585] 2014 . Ann Oncol . 
2015 ;26(2):259–71.  
 