  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9/10/2019 
 
 
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   Unique Protocol ID: [PHONE_15976]  
 
Principle Investigator: [CONTACT_765814], DDS, MSD  
 
Project title:  
Amnion -Chorion Allograft Barrier Used for Root Surface and Guided Tissue 
Regeneration for Periodontal Intrabony Defects and Grade II Furcation 
Defects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Protocol:  
Patients who are referred to the Graduate Periodontics Clinic at Indiana University School of Dentistry for the 
treatment of severe chronic/aggressive periodontitis will be screened for possible participation in this study. Up 
to [ADDRESS_1050084] of care procedures.  
Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria :  
The following site inclusion criteria will be used:  
1) ASA class I or II;  
2) age  >18 years old;  
3) Non-smoker;  
4) diagnosis of chronic or aggressive periodontitis previously treated with nonsurgical mechanical debridement; 
5) patients have at least one two -wall intrabony defect in interproximal areas with radiographic evidence of an 
intrabony component  of ≥ 4 mm, [COMPANY_003] ≥ [ADDRESS_1050085] or second molars without 
soft tissue exposure of furcation entrance;  
6) tooth mobility Mille r Grade <1;   
7) more than 2mm of keratinized tissue with those selected teeth.  
The following exclusion criteria will be used:  
1) did not meet all inclusion criteria;  
2) pregnancy  or nursing  woman ;  
3) subjects with active systemic or localized infectio n (exclude chronic periodontitis);  
4) poor compliance or failure to maintain good oral hygiene as ascertained by [CONTACT_765804] -mouth plaque 
score ≥ 20%;  
5) restorations or caries on root surfaces or untreated endodontic infections;  
6) participant s received periodontal surgical treatment on the same site of this study within 2 years;  
7) use of systemic or local antibiotics on the anticipated surgical sites during the past 3 months.  
Clinical Measurements  
A single calibrated examiner will perform c linical baseline and 6 -month follow up measurements. O’Leary 
plaque score will be assessed. Six sites of each tooth of probing depth (PD), recession (REC) and clinical 
attachment level (CAL) will be recorded to the nearest millimeter with a University of N orth Carolina Probe 
(UNC Probe). For Glickman grade II furcation defects, in addition to the previous measurements, vertical 
probing pocket depth (VPD) and horizontal probing depth (HPD) will be measured.  
Radiographic assessment will be performed with ver tical bite -wing radiographs at baseline and [ADDRESS_1050086] 
operatively.  Sirona Dental Systems© with 7mA 60kV with 0.16s exposure time will be utilized for all 
radiographs. Digital #[ADDRESS_1050087] (BD)  will be defined as the most coronal point where the periodontal ligament space showed a 
continuous width. If several bony contours could be identified, the most api[INVESTIGATOR_765799] r crest. If the cemento -enamel junction (CEJ) was 
destroyed by [CONTACT_765805], the margin of the restoration will be taken as a landmark.  
Surgical Procedures :  
All surgery will be rendered at the Graduate Periodontics Clinic at Indiana Universi ty School of Dentistry. All 
the patients will be treated under local anesthesia (2% lidocaine with 1/100,000epi [INVESTIGATOR_1660] 4% articaine with 
1/100,000epi). If the patient is willing to receive the surgery under intravenous or oral sedation, those services 
will be provided based on the necessity.  After local anesthesia, intracrevicular incisions will be made and full -
  
 thickness mucoperiosteal flaps will be raised both buccally and lingually; the surgeon will try to preserve the 
maximum extent of the marginal and int erdental gingival tissue to obtain primary closure and membrane 
coverage. Vertical releasing incisions will only be used if necessary to gain access for defect debridement. The 
alveolar bone will be exposed at least [ADDRESS_1050088], and  periosteal releasing incisions 
will be made to ensure complete membrane coverage at the time of suturing if necessary. All granulation tissue 
will be removed, the defects will be debrided, and the roots will be thoroughly scaled and root planed by [CONTACT_765806]. Following debridement, 17% EDTA solution with cotton pellet will be 
applied on the root surface for 2 minutes. After thorough irrigation with saline, BioXclude® (Amnion -Chorion 
Membrane: FDA Approved materials for intrabon y defects) will be cut into two pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928]. The amnion -chorion 
BioXclude membrane is regulated by [CONTACT_765807] [ADDRESS_1050089] as a “Human 
cells, tissues, and cellular or tissue -based product” (HCT/P).  The FDA does not require pr e-market approval for 
these products like it would with drugs, biologics or devices.  Therefore, this product will have no associated 
“investigational device exemption” (IDE) number.  The FDA views using amnion chorion as a wound covering 
to aid in the hea ling of tissues throughout the body to be a “homologous use”. One goes to the root surface, and 
coronal portion of the membrane has to be >3mm coronal of CEJ. Once applied the membrane, one drop of 
saline will be applied to obtain better adaptation of memb rane on the root surface. Bone substitutes 0.5cc 
(Particle size of 0.25 -0.5mm of Corticocancellous, Maxxeus®) will be hydrated for at least 10min prior to 
application, and applied into the defects. The bone particles will not exceed the edge of defects in order to avoid 
over fill. Following the bone graft will be delivered to the defect. The coronal portion of excessive membrane 
will be just folded over the graft materials. The other BioXclude membrane will be utilized over the grafts, and 
will always be pl aced coronal to the interproximal bone crest so that it completely covers the defect and extends 
2 to 3 mm beyond the residual bone. No sutures, pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115], or tacks will be used for membrane fixation or 
stabilization. The orientation of the membrane will not ma tter. Vertical or horizontal mattress sutures with 5 -0 
Proline (Monofilament/Nylon) will be placed in the interproximal tissues to obtain primary closure as much as 
possible.  
Intra -surgical Clinical Measurements . 
Intrabony defects: defect morphology will be measured (1 wall, 2 walls and/or those combinations) from the 
deepest aspect of the defect from the most coronal side of edge of the defects.  
 
Postoperative Care and Maintenance :  
All patients will receive antibiotics (875mg amoxicillin twice /day) for  one week. If participants are allergic to 
amoxicillin, clindamycin (150mg twice/day) for one week will be prescribed. Analgesics (600mg ibuprofen 
three times/day) will be prescribed as needed for discomfort. Pt will be seen one, two and four weeks as a po st-
operative follow up. Patients will be advised to rinse twice daily with 0.12% chlorhexidine for 2 weeks after 
surgery. Patients will be instructed to refrain from brushing the teeth in the surgical area for 2 weeks. After that, 
they will be instructed t o initiate brushing with an extra -soft toothbrush. Subjects will be recalled at 4 -week 
intervals after 4weeks from surgical procedure for a period of 6 months for plaque scoring, oral hygiene 
instruction, and professional prophylaxis as needed. No subgingi val probing or instrumentation will be 
performed at the experimental sites until the 6 -month follow -up appointment.  
Statistical Analysis:  
Due to the nature of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_765800], no sample size justification estimated were performed. Means and standard 
deviations for all parameters will be calculated. The paired -sample t test will be used to assess the statistical 
significance of the difference between the initial and the 6 -month visit within group. Difference will be 
considered statistically significant at the P < .05. All data analysis will be performed using statistical software. 
(Microsoft Excel.)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Informed consent form:  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:    [INVESTIGATOR_765801]. Hamada , DDS, MS D  
 
ADDRESS OF STUDY SITE:   Indiana University School of Dentistry  
     [ADDRESS_1050090]  
     Indianapolis, IN  [ZIP_CODE]    
 
DAYTIME TELEPHONE:   (317) 274 -5121  
 
AFTER HOURS TELEPHONE:  In a study related emergency only, call (317 -874-7860 )   
  
 INTRODUCTION  
You are being asked to volunteer for a dental research study. You were chosen as a possible subject 
because you are an adult attending a visit at the periodontal clinic at Indiana University (IU) School of 
Dentistry.  Before agreeing to be in this study, y ou should read this consent form which describes the purpose, 
procedures, benefits, payment, and risks of the study. No promises or guarantees can be made as to the 
results of the research study. Please ask as many questions as you want so you can decide w hether you want 
to be in the study.  
 
This study i s being conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Y. Hamada of the ( IU) School of Dentistry .  The Amnion -Chorion 
membranes to be used in this study were donated Snoasis Medical, LLC.  All remaining funds required to 
conduct the stud y were provided by [CONTACT_744458].  
  
BACKGROUND AND STUDY PURPOSE   
Bone allografts and membrane allografts are used in dentistry to treat bony defects due to the tooth loss and 
gum diseases. An Amnion -Chorion membrane allograft is used in the medical field as well as dentistry to 
treat a wound surface since this membrane can accelerate the wound healing. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_765802] a bone 
graft is placed over the bone defect and is covered with a membrane allograft.  In this study we will place the 
membrane allograft against the root surface of the defect area first and then pl ace the bone graft over it and 
then cover the bone graft with an additional membrane.  The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_765803]. We will study how muc h your 
probing depth, rece ssion and  clinical attachment level  changes as a result of placing this membrane on the 
root from measurements taken before and after your surgery.  
  
HOW LONG THE STUDY WILL LAST AND THE NUMBER OF SUBJECTS PARTICIPATING  
This study will last about six mont hs.  Your study visits will be the same days as your treatment visits.  If you 
agree to participate, you will be one of up to 20 adult subjects participating in this study.  
  
WHAT WILL HAPPEN DURING THE STUDY  
You will be given a treatment plan for your per iodontal care. What will be identified on the treatment plan will 
be procedures and measurements considered “standard of care”, meaning they are procedures that would 
be performed regardless of whether or not you are in a research study. What will not be s tandard of care will 
be the placement of the membrane over the root surface before placing the bone graft during surgery.  
There are published studies that show the use of this membrane on the root surface for to treat gum 
recession, but this is not consid ered standard of care at the IU School of Dentistry. All data collected for this 
study will come from procedures and measurement associated with your recommended treatment plan. By 
[CONTACT_765808] e over the root surface and 
use data we collect as a part of your visits for this research study.  You are not being asked to do anything in 
addition to what is written here or have any extra procedures performed that would not be done anyway as a 
part of your treatment.  
 
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS AND RISKS OF THE TREATMENT  
There are risks associated with the treatment and surgery.  These risks will be explained to you in your 
treatment consent. There could be unknown risks associated with the membrane being placed over your 
root surface during surgery.  This risk is believed  to be low since there are published articles of other 
dentists who have performed this procedure and because this member is used in medicine and dentistry to 
stimulate bone growth in various parts of the body.  
 
Potential loss of confidentiality of resear ch records is also a risk. To reduce this risk, all study records and 
data will be stored in locked cabinets and  encrypted,  password protected computer files that only study 
personnel can access. With the e xception of the forms you sign,  a unique stu dy num ber is what will identify  
your study records.   
  
 POSSIBLE BENEFITS OF THE STUDY  
There are no additional health benefits to participating in this study beyond what you will receive by 
[CONTACT_765809].  This study could help us better understand the use of this 
membrane on the root which could help others in the future.  
 
ALTERNATIVES TO TAKING PART IN THE STUDY  
You do not have to be in this research study to have periodontal treatment.  You may choose to have the 
standard of care  periodontal treatment (the membrane would not be placed over the root surface before 
placing the bone graft during surgery) at the IU School of Dentistry without being in this study or to seek 
standard of care periodontal treatment from a private practice  outside of Indiana University.  
 
LEGAL RIGHTS   
You will not lose any of your legal rights as a research subject by [CONTACT_50841].   
 
RELEASE OF YOUR MEDICAL RECORDS, DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION AND PRIVACY  
Efforts will be made to keep your person al information confidential.  We cannot guarantee absolute 
confidentiality. Your personal information may be disclosed if required by [CONTACT_2371]. Your identity will be held in 
confidence in reports in which the study may be published and databases in which result s may be stored. 
Organizations that may inspect and/or copy your research records for quality assurance and data analysis 
include groups such as the  study sponsor, study investigator and his research associates, the Indiana 
University Institutional Review Board or its designees and (as allowed by [CONTACT_2371]) state or federal agencies, 
specifically the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP).    
 
PAYMENT FOR INJURY RELATED TO THE STUDY  
In the event of physical injury resulting from your participation in this r esearch, necessary medical treatment 
will be provided to you and billed as part of your medical expenses. Costs not covered by [CONTACT_765810]. Also, it is your responsibility to determine the extent of your health care  
coverage. There is no program in place for other monetary compensation for such injuries. However, you 
are not giving up any legal rights or benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  If you are participating in 
research that is not conducted at a med ical facility, you will be responsible for seeking medical care and for 
the expenses associated with any care received.  
 
WHOM TO CONTACT  
[CONTACT_765811] a research related injury, please call [CONTACT_765815]  or his staff at (317) 27 8-
1087.  For emergencies that you feel may be related to this study that fall after regular business hours, call 
our emerg ency answering service at ( [PHONE_15977].  One of the researchers will be contact[CONTACT_765812]. If you want to reach the researcher during regular business hours (8:00 am –
5:00 pm weekdays) but can’t, call the Indiana University (IU) Human Subjects Offi ce at (317) 278 -3458 or 
toll free at (800) 696 -2949.    
 
For questions about your rights as a research participant or to discuss problems, complaints or concerns 
about a research study, or to obtain information or offer input, call the IU Human Subjects Of fice at (317) 
278-3458 or (800) 696 -2949.   
 
PAYMENT FOR BEING IN THE STUDY  
You will not receive a cash payment for your participation.  However, if you decide to participate  in the study , 
your bone graft and membrane procedures will be covered by [CONTACT_43038] y funds.  The estimated value of this 
is $454.[ADDRESS_1050091] may take you out of the study without your permission at any time for the following reasons:  
  
 • if it is discovered that you do not meet the study requirements  
• if the study is canceled  
• if it appears to be medically harmful to you  
 
ADDITIONAL COSTS  
There is no cost to you for participating in this study.    
 
  
AGREEMENT TO BE IN THE STUDY  
Please do not sign t his form until a study person  has reviewed the form with you.  After the review, in signing 
the consent form you are agreeing to the following statements:  
 
o I have had time to read all pages of this Informed Consent Document.  
o The content and meaning of this information has been fully explained to me.   
o I have been offered a chance to ask questions.  
o I am satisfied with the answers to all of my questions.  
o I understand that if I do not take part in the study, I will not be penalized or lose any benefits 
to which I am otherwise entitled.   
o I agree to voluntarily participate in this study.  
o I understand that I may withdraw my consent to be in the study at any time.    
o I certify that all information I will give, including my medical history, is true and correct to the 
best of my knowledge.  
o I know that it is my responsibility to tell the study doctor about all changes in my physical or 
mental health during the study.  
o I acknowledge that I will get a copy of this signed and dated Informed Consent Document for 
my records.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Printed Name [CONTACT_765813]  
 
 