Xiamen LP Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Protocol  Number:  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033612] -2020  Page  1 of 4 CONFIDENTIAL   
 Protocol Number: LP -CT-PALO -202002  
 
 
 
 
Study Title  A Randomized, Dose -ranging, Open -label, Parallel Group Study to Assess the Efficacy, 
Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Palonosetron HCl Buccal Film versus IV Palonosetron  
0.25 mg (ALOXI®) for the Prevention  of Chemotherapy -induced  Nausea and Vomiting 
in Cance r Patients Receiving Moderately Emetogenic Chemotherapy  
NCT N umber  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol  Number  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033613] 2020  
 
 
Xiamen LP Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Protocol  Number:  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033614] -2020  Page  2 of 4 CONFIDENTIAL   
 SYNOPSIS  
 
Study  Number:  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033615]:   
Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  (LP035)  
 
Title  of Study:  A Randomized, Dose -ranging, Open -label, Parallel Group Study to Assess the 
Efficacy, Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Palonosetron HCl Buccal Film versus IV 
Palonosetron  0.25 mg (ALOXI®) for the Prevention  of Chemotherapy -induced  Nausea 
and Vomiting in Cance r Patients Receiving Moderately Emetogenic Chemotherapy  
Indication:  Prevention  of acute  and delayed  nausea  and vomiting  associated  with moderately 
emetogenic cancer chemotherapy  
Development  Phase:  2 
 
Objectives:  To compare  the efficacy,  safety  and pharmacokinetics  of single  dose of Palonosetron 
HCl Buccal  Film  0.25 mg or  0.5 mg to IV  palonosetron  0.25 mg in the  prevention of 
chemotherapy -induced nausea and vomiting in cancer patients receiving moderately 
emetogenic chemotherapy  
Study  Population:  The study  population  will consist  of male  or female  adult  chemotherapy  naï ve  (i.e. no 
history of cytotoxic chemotherapy) or non -naï ve patients with histologically or 
cytologically confirmed solid tumors, scheduled to receive MEC.  
 
Study  Design:  This is a randomized,  open -label,  multicenter,  parallel  group,  dose-ranging  efficacy, 
safety and pharmacokinetic study. Patients will be randomized into three treatment  
groups.  
Number  of Subjects:  22 subjects will be randomized into three treatment groups, 8 subjects in 0.25 mg 
LP035  group,  8 subjects  in 0.5 mg LP035 group,  6 subjects  in 0.25 mg ALOXI® group.  
Palonosetron PK  will be assessed  in a subgroup  of patients  in 12  patients,  4 patients  per 
group.  
 
 
 
Study  Duration:  Patients  not included  in the PK subgroups,  will stay on the study  for a maximum  of 16 
days including an  up to 7-days screening  period,  6 days on study (control  phase) and  a 
follow -up patient visit or telephone call 3 days after control phase.  
Patients  involved  in the PK subgroups will  stay on the study  for a maximum  of 18 days 
including an up to 7 -days screening period, 8 days on study (6 days control  phase, and 
an additional 2 days PK phase) and a follow -up patient visit or telephone call 3 days 
after the PK phase.  
 
 
 
 
 
Treatment  Groups:  Divided  into 3 groups： 
Test Drug  Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  0.25 mg, administered  on Day 1,  
(Group A):  8 subjects;  
Test Drug  Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  0.5 mg, administered  on Day 1, 
(Group B):  8 subjects;  
Reference  IV palonosetron  0.25 mg (ALOXI®), administered  on Day 1 
(Group C):  6 subjects.  
 
 
Criteria  for Inclusion:  For inclusion  in the study,  patients  must  fulfill  all of the following  criteria:  
1. Provide  written  informed  consent;  
2. Male  or female,  aged  ≥ 18 years;  
3. With  histologically  or cytologically  confirmed  malignant  disease;  
4. Patients  and patients’  partners  using  reliable  contraceptive  measures ; 
Xiamen LP Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Protocol  Number:  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033616] -2020  Page  3 of 4 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
Criteria  for Inclusion:  5. Female  patient  of childbearing  potential  having  a negative  serum  pregnancy  test;  
6. Be able to read,  understand,  and follow  the study  procedures  and able to complete 
patient d iary autonomously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  Any of the following  is regarded  as a criterion  for exclusion  from  the study:  
1. Expect  to be non-compliant  with the study  procedures;  
2. Receive  any investigational  drugs  within  30 days before  the start of study 
treatment or schedule to receive a highly or moderately emetogenic 
chemotherapeutic agent;  
3. Have  a clinically  unstable  seizure  disorder  with seizure  activity  requiring 
anticonvulsant medication ; 
4. Have  severe  renal  or hepatic  impairment;  
5. Have  positive  serology  test results;  
6. Have  a known  contraindication  to 5-HT 3 receptor  antagonists;  
7. Treat  with commercially  available  palonosetron  formulations  within  2 weeks  prior 
to start of study treatment or enrollment in a previous trial investigating 
palonosetron;  
8. Is allergic  to palonosetron  or any other  5-HT [ADDRESS_1033617];  
9. Is currently  a user of any recreational  or illicit  drugs  (including  marijuana)  or has 
current evidence of drug or alcohol abuse or dependence as determined by [CONTACT_1275];  
10. Will be receiving  stem  cell rescue  therapy  in conjunction  with study  related  course 
of emetogenic chemotherapy;  
11. Has received or will receive total body irradiation or radiation therapy to the 
abdomen  (includes  the level  of the diaphragm  and below)  or pelvis  in the week 
prior to Treatment Day 1 and/or during the diary reporting period . 
 
 
 
 
Study  Treatments:   
Test Drug 
(Group  A): Administration  of Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  0.25 mg 
on Day 1, 60 ±  [ADDRESS_1033618] Drug 
(Group  B): Administration  of Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  0.5 mg 
on Day 1, 60 ±  10 min before start of Chemotherapy.  
Reference 
(Group  C): IV palonosetron  0.25 mg (ALOXI®) administered  on Day 
1, 30 ±  5 minutes before start  of Chemotherapy, as an IV 
bolus over 30 seconds.  
 
 
 
Schedule  of Patient Visits:  Patients  will undergo  the following  visits:  
• Screening:  Visit  1 (Day  -7 to Day -1); 
• Visit  2 (Day  1): chemotherapy  and study  drug administration;  
• Visit  3 (Day  2): 24 hours  after the start of chemotherapy  administration  
• Visit  4 (Day  6 [+2 days]/Day  8): 120 [up to 175] hours  after start of 
chemotherapy administration  
• Visit  5 (Day  9 [± 1 day]/Day  11 [± 1 day]):  follow -up [visit  or 
phone contact].  
 
 
Chemotherapy Regimens:  Any MEC (ASCO Guideline ), taken on Day [ADDRESS_1033619] agent is to be 
considered as the start of chemotherapy.  
Any chemotherapy  agent  of high or moderate  emetogenicity during  the period  from Day 
2 up to 120 hours after start of chemotherapy is not allowed.  
Xiamen LP Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Protocol  Number:  LP-CT-PALO -[ADDRESS_1033620] -2020  Page  4 of 4 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
Efficacy  Assessments:  Primary  Endpoint:  
Complete  response  (CR)  (no emetic  epi[INVESTIGATOR_754977])  during  the first 
24 hours after chemotherapy.  
 
 
Safety  Assessments:  Safety assessments include the recording and assessing of all adverse events (AEs), vital 
signs, physical examinations (PE), clinical laboratory parameters, 12 -lead 
electrocardiogram (ECG), buccal application site evaluation at 0.5 hour (for all subjects),  
24 hours  (for all subjects) post -dose and at Visit  4 (day 8 for PK subgroups, day 6 -8 for 
non-PK subgroups).  
 
 
 
 
Analysis  Sets:  The full analysis  set (FAS)  is defined  as all randomized  patients  who received  the study 
medication and at least chemotherapy. The analy sis based on the FAS is considered as 
primary analysis for all efficacy parameters.  
The per-protocol  (PP) set is defined  as all patients  who completed  Day 2  (primary 
endpoint) and who is compliant with the study protocol.  
Pharmacokinetic  set (PKS)  is defined  as all subjects  completing  the study  and for 
whom the pharmacokinetic profile can be adequately characterized.  
The safety set (SS) is defined as all patients treated and have at least one safety 
assessment  after treatment.  "Patients  treated"  is defined as any patient  who received any 
study medication (palonosetron).  
Pharmacokinetic : Parameters:  AUC 0-t, AUC 0-inf, Cmax, Residual  area,  Tmax, T½ el, and kel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical  Methods:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Efficacy:  
The primary analysis will be summarized by [CONTACT_2939]. The number and 
proportion of patients will be  presented by [CONTACT_397933].  For the response rate and 
for the difference  in response  rate between  each Palonosetron  HCl Buccal  Film  group 
and IV palon osetron group, 95% confidence interval (CI) will be provided.  
For the CR rate at 24 h,  analyses  will be carried  out for both FAS and PP population; 
the other parameters will be analyzed only for FAS population.  
The subgroups  will be analyzed  based  on FAS for the primary  efficacy  by [CONTACT_654], gender, 
chemotherapy history, ethano l use, history of pregnancy -related morning sickness, 
history of motion sickness. The between -group treatment effect (with a nominal 95% 
CI) for the primary endpoint will be estimated within each category.  
Safety:  
The analysis of safety will be performed f or the safety set. The result will be 
interpreted  in a descriptive  manner.  Incidence  of AEs will be calculated  overall,  by 
[CONTACT_754978].  
Physical examination, vital signs, 12 -lead electrocardiogram and application site 
evaluation  data will be listed  and summarized.  For vital signs,  differences  will be 
calculated compared to baseline.  
Laboratory data will be analyzed and described considerin g the age and/or gender 
dependent  normal  ranges  of the local  laboratory.  Laboratory  data will be summarized and 
listed. Marked abnormalities and assessments concerning clinical relevance for abnormal 
values will be included. Shift tables will be used for v ital signs and laboratory data to 
evaluate categorical changes with respect to normal ranges.  
Sponsor:  Xiamen  LP Pharmaceutical  Co., Ltd. 