[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study ID: LIN‐MD‐10 
 
Title: An Open‐label,  Long‐term Study to Assess  the Immunogenicity  of Linaclotide  Administered  Orally 
to Adult  Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome  With Constipation  or Chronic Idiopathic  Constipation  
 
 
Protocol Amendment  2 Date: 05‐Oct‐[ADDRESS_491605] Research Institute , Inc., an affiliate of Actavis Inc .
Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE]
An Open -label, Long- term Study to Assess the Immunogenicity of Linaclotide 
Administered Orally to Adult Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome With 
Constipation or Chronic Idiopathic Constipation
LIN-MD-10
IND #63,290
Original Protocol /Date: Protocol MCP -103- 402, 25 Nov 2013
Amendment #1 09Apr 2015
Amendment #[ADDRESS_491606] Research Institute, Inc., and may not —in full or 
part—be passed on, reproduced, published, distributed, or submitted to any regulatory
authority without the express written permission of Forest Research Institute , Inc. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491607] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
2.0 SYNOPSIS AND SCHEDULE OF EVALUATIONS
CLINICAL STUDY SYNOPSIS: Study LIN-MD-10
Study Number LIN-MD -10
Title of StudyAn Open -label, Long -term Study to Assess the Immunogenicity of Linaclotide 
Administered Orally to Adult Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome W ith 
Constipation or Chronic Idiopathic Constipation
Study Centers (Country) Approximately 80 ([LOCATION_002])
Development Phase 4
Objective sThe primary objective of this study is to assess the potential of linaclotide 
treatment to induce the development of anti -drug antibodies (ADAs). The 
secondary objectives are to provide additional evidence supporting the long -
term safety and efficacy of linaclotide in adult irritable bowel syndrome with 
constipation (IBS -C) and chronic idiopathic constipation (CIC) patients and to 
evaluate lower doses of linaclotide in patients who consider study withdrawal 
due to intolerable adverse events (AEs) .
Methodo logyMulticenter , open -label study . Patients who experience intolerable AEs ( defined 
as AEs that subjectively would cause a patient to consider study withdrawal),
may have their dosing suspended and, following resolution of the intolerable 
AEs,be randomiz ed to receive the same or lower doses of double -blind 
linaclotide as an optional treatment course . Patients who experience further 
intolerable AEs after the randomization can be transitioned to open -label 72 ug
linaclotide.
Number of Patients1000 (projected number screened); 800 IBS -C or CIC enrolled. For each patient 
group (IBS -C or CIC), at least 300 patients are expected to be enrolled.
Diagnosis and 
Main Criteria for InclusionMale and female adult ( ≥ 18 years of age) outpatients who meet the Rome III 
criteria for IBS -C or CIC
Test Product, Dosage, and Mode of 
AdministrationPatients with CIC: l inaclotide 145 -ugcapsules , oral ly,once daily 
Patients with IBS -C: linaclotide 290- ugcapsules, orally, once daily
Patients with intolerable AEs will be randomized to receive 290 ug, 145 ug, or 
the lower (unapproved) dose of 72 uglinaclotide oral capsules for IBS-C; and 
145 ug or 72 u g for CIC. Patients who experience further intolerable AEs after 
the randomization ca n be transitioned to open -label 72 uglinaclotide.
Duration of Treatment Up to a 3 -week Screening Period, followed by a 52 -wee k Treatment Period
Reference Therapy, Dosage, and 
Mode of Adm inistrationNone
Criteria for Evaluation Patient -reported assessments
Phar macokinetic Analysis Immunogenicity assessments
Primary Outcome Measure ADA determinations from blood samples
Secondary Outcome MeasuresAE reporting of recurrence (including date) of intolerable diarrhea after 
randomization to double -blind treatment following resolution of initial 
intolerable diarrhea.
Assessments of efficacy  during open -label 
treatment, and during double -blind treatment.
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491608] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

Statistical MethodsImmunogenicity Assessments
For each indication separately and combined, the number and percentage of 
patients meeting treatment -related ADA -positive status will be summarized, 
along with the 1-sided 95% Clopper-Pearson confidence interval, for Safety 
Population patients with at least 1assessable postbaseline sample, ie, patients 
who are not postbaseline ADA undetermined (sample lost, damaged ,or out of 
specifications). A sensitivity analysis will be performed where baseline ADA 
undetermined patients are excluded . 
Efficacy 
The efficacy  will be analyzed descriptively based on 
the Inten t-to-Treat Population. As this is an open -label study, no inferential 
statistics will be performed .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491609] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
9.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN A ND PLAN: DESCRIPTION .............. . 
9.[ADDRESS_491610] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

9.5.4 Safety Assessments .......................................................................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Events .......................................................................... . 
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Severity Assessment 
.................................................................. . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Serious Adverse Events ............................................................. . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Reporting Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events ........... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Immediate Reporting of  Serious Adverse Events ...................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Reporting of Pregnancies That Occur During the Study ........... .         
 
   
 
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_491611] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

9.6.1 Data Monitoring ............................................................................... . 
9.6.2 Data Recording and Documentation ................................................ . 
9.7 STATISTICAL METHODS AND DETERMINATION OF 
SAMPLE SIZE ............................................................................................. . 
9.7.1 Patient Populations ........................................................................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Screened Population ................................................................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Safety Population ....................................................................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Intent-to-Treat Population .......................................................... . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Randomized Population ............................................................. . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Double-blind Safety Population ................................................. . 
[IP_ADDRESS] Double-blind ITT Population ..................................................... . 
9.7.[ADDRESS_491612] OF THE STUDY OR PLANNED 
ANALYSES ................................................................................................. . 
9.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS .................................................................. . 
10.0 STUDY SPONSORSHIP......................................................................... . 
10.1 STUDY TERMINATION .................................................................... . 
10.2 REPORTING AND PUBLICATION .................................................. . 
11.0 INVESTIGATOR OBLIGATIONS ........................................................ . 
11.1 DOCUMENTATION ........................................................................... . 
11.2 PERFORMANCE ................................................................................. . 
11.3 USE OF INVESTIGATIONAL MATERIALS ................................... . 
11.4 CASE REPORT FORMS ..................................................................... . 
11.5 RETENTION AND REVIEW OF RECORDS .................................... . 
11.6 PATIENT CONFIDENTIALITY ........................................................ . 
12.0 INVESTIGATOR’S STATEMENT ........................................................ . 
13.[ADDRESS_491613] OF IN-TEXT TABLES 
 Page
.. 
Table 9.7.2–1. Summarization of Patient Disposition ..................................... . 
 
 [ADDRESS_491614]
IBS irritable bow el syndrome
IBS-C irritable bow el syndrome with constipation
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation 
IND Investigational New Drug (application) 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491615] (I RB) before the start of the study  will be the 
responsibility  of the Investigator . A copy  of the approval letter will be supplied to Forest 
Research Institute, Inc., along with a roster of IRB members or the US Department of 
Health and Human Services general assurance number. During the course of the study , 
the Investigator will provide timely  and accurate reports to the I RB on the progress of the 
study , at intervals not exceeding 1 year (or as appropriate), and will notify  the I RB of 
serious adverse events (SAEs) or other significant safet y findings. The study protocol, 
informed consent form (ICF), information shee t advertisements, and amendments (if any ) 
will be approved b y the study center 's IRB in conformance with CFR, Title 21, Part 56.
5.[ADDRESS_491616] 
their or igins in the Declaration of Helsinki.
This clinical study  will comply  with I CH Guidances on General Considerations for 
Clinical Trials (I CH-E8; 62 FR66113, 17 Dec1997) and GCP (ICH -E6; 62 FR [ZIP_CODE], 
09 May  1997), as well as Part 312 of the CFR.
5.3 PATIENT IN FORMATION AND INFORMED CONSENT
Patients, after being given an explanation of the study , will give voluntary  and written 
informed consent and HIPAA authorization (in compliance with 21 CFR, Parts 50 and 
312) or other appropriate forms before participating in an y stud y-related procedures.
Each patient will read, assent to an understanding of, and sign an instrument of informed 
consent or other locally  applicable regulation and authorization form ,after having had an 
opportunity  to discuss the study and the ICF with the study  staff; each patient will be 
made aware that he or she may  withdraw from the study  at an y time without impact to 
further treatment.
The informed consent statement contains all the elements of informed consent listed in 
Appendix I  of this protocol. Signed copi[INVESTIGATOR_391590] y 
applicable form will be given to the patient, and both documents will be placed in the 
Investigator ’s study  files.  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491617] UDY ADMINISTRATIVE 
STRUCTURE
This study  will be perform ed at approximately  80 study centers in the [LOCATION_002].
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that the study  is conducted according to the 
signed Investigator statement, the study  protocol, GCP guidelines, and applicable 
regulations; for protecting the rights, safet y, and welfare of patients under the 
Investigator’s care; and for the control of investigational products used in the study . 
AnInvestigator shall obtain the informed consent of each patient prior to the patient 
enrolling in the stud y and/or prior to participating in any stud y-related activity .
The Investigator at each site must meet obligations to the patients, ethics committee, 
Sponsor, and regulatory  authorities by  [CONTACT_204098] ’s 
conduct and the stud y staff. It is the responsibility of the Investigator to en sure that any  
and all delegated duties be assigned to staff qualified by [CONTACT_8640], experience, and 
licensure (in accordance with local regulations) and that the I nvestigator oversight is 
documented and assessment of Investigator capabilities and performan ce consistent with 
the study  protocol. The Investigator at each site will be responsible for the management 
of the study , including maintaining the study  file and the patient records, corresponding 
with the I RB, and completing the electronic case report fo rms ( eCRFs). 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491618] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
7.0 INTRODUCTION
7.1 CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC CONSTIPATION
The sy mptoms of chronic idiopathic constipation (C IC) are repor ted in approximately  
15% of the general population (Stewart et al, 1999). The prevalenc e of C IC is higher in 
women than men and increas es with age (Johanson et al, 1989; Lembo and Camilleri, 
2003). Patients with C IC report multiple bowel and abdominal sy mptoms including 
straining, gas, hard stools, abdominal discomfort, infrequent bowel movements (BMs ), 
bloating, a sense of incomplete eva cuation, and abdominal pain (Johanson and Kralstein, 
2007).
7.2 IRRITABLE BOWEL SYND ROME WITH CONSTIPATI ON
Irritable bowel sy ndrome (IBS) is a chronic functional gastrointestinal (GI) disorder
characterized b y recurrent sy mptoms of abdominal pai n and/or discom fort accompanied
by [CONTACT_391598] (L ongstreth et al, 2006). I n mode rate to severe cases of IBS, an
overall deterioration in quality  of life is often present (Drossman et al, 2002). IBS is one
of the most common GI disorders diagn osed in the [LOCATION_002]; data suggest the 
prevalence of IBS is 10% to 15% of the population in North America and Europe
(Muller-Lissner et al, 2001). Based on Rome III guidelines, IBS is subty ped as IBS wi th 
diarrhea (IBS -D) or IBS with constipation (IBS -C); patients who do not fit IBS -C or 
IBS-D subt ypes are classified a s having mixed IBS (IBS- M) or unt yped IBS (IBS -U) 
(Longstreth et al, 2006). In addition to abdominal pain or discomfort and reduced stool 
frequency , IBS -C patients also report a number of other complaints including bloating, 
hard stools, straining, and a sensation of incomplete evacuation.
7.3 SUMMARY OF LINACLOTI DE PROPERTIES
Linacl otide, a 14-amino acid peptide that acts on the api[INVESTIGATOR_391591] C, is approved and marketed 
as an orall y administered therapeutic for the treatment of CIC and IBS-C. By  [CONTACT_391599] C, orally  administered linaclotide has been found to increase 
both intestinal fluid secretion and intestinal transit and also to decrease visceral pain in 
animal models (Linaclotide, 2013) .Linaclotide has minimal oral bioav ailability  (≤ 0.2% ) 
in several animal species (Bryant et al, 2010; Eutamene et al, 2009). Refer to the 
Investigator’s Brochure for a more detailed description of the chemistry , pharmacology , 
efficacy , and safety of linaclotide, based on studies conducted i n animals, healthy  
volunteers, and in patients with IBS- C and CI C(Linaclotide, 2013) . 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491619] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
7.4 CLINICAL EXPERIENCE
Linaclotide has been developed b y the Sponsor ( Forest Research Institute, Inc.) and 
Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, I nc.,for the treatment of CI C and IBS-C in adults. The 
clinical development program for linaclotide that culminated in FDA and European 
Medicines Agency  approvals included the following studies in adult patients:
4 large double -blind, placebo -controlled Phase 3 registration studies (2 IBS- C studies 
[LIN- MD-31 and MCP- 103-302] and 2 CI C studies [LIN -MD-01 and 
MCP -103- 303]) 
2 long -term safet y studies (LIN -MD-02 and MCP-103- 305), each with 78 -week 
treatment periods
In addition, a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel -group Phase 3b 
study  (LIN -MD-04) in patients with CI C was recently  completed.
The 2 IBS -C studies (LIN -MD-31 and MCP-103- 302) evaluated the safety and efficacy  
of linaclotide 290 ug(the adult dose subsequently  approved b y FDA) administered as an 
oral capsule for 12 o r 26 weeks, respectivel y. In these studies, linaclotide demonstrated 
statistically  significant and clinically  meaningful improvements in patients’ constipation 
symptoms and abdominal pain, and met all the pre- specified primary  and secondary  
endpoints. Study MCP -103-[ADDRESS_491620] common adverse event (AE) was diarrhea 
occurring in approximately  20% of IBS-C patients in both studies. Overall, there was no 
obvious pattern in the ty pes of SAEs experienced in either the placebo or linaclotide 
group. There were no SAEs of diarrhea. 
The 2 CI C studies (LIN -MD-01 and MCP-103- 303) evaluated the safety  and efficacy  of 
linaclotide 145 ug (the a dult dose subsequently  approved b y FDA for this indication) and 
linaclotide [ADDRESS_491621] common AE was diarrhea occurring in 13.1 % to 17.2% of CI C 
patients in both studies. There were no SAEs of diarrhea although diarrhea was reported 
in 1patient along with SAEs of de hydration and orthostatic hy potension. There were no 
clinically  relevant differences between the 2 linaclotide dose groups in the incidence of 
diarrhea treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs), severe diarrhea TEAEs, or diarrhea 
that resulted in discontin uation from the studies. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491622] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
The sy stemic exposure to linaclotide was also evaluated in the Phase 3 IBS -C and CI C 
studies in adults. Analy sis of plasma indicated that linaclotide and its only  active 
metabolite (des t yrosine linaclotide) MM-419447, plasma conce ntrations are generally  
not detectable. Linaclotide was detectable at concentrations just above the limit of 
detection (0.2 ng/mL) in the plasma of onl y 2 out of the 465 patients whose plasma 
samples were anal yzed (both were IBS -C patients). MM -419447 was not detectable in 
any patient plasma samples.
Because of linaclotide’s limited sy stemic availability , a thorough QT stud y was not 
performed. However, triplicate electrocardiograms (ECGs) were part of the safet y data 
obtained during the Phase 3 studies in a dults. There were no clinically  meaningful 
differences between placebo and linaclotide groups in the mean or change from baseline 
QT interval ( corrected by [CONTACT_391600]). Overall the data 
indicated that linaclotide does not adver sely affect the ECG of adult linaclotide -treated 
patients.
Long -term studies LIN -MD-02 and MCP-103- 305 included 78- week treatment periods to 
evaluate the long- term safety  of linaclotide in IBS- C and CI C adult patients. Both studies 
included patients who co mpleted 1 of the linaclotide Phase 2 or 3 studies, or completed 
the pretreatment period of 1 of the Phase 3 double-blind studies, but failed to meet 
specific inclusion or exclusion criteria to be randomized. Study  MCP -103- 305 had a 
single case of aplastic anemia reported; the clinical presentation of the patient suggested 
that the disease process culminating in aplastic anemia began prior to linaclotide 
exposure and was most likely  idiopathic. Post -hoc anal yses of the linaclotide Phase [ADDRESS_491623] and based on linaclotide’s pharmacologic properties and minimal sy stemic 
bioavailab ility, linaclotide is unlikely to cause aplastic anemia. In both Study  
MCP -103- [ADDRESS_491624] commonly  reported AE was diarrhea, 
which occurred in approximately  30% of CI C patients and IBS- C patients in both studies. 
Neither stud y report ed SAEs of diarrhea.
The recentl y completed Phase 3b study (LIN -MD-04) was a randomized, double -blind, 
placebo- controlled, parallel -group, study . Linaclotide at doses of 145 ug /day and 
290 ug /day was administered orally  for 12 weeks to 487 randomized adult patients with 
chronic constipation and prominent abdominal bloating at baseline (ie, bloating ≥ 5.0 on 
an 11 point numerical rating scale). No new safet y trends or concerns were identified. 
There were no deaths during the stud y and no SAEs of diarrhea. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491625] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
Safety data from these studies in adults showed that, except for diarrhea, the proportion 
of patients reporting a TEAE was similar between placebo and each linaclotide dose 
group, and the incidence of TEAEs was not dose -related. With the exception of the GI 
system organ class (SOC), the occurrence of TEAEs in the CI C and IBS -C patients was 
balanced across treatment groups in each SOC for the adult Phase [ADDRESS_491626] common TEAE in linaclotide-treated CIC and IBS- C 
patients, consistent with its pharmacology ; however diarrhea was rarel y associated with 
serious sequelae such as dehy dration, fecal incontinence, or defecation urgency . 
SAEs were infrequent and balanced across treatment arms within each indication. An 
analysis of the SAEs across the entire clinical development program revealed no pattern 
to suggest that linaclotide causes any specific serious condition.
Minor abnormalities in laboratory , vital sign, or ECG parameters were observed rarel y; 
overall, there were no clinically  meaningful differences between linaclotide and placebo 
treatment groups for an y of these parameters in the Phase 3 placebo -controlled studies in 
adults.
Refer to the Investigator’s Brochure for a more detailed description of the chemistry , 
pharm acology , efficacy , and safet y of linaclotide, based on studies conducted in animals, 
healthy  volunteers, and in adult patients with IBS -C and CI C. Linaclotide is 
contraindicated in pediatric patients up to 6 y ears of age. This is because i n nonclinical 
studies, administration of a single, clinically  relevant adult oral dose of linaclotide caused 
deaths in y oung juvenile mice.
7.5 RATIONALE FOR THIS S TUDY
The possibility  of an immune response to linaclotide, in the form of anti -drug antibody  
(ADA), was not evalu ated in the linaclotide clinical development program. Upon 
approval of the NDA, the FDA Division of Gastroenterology  and Inborn Errors Products 
required the S ponsors to evaluate this possibility  by [CONTACT_746] “a clinical trial in adults 
receiving Linzess ( linaclotide) to assess development of ADA responses in patient 
samples.” The Division also prescribed that in this trial “adverse events will be 
collected.”
Evaluation of the immunogenicity  of therapeutic proteins and peptides remains an 
important part of product development. Antibody -related clinical sequelae that can occur 
in humans range from no apparent or mild side effects to altered efficacy , 
immune -complex -mediated sy mptoms, and allergic reactions. Thus, it is necessary  to 
collect appropriate data re garding the possibility  of the appearance of and, if they  appear, 
the characteristics of antibodies induced over time and assess how these findings may  be 
associated with clinical outcomes. (Koren et al, 2008; Parenk y et al, 2014 ; Shankar et al, 
2014) 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491627] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
8.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES
The primary  objective of this study  is to assess the potential of linaclotide treat ment to 
induce the development of ADAs. The secondary objectives are to provide additional 
evidence supporting the long- term safety  and efficacy  of linaclotide in adult irritable 
bowel sy ndrome with constipation (IBS -C) and CIC patients and to evaluate low er doses 
of linaclotide in patients who consider study withdrawal due to intolerable AEs. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491628] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
9.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
9.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN: DESCRIPTIO N
This will be a multicenter, open -label, long -term clinical study to assess the 
immunogenicit y and long -term safety  of linaclotide administered orally  to adult patients 
with IBS-Cor CIC,and to evaluate lower doses of linaclotide in patients who consider 
study  withdrawal due to intolerable AEs that may  be related to the use of linaclotide.
Approximately  800 IBS- C or CI C patients (a minimum of 300 each) will be enrolled.
The study  will consist of u p to a 3 -week Screening Period, followed b y a 52 -week 
Treatment Period (Figure 9.1–1). Patients who meet the entry  criteria will receive o nce 
daily , open -label dosesof 290 uglinaclotide forpatients with IBS -C; those with CI C will 
receive once daily , open -label dosesof [ADDRESS_491629] of lowering the dose inpatients who ex perience intolerable AEs ( defined 
as AEs that subjectivel y would cause a patient to consider stud y withdrawal) , in 
particular diarrhea and other GI AEs that may  be related to the use of linaclotide ,the 
following intervention ( Figure 9.1–2) will be offered as an optional treatment course to 
such patients, unless deemed clinically  inappropriate by  [CONTACT_737]:
1.A temporary  suspension of dosing of up to [ADDRESS_491630] the Study  Physician to discuss the duration of the dose suspension or 
withdrawal of the patient from the study. All AEs resulting in the temporary  
suspension will be recorded on the eCRF.
2. After the intolerable AE has resolved, the patient will be randomized into a 
Double -blind Treatment Period via an interactive W eb response s ystem (IWRS) and 
will receive dose regimens specific to each indication as follows. If the randomized 
dose regimen is tolerated, the patient will remain on this dose for the duration of the 
study (total duration of linaclotide exposure [whether open -label or double -blind] is 
not to exceed 52 weeks).
IBS-C patients will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to 1 of the following regimens:
○Linaclotide 290 ugevery day
○Linaclotide 145 ugevery day
○Linaclot ide [ADDRESS_491631] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
CIC patients will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 1 of the following regimens:
○Linaclotide 145 ugevery day
○Linaclotide [ADDRESS_491632] longer than 7 day s because the intolerable AE has not 
resolved, then the Investigator should inform the Study  Physician about the duration 
of dose suspensio ns or withdrawal of the patient from the study . 
After the intolerable AE has resolved, irrespective of the IBS -C or CIC status, 
patients should be dispensed open -label linaclotide (72 ug) and may  continue on this 
dose in a Dose -Reduced Open- label Treatment Period for the duration of the study .
4.If patients experience an intolerable AE while receiving the adjusted dose of [ADDRESS_491633] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

Screening Period
The Screening Period starts with signing of the ICF and lasts for up to 2 1calendar day s. 
During this period, patient eligibility  for entry  into the Treatment Period will be 
determined, based on results of physical examination, medication history , 
medical/surgical history , all laboratory  tests, ECG ,and colonoscop y (if applicable). The 
end of the Screening Period coincides with the start of the Treatment Period. 
Treatment Period
The Treatment Period lasts for 52weeks , including open -label treatment (all patients) and 
double -blind treatment (patients with intolerable AEs). Patients will attend study  visits to 
complete all assessments. A list of assessments to be completed for all patients, for IBS -C 
patients, and for CIC patients , as well as the visits at which they  are performed is 
provided in the Schedule of Evaluations ( Section 2.0 ).  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491634] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

Follow-up Period
The follow -up period consists of a 1 -month telephone visit for all patients (Visit 9). A 
4-Month Follow -Up Visit (Visit 10) is required only for patients with treatment- related 
ADAs at the time of study completion (52 weeks, Visit 8) or early termination [ET]. If 
treatment -related ADAs are still present in the patient’s serum at the [ADDRESS_491635] a subsequent 1- month 
telephone call to review ADA status and determine if continuation to an 8- Month 
Follow-up Visit (Visit 11) is necessary.
If an ADA -positive patient becomes ADA negative or a baseline ADA- positive patient’s 
titer returns to less than 4 -fold the baseline titer at the e nd the treatment period 
(52weeks or early termination) or 4 -Month Follow -up Visit (Visit 10), no further 
follow-up or visits are required. A list of assessments and the visits at which they are 
performed is provided in the Schedule of Evaluations (Section 2.0).
9.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN, INCLUDING TH E CHOICE 
OF CONTROL GROUPS
An open -label stud y design with up to 52 weeks (12 months) of investigational -product 
exposure was chosen in accordance with the concepts in the I CH-E1 guideline for the 
safet y evalu ation of drugs intended for the long -term treatment (chronic or repeated 
intermittent use for longer than 6 months) of non- life-threatening diseases. The 12- month 
duration of the study  will allow for assessment of the potential for ADAs to develop in 
respo nse to long -term linaclotide treatment.
Two of the linaclotide doses selected for use in this study  for CIC and IBS-C patients 
(145-and 290- ug, respectively ) have been approved, and are currentl y marketed, in North 
America (ie, [LOCATION_002], Canada, and Mexico for both indications) and the European 
Union (IBS -C onl y).Patients with intolerable AEs that occur during open -label dosing 
will be randomized to receive double- blind treatments of 290 ug, 145 ug , or the lower 
(unapproved) dose of 72 uglinaclotide oral capsules for IBS- C; and [ADDRESS_491636] meet the following criter ia:
1.Provide w ritten informed consent obtained from the patient before the initiation of 
any study -specific procedures 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491637] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
2.Be an ambulatory , community -dwelling male or non- pregnant female 18 years or 
older at the Screening Visit
 
 
 
 
6.Patient meets the colonoscopy  requirements defined in Appendix V , which are 
modified from the Summary  of the US -Multi -Society  Task Force on Colorectal 
Cancer and other Colonoscopy  Requirements
7.Patient has no clinically  significant findings on a phy sical examinatio n, 12- lead ECG, 
and clinical laboratory  tests (clinical chemistry  panel, complete blood count, urine 
drug screen, urinal ysis) after signing the ICF but before receiving the first dose of 
investigational product. (Note: The Investigator will determine if a particular finding 
is clinically  significant. In making this determination, the I nvestigator will consider 
whether the particular finding could prevent the patient from performing any of the 
protocol -specified assessments, could represent a condition that would exclude the 
patient from the study , could represent a safety  concern if the patient participates in 
the study , or could confound the study -specified assessments of safet y or efficacy)
8.Patient meets the Rome III criteria for IBS-C or CIC as described below:
IBS-C Criteria: the patient must meet the following 2 criteria (A and B): 
A.IBS Criteria: The patient must have abdominal pain or discomfort at least 
3days per month in the 3 months before diagnosis (with sy mptom onset at 
least 6 months before diagnosis) associated with 2 or more of the following: 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491638] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

1. Improvement with defecation
2.Onset associated with a change in frequency  of stool
3.Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool
BStool Consistency Requirement : During the [ADDRESS_491639] or lumpy  stools 
(Bristol Stool Form Scale [BSFS] score 1 or 2) with at least 25% of BMs and 
has loose or mushy stools (BSFS 5 or 6) with < 25% of BMs
CIC Criteria: the patient must m eet the following 3 criteria (A, B, and C): 
A.Patient meets [ADDRESS_491640] 6 months before diagnosis:
1.Straining during at least 25% of defecations
2.Lump y or hard stools in at least 25% of defecations
3.Sensation of incomplete evacuation for at least 25% of defecations
4. Sensation of anorectal obstruction/blockage for at least 25% of 
defecations
5.Manual maneuvers to facilitate at least 25% of defecations (eg, digital 
evacuation, support of the pelvic floor)
6.Fewer than 3 defecations per week
B.Loose stools are rarel y presen t without the use of laxatives
C.Insufficient criteria for irritable bowel s yndrome. (The criteria for IBS are 
provided in Point A under IBS Criteria, above)
 
9.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
Patients who meet any of the following criteria will not be eligible to participate in the 
study :
1.At the Day 1 Visit, the patient reports having 6 or more spontaneous bowel 
movement s(SBMs) when asked about the number of SBMs that they  had during the 
week before the visit. (Note: An SBM is a bowel movement that occurred in the 
absence of laxative, enema, or supp ository  use on either the day  of the BMor the day  
before the BM)
2.At the Day  1 Visit, patient reports having any  SBMs that were watery  (BSFS =7) or 
more than 1 SBM that was mushy  (BSFS = 6) when asked about the number of SBMs 
that were watery  or mushy  during the week before the visit 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491641] an y of the following: 
 
 
 
○ S tructural abnormalit y of the GI tract or a disease or history  of a condition that 
can affect GI motility  (eg, gastroparesis, celiac disease)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491642] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Patient has ever received linaclotide as a treatment (including commerciall y-available 
product) or has been randomized into any  clinical study  in which linaclotide was a 
treatment. ( Patients who enrolled into linaclotide clinical studies conducted prior to or 
during this study  but failed to be randomized are eligible for the current study )
10.Patient has ever received plecanatide , SP-333, or has participated in a plecanatide 
clinical study 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491643] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

 
 
 
9.3.3 Removal of Patients from Therapy or Assessment
Apremature discontinuation will occur when a patient who signed the ICF ceases 
participation in the study , regardless of circumstances, before the completion of the 
study . Patients can be prematurely  discontinued from the study  for one of the following 
reasons:
○Screen failure ( failure to meet inclusion/exclusion criteria )
○Withdrawal of consent
○AE
○Lack of efficacy
○Protocol violation
○Noncompliance with investigational product
○Lost to follow -up
○Study  terminated by  [CONTACT_2728]
○Site terminated by  [CONTACT_2728]
○Other 
All enroll ed patients who prematurel y discontinue from the study, unless the cause is 
screen failure , must beseen for a final assessment at ET ,and follow -up blood samples as 
described in the Schedule of Evaluations ( Section 2.0) should be obtained for patients 
who are ADA positive at the last visit. A final assessment will be defined as completion 
of the evaluations scheduled for the Final Visit at the end of Week 52End of Study  
(EOS)/ET Visit (Visit 8).  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491644] make a reasonable effort to follow pregnant patients until delivery  orend of 
the pregnancy .
Patients who do not complete all required scheduled visits/procedures must be requested 
in writing to come in for a n ET Visit and to return any  unused investigational product. A 
clear description of premature discontinuation must be documented. A copy of the letter, 
together with the source documentation, will be kept by  [CONTACT_737] . The reasons for 
premature disc ontinuation from the study  will be reflected on the eCRF.
9.3.[ADDRESS_491645] in the form of capsules w ill be provided by  [CONTACT_1034]. Patients 
will be supplied capsules with identical appearance containing either 72 uglinaclotide, 
145 ug linaclotide, or 290 ug linaclotide.
Rescue medication will not be provided; however, patients may  use any  laxative, 
suppository , or enema that they  choose when at least [ADDRESS_491646] will be supplied in bottles containing 35 capsules and will be 
labeled with the following content: protocol number, storage information, warning 
language (“Caution: New Drug -Limited by  [CONTACT_4496] L aw to Investigational Use .Keep Out 
of Reach of Children”), and instructions to take as directed. The label will also include 
the kit number. All 3 strengths of linaclotide (72 ug, 145 ug, and 290 ug) will be listed on 
the bottle label. IWRS will be used to disp ense kits in Open-l abel and Double -blind 
treatment periods .
Immediately  before dispensing investigational product, the Investigator or designee will 
write the patient’s initials, patient identification number, and dispensing date on the label. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491647] be stored at the study center in an appropriate secure area 
(eg, a locked cabinet in a locked room)  excursions permitted between 
 Keep product in the original container. Do not subdivide 
or rep ackage. Protect from moisture. Do not remove desiccant from the container. Keep 
bottles tightly  closed in a dry  place.
Formulation information for the investigational products is provided below. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The Investigator or designee is responsible for recording the receipt and use of all 
investigational products supplied and for ensuring the supervision of the storage and 
allocation o f these supplies. All unused investigational products must be returned, and 
whenever investigational products are returned, unit counts must be performed. All 
investigational products must be accounted for. At the end of the stud y, all unused 
investigation al products and empty  investigational product bottles should be returned to 
the S ponsor or the local distributor at the address provided in the Study  
Reference Binder. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491648] dispensing visits; the IWRS will assign the kit number for the investigational 
product to be dispensed to the patient at the first Treatment Period visit (Visit 2) and at 
other visits as designated on the Schedule of Evaluations ( Section 2.0). 
This is an open -label (unblinded) study , with IBS -C patients init ially assigned to receive 
290 ug linaclotide and CIC patients assigned to receive 145 ug. Patients who experience 
intolerable AEs during open -label phase will be randomized into a Double -blind 
Treatment Period via the IWRS and will receive dose regimens sp ecific to each 
indication as described in Section 9.4.4.
9.4.4 Selection of Dosages in the Study
The linaclotide dosages chosen for the open- label phase of this study  (145 ugand 290 ug)
have been shown to be safe and effective in adults for treatment of IBS -C (290 ug) and 
CIC (145 ug ) and are approved in North America at those doses for those indications. 
Data from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_391592], diarrhea was the most frequent AE, reported in 20% for 
IBS-Cpatients treated with 290 uglinaclotide and in 16% for CI C patients treated with 
[ADDRESS_491649] common reason for discontinuation (5%). In the 
majority  of cases, onset of the diarrhea occurred within the first 2 weeks of treatment, and 
the diarrhea was generally mild to moderate (being assessed as severe in only  2% of 
linaclotide -treated patients in each patient population). 
Patients with intolerable AEs that may  be related to the use of linaclotide will be 
randomized to receive double -blind 290 ug, 145 ug , or 72 ug linaclotide oral capsules for 
IBS-C; and [ADDRESS_491650] meal of the day .
Patients who meet all eligibility  criteria at Day 1 (Visit 2) will be dispensed 1bottle 
(assigned b y IWRS) containing 35capsules of investigational product . Additional bottles 
of investigatio nal product will be dispensed at subsequent visits per the Schedule of 
Evaluations (Section 2.0). Patients will be instructed to return an y unused investigational 
product at the next study  visit.
Patients must have fasted for at least 2 hours before arrivi ng at the site for Day 1 
(Visit 2). Patients will take their initial dose of investigational product (1 capsule) at the 
study  center during Day 1 (Visit 2) after all study  eligibility  criteria have been confirmed. 
On all subsequent day s, the patient will t ake [ADDRESS_491651]. If, for an y reason, it is inconvenient for a 
patient to take linaclotide in the morning, the dose may  be taken at another time during 
the day  with the I nvestigato r’s prior approval and documentation, as long as linaclotide is 
taken on an empt y stomach or at least 2 hours after a meal.
Should an intolerable AE occur and, in the Investigator’s judgment, the patient is unable 
to resume investigational product dosing a fter [ADDRESS_491652] the 
Study  Physician to discuss the patient’s continued participation in the study 
9.4.6 Blinding
Randomization only  occurs for those patients who experience intolerable AEs that may  
be related to the use of linaclotide and undergo intervention ( Section 9.1). For those 
patients, a list of patient randomization codes will be generated b y Statistical 
Programming at the Sponsor or de signee, and implemented by  [CONTACT_941] I WRS vendor (an 
electronic version will be stored on a secure server). This list will identify  each patient b y 
randomization number and include the patient’s corresponding treatment assignment.  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491653] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
9.4.7 Unblinding
In the open- label a nd double -blind treatment phases, bottles of linaclotide will be 
dispensed that include on the label: contains either 72 ug linaclotide, 145 uglinaclotide, 
or 290 ug linaclotide. During the open- label treatment phase both the Investigator and 
patient will be made aware of the dose contained in the I WRS -assigned bottle.
Unblinding procedures are applicable to the double- blind treatment phase only .
Any unblinding (performed only  via IWRS) at a study  center should be done only  in an 
emergency  that requires the investigational product to be identified for the medical 
management of the patient. The Investigator must notify  the Study  Physician immediately  
(see Appendix II ),and a full written explanation must be provided if the blind is broken. 
Before the investi gational product is unblinded, every attempt should be made to discuss 
the case with the Study Physician. Breaking the code at the study center will immediately 
disqualify  the patient from further participation in the study .
Treatment codes may  be broken b y the Patient Safety Department at Forest Research 
Institute, Inc., for regulatory  reporting purposes. In such cases, the study  staff will be kept 
blinded, and the patient will not need to be disqualified from the stud y.
In an emergency , the Investigator c an obtain the treatment assignment of any  patient at 
his or her study site through the IWRS.
9.4.[ADDRESS_491654] will be recorded as prior medications. An y changes in 
concomitant medicines or new medicines added will be recorded in the eCRF. 
Concomitant medicines will be recorded at stud y visits throughout the entire study  
(beginning at Visit 1) including the Follow -up Perio d (Visits 9 - 11).
The concomitant medicines listed below are prohibited from the Screening Visit until the 
end of the Treatment Period ( Appendix III ):
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491655] and bottles at specified visits defined in the Schedule of 
Evaluations ( Section 2.0). Before new investigational product is dispensed at the 
specified visits,every  effort will be made to collect all unused investigational product.
9.5 EFFICACY AND SAFETY VARIABLES
9.5.1 Primary Outcome Assessment
Assessments of total anti- linaclotide antibodies will be used to determine the primary  
outcome parameter , the presence of ADAs. The p resence of anti -linaclotide antibodies 
will be determined b y a validated assay.    
[IP_ADDRESS] Immunogenicity Assessments 
Blood will be collected for determination of ADAs to linaclotide at the Day  1 Visit 
(Visit 2) prior to the patient receiving investigational prod uct (to acquire a baseline), and 
at all scheduled study visits during the Treatment Period. For patients who prematurel y 
discontinue, blood samples should be obtained within [ADDRESS_491656] dose of 
linaclotide, and follow -up blood samples as described in the Schedule of Evaluations 
(Section 2.0) should be obtained for patients who are ADA positive at the last visit.
Blood samples collected for ADA determinations will be anal yzed in batches; therefore 
real-time repor ts of ADA results will not be available.   
Investigators and patients will remain blinded throughout the stud y as to ADA status. 
Patients who develop positive or increased ADA titers will not be withdrawn from 
treatment; investigators will continue such p atients on therapy  as they  would any  patient 
in the study .Clinical symptoms of hy persensitivity  such as anaph ylactic shock, 
angioedema, skin rash, and urticaria require treatment withdrawal even without ADA 
results available at the time of occurrence. 
Each individual sample will be assay ed and categorized as one of the following:
○ADA positive
○ADA negative
○ADA undetermined (sample lost, damaged ,or out of specifications) 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491657] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
A sample is only  considered ADA positive if the screening and confirmatory  assay  both 
indicate the presence of ADAs. A sample indicating the presence of ADAs by  [CONTACT_391601] (eg, insufficient sample, lab oratory error) will 
be considered ADA undetermined.
ADA-positive patients will be split into two groups at the end of the study; treatment -
related ADA and non –treatment -related ADA. A treatment -related ADA is any patient 
who is ADA negative at baseline and becomes ADA positive at one or more time points 
in the study (treatment induced ADA), or who is ADA positi ve at baseline and has a 
titer increase greater than or equal to 4- times the baseline titer at one or more time 
points in the study (treatment boosted ADA). A non–treatment -related ADA positive 
patient is any patient who is ADA positive at baseline and is either ADA negative or 
has a titer less than 4- fold the baseline titer at any time point in the study.
Patients with treatment -related ADAs detected at the end of the Treatment Period 
(52weeks visit or early termination visit) will be followed at 4 months (Visit 10) and, if 
needed, up to a maximum of 8 months (Visit 11), or until they are ADA negative or 
their titers revert to baseline. Any patient who is ADA negative or has non –treatment -
related ADA at the end of the treatment period (52 weeks or ET) does not require 
follow up regardless of ADA status at any other time during the study. In order to 
minimize the number of ADA-undetermined results, patients whose serum samples 
from theWeek 52 EOS/ET Visit (Visit 8) are lost, damaged, or out of specification may 
be called for an unscheduled visit to obtain another sample.
In order to show reversion to baseline for treatment- related ADA -positive patients who 
require follow up, 1 negative sample or 1 sample showing a return to an ADA titer less 
than 4-fold the baseline titer is required. Patients with treatment- related ADAs who 
complete the study or terminate early will be requested to return for additional follow -
up visits to provide blood samples for ADA assessments at 4 and 8 months to document 
persistence of positivity or reversion to baseline. No further visits will be required after 
the 8-Month Follow -up Visit (Visit 11). Patients previously ADA positive who have 
become ADA negative or have reverted back to within 4 -fold their baseline titer at the 
4-Month Follow-up Visit will not be required to complete the 8 -Month Follow -up Visit. 
Investigators will be notified of the ADA status following patient completion or ET and 
before the 1- month follow -up phone call to the patient.
Samples will be banked for up to 10years in case further testing for isoform, subform ,
and/or linaclotide concentration is requested. Consent for storage and further testing will 
be obtained from patients. 
In cases of SAEs, ADA status can be reported to both patients and investigators if
requested and felt to be necessary  for the medical care of the patient. If the blind is 
broken, the patient must be withdrawn from treatment. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491658] with Q-Squared Solutions BioSciences LLC for ADA 
testing.
The testing methods wil l be the following: 
Screening a ssay for the presence of anti-linaclotide antibodies: c ustom bridging 
ELISA with electrochemiluminescence detection. Positive results in the screening 
assay  will be confirmed by  [CONTACT_391602]-linaclotide antibodies 
with free linaclotide using the same assay . A sample is considered ADA negative if it 
is negative in either the screening or confirmatory assays. A sample is considered 
ADA positive if it is positive in the confirmatory assay   
ADA positive serum will be titered and assay ed for neutralizing antibodies and cross 
reactivit y with the endogenous hormones, guan ylin and uroguany lin 
9.5.2 Efficacy Assessments
The following information will be captured at the specified study  visits ( Section 2.0). All 
assessments required on Day  1 Visit (Visit 2) should be performed before first dose of 
linaclotide.
For all patients:
Patient Assessment of Constipation Severity  (captured at all study  visits except 
the Screening Visit [Visit 1] ): 
oRating of the constipation severit y during the previous 7 day s on a 5 -point 
ordinal scale will be provided by  [CONTACT_357872]:
“On average, how would y ou rate y our constipation during the past 7 day s?”
o1=None
o2=Mild
o3=Moderat e
o4=Severe
o5=Very  Severe
For IBS-C patients:
Patient Assessment of IBS Sy mptom Severit y (captured at all study visits except 
the Screening Visit [Visit 1] ): 
oRating of IBS s ymptoms severit y during the previous 7 days on a 5 -point 
ordinal scale will be pro vided by  [CONTACT_357872]:
“On average, how would y ou rate y our IBS s ymptoms during the past 7 days?”
o1=None
o2=Mild
o3=Moderate 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491659] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
o4=Severe
o5=Very  severe 
Degree of Relief of IBS Sy mptoms (captured at all study  visits except the 
Screening Visit [Visit 1] ):
oRating of degree of relief of IBS s ymptoms during previous 7 day s on a 
7-point balanced ordinal scale will be provided b y the patient answering the 
following question: 
“Compared to before you started this study , how would y ou rate y our IBS 
symptoms during the past 7 day s?”
o1 = completel y relieved , 
o2 = considerably  relieved
o3 = somewhat relieved
o4 = unchanged
o5= somewhat worse
o6 = considerably  worse 
o7 = as bad as I can imagine
IBS Treatment Satisfaction Assessment (captured at all study  visits except the 
Screening [Visit 1] and Day 1 Visits [Visit 2]): 
oRating of degree of satisfaction with the investigational product’s ability  to 
relieve IBS s ymptoms on a 5 -point ordinal scale will be provided by  [CONTACT_391603]:
“Overall, how satisfied are you with the study medication’s ability  to relieve y our 
IBSsymptoms?”
o1=Not at all satisfied
o2=A little satisfied
o3=Moderately  satisfied
o4=Quite satisfied
o5=Very  satisfied
For CIC patients:
Constipation Treatment Satisfaction Assessment (captured at all study  visits 
except the Screening [Visit 1] and Day 1 Visit s [Visit 2] ):
oRating of degree of satisfaction with the investigational product’s ability  to 
relieve constipation s ymptoms on a 5- point ordinal scale will be provided by  
[CONTACT_357872]:
“Overall, how satisfied are you wi th the study  medication’s ability  to relieve y our
constipation sy mptoms?”
o1=Not at all satisfied
o2=A little satisfied 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491660] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
o3=Moderately  satisfied
o4=Quite satisfied
o5=Very  satisfied
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.5.4 Safety Assessments
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Events
An AE is an y untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation subject
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily  have to have a 
causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any  unfavorable and 
unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or 
disease temporall y associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not 
considered related to the medicinal product (ICH -E2A). 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491661] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

For the purpose of the site’s data collection responsibilities, any  untoward event that was 
reported from the time the pa tient signed the ICF until [ADDRESS_491662] , until ADA positive status for antibod y positive patients has 
reverted to ADA negative , or until the end of the Follow- up Period (whichever is later), is 
to be consider ed an AE.
Examples of AEs are as follows:
Changes in the general condition of the patient
Subjective sy mptoms offered by  [CONTACT_44742]
Objective signs observed by  [CONTACT_391604]
All diseases that occur after s igning inform consent, including an y change in severity 
or frequency  of pre -existing disease
All clinically  relevant abnormalities in laboratory  values or clinicall y relevant 
physical findings that occur during the study  schedule
Please note that medical procedures scheduled prior to consenting, but occurring during 
the study  should not be captured as AEs, but should be listed in the medical history  if 
related to a pre -existing condition.
[ADDRESS_491663] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

[IP_ADDRESS] Severity Assessment
The Investigator will provide an assessment of the severit yof each AE b y recording a 
severit y rating on the appropriate AE reporting page of the patient’s eCRF. Severity,
which is a description of the intensity  of manifestation of the AE, is distinct from 
seriousness, which implies a patient outcome or AE -require d treatment measure 
associated with a threat to life or functionalit y (Section [IP_ADDRESS]). Severit y will be assessed 
according to the following scale:
Mild: The AE was an anno yance to the patient but did not further hinder 
baseline functioning; the AE may  have been intermittent or continuous.
Moderate: The AE caused the patient to experience some discomfort or some 
interference with normal activities but was not haza rdous to health; 
prescription drug therap y may have been emplo yed to treat the AE.
Severe: The AE caused the patient to experience severe discomfort or severel y 
limited or prevented normal activities and represented a definite hazard to 
health; prescriptio n drug therap y and/or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_391593].
[IP_ADDRESS] Serious Adverse Events
An SAE is any  untoward medical occurrence that at any  dose:
Results in death
Is life threatening
Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_103296]
Results in a persistent or significant incapacity  or substantial disruption of the ability
to conduct normal life functions, or
Is a congenital anomal y/birth defect
Important medical events that may  not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_44719], based on appropriate medical judgment, 
they may  jeopardize the patient or subject and may  require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definit ion. Examples of such 
medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an 
emergency  room or at home, blood dy scrasias or convulsions that do not result in patient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of investigational product d ependency  or drug abuse. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491664] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
Emergency  room visits that do not result in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_44720].
Preplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] (eg, elective procedures for pre- existing conditions that did 
not worsen, such as cosmetic surgery  and hy sterectomy ) are excluded from SAE 
reporting.
[IP_ADDRESS] Reporting Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
At each visit, patients are to be queried regarding any  AEs or SAEs that have occurred 
since the previous visit. Patients will be asked to volunteer information with a nonleading 
question such as, “How do y ou feel since your last visit?” Study  site personnel will 
record all pertinent information in the patient’s eCRF. Any AEs reported in diaries will
also be reported on the relevant eCRF page.
All AEs must be recorded on the appropriate AE reporting page of the patient’s eCRF 
whether or not they  are considered causally  related to the investigational product.
For every  AE, the Investigator must:
Provid e an assessment of the seriousness of the event (ie, is it an SAE?), as well as 
the severit y and causal relationship
Document all actions taken with regard to the investigational product
Detail an y other treatment measures taken for the AE
Document the out come of the AE
In addition, patients are to be reminded, as described in the I CF and in accordance with 
Section [IP_ADDRESS], to notify  site personnel of a ny AEs occurring up to [ADDRESS_491665] 
known dose of linaclotide, or for ADA positive patients, until the end of the 8 -month 
Follow -up Period. An y AEs reported b y the patient (or patient representative) during this 
period are to be recorded in original source documents. AEs are also to be recorded in the 
eCRF if at least 1 of the following conditions is met: 1) the event meets the criteria for an 
SAE (see Sections [IP_ADDRESS] and [IP_ADDRESS]), and/or 2) the event is considered b y the 
Investigator to be potentially  causall y related to investigational product.
Any AEs that are ongoing at the time of the final protocol -defined stud yvisit will be 
followed until the condition returns to prestud y status, has resolved or stabilized, or can 
be explained as being unrelated to the investigational product. If a follow -up visit is 
deemed necessary  for appropriate safet y surveillance, it will take place within [ADDRESS_491666] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
[IP_ADDRESS] Immediate Reporting of Serious Adverse Events
The Sponsor is required to inform worldwide regulatory  authorities of SAEs that meet 
specific criteria. Therefore, the Sponsor must be not ified immediately  regarding an y SAE 
that occurs after informed consent is obtained.
Within [ADDRESS_491667] Patient Safety  on the SAE Form for
Clinical Studies. The Sponsor’s Study  Physician may  also be notified by  [CONTACT_756].
If, during follow -up, any  nonserious AE worsens and eventuall y meets the criteria for an 
SAE, that AE should be recorded as a new SAE. 
The site must transmit the SAE Form for Clinical Studies to the SAE fax number shown 
below. Even if an initial report is made b y telephone, the SAE Form for Clinical Studies
completed with all available details must still be faxed within [ADDRESS_491668] be 
recorded on the appropriate pages of the patient’s eCRF. All SAEs are to be followed b y 
the study  staff until resolution or until the SAE is deemed stable. The Sponsor may 
contact [CONTACT_391605].
Fax the SAE Form for Clinical Studies to Forest Research Institute, Inc.
SAE fax number: 
Sponsor's Study  Physician Medical Emergency  phone number: 
[IP_ADDRESS] Reporting of Pregnancies That Occur During the Study
Study  site personnel must report a pregnancy  from the time the patient signs the I CF until 
[ADDRESS_491669] Patien t Safet y on the 
Clinical Study  Pregnancy Form and fax it to the SAE/Pregnancy fax number stated in 
Section [IP_ADDRESS], even if no AE has occurred. Pregnancies in female partners of male 
patients occurring during the time frame described above must also be reported. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491670] be followed to term and the outcome reported by  [CONTACT_12550] a 
follow -up Clinical Study  Pregnancy  Form. If the pregnanc y is associated with an SAE 
(eg, if the mother is hospi[INVESTIGATOR_143460]), a separate SAE Form for Clinical 
Studies must be filed as described in Section [IP_ADDRESS] with the appropriate serious criterion 
(eg, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) indicated in addition to the Pregnancy Form.
[ADDRESS_491671] Research Institute, I nc., 
will meet with the I nvestigator and the stud y-site staff to review the procedures to be 
followed during the study. Electronic data capture (EDC) functionalit y training is 
provided via computer -based training to train Investigators and authorized designees on 
recording the data i
n the eCRFs using the electronic data capture EDC s ystem. After the 
first patient is enrolled, the Forest representative, a Regional Site Manager (RSM) or 
designee, will periodically monitor the progress of the study  by [CONTACT_143505] -site visits. 
This RSM or designee will review query statuses remotely, possibl y warranting more 
frequent communication and/o r site visits with the Investigator and the study  site staff. 
The Investigator will make available to the RSM or designee source documents (written 
notes and electronic medical records, if used), signed consent forms, and all other study -
related documents. The Investigator and the stud y-site staff will be responsible for data 
entry  of patient data into the eCRFs via the EDC system, resolving data queries generated 
via the EDC sy stem and providing missing or corrected data. The Investigator or 
designee will be responsible for approving all changes performed on the data, and 
endorsing the patient data within the EDC sy stem. This approval method will include 
applying an electronic signature [CONTACT_153914] a uniquely  assigned username [CONTACT_211440] a traditional handwritten signature. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491672] access. Patient’s data are to be entered into the EDC system b y the 
Investigator or designee using their assigned EDC user account. After data entry  into the 
EDC sy stem by  [CONTACT_18370], a combination of ma nual and programmatic 
edit checks will be used to review the data for completeness, logic, and adherence to 
study  protocol. As a result of these edits checks, data monitoring and reviews ,queries 
may be electronicall y issued to the site and should be answe red electronically  via the 
EDC sy stem.
Each query  will carry  identify ing information (assigned username, date, and time) to 
assist Forest and the Investigator on the origin of the data clarification request and the 
response provided b y the Investigator. All data changes made to the patient’s data via a 
data query  will be approved by  [CONTACT_143506].
After all data have been reviewed and all issues have been resolved, the database will be 
locked.
All data collected in the contex t of this study  will be stored and evaluated per regulatory  
requirements and applicable guidance for electronic records. Also, data will be stored and 
evaluated in such a way  as to guarantee patient confidentiality  in accordance with the 
legal stipulations apply ing to confidentiality  of data. Study  records (eg, copi[INVESTIGATOR_1495] , 
laboratory  reports, patient diaries, regulatory  documents, etc.) will be retained at the site, 
along with adequate source documentation, according to FDA and ICH requirements. All 
study records must be available for inspection by  [CONTACT_44754], I nc., its 
authorized representatives, and the FDA or other health authorities .
9.7 STATISTICAL METHODS AND DETERMINATION OF
SAMPLE SIZ E
9.7.1 Patient Populations
The following populations wil l be considered in the statistical anal ysis of the study .
[IP_ADDRESS] Screened Population
The Screened Population will consist of all patients who sign an ICF for the study  and 
receive a patient identification number.
[IP_ADDRESS] Safety Population
The Safet y Population will consist of all patients in the Screened Population who receive 
at least [ADDRESS_491673] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
[IP_ADDRESS] Intent-to-Treat Population
The Intent -to-Treat ( ITT) Population will consist of all patients in the Safety  Population 
who have at least 1 postbaseline assessment for any  efficacy  or health 
outcomes parameter.
[IP_ADDRESS] Randomized Population
The Randomized Population will consist of all patients in the Safet y Population who are 
randomized to double -blind inv estigational product following resolution of an 
intolerable AE.
[IP_ADDRESS] Double-blind Safety Population
The Double -blind Safet y Population will consist of all patients in the Randomized 
Population who receive at least [ADDRESS_491674] during the Double -blind 
Treatment Period.
[IP_ADDRESS] Double-blind ITT Population
The Double -blind ITT Population will consist of all patients in the Double- blind Safety  
Population who have at least [ADDRESS_491675]- randomization assessment for an y parameter during 
the Double -blind Treatment Period.
9.7.2 Patient Disposition
The number of patients in each of the study populations described in Section 9.7.1 will be 
summarized overall, by  [CONTACT_35151] ( IBS-C or CIC), and study  center.
The number of screen failures (ie, patients who enter the Screening Period but not the 
Treatment Period) along with the associated reasons for failure will be tabulated overall. 
The number and percentage of patients in the categories described in Table 9.7.2–[ADDRESS_491676] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
Table 9.7.2 –1. Summarization of Patient Disposition
CategoryBy [CONTACT_391606] -label Treatment Period No
Patients who prematurely discontinue during the Open -label Treatment Period No
Reasons for premature discontinuation of open -label treatment as recorded on the 
eCRFNo
Patients who prematurely discontinue open -label treatment due to AE who do not 
randomize to double- blind treatmentNo
Patients who pr ematurely discontinue open -label treatment due to AE who do 
randomize to double- blind treatment (Randomized Population)Yes
Patients who complete the Double -blind Treatment Period Yes
Patients who prematurely discontinue during the Double -blind Treatment Period Yes
Reasons for premature discontinuation of double -blind treatment as recorded on the 
eCRFYes
Patients who prematurely discontinue double -blind treatment due to AE who do not 
reduce dose to open -label 72 ug doseYes
Patients who prematurely discontinue double -blind treatment due to AE who do reduce 
dose to open -label 72 ug doseYes
Patients who complete the Dose -Reduced Open -label Treatment Period Yes
Patients who prematurely discontinue during the Dose -Reduced Open -label Treatment 
PeriodYes
Reasons for premature discontinuation of dose -reduced open -label treatment as 
recorded on the eCRFYes
9.7.3 Demographics and Other Baseline Characteristics
Demographic parameters ( ie, age, race, ethnicit y, sex, weight, height, and body  mass 
index ) and other baseline characteristics will be summarized by  [CONTACT_391607] y 
Population, and for each indication by  [CONTACT_391608] -blind 
ITT Population.
Prior medicines are defined as an y medicines taken prior to date of first dose of 
investigational product. Concomitant medicines are defined as an y medicines taken 
during the Treatment Period (ie, between the date of the first dose of investigational 
product in the Treatment Period and the date of the last dose of investigation al product in 
the Treatment Period, inclusive). Any  medicines started after the date of last dose of 
investigational product will not be considered concomitant medicines for summary  
purposes, but will be included in the patient data listings. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491677] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
Both prior and concomitant medicine use will be summarized by  [CONTACT_391609]. Concomitant medicine use will be presented for the Treatment Period 
as a whole b y indication (IBS -C and CIC) for the Safety  Population. Multiple medicines 
used by  a patient in the same category  (based on Anatomical -Therapeutic -Chemical 
classification) will only  be counted once.
The WHO Drug Dictionary , Version September [ADDRESS_491678] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

9.7.5 Efficacy Analyses
The e fficacy  anal yses will be based on the ITT Population. As this is an open -label stud y, 
no inferential statistics will be performed on these endpoints.
Descriptive statistics (n, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum) 
will be presented for c ontinuous variables, and frequency  distributions will be presented 
for categorical variables. These summaries will be presented b y indication (IBS -C and 
CIC) and, where the endpoint is measured for both IBS- C and CIC, pooled across both 
indications at each scheduled visit the parameter is assessed. 
The following parameters will be summarized: 
Constipation severity
IBS symptom severit y (IBS -C only )
Degree of relief of IBS symptoms (IBS -C only )
IBS treatment s atisfaction (IBS -C onl y)
Constipation treatment s atisfaction (CI C on ly)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For recurrence of diarrhea parameters, tab les based on the Double -blind ITT Population 
will specificall y refer to recurrence of diarrhea. Listings based on the Randomized 
Population will identify  the patient -specific AEs. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491679] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

Parameter Description
 
Recurrence of 
(intolerable) diarrheaFrequency summary; Fisher exact test, comparing treatment groups.
Time to first recurrence 
of (intolerable) diarrheaParameter = First recurrence of (intolerab le) diarrhea date – first randomized dose 
date + 1; censored at date of last randomized dose for patients who do not have 
recurrence of (intolerable) diarrhea.
Summary statistics for patients who have recurrence of (intolerable) diarrhea; 
Kaplan -Meier summ ary statistics, log -rank test, and figure, and hazard ratio per 
Cox proportional hazards regression model, for all patients, comparing treatment 
groups, controlling for geographic region.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491680] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

[IP_ADDRESS].1 Immunogenicity Assessments
A patient’s baseline ADA status (ADA positive, ADA negative , or ADA undetermined)
will be the assay  result of the Treatment Period Day  1 (Visit 2) sample. A patient’s 
overall postbaseline ADA status will be derived from all postbaseline samples during the 
Treatment Period and within [ADDRESS_491681]. The 
possible categories, dependent on baseline ADA status, are described in
Table [IP_ADDRESS].1–1.
Table [IP_ADDRESS].1 –1. Patient Postbaseline ADA Categorization
Baseline ADA Negative and ADA Undetermined 
PatientsBaseline ADA PositivePatients
Treatment- induced ADA positiveTreatment- boosted ADA positive
Non-treatment -boosted ADA positive
ADA negative ADA negative
ADA undetermined ADA undetermined
Postbaseline ADA category derived for each patient based all postbaseline samples after Visit [ADDRESS_491682].
Treatment -induced ADA positive :Baseline ADA negative or ADA undetermined patient with ≥1 ADA positive 
sample
Treatment -boosted ADA positive :Baseline ADA positive patient with ≥1 ADA positive sample and with titer≥ 4-fold 
the baseline titer
Non-treatment -boosted ADA positive :Baseline ADA positive patient with subsequent ADA positive samplesthat 
have titer values <4-fold increasefrom the baseline
ADA negative : Patient with ≥1 ADA negative sample with no A DApositive samples
ADA undetermined: Patient with no assessable samples ( sample lost, damaged ,or out of specifications
 
A patient will meet treatment- related ADA positive status if the patient meets either of 
the following criteria: 
○Treatment -induced ADA positive for baseline ADA negative or ADA 
undetermined patients
○Treatment -boosted ADA positive for baseline ADA positive patients
 
 
A sensitivity  anal ysis will be performed where baseline ADA 
undetermined patients are excluded. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491683] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

9 4
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS].2 Interim Analysis
No interim anal ysis is planned for this study .
9.7.9 Determination of Sample Size
The objective of this study  is to assess the long -term safet y of linaclotide administered to 
patient s with IBS -C or CIC and to determine the potential of linaclotide to induce ADAs .
If 0 of 800 p
atients develop ADAs, the 1- sided 95% upper confidence interval for th is
rate(0/800 [ 0%])is0.374%.
9.7.10 Computer Methods
Statistical analy ses will be performed using version 9.3 (or newer) of SAS on a Linux 
operating s ystem. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491684] 
Research Institute, Inc. No protocol amendment may  be implemented (with the 
exceptions noted below) before it has been approved by  [CONTACT_242317], 
signed b y the Investigator , has been received b y Forest Research Institute, Inc. If the 
protocol is amended to eliminate or reduc e the risk to patients, the amendment may  be 
implemented before IRB review and approval. However, the IRB must be informed in 
writing of such an amendment, and approval must be obtained within reasonable 
time limits. 
9.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 
A protocol deviat ion is any  change, divergence, or departure from the study  design or
procedures that is under the I nvestigator’s responsibility  and oversight (as defined by
[CONTACT_19124]) without prior written IRB approval or favorable opi[INVESTIGATOR_391594] d that does not have a major impact on the patient’s rights, safety , or 
well-being, or on the integrit y and authenticity of the study data. Deviations may include, 
but are not limited to, departure from inclusion/exclusion criteria, allowed concomitant 
medications, dosing, or duration of treatment, failure to follow withdrawal criteria or 
perform the required assessments at specified time points, scheduling of visits not in 
accordance with specifications.
Deviating from the protocol is permitted only  if absolutely  necessary  for the safet y or
clinical management of the patients and must immediately  be reported to Forest Research
Institute, Inc. Protocol deviations should be reported to the Sponsor (either verball y or
electronically ) in a timely  manner from th e date of discovery .
Protocol deviations that may  impact patient’s rights (eg, failure to obtain i nformed
consent prior to initiating study procedures), safety  or well- being (eg, deviations that 
resulted in an SAE, exposure during pregnancy ) or the integr ity and authenticity  of the 
study  data should be reported to the Sponsor within [ADDRESS_491685] Research Institute, Inc., before the 
start of the study :
A completed and signed Form FDA 1572. If, during the course of the study, an y 
changes are made that are not reflected on Form FDA 1572, a new Form FDA [ADDRESS_491686] Research I nstitute, Inc., for submission to 
the FDA
A fully  executed contract
The curricula vitae for the Investigator and all Sub -Investigators listed on Form FDA 
1572, including a cop y of each ph ysician’s license
A cop y of the original IRB approval for conducting the stud y. If the study is ongoing, 
renewa ls must be submitted at yearly intervals. All subsequent modifications must be 
submitted and approved by  [CONTACT_1201], as stated in Section 5.1
A cop y of the IRB -approve d ICF
A cop y of the H IPAA authorization form, or other local privacy  applicable forms
A list of the I RB members or the Department of Health and Human Services general 
assurance number
A cop y of the laboratory certifications and reference ranges
The Investi gator’s Statement page in this protocol signed and dated b y the 
Investigator 
Financial disclosure agreement completed and signed by  [CONTACT_391610] 1572. The Investigator and all 
SubInvestigators will provide an updated financial disclosure agreement to the 
Sponsor [ADDRESS_491687] each patient’s use. All unused 
investigational products and empty  investigational product bottles should be returned to 
the S ponsor or the local distributor at the address provided in the Study  Reference 
Binder. It is the Investigator’s responsibility  to ensure that patients return thei r 
investigational product.
11.[ADDRESS_491688] of this study, including case report 
forms, source documents, consent forms, regulatory  documents, clinical laboratory  
results, ca libration logs, or reports (including, but not limited to, all local and central 
laboratory  results and ECG reports), and medication inventory  records in all formats 
(including, but not limited to, written, electronic, magnetic, and optical records, and 
scans, x -rays, and ECGs) must be retained b y the Investigator for a period of at least 
15years after stud y completion unless local regulations or institutional policies require a 
longer retention period or otherwise notified in writing by [CONTACT_1034].
Nostudy  records shall be destroy ed without notifying the Sponsor and providing the 
Sponsor the opportunity  to arrange long -term storage for such study  records or 
authorizing in writing the destruction of records after the required retention period . 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491689] be notified in writing of the name [CONTACT_391612].
11.6 PATIENT CONFIDENTIAL ITY
All patient records will only  be identified b y initials and patient identification number. 
Patients’ names are not to be transmitted to Forest Research Institute, Inc. The 
Investigator willkeep a master patient list on which the patient identification number and 
the full name, address, and telephone number of each patient are listed. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491690] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
12.0 INVESTIGATOR’S STATE MENT
I agree to conduct the study in accordance with this protocol ( LIN-MD-10, dated 
05Oct2015), and with all applicable government regulations and good clinical practice
guidance.
_______________________________________ _____/_____/______
Principal I nvestigator’s Signature [CONTACT_1782]
_______________________________________
Principal Investigator ’s Name 
[CONTACT_44754], Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491691] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
13.0 APPENDICES
APPENDIX I. ELEMENTS OF INFORMED CONSENT
Procedures will comply  with 21 CFR, Parts 50 and 312. Signed informed consent will be 
obtained from each patient participating in a clinical research study  or from the patient’s 
legally  authorize d representative . This consent must include the following items:
 A statement that the study involves research and an explanation of the purposes of 
the research; a description of the procedures to be followed and the identification of 
any procedures that a re experimental; and the expected duration of the patient’s 
participation
 A description of an y reasonably  foreseeable risks or discomforts to the patient
 A description of an y benefits to the patient or to others that may  reasonably  be 
expected from the res earch. If the patient is to be paid for participating in the study , 
the consent form must state the amount that he/she will receive and the schedule of 
payment (to ensure neither coercion nor undue influence)
 A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedu res or courses of treatment, if an y, 
that might be advantageous to the patient
 A statement describing the extent, if any , to which confidentiality  of records 
identify ing the patient will be maintained and noting the possibility  that the FDA; 
Forest Researc h Institute, I nc.; the IRB; or an authorized contract research 
organization may  inspect the records
 For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation of whether any  
medical treatment is available if injury  occurs and, if so, what it consists of or 
where further information may  be obtained
 An explanation of whom to contact, including the relevant telephone number, for 
answers to pertinent questions about the research and the research patient’s rights 
and whom to contact [CONTACT_44751] a research- related injury  to the patient. (Note: 
In some cases, it may  be necessary  to identify  a person other than the Investigator
as the contact. The guidance of the IRBmay be required)
 A statement that participation is voluntary , that refusal to participate wil l involve no 
penalty  or loss of benefits to which the patient is otherwise entitled, and that the 
patient may  discontinue participation at any  time without penalty  or loss of benefits 
to which the patient is otherwise entitled 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491692] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
 A statement that the particul ar treatment or procedures may  involve risks to the 
patient (or to the embry o or fetus if the patient is, or may  become, pregnant) that are 
at present unforeseeable
 The expected circumstances for which the patient’s participation may  be terminated 
by [CONTACT_44752]’s consent
 Any additional costs to the patient that may  result from participation in the research
 The consequences of a patient’s decision to withdraw from the research and 
procedures for an orderl y termination of t he patient’s participation
 A statement that significant new findings developed during the course of the 
research that may  relate to the patient’s willingness to continue participation will be 
provided to the patient
 The approximate number of patients invol ved in the study
 A statement of consent (eg, “I agree to participate . . .”)
 A place for the patient’s signature [CONTACT_204131]
 A statement indicating that information about this study  has been, or will be, 
entered into a databank that is publicly  accessible at www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
A cop y of the signed consent form should be given to the patient. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491693] Research Institute, I nc., personnel is as follows:
Medical Emergency  contact [CONTACT_6227]: 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491694] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
APPENDIX V. SUMMARY ADAPTED FROM GUIDELINES OF THE US
MULTI- SOCIETY TASK FORCE O N COLORECTAL 
CANCER AND OTHER COL ONOSCOPY 
REQUIREMENTS
Note: Patient may  be enrolled if no follow -up colonoscopy after poly p removal is due while 
participating in the study .
1.Patients age 50 years (40 years if African American) and older must have had a 
colonoscopy  with negative findings within the 10 years prior to the Screening Visit 
(Visit 1).
2.If the most recent colonoscopy revealed hyperplastic polyps that were entirely 
removed, the patient may be enrolled, provided the colonoscopy  was performed 
within 10 y ears prior to the Screening Visit (V isit 1).
3.If the most recent colonoscopy revealed 2 or fewer small (<1 cm) adenomatous 
polyps with tubular structure with low grade dysplasia and without appreciable 
villous tissue, the patient may be enrolled, provided the colonoscopy was 
performed within 5 years prior to the Screening Visit (V isit 1). 
4.Patients who have 1first-degree relative with colorectal cancer or adenomatous 
polyps diagnosed before age [ADDRESS_491695] had a colonoscopy with negative findings 5 years 
before the Scr eening Visit (Visit 1). This applies to patients who are [ADDRESS_491696] had a colonoscopy with negative findings 
within 10 years prior to the Screening Visit (Visit 1). This applies to patients who 
are [ADDRESS_491697] 1of 
the aforementioned conditions. 
Other Colonoscopy Requirements:
Patients of any  age who have alarm symptoms must have had a colonoscopy with
negative findings after the onset of the alarm symptoms and within 5 years prior to the 
Screening Visit (Visit 1). Alarm symptoms include lower GIbleeding (rectal bleeding or 
heme -positive stool), iron -deficiency  anemia, and weight loss. (Note: Current 
unexplained or clinically significant alarm symptoms are exclusionary.)
These requirements are adapted based on recent Guidance on Colorectal Cancer Screening 
(Levin et al, 2008; Lieberman et al, 2012; Quaseem et al, 2012). 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491698] lumps like nuts (difficult to pass) 
Type 2 -Sausage shaped but lumpy  
Type 3 -Like a sausage but with cracks on surface 
Type 4 -Like a sausage or snake, smooth and soft 
Type 5 -Soft blobs with clear -cut edges (passed easily) 
Type 6 -Fluffy  pi[INVESTIGATOR_6927], a mushy  stool 
Type 7 -Watery, no solid pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928] (entirely liquid)  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491699]. Life Sciences 2010;86:760 -5. 
Drossman DA, Camilleri M, May er EA, et al. AGA technical review on irritable bowel 
syndrome. Gastroenterology  2002;123:2108-31. 
Eutamene H, Bradesi S, Larauche M, et al. Guanylate cy clase C -mediated antinociceptive 
effects of linaclotide in rodent models of visceral pain. Neurogastroenterol Motil 
2010;22:312 -e84.
Johanson JF, Sonnenberg A, Koch TR. Clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_391595]. 
JClin Gastroenterol 1989;11:525 -36.
Johanson JF, Kralstein J. Chronic constipation: a survey  of the patient pers pective. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2007;25:599-608. 
Koren E, Smith HW, Shores, E, et al. Recommendations on risk- based strategies for 
detection and characterization of antibodies against biotechnology  products. J I mmunol 
Methods 2008;333:1 -9.
Lembo A, Camill eri M. Chronic constipation. N Engl J Med 20 03;349 :1360 -8. 
Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveillance for the e arly 
detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous poly ps, 2008: a j oint guideline from the 
American Cancer Society, the US Multi -Societ y Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and 
the American College of Radiology . Gastroenterology  2008;134:1570-95.
Lieberman DA, Rex DK, Winawer SJ, et al. Guidelines for colonoscop y surveillance 
after screening and pol ypectomy : aconsensus update by  [CONTACT_162078] -Society  Task 
Force on Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology  2012;143:844 -57.
Linaclotide: Investigator’s brochure. Edition 8. Cambridge, MA: Ironwood 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc; 2013 Mar 12. 
Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey  WD, et al. Functional bowel disorders. 
Gastroenterology  2006;130:1480 -91. 
Muller -Lissner SA, Bollani S, Brummer RJ, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_391596]. Digestion 2001;64:200-4.
Parenk y A, M yler H, Lakshmi A, et al. New FDA Draft Guidance on Immunogenicity . 
Am Assoc P harm Sci J 2014;16: 3. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491700] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
Quaseem A, Denberg TD, Hopkins RH, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer: a guidance 
statement from the American College of Phy sicians. Ann I ntern Med 2012;156:[ADDRESS_491701] biotechnology  products. 
JPharm Biomed Anal 2008;48:1267 -81.
Stewart WF, L iberman JN, Sandler RS, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_391597] (EPOC) 
study  inthe [LOCATION_002]: relation of clinical subty pes to sociodemographic features. 
AmJGastroenterol 1999;94 :3530 -40.
Study  LIN-MD-01: a phase III, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, 
parallel -group trial of linaclotide administered orally  for 12 weeks in patients with 
chronic constipation . Jersey  City, NJ: Forest Research Institute, Inc; 2010 Jun 2. 
Study  LIN-MD-02: an open- label, long -term safety  study  of oral linaclotide administered 
to patients with chronic constipation or irritable bowel syndrome with constipation. 
Jersey  City , NJ: Forest Research Institute, Inc; 2012 Nov 5.
Study  LIN-MD-04: a phase 3b, randomized, double- blind, placebo -control led, 
parallel -group trial of linaclotide administered orally  for 12 weeks to patients with 
chronic constipation and prominent abdominal bloating at baseline. Jersey  City , NJ: 
Forest Research Institute, I nc; 201 4May 10.
Study  LIN-MD-31: a phase III, randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled, 
parallel -group trial of linaclotid e administered orally  for 12 weeks followed by  a 4-week 
randomized withdrawal period in patients with irritable bowel s yndrome with 
constipation. Jersey  City , NJ: Forest Research Institute, I nc; 2011 May  10.
Study  MCP -103-302: a phase 3, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled,
parallel -group trial of linaclotide administered orally  for26 weeks in patients with 
irritable bowel s yndrome with constipation. Cambridge, MA: Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc; 2011 May 24.
Study  MCP -103-303: a phase 3, randomize d, double -blind, placebo -controlled,
parallel -group, trial of linaclotide administered orally  for12 weeks followed by  a 4-week 
randomized withdrawal period in patients with chronic constipation. Cambridge, MA : 
Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, I nc; 2010 May  7.
Study  MCP -103-305: an open- label, long -term safety  study  of oral linaclotide
administered to patients with chronic constipation or irritable bowel s yndrome with 
constipation. Cambridge, MA: Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, Inc; [ADDRESS_491702] 2015Amended Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
US Department of Healt h and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration . Guidance 
for industry , drug -induced liver injury : premarketing clinical evaluation. 2009 Jul. 
Available from: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM174090.pdf . 
Accessed [ADDRESS_491703] Research Institute, Inc., a naffiliate of Actavis In c.
Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE]
SUMMARY OF CHANGES TO PROTOCOL 
An Open -label, Long- term Study to Assess the Immunogenicity of Linaclotide 
Administered Orally to Adult Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome With 
Constipation or Chronic Idiopathic Constipation
LIN-MD-10
IND #63,290
Original Protocol / Date: Ironwood Protocol MCP -103- 402, 25 Nov 2013
Amendment #1: 09 Apr 2015
Amendment #2: [ADDRESS_491704] Research Institute, Inc., and may not —in full or 
part—be passed on, reproduced, published, distributed, or submitted to any regulatory 
authority without the express written permission of Forest Research Institute , Inc. 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491705] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Amendment #2 specifies the following changes to the original ,FDA -approved protocol
Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, I nc., Protocol MCP -103-402, dated 25 Nov 2013 and 
previously  amended 09 Apr 2015:
 
 
3.Updating of conta ct information
4.Correction of minor typographic error s
This summary  of changes present sall new content asgreen underlined text.Deleted 
material is shown as st rikeou t text. The page numbers shown in the headings of this 
document are those of the last published version of the protocol (Amendment #1). 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491706] been made globall y to the protocol:
   
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491707] been renumbered : 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491708] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

4.0 SECTIONS ADDED
Rationale: A new section has been added to introduce the possibility  that some patients’ 
ADAs may  not have reverted to baseline at the 4 -Month Follow -up Visit; an additional 
visit (Visit 11) will be required for those patients.
The new section will read as follows:
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491709] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

5.0 REVISIONS
5.1 SECTION 2.0 S YNOPSIS AND SCHEDULE OF 
EVALUATIONS (PAGE 2)
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491710] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

5.3 SECTION 9.3.1, INCLUSION CRITERIA (PAGE 25)
Rationale: Inclusion criterion [ADDRESS_491711] sentence of inclusion criterion 8 becomes inclusion criterion 9 as follow:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491712] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

 
 
5.6 SECTION [IP_ADDRESS], IMMEDIATE REPORTING OF  SERIOUS 
ADVERSE EVENTS (PAGE 44)
Rational: This section has been amended to update the Sponsor's Stud y Physician 
Medical Emergency  phone numbe r.
The last paragraph of this section now reads as follow:
Sponsor's Study  Physician Medical Emergency  phone number: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491713] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

Bullet 3 of this section now reads as follows :
Review and record AEs
○Patients who report an AE of diarrhea or who repo rt a sy mptom that could be 
considered diarrhea (eg, loose stools or BMs, soft stools, watery  stools, liquid 
stools, mushy  stools) will also complete the diarrhea questionnaire during the 
study  visit ( Appendix VII)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491714] INFORMATION (PAGE 79)
Rationale: This appendix was updated to reflect changes of staff for the study  team.
The revised appendix will read as follows:
Contact [CONTACT_391611], I nc., personnel is as follows:
Medical Emergency  contact [CONTACT_6227]: 
Forest Research Institute, Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491715] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2

6.0 INVESTIGATOR’S STATE MENT
I agree to conduct the study  in accordance with this protocol (LIN- MD-10, 
Amendment #2, dated [ADDRESS_491716] 2015) and with all applicable government regulations and 
good clinical practice guidance.
_______________________________________     _____/_____/______
Principal Investigator’s Signat ure                                             Date
_______________________________________
Principal Investigator’s Name 
[CONTACT_44754], Inc. Page [ADDRESS_491717] 2015Protocol LIN-MD-10 Amendment 2