Compa rative Effectiveness of Diabetes Shared Medical 
Appointment Models ("Invested in Diabetes") Protocol 
and Sta tistica l Analysis Plan Cover Page 
Version date 8/24/2021 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_627299] M Kwan 
IRB: Colorado Multiple Institutes Review Board # 
17-[ADDRESS_835922] 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835923] prevalent chronic diseases in the [LOCATION_002], such that as of 2012 an estimated 12-
14% of the US population had diagnosed or undiagnosed diabetes.1 Type II diabetes (T2DM) is the most common form of 
diabetes among adults.2 Diabetes can be controlled with appropriate diet and physical activity, and oral and injectable 
medications.3 The goal is to maintain glycosylated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1c, or HbA1c) under 7% (or under 8% for 
those age 45-64 with complications), while  over 9% is considered poor control.4  Yet as many as 49% of adults with 
diabetes do not meet targets for glycemic control.[ADDRESS_835924] engage in daily self-care acti vities including blood glucose monitoring, following dietary 
recommendations, regular physical activity, and medication adherence (including insulin management in those who are 
insulin-dependent). Diabetes self-management is chal lenging, especially among low-income populations12, and many 
patients experience diabetes distress, the sense of being overwhelmed with managing diabetes.13 Diabetes distress 
stems from the regimen, interpersonal, emotional, and he althcare navigation burden associated with managing 
diabetes, and interferes with self-care and glycemic control.14  As projections indicate the prevalence of diabetes may 
reach 25-28% of the US population by [CONTACT_2892] 2050,[ADDRESS_835925] continue to improve diabetes care. 
Improving care for patients with T2DM 
Standards of care for T2DM currently include medication  management, smoking cessation, and diet and physical 
activity counseling.  According to the American Diabetes Association’s 2015 position statement, care for patients with T2DM should include antiglycemic therapy and cardiovascular risks reduction through weight loss, blood pressure 
reduction, and smoking cessation.
15 Wagner’s chronic care model (CCM) has in formed how care should be delivered for 
T2DM patients to help achieve these goals.16-18 The CCM emphasizes whole person care, addressing physical, mental 
health and psychosocial needs.19 Evidence shows patients with diabetes benefit from models of care based on the 
CCM20, including comprehensive diabetes self-management e ducation (DSME) and self-management support (SMS) in 
primary care.21,22  Notably, SMS can decrease the burden of diabetes and improve diabetes distress.23 Shared medical 
appointments (SMAs) can help practices efficiently and effectively provide DSME and SMS , consistent with the CCM. 24  
Shared medical appointments (SMAs) 
SMAs are “groups of patients meeting over time for co mprehensive care, usually involving a practitioner with 
prescribing privileges, for a defining chronic condition or health care state”.[ADDRESS_835926] effective for improving outcomes important to patients and practices.   
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835927] the features 
highlighted in Table 1, including 1) a patient-driven curriculum, 
from which patients choose from a range of diabetes and mental health topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]; and 2) a multidisciplinary care team with diabetes 
peer mentors, health educators, medical providers and behavioral health providers. These features correspond to a model involving “professionally-led group visits with peer 
exchange and a team of providers”
29, and which we refer to as 
patient-driven SMAs. Evidence supports each of these 
components in diabetes SMAs and for diabetes care in general, 
including the use of multidisciplinary care teams30,31, peer 
support32-34, and allowing patients to drive topic selection30, but no comparative 
effectiveness trials comparing patient-driven SMAs to standardized SMA models (patients do not select topi[INVESTIGATOR_627300]) .  
 Methodology Standard RQ-1: Gaps in Evidence  
SMAs are carried out in a variety of ways, and it is unclear which components lead to greater patient participation 
and health outcomes. SMAs vary in terms of the makeup of the care provider team, the clinical and educational strategies used, the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627301], and the outcomes evaluated.  
Also, there is little evidence on the effects of SMAs on patient-centered outcomes, such as diabetes distress. Thus, the 
proposed study will compare the effects of a standardized diabetes SMA model to the patient-driven model involving 
multidisciplinary care teams and patient-driven content on pa tient-centered outcomes– these are critical evidence gaps 
for SMAs and priority features for our stakeholders.  
 
B. Significance  
Improving Primary Care Services for Patients with Diabetes 
The CCM is considered an evidence-based and patient-centered model of 
care.[ADDRESS_835928] the extent to which – and for whom – more patient-centered SMA models (ensuring the right 
resources for the right patient at the right time) are more effective at engaging patients and improving patient-centered 
outcomes than more standardized models (same intervention for all). Given the importance placed on patient-centered 
approaches to diabetes care36 and the need to efficiently provide care to increasing numbers of patients with diabetes, 
practices need to know the extent to which patient-driven SMAs are more effective and engaging than standardized SMAs (see Letters of Support). Practices need this informatio n to justify widespread uptake of enhanced models of care. 
Stakeholder engagement: Selecting questions that affect outcomes of interest to patients and other stakeholders 
Aligning multiple stakeholder needs to design and test care models can benefit from joint engagement strategies.37 
We used the Boot Camp Translation (BCT) approach to jointly engage patients with diabetes, caregivers, and primary 
care providers and staff in translating evidence abou t SMS into a mutually-desirable diabetes care model.38,[ADDRESS_835929], 9 
patients with diabetes and three family members and 6 pr oviders and staff members from  a local federally qualified 
health center (FQHC) participated. When discussing how to connect patients to evidence-based services, patients 
repeatedly voiced the importance of “meeting people where they’re at” – a commonly-used phrase by [CONTACT_627351]. Specifically, diabetes care shou ld address the fact that not 
all patients feel as though they can readily absorb and apply new information about their condition and how to manage it – this is health literacy, a known correlate of diabetes control.
29,[ADDRESS_835930] “guest speakers” representing 
clinical and behavioral health specialties 
Peer support Peer mentors co-facilitate SMAs and work 
with patients one-on-one 
Whole-person orientation  SMA curriculum includes health behavior 
change and mental health content 
Patient-driven 
content and 
structure Modular curriculum with topi[INVESTIGATOR_627302]-driven care 
team and family involvement 
Focus on patient-centered outcomes Diabetes distress, quality of life, self-
management behaviors, SMA participation 
Criterion 1. Potential to fill 
gaps in evidence 
Criterion 2. Adoption into Clinical 
Practice and Improved Care 
Criterion 4. Patient-Centeredness 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835931] group endorsed a model with di abetes “veterans” co-facilitating group visits with a 
variety of diabetes care professionals, and in which patients  select topi[INVESTIGATOR_285817] a compre hensive curriculum according to 
their needs, preferences, and readiness for new informatio n. The group visit curriculum should include topi[INVESTIGATOR_627303], healthy eating, taking medication, acceptance and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and social support. For this project, we 
selected the Targeted Training in Illness Management [TTI M] curriculum because it has all of these components, and 
has demonstrated effectiveness for both clinically significant reduction in HbA1c and clinically relevant improvement in patient-reported psychological symptoms.  
41,42  The practice stakeholders want to do enhanced group visit models 
endorsed by [CONTACT_1962]. However, in their experience, SMA participation can be low, and the patient-driven SMA model 
could be burdensome to deliver and may require more resources. Practices need to know the extent to which SMA 
participation and outcomes are improved compared to the standardized approaches they tend to use now.  Patients 
need to know if it’s worthwhile to spend the time and e ffort participating in SMAs. Th us, BCT informed the research 
questions, patient-centered outcomes, implementation approaches, and study design. 
 
C. Study Design or Approach  
C. 1 Specific Aims:   
The purpose of this proposal is to compare diabetes SMAs  led by [CONTACT_627352] a standardized 
curriculum (standardized meaning “same for all SMA cohorts” ) to a patient-driven, team-based SMA model (patient-
driven meaning “varies depending on SMA cohort needs and pref erences”), in which patients involved in a given group 
(i.e., an SMA cohort) drive choice of visit topi[INVESTIGATOR_285817] a comprehensive curriculum including diabetes and mental health 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  The specific aims are: Aim 1. To implement standardized and patient-driven diabetes SMAs in multiple diverse primary care practice 
settings and refine protocols for a comparative effectiveness study. 
Aim 1a. Engage patients, caregivers, health centers, and heal th plans to refine the resear ch protocol, design practice 
workflows, and plan data collection procedures and reporting to stakeholders. 
Aim 1b. Train multidisciplinary care teams in an eviden ce-based modular chronic disease management curriculum 
(i.e., the Targeted Training in Illness Management Program) Aim 1c. Implement patient-driven and standardized diabetes SMAs in 20 primary care practices (urban and rural, commercial and public payer, and primary care)  
Aim 2. To conduct a pragmatic, cluster randomized comparative effectiveness study of standardized versus patient-driven diabetes SMAs in 20 diverse primary care c linics for approximately 1440 patients with diabetes 
Aim 2a. Compare changes in patient-centered outcomes, including the primary patient-centered outcome diabetes 
distress, as well as perceived autonomy support, and diab etes self-care; changes in clinical outcomes, including 
hemoglobin A1c, blood pressure, and body mass index; and out-of-pocket cost and time commitment  Aim 2b. Compare reach and engagement of patients in patient-driven versus standardized diabetes SMAs 
Aim 2c. Evaluate practice-level outcomes, including quality of care, team-based care, and sustainability, such as 
resources required and burden to the health system   
 
C.2 Overview of approach and conceptual model 
In this pragmatic, cluster randomized comparative effectiveness trial, we will compare the reach and 
effectiveness of patient-driven diabetes SMAs to standardiz ed diabetes SMAs for both patient-centered and clinical 
outcomes . The patient-driven SMA approach allows patients to determine visit topi[INVESTIGATOR_627304]. The curriculum to be used is Targeted Training  for Illness Management (TTIM) , a 12-session modular group 
intervention adapted to be [ADDRESS_835932] of diabetes SMAs with the full TTIM 6-session curriculum (Appendix A), led by 
a health educator (HE). The patient-driven group visit model w ill consist of 6 diabetes SMAs with TTIM topi[INVESTIGATOR_627305]; groups will be co-led by [CONTACT_627353] (medical provider, behavioral  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 4 health provider, HE), depending on the topic. The distinguishing features of these two models are depi[INVESTIGATOR_28071] 2. 
The number of sessions and curriculum are identical across models; the distinction is who delivers the curriculum and 
whether patients choose session topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  
In Aim 1, we will engage stakeholders 
to refine the study protocol and intervention packaging, and then provide technical assistance to practices to implement 
standardized or patient-driven SMAs. In Aim 2, 
we will conduct a cluster randomized comparative effectiveness study. There are 
three parts to this project: 1) Intervention and 
study design ; 2) Implementation; and 3) Research and evaluation,  each of which is 
informed by [CONTACT_627354] (Figure 1) and stakeholder engagement, implementation, and evaluation frameworks. Patient and other stakeholder engagement follows the analytic-deliberative model of 
stakeholder engagement. The implementation 
framework is Replicating Effective Programs 
(REP).
43 The evaluation framework is RE-AIM.44  
C.2.1 Intervention conceptual model 
The conceptual model (Figure 1) 
underlying patient-driven diabetes SMAs is 
based on self-determination theory (SDT)45 and principles of whole person care.46 According to SDT, human motivation 
and behavior are a function of the social environment and the extent to which that environment supports basic 
psychological needs shown to enhance “self-determined motivation.” Considerable evidence supports SDT; studies show 
people tend to be more motivated to engage in an intervention and more likely to change their behavior when the intervention supports the need for autonomy (respect for choice and preference), competence (building self-efficacy, 
recognizing capacity for change), and relatedness (sense  of belonging, understanding an individual’s values).
47,[ADDRESS_835933] been found to mediate improvement in outcomes in diabetes self-management studies.
49,50 Several elements of the patient-driven SMA model are intended to create a more 
patient-centered social and clinical environment in which the SMA curriculum is delivered, thus enhancing autonomy, competence, and relatedness, and increasing motivation to adopt and maintain health behavior changes needed for diabetes self-management.   
In the patient-driven SMA model (all elements in Figure 1),  patients receive a curriculum with both diabetes 
and mental health content. In the spi[INVESTIGATOR_627306]-person  orientation to care, this curriculum is delivered by a 
multidisciplinary care team, including he alth educators, behavioral health providers, medical providers, and peer 
mentors. To support autonomy, patients in a given SMA cohort select the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627307] (i.e., choose the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627308]). To support competence, the curriculum 
emphasizes building skills (e.g., problem-solving, goal se tting, communication skills) and enhancing self-efficacy. To 
support relatedness, SMAs are co-facilitated by [CONTACT_37110] p eer mentors, and peer mentors are available to patients 
outside of the group visit setting for individual meetin gs. These needs-supportive elements may enhance self-
determined motivation and help overcome known barriers to  diabetes self-management behaviors; these elements are 
expected to enhance not only clinical outcomes, but also patient-centered outcomes, such as diabetes distress.  Table 2. Features of Comparator SMA Models 
 Standardized 
SMAs Patient-Driven 
SMAs 
Same for both groups 
No. of sessions  6 (consisting of diabetes and mental health sessions) 
Educational 
components Diabetes and mental health with goal setting and psychosocial 
support topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (TTIM curriculum) 
SMA coordinator Scheduling and documentation 
Medical provider  Medication management by [CONTACT_627355] (Physician 
Assistant, Nurse Practitioner, or MD/DO); 
Answer patient-specific medical questions with group present 
Distinguishing features 
Patient topic choice Order of and time spent on 
TTIM topi[INVESTIGATOR_627309]-instructor with peer mentor 
for non-mental health topi[INVESTIGATOR_627310]-instructor with peer mentor 
for mental health topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]; 
Answer patient-specific 
mental/behavioral health 
questions with group present 
Peer mentor role Not involved in SMAs Co-instructor for all group 
visits; 1x1 peer access  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835934], the standardized SMA model (components in Figure 1 marked by a dotted outline) includes the 
same curriculum as in the patient-driven model, but it is delivered in a standardized way (order of and time spent on 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_627311]) by [CONTACT_336465]. Thus, distinguishing features between the patient-driven SMA model and a 
standardized model are the elements that represent a more patient-centered social and clinical environment in which the SMA curriculum is delivered (multidisciplinary care team with peer support and patient-driven content).
Figure 1. Patient-Driven Diabetes Shared Medical Appointment Conceptual Model
PATIENT-CENTERED SOCIAL AND CLINICAL ENVIRONMENT 
Self-Determination Needs Support
Patient-Driven Content (Autonomy)
Skills-based curriculum (Competence)
Peer Support (Relatedness)Whole Person Orientation
Multidisciplinary Care TeamOUTCOMES
Patient-Centered 
Outcomes
Clinical OutcomesHEALTH BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Patient self-management behaviorsDIABETES SHARED MEDICAL 
APPOINTMENT CURRICULUM
Diabetes 
ContentMental Health 
ContentCARE TEAM PROCESS CHANGE
Relational Coordination
Chronic Illness Care Processes
C.2.[ADDRESS_835935] been shown to be useful organizing models and frameworks, 
which we will integrate in planning, deliv ering and evaluating our intervention:
Analytic-Deliberative Model of Stakeholder Engagement. In Aim 1, we will undertake stakeholder engagement 
and implementation planning, guided by [CONTACT_627356]-deliberative model (ADM) of stakeholder engagement.51According 
to the ADM, the first step in engagement is identifying rele vant stakeholders, which may include researchers, clinicians, 
healthcare providers, and patients. Stakeholders undertake a process of gathering and analyzing the evidence (the inputs, which include stakeholder values, experience, and literature review), deliberating (methods for combining 
evidence), and decision-making (e.g., recruitment and imple mentation strategies). [CONTACT_255461] (PI) has successfully used
engagement methods consistent with the ADM for developi[INVESTIGATOR_627312].
37Thus, analysis, 
deliberating and decision making will guide agenda-setting, meeting facilit ation, and refining the study protocol.
Replicating Effective Programs (REP). The implementation of SMAs will be guided by [CONTACT_627357]43, used 
successfully by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Waxmonsky (Co-PI) fo r implementation of similar programs. The use of implementation strategies 
described by [CONTACT_627358]. The REP implementation process involves a pre-condition phase (e.g., packaging intervention for training and asse ssment using community input), a pre-implementation phase 
(e.g., orientation, explain core elements, customize delivery, logistics planning, staff training, and technical assistance), an implementation phase (e.g., ongoing support and part nership, booster training, fidelity monitoring), and a 
maintenance and evolution phase (e.g., understanding requirements for sustaina bility). Each of these REP phases and 
elements is reflected in the SMA implementation process for this project.
RE-AIM. The evaluation will be guided by [CONTACT_39505]-AIM framewor k, which is an acronym for Reach, Effectiveness, 
Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance.
[ADDRESS_835936]. Glasgow (Co-I), a key RE-AIM developer, will 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835937] focuses on the RE-AIM 
dimension of Effectiveness (clinical and patient-centered outcomes), Aim 2b focuses on  Reach  (patient participation in 
SMAs), and Aim 2c focuses on Maintenance  at the practice-level (sustainability fa ctors such as resources required and 
practice burden). Adoption and implementation will be studied in future research.   
 
C.3 Research Questions and Hypotheses 
Hypotheses (Quantitative): 
Hypothesis I (Aim 2a, patient-centered outcomes).  Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, patients participating in 
patient-driven diabetes SMAs will report greater improv ements in patient-centered outcomes, including diabetes 
distress (primary outcome), autonomy support, and diabetes self-management behaviors (secondary). 
Hypothesis II (Aim 2a, clinical outcomes).  Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, patients participating in patient-
driven diabetes SMAs will exhibit greater improvements in HbA1c, blood pressure, and body mass index. Hypothesis III (Aim 2b, patient reach and engagement).  Among eligible patients offered participation in SMAs, those 
offered the patient-driven model will be more likely to acce pt services and will attend more scheduled sessions than 
those offered the standardized model. Hypothesis IV (Aim 2c, practice outcomes).  Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, practices using patient-driven 
diabetes SMAs will exhibit greater improv ements in quality and team-based care. 
Qualitative Research Questions: 
QRQ-1 (Aim 2a, patient experience/autonomy support). How do patients involved in standardized and patient-driven 
diabetes SMAs describe their experience of SMA features (diabetes and mental health content, whole person 
orientation, care team member involvement)? Compared to pa tients in standardized SMAs, how does the experience of 
patients in patient-driven SMAs reflect themes consistent with SDT and a whole person orientation? QRQ-2 (Aim 2a, patient self-management). Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, what kinds of changes do 
patients involved in patient-driven diabetes SMAs describe in diabetes self-management behaviors?  
QRQ-3 (Aim 2b, patient engagement in SMAs/costs). Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, what reasons do 
patients involved in patient-driven diabetes SMAs cite for th eir level of participation? What diabetes care-related out of 
pocket and opportunity costs do patients incur under each model? QRQ-4 (Aim 2c, practi ce sustainability). What are practices’ experiences with delivering standardized and patient-driven 
SMAs? How do the models compare in terms of practice perception of resources required, burden and complexity, and potential for widespread uptake? QRQ-5 (Aim 2c, practice value). What is the overall practice perceived value for the patient-driven versus standardized 
SMAs in terms of patient participation and effects on health outcomes? For which types of patients and practices is each model perceived as valuable? 
 
C.4 Research Design and Methods (C riterion 3: Scientific Merit) 
 
C.4.1 Study Design. This is a pragmatic, cluster randomized comparativ e effectiveness trial.  Given the complexity of 
systems and processes needed to implement SMAs, and the po ssibility of contamination ef fects, randomization will be 
clustered at the practice level using covariate constrained randomization.55-57  Twenty-two practices will be randomly 
assigned to either standardized or patient-driven diabetes SMAs (10 per condition). During the 24-month 
implementation period, each practice will conduct SMAs with  around 8 cohorts of 8 to 10 patients each (ultimately 
yielding up to 72 patients per practice).  The initial plan is that cohorts of adult patients with T2DM will progress through 
6 weekly SMA sessions, and a new cohort will begin every 3 months, but practices can choose their own timeline. A 
mixed-methods evaluation will include quan titative (practice and patient-level surv eys, electronic health records (EHR), 
and participation and intervention fidelity tracking data) an d qualitative (practice and patient interviews, observation) 
components.  
Sample Size and Power Calculations:  Previous power calculations used 1,440 to tal patients, which is not feasible given 
recruitment challenges by [CONTACT_627359]. We are expecting N (total) = 22 clinics, 1,000 patients (11 clinics and 500 patients 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 7 per condition), allowing for ~15-20% attrition (leaving 400 patients per arm). However, we are estimating power based 
on [ADDRESS_835938] sizes detectable for different po wer calculations for various numbers of practices and patient sample sizes and 
intraclass correlations (ICC; see table belo w), with effect sizes of approximately .2 9 to .35 for intent-to-treat analyses of 
primary outcomes with a type-1 error rate of .05. Power for planned subgroup analyses for patient characteristics (e.g., 
mental illness, health literacy) is also shown. An effective sample size of [ADDRESS_835939] between groups (increasing from 0 to .5 SD) using general linear mixed models with random slopes 
and intercepts.58 
Practices per arm: N Patients per practice: N With 15-20% attrition: N  ICC Effective sample size Detectable difference (effect size)  Power 
10 53.4 (534 per arm) 44.5 (445 per arm) 3% 193 .29 >80% 
10 53.4 (534 per arm) 44.5 (445 per arm) 5% 140 .34 >80% 
10 46.2 (462 per arm) 38.5 (385 per arm) 3% 181 .30 >80% 
10 46.2 (462 per arm) 38.25 (385 per arm) 5% 134 .35 >80% 
For subgroup analyses (for patient characteristics) 
10 11.5 (115 per arm) 9.6 (96 per arm) 3% 76 .46 >80% 
10 11.5 (115 per arm) 9.6 (96 per arm) 5% 67 .49 >80% 
 
Hypothesized Effect Size for Comparative Effe ctiveness for Main Patient-Centered Outcome: The hypothesized effect 
size for comparative effectiveness of patient-driven versus standardized SMAs is 0.30  (a small to medium effect), based 
on an expected difference in change in HbA1c of 0.60%  between arms and a SD of 2.[ADDRESS_835940] of SMAs on HbA1c is -0.55%.[ADDRESS_835941] led to an average change in HbA1c of -1.15%.
[ADDRESS_835942]. For instance, assuming an average 
baseline HbA1c of 9% (SD 1.2), the patient-driven model is expected to yield a follow-up HbA1c of 7.85%, and the 
standardized model is expected to yield a follow-up HbA1c of 8.45%. The increased effect of patient-driven SMAs could 
be attributed to greater patient engagement in treatment and better understanding and uptake of diabetes self-care 
behaviors, in accordance with the intervention conceptual model. Thus, a 0.60% difference in change in HbA1c between 
standardized and patient-driven SMAs is supported by [CONTACT_627360]. Furthermore, an effect size smaller 
than 0.30 would not be clinically significant, and any incr eased practice burden of patient-driven SMAs would likely be 
unjustifiable. Diabetes distress is the main patient-centered outcome , but data are not directly available for distress, so 
we extrapolate from evidence on HbA1c. Evidence shows that a 0.5 SD change in HbA1c corresponds to a 1-unit change 
on the diabetes distress measure we intend to use.60,61 A 0.60% difference in change in HbA1c would correspond to a 
1.[ADDRESS_835943] will be centrally coordinated at the Universi ty of Colorado School of Medicine (CU-SOM) in the 
Adult and Child Consortium for Health Outcomes Research  and Delivery Science (ACCORDS), a multi-disciplinary 
research program with expertise in comparative effectiveness research, biostatistics, community engagement, and qualitative methods.  ACCORDS is the coordinating center fo r the State Networks of Colorado Ambulatory Practices and 
Partners (SNOCAP), an umbrella of primary care practice-based research networks (PBRNs), which include FQHC and primary care private practice members. This study will be co nducted in these PBRN practices in the context of real-world 
care (see Letters of Support from PBRN practices and directors and CMHCs). The [ADDRESS_835944] established relationships and 
substantial collaborative research experience with these practices. 
 
C.4.3 Study Protocol. 
C.4.3.1 Aim 1: Refine the study protocol and implement diabetes SMAs 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835945]. Selection criteria, scripts and paper invitations will be 
provided to facilitate this process.  Stakeholder Meetings . Drs. Kwan (PI) and Waxmonsky (Co-PI) will co-facilitate 
meetings with patient, provider, and organizational leadership stakeholder representatives at least monthly during the 
first [ADDRESS_835946]. The engagement objectives are to: 
1) Refine the study protocol  (RQ-2) by [CONTACT_627361], interventi on packaging, study design, patient centered 
and clinical outcomes chosen by [CONTACT_627362], and data collection proc edures with the full stakeholder group. 
See also “Engagement Plan” below.  The intervention will be pa ckaged in the form of a manual and implementation 
worksheet to instruct practices on intervention delivery and tracking (Appendix B). The  manual and  worksheet will guide 
clinical processes needed to identify a nd recruit eligible patients, set up and deliver SMAs, conduct patient assessments, 
and identify staff responsible for tasks.   
2) Plan logistics of delivering SMAs.  To optimize fidelity and consistency across practices, we will employ a practice 
coach  trained in practice facilitation  strategies62 to explain core elements of the intervention and customize delivery 
according to each site’s unique needs and resources. This includes designing workflows, identifying care team 
members, and establishing roles and responsibilities for SMAs. Participating practices have experience with SMAs, but 
the approach varies across practices; additionally, TTIM is a new curriculum for all practices. Every clinic is different, and 
workflows must be customized to  the unique clinic context. The practice coac h will work with each practice to complete 
the implementation worksheet, identify and address barriers to implementation, plan workflows and data collection 
procedures, and help identify resources needed to implement SMAs with fidelity and to execute the study protocol. This will help ensure this research has high  internal validity, and any conclusions ab out comparative effectiveness accurately 
reflect the difference between standardized and patient-driven SMAs.  
The practice coach will help each practi ce identify SMA care team members: health educators  (HEs; a general 
term referring to those qualified and se lected to lead the groups, such as nurse educators or certified diabetes 
educators), prescribing providers  (e.g., physicians, advanced nurse practitioners), behavioral health providers  (BHPs; 
clinical psychologists, licensed clinical social workers), and peer mentors  (lay health workers). Preference will be given to 
peer mentors with lived experience with diabetes, who have  been patients in the respective clinics, and who have 
behavioral health experience.
63,64 Peer mentors will receive ongoing training and support from study and practice staff; 
as lay health workers, supervision is necessary.65 
3) Ensure adequate SMA reimbursement mechanisms  are in place.66,67 Health care financing continues to evolve, and 
thus the context in which elements of patient-driven SMAs are paid for is expected to change in coming years. For 
instance, how peer support and behavioral health services  are funded today (e.g., behavioral health carve-outs, 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_627313]) may be different in a year or two (e.g., bundled payments from accountable care collaboratives). The stakeholder group will review health ca re reimbursement strategies for the patient-driven SMAs, 
and ensure this project keeps abreast of these changes. St akeholder representation from health plan members of the 
Colorado Prevention Alliance will facilitate understanding of local health plan-specific reimbursement mechanisms, 
which are known to vary by [CONTACT_627363]. 
C.4.3.1b Aim 1b.  Train multidisciplinary care teams in the TTIM curriculum 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835947] work with 
complex populations with diabetes.31,41 In one-day intensives, investigators w ill train those who will serve as TTIM 
instructors in the patient-driven model (H Es, peer mentors, and BHPs), who will part icipate only in training relevant to 
their respective roles. The TTIM trainings will be led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Sajatovic, with the practice coach, [CONTACT_255461] and [CONTACT_627410] assisting. Training will have a number of sequential components that are all designed to lead to each care 
team member’s comfort with their respective roles in delivering the curriculum (Table 3).  First, the study team 
members, HEs, BHPs, and peer mentors will be provided with  a semi-structured “introduction” session to get to know 
each other. [CONTACT_327821] will provide an overview of the TTIM curriculum and how TTIM fits within the SMA model. The 
SMA care team will receive a binder including all the TTIM materials to keep and review as convenient to him/her, 
including the existing detailed manual for conducting TTIM sessions (see excerpt in Appendix D).  In addition to going 
over each TTIM session, the training will include mental heal th and diabetes self-care topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], communication skills, group 
leading/co-leading, assistance with help-seeking pathways , and crisis management. This will involve role-play and 
repetition as needed depending on the materials and peer  mentor comfort/knowledge.  Finally, the training will 
emphasize creating a patient-centered social and clinical  environment that supports patient autonomy (eliciting 
preferences), competence (practicing skills) and relate dness (expressing concern for the individual).   
Standardized Curriculum SMA training .  For the standardized curriculum SMA,  the Investigators will train HEs from 
standardized SMA practices in one-day intensives, similar to but separate from the patient-driven SMA practices. The 
HEs will be trained to deliver the full curriculum as the sole instructor. I n addition, in both conditions, all potential 
prescribing providers who may provide medical management in SMAs will participate in a 1-hour “Lunch and Learn” 
to learn about the project and discuss their role in diabetes SMAs.  
C.4.3.1c Aim 1c.  Implement patient-driven and standardized diabetes SMAs in [ADDRESS_835948] information that will be used in 
the covariate constrained randomization (CCR) procedure de scribed below. This information will include patient and 
practice characteristics that are likely to  influence the practice’s ability to implem ent the intervention(s ) or be associated 
with the outcome, such as practice size, practice type (F QHC, private practice), and patient panel characteristics, 
including race/ethnicity and payer mix (% Medicaid).  
Randomization to Condition.  As shown in prior work by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Dickinson (Co-I), covariate constrained randomization will 
be used to enhance internal validi ty and achieve balanced study arms.55,68,[ADDRESS_835949] 
care team 
members for both 
SMA models Health Educator (RN, RD, or CDE) Group DSME/SMS instructor  Deliver TTIM self-management education  
Medical Provider (MD, NP, or PA) Medical management Prescribing provider attends during the last [ADDRESS_835950]-visit data collection by [CONTACT_627364] (Patient-driven SMAs only) 
Additional care team 
members 
for patient-
driven SMAs Behavioral Health Provider Instruction and Q&A for 
mental health SMA topi[INVESTIGATOR_627314]-lead instruction on mental/behavioral health topi[INVESTIGATOR_627315]-ended discussion/question and answer 
Diabetes Peer Mentor (CHW, lay 
person, patient navigator) Co-instructor  
Peer mentoring 
 Co-lead instruction with HE/BHP (topic based) 
Share personal experience in group context 
1x1 support outside group visit 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 10 as the sum of squared differences on standardized vari ables between arms will be computed. After examining the 
distribution of the balance criterion, an optimal set of randomi zations will be identified (best 5% to 10%). From this set, 
one will be chosen using a random number generator, and th e practices will be assigned to standardized or patient-
driven SMA. We have used these approaches successfully in other studies to achieve well-balanced study arms.57  
Technical assistance: The practice coach will provide technical assistance  to practices as they work to execute plans 
made for delivering their assigned SMA models. The coach will also monitor progress and ensure accountability to 
timelines through regular email communication an d monthly meetings with the practice team.  Each participating 
practice will identify an SMA coordinator  (either selected from existing staff or hired for this project) to perform 
coordination tasks necessary for ensuring  fidelity to the research protocol and to ensure practices dedicate sufficient 
resources and attention to the project. The practice coach has the role of external facilitator, serving as an expert in 
practice transformation and mentoring the SMA coordinato r, who serves as an internal facilitator for local 
implementation. The SMA coordinator will actively guide all daily aspects of the SMA implementation, and keep site 
leadership is informed of progress  or problems in implementation.71 It is necessary for the SMA coordinator to be an 
employee of the health care organization in order to recruit pa tients to participate in interv iews, to track participation in 
SMAs, to coordinate initial and booster training (e.g., upon staff turnover), and to have access to identified data prior to de-identification and transfer to the research team.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_138886].  At each practice, an initial cohort of patients will be  identified and offered either  the patient driven SMA or 
standardized curriculum SMA (bas ed on site randomization). For this initial cohort, the practice coach will meet with the 
clinical team delivering the intervention or comparator intervention  to assist with any potential barriers to delivery, 
clinical questions, and to garner feedback on the intervention. After each practice has had the initial cohort receive the 
intervention, any final revisions to the study protocol will be made prior to full “go-live”.   
Note on mode of delivery:  Following stay at home orders put in place by [CONTACT_627365]-19 pandemic in March 2020, our participating primary ca re sites halted non-emergency in-person visits. The rate 
of return to in-person visits has varied for our practices based on their location, local levels of risk, and levels of risk 
deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_627366]. As a pragmatic trial, we consider mode of delivery to be a feature driven 
primarily by [CONTACT_627367] , given their unique needs, 
preferences, capacity and local context. (Note: This pers pective relates to the settin g and delivery domains of the 
PRECIS-2 pragmatic trial planning framework.) As such, deliv ery of group visits via telehealth, while not a protocol 
change per se, is specifically allowed as long as practices ma intain fidelity to core componen ts (features required to be 
the same vs different between conditions). Importantly, mode of delivery is not a core component. Practices condicting 
SMAs via telehealth will document delivery option of groups , report specific issues seen  with the telehealth delivery 
mode. Mode of delivery will be accounted for analytically, consistent with the intent-to-treat analytic framework. 
 
C.4.4.2 Aim 2: Conduct a Cluster Randomized Comparative Effectiveness Trial 
C.4.4.2a Recruitment and Retention of Study Participants (PC-2). 
As shown above in Section C.4.1, the sample  size needed to detect the hypothesized effect size is 20 practices with 60 
patients each. Assuming 20% loss to fo llow-up among participants, each practice  will be asked to enroll at least [ADDRESS_835951] 60 patients/practice; practices may enroll mo re than the minimum.  Recruitment stra tegies will be determined as part of 
Aim 1. Strategies may include identifying patients in existing diabetes registries, systematic screening and referral for 
new diagnosis of T2DM, and/or through provider referral. While strategies may vary somewhat across practices, the 
objective is to enroll as large and representative sample  of eligible patients as possible in that practice. Patients will be 
enrolled in SMAs as part of their regular health care; at the practice level, this is considered quality improvement (QI) and similar projects have been approved as such by [CONTACT_232730]. All survey data collected from patients 
will be collected as part of the SMA process, as described belo w, and will be made available to inform clinical decision-
making, such as which SMA topi[INVESTIGATOR_627316]; use for research 
purposes will thus be considered secondary analysis. In our ex perience, making survey data relevant to clinical care is 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835952] and time commitment surveys for explanatory purposes. A 
description of this sampling plan is described in Section C.4. 4.2c, Data Collection (Qualitative).  Protocols to ensure data 
are collected thoroughly and systematically will be at the practice level, managed on a daily basis by [CONTACT_627368]. Practices engage patients in 
treatment as they do in real-world care (i.e., not for resear ch purposes), using reminder and follow-up calls to encourage 
patient attendance at visits, so that the fi ndings of this research will be directly  applicable to other practice settings. 
Provider and staff study participants. Key organizational leadership, providers and other clinic staff will be invited to 
participate in practice surveys a nd interviews, and also participate in training and implementation.  
C.4.4.2b Interventions and Comparators. The comparator interventions are: 
1.  Standardized diabetes SMA model, led by a HE using standardized curriculum content   
2.  Patient-driven diabetes SMA model, co-led by a multidisci plinary care team (HE, peer mentor, and BHP) using patient-
driven curriculum content 
Selection of interventions and comparators (RQ-5) . As described above, patients and other stakeholders engaged in this 
research selected the SMA features to be tested. These features characterize the patient-driven SMA model , which will 
be compared to the standardized SMA model. 
 The comparison condition (standardized SMA model) was selected as it 
reflects the more typi[INVESTIGATOR_627317] (a set curriculum delivered by a qualified health 
educator), according to practices engaged in this research. The selection of the TTIM curriculum – and the collaboration 
with [CONTACT_327821], who developed and tested TTIM – was based on the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627318].  It is 
important to note that regardless of which SMA model a patie nt receives, patients will have access to all available care 
team members as is standard in their practice; we will assess contact [CONTACT_627369] a possible confounder in analysis.   
Description of interventions. Both SMA models will consist of [ADDRESS_835953] session. The care team members, role s, and responsibilities for both standardized 
and patient-driven SMAs are described in Table 4. Self-m anagement education components for both models address 
diabetes management challenges as well as mental health comorbidity, particularly depression, as well as problem 
identification, and personal goal setting (Appendix A). TTIM sessions are manualized and include hand-outs that 
reinforce the oral materials, tailored to patient health literacy. In both models, patients will be recruited as determined 
in Aim 1. For instance, the SMA coordinator may invite potential participants to the SMA groups, describe the 
intervention, collect pre-visit assessment data and schedule the initial SMA session. Assessments will be conducted as described below. The general stru cture for both SMAs will be:  
1. Structured instruction/education on TTIM topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]  
2. Open discussion and Q&A with SMA instructor(s)  
3. Medical management and Q&A with the medical provider (during patient-pull outs or before and after TTIM 
sessions)  
4. Wrap-up and planning for next session  
 
Standardized SMAs.  Standardized diabetes SMAs consist of the full TTIM 6-session curriculum, led by [CONTACT_627370], with topi[INVESTIGATOR_627319] A for all cohorts. The TTIM curriculum used in this study will be slightly adapted to de-emphasize more acute mental health symptoms  (such as psychosis) which was provided in the original 
TTIM program, and slightly increase focus on symptoms of depression and distress as prevalent impediments to diabetes self-management. The SMA coordinator supports patients in making and keepi[INVESTIGATOR_545886]. Medical 
providers will be present to discuss patient-specific medica l questions via one-on-one sessions, either during direct 
patient pull out or before or after the TTIM sessions, depending on what works best for the practice.  
Patient-driven SMAs.  For the patient-driven SMAs, the curriculum will be delivered collaboratively by [CONTACT_627371] (HE, medical provider, and BHP) and a lay worker 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 12 (diabetes peer mentor). Each professional care team member is present only for the portions of the visit(s) in which they 
have a role; thus, HEs, BHPs, and medical providers will not over lap. As in the standardized model, the HE serves as the 
primary instructor, and the medical provider does medical ma nagement. Distinguishing features of patient-driven SMAs 
are the BHP, who serves as the co-instructor with the peer me ntor for session topi[INVESTIGATOR_627320], and the 
diabetes peer mentor, who serves as co-instructor for all vi sits and reinforces the curricu lum by [CONTACT_1541] a personal 
experience perspective. The classic TTIM intervention includes  “peer educators”, so that peer mentor roles are already 
described in the TTIM manual. BHPs help patients learn skills for copi[INVESTIGATOR_627321], explore the emotional side of diabetes, address adherence and motivation, and help patients engage 
in the ambivalence they feel. BHPs will de liver manualized content on TTIM content relevant to the topic of interest and 
be available for open discussion, an advantage being they ca n answer any questions specific to their area of expertise 
better than HEs, who do not have licensure as mental health  professionals. The peer mentor will foster engagement, 
self-efficacy and behavioral modeling, address healthy behaviors, provide social and emotional support, suggest resources, and address questions that may arise from a “c onsumer” perspective. Peer mentors will be available to 
provide one-on-one support either in person or by [CONTACT_756].  
Another key feature of the patient-driven model is that patients choose the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627322], from 
the comprehensive TTIM curriculum (Appendix A). The topi[INVESTIGATOR_627323] (introductions, setting the 
stage) and last session (debriefing and maintenance), but ar e otherwise open for patient prioritization. At the first 
session, patients in each SMA cohort w ill be guided by [CONTACT_22888]-instructors to collectively choose the order of the 
remaining TTIM sessions, and emphasis and time spent on the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627324]. Depending on the topi[INVESTIGATOR_627325], the SMA coordinator will schedule the BHP for mental health sessions. 
C.4.4.2c Outcomes and Measures. 
We will use quantitative and qualitative methods  to evaluate research questions and test hypotheses for patient and 
practice-level outcomes. Table 4 summarizes outcomes, measures, data sources, and timing and administration.  
Patient-level outcomes measures:   
Patient-reported outcomes (PC-3).  Patient stakeholders selected diabetes distress as the primary patient-centered 
outcome (RQ-6). Diabetes distress will be measured using the 17-item Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS-17), a validated self-
report survey.60,61 Respondents indicate on a scale from 1 to 6 the extent to which they experience bothersome distress 
in four domains: emotional, regimen, interpersonal, and healthcare navigation burden. The DDS-17 has been 
demonstrated to be strongly related to and prospectively predictive of diabetes self-management behaviors as well as 
glycemic control, and has discrimina nt validity for depression measures.14 Additional patient-reported outcomes 
measures to be administered were selected by [CONTACT_8097]/ or reflect SDT constructs from the conceptual model; all are 
established valid and reliable self-report measures (IR-4). Pe rceived autonomy support in health care settings and self-
efficacy (SDT constructs) will be measured using the 6-item  Health Care Climate Questionnaire (HCCQ) and the 4 item 
Perceived Competence for Diabetes Scale (PCDS).73 Diabetes self-management behaviors will be measured using the 
Summary of Diabetes Self-Care Activities  (SDSCA). The 11-item SDSCA assesses self-reported dietary adherence, physical 
activity, and medication adherence, and is the most widely used and validated brief patient report scale for diabetes 
self-management behaviors.[ADDRESS_835954] measures will us e questions drawn from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 
and the National Health Interview Survey.75 Measures of the amount of time patients spend receiving, waiting for, and 
traveling to receive medical services will be  drawn from the American Time Use Survey.76 Health literacy, a potential 
moderator, will be measured using the validat ed 3-item Health Literacy Scale.    
Patient-level clinical outcomes (Aim 2a) . We will gather clinical outcomes data (HbA1c, blood pressure, body mass 
index) from participating practices’ EHRs. All encounter data (dates, locations, visit and provider types, diagnosis codes), 
lab results and vital signs measures from 9 months before through 9 months after each patient’s initial SMA visit will be 
requested.  Diagnosis codes (ICD-9/10) will be used to compute a comorbidity index77 and to corroborate diagnosis of 
mental illness. Prescription data will be  used to assess insulin dependence. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 13 Patient reach and engagement in SMAs (Aim 2b).  We will assess reach and engagement in terms of acceptance (i.e., 
what proportion of patients agree to participate in SMAs?) and participation (i.e., what proportion of SMAs do patients 
attend?), defined by [CONTACT_627372].78 Attendance at each session and total atte ndance for each of the 6 sessions, as well 
as any reasons for dropout, will be recorded by [CONTACT_627373] a spreadsheet.  
 
Practice-level outcomes measures (Aim 2c).   
Practice quality of care, team-based care, and resource requirements.  We will administer several validated 
practice-level measures to all practice staff and providers, as summarized in Table 5. Practice staff and providers in 
participating practices will be asked to complete survey me asures assessing aspects of practice context (which often 
influence efforts to improve diabetes care79), including measures of relational coordination (using the Relational 
Coordination Survey,80 a measure of team-based care and important fa ctor in chronic illness care in primary care 
teams81), practice CCM-consistent ca re (using the Assessment of Chronic Illness Care [ACIC])82, and role in SMAs. Those 
involved in SMAs will also complete measures of SMA resour ce requirements using a time-driven activity-based costing 
[TDABC] framework83 to assess staff time use, workflows, required materials and supplies, and other resources needed 
to deliver each SMA model, distinguishing between early and la te implementation phases. To assess practice culture, the 
Practice Culture Assessment will be administered to all practice staff. 
Table 4. Outcomes, Measures and Data Sources 
Outcome 
Domain Construct Source Metric/Measure Timing  Respondent
/ Unit Administered 
/Collected by 
[CONTACT_627374]-in sheets #/% and types of sessions 
attended Weekly Patient SMA coordinator 
Interviews Patient reasons for 
participation/non-
participation Within [ADDRESS_835955] session Patient Qualitative Co-I and 
professional 
research assistant 
(PRA) 
Patient 
demographics EHR Age, gender, insurance, 
race/ethnicity Collected during 
routine care  Patient Practice data 
analyst 
Patient clinical 
status  EHR  Comorbidity index77; 
Insulin dependence, 
mental illness Collected during 
routine care  Patient Practice data 
analyst 
Patient-Level 
Effectiveness 
Outcomes Diabetes distress Survey DDS-[ADDRESS_835956] 
session Patient SMA coordinator 
      
Health literacy 
(moderator) Survey Chew Health Literacy 
Scale 1st session Patient SMA coordinator 
Clinical outcomes EHR HbA1c, blood pressure, 
body mass index Collected during 
routine care 
(~quarterly)  Patient visit Data analyst 
Patient experience Qualitative 
Interviews Interview guide  > [ADDRESS_835957] 
session Patient Qualitative Co-I and 
PRA 
Practice-Level 
Fidelity, 
Effectiveness Intervention 
Fidelity  Tracking 
spreadsheet, 
observation TTIM Fidelity tool Intermittent, 
ongoing Clinical 
team, 
patients Co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_627326] (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 14 Table 4. Outcomes, Measures and Data Sources 
and 
Sustainability  Team-based care Survey Relational coordination 
survey80  Baseline, 9, 24 
months Clinical team PRA 
Quality of care Survey Assessment of Chronic 
Illness Care (ACIC)82  Baseline, 9, 24 
months Clinical team PRA 
Practice culture Survey Practice Culture 
Assessment (PCA) Baseline, 9, 24 
months Clinical team PRA 
Perceived value, 
resources 
required, burden 
to practices Qualitative 
Interviews Interview guide Baseline, 9, 24 
months Clinical team Qualitative Co-I and 
PRA 
Survey TDABC framework.83 Baseline, 9, 24 
months Clinical team Qualitative Co-I and 
PRA 
Quantitative data collection. Data collection procedures are as follows: Patient participation data  will be tracked by [CONTACT_627375] a spreadsheet. At each SMA session, the instructor will complete a check-in sheet noting the TTIM 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_627327], and provide this information to the SMA 
coordinator for data entry. Most patient surveys  will be administered to patients by [CONTACT_627376] (during SMA, 
by [CONTACT_155255], as determined in Aim 1a) prior to the first and last SMA sessions; As surveys are clinically 
relevant, they will be scored and made available to patients and instructors to inform discussion (and for patient-driven 
SMAs, topic selection) during the SMAs. Patient cost and time surveys  will be administered separately by a PRA with the 
patients recruited for patient interviews, as these cannot justifiably be considered part of clinical care. The SMA coordinator will attempt to collect surveys for all patien ts, including those who stop attending sessions. The SMA 
coordinator will be responsible for survey administration, sc oring and entry into a local database (e.g., a custom EHR 
template in the patient’s record or a separate database with the patient’s medical record number [MRN]
37). This ensures 
survey data can be linked at the patient level with clinical data. MRN will be replaced with a random identifier prior to 
transfer to the study team (IR-2). 
Clinical outcomes data  for each participating patient will be extracte d from the participating practices’ EHR for the 
period 9 months before and after each patient’s involvemen t in SMAs using chart review and extracts from practice 
backend EHR databases. EHR extracts will be requested for all patients enrolled to date at the mid-point and end of the 
implementation phase. Patients with diabetes are typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] s een in primary care every 3 months, or more often if poorly 
controlled, and data on HbA1c, body mass index (BMI), and blood pressure are collected routinely at these visits. Using data collected in the course of routine care is a pragmatic feature of this project, reducing costs and burden to practices and patients. Because all data will be gathered from the pr actice EHRs, availability of da ta will not be dependent on 
participation in interventions, allowing robust estimates of effectiveness of interventions among those for whom they are intended as well as sub-analyses among those who particip ate. These EHR extracts will include patient survey data, 
as described above. The SMA coordinator will provide a list of pa tients to a practice data analyst (an existing role in  
participating practices). The analyst will extract the requested da ta into flat files following sp ecifications provided by [CONTACT_5055], strip direct identifiers to create a HIPAA limit ed data set, and create a random unique patient identifier. 
Data will be transferred to the research team using a secu re cloud-based encrypted transfer mechanism (Egnyte.com), 
cleaned, and standardized across practices according to the OMOP common data model using middleware developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Kwan and other local informatics colleagues.
[ADDRESS_835958] and review of  data quality following recommendations for data quality checking in CER (e.g., 
assessing attribute domain constraints including ranges, relational  integrity rules, historical data rules including temporal 
components, and missingness).85 HIPAA data use agreements will be execut ed with participating practices prior to 
transfer of data. Drs. Kwan, Nease and Dickinson routinely use this approach through our data network infrastructure.  
Practice surveys  will be administered at baseline (pre-implementat ion state), 6-9 months (early impressions) and 
within 2 months of completion of SMAs (final impressions)  in the implementation phase; practices will be given the 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835959] 70% of all 
practice staff and providers, and 100% of those in volved in diabetes SMAs in the prior [ADDRESS_835960] for fidelity monitoring (Appendix C). A randomly sampled 10% of SMA sessions will be observed and coded for fidelity  to determine if sessions covered relevant TTIM topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], 
format was appropriate, and if sufficient time was devoted to the discussion and Q&A session.  
 
Qualitative data collection. We will conduct interviews with patients and practice staff and providers involved in SMAs 
to gather data for answering qualitative research qu estions on SMA experience, value and sustainability. 
Patient interviews. Interviews will be conducted by a qualitative PRA using a semi-structured interview guide, under 
the guidance of [CONTACT_105008]. Interviews will assess patient experience of SMAs specifically and diabetes care more 
generally. Probes will include the various elements of SMAs and which were most valuable (emphasizing exploration of 
the elements thought to reflect SDT constructs), reasons for participation or non-participation in SMAs, barriers and 
facilitators to participation, experience with care team  members, and effects on self-management behaviors.  
Interviews will be conducted with 3-[ADDRESS_835961] a variety of ages, race/ethnicity, genders, and participation experiences (high and low participation) 
as well as the two study arms (standard and patient-driven SMAs). For each SMA, the class roster will be reviewed by a 
professional research assistant (PRA) and the SMA coordinator. One or two patients per practice in the initial cohort of 
participants will be identified. The SMA coordinator will us e an opt-out procedure approved by [CONTACT_627377], mailing the pa rticipant a letter of invitation for the interview and that they can opt out of 
participation. If the patient declines, s/he will not be contact[CONTACT_627378]. The PRA will 
continue to schedule and interview part icipants in future cohorts until at least the minimum number of patients is 
obtained (35-40 per condition). Total interview numbers are expected to vary depending on saturation of themes across 
arms. These same patients will be invited to complete th e cost and time commitment survey. Participants will be 
compensated with a $[ADDRESS_835962]-implementation. 
Three to five key informants per practice  (all care team members involved in SMAs , varies by [CONTACT_3004]) at each time 
period will be interviewed individually, in person by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Ho ltrop (Co-I) or a PRA. Interview guides will cover practice 
perceptions of the value and sustainability (burden, complexity and potential for widespread uptake) of patient-driven and standardized diabetes SMAs. A semi-structured intervie w guide will be developed for each time period. Baseline 
interviews will focus on importance and in terest in the upcoming SMAs, factors th ought to affect adoption of the SMAs, 
and anticipated patient response to the SMAs. Midpoint and e ndpoint interviews will elicit the participant’s experiences 
with the SMAs, including a cognit ive task analysis of the intervention as de livered in the practice , to provide a detailed 
understanding of fidelity and any possible adapta tions, while illuminating gaps in understanding.
87 Endpoint interviews 
will also specifically focus on recommendations for other pr actices and plans for continuing SMAs. This information will 
be considered in light of contextual factors such as practice structure and patient panel characteristics.  
C.4.4.2d Analytic Plan (Methodology Standard IR-3) 
The analytic plan includes both Quantitative (section C4.4.2d.1) and Qualitative (section C4.4.2d.2) components. 
C4.4.2d.1 General Quantitative Approaches.  For this cluster randomized trial, desc riptive statistics will be computed for 
baseline patient and practice characteristics, initially reporting on differences between: (1) different intervention arms 
and (2) patient dropouts vs. non-dropouts (MD-4) . Patient-level covariates will be sc reened in bivariate analyses and 
included in multivariate analysis if related to the outcom e at p<.2, are associated with dropout, or used in the 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 16 randomization procedure.88 Covariates (to adjust for potential confounding) and potential moderators will include the 
following : mode of delivery of SMA (in-person vs. telehealth), age, gender, race/ethnicity, comorbidity index, insulin 
dependence, baseline diabetes distress, health literacy, and me ntal illness. Recent literature on cluster randomized trials 
notes that imbalance in covariates is more of a problem than for individually randomized trials, and covariates should be 
included to improve precision and should be selected prior to analysis.55,88,89 In the event normality assumptions are not 
met, we will use transformations to normalize distributions, ordinal or Poisson regression where appropriate, and/or the 
appropriate link function (e.g. logi t link for dichotomized measures).90-92 We will employ intent to treat analyses using 
general (generalized) linear mixed models  (GLMMs) to incorporate data structures that are both hierarchical and 
longitudinal.91,93-97 Hypothesis tests will be two-sided with ɲ=.05 or p values reported. Goodness of fit statistics and 
model fitting diagnostics will be used to assess for influentia l points, outliers, overdispersion and heteroscedasticity and 
to evaluate alternative model specifications.90 All statistical analyses will be pe rformed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS 
Institute Inc., Cary, N.C.). 
Missing Data (MD-2). Prior to beginning analyses described below to address study hypotheses, we will examine the 
data carefully to determine whether patterns of missing  are ignorable (MCAR or MAR)  or non-ignorable (MNAR).98-101 If 
so, we will employ likelihood–based meth ods that utilize all available data (MD- 4), adjusting for covariates that are 
associated with missingness (MD-3). If missingness is  non-ignorable we will employ pattern mixture models. 102 
Sensitivity analyses will be carried out usi ng multiple imputation approaches (MD-5). 
Quantitative analysis plan. The following analyses will be carried out by  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Dickinson and the quantitative analyst. 
In recent literature on cluster randomized trials, general (or generalized) linear mixed models, adjusted for covariates 
are recommended for analysis of cluster randomized trials,89,103 even after using such procedures as constrained 
randomization.54   Likelihood based models using all available data are the preferred method for analyzing longitudinal 
data with dropout under MAR conditions.104-107 This will be our primary analysis; however, we will examine change 
scores as outcomes, adjusting for baseline, in sensitivity analyses.  
To test hypothesis I (comparing patient-centered outcomes): The outcomes for these analyses will be patients’ 
scores on each of these measures at baseline and follow-up (1st and last session). The structure of the data is hierarchical 
(patients nested within practices) and  repeated measures on patients over time. In the basic mixed effects model 
shown below, Y tij is the score for patient i at time t (baseline: time=0, or follow-up: time=1) in practice j. Intervention is 
an indicator variable: 0=standard SMA, 1=patient-driven SM A. Covariates will be included in all models but are not 
shown here for ease of understanding.   
  Y tij = J000 + J010 (intervention) + J100 (time)  + J110 (intervention x time)  + u 00j   +  r0ij  +   Htij 
 
where J000 represents the initial status for standard SMA;  J010 represents the baseline difference between the patient 
driven SMA practices and standard SMA practices (should be close to 0);  J100 is the pre-post change in scores for the 
standard SMA practices; J110 is the difference in pre-post change (i.e. difference in difference) for standard vs. patient-
driven SMA practices. r tij is a patient random effect and U 00j is a practice random effect, independent of r tij and assumed 
to have a bivariate normal distribution over practices;   Htij is residual variance. Thus, the intervention effect of patient-
driven vs standard SMAs can be tested as H 0: J110=0 vs H 1: J110тϬ͘ 
In the model above we use practice level random effects. Howe ver, it is possible that groups (within practices) are a 
greater source of variation than practices per se. Therefore,  we will estimate variance components for groups within 
practices and retain both random effects if there is sufficient variability. If it is not possible to retain both group and 
practice random effects, we will test each separately an d examine model fit and varian ce components to determine 
which to retain.  
To test hypothesis II (comparing clinical outcomes): Outcomes for these analyses will be obtained from EHR data 
covering 9 months’ post-baseline for each patient. The baselin e measure for each clinical outcome will be defined as the 
last recorded value prior to enrollment in the study. All subsequent clinical measures through 9 months after enrollment 
will be used in analysis. Analytic approaches will be similar to those described for hypothesis 1, with time will be coded 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835963] SMA practices differ from patients in patient-driven SMA practices (time x arm interaction term in mixed model notation). Hypothesis III.  Compared to standardized diabetes SMAs, practices using patient-driven diabetes SMAs will exhibit 
greater improvements in quality and team-based care, as measured by [CONTACT_627379]. 
To test hypothesis III (comparing patient reach and engagement). The outcomes for these analyses will be 1) 
acceptance of services (Y/N), and 2) number of SMA se ssions attended. General or generalized linear mixed effects 
models (depending on distribution of outcomes variable) wi th a practice random effect will be used for analysis. In 
addition to including covariates as described above, we will test whether mental illness is a moderator of intervention 
effectiveness. This will involve including a main effect for mental illness, along with an arm x mental illness interaction 
term (mixed model notation). 
To test hypothesis IV (comparing practice quality and team based care): Outcomes for this analysis will be scores 
on the relational coordination survey an d the ACIC at baseline, 9, and 24 months. Analytic approaches will be similar to 
those described for hypotheses I and II. 
Heterogeneity of treatment effects (HTE) (HT-2).  It is not known at this time whether patient-driven SMAs will 
benefit certain patients more than ot hers. Thus, in addition to the analyses described above, we will conduct 
exploratory analyses to test for potential effect modificati on (moderator of intervention effectiveness) by [CONTACT_627380] (HT-1). While this study may be powered to detect effect modification with large effect sizes, the 
planned sample size of [ADDRESS_835964] above for analysis of hypothesis IV with mental illness as a potential moderator; 
mental illness comorbidity is our primary target for HTE anal yses and will be examined for every hypothesis above.  
Additional sub-populations of interest are defined by [CONTACT_547], Hispanic ethnicity, and health  literacy; existing evidence 
suggests possible differential participation and effectiveness for these groups.
29,108,109 The general hypothesis for these 
moderator analyses is as follows: The effects of the patient-driven vs standardized SMAs on diabetes distress (and other 
primary and secondary outcomes) will differ for patients with  mental illness compared to pa tients without mental illness 
(male vs. female, Hispanic ethnicity vs not, high vs. low heal th literacy, food security, cohort conducted in English or 
Spanish, virtual vs. in-person, insulin de pendence). To assess for possible heteroge neity of treatment effects by [CONTACT_627381] (effect modification, moderator) additional analyses  will be performed including the appropriate two and three-
way interactions between treatment arm and mode: arm x modality interaction for single outcomes, arm x time x modality along with relevant two-way interactions for long itudinal analyses. Additionally, sensitivity analyses will 
performed to further explore delivery mode. Additionally, we will examine vari ability between SMA groups separately 
for standard and patient-driven arms to  determine if the group itself (especially in the patient-driven arm) is an 
important contributor to differences in outcomes. 
 For hypotheses I, II and IV, moderator analyses involve in clusion of main effect for time, arm, moderator variable, 
time x arm, time x moderator, arm x moderator, and time x arm x moderator interaction term  in the model ( HT-3 ). The 
three-way interaction term tests for diffe rential intervention effectiveness in subgroups identified by [CONTACT_627382].  Due to the exploratory nature of these analyses, we do not plan to adjust for multiple comparisons in 
moderator analyses using the subgroups de fined above. However, inte rpretation of results will include reporting on all 
subgroup analyses and take into account the number of subgroup analyses performed ( HT-4 ). 
Patient cost/time and practice resource/time data analysis . The following analyses will be conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Gritz. 
Patient cost/time and practice resource and staff time use data will be examined using simple descriptive measures, 
including minimum and maximum values (range) and means. De scriptive measures will be calculated for practices in 
each arm of the study as well as for each type of practice an d by [CONTACT_627383]. To examine the extent to 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 18 which practice resources are related to patient participatio n in SMAs, we will examine multiple values calculated for 
each measure, including a practice-level value, per-patient th at agrees to complete these measures, and the value of the 
measure per-patient that completes different numbers of sessi ons. Outlier values of these measures will be confirmed 
with practices prior to the final analysis of these measures. Re sults from the analysis of practice resources and staff time 
use will not involve formal statistical tests of differences, as these data will be used for descriptive rather than 
comparative purposes. 
 
C4.4.2d.2 Qualitative Analysis   
To answer the qualitative research questions (QRQ 1-5, Sect ion C.3), a qualitative analysis of practice and patient 
interview data will be conducted under the direction of [CONTACT_105008] with assistance from qualitative PRAs (team of 2-3) 
and with ongoing input and direction from the core study te am. Interview data will be transcribed, cleaned and entered 
in the ATLAS.ti qualitative software prog ram. Qualitative analysis proceeds as a small group process to capi[INVESTIGATOR_627328], resulting in a rich result, accurate to the data. For all analyses, we will begin 
with a grounded hermeneutic editing approach to the data.110 This approach will help to  identify themes that are 
“grounded” or developed from an interpretation of the data. The analyst team will read through 5 to 10 interviews and 
together discuss and determine the key themes and the associated definitions and labels (“codes”). These codes will be vetted with the study team and stakeholde r representatives. After initial codes ar e established, the analysts will code – 
first together, then independently – the data using a coding  and editing approach as outlined by [CONTACT_105002], and will 
compare and reconcile coding until achieving a high degree (> 80%) of conceptual inter-rater reliability. The text will be 
sectioned into segments representing categories of responses.  
To answer QRQ 1-3 (patient experience, effects on self-management, and engagement), data from the patient 
interviews and program observation field note data will be used in the qualitative analyt ic approach noted directly 
above, with focus on the grou nded theory analysis. To anal yze the patient data, codes will be created and utilized to 
interpret the patient data . Within ATLAS.ti, patient interviews will be gr ouped into two families: standardized SMA and 
patient-driven SMA participants. We will examine the code s across these two groups by [CONTACT_627384]-management behaviors.  A priori  coding using a template framework will be used in both groups to 
identify evidence of self-determination  theory (SDT) constructs. A specific se t of codes (i.e., competence, autonomy, 
relatedness) will be used to gather evidence to support or refute patient expression of SDT constructs interacting with the intervention. Finally, examination of  patient expressions of reasons for part icipation (or non-part icipation) will be 
examined with data regarding actual participation to corro borate and explain quantitative results. The final phase 
consists of preparing interpretive summaries detailing the fi ndings of prior phases. All phases of data processing and 
analysis will be cross-checked to ensure consistency in  application of coding and classification procedures.  
The analysis of QRQ-4 (practice sustaina bility) and QRQ-5 (practice value) will proceed in two directions: 1) Develop 
overarching themes across all practices; 2) identify factors (practice context, type, intervention arm) that explain 
perceived value and sustainability of SMAs.  Using the approach described above, o verarching themes related to the 
data emerge to describe the experience of the practice member s as they interact with the in tervention. This analysis will 
discover if there are key underlying characteristics of the prov iders or practices such as belief systems or mindsets, or if 
there are practical reasons that make SMAs work or not work  and to what extent. Ongoing meetings will be held with 
the overall team considering existing literature and associat ed experiences such that co rroborating/legitimating will 
occur to seek out additional data to confirm or refute insights  from the analysis. After initia l analysis has identified data 
to support one theme or interpretation, particular effort w ill be devoted to finding negative or disconfirming evidence. 
Practice members from  practices for each type (FQHC, private)  will be selected for checking and revision of the thematic 
groupi[INVESTIGATOR_104972].  
Second, a matrix approach will be used to examine specific identified factors across practice “cases” to identify if 
there is a pattern of configurations that may explain results.  Each practice will be represented as a case (row in the 
matrix) and the conditions of interest (practice types an d context and intervention ch aracteristics) will form the 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 19 columns. These configurations of conditions with overall perceived value will be compared using qualitative methods 
and the formal technique of qu alitative comparative analysis.111-113 This analysis will help id entify factors important to 
the relative effectiveness of SMAs across model types (sta ndard or patient-driven) and practice characteristics. [CONTACT_627411] has experience with this approach and has used it in previous studies.114  
 
Reporting plan (IR-6). The fidelity and participation checklists will ca pture differential particip ation, which may influence 
the effectiveness of the comparators. Progress reports will deta il recruitment, enrollment, co mpleteness of follow-up by 
[CONTACT_105150], internal consistency of measures, primary analysis of all outcomes, and any exploratory analyses. For 
manuscripts, practice and patient recruitment and retentio n will be tracked and reported  in accordance with the 
CONSORT statement for cluster randomized tria ls and the RE-AIM extended CONSORT diagram.115,116   
D. Patient Population and Subgroups (RQ-3 and RQ-4) 
Up to 1000 patients (45.5 patients/practice * 22 
practices) will be enrolled in  either standardized or 
patient-driven SMAs and will contribute data to the 
evaluation. Inclusion criteria for patients include adults 
at least [ADDRESS_835965] the area in the next year. These criteria  will be finalized with the 
stakeholders.  Subgroups include patients with comorbid mental illness (e.g., depression, anxiety, 
bipolar disorder). We anticipate each practice will need 
to invite at least 150 patients to participate in SMAs in order to successfully enroll 46 patients who agree to participate (50% treatment acceptance rate) and retain at least 36 patients who contribute complete data to the evaluation (15-20% attrition). Barriers to enrollment will be addressed as part of stakeholder meetings throughout 
the implementation period (see engage ment plan). Practices will use their usual procedures to maximize patient 
attendance at visits, including calling pa tients to remind them of upcoming visi ts, arranging for transportation (often 
needed for patients in FQHCs), and calling patients who do  not show for a scheduled visit to assess barriers to and 
encourage future attendance (PC-2, retention). We will also attempt to collect all follow-up survey data from patients 
who discontinue participation, through email or telephone. Table 5. Recruitment Plan for Prospective Studies:
 
Estimated number of potentially eligible 
study participants (describe how this number was determined [e.g., EHR, claims 
data, clinic logs, administrative data, 
other]): Participating practices see on 
average ~500 unique adult patients/year with diabetes 
(estimated from EHR data) 
Total number of study participants 
expected to be screened: N/A (screening does not apply) 
Total number of study participants 
expected to be eligible of those screened: N/A 
Target sample size (use same number 
stated in milestones): 1000 patients (45.5/practice *22 
practices) 
If applicable, total number of practices/centers that will enroll participants: [ADDRESS_835966] participant enrolled 
(month after project initiation): Month 9 (pi[INVESTIGATOR_138886]) 
Projected month last participant enrolled 
(month after project initiation): Month 45  
Projected rate of enrollment (anticipated 
number enrolled per month of enrollment period): 1 new cohort of 8-10 patients per 
practice every 3 months 
Estimated percentage of participant dropout: 15-20% 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 20 E. Investigators and Environment (Criterion 4) 
As noted above, this study will take place in the CU-SOM’s 
ACCORDS in collaboration with member practices of the SNOCAP PBRNs. The research team has considerable expertise 
and experience in practice-bas ed research, diabetes self-
management interventions, study design and analysis, 
implementation science, stakeholder engagement, mental and behavioral health, and mixed methods research. [CONTACT_255461], the PI, is a social health psychologist and health services researcher with experience in mixed methods research and 
application of psychological theory to the design and testing of 
interventions for chronic disease management in primary care settings. She is the Associat e Director of SAFTINet, a 
distributed data network and SNOCAP-affiliated PBRN with 
infrastructure linking clinical, cl aims and patient-reported data. 
With the support of the Co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706]-investigators, with whom 
she has a track record of successful collabo ration, she is well-prepared to lead this study. [CONTACT_627412], the Co-PI, is a 
clinical psychologist and director of research and evaluation at the Jefferson Center for Mental Health with a history of 
successful collaboration with the clinics engaged in this study. She has extensive experience in stakeholder engagement, 
mental health and primary care, and leading implementation of similar chronic disease management programs.  
[CONTACT_627413] is well-known for his seminal work on the RE-AIM framework, and implementation and testing of 
diabetes SMS interventions. [CONTACT_627414] is a family medicine physician with clinical experience with diabetes, community engagement core leader for ACCORDS and Colorado’s clinical  and translation science award (CTSA), and the director of 
SNOCAP.  [CONTACT_627415] is a senior biostatistician with expe rience in cluster randomized trials and multilevel modeling. 
[CONTACT_105008] is an experienced mixed-methods researcher with expertise in qualitative methods, and has published 
widely on interventions based on the CCM in primary care. [CONTACT_105010] is an economist with experience in collecting and analyzing patient out of pocket costs and time use, as well as practice resource and staff time use data for diabetes prevention and other interventions. [CONTACT_327821], psychiatrist and health services researcher, led the TTIM development and implementation, including intervention packaging, training , and fidelity monitoring.  [CONTACT_105055] is a clinical health 
psychologist with experience coordinating and leading diabetes SMAs at participating practices.  
Selection of study sites. The participating organizations have longstan ding relationships around collaboration in 
research and QI as part of our PBRNs, and for medical and be havioral healthcare integration initiatives in Colorado. They 
expressed considerable interest in participating as they see the patient-driven SMAs as an opportunity to improve diabetes care in their practices. Furthermore, they perceive both SMA models as readily fitting into existing clinical 
workflows and diabetes care initiatives, and intend to disseminate patient-driven SMAs to other practices if successful (see Letters of Support). Integrated behavioral health and primar y care is in place in all practices that have signed letters 
of support. Peer mentor resources are available through co ntracts with Community Mental Health Clinics for practices 
that do not already have these resources on staff. Therefore, availability of personnel is not expected to be a barrier to 
participation.  
 
F.  Engagement Plan (Criterion 6)  
This proposal emerged from strong patient and practice stakeholder engagement using BCT. Three 
patients/caregivers and three providers participated in preparing this proposal, and intend to continue upon funding.  
Our BCT group advocated for studying effective and engaging mo dels of diabetes group visits, an issue of importance to 
many of our PBRN practices.  Our patient and practice stakeholders indicated group visits can be plagued by [CONTACT_627385] (which makes practices relu ctant to consistently offer SMAs) and “information overload” (which makes 
patients reluctant to participate and may exacerbate diabetes distress).
39 Still, patients felt SMAs were an appropriate Table 6. Estimated Final Racial/Ethnic and Gender Enrollment Table 
Race Male (N) Female (N) Total (N) 
American Indian/Alaska 
Native 4 4 8 
Asian 15 15 30 
Black/African American 27 27 54 
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2 2 4 
White 444 444 888 
Multi-race 8 8 16 
Total 500 500 1.000 
Ethnicity Male (N) Female (N) Total (N) 
Hispanic (Latino/Latina) 290 290 580 
Non-Hispanic 210 210 420 
Total 500 500 1,000 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 21 forum for DSME/SMS, and practices appreciate the effi ciency of offering DSME/SMS in a group setting.  The analytic-
deliberative model of stakeholder engagement (described above) provides a backdrop for ensuring the six engagement 
principles continue to be front and center in our stakeholde r engagement efforts. Decision making will occur at multiple 
levels: high-level decisions (e.g., the overall targeted patient population) will be made at stakeholder meetings, while 
local decisions (e.g., specific workflow s to identify the targeted population) will be made at local implementation 
meetings and in consultation with participating providers and staff. Patients and other stakeholders will participate at all 
levels of decision making, providing input on planning, implementation, and dissemination of findings. For all phases of 
the project, the engagement process will involve 1) collabora tive agenda setting for stakeh older meetings; 2) meetings 
led by [CONTACT_627386], experience and perspectives; 3) 
circulating meeting summaries to all stakeholders with majo r decisions made and remaining questions; and 4) inviting 
feedback on decisions through email or in dividual meetings (for those less comfor table in group discussions). This helps 
ensure transparency, trust, and honesty; eliciting perspectives  of all partners contributes to co-learning. The research 
team will ensure agendas are clearly defined and well-organi zed, and held in convenient , accessible locations; this 
respects the stakeholders’ time.  Communication outside group settings will be done at a time convenient to partners, using their preferred communication strategy. Patient and pr actice stakeholder partners will receive compensation for 
participation in stakeholder and implementation planning  meetings, reviewing materials and providing input on 
decisions as described in the budget justification.  
1. PLANNING THE STUDY: Stakeholder engagement in planning to date has been described above. The stakeholders will 
inform the process of implementation of patient-driven and standardized SMAs, help refine the research protocol 
(including outcomes assessment, evaluating fidelity to the SMA models, and recruitment), and contribute to 
interpretation of findings and dissemination in the literatur e and in practice. Details about stakeholder engagement in 
planning the implementation has been described in Aim 1a.  
2. CONDUCTING THE STUDY: Stakeholder partners (patients and practice re presentatives) will participate in the study 
conduct by [CONTACT_627387], and suggesting changes in approach should the rate of 
enrollment lag behind milestone goals - each providing their own perspective. There are often unforeseen barriers and 
challenges in implementation; stakeholders can also contribute to troubleshooting these barriers. The stakeholders may have to decide, for instance, the extent to which elements determine to be required elements need to be adapted or modified. Health plan stakeholders will inform reimbursement plans.  Quarterly stakeholder conference calls are planned 
throughout the 24-month implementation phase.   
3. DISSEMINATING THE STUDY RESULTS: Patient partners will be engaged in dissemination by 1) contributing to 
interpretation of results from the patient and family perspect ive, 2) translating findings into messages that help other 
patients make decisions about whether or not to participate in SMAs, 3) participating in conference presentations (co-authoring and attending conferences), 4) contributing to framing and conclusions in published manuscripts (as co-
authors). Additionally, depending on the results, patient partners may advise adding or eliminating other features of SMAs, and may serve as advocates to the practices and payers to support maintaining the patient-driven SMA model.  Similarly, practice and health plan stakeholder representati ves will contribute to interpre tation of findings from the 
practice and health system perspectives, and to disseminat ion in the peer-reviewed literat ure. They will help prepare 
briefs on the value of patient-driven versus standardized SMAs and other information relevant to potential adopting 
organizations such as personnel, space and scheduling requ irements, reimbursement strategies, and related issues.  
Practice and health plan stakeholders will also ultimately  determine whether to promote adoption of standardized or 
patient-driven SMAs, and to advise the research team on oppo rtunities for further research on additional variations of 
SMAs and/or larger scale implementation and dissemination trials.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 22  
DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION POTENTIAL  
For detailed instructions, refer to the Application Guidelines for your PFA. Do not exceed two pages.  
 
A. Describe the potential for disseminating and implementing the results of this research in other settings.   
Highly qualified researchers, innovative community partners, and patient and provider stakeholders experienced in 
intervention studies and program development worked closely together to develop the research questions and intervention to fit with existing clinical structures (e.g.,  SMAs) with minimal disruption and burden to primary care 
clinicians. Diabetes group visits are employed at the partic ipating clinics (e.g., Denver Health had 858 SMAs with 223 
patients in a year), and incorporated into clinical flow and billing practices,  thus providing reimbursement models.  
Novel to this project’s design, is the focus on the delivery  of the SMAs, i.e., the comparison of the patient driven 
SMA model to a standardized SMA model while using the sa me TTIM curriculum. Patient stakeholders chose TTIM for 
diabetes education in the context of SMAs because (1) they resonated with the TTIM content, and (2) TTIM is flexible enough to be delivered in either manner (patient-centered vs. standardized). Both SMA models have potential benefits for the patients and providers/clinics. Although diabetes SMAs are accepted as a standard of care, they currently are not “standardized” in delivery. The proposed standardized SMA model  would allow for both ease of dissemination as well as 
provide data about which SMA components lead to better outcomes which currently is a gap in the literature. The 
patient driven SMA model  , conceptualized by [CONTACT_627388], is designed for meeting patients “where they 
are at” in terms of their medical and psychosocial needs regarding diabetes self-management, and is augmented by [CONTACT_627389].  The patient driven SMA model may provide a relative advantage over the standardized SMA model in terms of 
patient engagement and clinical outcomes as it is customized for patients’ self-management needs. Thus, through the comparison of these two delivery models, the study will provid e outcomes that allow practices to decide which delivery 
approach makes the most sense within their practices and for which patients.  
Dissemination plan. We will disseminate findings via messages and strategies tailored to key audiences, who have 
different information needs, preferences, and perspectives regarding the decisional dilemma of how and whether to offer or participate in diabetes SMAs (T able 7). Study practices will disseminate the results within their organizations, 
and in turn, these organizations will help disseminate results to patients and their communities, behavioral health and 
medical providers, health plans, state and national profe ssional organizations. There is  a key focus on stakeholder 
engagement (patients, providers, and health plans) in the di ssemination process,  who will be invited to be co-authors 
on manuscripts, professional conference and community pres entations, and in electronic media dissemination to hold 
true to the spi[INVESTIGATOR_627329]. The research team will also be available for consultation to 
other clinic sites who wish to implement the SMA models. 
Table 7. Dissemination message and strategy by [CONTACT_627390]: Patients 
Messages: 1) Reasons to participate in SMAs, 2) 
Anticipated patient costs, and 3) Effect on patient 
centered outcomes (study results)  x One page infographics.  Includes key patient messages about SMAs to 
be displayed in clinic waiting ro oms, and on clinics’ websites.  
x In person, local meetings. Includes patient stakeholders, and local 
patient advisory boards from participating clinics and organizations  
Audience: Practices/Providers  
Messages: 1) This a way to engage patients and 
achieve patient centeredness, 2) Informs 
infrastructure/resources needs to deliver SMAs 
and to optimize quality of care, and 3) how to bill x Customized provider and patient infographics . Includes study results, 
patient/provider testimonials, potential impact for patients/providers  
x Development plan . For further spread of  intervention within 
participating health care organizations 
Audience: Local and Regional Networks and Organizations, e.g., Colorado Community Health Ne twork (primary care providers), 
Colorado Behavioral Health Council Integrated Care Advisory Board, Colorado Coalition for the Medically Underserved (CCMU), 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 23 State Networks Of Colorado Ambulatory Practices and Partners (SNOCAP; see letter of support).  
Messages:  1) Use of SMAs to increase patient 
engagement and clinical outcomes, 2) Use of 
patient driven SMAs with a multidisciplinary team 
to enhance patient engagement and clinical 
outcomes (if our findings support this), and 3) Implications for policy, workforce development, 
integrated care and alternative payment models  x Conference Presentations. Presentation materials developed and 
presented jointly by [CONTACT_627391] 
x Webinar. Via statewide webinar discuss findings and their implications  
x Media outlets.  UCD’s Office of Media Relations and Jefferson Center’s 
Department of Marketing will assist in preparing print, broadcast (radio 
or television), online interviews, and press releases about our findings.  
x Websites. (e.g., UCD’s SNOCAP’s and Jefferson Center’s Office of 
Health Care Transformation websites, Facebook, and Twitter accounts  
Audience: Health Plans , e.g., Colorado Department of Healthcare Policy and Financing (HCPF) administers Medicaid for the State 
of Colorado, and Colorado Prevention Alliance (CPA) a collaborative of public and private health insurers (see letter of suppor t) 
Messages: 1. Implications for payment 
methodologies for sustaining the intervention 
model, 2.Widespread dissemination of findings to their constituent providers and patient 
populations  
 x Presentations  to HCPF and CCMU describing results, patient and 
provider perspectives on the value to patients and resources required 
to deliver both SMA models 
x Briefs will be created to educate local, state, and federal policy makers, 
health care organizations, and patient-advocacy entities about the implications of findings for impleme ntation and sustainability; and will  
describe resources require d for SMAs’ set up in clinical practice, how to 
identify patients, and how to bill and document for SMAs  
Audience: National Organizations,  e.g., the North American Primary Care Rese arch Group (NAPCRG), AcademyHealth, SAMHSA-
HRSA Center for Integrated Health Solutions, the Collaborative Family Healthcare Association, American Association of Family 
Physicians, Agency for Heathcare Quality and Research, Peers for Progress and the American Diabetes Association 
Messages:  1) Effectiveness of SMAs to increase 
patient engagement and clinical outcomes, 2) 
Implementation Processes for  SMAs  and 3) Implications for policy, workforce development, 
integrated care, and alternative payment models 
  x Peer reviewed manuscripts  will be developed and submitted to inform 
other researchers, clinicians, professional organizations, and the public 
x Presentations  will be submitted to national conferences 
x National organizations media  will be contact[CONTACT_627392] 
B. Describe possible barriers to disseminating and implementing the results of this research in other settings.  
Challenges to dissemination and implementation of this project are not unique to health care organizations that 
employ peer mentors and involved integrated care te ams that work across primary care and mental health 
organizations, i.e., funding non-licensed peer mentors and care  coordination and other integrated care team activities in 
a current health care system where fu nding streams for medical and behavioral  health are bifurcated. Both the CU 
Department of Family Medicine and JCMH’s Office for Heal thcare Transformation are he avily involved in clinical 
transformation and health care financing reform to support integrated care efforts and are working developi[INVESTIGATOR_627330]. Al so of note, is that the init ial infrastructure set up and 
resources needed to implement the patient-driven SMA may be require additional startup costs for some clinics so it is important to demonstrate that this model shows signific ant clinical outcomes and patient engagement over a 
standardized SMA for a clinic’s population of patients with diabetes and/or a subset of this population that has significant psychosocial distress.   
C. Describe how you will make study results available to study participants after you complete your analyses.   
At enrollment, all study participants will be asked if they ar e interested in having study findings shared directly with 
them at the study conclusion. Interested participants will receive a summary of study results and will be notified of the 
possibility to engage in further dissemination activities if  interested. Study findings w ill be provided as one page 
‘infographic briefs’, a plain language communication form  that our department has pi[INVESTIGATOR_627331]. The study team (including patient and provider stakeholders) will assure that the study findings will be 
communicated in a manner that insures relevance and un derstandability to study participants, including personal 
patient narratives to illustrate study result s.  If we successfully receive further funding for dissemination activities, we 
will further partner with local public he alth departments, state organizations, healthcare consumer groups, to create 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 24 written and web based communication strategies (e.g., webinars, social media).   
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Describe the protection of human subjects involved in your research  
OVERVIEW 
This research will be undertaken with the strictest procedures in place to assure the safety, anonymity, and confidentiality of the research subjects involved.  This research protocol will be reviewed by [CONTACT_627393] (COMIRB), the body that governs human subjects’ research at the University of Colorado Denver (UCD) and other local institutions. The study methods for the current proposal, including techniques for 
recruitment, conduct of a cluster randomized, pragmatic comp arative effective trial of inte rvention strategies, reviews 
of existing administrative databases, and on-site data colle ction, are similar to methods used in prior IRB-approved 
protocols directed by [CONTACT_3476].  If practices involved in the study require their own institution’s IRB approval, these will also be obtained prior to starting any study proced ures. Protection of human subjects applies to three parts of 
the proposed project: 1) qualitative in terviews and surveys among providers and staff at participating practices; 2) 
qualitative interviews and out of pocket surveys among patients  at participating practices; and 3) patient-level clinical 
and patient reported outcomes via analyses of local admini strative datasets or electronic medical record data. The 
intervention (training and implementation of SMAs guided by [CONTACT_5051]) is delivered at the practice-level, such 
that actual patient care (delivery of SMAs by [CONTACT_627394]) is considered quality improvement. Thus, patients are not considered enrolled in research unless they are recruited for the interviews and out of pocket cost surveys.   A. RISKS TO HUMAN SUBJECTS 
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics and Design: 
This study involves both primary data collection via qualit ative and self-report surveys and a secondary analysis of 
existing clinical, demographic and administrative data from  local practice electronic health records (“EHR data”) 
maintained by [CONTACT_627395]. Intervention implementation strategies informed and refined through focus groups and qualitative interviews will be developed and pi[INVESTIGATOR_48085] t-tested during the first year, implemented in years two and 
three, and assessed in year four. A cluster randomized, pragmatic comparative effectiv e trial will be utilized, where 
practices will be assigned either to standardized or patient-driven SMA intervention groups to compare the 
effectiveness of the intervention strategies.  Patients in standardized groups will receive the standard intervention model at the participating sites.  Patien ts in patient-driven groups will receive enhanced SMAs as developed during year 
one.    
1. Practice Interviews: Selected practice staff and providers in participating practices will be asked to participate in 
key informant interviews to assess practice culture and co ntext. These interviews will be completed at baseline 
and again at 9 and 24 months. 
2. Practice Surveys: All practice staff and providers in pa rticipating practices will be asked to complete survey 
measures assessing team-based care and quality of care. These surveys will be complete d at baseline and again at 
[ADDRESS_835967]  surveys: Patient interviews and out of pocket cost and time surveys will 
assess patient experience as well as patient-incurred costs of SMAs specifically and diabetes care more generally. 
Interviews will be conducted 35-40 purposefully selected  patients sampled from each of the experimental 
conditions. 
4. Patient Reported Outcomes Measures: Patient surveys a ssessing outcome measures selected by [CONTACT_627396], as 
part of clinical care. These data will be linked with clinical outcome data and stored in local data bases. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 25 5. Patient-level Clinical Outcomes data from the EHR: 
We will gather clinical outcomes from pa rticipating practices’ electronic health records (EHR). Diagnosis data from the 
EHR will be used to compute a comorbidit y index and to corroborate diagnosis of mental illness. Prescription data from 
the EHR will be used to assess insulin dependence. Clinical outcomes data for each participating patient will be extracted from the participating practices’ electronic health records for the period [ADDRESS_835968] akeholders.  Subgroups include patients with 
comorbid mental illness (depression, anxiety, bipolar diso rder, psychotic disorders). Given the patient populations 
represented by [CONTACT_517533], this sample will include represen tation from a number of AHRQ priority groups: inner-city; 
low income; minority; women; children; elderly; and those who need chronic and/or mental health care .  
 
Sources of Materials  
Practice Surveys and Interviews:  Practice staff and providers in participating practices will be asked to complete survey 
measures assessing aspects of practice context including measures of team based care (relational coordination) and 
quality of care (assessment of chronic illness care). Sele cted practice staff and providers involved in SMAs in 
participating practices will be asked to participate in key informan t interviews, conducted by [CONTACT_627397], includ ing perceived value and sustainability, 
and to complete surveys assessing workflows and resource requirements to deliver SMAs. Interviews will be conducted by a trained and experienced qualitative interviewer. RedCap will be used to collect and ma nage survey data. Interviews 
will be recorded, transcribed and loaded into a qu alitative analysis software program (Atlas.ti).  
Patient Cost Surveys and Interviews:  A purposefully sampled subset of patients will also participate in qualitative 
interviews and complete cost surveys to assess patient expe rience and out of pocket costs of participating in SMAs 
specifically and diabetes care more generally. Patients w ill complete self-report surveys about cost of care. Interview 
guides and recorded intervie ws will support the qualitative data collection process.
 Interviews will be recorded, 
transcribed and loaded into a qualitativ e analysis software program (Atlas.ti).  
 
Patient Reported and Clinical Outcomes from the EHR:  This study also involves secondary use of data from electronic 
health records and patient reported data which reside in lo cal databases maintained by [CONTACT_627398]. The 
data to be requested from the practice will be limited data sets, as they will include dates of services (for determining 
exposure and outcomes periods), but otherwise contain no direct identifiers, as defined by [CONTACT_2373]. The patient reported outcome data are from surveys to be administered in the context of receiving care in SMAs, and include information 
about patient health behaviors, quality of life,  disease di stress. The data from the EHR to  be used for this study will 
include health, demographic and health care utilization data, in cluding information on diagnoses, laboratory tests, vital 
signs, patient demographics, encounters and procedures.  
 
Potential Risks:  
Minimal risks to human subjects are anticipated for this study. There is a slight risk of psychological discomfort and/or a 
time burden associated with participating in qualitative interviews or completing the self-report surveys. There is also a 
slight risk of loss of confidentiality and/or anonymity.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835969] RISKS  
Informed Consent: 
For qualitative interviews with providers and staff:  Each participant will receive an information consent (also known as 
“postcard consent” document, as approved by [CONTACT_38301]’s Institutional Review Board; we will request a 
waiver of documentation of consent for these interviews. Th is will be presented in person by [CONTACT_627399]. The consent form will inform participants that participation is voluntary, that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time, that all information is to be kept confidential, that their id entity will not be revealed, that a code number will be used to track all of their information, 
and that only the research investigators will have access to  the data. Written consent forms will be kept in a locked 
cabinet in the PI’s private, locked office.  All study result s will be published and presented in aggregate form only, with 
no individual responses identified.  
 For surveys with providers and staff:  We will request a waiver of documentation of consent for participation in surveys, 
because the only risks to participants relate to a potential lo ss of confidentiality.  Any br each of confidentiality will be 
strictly guarded against, and any unintentional breach of confidentiality would not be anticipated to affect the employability, reputation, or financial status of a participan t. We will use an information (or postcard) consent as the 
first page of practice surveys, informing respondents of the purpose of the surveys, confidentiality protections, and that 
completion is not-mandatory. All study results will be pu blished and presented in aggregate form only, with no 
individual responses identified.  
 
For qualitative interviews and out of pocket cost surveys with patients:  Each patient will receive an information consent 
document, as approved by [CONTACT_38301]’s Institutional Review Board; we will request a waiver of 
documentation of consent. This will be presented in person by [CONTACT_627400]. Th e consent form will inform participants that participation is voluntary, that 
they are free to withdraw from the study at any time, that all information is to be kept confidential, that their identity will not be revealed, that a code number  will be used to track all of their in formation, and that only the research 
investigators will have access to the data. Written consent form s will be kept in a locked cabinet in the PI’s private, 
locked office.  All study results will be published and presented in aggregate form only, with no individual responses identified. 
 
For surveys (non-cost related) and EHR data from patients: We will request a waiver of consent for linked survey and 
EHR data. These data will be transferred to the research team  as a HIPAA-defined limited data set (including only birth 
dates, service dates and practice zip codes), with no direct identifiers. We will execute data use agreements with practices to use these data for evaluation of study outcomes.   
Protections Against Risk:  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_627332]. Patient survey data will be 
collected as part of their care, and linke d with EHR data as described above. Investigators will not have access to contact 
[CONTACT_627401]. Identifying 
information will not be linked to participan t responses, such that all participant data will be confidential. The clinical 
data for this study will be requested from the EHR of the participating health care organization using established secure query protocols and query technology. Random identifiers will be assigned to patients who agree to participate; these 
random identifiers will be stored in the distributed databases to allow linkage of clinical and survey data. Required IRB 
approvals and data use agreements between the University of Colorado Denver and participating organizations will be obtained. Once the combined anal ytic data set from the surveys and the distributed database is created, it will be stored 
on a secure password-protected server in the Department of Family Medicine.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 27  
To mitigate risk of psychological discomfort and/or time bu rden, participants will be inform ed that they may choose not 
to complete any questions that make them uncomfortable and they may choose to withdraw from the study at any time without losing any benefits to which they may be entitled. To  mitigate the risk of loss confidentiality and/or anonymity, 
the data set requested from the practice EHR for this rese arch will contain the minimal amount of data required to 
conduct the proposed analyses, and will contain no direct iden tifiers other than a study-specific random identifier (to 
allow linkage with survey data) and only service dates as  indirect identifiers. Secure web-based data transfer 
mechanisms using Egnyte.com will be used to transfer data from the local practi ce/organizational databases to a secure 
server at UCD. Data access will be limited to study personnel on a secure server at UCD, an d all information will be kept 
confidential. This is likely to mitigate th e risks identified. For all research groups the following additional protections wil l 
be implemented: 
x All investigators involved in the project have complete d either the Program for Education and Evaluation in 
Responsible Research and Scholarship (PEERRS) or the Colla borative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) online 
training courses related to human subject’s protection s. These courses fulfill all NIH requirements for human 
subjects training. 
x Study activities involving human subjects will not begin until approval has been granted from all relevant 
Institutional Review Boards. Annual renewal of this ap proval will be required for continuation of the study. 
Although we do not anticipate any adverse events to occur in this study, should any occur, they would be reported to all 
involved IRBs in accordance with federal and institutional policies. 
 C. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO HUMAN SUBJECTS AND OTHERS  
There are no direct benefits to participants, with the possible exception of insight into one’s own health behaviors. However, their participation may benefit others, as this research is designed to inform more patient-centered and effective approaches to improving the health and well-being among those with Type II diabetes. The minimal risks (loss 
of confidentiality, psychological discomfort and time burden ) to subjects are reasonable in relation to the potential 
benefits to the broader population. The risks are small and not serious, while benefits to the broader population in terms of reduced costs to society and improved health and well-being could be substantial.  
 
D. IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
Results from this study will significantl y advance the understanding of the process of planning and implementing SMAs, 
including a curriculum that can be tailored to the divers e needs of their patient population. The findings can be 
extended to other populations, potentially having far reac hing effects on implementation of SMAs among those with 
chronic conditions. If no differences in outcomes are demons trated between standardized and patient-driven SMAs, this 
information is also important, as it points to a need to devi se alternative strategies for connecting patients to evidence-
based services. The risks are small and not serious, while the knowledge to be gained has the potential to help support 
management of chronic disease and can improve quality of life. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835970] deliverables in accordance with the milestone schedule. 
 
We will initiate subcontracts with the following organization s: 1) Jefferson Center for Mental Health; 2) Case Western 
Reserve University; and 3) Denver Health and Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54686].  
Jefferson Center for Mental Health (JCMH) 
A subcontract will be established with JCMH to facilitate im plementation of the interventi on in participating clinics. 
JCMH, which has vast experience providing collocated and inte grated behavioral health services at FQHCs and over [ADDRESS_835971], including stakeholder engagement, 
intervention implementation and fidelity monitoring, clinician training, data collection monitoring, and practice support/facilitation. In addition, we will pay for an impl ementation project manager to facilitate all day-to-day 
implementation activities, and for site leadership and staff to facilitate stakeholder engagement, establish and maintain 
research protocols, and provide behavioral health guidance throughout the project.  Jefferson Center for Mental Health (JCMH) will serve as the lead CMHC for this project. JCMH has over 20 years’ experience providing collocated and integrated behavioral he alth services at FQHCs and over [ADDRESS_835972] in health behavior chan ge. Additionally, JCMH has an 
existing diabetes/metabolic syndrome workgroup that work s specifically with primary care clinician partners on 
addressing the needs of patients with diabetes and mental he alth disorders, and a cadre of peer specialists that can be 
deployed as peer mentors. JCMH and Aurora Mental Health  Center (AuMHC), another community mental health center 
with a bi-directional health home, serv e similar patient populations with medical illness and psychiatric comorbidities. 
 
Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) 
A subcontract will also be established with CWRU to conduc t the training for the interven tion. The subcontract funds will 
cover [CONTACT_327821] to assume the overall responsibility for use of the TTIM intervention, and to also participate in 
interpretation of study findings and to help facilitate disseminations of results as  appropriate. The allotted funds will pay 
for [CONTACT_327821]’s time, 5% of a research manager, and travel expenses. 
 
Denver Health and Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54686] (DH) 
A subcontract will be established with DH to implement the intervention at two Denver Health Clinics.  DH is an 
academic medical center and is nationally recognized fo r its model of care delivery to underserved, indigent, and 
minority patients and for its growth and financial stability.  Funds will be used to cover [CONTACT_627416], who will 
oversee research implementation at those sites. [CONTACT_105055] is a clinical health psychologist at DH and an Assistant 
Professor at the University of Colorado Denver, School of  Medicine. She has subsequently served as the Principal 
Investigator (PI) of multiple awards to translate best pr actices in diabetes prevention and management to clinical 
settings serving diverse individuals. In addition to [CONTACT_105055]’ s time, this subcontract will also cover costs of a research 
manager, a statistical specialist, and travel expenses.
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 29  
REFERENCES CITED  
For detailed instructions, refer to the Application Guidelines for your PFA. Do not exceed 10 pages. 
 
Following scholarly citation practice (AMA style), list  the source material cite d in this Research Plan.  
1. Menke A, Casagrande S, Geiss L, Cowie CC. Prevalence of and Trends in Diabetes Among Adults in the United 
States, 1988-2012. Jama. Sep 8 2015;314(10):1021-1029. 
2. Guariguata L, Whiting DR, Hambleton I, Beagley J, Li nnenkamp U, Shaw JE. Global estimates of diabetes 
prevalence for 2013 and projections for 2035. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice. 103(2):137-149. 
3. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2 016 Abridged for Primary Care Providers. Clin Diabetes. Jan 
2016;34(1):3-21. 
4. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2 016 Abridged for Primary Care Providers. Clinical diabetes : a publication 
of the American Diabetes Association. Jan 2016;34(1):3-21. 
5. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saaddine JB, Cowie CC, Imperatore G,  Gregg EW. Achievement of goals in U.S. diabetes care, 
1999-2010. N Engl J Med. Apr 25 2013;368(17):1613-1624. 
6. Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, Gregg EW, Barker LE, Williamson DF . Projection of the year 20 50 burden of diabetes in 
the US adult population: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes prevalence. Popul Health 
Metr. 2010;8:29. 
7. Gregg EW, Li Y, Wang J, et al. Changes in diabetes-related complications in the [LOCATION_002], 1990-2010. N Engl 
J Med. Apr 17 2014;370(16):1514-1523. 
8. Li R, Barker LE, Shrestha S, et al. Changes over time in high out-of-pocket health care burden in U.S. adults with 
diabetes, 2001-2011. Diabetes Care. Jun 2014;37(6):1629-1635. 
9. Koopmanschap M. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_627333]: the patient's perspective. Diabetologia. Jul 2002;45(7):S18-22. 
10. Meyers JL, Parasuraman S, Bell KF, Graham JP, Candrilli SD . The high-cost, type 2 diabetes mellitus patient: an 
analysis of managed care administrative data. Arch Public Health. 2014;72(1):6. 
11. Egede LE, Zheng D, Simpson K. Comorbid depression is associated with increased health care use and 
expenditures in individuals with diabetes. Diabetes Care. Mar 2002;25(3):464-470. 
12. Rabi DM, Edwards AL, Southern DA, et al. Association of socio-economic status with diabetes prevalence and 
utilization of diabetes care services. BMC Health Services Research. 2006;6:124. 
13. Fisher L, Skaff MM, Mullan JT, et al. Clinical depression  versus distress among patients with type 2 diabetes: not 
just a question of semantics. Diabetes Care. Mar 2007;30(3):542-548. 
14. Fisher L, Glasgow RE, Strycker LA. The relationship between diabetes distress and clinical depression with 
glycemic control among patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(5):1034-1036. 
15. Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al. Management  of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2015: a patient-
centered approach: update to a position statement of the American Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes. Diabetes Care. Jan 2015;38(1):140-149. 
16. Nutting PA, Dickinson WP, Dickinson LM, et al. Use of ch ronic care model elements is associated with higher-
quality care for diabetes. Ann Fam Med. Jan-Feb 2007;5(1):14-20. 
17. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence  on the Chronic Care Model in the new millennium. Health 
Aff (Millwood). Jan-Feb 2009;28(1):75-85. 
18. Austin B, Wagner E, Hindmarsh M, Davis C. Elemen ts of Effective Chronic Care: A Model for Optimizing 
Outcomes for the Chronically Ill. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_41744]. 
Aug 2000;1(4):S15-S20. 
19. Wagner EH. Chronic disease care. Bmj. Jan 24 2004;328(7433):177-178. 
20. Wagner EH, Grothaus LC, Sandhu N, et al. Chronic ca re clinics for diabetes in primary care: a system-wide 
randomized trial. Diabetes Care. Apr 2001;24(4):695-700. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 30 21. Norris SL, Lau J, Smith SJ, Schmid CH, Engelgau MM. Self -management education for adults with type 2 diabetes: 
a meta-analysis of the effect on glycemic control. Diabetes Care. Jul 2002;25(7):1159-1171. 
22. Haas L, Maryniuk M, Beck J, et al. National standards for diabetes self-management education and support. 
Diabetes Care. Jan 2013;[ADDRESS_835973] 1:S100-108. 
23. Fisher L, Hessler D, Glasgow RE, et al. REDEEM: a pragmatic trial to reduce diabetes distress. Diabetes Care. Sep 
2013;36(9):2551-2558. 
24. Glasgow RE, Davis CL, Funnell MM, Beck A. Implementing  practical interventions to support chronic illness self-
management. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety. 2003;29(11):563-574. 
25. Edelman D, Gierisch JM, McDuffie JR, Oddone E, Williams JW, Jr. Shared medical appointments for patients with 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med. Jan 2015;30(1):99-106. 
26. Healthcare Financial Managment Association. Shared Medical Appointments Improve Access, Quality, and 
Efficiency. 2013; http://www.hfma.org/Leadership/E-
Bulletins/2013/April/Shared_Medical_Appointme nts_Improve_Access,_Quality,_and_Efficiency/ . Accessed 10 
Feb, 2016. 
27. Clinic C. Shared Medical Appointments.  http://my.clevelandclinic.org/p rofessionals/shared-medical-
appointments . Accessed 10 Feb, 2016. 
28. Physicians AAoF. Shared Medical Appointments/Group Visits.  http://www.aafp.org/about/policies/all/shared-
medical.html . Accessed 10 Feb, 2016. 
29. Schillinger D, Grumbach K, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_34413] J, et al. Asso ciation of health literacy with diabetes outcomes. Jama. Jul 24-31 
2002;288(4):475-482. 
30. Sadur CN, Moline N, Costa M, et al. Diabetes management in a health maintenance organization. Efficacy of care 
management using cluster visits. Diabetes Care. Dec 1999;22(12):2011-2017. 
31. Blixen C, Perzynski A, Kanuch S, et al. Training peer educators to promote self-management skills in people with 
serious mental illness (SMI) and diabetes (D M) in a primary health care setting. Prim Health Care Res Dev. Apr 
2015;16(2):127-137. 
32. Tang TS, Funnell M, Sinco B, et al. Comparative effectiveness of peer leaders and community health workers in 
diabetes self-management support: results of a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. Jun 2014;37(6):1525-
1534. 
33. Heisler M. Different models to mobilize peer support to improve diabetes self-management and clinical 
outcomes: evidence, logistics, evaluation considerations and needs for future research. Fam Pract. Jun 2010;[ADDRESS_835974] 1:i23-32. 
34. Brownson CA, Heisler M. The role of peer s upport in diabetes care and self-management. Patient. Mar 1 
2009;2(1):5-17. 
35. Wagner EH, Bennett SM, Austin BT, Greene SM, Schaefer JK, Vonkorff M. Finding common ground: patient-
centeredness and evidence-b ased chronic illness care. J Altern Complement Med. 2005;[ADDRESS_835975] 1:S7-15. 
36. Romeo GR, Abrahamson MJ. The 2015 standards for diabetes care: maintaining a patient-centered approach. 
Ann Intern Med. Jun 2 2015;162(11):785-786. 
37. Kwan BM, Sills MR, Graham D, et al. Stakeholder Enga gement in a Patient-Reported Outcomes (PRO) Measure 
Implementation: A Report from the SAFTINet Practice-based Research Network (PBRN). J Am Board Fam Med. 
Jan-Feb 2016;29(1):102-115. 
38. Norman N, Bennett C, Cowart S, et al. Boot camp tr anslation: a method for building a community of solution. J 
Am Board Fam Med. May-Jun 2013;26(3):254-263. 
39. Kwan BM, Jortberg B, Warman MK, et al. Stakehol der Engagement in Diabetes Self-Management:Patient 
Preference for Peer Support and Other Insights. Family Practice: Intl J of Res Prim Care. in press. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835976] KJ, Webster K, Baker DW, Choi SW, Bode RK, Hahn EA. Bilingual health literacy assessment using the Talking 
Touchscreen/la Pantalla Parlanchina: Development and pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124]. Patient Educ Couns. Jun 2009;75(3):295-
301. 
41. Lawless ME, Kanuch SW, Martin S, et al. A Nursing Appr oach to Self-Management Educ ation for Individuals With 
Mental Illness and Diabetes. Diabetes Spectrum. 2016;29(1):24-31. 
42. Sajatovic M, Dawson NV, Perzynski AT , et al. Best practices: Optimizing care for people with serious mental 
illness and comorbid diabetes. Psychiatric Services. Sep 2011;62(9):1001-1003. 
43. Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62113], Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence-based interventions in health 
care: application of the replicating effective programs framework. Implementation Science. 2007;2(1):1. 
44. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion interventions: the RE-
AIM framework. Am J Public Health. Sep 1999;89(9):1322-1327. 
45. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the fac ilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and 
well-being. Am Psychol. Jan 2000;55(1):68-78. 
46. Mead N, Bower P. Patient-centredn ess: a conceptual framework and review of the empi[INVESTIGATOR_20661]. Soc Sci 
Med. Oct 2000;51(7):1087-1110. 
47. Williams GC, Patrick H, Niemiec CP, et al. Reducing the health risks of diabetes: how self-determination theory 
may help improve medication adherence and quality of life. Diabetes Educ. May-Jun 2009;35(3):484-492. 
48. Teixeira PJ, Carraca EV, Markland D,  Silva MN, Ryan RM. Exercise, physical activity, and self-determination 
theory: a systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2012;9:78. 
49. Williams GC, McGregor HA, Zeldman A, Freedman ZR, De ci EL. Testing a self-determination theory process 
model for promoting glycemic control through diabetes self-management. Health Psychology. 2004;23(1):58. 
50. Williams GC, Lynch M, Glasgow RE. Computer-assisted inte rvention improves patient-centered diabetes care by 
[CONTACT_333063]. Health Psychology. 2007;26(6):728. 
51. Deverka PA, Lavallee DC, Desai PJ, et al. Stakeholder participation in comparativ e effectiveness research: 
defining a framework for effective engagement. J Comp Eff Res. Mar 2012;1(2):181-194. 
52. Glasgow RE LL. Evaluation of theory-based interventions. . In: Glanz K RB, Viswanath K, ed. Health Behavior and 
Health Education: Theory, Research, and Practice.  4th ed. ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 2008:487-508. 
53. Kessler R, Glasgow RE. A proposal to speed translation of healthcare research into pr actice: dramatic change is 
needed. Am J Prev Med. Jun 2011;40(6):637-644. 
54. Gaglio B, Shoup JA, Glasgow RE. The RE-AIM framework: a systematic review of use over time. Am J Public 
Health. Jun 2013;103(6):e38-46. 
55. Li F, Lokhnygina Y, Murray DM, Heagerty PJ, DeLong ER. An evaluation of constrained randomization for the 
design and analysis of group-randomized trials. Stat Med. 2015. 
56. Moulton LH. Covariate-based constrained randomization of group-randomized trials. Clinical Trials. 
2004;1(3):297-305. 
57. Dickinson LM, Beaty B, Fox C, et al. Pragmatic Cluster Randomized Trials Using Covariate Constrained 
Randomization: A Method for Practice-based Research Networks (PBRNs). J Am Board Fam Med. Sep-Oct 
2015;28(5):663-672. 
58. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD, Waternaux C. Sample size estima tion for longitudinal designs with attrition: comparing 
time-related contrasts between two groups. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics. 1999;24(1):70-93. 
59. Taveira TH, Dooley AG, Cohen LB, Khatana SA, Wu WC. Pharmacist-led group medical appointments for the 
management of type 2 diabetes with comorbid depression in older adults. Ann Pharmacother. Nov 
2011;45(11):1346-1355. 
60. Fisher L, Hessler DM, Polonsky WH, Mullan J. When is di abetes distress clinically me aningful?: establishing cut 
points for the Diabetes Distress Scale. Diabetes Care. Feb 2012;35(2):259-264. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 32 61. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Earles J, et al. Assessing psychosocial distress in diabetes: development of the diabetes 
distress scale. Diabetes Care. Mar 2005;28(3):626-631. 
62. Dickinson WP, Dickinson LM, Nutting PA, et al. Practice facilitation to improve diabetes care in primary care: a 
report from the EPIC randomized clinical trial. Ann Fam Med. Jan-Feb 2014;12(1):8-16. 
63. Norris SL, Chowdhury FM, Van Le K, et al. Effectiveness of community health workers in the care of persons with 
diabetes. Diabet Med. May 2006;23(5):544-556. 
64. Heisler M, Choi H, Palmisano G, et al. Comparison of community health worker-led diabetes medication 
decision-making support for low-income Latino and African American adults with diabetes using e-health tools 
versus print materials: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. Nov 18 2014;161([ADDRESS_835977]):S13-22. 
65. Rowe AK, de Savigny D, Lanata CF, Victora CG. How ca n we achieve and maintain high-quality performance of 
health workers in low-resource settings? The lancet. 2005;366(9490):1026-1035. 
66. Hodorowicz MA. Reimbursement for Shared Medical Ap pointments Incorporating Diabetes Self-Management 
Education/Training or Diabetes Medical Nutrition Therapy. Diabetes Spectrum. May 1, 2012 2012;25(2):84-90. 
67. Physicians AAoF. Coding for Group Visits.  http://www.aafp.org/practice-management/payment/coding/group-
visits.html . Accessed 10 Feb, 2016. 
68. Dickinson LM, Beaty B, Fox C, et al. Pragmatic Cluster Randomized Trials Using Covariate Constrained 
Randomization: A Method for Practice-based Research Networks (PBRNs). Journal of the American Board of 
Family Medicine. Sep-Oct 2015;28(5):663-+. 
69. Moulton LH. Covariate-based constrained randomization of group-randomized trials. Clinical trials (London, 
England). 2004;1(3):297-305. 
70. SAS V 9.3  [computer program]. Cary, NC: SAS Institute, Inc. 
71. Kirchner JE, Ritchie MJ, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_311438], Parker LE, Curra n GM, Fortney JC. Outcomes of a partnered facilitation 
strategy to implement primary care-mental health. J Gen Intern Med. Dec 2014;[ADDRESS_835978] 4:904-912. 
72. Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloyd A, et al. Development and pr eliminary testing of the new five-level version of EQ-5D 
(EQ-5D-5L). Qual Life Res. Dec 2011;20(10):1727-1736. 
73. Williams GC, Freedman ZR, Deci EL. Supporting autonomy to  motivate patients with diabetes for glucose control. 
Diabetes Care. 1998;21(10):1644-1651. 
74. Toobert DJ, Hampson SE, Glasgow RE. The summary of diabetes self-care activities measure: results from 7 
studies and a revised scale. Diabetes Care. Jul 2000;23(7):943-950. 
75. Hwang W, Weller W, Ireys H, Anderson G. Out-of-pocket medical spending for care of chronic conditions. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2001;20(6):267-278. 
76. Russell LB, Ibuka Y, Carr D. How much time  do patients spend on outpatient visits? The Patient: Patient-Centered 
Outcomes Research. 2008;1(3):211-222. 
77. Deyo RA, Cherkin DC, Ciol MA. Adap ting a clinical comorbidity index fo r use with ICD-9-CM administrative 
databases. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Jun 1992;45(6):613-619. 
78. Raue PJ, Sirey JA. Designing personalized treatment engagement interventions for depressed older adults. 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 2011;34(2):489-500. 
79. Dickinson LM, Dickinson WP, Nutting PA, et al. Practice  context affects efforts to improve diabetes care for 
primary care patients: a pragmatic cluster randomized trial. J Gen Intern Med. Apr 2015;30(4):476-482. 
80. Gittell JH, Godfrey M, Thistlethwaite  J. Interprofessional collaborative practice and relational coordination: 
improving healthcare through relationships. J Interprof Care. May 2013;27(3):210-213. 
81. Noel PH, Lanham HJ, Palmer RF, Leykum LK, Parchman  ML. The importance of relational coordination and 
reciprocal learning for chronic illne ss care within primary care teams. Health Care Manage Rev. Jan-Mar 
2013;38(1):20-28. 
82. Bonomi AE, Wagner EH, Glasgow RE, VonKorff M. Assessme nt of chronic illness care (ACIC): a practical tool to 
measure quality improvement. Health Serv Res. Jun 2002;37(3):791-820. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 33 83. Kaplan RS, Haas DA, Warsh J. Adding Value by [CONTACT_627402]. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2016;375(20):1918-1920. 
84. Schilling LM, Kwan BM, Drolshagen CT, et al. Scalable Ar chitecture for Federated Tran slational Inquiries Network 
(SAFTINet) technology infrastructure for a distributed data network. eGEMs (Generating Evidence & Methods to 
improve patient outcomes). 2013;1(1):11. 
85. Brown J, Kahn M, Toh S. Data quality assessment for comparative effectiveness research in distributed data 
networks. Med Care. 2013;51(8 0 3):S22. 
86. Gilchrist V, Williams R. Key Informant In terviews. In: Crabtree B, Miller W, eds. Doing Qualitative Research . 2 ed. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1999:71-88. 
87. Potworowski G, Green L. Cognitive ta sk analysis: methods to improve patient-centered medical home models by 
[CONTACT_627403]. Rockville MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
2013. 
88. Wright N, Ivers N, Eldridge S, Taljaard M, Bremner S. A review of the use of covariates in cluster randomized 
trials uncovers marked discrepanc ies between guidance and practice. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2015;68(6):603-609. 
89. Murray DM. Design and analysis of group-randomized trials.  Vol 29: Oxford University Press, [LOCATION_003]; 1998. 
90. Littell R, Milliken GA, Stroup WW, Wolfinger RD, eds. SAS System for Mixed Models.  Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc; 
1996. 
91. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons; 2006. 
92. Raman R, Hedeker D. A mixed-effects regression  model for three-level ordinal response data. Stat Med. Nov 15 
2005;24(21):3331-3345. 
93. Bryk  AS, Raudenbush SW, eds. Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data Analysis Methods.  Second ed. 
Newbury Park: Sage Publications; 2000. 
94. Murray D, ed Design and analysis of group-randomized trials.  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1998. 
95. Giraudeau B, Ravaud P. Preventing Bias in Cluster Randomised Trials. PLoS Med. 2009;6(5):e1000065. 
96. Puffer S, Torgerson D, Watson J. Evidence for risk of bi as in cluster randomised trials: Review of recent trials 
published in three general medical journals. BMJ. [ADDRESS_835979] 4 2003;327(7418):785-789. 
97. Campbell MK, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. CONSORT statement: extension to cluster randomised trials. BMJ. 
March 20, 2004 2004;328(7441):702-708. 
98. AP D, NM L, DB R. Maximum likelihood estimation from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society: Series B 1977;39:1-38. 
99. P D, MG K. Informative drop-out in longitudinal data analysis. Appl Stat 1994;43:49-93. 
100.  RJA L. Statistical analysis with missing data . [LOCATION_001]: Wiley; 1987. 
101.  DL F. Design and analysis of quality of life studies in clinical trials . [LOCATION_001]: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2010. 
102.  Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Application of random-effects pa ttern-mixture models for missing data in longitudinal 
studies. Psychological Methods. Mar 1997;2(1):64-78. 
103.  Littell RC, Stroup WW, Milliken GA, Wolfinger RD, Schabenberger O. SAS for mixed models : SAS institute; 2006. 
104.  Dempster A, Laird N, Rubin D. Maximum likelihood estimation from incomplete data. Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society (B). 1977;39(1):1-38. 
105.  Little RJ, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data : John Wiley & Sons; 2014. 
106.  Diggle P, Kenward MG. Informative drop-out in longitudinal data analysis. Applied statistics. 1994:49-93. 
107.  Fairclough DL. Design and analysis of quality of life studies in clinical trials : CRC press; 2010. 
108.  Liu L, Lee MJ, Brateanu A. Improved A1C and Lipid Profile in Patients Referred to Diabetes Education Programs in 
a Wide Health Care Network: A Retrospective Study. Diabetes spectrum : a publication of the American Diabetes 
Association. Nov 2014;27(4):297-303. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 34 109.  Hawkins J, Kieffer EC, Sinco B, Spencer M, Anderson M, Rosland AM. Does Gender Influence Participation? 
Predictors of Participation in a Community Health Wo rker Diabetes Management Intervention With African 
American and Latino Adults. Diabetes Educator. Sep 2013;39(5):647-654. 
110.  Addison R. A Grounded Hermenuetic Editing Approach. In: Crabtree B, Miller W, eds. Doing Qualitative 
Research . 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1999:145-161. 
111.  B R, CC R. Configurational comparative methods: qualiative comparative analysis (QCA) and related techniques. . 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2009. 
112.  C R. Studying cases as configurations. In: C R, ed. Fuzzy-set social science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 
2000:64-87. 
113.  C R. Causal complexity. In: C R, ed. Fuzzy-set social science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 2000:88-119. 
114.  JS H, G P, C R, LA G. Necessary and sufficient conditio ns for high quality care management: an analysis using 
qualitative comparative analysis (QCA). . under review. 2016. 
115.  Kessler R, Glasgow RE. A proposal to speed translation of healthcare research into pr actice: dramatic change is 
needed. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(6):637-644. 
116.  Campbell MK, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. CONSORT statement: extension to cluster randomised trials. Bmj. Mar 
20 2004;328(7441):702-708. 
   
 
         
 
    
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 35  
APPENDIX (optional)  
 
 
Appendix A. TTIM Curriculum Modules  
 
TTIM Curriculum Modules  
Module Menu of Topic(s) Core 
Diabetes/Mental 
Health 
1 Orientation and introductions, Emphasize ground rules, Establishment of a therapeutic 
relationship, An introduction to DM, An introduction to personal goal-setting Core (always 1st) 
2 Diabetes complications and benefits of change, Blood sugar monitoring, Symptoms of 
high/low blood sugar Core  
3 The challenge of having both mental health conditions (MHC) and DM, Stigma of MHC and 
strategies to cope with stigma, Relationship of MHC symptoms and functioning in response 
to stress and DM Mental Health 
4 Personal MHC profile (what does worsening il lness look like for you), Triggers of MHC 
relapse, Personal action plan for copi[INVESTIGATOR_627334] 
5 Problem-solving skills and the IDEA approach (Identify the problem, Define possible 
solutions, Evaluate the solutions, Act on th e best solution), Talking with your medical 
providers, Role play of communication with care providers Core 
[ADDRESS_835980] physical and emotional health, Reading labels  Core 
7 Replacing unhealthy sugar and fat, Substance use and its effects on DM, Problem-solving to 
feed your body healthfully Core 
8 Effects of exercise on physical and emotional health, The importance of daily routine and 
good sleep habits Core 
9 Medications and psychological treatments for MHCs, A personal care plan to take care of 
the mind & body; Talking with your mental health providers Mental Health 
10 Social supports and using your available supports, Types of physical activity and your 
community  Core 
11 Taking care of your feet, Staying on track with medication treatments  Core 
12 Illness management as a life-style, Acknowle dgement of group progress, Setting the stage 
for ongoing Illness management and recovery (Step 2) Core (always last) 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 36 Appendix B. Patient-Driven Shared Medical Appointments Implementation Planning Worksheet Outline 
 
INSTRUCTIONS AND EXPECTATIONS: This instrument should be completed by [CONTACT_627404].  This is a working document to facilitate the integration and implementation of diabetes SMAs. Please read through this 
entire document before completing any questions, to ensure full understanding of research team expectations and the 
decisions to be made by [CONTACT_627405]. 
  Organization Name:          [CONTACT_508387]:       
 Person(s) completing the worksheet:         
 
1. Identify the patient population 
a. What are their characteristics? (i.e., eligibility, priority) 
b. How will they be identified? (i.e., registries, systematic assessment) 
c. Who will identify them? 
d. When will they be identified? 
2. Identify local practice and organizational resources needed 
a. SMA health educator 
b. SMA peer mentor 
c. Other SMA care team members 
d. SMA coordinator  
e. Physical space 
f. Information Technology 
g. Quality Improvement 
3. Training 
a. Key staff training 
b. Timelines for rollout 
4. Recruit or invite eligible patients 
a. What is the message to eligible patients? 
b. Who invites eligible patients? 
5. Scheduling SMAs 
a. Where and when will SMAs be held? 
b. Who schedules and in what system? 
6. Data collection 
a. Patient assessments 
b. Tracking invitations, acceptance  and participation by [CONTACT_1962] 
c. Tracking elements of modular curriculum delivered (fidelity) 
d. Tracking connections to the care team (communication/consultation and referral) 
7. Incorporate into shared care plan 
a. Care plan location (EMR) 
b. What is the process/ technology used for sharin g of care plan among all care team members?  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 37 8. Preparation for the Intervention (SMAs) 
a. Staffing: Who delivers the SMAs? 
b. Where are they delivered? 
c. What are the administrative an d clinical/agency requirements? 
d. How is the intervention promoted throughout the clinic?  
9. Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_627335] 
a. How does the clinic team address staff turnover? 
b. How does the research (implementation) team address clinical team’s concerns? 
c. How does the clinic team receive technical assistance in adapting SMAs to their setting? 
10. Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_627336] 
a. How are patients outreached by [CONTACT_45914]?  
b. How are patients’ concerns addressed?  
11. Changing and Sustaining Clinic Culture to Support SMA 
a. How will barriers to implementation, clinical staff concerns be addressed? 
b. How will patient (and provider) succe sses be shared with clinic staff? 
c. How can the clinic staff be incentivized? 
12. Sustainability 
a. Who are key stakeholders for sustai nability outside of the clinic?  
b. How are these key stakeholders engaged in the sustainability discussion? 
c. What data is needed to inform the business case for sustainability?    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle [ADDRESS_835981] 
Intervention Fidelity Evaluation Form:  
TTIM will be assessed with respect to fidelity (how closel y Nurse interventionists follo w the treatment manual).   
Fidelity to TTIM processes, content, an d format will be evaluated by [CONTACT_105]-interv entionist study staff randomly attending 
20% of TTIM sessions to determine if: 
1. Sessions covered relevant TTIM constructs and health practices,  
2. Format as appropriate, and  
3. If sufficient time was devoted to the question/answer/comment session. 
 FIDELITY CHECK FACE-SHEET:  DATE: RATER INITIALS: COHORT #:____ 
SESSION #:____ 
 TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 1:  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_33722]: Orientation and introductions: Yes__  No__  Emphasize ground rules: Yes__  No__ Discuss facts and misconceptions about SMI Yes__  No__ An introduction to DM: Yes__  No__ Did the interventionist establishment groundwork for a ther apeutic relationship? (non-judgemental, collaborative and 
supportive: Yes__  No__   
 Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__  TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 2: 
 Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: 
The challenge of having both SMI and DM Yes__  No__ 
Stigma of SMI and strategies to cope with stigma Yes__  No__ Relationship of SMI symptoms and functioning in response to stress and DM Yes__  No__ An introduction to personal goal-setting Yes__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__  TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 3: 
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: 
 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 39 Personal SMI profile (what does worsening illness look like for you Yes__  No__ 
Triggers of SMI relapse Yes__  No__ Personal action plan for copi[INVESTIGATOR_627338]__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__   TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 4: 
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: 
Diabetes complications and benefits of change Yes__  No__ Blood sugar monitoring Yes__  No__ Symptoms of high/low blood sugar Yes__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__  Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 
TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 5: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Problem-solving skills and the IDEA approach Yes__  No__ Talking with your medical and your mental health care providers Yes__  No__ Role play of communication with care providers Yes__  No__ 
 Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 
TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 6:  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Nutrition for best physical and emotional health Yes__  No__ Reading labels Yes__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 
TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 7: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Replacing unhealthy sugar and fat Yes__  No__  
Substance use and its effects on SMI and on DM Yes__  No__ Problem-solving to feed your body healthfully Yes__  No__  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 40 Format: 
60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 8: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Effects of exercise on physical and emotional health Yes__  No__ The importance of daily routine and good sleep habits Yes__  No__  Format: 
60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ 
Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__  TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 9: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Medications and psychological treatments for SMI Yes__  No__ A personal care plan to take care of the mind & body Yes__  No__  Format: 
60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ 
Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__  TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 10: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Social supports and using your available supports Yes__  No__ Types of physical activity and your community Yes__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ 
Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 11: Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Taking care of your feet Yes__  No__ Staying on track with medication treatments Yes__  No__  Format: 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
TTIM Fidelity Check SESSION 12: 
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_627337]: Illness management as a life-style Yes__  No__  
Acknowledgement of group progress Yes__  No__ Setting the stage for ongoing Illness management and recovery (Step 2) Yes__  No__  Format: 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 41 60-90 minutes in duration: Yes__  No__ 
Sufficient time to answer questions that arose during group process: Yes__  No__ 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 42 Appendix D. Snapsot of TTIM Treatment Manual including scripts for care team members 
Part One: Having a Mental Illness and Diabetes Together: Nurse Educator script (Poster 4):  Review and discuss Poster #4.  “People with SMI are more likely to have diabetes than people without SMI.  At the same time, people with diabetes are more likely to have SMI than to those who do not have diabetes.”  “People with SMI and Diabetes have medical and mental health  problems.  Examples of this are higher rates of 
heart attack and psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].”  So, if SMI and Diabetes are not in good control, it could effect how long a person lives.    “Studies show that taking care of Diabetes has good effects on mental health and that taking care of your 
mental health has good effects on Diabetes. So you can have a healthier and longer life by [CONTACT_627406].” 
 
“Taking care of SMI includes taking prescribed medicati ons, following up with counseling/case management, 
avoiding drugs and alcohol, having daily routines such as a regular time to go to sleep and wake up, as well as 
taking advantage of supports like family and friends.”  “Taking care of Diabetes includes following a proper diet , exercising, taking prescribed medications and testing 
blood sugars as recommended. Part Two: Stigma of SMI and Strategies to Cope with Stigma:  Nurse Interventionist Script: “We are now going to talk about STIGMA.  This follow s the discussion we had last session on “myths” about 
mental illness.  Our feelings and knowledge abo ut mental illness are influenced by w hat we have learned from other people. 
One of the difficulties that some people encounter is psychiatric stigma. Psychiatric stigma is caused by [CONTACT_627407], stereotypes, myths, and misconceptions  people have about mental illness. Stigma influences 
the way others act toward th ose people who have mental illn ess. Stigma also affects the way pe ople feel about 
having mental illness and can even affect a person’s behavior. For example, it  may make a person less likely to 
take their medication. Have these comments affected the way that you think, feel, or manage your condition?”  What might be some good ways to deal with cope with STIGMA?  Note to Leaders: Discuss ways to cope with Stigma (Poster 5).  Review and discuss Poster #5. Give door prizes for additional, first/best answers on ways to cope with Stigma.      
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE): Kwan, Bethany Matthews
PCORI Cycle 3 2016 Research Plan Template                                                                       
 43Part Three: Relationship of Mental Symptoms and Functioning in Response to Stress and Diabetes:
Nurse Educator Script:
“Everybody has stress and everyone in this room (Includi ng your group leaders!!) is likely to have some future 
stress in their life. People respond in different ways when they are stressed or their SMI symptoms are getting worse (relapse).  This behavior can be called a “copi[INVESTIGATOR_627339]”.  Sometimes the copi[INVESTIGATOR_627340] a good outcome.  Other times the outcome can have no effect or be negative/bad.  
Some copi[INVESTIGATOR_627341].  Sometimes people will try one copi[INVESTIGATOR_627342] a while, and then switch to another behavior if the first one does not work.  Sometimes people use more than one copi[INVESTIGATOR_627343].”
Poster #[ADDRESS_835982] good/neutral or effe cts on both mental illness and on Diabetes (Poster 6).
Review and discuss Poster #6.
Questions for the group:
1. Has any one ever used any of these in the past to deal with stress or symptoms of mental illness?2. What kinds of copi[INVESTIGATOR_627344]?3. What would be copi[INVESTIGATOR_627345]?
Note to Leaders: 
Start with the list of possible copi[INVESTIGATOR_627346].  Encourage group members to generate additional copi[INVESTIGATOR_627347].  Give door prizes to first/best responses on copi[INVESTIGATOR_627348].
Conclude this segment by [CONTACT_627408].  
By [CONTACT_627409][INVESTIGATOR_627349], individuals might be able to plan and possible be able to use these ideas for future stress.
You Answer: Copi[INVESTIGATOR_627350] :
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________